PANOOPYKTOLOGIA.

SIVE Panzoologicomineralogia.

Or a Complete HISTORY Of Animals and Minerals, Containing the Sum of all
Authors, both Ancient and Modern, GALENICALL and CHYMICALL, touching Animals,
viz. Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, Insects, and Man, as to their Place,
Meat, Name, Temperature, Virtues, Use in Meat and Medicine, Description, Kinds,
Generation, Sympathy, Antipathie, Diseases, Cures, Hurts, and Remedies etc.

With the Anatomy of MAN, his Diseases, with their Definitions, Causes, Signs,
Cures, Remedies: and use of the London Dispensatory, with the Doses and Forms
of all kinds of Remedies:

As also a History of MINERALS, viz. Earths, Metals, Semi-mettals, their
Natural and Artificial excrements, Salts, Sulphurs, and Stones, with their
Place, Matter, Names, Kinds, Temperature, Virtues, Use, Choice, Dose, Danger,
and Antidotes.

Also an Introduction to ZOOGRAPHY and MINERALOGY. Index of Latin Names, with
their English Names. Universal INDEX of the Use and Virtues.


By ROBERT LOVELL. St. C. C. Oxon, (...).

OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL, for JOS: GODWIN. 1660.

Serenissimo and Invictissimo CAROLO II, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defensori: etc. Omnia Secunda.
AD Regem, Serenissime Rex, tardus accedo, sed laetus; nec laetus, quia tardus;
sed tardus, quia laetus; quia remis velisque and bonis avibus appulsus; nec
quia appulsus ipse ego, sed REX IPSE: at at, En Vestram ad Majestatem tandem
accedo, nec carmina apporto, sed carnem, haud (...), sed (...), meo etenim
(vestro potius, ut rectius dixerim) cum grege, cum equo, cum Monocerote, cum
Leone, and cum agno, and quotquot sunt; agnosco etiam, cum vulpe, sed catenata;
and cum lupo, sed quem auribus teneo; nec sine avibus, cum aquila, cum
pelicano, cum luscinia, cum columba cum olivae ramo, nec sine vulture, (utpote
qui bella sequitur,) sed de eo concla^atum est: nec taceo pisces, cum delphino,
cum purpura, cum gladio, sed non sine siluro, and cum enchrasicolo, sed sine
capite: nec sine Serpentibus, Invictissime Rex, cum angue, cum jaculo, cum
caecilia, cum amphisbaena, sed sine venenis, cum basalisco, at sibilare non
audet, cum vipera, cum haemorrhoo; sed non sine remediis: nec non cum Insectis,
sc. cum ape, cum formica, cum bombyce, nec sine hirudinibus, erucis,
cantharidibus, auriculariis, muscis, crabronibus, vespis, sed horum capita filo
tam tenui junguntur corpori, ut quoties pungunt, facili negotio devictae sint
vires, and ipsa suis ictibus fiant remedia; accedo etiam cum cochlea, ideoque
tardus: denique mecum meum affero servum, ut Vestrae Majestati fidelis si non
fuerit oeconomus, omnibus trium regnorum Anatomicis fiat spectaculum. Restat
adhuc aliquid terrae, sc. sigillatae, cimoliae and cretae; nec omnia perdidi
metalla, etenim aes superest, sed quod antea damnabatur in bombardarum usum,
and globulorum plumbum, ex ferro fiebant enses, and ferro ferrea aetas; nunc
vero volente Deo, populo volente, aurum denuo metallorum Rex est, and argentum
quod totum fere erat vivum (adeo ut vix quispiam loculis retineret,) jam fixum
esto, and vestra insignitum effigy: est etiam nonnihil salis, quod nullus
dubito, quin Vestra Majestas, ne insipidum fiat, curabit; and sulphuris, quod
si nulli alii inserviat usui, haereticorum utcunque comburendis inserviat
libris: sed adhuc supersunt gemmae, in quarum numero duodecim sunt sacrae, quae
nunc restant ad coronam vestra^ decorandam; and quotquot alii plebeii nimis in
Lithologia sunt lapides, ad nihil aliud si utiles, ad contegendos inimicorum
Regis serventur tumulos: hae sunt (Serenissime Rex) quales saeviente Mart
(tanquam in Arca) servare potui divitiae, quas Sacrae Majestati Vestrae D. D. D.

Augustissimae Majestatis Vestrae Devotissimus Servus Robertus Louellus. Ex
Aede Christi, OXON.

ISAGOGE ZOOLOGICOMINERALOGICA. OR An Introduction to the History of Animals
and Minerals, or Panzoographie, and Pammineralogie.
COURTEOUS READER,
THY former acceptance of my Book of Plants, (Pambotanologie,) containing the
first part of the materia medica, does now encourage me to present thee with
the second, called Panzoologie, and a third, or Pammineralogie: in the first of
which, thou have the nature and use of all sorts of useful Animals, both
dieteticall and medicinal, etc. and that of Minerals in the last.

I. As for Animals, they are animate bodies, and sentient, having local
motion, and are either irrational or rational.

I. Irrational. I. Four-footed beasts, which are. 1. Solidipedes, having whole
hoofes; as the Horse, ass, onager, mule, zebra, elephant, unicorne, and
cornute ass. 2. Bisules, having divided hoofes; and these are either
cornigerous ruminants, horned and chewing the cudde; as the Cow, empalanga,
ure-oxe, bison, butrones, bonasus, bugill, strepsiceros, sheep, musmon, goat,
rock-goat, ibex, bubalis, pygargus. buck, cagua cuete, cugvacu-apara; musk-cat,
bez^artick-goat, vicuna, taruga, Scythian suhak, Syriack mambrina, oryx, heart,
macame, yztac macame, quauhtlamacame, tamamacame, seouasseu, tragelaphus,
tarandus, rainger, elke, and rhinoceros: or ruminants without horns; as the
Camel, dromedary, hugium, becheti, ragvahil, and camelopardale: or not
ruminating; as the Hog, zainus, and tapierete: or aquatick, as the Seahorse.
3. Viviperous digitates, having diverse toes, and bringing forth live young
ones, and are either wild; as the Lion, puma, mitzli, quamitztli, macamitzli,
cuitlamitzli, tlalmitzll; Pardal, thcotochtli; lynx, tigre, tlaeoocelotl; bear,
wolf, gulion, and sesef: or wildish; as the Fox, cojotl, cuit-laxcojotl,
azcacojotl, oztoa, izquiepotl, conepatl, bachirae, annae, ilpemaxtla,
carygueja, tajibi, tamandua-gvacu, tamandua-i, coati; ape, orang-outang, baris,
monkey, guariba, exquima, cagvi, sagovin, macaqvo, cay; cynocephalus, papio,
upalim; ignauus, priguiza, bay, badger, heyrat, quaupecotli, tzcuintecuani,
tlalcoyotl; beaver, otter, saricouieme, carygveibeju; ichneumon, weasel,
hermellani, visela, girella, rosola, chiurca, vormela, lardiron, hamester,
fitch, neerza; martes, mustela zibellina; civet cat, hare, citli, cotias,
pacas; coney, pig-coney, pactli, eliztactotli, cuitlatepotli, tocanthoctli,
quautochtli, metochtli, cacatochtli, cuitlatepolli, hapaztochli, viscachae;
squirrel, quauhtcchallotl, tliltic, quapachtli, techallotl, thalmototli,
quimichpatlan, yztactechalotl; dormouse, mouse, rat; aquatick mouse, filberd,
shrew, Alpin mouse, and coyopollin; mole, hedghogg, porcupine, and tatus: or
domestic, as the Dog, melitean, hound, grayhound, bloodhound, beagle,
bandogge, mastive, curre, xoloitzeuintli, itzceuinteporzotli, tetichi, and cat.
4. Oviperous digitates, having diverse toes, and bringing forth eggs, and are
either covered with skin; as the Aquatick frog, toad, green frogge, temporary
frogge, lizard, lizard green, and chalcidick, Indian senembi, tejugvacu,
taraguira, americima, caropopeba, ameiva, taraguycu aycuraba, tejunhana;
salamander, stellion, scinck, cordylus, chamaeleon, and crocodile: or
testaceous, having shells; as the Torteise, jaboti; lutarie torteise and
marine, jurucua, jurura: or Exotic and dubious, as the Tlacaxolotl, cabim,
animal maripetum, danta, cappa, ejulator, su, peva, foetid animal, Graffa, and
caoch.

II. Birds, which are 1. Terrestiall carnivorous, or living upon the land and
eating flesh; as the Eagle, chrysaetus, haliete, melanete, pygargus, morphnos,
percuopter, ossifrage, anopaea, white eagle, heteropos, avis scythica; vultur,
little, cinereous, boetick, black, leporarie, and golden; hawk, asteriu,
hobbie, sparrowhawk, faulcon gentle, merlin, kastrell, buzzard, ringtaile,
colluriones, kite, harpie, cuckoo, faulcon, saker, gyrfaulcon, peregrine,
mountane, tunetane, gibbous, white, lapidarie, arborarie, red, cyanopus, and
promiscuous; Parret, great cyanocroceus, white cristate, green, poikilorinchus,
green melanorinchus, leucocephalus, erythrocyanus, cinereous, erythroleucus,
torquatus macrourus, erythrochlorus macrourus, erythrochlorus cristatus; crow,
cray, rook, chough, coracia, pyrrhocorax; pie, caudate, indian, glandarie,
garrulus, marine, persick ampelide, brasilian, rhinoceros, loxia; owl,
scrich-owle, horn-owle, scops, aluco, howlet, caprimulgus; batt, and ostrich.
2. Phytivorous, or feeding upon plants; and these are either, granivorous not
melodious, or feeding upon grain, and singing not, and are pulveratricious and
wild; as the Peacock, japonian, and turkey; pheasant, bustard, grigallus,
heath-cock, hasle-hen, land duck, stella, oedicnemus, partridg, grecian,
reddish, cinereous, white, and damascen; quail, ortygometra, and cynchramus:
and pulveratricious domestic, as the Cock and hen, patavine, Turcick, Perfick,
Scottish, Indian, and Ginnie; and pulveratricious lavant, as the Pigeon,
ring-dove, stock-dove, alchata; turtle, sparrow, white, yellow, spotted,
whitish, mountain, wild, torquate, juglandine, illyrick, brachyurus,
porphyromelanus, and embriza: or granivourous and melodious; as the Goldfinch,
sisken, Canarie sparrow, finch, brambling, linnet, lark, cristate, and not
cristate, green-finch, citrinella, serinus, and lutea: or baccivorous, or
eating berries; as the Thrush, ixophagus, trichas, blackbird, saxatile,
mountain, torquate, double-coloured, roselike, brasilian and indian, stare, and
clot-bird 3. Insectivorous, or feeding upon insects, and are. either not
melodious; as the Woodpecker, great, greatest, green, luteous cyanopus,
murarie, nutjobber, witwal, hickwall, creeper, wren, cristate, and not
cristate, hedgsparrow, asilus, swallow, wild and riparie; martinet, houpe, tit
mouse, great fennish, sylvatick, black, c^yuleous, caudate, and cristate;
wagtaile, spipola, stoparola, muscicapa; robbin-red-breast, bunting, redtaile,
phoenicurus, anthus, cannevarola, oenanthe, lusciniola: or melodious; as the
Nightingal, titling and colemouse. 4. Aquatick palmipedes, living in the water,
having whole feet, which are either, piscivorous, or feeding upon fish, as the
Pelecane, bird diomedea, sea gull, white, cinereous, piscatorie, black, sterna,
fidiped; sea-drake, cepphus, barnicle, plungion, sylvatick crow, night-raven,
palmipede daw, mergus, rhenane, glacial, longirostrate, rau^edulous, red,
white, cirrhate, merganser, gulo, morfex, scheladrachus, colymbus, uria,
br^nthus; Phalaris, avosetta, and trochilus: or herbivorous, eating grass or
plants; as the Swan goose, tante and wild, barnicle, birgander, capricalca,
duck, domestic, indian, lybian, cairine, wild, teale, glaucius, fuscous,
muscovie, platyrynchus, fistularie, candacute, black herle, la tardone, puffin,
and bird penelope, coot, and rallus. 5. Aquatick fissipedes, abiding in the
water and having divided feet; and are either carnivorous, or feeding upon
flesh; as the Storke, ibis; phoenicopter heron, blew, dwarf, garletta,
egretta, squaioeta, bittour, falcinel, bird pugnax; porphyrion, horion,
h^lorius, limosa, barge, haematopus, kingfisher, and rousserolle: or
insectivorous, or eating insects, as the Arqua-Arquata, crece, totanus,
calidris, himantopus, aquatick henn, chloropus, erythropus, rhodopus, erythra,
ochra, hypoleucus, serica; wood-cock, snite, gallinula, chloropodes, trynga,
red-sparrow, water-swallow; lapwing, cercio, plover; and charadrius: or
herbivorous, feeding upon plants, as the Crane, balearick, and japonian. 6.
Exoticks, or outlandish, chiefly the American, and they are terrestrial; or
such as live upon the land: as the Manucodiate, rhyntace, bird day guitguit,
maja, xochitenacatl, jajauhquitototl, tuputa, quapachtototl, tentzontototl,
tritonus, hoactzin, emeu, xochitototl, aura, garagay, quetzaltototl,
tzinitzian, totoquestal, tepetototl, hoitlallotl, dodone, ceoan, cenotzqui,
pauxi, picicitli, polyglotta, chicuatli, tominejus, cuntur: of Brasil,
Guranhaeengera, tangara, quereiva, tucana, quirapanga, macucagna, and mutu: of
Maragnana, ouyra ovassou, moyton, toucan, ouru, jandou, salian: or aquatick,
living in the water; as the Passer stultus, anser magellanicus,
jochualcuachili, xochitenacatl, tlauhquechul, acolin, quachiltone, acacalotli,
xomotl, acototloquichitl, aca cahoactl, jacacintli, xlepapantototl, hoactli,
heatototl, achalalactli, amalozque: of Farra, Lunda, alka, lomwia, ilabrimel,
goifugel, hafflert, stormfinck, barnfiard, helfingegans, exandgans, skua, aves
lomsbay, vultur aquaticus, flamenco: or Brasilian, as the Nhanduguacu, jacana,
curicaca, tiiepiranga jacapu, jambu, gallina africana, quiratangeima, jupujuba,
sayacu, any, guira guainumbi, jaeguacatiguacu, mitu, mituporanga, ibijau
guainumbi, jacup ma, jacamacaii, jacurutu, soco, matuitui, jabiru, jabiruguacu,
manucodiata or paradisea, gui^apunga, quiraquerea, jacamaciri, cariama, guara,
urutaurana, maguari, guarauna, ajaja, picui pinima, pica cureba, tuidara, guaca
guacu, tapera, psittaci aiuru, aiurucurau, aiurucuruca, tui tirica, jendaya tui
ete, tui para, araracanga, ararauna, anaca, maracana, qui juba tui, paragua,
tarabe, ajurucatinga, ajuruapara, ipecu, urubu, tamatia, guirajemoja,
gurrarunheengeta, cocoi, guiratinga, jacarini, guiratirica, guiran heemgatu,
curucui, caracara, tijeguacu, teitei, guiraguacu beraba, guiracoereba,
guiraperea, japacani, cabure, andira aca, macuacagua, urubitinga, mareca,
tijeguacu paruara, tangara, anhima, pitangua guacu, attinguacu camacu, guira
acangatara, matuitui, aracari, anhinha, ipecati apoa: the aquatick are,
Quiratinga, caripira, calcamar, ayaya, caracura, guara, guirateonteon; the
fabulous are, the Gryphin, harpie, stymphalides, sirenes, seleucides, phoenix,
cinnamologus, and semenda.

III. Fishes, which are, 1. Marine, and these are either pelagious, living in
the main sea, and either scaled; as the Linge, molva, morchuel, haddock, sea
tench, herring, liparis, aper, scolopax, monoceros, glaucus, and hippurus; or
smooth, as the tunie, pompilus, amia, swordfish, suckstone, sea-serpent,
conger, orphidion, lamprey, myrus, and taenia; or cartilagineous, and they are
long, as the Dogg-fish, galeus, catulus, eele, mustelus, asterias, maltha,
vulpecula marina, centrine, simia marina, zygaena, mola; or plain, as the
cramp-fish, fork-fish, sea hawk, raie undulate and oculate, oxyrinchus,
stellarie oculate and clavate, spinose, rough, fullonick and roughest; sea
frogge, skate, lamia, lump, and gibbous fish: or saxatile, living near stones,
and are squammose; as the Golden eye, thrush fish, peacock fish, lepras, cook
fish, julis, phycis, sea perch, channe, liver-fish, black tail, alphestes,
crow-fish, adonis, amber, anthiae, sea gudgins, sphyraena, horne-beak, and
faber; or smooth, as the Larkfish cristate and not cristate, and pholis: or
litorall, living near the shore, and are either squammose not plain, as the
Mullet, swallow fish, cuckcowfish, keeling, harp-fish, pagrus, crythrinus,
acarnane, orphus, dentix, synagris, chromis, guilt head, sargus, sparus,
mormyrus, cantharus, stock fish, stromatheus, fiatola, scorpion fish,
scorpaena, blennus, pecten Rom, graundlin, phalerick, membras, cobites,
hephetus, anchovae, atherina, lavaronus, sprat, mana, smaris, and boops; or
squammose plain, as the Sole, citharus, rhomboides, and plaise; or smooth, and
not scaled, and they are not plain, as the Sandilz, dragon, dracunculus,
star-gazer, roughtaile, mackrel, colia, saurus, corax; or smooth and plain, as
the Platessa, and sea flounder. 2. Marine and Fluviatile both, and are
squammose, or scaled; as the Salmon, pike, latus, alosa, ziga, mugil,
capriscus, sturgeon, galeus rhodius, and cataphractus: or smooth, as the Huso,
eperlanus, lamprey, eele, orbs, holosteos, and catan. 3. Fluviatile, or living
in rivers, and are squammose, or scaled; as the Trout, grailing, umber, barbel,
capitones, little, rapacious, and reddish; dace, oxyrinchus Rond, corvus
niloticus, nasus, gudgin capitate and not capitate, pisciculus asper; cobites
aculeate, and barbatula, phoxinus, bubulca, and roche; or smooth, as the
Attilus, antacaei, ichthyocolla, glanis, barbota, mustela, fossil fishes,
stonebright, and salmerinus; or living in rivers and other sweet waters, as the
Perch, ruffes, scrollus, bley, jack, carp, breame, ballerus, tench, and lota;
or lakish, as the Vmbla, trout, carp, lavaretus, bezola, albula parva, albus,
farra, pigus, schilus, and sarachus. 4. Exotic, and they are either squammose;
as the Tajasica, paru, pira acangata, acarauna, guaperua, piranema, acarapucu,
pudiano vermelho, pudiano verde, juruucapeba, jaguaraca, carauna, cururuca,
guatacuba juba, pira jarumenbeca, tamoata acara, pira pixanga, vubarana,
capeuna, acarapitamba, jaguacaguare, curimata, tareira d'Alto, tareira de Rio,
piratiapia, ceixupira, piquitinga, camuri, gvara capema, miivipera, guaibi
coara, guaperua, piraya, amore guacu, guacari, piraumbu, acaraja, acara,
guaru-guaru, cucupu-guacu, maturaque, carapo, piaba, piabucu, nhaquunda, amore
pixuma, amore tinga, guara tereba, piracoaba, corocoro, guatucufa, uribaco,
guarerva, camaripuguacu, piratia pua, curema, parati, and aramaca: or smooth,
and that altogether so, as Guamaiacu ape, petimbuaba, nhambdia, guaperua,
curvata pinima, puraque, piscis innominatus, mucu, abacatuaia, acaramucu,
punaru, timucu, guebucu; bagre, ajereba, jabebirete, niqui, and guatacupu; or
not altogether so, as the Guacucuja, guamajacu guara, and guamajacu attinga,
narinari, tiburones, and iperuquiba: or monstrous, etc. as the fish
Anthropomorphos, remora, piscis goensis, oxototl, pusta, michipillin, ambiza,
piscis mularis, piscis tauriformis, and amilotl. 5. Cetaceous, as the Whale,
whirle-poole, pustes, orca, dolphin, parpaise, cetaceous scolopender,
sea-calfe, and indian manati. 6. Exanguine aquaticks, which are either soft, as
the Polypus, cuttle, loligo, and sea hare; or Crustate, and are either tailed;
as the Lobster, astacus, or crevisse, shrimp, broad, gibbous, and little; or
round, as the Crab, majus, grampel, hippeis, undulate, marmorate, fluviatile,
little, and cancellus; Of Brasil, Guaja apara, guaia miri, carara una, cunuru,
ciecie ete, ciri apoa, nca una, guanhumi, aratu pinima, maracoani,
potiquiquiya, tamaru guacu, paranacare, guaricuru: or testaceous, and are,
turbinate, which are either involute, as the Nautilus, purple, buccinum, murex,
marmorecus, triangularie, white, purple orthocentros, coracoides, aporrhais;
and conchylium; or orbicular, as the Welke, trochi, nerita, cochlea, sea
urchin, spatagus, brissus, echinometra: or conchylious and bivalve, as the
Chama, oister, pectines, muscles, tellinae, balani, pholades, solen, nakre; or
univalve, as the Lepas, and concha venerea: as for Zoophytes, or
plant-animalls, they are, Vrticae marinae, pulmo marinus, holothuria, tethyia,
mentula marina, malum granatum, fungus marinus, penna marina, uva marina,
cucumer marinus, malum insanum, and manus marina.

IIII. Serpents, which are. 1. The vulgar and lesser, and are either
terrestrial, or living upon the land, as the Viper, ammodyte, horned serpent,
hemorrhe, sepedon, aspe, dipsas, scytal, double head, slow-worme, myllet, dart,
dryine, elaps, and snake; the exotic, and chiefly the Indian, are Boicininga,
ibiboboca, boigvacu, boitiapo, iraraca, caninana, apochycoatl, alatus, bojobi,
tetrauchcoatl, tleoa, cumcoatl, trinhutili: or aquatick living in the water, as
the Water snake, torquate and rubetarie; boas, hydrus, sea scolopender, accatl,
and boquatrara. 2. Dragons, and are not alate, or not having wings, either
without legs also, as the Basilisk, draco pythius, serpents bambae and
senegae, or not alate with legs, as the Hydra, and bononian dragon; or alate,
as the winged dragon.

V. Insects, which are. 1. Terrestrial with feet and wings, and are either
anelytra, having no wing-coverings, and have four wings, and these
membranaceous, as Bees, drones, wasps, hornets, grasshoppers, blister-flies,
cimices, perlae; or farinaceous, as Butterflies, phalanae, great, middle, least,
great diurne, middle diurne, least diurne, and silken; or having two wings, as
Flies, aquatick, phryganides, macedonick, tigurine, aeschnae, luteous, fuscous,
and water-spider; terrestrial, zoophagae, carnivorous, canine, equisugae,
bucularum osores, ovisugae, serpentivorae, merdivorae, bombylivorae, humisugae,
herbivorae, strutiopteros, erinopteros, chelidonios, seticaudae, unifeta,
bipiles, tripiles, quadripiles; oxeflie, asylus, dayflie, and gnat: or
coleoptera, having wing-cases; as Locusts, tenamazna. napaloa, gryllus, beetle,
cornute platyceros, aigoceros, quici, bovicornis, nasicornis, ariecornis; not
cornute, as the pilularie, melolonthes, purple, atrate, arboreous, fullo;
scarabaeus, proscarabaeus, water-beetle, taurus volans, cantharides, burn-cow,
ips, cucujus, glow-worme, blatta, earewig, scorpion, pismire, and pediculi
alati. 2. Terrestrial with feet, and without wings; and are such as are
paucipedes, or have fewer feet, and these are sepedes, having six feet, as the
Pismire, wall-louse, louse, reduvius, flea, nits, forbicine, talpa Ferrantis,
sphondyle, staphylinus, and anthrenus; or octipedes, having eight feet, as the
Scorpion, spiders, harmless, as the subdiale, and domestic, retiarie, and
telarie; and various, longlegged black, white, red, nhamdui; or hurtful, as
the phalangia, formicarie, venatorie, rhagia, stellate, ceruleous, sphecia,
tetragnathia, cantharidea, ervestria, cranocalaptes, sclerocephala, scolecia,
lanuginous, and lentiginous, or tarantulae and tunga; or having 12 or 14 feet,
as Caterpillars, smooth, as the green, ligustrine, sambucine, lactucarie,
mespilarie, quercine; yellow, vinula, fuscous; various; or hirsute and rough,
with much hair, as the pity ocampes, ambulones, corylarie, polymidae,
neustriae, tuberculous, mesoleucae, urticarie, brassicarie, and sepiarie; or
with less hair, as the Geranivora, jacobaea, antennula, echinus, rubicola,
and cornute; silk-worme, and mire: or multipedes, having many feet, as the
Cheselippe, pollin, coyayhoal, scolopender, and gally worm. 3. Terrestrial
without feet, as Worms, plantarie, as the arborarie, ligniperdes, corticarie,
syrones, and fructuarie, nopal ocuillin, axocuilin, cuchipilutl, deces,
enxulon, thripes, termites, cossi, teredines; fruticarie, leguminarie,
frumentarie, herbarie; or breeding in animals, with the litta, tarnia, meldera,
cleri, humane, sinones, broad, sharp, ascarides, and monstrous; earthworme, and
snaile. 4. Aquatick, and are either pedate, having feet, and these are
paucipedes, having few feet, as the Squilla, locust, scorpion, notonecta,
cicada fluv, anthrenus, forficula, neute, corculus, aquatick fly, cantharides,
beetle, water spider, attelabus arachnoides, ligniperda aquatica; or
multipedes, having many feet, as the Tinea, sea flea, sea louse, aquatick
asilus, sea scolopender and cadices: or apodes, and without feet, as the Leech,
stellae, cartilagineous, testaceous, smooth, pectinate, echinate, arborescent,
and solar, hippocampus, and uva marina: These are the general differences of
irrational animals.

There is further considerable. 1. Amongst Quadrupeds, that those that bring
forth animals have hairs, and the oviperous have shells: horses have most
hair upon the mane, lions upon their shoulders, conies upon the corners of the
mouth and legs, and the hare is most villous; in all, they grow thick in old
age, and gray in the horse; hogs and porcupines have bristles, the sheep is
covered with woole, and the goat is bearded. The skin, in the sea horse is so
thick, that spears may be made thereof; and in the elephant and rhinoceros, it
is almost impenitrable. The horns, in the stagge are ramous, simple in the
spitter, palmate in others, ramous and little in roes, not sheeding, turning
round in rams, dangerous in bulls, bending backwards in the rock-goat,
adverse in the damae, erect contort and sharp in the strepsiceros, the Phrygian
have moveable horns, the Troglodyte direct to the earth; also some have robust
for butting, others for wounding, some aduncate, others reduucate, others for
tossing are supine, converse or connext: and all are mucronate. The ears, are
moveable, and all have them, at least all that bring forth animals, and some
have great ears, others have little; they are divided as it were in the heart,
and pilous in the rat; in horses, and laboring beasts they show their spirits,
being emarcid in those that are weary, micant in the fearful, somewhat erect
in the furious, and loosed in the sick. The mouth, is large in the lion, and
dog, and as it were rent, in those that live by hunting, and mean in swine.
The trunk, is only in the elephant. The jaws, are long in working cattle, and
round in apes. The neck is stiff in the lion, woolfe and hyena. The duggs are
two, in those that have two young ones, and solid hoofes, and those betwixt the
thighs, so in bisulcs and those that are cornigerous: cowes have four teats,
and sheep and goats two those that have a numerous breed, and are digitate,
have more along the belly, in a double order, as swine; the best 12, the vulgar
10, so bitches: some have 4 in the middle of the belly, as panthers: others
two, as lionesses, the elephant has two under the shoulder: none have them
between the thighs, that have toes. The toes, of those that live by prey, are
five in the forefeet, and four in the rest; but lions, woolfs, dogs, and a few
others, have five in the other also, one hanging down near the joint of the
leg; the rest, which are less, have five. The nails are in all that have
toes; but the ape's are imbricate, those of the rapacious aduncate: in others
they are straight; as in dogs, except that which for the most part depends on
the leg. The hooses, are solid in those, that are not cornigerous: and those
that are horned, are commonly bisulks, the jllyrick swine in some places have
solid, and they are renewed only in the veterine. The tail is in all, except
apes, and in those that have eggs according to the body: they are bareish in
those that are rough, as boares; little in the shagged, as bears setose in
those that are longish, as horses; and being cut off, they grow again in
lizards, it is very long in kine, and rough at the bottom, in horses the dock
is shorter than in asses, but setose in the veterine; in the lion it is like the
cowe's at the bottom, etc. but not so in panthers: it is bushey in foxes and
woolfs, as also in sheep. Also in the internal parts, there is a diversity.
The teeth, are exerted in the boar, serrate in the dog and lion; contiguous
in the horse and cow, the foremost acute, and the interior plain. The
cornigerous have but one row: they are exert in none, in which they are serrate
they are not exert or serrate in any that are horned: but concavous in all, and
solid in the rest, and in the ape as in man; in those that are ruminant, the
lion and the dog, they are changed in swine they never fall out. The tongue, in
crocodiles, does all adhere: in lions and cats, it is of an imbricate asperity,
and like a file: and broad chiefly in the elephant. The ribs, are 10 in
swine, and 13 in those that are horned. The heart, in all, is in the middle of
the breast; in that of horses, kine, and staggs, there are bones. it is greatest
in proportion, in mice, hares, asses, staggs, hyaena's, and all that are
malefick by reason of fear. The lungs, in the tortise are without blood: and
greatest in proportion in the chamaeleon, and nothing else within. The belly,
in solipedes is rough and hard: in others that are terrestrial, of a
denticulate asperity, and in some mordaceous cancellate. The spleen, is round
in bisulks, and those that are cornigerous: prolix in the multifid; and very
long in solipedes. The reins are in all that generate animals; and only in the
tortise amongst the oviperous. The bladder, is in none of the oviparous, except
the tortise: and in none that want sanguineous lungs, or feet. The fat, is
often in the horned, having teeth in one part, and huckle bones in the feet,
these have tallow; bisulks, or the cloven footed, and without horns, grow fat,
and this when cold is fragile, and ever in the extremity of the flesh; but the
fat between the flesh and the skin, is succulent and liquid: some grow not fat:
but all those that are more sterill, are fat. The marrow, is red in the young,
and whitish in the old: it is only in hollow bones, and not the legs of
laboring beasts, and dogs: it is fat in those that are fat, and sevous in the
cornigerous: bares have none, and the lions little in their thigh bones and
fore legs. As for the place, for the most part it is the land; but some live in
the water, as the crocodile, seahorse, beaver, and sea tortise; some in denns,
others in trees; some in a hot climate, others in a cold; and in Africa, there
are no boares, staggs, nor goats. The diet also is not alike, cowes, staggs,
horses and swine, feeding upon herbs and fruits; sheep, low, goats high, upon
bows and sprouts; woolfs, lions, and dogs upon flesh; the beaver, and cat,
delighting in fishes; and the chameleon in flies; some chew the cud, others
not, the ape and monkey eat any thing, and the bear is said to lie hid in
winter, and to live by sucking the moisture, which is then in their swollen
forefeet. The generation is diverse also, but most generate in autumn, summer
or spring, and bears and bulls with ferocity, but dogs without it: for the
most part, they bring forth live young ones, but the tortise crocodile and
lizard have eggs, and cowes have their young only in the right sinus of the
womb. The gestation is various also, the woolf goes a month or forty days,
the bitch nine weeks: the sow 4 months, the goat 5. sheep 6, cow 10, and mare
11. The number of their young differs likewise, the mule is said never to
breed, the woolf but once, and the hare is often troubled with superfetation.
The bigness is differing, solipeds and bisulcs usually being greater than the
digitate. And the magnitude differs according to the place. torteises being of
an hundred pound weight in Taprobana, and lizards 8 cubits long in Aethiopia.
The life, in some is short, in others long. hares and cats live seven years;
rams and goats seldom above ten; hogs twenty, and dogs sometimes; the exe
seldom above 16, horses 35, mares till 40 or 50, or as Pliny, till 70 or
upwards; the mule 80, and stags an 100. The sight is most acute in the lynx and
dorcas; hyaenas and cats see in the night; moles, very little or not at all.
The hearing is most exact in the hare. The smell is best in the dog, and so
weak in swine that they are not offended with dung. The taste is exactest in
the ape. The inward senses are very dull in the bugill, which having hid his
head, thinks the whole body covered: others are more subtle; apes are full of
imitation: the fox tries the thickness of the ice he is to pass over, by
laying his ear to it: dogs remember the ways best, and are not excelled by
any but only man: staggs hearing the dogs bark, run down the wind, that their
sent may not betray them: and most beasts know what remedies are best for their
diseases: the panther seeks man's dung, the tortise strengthens himself against
serpents, by eating the herb called cunila, and the weasel uses rue. The love
of apes is such toward their young, that they often kill them by hugging them.
The lust of swine is such, that then they will wound such as stand in their
way, the bull is most impetuous, but the camel engenders only in the covert.
The motion also, is differing; some being swift, others slow, and the hare
swiftest, the elke will go as far in one day as the horse in three, but the
ass is exceeding slow. The voice in horses is called neighing, lowing in
bulls, braying in asses, grunting in swine, roaring in lions, houling in
woolfes, barking in dogs, yelping in foxes, and croaking in frogs, etc. The use
likewise is various, those that are hairie yielding milk, others flesh; some,
garments: and that of the dog, cat, and horse etc. is known, and the use of
their several parts follow.

2. Amongst Birds. The neck and parts toward the earth, are common with those
of other animals: and wings, feathers and bill are proper; but they want lips,
teeth, auricles, and nostrils, yet have little holes instead thereof. The eyes,
are as those of other creatures, two in number, but without lids; but they
wink, a membrane passing from the angle. The thigh is like the hip, long,
reaching to the middle of the belly, fixed to it. The hip is large in those
that have crooked claws, and the breast is stronger than in others. The tail
is supplied by a rump, it is short in those that have long legs, or whole feet,
but long in others. They bend the wings forewards. The legs are two, as in
man, but they bend them backwards as quadrupedes, they are long in those that
have claws, and live in the water: yet the manucodiats want them: they all have
diverse claws, and in some measure divided; those which fly high have all
four toes, three in the forepart, and one backwards, in stead of a heel; a
few have two forewards, and so backwards, and some have spurs, but not the
crooked clawed. The comb, is in the cock, yet some have feathers instead
thereof. The inward parts are differing also. The tongue is found in all, in
some long, in others broad, which may be taught to counterfeit speaking; in
some it is hard and sharp like horn, and fleshie backwards. The throat
stopper is in none, yet they temper the motion so, that nothing may fall into
the throat. The bowels are diverse, in some the craw lying before the stomach.
The ventricle in very many is carnose and compact, having a very strong skin
within. The craw being wanting, the gullet is broad and large where it is joined
to the ventricle, as in jack-dawes, crows, and quails; and those that want
it, have a long one, and their excrements are more liquid, as the porphyrio.
The intestine in some is small, and single. The appendices are explicate, but
few, and not above, as in fishes, but in the lower part, at the extremities of
the intestines. The gall in some is in the belly, in others in the intestines,
as in the swallow, and pigeon, etc. The testicles, are joined to the reins,
and in some are little and obscure, and in the time of coiture they are
greater. The sperme is white. The bladder is wanting, a great quantity of
humidity being required to the nourishment of feathers. The place, is the air,
water, or earth, and some abide not in the some region, the swallow tarrying
but half a year, the thrush and turtle three months, others depart after
breeding, as houps, and some live in hidden places. The meat, is flesh,
insects, herbs, grains, seeds, fishes and frogs: of these, some drink by
sucking, as those that have long necks, with intermission, and resupination of
the head and the porphyrio by biting. The generation is by the lying down of
the female, as in hens; or standing, in cranes: in some at any time, as in
hens: and they breed at any time, except in the two brum all months of winter;
but for the most part in the beginning of Spring, and Summer, when also they
breed, and commonly but once: they all lay Eggs, except the bat, which brings
forth young ones. Those that have aduncat claws are infecund, and their prey
more fruitful: of their eggs, some are white, as those of henns and
partridges: others, pale, as of the aquatick; others spotted, as the turkie's;
some red, as the pheasant's; and within they are all of two colors; the young
when hatched, pass out by the roundest part, the shell being soft, but
presently waxing hard: the time of sitting and number hatched is various,
sometimes only the hen sits, sometimes only the male: amongst pigeons the
cock in the day, and hen in the night: amongst ringdoves, the hen from noone
till morning, and the cock the rest; after coiture they quiver, and stretch,
themselves; amongst these there is sympathy; and antipathie, as betwixt the
swan and eagle, crow and kite, and so as to beasts. The motion, is various,
some walking, as crows, sparrowes and blackbirds leaping, partridges and
woodcocks running, storks and cranes throwing their legs forewards, kites
stretching their wings, and seldom shaking them; others, oftener, but only
their feathers, the crow stretching the whole side, hick-ways for the most part
close, linnets moving the wings once or twice, swallows flying high, low,
directly, partridges low, larks high and falling, quails leaping, ducks
upright at first and high; vultures and those of heavy bodies, flying from some
high place, and being ruled by the tail; some looking about, others bending
the neck many making a noise when they fly, others being silent, some flying
straightish, others pronely, obliquely, sidewise; and others resupinate; those
that have long legs fly holding them backwards; if short, they hold them
contracted: those that have crooked claws usually fly high, except the
nocturnall. The voice is most frequent in those that are small, and chiefly
when about generation, some make a noise in fighting, as quails; others before
it, sc. partridges, and cocks, after it; and amongst some, the cocks have one
note and the hen another. some sing all the year, others at certain times: the
noise in ringdoves is the same in all, the bird taurus imitates the lowing of
cattle, and anthus the neighing of horses. The life, is various amongst them,
the male sparrow not living much above one year, pigeons and turtles eight,
and quails and crows many. Their disease, is known by their feathers, and
they are subject unto many. Their divination is known, cranes foretelling fair
weather by their silence, and tempests by their noise; so herons, crying at
break of day, fair weather is expected when the owl hooteth at night, the
crow and quail making a noise in the evening portend foul weather, and
swallows flying up and down about waters. Their use, is for meat, medicine,
and sport etc. and their flesh is light, wholesome, and well digested. Their
difference, is according to their parts, so some have straight bills, some
crooked; some long legs, others short; some have toes, others whole feet,
others without: some are cristate or horned, others not: some have long necks,
as cranes, others short: their wings usually are proportionable, except in the
dodo which is covered with down, and for the most part all have tails: they
are great or little, terrestrial, marine, lakish, fennish, domestic, wild,
feelden, or solitary; their colors are diverse, so their meat, and frequency
of generation. The voice in nightingals is called singing, croking in crows,
calling in partridges, gagleing in geese, groaning in pigeons and turtles,
crowing in cocks, chackling and clucking in henns, crunkling in cranes,
quacking in ducks, cherping in sparrows, chattering in pies, and hooting in
owls, etc.

3. Amongst Fishes, The Cartilagineous, are plain or long: the lesser of them
are above a cubit in length, and their spine is cartilagineous, their gills are
detect, their finnes are double, and five on each side, they have eggs all
like birds; their place is various. The heart is pentagonous, and gall placed
in the liver in the galeus. The womb has sinus's, and those placed under the
septum of the midriffe, as birds. Some have their mouth upwards, or in the
extreme, and cannot take the prey, without resupination. They live in the deep
sea, and when they bring forth, they go to the foords and shores. Their meat
is fishes. Some of them generate aversly; the plain that have tails, copulate
being supine upon the backs of the females, and they have eggs in the
superior part: and hate the forkfish. The Raie has a long and rough tail,
the eye is covered with a nebula: the genital is like that of the sea-calse.
Their place is in dirty places not far from the shore. They generate by the
conjunction of their supine parts, and beget eggs, and bring forth animals.
The Psettaceous, or plain and spinose, have a spine that seems to be divided
in the amidst. Their finns are four, two in the prone part, two in the
supine, and circumvallate round. Their gills are four, on each side. The
tongue is wanting. The eyes are in the supine part of their heads. Their jaws
are rugous and rough, and serve instead of teeth. Their Throat is somewhat like
a craw, and contiguous to the ventricle. Their mouth is little in respect of
their bodies. The heart is gibbous in one part thereof. The liver is broad, and
embraces the ventricle. The gall is in the extreme part thereof. The spleen is
black; situated under the ventricle, which is broad. Their place is the sea,
and muddie rivers. Their meat is of crustats and shell-fishes. They breed once
in a year: and they swim transeversly. They take their prey, by hiding
themselves in the mudde and putting out their virgulae, and so alluring the
small fishes, coming to them as weeds. The Cetaceous, have lungs, artery and
neck, and other members common with the terrene quadrupedes. Their skin is
extraordinary thick. Their lungs serve to cool their great heat: therefore
they want gills; but have fistules. Their mouth is downwards, that the fishes
might escape, when they are resupinated. The teeth are wanting in some, others
are toothed, having them broad forewards, and sharp backwards. The teats in the
female yield much milk. Their fat increases much, they eating fishes, and
moving slowly. The internal parts, under the peritonaeum, which are made for
nutrition and generation, are more like those of terrestrial quadrupeds, than
of fishes: for the epiploon is less fat in them, the ventricle is great. The
pancreas is joined to the fundus thereof, and it passes to the intestines,
which have many windings. The mesentery is joined to the vertebra's, having
black glandules, veins and arteries interwoven. The reins are situated
betwixt the liver and testicles. The urine is percolated through the ureters
into the bladder, which is like that of terrestrial animals, and in the
inferior part of the belly, and it is retained by the sphincter. To the
urachus the umbilicall arteries are joined. The testicles are on each side,
longish, having preparant vessels, sc. many ramuli of veins and arteries
arising from the great vein, which after many turnings are inserted into the
epididymis. The genital is in the urinary passage, consisting of a hollow
nerve, the end of which hangs out, terminating in a slender glans; and within
it is replicate, and has its veins, nerves and arteries. The thorax consists
of true and small ribbs, a sternon, vertebra's and muscles. The lungs fill the
capacity of the same, and are of a thicker substance than in terrestrial
animals, in thickness and color resembling the liver of quadrupedes, and are
divided into two parts. The heart is on each side embraced thereby, being
included in the pericard, and placed in the middle of the thorax, like that of
the hog: also they have the rough artery, oesophagus, muscles, etc. as in the
terrestrial animals, the clavicle excepted. The head is articulated with the
vertebrae. The brain is divided forewards and backwards, thence conjugations of
nerves arise, the choroid plexus, rete mirabile, and two meninges. The womb in
the females has a neck of one hand in length, and then it is divided into two
rami, as in terrene quadrupedes, their testicles are placed at the horns of
the womb, and the pudend is betwixt the navill, and anus. Their magnitude is
various. Their place is the sea only, yet not in all, and in the deep; they
are seen chiefly about the solstices, and are at other times in the bottom of
the water. Their meat is fish, and chiefly herrings, which sometimes they so
greedily follow, that they cast themselves upon the shore. They generate within
themselves, and bring forth young, which when young follow the damme. Their
motion is slow, by reason of their largeness. Their sight and hearing is dull:
some say they use a little fish for their guide, they love the smell of pitch,
insomuch that they rub themselves against the sides of ships: and they are
driven away by noise. The Mollusca, or soft, having neither a rough or
testaceous skin, nor scales: they have a middle nature betwixt flesh and
nerves. Their head is betwixt the feet and belly, in the mouth are two teeth,
instead of a tongue they have a certain carnose substance in the mouth, by
which they taste. Their eyes are two, and large. Their feet are in the
forepart, about the head, bending about the eyes: some have acetabula, and two
long trunks, which they use as anchors in storms. They have a fistule above
the head before the alveus which they move about, they have a little finne
compassing in their alveus, by which they swim and direct themselves therein.
To the head is joined a venture of large capacity, the flesh of which is
orbicularly fissile. They have capillamenta in the side, serving in stead of
gills. The throat is narrow, after which is a receptacle, to which the belly is
joined; the intestine is slender, which tends toward the upper parts. The
bladder is wanting. They have a black humor serving in stead of blood. Their
place is in salt waters. Their meat is flesh. Their womb is bifid, and they
have two testicles near the genitall. The male has the prone parts of the
body more black than the supine, and all parts more rough than the female,
various by intervening lines, and the tail sharper. They copulate long, and
the females have eggs, at first undivided, afterward separated, and then
increase, after they have received a vital strength from the sperme of the
male shed thereon, and that after the manner of worms. The Crustates are in a
mean betwixt the testaceous and soft. They want bones. They have a head,
capacity, throat, and belly, common with other animals without blood. The belly
is little in respect of their bulk, and the intestine single, to the passage of
excrements. They have two foreteeth in the mouth, and three in the ventricle,
one on each side, and the third below: betwixt those in the mouth, is a carnose
part, serving in stead of a tongue. above the mouth are the eyes, which are
hard in all, fit to move inwards, outward, obliquely, and swiftly, therefore
they want eyeleds. Their head is little, with horns and appendices, with which
they fight, and feel their way. Their feet are eight, and move obliquely. They
have two claws, which they use instead of hands, of which the right is biggest
and strongest usually. Their flesh is reddish like blood, and in the belly is a
kind of palish humor. Their place is about the mouths of rivers, stony and
dirty places. Their meat is little stones, reites, mud, and excrements, and
flesh also. Their coiture, is as theirs that piss aversely, in the spring
time, and long, being without blood, and cold: the female brings forth a
reddish egg, compassed in with a very thin membrane, sticking to the belly and
sides, which afterward increases: the male is biggest and thickest, and the
first foot is single, and tail narrower. Their age is long, yet none of them
breath, but they are refrigerated by casting out water with their fistula.
Their sight is dull, but smell and taste well, they sleep like other aquatiles,
they are without voice, go obliquely, and swim only with the tail. they lie
hid in the winter, and are fat in spring and autumn. they fight with the
horns, and cast their shells after breeding. The Squillae have a tail, but no
forceps. The body is blackish in spring, but whitish after. Their horns are
sharp and in the top of the head. The intestine is terminated in the tail, as
in crevisses, by which they evacuate excrements, and bring forth eggs: they
live in marine, fennish or stony places: their meat is oisters, and reites. The
male is known by two white particles in the flesh of the breast, and the female
has eggs annexed to the belly: they copulate like quadrupedes that piss
backwards, in the spring time, near the earth. They are enemies to the pike,
whom they wound by their horns. The round crustates, sc. the Cancri, have
moveable eyes, an indiscrete head, without a brain, yet having a part serving
in stead thereof. The tail is turning: they look obliquely, and go so, having
ten feet with claws, the right of which is biggest, and in the foremost, the
superior part is moveable and the inferior not. they have two teeth inwards,
betwixt which, is a caruncle like a tongue: to the mouth, the stomach is joined
which is little. They live in rockey places, open in the winter, and hidden in
the summer. Their meat is shell-fishes, they draw the water into the mouth and
so pass it out again. They copulate in the forepart, by joining their
opercula, in which also they bring forth eggs: also the female has the first
foot double, and the male single; these only amongst crustates swim not, but
go, and that sidewise. They are very crafty, and in danger hide them selves in
the mud, or amongst stones: they fight like rams with their horns: they feed
on shelfishes by casting in a stone, when they open themselves; they lie hid
five months, and in the beginning of spring cast their shell, like serpents,
under which is a soft shell, so that they can hardly move. The Testaceous are
without blood, their shell within is smooth. Their flesh increases in the
increase of the moon, which is contained by the shell which is terrene, and
preserves their little heat, and they cast it not. They have teeth, and
somewhat proportionable to a tongue. Their head is downwards. The stomach is
joined presently to the mouth, and is little; after which is the belly, in
which also there is a papaver, from which passes a single intestine. They are
nourished like plants, by pores, and that by a sweet humor. Their motion is
adverse. They differ in the hardness of the shells, the holothuria, pulmones,
and echini having softer, than the purple and buccina; some are covered on
every side, as oisters, cocks, and tellinae; others have but one valve, the
other side sticking to rocks; the chamae, and solenes, are uncovered in the
extremes, so that they put forth the head, and hinder parts: of those that are
covered on every side, some are turbinate, as the purple, and buccinum; others
not, as the conchae; some have one shell as the lepas; others two, as mussels;
of the shells, some are smooth, as of the ungues, and mussels, others rough, as
of the purple, buccina, and oisters. their place is the sea, and they lie hid
in great heat and cold. Their generation is spontaneous, of spumous faeces.
Their sense is denied by some, though others grant it, and they have an
antipathie against thunder. The Turbinate have a torcular shell, out of the
midst whereof comes the head with two horns: some of them have small
teeth; some have a proboscis like flies, and it is hard in the purple and
buccina. near to the mouth is a venture, like the craw of birds, after which is
the gula, to which the intestine is joined, which is single, and reciprocating
toward the head, about which the excrement is evacuated in all turbinates
terrene or marine. they grow like worms their motion is as in the former. The
turbines, are great, eared, tuberous, angulous, muricate, or pentedactyls, and
they are orbicularly turned, etc.

4. Amongst Serpents. The head is light in some, heavy in others, broad,
narrow, white, black, yellow, or spotted, and some turn them so quick, that
they seem to have two heads. Their cares are not protuberant, but hollow. Their
eyes are hardish. Their upper eyelid moves not, but they wink with the lower.
The neck is wanting. Their slough is in stead of a skin. The tail is various.
As for their inward parts, their head is covered with one bone. The teeth are
serrate and sharp, and two are long in the upper part, perforate, by which they
ejaculate their poison. The tongue is thin, long, black, bifid in the end, and
sharp, under it is a cuticle, which like a vesicle covers the teeth, in which
is poison, which is shed forth by the holes of the teeth in biting. The heart
is little, long, and represents the figure of the reins, and is very hot. The
artery is very long, and seems to be under the tongue, and after it is
carried to the lungs, by which they differ from fishes; their lungs are single,
fibrous, divided by pipes, very long and fungous. The epiglottis is wanting,
but they contract and dilate the passage at their pleasure. The ventricle is as
it were a great intestine, like that of a dog, sc. angust, and of a long
figure. The intestine is small and long, reaching to the vent. The liver is
long and single. The spleen is little, and round. The gall in all, except the
water-snake, sticks to the intestines, and is full of a certain black and
liquid exerement. The bladder and reins are wanting: as also the genitall,
they not having legs, and testicles, the body being long; but they have two
meatus, like fishes, arising from the septum, passing on both sides the spine,
which in the time of congresse yield a white sperme. They want duggs, not
having milk. The womb is bifid and long, in which eggs are begotten, and pass
thence in a certain continuous series. Their bones are like those of fishes.
Their vertebra's are cartilagineous and flexile, and there are as many ribbs in
snakes as days in a month; also in respect of the heart, lungs, and rough
artery, serpents are like birds; and in the liver, intestines, and abdomen,
like fishes; but differ from both, in respect of the gall and disposition of
the eggs. Their place is Ophiusa, Melitaea, Thessalia, Apulia. Arabia, Numidia,
Aethiopia, Africa, and the Indies. Their meat is earth, and oniscs, and they
live long without meat, and when they devour any great bait, they contract
themselves; when they swallow birds, they vomit up the bones and feathers: they
delight in wine, milk, water and yolks of eggs, which they get, by twisting
themselves about them: as for their temper, some are cold, and others hot. They
are generated of the putrefaction of the earth, of the blood of certain birds,
and of the marrow of man's back: they generate by conjunction, so, that they
seem but one serpent having two heads, they lay eggs and hatch them, hanging
together like a bracelet; but some of them bring forth animals. Their voice is
hissing. Their motion is creeping, and their ribs serve them as legs. Their
enmity is against men, eagles, peacocks, storks, hawks, vulture, swallows,
cocks and henns, elephants, leopards, stags, swine, rats, tortise; ichneumon,
chameleon, crabs, and spiders; the ash, oak, betony, garlic, rue, wormwood,
mugwort, southernwood, herb frankincense, nep, elecampane, and fire. They love
one an other, eels, foxes, cats, ivy, fennel, and savin. As for their nature
and manners, they have their poison in the tail, which they bring to a little
bladder near the mouth; which, after the former is evacuated, is again filled
with more, in the space of a natural day. in the four coldest months they
lie hid, and eat nothing, and their poison then is so weak, that they may
then be handled without danger: at the rising of the dog star they are so
furious that they cannot rest. in the spring when they come out of their holes,
they cast their slough, beginning at the head. they live long, eating but
little. they sleep with their eyes open: in danger they chiefly defend their
heads; exposing their bodies to wounds, which are soon healed again. if they
are struck, they strive as much as possible to wound their enemies. their
poison is under their tongue, and there are as many kinds thereof, as species
of serpents: of these, the males, old, great, and fasting are most pernicious,
and all in summer, more than in winter. As for their differences, the female is
less than the male, and some grow to be above an hundred foot long. As for
their color, some are spotted, some streaked, some of the color of brass,
gold, silver, red, and green; as to their place, some are aquatick, others
terrestrial, some live in mountains, others in plains, some amongst oaks,
others about beeches, and hasels: in respect of smell, some are sweet, like
musk. in Hispaniola some are harmless, Some have great eyes, some little; and
others, of a bloody color. some have narrow mouths, others very large, some
have combs, others have horns, or wings, and are monstrous.

5. Amongst Insects, the horns are in some, others are without them. The eyes
are open in all, and hard, and moveable, The eyelids are wanting, and cheeks
also. The tongue in some is soft and weak, but hard and strong in all such as
have no sting in the tail. The teeth are wanting in such as use moist meat.
The covering is of a middle nature, betwixt skin and crust, and dry, and they
seem to have no nerves, bones, spine, cartilages, fat, or flesh, but have
parts of a middle nature betwixt all these. The wings are in some, others are
without them. The tail is only in the scorpion. The case is usually cast by
such as have wing cases. The legs are moved obliquely in those that have
them: and in some, the foremost longest are bended forewards; but those that
leap, or have the hindmost feet longest, are bended backward, and nature has
given some longest feet forewards, that thereby, wanting good sight, they might
remove what might trouble them: also those have most, which by reason of the
length of their bodi^s are most cold; and the wild fewer, in some their want of
feet is recompensed by the help of wings. Their generation is partly
spontaneous, partly by coiture. ^gnats and little worms do neither copulate,
nor are bred of animals. few of the males in coiture insert into the female;
but the females have a long genital, by which they attract the generative
spirit from the male. those that generate without coiture, engender worms, and
those that are spontaneous. the coiture of the rest is long, and they part
slowly. whether they emit sperm or not is uncertain, their generation is
perfected for the most part in three or four septenaries, as in oviperous
creatures, seven days after coiture there is a concretion and consummation of
the eggs, in the other three septenaries they cherish and hatch them, sc.
those which procreate with their foetus, as spiders. Their motion, is creeping,
walking, and flying, etc. they all move with more kinds of motion than the
sanguine animalls. Their breathing is not acknowledged by diverse, who
acknowledge only perfrigeration; but they want lungs, and not refrigeration,
they being of a cold temper. the noise that bees and flies make, is occasioned
by the agitation of the interior spirits. those that seem to sing, make a
noise by the membrane under the septum transversum, against which the included
spirit is moved. Many of them are exanimated under the water, and recovered in
ashes, not because they cannot inspire; but by reason that, that interior
spirit was suffocated by the humor, which being discussed by the heat, it is
again restored to it self. Their smelling is performed by their native
spirit. Their sound is by the attrition of the interior p^llicle, locusts make
a noise by rubbing themselves with their gubernacula; that of the be is
humming, but it is shrill in the grassehopper. The life is more tenacious in
them, than in the sanguineous, chiefly in those that have long bodies and many
feet, as in the palmer-worme, by reason of the multiplicating part of their
original, yet they are easily killed by pouring oil on them, its viscosity
stopping the narrow passages, and so intercepting the spirits. They differ
according to place, the fier-flie living in the fire, rough-wormes in the snow,
scolopenders in the sea waters, water-beetles and leeches in sweet waters,
worms in the earth, wood-worms in the roots of trees, the cerastes in the
sigtree, red and hairy worms in the service-tree, the butyri in vines, and
ipes, and the vinefretter in the leaves thereof, maggots in the cypress,
caterpillars on leaves, pras^curid^s in leekes, crambides in cabbages, punies
in mallows, weevills in wheat, the mida in beans, nits and lice in beasts,
tikes in sheep, brees in cowes, or horse-flies, the scolichia in the mullet,
others in the carp, perch, gudgin, and dace; the clerus in beehives, and moths
in garments. The color in some is the same, in others various. As for quantity
and figure; some are little, others great, round, ovale, angulous, smooth, or
rough, etc. some are winged, others not; others change their form, as
catterpillers, which turn into butter-flies. Some have wingcases, as beetles,
and cantharides etc. others have their wings always open, as flies, bees, etc.
Some have two wings; others four, sc. those that have stings in their bellies;
if in their mouths, two, The wings pulled off, grow again in none of them, and
those that have crusts over their wings are without stings. Some have wings not
divided, as bees, and wasps, and in butterflies they are mealy: as for the
legs, worms are without them, others have many, and most have not fewer than
six. The tongue in some is soft and weak, in others hard and strong, as
oxe-flies, and it is in all that have not a sting in the belly. very many have
teeth; but not those that live on moist things, some have a sting in their
mouth, and is instead of a tongue and lips; others in the belly; also they are
terrestrial or aquatick, with or without feet, etc. Also amongst the aforesaid
living creatures, some are Solar, sc. those that are generous, and lively, as
the bull, goat, horse, lion, and ram. Amongst Birds; the eagle, cock, crow,
swan, and vulture. Of Insects; the pilularie beetle and spanish flies: the
contrary, are such as are Lunar, Saturnine, and Martial, etc. The Lunar, are
the Cat, beaver, dog, goat, heart, otter, and menstruall blood. Of Birds; the
Duck, goose, heron, and merguli, etc. Of Fishes; the carp, crab, gilt-head,
frog, cister, perch, and cockle. Of Insects, Spiders, etc: the contrary are
such as are Solar and Martial. The Saturnine, are the solitary, nocturnall and
sad: as the Ass, camel, cat, ape, hare, mule, mouse, mole, bear, toad, and
wolf. Of Birds, the Bat, crow, crane, houpe, ostrich, owl, and peacock, and
Serpents. Of Insects, Flies, scorpions, pismires, and worms: the contrary, are
all but the Martial. The Joviall, are the Heart, bull, elephant, lamb, and
sheep. Of Birds, the Hen, eagle, partridg, pheasant, pigeon, storke, and
swallow: the contrary are the Martial. The Martial, are those that are
quarrelsome, impetuous, powerful, bilious, and rapacious; as the Dog, goat,
kid, fox, mule, purdal, and woolfe. Of Birds, the Crow, chough, eagle, hawke,
faulcon, kite, owl, and vulture. Of Fishes, the Dogge-fish, jack, perch, and
fork fish: the contrary are all, except the Venereall. The Venereall, are the
delitious, lascivious, mild, kind, pleasant, and tame; as the Calfe, cony,
dog, goat, and scinck. Of Birds, the Crow, cock, eagle, pigeon, peacock,
partridg, pie, swallow, swan, turtle, and wagtaile: the contrary are the
Saturnine. The Mercuriall, are those that are ingenious, crafty, sagacious,
fauning, and loquacious; as the Dog, ape, hare, heart, mule, fox, and weasell.
Of Birds, the Bat, colemouse, blackbird, gold-finch, lark, parret, pie,
nightingale, swallow, and thrush. Of Insects, the Beetle, be, kind, locust,
and pismire: the contrary, are the Martial and Saturnine. Of the influence of
which Plants, See my Isagoge Phytologica, etc.

Thus of the more general differences of Animals, in respect of parts,
quantity, quality, place, meat, generation, motion, voice, life, sense, and
actions, etc.

Now follow their differences, as used in Meat, and Medicine, and they are as
follows. 1. Of Quadrupeds, or fourfooted beasts, those most used in diet are
the tame, sc. the calfe, ox, cow, bull, lamb, weather, ram, ewe, kid, goat,
pig, sow, boar, and hog: amongst the wild; the wild boar and sow, red and
fallow dear, roebuck and capreol, hare, conie, and squirrels, etc. of which,
see more in their proper places. Of these, the Substance of some is thin and
light, fit for fine complexions, idle and tender persons, and such as recover
out of some great sickness, as rabbets, etc. others are more gross, tough and
hard, agreeing chiefly with country persons and such as labor, and
secondarily with those that are strong using much exercise, and accustomed to
feed thereon, as the bull, and hog, etc. others are of a middle substance, and
generally the best, and most proper aliment, ingendering mean blood, agreeing
almost with all ages, times, and complexions, neither binding the body or
loosening it, neither strengthening nor weakening the stomach, neither procuring
nor hindering urin or sweat, causing no alteration in the first qualities,
neither over-nourishing or extenuating the body, but preserving it in such
state as before, and restoring little more than is daily decayed; as the
heifer, calfe, sheep, lamb, kid, pig, and coney. As for the Temperature, some
are hot; as the lamb, hog, pig, in the first degree; in the second, the hare,
and roe-buck: others are cold as the cow, steer, coney, rabbet, and young
hedghogs, in the first degree; some are moist, us the wild boar, etc. in the
first degree, in the second, the hedgbuck, etc. in the third, young hogs, and
pigs: others are dry; as the ox, dear, hare, and coney, in the second degree.
In respect of Taste, some are sweet; which agree well with nature, being of a
temperate heat, and so fittest for nourishment, they delight the stomach, and
liver, fatten the body, increase natural heat, fill the veins, digest
easily, soften that which is two hard, and thicken what is too liquid; but if
over sweet and gluttish, they soon turn into choler, stop the liver, puff
up the lungs, and spleen, swell the stomach, and often cause sharp fevers: the
bitter, if exceeding, do not much nourish, except first boiled or infused in
many waters, they otherwise engendring choleric humors, and burning blood,
they kill worms, open obstructions, cleanse the body, but nourish little or not
at all, and that which is, is derived only to some special parts: those made
sharp, dry the body exceedingly, hurt the eyes and liver, etc. drawing down
humors, sending up vapors, inflaming the blood, fretting the guts, and
extinuating the whole body; therefore they are to be tasted or fed upon, their
sharpness being allayed with washing, infusion, oiling, and intermixture of
sweet things: those made sour, though they naturally offend sinewey parts
weaken concoction, cool natural heat, make loan, and hasten old age; yet
they are profitable in cutting phlegm, opening obstructions, clensing
impurities, bridling choler, resisting putrefaction, extinguishing superfluous
heat, staying loathsomenesse of stomach, and procuring appetite; but if made
sour without sharpness, they strengthen the stomach, bind and corr^borate the
liver, stay fluxes, heal ulcers, and give indifferent nourishment to them that
eat them: if made salt, as such, they nourish little or nothing; but rather
accidentally, in procuring appetite, strengthening the stomach, and giving it a
touch of much heat; for if very salt, they engender choler, dry up natural
moisture, inflame blood, stop the veins, gather together viscous and crude
humors, harden the stone, cause sharpness of urin, and leanness, sc. the
accidental salt, not the natural, and inbred: the fat, if excessive, glut the
stomach, decay appetite, cause belchings, loathing, vomitings, and scowrings,
choke the pores, digest hardly, and nourish little; so if two dry and lean,
on the contrary, it is worse, and nourishes less, but the mean is best: the
insipid, are of weak nourishment, yet extraordinarily they nourish some,
nourishment being according to the relish usually, and the unsavory nourish
less and not speedily: also what has here been said of substance, and taste,
agrees also to birds, fishes, and other edibles. As for the age, the flesh of
those that are young, especially if newly brought forth, is slimy, soft, moist,
and excrementitious, especially when they are most moist by nature; yet it is
sooner concocted, and makes the belly soluble: the flesh of those that are old,
is hard, dry, nervous, hard of digestion, and of little and bad nourishment:
wainelings, are less hard and dry than the one; and more firm, temperate, and
nourishing than the other; but generally they are best for most complexions,
when they are almost come to their full growth, both in height, length, and
bigness, their temper being then best, and so most agreeable to our natural
moisture, being in a mean: the same may be said of birds, as of beasts. In
respect of sex, the flesh of the males, is more strong, dry, and heavy of
digestion; the females sweeter, moister, and of more easy concoction; but the
males are to be preferred, being hotter, dryer, more laborious, and less
excrementitious, when gelt, as appears, in oxen and weathers: when gelt they
are more tender, sweet, and of an easier digestion, as appears in barrow
hoggs; they then being of a middle nature. As for their feeding, those that
feed in moist and moorish places, have moist flesh, and full of superfluities;
but those that feed on dry places and mountains, are without excrements, more
easy of digestion, and fit to nourish: those that feed in good pastures, are
sweeter and more nourishing; so those that feed upon sweet herbs; also the
flesh of wild beasts is less excrementitious and dryer, than that of the tame;
so likewise of birds. And as to the preparation, beasts after they have been
fatted with goood food, as often as they desire it, in a clean and spacious
place, and chased, then killed in their season; they either keep relinquish or
alter their property by preparation; here therefore it is to be noted, that
flashy meat and naturally moist, should be dressed with a dry heat, (as in
baking, broiling, frying, and rosting,) and meats naturally exceeding in
arynesse and firmness should ever be boiled; and the temperate may be used any
way: if crude, it is eaten only by the barbarians: if roasted, it yields a dry
aliment, and often retains the excrements: if adust, it is worse: if fried
with external humidity, it is sweet, by reason of its fat humidity, but by
reason it does not conveniently emit its internal superfluity, but rather
imbibeth more of the redundant external, it is hardly concocted, nidorulent,
and torrifieth the blood: if seasoned with salt, and spices, it is yet dryer:
if boiled it is dryer within, yet by reason of exterior humidity, it moist^neth
and descends sooner; but roasted meat has more of it is own proper and
natural moisture, that of the boiled passing into the broth, and therefore it
nourishes less except eaten with the broth; yet boiled flesh is best for such
as are yet growing, and so of a hot temper, as also for such as are sick of hot
and dry diseases, and that in hot and dry countries, and seasons of the year;
but roasted meats are best for those who are of a cold and moist temper, who are
loose, and subject to cold and moist diseases: if stewed, being equaly
prepared, it generateth good, temperate, and permeable juice: if seasoned, it is
according to the cookery. Note also that flesh engenders better, purer, and
more perfect blood, than fish, and for sound men is the best sustenance. As for
the Parts of beasts. The musculous flesh is more hot by vivifick heat, than in
birds, and therefore they grow larger: the head, is edible, sc. of the cow,
calfe, sow, boar, kid, and hare, etc. but of hard concoction, thick and viscous
juice, yet of much nourishment: the tongue is loose, fungous, humid, and
glutinous, therefore it yields not a solid, thick, or lasting aliment; yet in
some it is most sweet, soft, of good juice, easy concoction, and good aliment;
but the part exerted is harder; the tongues of calves, kids, lambs, hogs, and
sheep, are of easy digestion, and breed laudable juice, neats tongue is
thicker, but more fit for nourishment and not dried: the ears, are
cartilagineous, and nourish little, except eaten with the vieine parts: the
eyes, of those that are young, separated from their skin, fat, bals, and
humors, are of a tender and musculous flesh, which is very easy of digestion,
especially the calves: the cheeks, if of young, sat, and carnose beasts, are of
good juice, and those of calves most tender: the brain, is pituitous, of thick
juice, hardly distributed, and concocted, causing nauseousnesse and vomiting,
and helps against poison by its viscidity; those of calves, lambs, kids, and
pigs, are to be eaten at the beginning of meals, the pigs are to be dressed at
the fire being the moistest: the palate, which is commended in the cow, has a
certain membranous flesh, and is often used in pies: the snowt, in hogs, is
worse than the feet, but better than the head. The heart, is hard of
concoction, and that of the hog causes sadness, it nourishes little; but if
well concocted, the nourishment is not weak or bad. The lungs, are of a cold
and moist temperament, pituitous juice, and of easy concoction and
distribution, by reason of their rarity and levity, some say they cause
inflation of the belly, they are of a froathy substance, and they are good for
young men sick of hot agues; but bad for strong and laboring men, so light a
meat not sufficiently nourishing them, but putrefying in the stomach; those of
foxes are not wholesome, but rather medicine for sore lungs; they are softer
than the heart, liver, kidneys, and spleenes; but not inferior to the liver,
as to nourishment. The liver, of all animals, is of thick juice, hardly
concocted, and slowly penetrating; that of hogs is preferred, that of lambs and
kids does more easily pass along, and is of less thick juice; that of goats
is said to cause epileptick convulsions, no less than the he goats; but the
hogs with the fat, is commended; usually they cause obstructions. The spleen,
drawing thick lutulent and melancholic blood, yields also a like
nourishment; those that are reddish, as the hoggs; being tinged with a less
evil blood, are not of so bad juice; others are hardly concocted and
distributed, and of an unpleasant taste. The reins, are of ill juice, an
ungrateful sapour, and hard concoction; those of kids and calves, being
neither hard or virous, are commended; others are of thick juice, betwixt flesh
and kernels, allwaies having a smack of that which passes through them, and
being two strong for most stomachs, after sucking. The testicles, being virous,
especially after coiture, are hard, and not easily concocted, but those of hogs
are preferred, and those of lambs are not discommended; those of boares help
decayed bodies, and cause lust, so those of bucks, and staggs. The womb, is of
cold and crude juice, therefore hardly concocted and of little juice. The
ventricle, what nourishment it yields, may easily be conjectured from its
constitution, it is filmy, and therefore cold, hard, dry, and glutinous; it is
of hard digestion, generates phlegm, begets obstructions, and is the cause of
many diseases; soft and sedentary men must abstain from it, it being fit only
for porters, ploughmen, and mariners. The guts, are of the same nature; but
those of lambs, and kids, are of an easier substance and concoction; the other
are far harder than flesh, hardly concocted, of little nourishment, and
unwholesome, causing itches, and leprosies, etc. The mesentery, if of a young
calfe and fat, is good with a little vinegar. The udders, of milch beasts, as
kine, ewes, do^s, and shee-goats, are of laudable taste, and better than
tripes, being of a more fleshy nature; the lean must be sod tender in fat
broth, the fat may be sod alone; but each of them needs first a little corning
with salt, being naturally of a phlegmatic and moist substance. The feet, and
other extreme parts, of fourefooted beasts, consisting of membrans, ligaments,
nerves, veins, arteries, and gristles, are cold, and dry, clammy, viscous, of
little nourishment, and hard digestion, except of young and sucking animals, as
of hogs, pigs, lambs, and calves; also a tender cow heel is counted
restorative, and pigs pettitoes boild in barley water for the aguish; the
sodden feet of geese also were counted restorative. The kernels, are sweet,
tender, and short, yielding a thick nourishment; and if the beast be sound,
very good; and being well concocted in the stomach, they nourish as much as
musculous flesh; not well digested, they breed phlegmatic and raw juice, sc.
those of the breast; of the other, those that are soft generate phlegmatic
blood, and the hard, that which is raw; the sweet breads of beasts, are best
first roasted, then boiled, their superfluous moisture being so consumed. The
fat, hinders appetite, gluts the stomach, hardly digesteth, turns wholly to
excrements, and decays the retentive powers, especially that of greater
beasts; it relaxeth the stomach, causes nauseousnesse, turns into choler in
hot bodies, and is rather sauce for our meat than nourishment. The marrow, is
the sweet of fat, as it were, secretly conveyed, into bones; sweet, unctuous,
and pleasant of taste, nourishing such whose bodies are dry, and stomachs able
to digest it: it may be sod usually with capons, cockrels, and henns, in a
nourishing white broth; or pies may be made thereof; but it soon causes
surfeits: of all; that of the dear is counted by some to be easiest of
digestion, next that of a young mutton, and that of beef the heauiest, that of
a goat is offensive, and that of lambs or calves not good, being crude, bloody,
and imperfect for want of age: the chine or pithmarrow, is much harder and
dryer, than the brain it self, especially toward the further end of the back;
which dryness makes it less loathsome to the stomach, than brains are; and it
strengthens that body, which is able to concoct it: some make candles
therewith and yolks of new laid eggs, to restore nature, and recover the
weakness of the loins caused by venery. The tripes, are far harder in
substance, than their flesh, long in concocting, nourishing little, and
excrementitious, ingendring filthy diseases. The skin of beasts, even of
roasted pigge is so far from nourishing, that it can hardly be well digested
of a strong stomach. This is the Use of the several parts of Quadrupedes:
there are diverse other things taken and made from them. As milk, which is the
abundant part of blood, whited in the breasts of such creatures, as are
ordained by nature to give suck; serving for the young, sick, or old; which, if
crude, it is to be taken fresh, that it may not provoke flatulency, and it is
not good presently after bringing forth, it may be corrected with a little salt
or sugar; if boiled it is less flatulent, but thicker, the serum being boiled
away, and so is apt to obstruct the veins; if caseous, it nourishes much, but
is less wholesome; if butyrous, it is somewhat more viscous, more difficultly
distributed, and causes inflations; if serous, it nourishes least, but
presently passes through the belly; if of lean beasts, it nourishes little;
if of fat, it causes danger of a convulsion; if of black, it is better than
that of white beasts; if milked after delivery, that which is most liquid and
thin, is after more thickened; the best is that which is tepid, of equal
substance, not quickly running off the nail if put thereon, light, not
viscous, but sweet, without smell, white, somewhat shining, and taken from a
sound beast of good feeding, that has good dugs. The most usual are the
woman's, which is the best; the cowes is thicker, fatter, more nutritive,
obstructive and hardly concocted; the sheeps, is worse and obstructeth more;
the goats, is a little hotter, than the former, of a thinner substance, more
nourishment, and sooner passes away; the mares is very thin, hot, and
detersive; the asses, is colder than the rest, thinner; and more serous, less
nutritive and obstructing, and cleanses without acrimony and mord^eity, of all
which, see more in their proper places: here note, that the milk of any beast
chewing the cud, is bad for rheumes, coughs, fevers, headache, obstructions,
inflammations, sore eyes, shaking sinews, young men, cramps, convulsions, the
stone, and teeth, and the camels is the best of those, that chew not the cudde,
being sweetest and thinnest; also all is thinnest in the spring, and thickest
in the summer; and that of horned beasts is not to be eaten uns^dden, it so,
not curdling or easily engendring wind; but that of women, asses, or mares,
will never curdle into any hard substance, raw; the other is to be seasoned
with salt, sugar, or honey, abstaining from wine, or four things after it,
eating it upon an empty stomach, and fasting an hour after it, abstaining from
exercise, and sleep, after that of beasts chewing the cud, and cleansing the
teeth after it it is best for children, and old men, in the marasinus, atrophie,
and phthisick, and the camels for the first, the woman's for the second, and
asses for the third, being of a middle age, kept clean, fed with grinded malt
and a little fennel seed, then drink the milk morning and evening with sugar of
roses, also she is to be kept in fine leaze, or with good hay in winter, and
red cowes milk may be the substitute, so fed: also milk is in active qualities,
temperate, inclining to cold, in the passive moist by the fat and watery
substance, thickning by the cheesy, abstersive by the serous, and asswaging by
the butyrous quality, and the best is soon turned into blood, and fattens the
healthful and clean, but is soon soured in cold stomachs, adust in the
chollerick, and swells the stomach and guts. The whey, as to its aqueous
substance and phlegmatic, does refrigerate and moisten; and cleanses as to
that which is sharp, salt, and bilious. The butter, helps the breast and
lungs, brings forth spittle, helps hot and dry coughs; if taken much, it
looseneth the belly, and has a faculty of digesting, discussing, concocting,
and gently evacuating; but if old, it grows acrimonious: also butter is hot
and moist 1, and almost of the same nature, as oil of ripe olivers; but it is
more moist than hot; the stale is hotter and thinner; and the new, almost
temperate in the active qualities, it nourishes and fattens; if too much used,
it loosens, hurts retention of the stomach, takes away the appetite, and begets
a naufeousnesse, and it is therefore to be avoided by those who are subject to
looseness, as also by men of hot complexions, who turn it into choler; it is
to be eaten first, it quickly descending into the belly, and making way for
other meats; but if it be eaten last, it loosens the stomach, and hinders the
orifice from embracing the meat, and closing up, hastening meat into the belly
before it be concocted, it is rheumatick, and easily converted into oily fumes,
hurtful to the throat and head, and fluxes of blood, humors, or sperme, and
it is rather to be used as sauce and physic, than as meat to feed upon: it is
best at breakfast, tolerable at the beginning of dinner; but no way good at
supper, it hindering sleep, and sending up unpleasant vapors to annoy the
brain; it is also best for children whilst they are growing, and for old men
decaying; but unwholesome betwixt those two ages, hot stomachs turning it into
choler, and the weak not concocting it, it floating in the stomach; the
fattest is made of sheeps milk the strongest of goats milk, and the best and
most of cowes milk, of which see more afterward. The cream, which is either
the flower of raw milk taken from it without fire, after it has stood in a
cold place; or the other, from it, when sod, or clouted cream; the first of
which though pleasant, yet weakeneth concoction, hinders retention, and is of
harder digestion than any milk; the last, used in tarts, fools and custards,
is less offensive, and of better nourishment; but it is to be eaten first, it
being light and unctuous: some count the former, to be like butter, and to
agree with it in virtues and quality; the other is of thick juice, and helps
hot defluxions, and watching. The curds, which are fresh, without salt or
runnet, or the other, with the one or both, are both utterly unwholesome when of
skimmed milk, clamming the stomach, stopping the veins and passages, speedily
breeding the stone, and many mischiefs; but if they be equally mixed with the
butterish part, the cheese made thereof is wholesome; except age, or ill
ordering has done hurt. The cheese if new, sweet and fresh, nourishes much;
the middle aged nourishes strongly; but the old and dry hurts dangerously,
it stopping siege, obstructing the liver, causing the stone, choler, and
melancholy, lying long in the stomach undigested, procuring thirst, making a
stinking breath, and a scurvy skin; so that no more thereof is to be eaten,
than to close up the mouth of the stomach after meat, though the fresh may be
eaten more liberally of: as to the Differences, the good is neither too soft or
hard, close or spongy, clammy or crumbling, salt or unsavory, dry or weeping,
pleasantly or strongly smelling, easily melting in the mouth, and never burning
when tosted at the fire; Also that of ewes milk is soonest digested, that of
cowes more nourishing, and the goats most, when new and soft; for it soon
becomes dry, earthy, and crumbling the best is counted that of Banbury, and
Cheshire, and the Holland cheese with salt. Also the old is hot and
acrimonious: when new; cold, moist, more windy, less provoking thirst and
binding, making fat, helping the stomach, easily distributed, yet hard of
digestion, causing the stone, etc. the stinking is worst; the sharp and salt is
hot and dry, and causes thirst and evil juice; the sower is of evil juice and
cold, the sweet and fat is moderately hot, and more nourishing and of better
juice; and the lean is far worse, the laxe is better than the close, and the
friable bad. As for medicine, the carnose parts, as also the creatures
themselves used alive or divided, and hot, applied to any member, have a
fomentative virtue, paregorick, and discutient, and so are of great use in the
phrensey, headache, and watching; and they may be applied to the head, neck, and
soles of the feet; applied to pestilent tumors, and stinging of poysonsome
animals, after ventoses, they draw out the poison, defend gallings by the
shoes from inflammation; and more particularly, every part respects its like;
as the liver, the liver; and spleen, the spleen etc. The horns, are cold and
dry, discuss, incide for the most part, cause sweat, and are alexpharmick,
according to the various nature af animals. The bones, dry, discuss, bind, or
stop fluxions, and strengthen the bones and ligaments; those of the heel
burnt, help the colic, etc. The gall, heateth, dries, incideth, cleanses,
stimulats the expulsive faculty, kills worms, applied it helps dimnesse and
spots of the eyes, and purulent ears, and they differ according to the nature
of the aliment and animal: amongst those of quadrupeds, the bulls is the
chiefest, that of partridges and hens amongst birds; and generally those of
birds are stronger, than of the terrestrials. The blood, heateth, binds,
stops fluxes of blood, more or less according to the various nature of
animals, and nutriment; that of birds, being for the most part nitrous, does
incide, cleanse, break the stone, and help suffusions of the eyes, as that of
the pigeon, kite, and vulture: also blood is hard of digestion, moist, and
excrementitious; that of geese, swans, hoggs, and sheep, is used in sauce and
puddings, but it is a gross and fulsome nourishment, except meeting with a
strong and good stomach. The tallow, is hot and moist moderately, or 1.
mollifyeth, discusseth, and somewhat binds. The siege, is according to the
nature of the aliment and animal, which by the chylifick virtue is altered; the
excrements of birds, (being of a most hot nature,) are altogether nitrous, and
therefore have a wonderful strength, to discuss, incide, attenuate,
dissolve, open, and cleanse the spots of the skin; but diversely, according to
the diversity of birds and their aliments: those of laboring beasts, are
anodyne, refrigerant, discutient, and are used both inwardly and outwardly. The
urin, is the colamen of chyle and blood, consisting of salt and a viscous
earth, mixed with phlegmatic humidity; it heats, dries, cleanses, resists
putrefaction, and expels urin, etc. The rennet, even all, is of a sharp and
digestive faculty, and drying.

2. Of Birds, those most familiar unto us, are the tame, as the cock, hen,
capon, chicken, turkey, peacock, goose, guiny-hens, duck, and pigeous: Amongst
the wild; feeding chiefly upon the land, are, the bistard, crane, heronshaws,
bittors, stork, pheasant, heath-cock, partridg, plover, lapwing, cuckoe, pie,
crow, woodcock, railes, redshanks, gluts, woodsnites, godwits, smiring,
turtles, stock-doves, rock-doves, ring-doves, jays, wood peckers,
stone-chatters, thrushes, mavis, feldefares, black-birds, stares, quails, and
all sorts of little birds, as sparrows, reed-sparrows, larks, bulfinches,
goldfinches, thistle-finches, citron-finches, bramblings, linnets, nightingals,
buntings, waggetailes, robin-redbreasts, wrens, witwalls, siskens, ox-eyes,
creepers, titmise, titlings, swallows, and martlets: Others in or upon the
waters, as the swan, bergander, barnicle, wild-geese, wild-duck, teale, widgin,
fly-duck, shovelars, cormorant, curlnes, gulls, black-gulls, sea-mews, coots,
water railes, sea-pies, pufins, plovers, sheldrakes, moor-cocks and moore-hens,
dobchicks, water-crows, kingfishers, and water-snites, etc. of which see more
afterward. Amongst these, some are of a thin and light Substance, as chickens,
young pheasants, partridg, heath poulse, godwitts, all small birds when young,
wings and livers of hens chickens and partridges, and their warm eggs; others
are more gross, and strong, as geese and swans; others are of a middle
substance, as hens, capons, turkeyes, and house-doves. The Temperature, of some
is hot, as of the gosling, partridg, quail, thrush, in the first degree; in
the second, the turkey, peacock, pigeon, duck, and turtle; others are colder
than the former; some are moist in the second degree, as the turkey, young
pigeon, ducks, and young quails; others dry, as the peacock, and heath-cock in
the first degree; in the second, the partridg, turtle, thrush, and blackbirds,
etc. others are temperate, as a young pullet, crowing cockrel, grown capon,
hens eggs poched, and all small birds when young. As to the taste, they are
diverse. The preparation after feeding with good meat as often as they desire
it, in a spacious place, and rightly killed, garbelled, and pulled, must be by
boiling, rosting, or baking, etc. according to the aforesaid rules, about
beasts. In respect of age, the young are most moist tender and excrementitious,
and the old more tough heavy lean and dry, and the full grown best. As to the
sex, the males are more strong, dry, and heavy of digestion, and the females
are sweeter moister and more easily concocted; but the kerned are of a better
nature. According to their feeding, those that feed themselves abroad fat with
wholesome meat, are of better nourishment, than such as are crammed in a coop:
and those that live in moist and moorish places, have a more moist and
excrementitious flesh, and harder of digestion; those that feed upon
mountains, have dryer flesh, more easily concocted, and void of excrements;
the flesh of the tame nourishes more than that of the wild, and roasted or
fried they are dryer than boiled: Also the purer their meat is, the better they
are themselves; and those that feed upon flesh and garbage, are not so wholesome
as those that feed upon corn, bents, and seeds, those that feed upon worms
and fishes at the sides of the water are worse; and such as eat serpents, and
spiders, etc. the worst, yet, may be more medicinable, and those taken by
flight are preferred; and those that have the whitest flesh are of easiest
digestion, the red fleshed are of strongest nourishment; and that which is of
black flesh, is hardly digested, and of slow nourishment, and so much the
worse, by how much the flesh and skin is blacker. As for the Parts of birds.
The combs of cocks, some reckon amongst meats, and they are counted
aphrodisiastick. The wings are of good juice and easy concoction, their crude
superfluous humidity being consumed by exercise; the Pinions are of like
disposition with the feet of beasts; yet those of geese, hens, capons, and
chickens are of good nourishment. The rump which is most fleshy and fat in
those that have short legs, does often cause nauseousnes, they are
correspondent to the rumps of beasts, having kernels, and cloying the stomach.
The brain is more dry and hard, than that of quadrupeds, and that of mountain
birds better than the other of such as live about fens and fields; that of
cocks, partridges, and phesants is most sweet, and that of sparrows and pigeons
is venerious; but none are absolutely commendable, except of such foul as are
temperate, as cocks, chickens, capons, pullets, partridges, and pheasants; also
those of roasted wood-cocks, snites, black birds, and all small birds, are
counted wholesome; but those of great birds, water-foule, pigeons, and all sorts
of wild doves are counted bad; yet those of quails help the epilepsy, and the
cranes the hemorrhoids. The neck is hurtful to the eyes by reason of blood
coagulated there, yet some say, ala mala, coxa noxa, crura dura, cropium
dubium, collum bonum. The tongue, the more musculous it is, the better, and
that of geese causes lust; but those of birds, are generally very dry, hard,
and gristly, except those of parrets. The heart is of a fibrous and hard
substance, hardly concocted and distributed, and often eaten, it causes
melancholic blood, and it nourishes little, except overcome. The lungs are
easily concocted by reason of their rarity, and nourish little. The ventricle,
which for the most part is carnose and callous, is most sweet in geese, that of
hens is more fleshy than callous. The intestine, of some is used, as the larks,
wood-cocks, and suites, when fresh. The liver is hot and moist, suitable to our
heat, that of geese is very nourishing; those of tame foul, as hens, capons,
chickens, ducklings, and geese, fatted with wholesome meat, please the taste,
clear the eyesight, agree with the stomach, and increase blood; those of
cranes sod in the broth of cicers, assuage the pain of the back and kidneys,
but they are of small and bad nourishment; those of larks and suites are very
sweet and restorative, as also of the wood-kock, which has the greatest in
proportion of all other birds. The testicles, which are best in cocks fed with
a serose meat, steeped in milk, are desired by the delicate, as promoters of
lust, and some say, that being kept from the hens, they will every day add so
much flesh to the body, as the stones themselves are in weight; some attribute
the same to those of sparrows, pheasants and partridges. The feet, having but
little flesh, nourish but little; and having nerves and tendons concoct
difficultly, those of geese are counted restorative. The skin of those that are
fat, is sweet, but of little nutriment, and hard concoction, but that of the
loins of cocks is most sweet; that of the neck, if rugous and fat, is better
boiled than roasted; yet the skin of no bird turns to nourishment, but rather
to ill humors, or filthy excrements, and some birds are sodden or roasted
without them, being black or bitter, as rookes, daws, coots, and moore hens.
The marrow of the back, is of the same virtue, as the brain, but somewhat
harder; that of the bones is more pleasant and fat, but being leberally eaten,
it causes nauseousnesse. The fat, moderately taken with salt, nourishes a
little but not well, yet pleasantly; it destroys appetite, wine being drunk
after it, the ventricle being made smooth, and the wrinkles taken away; but
that of little birds and small chickens, is not amiss, being soon overcome,
but of such the lean is best. The kernels are counted restorative. The eggs
consist of a yolk and white, that is easily inflamed and turned into fumes; but
this is cold, glutinous, begets ill blood, and is hardly concocted, but
together they generally agree with all stomachs: the best are those of hens,
partridges, and pheasants, being of the young and fat trodden by the cock, new,
white and long, such nourishing quickly, plentifully, clearing the voice and
breast, and strengthing the stomach, helping consumptions, and increasing
nature; and are best in the winter, and morning eaten alone, they otherwise
corrupting; and hurt children and old men, but are good for temperate young
persons, in fluxes, sharp humors, and weakness; others are of a bad relish,
and strong savor, and worse, as of ducks, geese and peacocks, and of all
water-foul, and the paler, being more aqueous; the trembling are of much
nourishment, good juice, easy concoction and distribution, and generate good
blood; the sorbile nourish less, and help asperity; the boiled are hardly
concocted, pass slowly, and yield thick aliment; the roasted are grosser, and
worse if covered with ashes, but better on the coals, and sod in water; if
tried, they become nidorous, corrupt other meat, and cause thick juice; and the
poch't are best for hot co^plexions. As for their use in medicine, see the
proper places.

3. Of Fishes those we feed on in England, are either scaled, as sturgian,
salmon, grailing, shuins, carps, breams, the barbel, mullet, pike, luce, perch,
ruffs, herrings, sprats, pilchers, roche, shads, dorry, gudgin, and umbers; or
shelled, as scallops, oisters, muscles, cockles, and periwinkles; or crusted
over as crabs, lobsters, crevisses, and shrimps; Or neither scall'd shell'd,
nor crusted, as tuny, ling, hake, haberdine, haddock, seal, conger, lampreys,
lamprons, eeles, plaise, turbut, flounder, skate, thornback, maids, sole,
curs, gildpoles, smelts, cuttles, sleeves, pouts, dogfish, poulps, yards,
mackrils, trouts, tenches, cooks, whitings, gurnards, and rochets: to which may
be added minoes, spirlings, and anchovaes: of which see more in their proper
places. And as for their Substance, that of some, is thin and light, as of all
little fishes of the river; others are more gross tough and hard, and bad if
clammy, as salt-fish, ling, and tunies; and others in a mean, and the best are
friable, fat, new, and adult. Their Temperature, is cold and moist usually, of
some it is hot, as of sturgian, mullet, oisters, cockles, in the first degree;
in the second, pickled oisters, and anchovaes; others are cold, as eeles,
lumps, old-wives, fresh tunny, fresh sprats, and fresh herrings, in the first
degree; in the second, tench, pike, shrimps, crabs, and crevises: some are
moist, as lamprey, barbel, crab, shrimps, and crevise, in the first degree; in
the second, fresh sturgian, lumps, olaffs, tunny, tench, eele, and fresh
oisters; others dry, as the dorry, and all fresh fish lightly powdered; in the
second, mullets, crabs, perwinkles, and cockles; in the third, fish long
salted, and stockfish: and some are temperate, as soles, and perches. The
taste, is diverse. Their Preparation also, alters them much; the flaggy,
slimy and moist, are best broiled, roasted or baked; and the firm and dry,
sodden. And as for their Age, the little, if of more hard flesh, are bad, and
the softer that are mucous; the old, loose much of their flesh, by age; those
of a middle age, being neither mucous, nor of evil juice, are good. In respect
of Sex, the males are more strong, dry, and heavy of digestion; and the
females are sweeter, moister, and easier to be concocted, and the barren fish
are counted of a middle nature, and grow most fat. According to their feeding,
those that eat flesh, are of a harder and dryer flesh; those that live upon a
mucous matter, are of a glutinous substance: and those that eat roots and
herbs are of a friable and soft flesh: those that feed upon salt, and saltish
mud, are very salt, and unwholesome for most stomachs: those that devour bitter
weeds and roots, in some places, are bitter: those that feed upon garbage,
carrion, or city filth, and the like; are not so sweet, wholesome and
pleasant, as they which feed themselves in seas, and rivers, they enjoying the
benefit of fresh air, agreeable water, and meat correspondent to their own
nature. In respect of place, those that live in fennes, being more muddy and
less exercised, are full of excrements, most slimy, unsavory, last digested,
and soonest corrupted: those of great lakes are better; the pond-fish are soon
fatted, having much meat and little exercise, but they are not so sweet as
river fish, except they have been kept in rivers to scour themselves,
especially if kept in standing ponds, not fed with continual springs, nor
refreshed with fresh waters: those of rivers, if troubled and defiled with the
filth of great cities, are bad for the stomach, of gross substance, and of
difficult excretion; but those of clear waters, are better than the lakish, and
they are best and most wholesome and light, when they live in rocky, sandy, or
gravelled rivers, running northward or eastward, and are best when swimming up
highest; but those that live in slow, short, and muddy rivers, are
excrementitious, of corrupt juice, and of a bad smell and evil taste: the
marine, living in seas agitated with the wind, and boreal, have very good flesh
by reason of their exercise, and purity of the wind: and sea fish is not only
the sweetest of all other, but the least hurtful, and though their substance be
thicker and more fleshy, yet it is most light and easy of concoction, and
wholesome, the salt water washing away the inward filth; it is less moist and
clammy, easier of concoction, sooner turned into blood, and every way fitter
for man's body, when the next continent is clean, gravely, sandy, or rockey, and
northeast; and not calm or muddy: the pelagious, living in the bottom of the
sea, are of a hard flesh, hardly concocted; but of much nourishment: the
littoral, by exercise dissipating the excrements of their feeding, are better
than the former: the saxatil are easily concocted, of good juice, abstersive,
light, and of little nourishment, sc. those that keep their place and feeding;
the wanderers, by reason of their constant motion and beating of the waves,
have harder flesh: the fossile have a hard and unpleasant flesh, and sometimes
have been so bad, that all have dyed, that have eat thereof: the Amphibii,
living partly on the land, partly in the water, by reason of the variety of
their meat and motion, are hardly approved of: also fishes of the same kind and
species differ in their goodness according to the healthfulnesse of the place,
in which they live, and some are better in the ocean than in the mediterranean,
and the contrary. Note, that be a fish well grown, it shows it is heal thy; if
fat, it is young; and new, it is sweet; and keeps but till the next day, if fed
in a muddy or filthy water, it soon corrupting; also sodden fish or broiled, is
presently, to be eaten hot, for kept cold, in one day, if without pickle or
vinegar it will corrupt, and hurt the eater; and if taken out of a pan, it is
not to be covered with a platter, least the congealed vapor drop thence, and
so cause vomiting, scouring, or corruption in the veins; also before the
eating of a fish dinner, the body is not to be heated with exercise, least the
juice too soon drawn by the liver, corrupt the whole mass of blood; neither
is it to be sodden or eaten without salt, pepper, wine, onions, or hot spices;
all fish compared with flesh being cold and moist, of little nourishment,
engendring watrish and thin blood; and though crabs, skate, cockles, and
oisters, procure lust, yet it is not by great nourishment, but by wind, making
sharp nature and tickling, and such sperme is unfruitful; furthermore those
fish which are scaly, and have a substance that crumbles easily, are more
wholesome, than those that are without them, being of a dryer substance; but the
other are more slimy, moist, and glutinous. As for the Parts of fishes. The
head, in some is edible, as that of the mullet, salmon, umber, and carp. The
tongue, is tender and fat in the dolphin, sweet in the carp, and causes
venery. ^he eyes, in the salmon are tender and fat. The barbs are counted
delicate. The neck and throat, salted, are pleasant, and hardly vitiated. The
livers of the aselli, are counted better than those of other fishes; and that
of the sheath-fish, is so sweet, that it causes nauseousnesse; that of the
pike roasted and seasoned with the juice of an orange, is not inferior to that
of geese. The sides of sturgians and lampreys are commended. The bowels are
commended in the scarus, and are pleasant in the dolphin, by their taste and
smell. The belly of the huso tastes like hoggs flesh, that of tunies is to be
seasoned with salt vinegar and fennel. The lactes, are commended in the huso
and lamprey. The abdomen in the tuny is fat and savorie. The intestines are
commended in the pike, salmon, asellus, and conger. The ilia of the flounder
are commended also. The Ioines are counted good in the sphyraena. The tail, in
the pike and tunie is desirable. The skin of the tench, is by some women
preferred before the flesh. The eggs or spawn, of perches broiled, of carps
sod and fried, of the pike, salmon, and huso seasoned, are desirable; but
those of barbels, cause pain in the belly. As for medicine, the crustaceous, or
testaceous, are all of a saline and tartareous nature, and yield excellent
remedies to resolve the stone or tartar, to help the strangury, dysury,
ischury, and difficulties and suppression of urin, the colic passion, and
tartareous diseases of the lungs; etc. And outwardly they are used in
dentifrices, especially if burnt, also they consolidate and dry chaps in the
skin: And all kinds of stones found in the heads of fishes, powdered and drunk
in wine, help the colic, and stone in the reins.

4. Of Serpents, there are few that are eaten, or that eat them. And as for
medicine, the body having the head and tail cut off and intrals cast away,
being flead, well washed, boiled with wine, with aromatized broth, is commended
against the leprosy. The fume provokes the menses. Boiled in oil with the
flowers of cowslips, it helps the gout. The ashes help fistula's. And as for
the parts: The eye applied is said to help epiphora's. The heart bitten or
applied helps the toothach. The liver eaten is said to be prophylactick. The
gall, helps bitings of mad dogs, tasted caseth delivery, and applied helps the
hemorrhoids. The blood makes red the lips, applied cleanses the skin, and
helps stinking of the gumms. The fat with other things helps the french
disease, the palsy and gout boiled with may butter and strained, and with
bulls gall in pessaries it helps sterility. The flesh cleanses the skin, and a
dram of the powder taken with syrup of honey helps the leprosy, also it helps
wounds and cut sinews. The cast skin, helps falling off of the hair, and
clears the eyes rubbed therewith, boiled in vinegar it helps the toothach,
and brings out the same, and boiled in vinegar or oil it helps pains of the
ears. And the fume with apopanax, myrrh, galbanum, castoreum and pigeons ar
hawks dung, brings forth the foetus alive or dead. The Particular Serpents,
See after.

5. Of Infects, few are used as meat, except snailes, which some count most
dainty sweet and nourishing meat, and are best toward winter having scoured
themselves, and those are to be preferred that are of a middle size, feeding in
the summer time in hilly places upon wholesome herbs, and are to be eaten after
september: also they are bad for those that are of cold and moist complexions,
being cold 1. and moist 2. but help those that are hot, choleric, thirsty,
inflamed, watchful, and those that have ulcers of the lungs being parboiled in
warm water, and so broiled upon the coals, and eaten. As touching the use of
insects in medicine, there is little to be said in general; but of them, as
also of the rest of the irrational animals, see more after, more particularly,
in Alphabetical order.

Having thus spoken of Animals, as to their general differences, in respect of
parts, magnitude, place, qualities, meat, generation, motion, voice, life, and
actions, etc. together with their use as Meats, with their differences, as
considered in kind, substance, temperature, taste, preparation, age, sex,
feeding, and place; and of their several parts, both natural and
excrementitious, in general; as also of their use in Medicine: it may not be
amiss to add something concerning Sawces, etc. Which serve to help the want
of appetite and digestion, and fit each meat to the several stomachs, by which
it is to be received.

As for Sawces therefore, they are either hot, serving, if the stomach want
appetite, by reason of cold and raw humors furring it, and dulling the sense
of feeling in its orrifice; and are made of dill, fennel, mints, organy,
parsley, dried gilli-flowers, galingal, mustard seed, garlic, onions, leekes,
juniper berries, sage, time, vervain, betony, salt, cinnamon, ginger, mace,
cloves, nutmegs, pepper, pills of citrons, limons, and orenges, grains, cubebs,
etc. mix 1. 2. or 3. of them, as need requires, with wine or vinegar, made
strong of rosemary or gillyflowers: or cold, helping the stomach and appetite,
hurt by much choler, or adust and putrifyed phlegm; as those made of sorrel,
lettuce, spinache, purselane, or saunders; mixed with vinegar, verjuyce, cider,
alegar, or water; or the pulp of prunes, apples, and currens, etc. some help
also for slow digestion, which is caused by coldness of the stomach or
hardness of the meat, and helped by hot things; mustard therefore is to be
used with beef, and all kinds of salted flesh and fish; and onion sauce with
duck, widgin, teal, and all water foul; salt and pepper with venison, and
galingal sauce with the flesh of cygnets; garlic or onions boiled in milk,
with a stuble goose; and sugar and mustard with red dear, crane, shovelar, and
bustard: and others are for temperate meats, and speedy of digestion; as pork,
mutton, lamb, veale, kid, hen, capon, pullet, chicken, rabbet, partridg, and
pheasant, etc. these therefore must have temperate sawces; as mustard and
green-sauce for pork, verjuice and salt for mutton; juice of orenges or limmons
with wine, salt and sugar for capons, pheasants, and partridges; water and
pepper for wood-cocks; vinegar and butter, or the gravet of roasted meat with
rabbets, pigeons, or chickens; for such meats, their sawces being too cold or
too hot, would quickly corrupt in the stomach, being else most nourishing of
their own nature; but others are to be corrected by artificial preparation, and
appropriated sauce, which nature has made queazy or heavy to indifferent
stomachs. These are the chief meats, sawces, or matter of Aliment; yet many
times they are joined with other Vegetables etc. they serving likewise for meat
and nourishment; of which the Substance of some is gross, as of cucumbers,
turnips, beans, hard pease, and brown and rye bread, etc. that of others, is
mean, and of good juice, as sodden lettuce, skirrets, almonds, raisins, and
bread made of the purest wheat, new, well baked, and leavened; the hard are not
easily concocted, but quickly corrupted; the soft are soon corrupted; the
viscid are hardly distributed; others are of firm or infirm aliment, and of
easy or difficult concoction or corruption. In respect of Quality, they are
either hot, attenuating thick humors, inciding the viscid, discussing
flatulency, and increasing choler in the temperate; and some are hot in the
first degree; as new hasle-nuts, new almonds, asparagus, borrage, bur-roots,
skirret-roots, white thistle roots, hop-buds, parsneps, wheat, rice, figs,
sugar, raisins, sweet apples, and ripe pomegranates; others 2. as ripe
mulberries, new walnuts, pickled olives, preserved capers, phisticks, dates,
chestnuts, artichokes, carrots, potatoes, parsley, raddish roots, eryngo roots,
nutmegs, and saffron; 3. mints, tarragon, onions, leekes, alisanders, old
wallnuts, cinnamon, ginger, cloves and pepper; and 4. skallions, garlic, and
ramsies; but such as are hot beyond the second degree, are rather medicine than
meat: others are cold, tempering the heat of the stomach and blood, but cause
flatulency; and are so 1. as pompions, melons, cherries, straw-berries,
peaches, some apples, pears, quinces, medlars, services, spinache, succory,
sorrel, goose-berries, cabbage, coleworts, pease and beans; 2. prunes, damsins,
apricocks, most sorts of plumms, lettuce, endive, citrons, orenges, limmons,
gourds, and cucumbers: some are moist, helping the dryness of the parts, and
loosening the belly; and are so 1. as pineapple kernels, new filbeards, sweet
almonds, dates, sperage, spinache, borrage, hop buds, carrots, turnips, and
French pease: others are dry, which are hardly concocted, and nourish strongly,
but cause a melancholic juice, and help those that are overmoistened; and are
so 1. as straw-berries, sour fruit, medlars, fennel, artichokes, coleworts,
and reddish saffron; 2. cinnamon, nutmegs, ginger, galanga, pears, quinces,
sour pomegranats, pickled olives, phisticks, chestnuts, succory, sorrel,
parsley, onions, leekes, limons, citrons, beans, and rice; 3. poudred capers,
services, mints, garlic, ramsies, scallions, watercresses, cloves, and the
best cinnamon; 4. pepper, and all things over seasoned therewith. And the rest
are temperate not exceeding the first degree, as fine wheat, etc. and are the
best, being easily concocted, nourishing much, yielding good aliment, not
easily corrupted, or gaining an evil quality, and such as leave little
excrement. As for the Taste, some are bitter, as sperage, hop sprouts,
broom-buds, and wormwood, etc. others sharp, as onions, skallions, leeks,
garlic, radish, mustard seed, cresses, and hot spices; others sour, as
sorrel, limons, orenges, citrons, sour fruit, and things strong of vinegar and
verjuyce; some are austere and acerb, binding if taken first, but loosening if
used last, as roasted quinces, wardens, services, medlars, etc. and others
insipid, as melons, pompions, pears, apples, berries, and plums of noe relish,
etc. others are sweet, etc. but amongst all other things that arise from
plants, the chief is wheat, serving to make the best bread of, which agrees
to all stomachs, without which if meat be eaten, it soon corrupts and passes
out of the body; and it is to be made of the purest wheat, well cleansed,
washed, kept, and ground, with clean water lukewarm, a little salt, mean
leaven, well molded, and slit, made into mean loaves, well baked, and full of
eyes; and it is then to be eaten, being 24. hours old, the crumbs to nourish
and the crust to dry, and the leavened for weak stomachs, in such quantity as
may make a convenient mixture of meat and drink, and the more when the meats
are liquid to retain them, avoiding fullness thereof, it being most dangerous,
by reason of its clamminesse. If new and hot, it is thirsty, and windy; if two
days old, dry and hardly concocted; if old and musty it is melancholic, and
binding; if heavy it is flatulent, and troublesome; and the biscuit is dry; if
branny, it nourishes best, but passes soonest through the belly, but the
finer is more nourishing; the domestic is good, the unleavened is heavy, and
the unsalted obstructive: also Drink is no less necessary, serving to mix the
meat and bread, and help their distribution, restore the humid substance of the
body, and quench thirst, help to concoction, and fusion, and to hinder
inflammation of the nutritive fat; and the most simple is Water, the purest of
which is cold and moist, and the best is clear, limpid, without muddinesse or
contents, taste or smell, thin and smooth, which runs presently through the
hypochondria, and is soon distributed through the body, soon hot or cold, and
lightest: Therefore Fountain water is to be preferred, having these qualities,
eastern and running through sand or gravel, the southern and northern are
worse, raw, heavy, and of slow passage; it is bad if running through pipes: Rain
water is next best, being brought in earthen pipes into a cistern, or through
gravel, in spring, and with gentle showers, and kept clean in a cistern; it is
worse, if falling in storms; if with thunder it is most light and thin, but
soon corrupting; that of snow and ice, is thick, hurts the ventricle, and
causes griefs of the joints and bowels; that taken in cisterns is bad if
falling from houses, by reason of the lime, etc. Well waters are thick and
heavy, obstructing, yet are better having good fountains near them, drawn out
of deep wells, if the sun come at them, often drawn, cleansed, remote from dung
hills, and the water is sweet in clay, colder in tophous earth, thin in sand,
and best amongst red stones, of good taste in gravel, cold at the bottom of
mountains, and best amongst stones and flints: River-water is sometimes
preferred before well water, being sweet, and clear, and taken from swift
streams, flowing in good ground, and a temperate region: That of standing
pooles, and lakes, is the worst, thick, raw, and sometimes malignant, hurting
the stomach, corrupting the humors, stopping the bowels, and causing putrid
fevers: but water may be corrected by boiling it. An other sort of drink is
Beer, which is made of wheat, oats, or rye, but chiefly of barley, which by
reason of hopps is hot and diuretical; and if new, it is unwholesome,
obstructive, and begets the stone; the defecated is more wholesome; and ale is
said to make fat: As for Metheglin, it is hot, and soon turned into choler: And
Wine generally is hot and dry, cherishing the heart, increasing the spirits,
refreshing the strength, purging choler by urin, and provoking the expulsion
of excrements; and the Muscadine is of good juice; Malago heats the stomach,
and helps the colic. The Rhenish is thin, strengthening the heart, and
restorative. The Thin soon penetrats, quickly restores, opens, provokes
sweat and urin, and is of less aliment, such is the aquose, deep yellow, and
yellow; the Thick is more nutritive, heating, drying, sticking, and sometimes
obstructing, as the black, red, sweet, and austere; the White is colder than
the yellow or deep yellow, if thin also; the deep Yellow is next it, and good
if thin; the Red does moderately heat, begets good blood, and troubles not the
head, if thick also, but obstructeth the spleen and liver; Claret is almost of
the same virtue; the Black is of a thicker substance, for the most part sweet,
very nourishing, and begets thick blood, but causes obstructions and fills
the head; the Sweet nourishes well, and is pleasant to the pallat, bowels,
lungs, and mouth, and troubles not the head, but obstructeth and turns into
choler; the Austere is less hot, rests longer in the belly, penetrats to
the passages of urin, and helps fluxes, but because it restrains spittle,
it is not to be used in the deseases of the breast; and the Mean is best; the
Fragrant by it is smell restores strength; increases the spirits, and
strengthens the faculties, and is good for old men, but that it fills the
head, and troubles the nerves; that without smell is not so desired or
nourishing; and that affected with an other smell is noxious; Must causes the
colic and hinders urin; the New is excrementitious, of difficult
distribution, and causes fluctuation; the Old troubles the nerves and head;
but the Mean is better for use: Thus meat in general is a more gross and
corporeal substance, taken either from living creatures living upon the earth,
or living ever or sometimes in the water; or vegetables in the earth, whereby
the grosser part of our body is preserved; and liquours are thin and liquid
nourishment, serving as a sted to convey meat to every member, and are
converted most easily into humors in the body.

This is the chief matter of meat and drink, by which the body of man is
preserved, augmented, and strengthened, there is further to be observed, that
what is according to nature is to be preserved, a mean is always to be
followed, sudden mutations are to be avoided, things accustomed are not
presently to be left off, bodies in exact health are to be cherished with their
likes; those that recede from it, are by little and little, and moderately, to
be reduced to the contrary; occult qualities are so to be preserved that the
temper of the body be not hurt; the innate heat of all the parts is to be
preserved by moderate heaters and binders. The Air most wholesome, must be
temperate, pure, clean, thin, open, free, without any ill vapors, moistness
or corruption, but moved with gentle winds, and serene, and seasonable, sc. hot
and moist in spring, hot and dry in summer, cold and dry in autumn, cold and
moist in winter, so for the months according to the quadrature of the moon, and
for the days, in respect of morning noon evening and night, the effects of
which are according to the qualities, and winds, yet all winds in their proper
nature, moisten and cool, but alter according to the site and condition of
places through which they blow, the septentrional being most vehement, the
oriental moderately hot and dry, and moist from the sea; the occidental
moderately cold and moist, and the meridional watrish showry and sickly; it is
altered also by the stars, meteors, as fiery aereal aqueous or impure, zones;
cardinal regions, the oriental being moderately temperate, and healthy; the
occidental sickly, the meridional making moist, and the septentrional dry; by
the parts of the world, kingdoms, and provinces, cities and edifices, and
particular constitution of places; being pure in high, moist in low, mean in
plain, thin in the stony, open in mountains, cloudy in woods, moist near
rivers, sickly in fennes, wholesome in marine places, and various near baths:
that is to be shunned that is stinking, and sudden mutations therein are not
to be made, the cold is to be altered with fire, hangings, or stoves; the hot
by cold water, roses strewed, water lillies, nettles, willows, and leaves of
trees; the moist by fire, and aromatic fumes; the dry by irrigation of waters,
and moistning herbs; the pestilent with the fume of aromatic wood, and
frankincense, those that are idle are to walk in the open air and fields, in
the morning about mountains, and fountains and rivers in the evening.

Then as for Meat, it is to be temperate, and familiar, acceptable and usual,
sc. the flesh of animals, and fishes, with bread well baked; also simple, or
various, yet not of a diverse substance or qualities at the same time, that it
may be concocted at the same time, with the same heat, and not being taken in
too great a quantity, and it is convenient; firm flesh, thin blood, sweet
phlegm, bitter gall, and sourish melancholy being to be preserved; but they
must be well prepared, orderly taken, and no error committed in quantity,
time, order and manner of eating; it is necessary in sickness also if compound,
of which more particularly after. And as for the Quantity of meat, it is either
full, increasing flesh, spirits and humors; and is fit for those that are
young, growing, strong, lusty, and able to endure much exercise: or moderate,
repairing flesh, spirits, and humors lost; and is fittest for persons of a
middle health, of an estate of body neither perfectly strong, nor very weak: or
else thin, lessening flesh spirits and humors for a time to preserve life, and
the strictest especially is to be used, only where there are violent diseases,
caused by fullness or corruption, where the sickness is abated by the
substraction of sufficient food. Also a man in health, must never eat to
satisfy, but rise with a quick appetite. If drowsy, weary and heavy after
eating, being before nimble and cheereful, it is a sign that accustomed measure
is exceeded; and that the quantity must be diminished, till such inconveniences
cease. If after meals, there be unfitness for the actions of the mind, as
study, contemplation, and other functions of the mind and body, then the due
proportion is exceeded. If there be too much repletion, there must be
evacuation; and that is known, by pain and heaviness of the head, long and
troubled sleeps, troublesome dreams, sleep in the daytime after meals,
laziness, weariness, pain in the whole body, or any part thereof, want of
appetite, crudities in the stomach, sower belching, binding of the belly,
frequent distillations, stopping of the nose after supper, with little
excrement evacuated, and much in the morning, much spitting, unusual abundance
of wind, and looseness. If a change be to be made, it must be by degrees, till
come to a proportion not offending the functions of the body or mind; and
several sorts of meat are to be shunned, at the same time, some being concocted
sooner, others more slowly, and so there is an evil concoction. The Quality of
meats also is to be regarded, there being like food like flesh, like meat like
nourishment. And the temperate are best for all sorts of persons, especially
for those well tempered, as flesh and bread of good juice. The quality is to be
heeded; it altering the constitution of the body. That is to be used which is
most agreeable to every ones particular nature, age, temperature,
distemperature, and complexion. Young, hot, strong, and laboring men may eat
hard and gross meats, as beife, bacon, poudered flesh and fish, hard cheese,
hard eggs, and rye-bread, etc. which may be concocted by degrees, and nourish
slowly; the lighter meats, as veal, lamb, capons, chickens, partridges,
pheasants, or plovers, etc. in them, being too soon digested, and turned into
choler; and milk is best for children, tender flesh for such as grow, and
liquid meats for such as are sick of sharp diseases. If the body be bound, the
diet must be moist, and of boiled meats; but dry, if moist. Sweet meats are bad
for young children, and men, and for hot stomachs; but help those that are old
and cold. The bitter engender choler, burn blood, and give no general
nourishment to the whole. Sharp spices hurt tender bodies, but the strong may
eat them with gross meats Sour meats with sharp, as citrons, limons, oranges,
and vinegar, hurt cold stomachs, and sinewy parts; but if cold and astringent,
as sorrel, quinces, services, and medlars, they help the stomach eaten last,
except subject to fluxes. Those over-salted help those only that toil and
labor, causing inflammations and obstructions, etc. the Fatty are good only
for cold and dry stomachs. All meats are to be given very hot to cold and raw
stomachs. They are to be contrary to the disease when sick, that which is
naturally or accidentaly loathed, is not to be eaten greedily when hungry,
being turned into wind, belchings, vimitings, and gripings. A strong and good
stomach may taste of all things, but not feed on them as nourishments. The Time
of eating, depends upon custom, but that hour may be omitted if the appetite
be not quick, yet it is most convenient to eat twice in the day. The supper, in
some that are healthy and in the flower of youth, ought to be equal or larger
than the dinner; but in others more sparing; and the most seasonable hour of
dining, is about 2. or 3. hours before noon, and it is most wholesome: as for
break fasts, in close places, and times of sickness, they are very necessary;
otherwise it is best to fast till dinner, where the air is clear, and wholesome,
except growing or chollerick, the meals are to be often for children and much,
little and often for old men, laborers very often, sc. 4. or 5. times in a
day, if working hard; and the time, quantity, and frequency may be altered by
custom, sickness and appetite. etc. The Order of aliments is this, that thin
meats, liquid, easy of concoction, loosening and easily descending, are to be
first taken, and the contrary last. At the beginning of the meal, some broth,
flesh, or some what else actually hot, is to be taken, not drinking first; but
drink with meat is necessary, without fluctuation, the most nourishing meat is
to be eaten first, and the cold last, if the stomach be hot; the breakfast may
be of liquid meats, the dinner of moist and boiled, and the supper chiefly of
roasted meats. As for the Manner of eating, it is to be with fine chewing,
leisurely, sitting upright for an hours time or less; except longer time be
confirmed by custom, or alleviated by pastime or discourse; but the time of
sitting is not to be very long or short, that the meat may descend, and not too
hastily settle. Here also the Custom and delight in the use of meats is to be
observed, the usual being more profitable though not so good, and that not
only in the substance, but quality, quantity, and time of eating also; and if
it be changed, it must be by degrees, and the most pleasing is to be used. In
respect of Age, the meat and diet of children should be cold and moist, given
in a great quantity: it is to be midling in quantity and quality for youths and
young men, and cold and moist: and it must be less for old men. According to
the Season of the year, in Winter it must be copious, hot and dry, and drink
more sparing, and wine pure: in the Spring it must be moderate in quantity and
quality, more hot and copious than in summer, but less than in winter: in
Summer it must be cold and moist, small in quantity, but with more drink: in
Autumn, it must be fuller, hotter, and dryer than in summer, and less at the
beginning than at the latter end. And this is to be observed, the Spring being
temperate, in a mean between the first qualities, or moderately hot and moist;
the Summer is hot and dry; Autumn is cold and dry; and Winter cold and moist,
and they produce diseases accordingly; a hot air, attenuating, dissolving and
weakening; the cold thickning binding and helping concoction; the moist
softning, increasing excrements, and making dull; the dry diminishing
excrements, making agile, and quickening; and the cloudy filling with ill
humors and spirits.

Also that the aforesaid meat or diet may be the more profitable to the body,
and health preserved: Motion and rest are to be considered, exercise exciting
natural heat, and increasing the spirits, and making the body more strong,
perfecting concoction, and causing transpiration; and it may be by walking,
running, leaping, riding, gestation, and other ways; but the chief is moderate
Walking through green and pleasant places, under a serene sky, before meat,
and chiefly before dinner, and that till the body swell, appears fresh, begin
to be weary, and a hot vapor breaks forth; also that is the best exercise,
which exercises all parts equally; if excessive, it exhausteth, refrigerats,
weakens, and hurts the eyes; if Swift, it attenuats, and thickens the body; if
Slow, it refrigerats and causes flesh; if Vehement, it makes lively, but lean;
if continued and equal, it more wearieth; and less if unequal; if Interrupted
and ordinate, it wearieth less; if in Places hot, it burns, and humecteth if
moist; if by Leaping, and continual, it hurts the head and breast; if upwards,
it helps the hips; if downwards, it cleanses the head, and strengthens the
legs; if with capering, it helps matter from the head; if by Running, and
vehement, it helps moist bodies, but hurts the head; if moderate, it heats,
causes appetite, and stops fluxions; if long and forewards, it diffuseth the
flesh, and makes thicker if by degrees; if backwards, and placid, it helps the
head eyes, stomach and loins; if circular, it hurts the head; if up hill, it
hurts the breast and legs; and the bowels, if downwards; in plain places, it is
good; if the body be covered, it moistens and makes pale, if bare it causes
evaporation. If by Quoits, it helps the limbs, but hurts bad reins, and
breast; if by Shooting, it causes a good habit. Moderate Walking helps
defluxions and retentions; if swift, it extenuats; if slow, it helps old men;
if too much, it discusseth and hurts the head; if much it helps the pined lower
parts, and head affected by the breast; if little, it helps the heavy body; if
long and straight it helps the head, and dries; if long and swift it helps
hickets; if short and turning it hurts the head; if upon the heels it helps a
moist breast; and the belly bound, if on the toes; if up hill, it wearieth, and
causes sweat, but hurts weak knees; if down hill, it draws from the head, but
hurts weak thighs; if through unequal places, it is good for such as are soon
wearied; if through rough, it fills the head; if on sand it strengthens; in a
close place it is bad; if by the sea it dries and attenuats; by rivers, it
moistens; it is bad in the dew; and in winds, it is according as it is said of
them before, as they alter the air; if in the sun, it hurts the head; but it is
good under mirtles, bay-trees, amongst sweet herbs, and in fair weather; if in
the morning, it loosens, quickens, and helps appetite, and moist bodies; in the
evening it prepares for sleep, helps inflations, but hurts the head; a little
after meat, is good, to help descent. Standing, if upright, hurts weak backs,
and inflamed or ulcerated reins; if before meat, it draws down excrements,
strengthens the legs, but hurts the vertiginous; if after meat, and moderate,
it helps descent; if long, it sends up vapors, draws down humors, and hurts
the breast and bladder; in the shade and sun, it is as in walking. Riding, if
slow, makes weary; if swift and seldom, it causes lust and hurts the breast;
if trotting, it hurts the back parts, but helps the reins; if running, it too
much heats, dulls the senses, and offendes the eyes. Gestation, increases
heat, discusseth, draws down excrements, and causes sleep; if in a coach, if
ge^tly, it helps diseases of the head and fluxes, and the sight if looking
back; if fast, it makes lean; in a horslitter, it is good after meals and for
the sick; as for the nature of Rest, it may hence appear. And as for Sleeping
and watching, they are no less to be regarded; moderate sleep, helping
concoction, restoring lost strength, moistening the body, and helping old men;
but if immoderate, it loosens the members, causes ill color and habit, makes
the head heavy, fills it full of vapors and humors, dulls natural heat, and
makes unfit for exercise: now the time that is most convenient for it, is the
night, 1 or 2 hours after supper, after a gentle walk, to help descent of
meat. And it is hurtful at noon, except great labor did precede, or sickness
or weakness, or weariness and watchfulness, or to recall the heat to the
internal parts in a hot day, if usual, and then it must be very long, or short;
the body being upright, and that, after dinner, a gentle walk being used, and
it must be the longer, the weaker the digestion is and slow; and it must be
first on the right side, then on the left, the head being highest, and the
limbs gathered up: also lying on the belly helps concoction, but hurts the
sight; but if on the back, it hinders the evacuation of excrements, and hurts
those that are subject to the sto^e. Watching, if moderate, does excite the
spirits and senses, and helps to distributio^, and the evacuatio^ of
excrements; but if immoderate, it dissipats the spirits, dries the body,
chiefly the brain, increases choler, inflames, and the heat being
dissipated, causes cold diseases. Excretio^s and rete^tions likewise must be
regarded, the excrements being too long retained, begetting several diseases,
sc. apepsie, nauseousnesse, putrid vapors, the colic, giddiness and head
ach; but if naturally evacuated, they are soft, of a middle substance, brown
color, not of very offensive smell, and corresponding with the quantity of
things received. And if they are often evacuated, they ease the body, and
preserve health; if frequently and long, it weakens the body, and corrodes the
intestines. Vrin natural is of a moderate substance, brown color, with or
without sediment, white, smooth, and corresponding to the quantity of liquour
taken; and if it be too long retained, it distends the urinary passages, and if
the serous humidity be not attracted by the reins, it causes the cachexie,
and dropsy. Insensible transpiration, if prohibited, causes great diseases, as
pleurefies, peripneumonies, and putrid fevers, etc. but if according to
nature, it preserves health. The sperme unduely retained, causes a heaviness
of the whole body, and dangerous accidents if corrupted; if too much evacuated,
it dissipats natural heat, debilitats the whole body, accumulats crudities,
hurts the nerves, and causes the palsy, and debility of mind; the flux of the
flowers should be moderate, according to the temper and custom of the woman,
with certain intervals and periods: as for Venery it hurts men more than
women, if immoderate; and it is to be used chiefly in youth and at the middle
age; But it hurts old men, and those of a dry and weak constitution; when used,
the interval must be such, that the body may be lighter after than before; also
it is worst after hard drinking, strong exercises, in time of famine, or after
long evacuations. The Passions of the mind are no less to be regarded; they if
moderate, preserving health; and decaying it, if immoderate, and therefore they
are to be bridled; and as for the effects. Immoderate love does accend, and
often causes palpitation, madness, or fainting. Joy, if moderate, it recreats
the heart and vital spirits; if sudden and excessive it so dissipats the
spirits, that often it causes death. Sadness does by degrees dissolve the
spirits, cool and dry the body, hurt concoction, and cause watching, and
melancholic diseases, palenesse, and smallenesse of pulse. Fear calls the heat
inwards, makes cold, pale, weak, causes looseness, resolution of the muscles,
and sometimes death with a small pulse. Anger moves the spirits outward,
agitats the same, and humors, beats, causes fevers, trembling, abortion, and
death. Externals, also may be profitable, as Baths, which alter much; but often
do not a little hurt those that seldom use them, or that are cocochymick,
plethorick, rheumatick and inclined to inflammations, and the erysipelas. That
of the vapor of sweet water, heateth, at first relaxeth and moisteneth, after
it melts, causes sweat; and if used long, it dries. Water hot, moisteneth,
but first heateth; and the hot vapors being gone, it cools, attenuats, and
dries if tepid, cools the hot and heateth the cold, relaxeth, and impinguats
moderately used, and concocts; used long, it dissolves, and discusseth;
therefore it is moderately to be used, by those that are hot and slender, it
helping them, as also the kectical, melancholic dry fevers, thirsty, weary,
painful, and cutaneous affections: if cold, it refrigerats, binds, thickens,
strengthens, calls in heat, helps concoction, prevents external injuryes; but
is bad for such as use not a good diet or exercise, or are bound, or full of
crudities, and sharp vapors. The artificial vary, according to the
ingredients; and the medicate according to their minerals; the sulphurous
heating, drying and resolving; and the nitrous, dry and cleanse. Inunctions may
be used before or after bathing. Friction, if hard, hardens and thickens; and
the contrary, if soft; the mean is indifferent; if much, it dssolves and
extenuats; if mean, it increases flesh; in the morning after evacuation of
excrements, it helps the dry and weary; so in the evening, and helps the
atrophie. As for Garments, they all heat; if of silk they heat more, and
mollify if fine, and heat more if villous; cloth heateth, and dries; that of
skins if full of hair is warmest. Scarlet is hot, and draws forth the spirits;
that which is aromatized is naught for a hot brain, and causes headache; if
linen and flaxen, made white with lime, it biteth and causes scabbinesse; and
that of hemp, is dryer. This may suffice to be said in general of Animals, as
used in diet, together with the quantity, quality, time, order, manner of
eating them, custom, and season of the year; with other things necessary, as
motion and rest, sleeping and watching, excretions and retentions, passions of
the mind and externals, etc. Now more particularly, as for the diet of those
that are great and of infants, etc. see the regimen after. And those betwixt
21. and 50. should use a quantity that may not load; less if hard, the stomach
cold, and appetite wanting, idle, and in su^mer time; if too much, it is to be
corrected by fasting, sleep, abstinence, rest, and vomiting; using flesh
chiefly, with suitable sawces to the temper, yet sparingly, or little and
often, according to age, temperament, life, and custom, twice in a day; or
oftener, if laboring, chollerick, lean, and when appetite, with some variation,
and according to custom, and least at night if health decays, the liquid first
and laxa^ts last to loosen, and the corruptible apart, drinking without
fluctuation, betwixt eating, and after concoction, the stomach not being empty;
also the affections must be moderate; and motion, little, if lean, hungry, or
meat crude, moderate before and after it, avoiding study, and long exercise,
sleeping 6 or 9 hours, on the right side first, the members being contracted,
and head elevated upon a soft bed; avoiding often and long bathing before
concoction, not eating soon after, voiding excrements by lenients, and exercise
daily. That of old men, must be hot and moist, so the air, of good juice and
easy concoction. With a little honey, and thrice in a day in exact quantity,
with some change, thin wine middle aged, mulse, or beer, shunning passions,
using gentle exercise, frictions, long sleep and lenients, as honey, raisins,
etc. That of the Intemperate must be altered by degrees to the contrary, til
te^perate: if declining, fasting, bleding, purging: if recovering, by purging,
moist, easy fit and good meat.

This may suffice concerning Animals, their differerences, use as meat and
medicine, sauces, and things to be joined therewith in diet, sc. bread, drink,
water, wine, beer, and fit air; the quantity of meats, quality, time, order,
and manner of eating, custom, and season of the year; with motion and rest,
sleeping and watching, excretions and retentions, passions of the mind,
externals, and particular dietetick rules, serving for the preservation of
health, by the use of Irrational Animals: Now follow the Rational, for whose
use they are.

II. Rational, viz. Man, who is an animal, besides sense and motion, having
reason also: in whom may be considered. 1. His Use in medicine. 2. His Anatomy,
and general external division of the whole body, into venters and limbs; as
also the bones, cartilages and ligaments, muscles, veins, arteries, nerves,
lower belly, middle venture, and upper venture. 3. Also his Diseases, which are.
1. Internal, and these are. 1. Universal, sc. fevers; and 2. Particular, with
their symptoms, sc. 1. The diseases of the upper venture or head; and it is
symptoms, of the eyes, ears, nostrils, tongue, lips, face, teeth, gumms,
jaws, mouth, uvula, and tonsils. 2. Of the middle venture, and it is symptoms,
sc of the gullet, throat, rough artery, lu^gs, breast, symptoms thereof, and
of the heart. 3. Of the lower venture and it is symptoms, sc. of the oesophagus,
ventricle, symptoms thereof, of the intestines, symptoms thereof, of the
anus, mesentery, spleen, liver, symptoms thereof, of the reins, symptoms
thereof, of the bladder, symptoms thereof, of the genitals in me^, symptoms
thereof, of the navil, of the abdomen, of the pudend in women and neck of the
womb, of the womb it self, of the symptoms therein, and about the menses and
other fluxes thereof, with those of virgins and women after twelve years of
age from the same, those about conception, preternatural affections of those
that are great and their regimen, symptoms about parturition, affections after
childbirth and the regimen of breeding women, as also their diseases of the
duggs, and symptoms thereof. 4. The diseases and symptoms of infants. Also
the arthritis, occult diseases from internal humors, water, and air, french
disease, diseases from witchcraft and inchauntment, and poisons inward or
outward, from animals minerals and vegetables. 2. Externals, sc. tumors,
ulcers, wounds, fractures, luxations, and pains. Of all which particularly, in
the same order, more shall be said in their proper places, together with their
definitions including the signs, causes, particular method of curation, brief
Theory, Remedies internal and external, general and particular. The inward, are
medicines cooling and attenuating choler, cooling and thickning it, altering
phlegm and melancholy, and black choler, aperients, cholagogons,
phlegmagogons, melanogogons, hydragogons, vomitories, sudorificks, diuretics,
errhines, sternutatories, masticatories, cephalicks, ophthalmicks, pectorals,
cardiacals, hepaticals, stomachicals, spleneticks, nephriticks, hystericals,
arthriticks, increasers and diminishers of milk, increasers and diminishers of
sperm, discutients of wind, astringents, killers of worms, and vulneraries; the
outward, are medicines refrigerating and repelling, emplasticks, anodines,
narcoticks, emollients, resolvers, epispasticks, suppurants, detergents,
sarcoticks, cicatrizers, stoppers of blood, glutinants, vesicants,
cathereticks, and causticks; and use of the London Dispensatory for the same
purpose, Doses of remedies, and Way of prescribing making and using of them,
according to the best rules of Art. etc.

Thus of Animals irrational and rational, etc. now follow Minerals.

II. As for Minerals, they are bodies perfectly mixed; inanimate, not having
sense or motion; and they Differ according to color, chalk, alum, the amianth
and arabic stone being white for the most part; and marble, crystal, silver,
and quicksilver: but pnigites, sorry, and others, black; earth of eretria, and
Melos is of an Ash color; the sapphir and cyaneous, of a Sky color; the
emerald and chrysocolla, Green, and vitriol; oker is Muddy; gold Yellow; the
sarda and carbuncle is Reddish; and these differ in intension, the emerald
being very green, the chrysocolla meanly; some have a proper color, as black
lead, and copper; others imitate those of others, as auripigment, and
ammochrysos of gold, aspilates of silver; chalcite of brass, etc. some are of
two colors, others of 3. 4. or more. Some have pellucidity, yet not earths,
metals, or great stones, and those so properly called, except the specular,
phengites, plaster; among juyces, nitre, alum, vitriol, amber and most jewels;
and of these many vary by inclination, as the eristalis from white to reddish;
others are less lucid thereby, as the emerald, charchedonius, and the globous,
etc. nitour, is in all kinds of fossils, as in the argentary chalk amongst
earths; in all translucid juyces, stones, and gemms, and pure metals; some
have only little Sparks, as misy: also amongst those things that shine, some
represent the Species, as the emerald, carbuncle, cepites, cepionides,
hephaestites and all hard stones, polished; and the obsidianus, a Shadow. The
sapour is differing, some being Sweet, as the melitites, and galactites; others
Fat, as the terra samia, and marla; some Bitter, as nitre; partly Salt, as
fossil salt; partly Sharp, as lapis asius, and Spodes; some Bind, as rubric;
others are Acid; some have a Mixed taste; as vitriol, etc. some yield a Juice,
when rubbed on a whetstone, as the haematites and schistos, but jewels and
stones not and the sapour of earths and metals may be Found by steeping them
in water. As for the smell, that of sorry is nauseons, it is drawn out of some by
striking with a stone or iron, out of others by stamping as sandaracha; or
burning, as myrrh, gagates, bitumen, camphire, and metals by melting. As for
other Qualities, some of them are hot, others cold, some moist, others dry.
Some are Fat, as marle, sulphur, gagates; others Lean, as oker, salt, sand
stone, and almost all stones; some are Hollow, as some chalk, and pumice stone;
some are Hard, as stones and metals; and others Soft, as spodos, and most
earths; some are Rough, as smiris, earth of Melos and tripela; some are Smooth,
as many gemms and pure metals; some are Heavy, and others light, as the pumice
stone, gagates, and tophi; some of them may be Liquefied by liquour, as earths,
salt, nitre, alum, copperas, etc. some by fire, as metallic fluores,
translucid gemms, flints, and metals; some are soon Mollified, as soft and
lean earths; the contrary slower, as also metals and stones; and those that
are mollified by liquours, are not by the fire, and the contrary; some are
mollified by humidity as earths, and some by fire as sulphur; also some are
Humected as earths, and others which are mollified by the aspersion of water;
some of them are clammy and glutinous, as bitumen and fat earth mollified; some
are Flexible, as the amianth, and metals; for the most part they are Friable,
and very few Fragil, as the loadstone; some receive Impressions, as fat earths,
soft, and moistened, bitumen, and metals; others that yield to iron may be
Engraven, and some turned; some break when pierced, as flints; others hardly
admit it, as the basaltes, and the adamant not at all; some may not be Filed,
as the sapphire and carbuncle, but the tapaz may; and all may have Sculpture by
the powder of smiris, except the adamant, which must have it done by it is own
fragments. Some may be compressed, as spodos; others not, as stones and
metals; some may be Densated, as earths fat and soft; some may be Extended, as
the same; but the hard, lean and dry, not. Some may be Drawn out, as gold,
silver, and brass, and stones not; some are Fissil, as the spectacle stone;
others not, as metals; some Burn, as brimstone, bitumen, gagates; and stones,
earths, and metals not; some totally, as bitumen, and brimstone; and others
partly, as the spinus, and they all yield smoke; some may be Burned as all
metals except gold, and others are powdered thereby as earths; some yield
Fire, as the fierstone, flint, millstone, and crystal; others, not; some Move
in vinegar, as the astroites and trochites; some Bubble in water, as certain
earths; some Swim, and being broken sink, as the pumice stone, and thyreus.
Some rubbed on a whetstone yield a juice, as the galactites, schistos, and
haematite. Some color metals, as cadmia; some impart their color to other
things, as chalk, black earth, silver, and earth of eretria, etc. some sharpen
iron as the whetstone, and sandstone; the loadstone Attracts it; the the amedes
Repels it, and amber attracts straws. As for figure, some are Round, as the
thyites; Semi-spherical, as callai, astroitae; Cylindric, as the beril, and
syenites; Triangular, as some gemms; Quadrate, as the and rodamas; of Five
angles, as the basaltes; Sexangular, as crystal; of More angles, as the
pangonus; and some partly plain, as the specular, and loadstone, partly Unequal,
as the aetites within, partly Concavous, as some emeralds; some are like warts,
as the myrmecias; like the curvat moon, the tephrites; the amiauth like hairs;
stelechites like the trunk of a tree; belemnites, like arrows; chalazias like
hail; the lapis judaicus, like an acorn, etc. some Represent the effigies of
things, as the enorchis, entrochos, enosteos, leucophthalmos, aegophthalmos,
lycophthalmos, astroites, and the achates of woods and rivers. They differ also
in quantity, some being great, as marble, and gemms small, etc. And some cure
the pestilence, as the emerald, sealed earth, and armenian. The sapphir drunk
helps stingings of scorpions, and sulphur applied, nitre drunk helps toadstools
eaten, and vitriol; salt applied helps against many sorts of stinging, and
opium drunk; some Stop bleeding, as the hematite and hieracites; some help the
stomach, as the jasper applied, the aetites worn preserves the foetus; some
move vomiting, as chrysocolla, armenium, and sutorie atrament. All fossils dry;
but some Heat also, as alum, sutorie atrament, chalcite, misy, sorry,
melanteria; others Cool, as earth of eretria, plumbarie stone, and stibium;
some Soften, as gagates; others Harden, as plumbarie stone and stibi; some
Open, as nitre, it is spume, aphronitre; some Shut, as samius after, and all
glutinous earth; some Discuss, as the pyrites, molaris, and bitumen; some
Cicatrize, as chalcite, misy, and fissil alum; others Diminish proud flesh, as
rust of brass, and chalcite if the body be soft, and misy; some Putrify, as
sandaracha, auripigmentum, and chrysocolla; some are of Different virtues;
others of the Same, as chrysocol, and armenium; auripigment and sandaracha; the
haematite and schistos; and sutorie atrament, chalcite, misy, sorry, and
melanteria, and the first are strongest. Some also are Deadly, some by erosion,
as spodos, cadmia, chrysocolla; and others by stopping, as gypsum, and the
specular stone. Thus of the color, Pellucidity, Fulgor, Nitor, sapour, odor,
heat, cold, moisture, dryness, fatness, leanness, thickness, rarity,
hardness, softness, asperity, smoothness, heaviness, lightness, liquidity,
mollification, humectation, clamminesse, glewishnes, flexibility, friability,
sculpture, turning, filing, compression, densation, traction, ductility,
fissure, burning, inflaming, motion in vinegar, swimming, juycinesse, tincture,
communication of color, sharpning of iron, attraction and repulsion of the
same, figure, quantity, helps, and hurts of Fossils, by which they differ in
general. Now more particularly.

1. Earths, which are fossil bodies, which irrigated by humidity, are first
softened into a lutum, and with more moisture become liquid; and the matter of
the fossil is a terrene exhalation, concrete with an adjunct aqueous vapor;
and they Differ by the variety of exhalations, heat, place, and mixture and are
generated betwixt stones, caves, veins, fibers, fountains, channels, ditches,
and plains, etc. they differ in simplicity and composition, and it is Light if
aereal, Binding if aqueous, Sharp if igneous, and complex if more compound: the
simple vary by fatness, leanness, rarity, thickness, or meannesse,
softness, hardness, as in a mean; and as smooth, rough or mean: and they are
Fat, when being moist they are concocted by temperate heat; Clammy, when with
much humidity, heat has concocted them to a fat spissitude; Thick when the
humor is mixed, and a dry heat has condensed it by concoction, or cold has
condensed it; it is Light from air, Rough from an inequability of the matter;
Liquability is from humidity first concocted, and after constringed by cold;
and they burn, if having a fat humor; also the fat and glutinous being airy,
make a noise in water, and the contrary. As for color, they are white, black,
luteous, red, purple, green, ceruleous, ash colored, or fuscous: the compound
earth is metallik, when a metallik juice spread on the earth does combine by
cold, and the earth is not changed, and it is like gold, silver, brass, lead,
or iron; it is Lapidose, when a clammie and brittle earth are mixed, and heat
has concocted them, and it is saxeous, marmoreous, lapideous, glareous,
sabulous, sandy, calculous, or gemmose; it is succous, to which concreat juyces
are adjunct, and they differ as salt, and sulphurous, etc. and the more
co^pound are made of more. As for their taste, it is astringent, if cold
constringeth it moistened in water, before much heat has well concocted it, or
an astringent humor being imbibed; but being relax't with heat, it becoms
sweet if humid; with more heat it is made salt; and bitter if more extenuated
and elaborated by a dry heat; and it is acid, acerb, or austere, by such juice
imbibed. The odor, if stinking, shows a metallic mixture, and the Fragrant
are rare: if Fat it is good for plaisterers, and husbandmen if solute; for
potters if fat and thick; for fullers if fat and sharp; for Physicians if
astringent, and then it is cold, it is hot if sharp, and emplastick if purely
fat; for painters if Lean or in a mean, and for carpenters; and for barbers if
abstersive. And in general, all earth cools, stops, and shuts; but in
particular as to medicine, some resist poison, as the Armenian, and that of
Lemnos; others Bind, as oker, smopick and fabrile rubric, also earth of
eretria, samos, chios, selenusia, and even all earths: some Discuss, as the
ampelite, fullers, and testae fornaciae; others Cleanse, as that of Melos, etc.

2. Mettalls, which are fossil bodies, hard, that may be melted by the fire,
consistent in their own nature, and malleable; their remote matter is vapor,
and the proximate, sulphur and quicksilver; their common affections are,
congelability, solidity in all, but quicksilver having an aqueous humidity,
liquability, ductibility, having an aqueous vapor, well mixed, therefore gold
is most ductile, ponderosity, being compact, but gold most; their taste is
acute, being sulphurous; and they are all foetid in smell, but gold least, and
all but it, are combustible, and they are 6 in number. Of these with their
excrements, as to medicine, some alter the body as conservant, by a manifest
quality, and are either Temperate as gold; or intemperate, and are either Hot
and Dry 2. as iron, and crocus martis; 3. as the flower of brass, burnt
brass, the squams thereof, it is rust, diphryges, and chalcite; 4. as misy,
sorry, chrysocolla and melanteria; or Cold 2. as the filings of silver, its
spume, lead, burnt lead, washed lead, the dust of lead, cerusse, and plumbage:
also some are A^tringent, as cadmia, tutty, pompholyx, spodium, antispodium,
and verdigrease; others Glutinate and cicatrize, as washed lead, and burnt
brass; others Corrupt, as the spume of silver, and cerusse.

3. Semi-mettals, etc. which are mineral bodies, near in nature unto metals.
Of them, some are Hot and Dry 2. as sinople; others are Cold, 1. as stibium,
and 2. as quicksilver; some Bind, as sinople; others Glue and cicatrize, as
stibium, and others Corrupt the body, as quicksilver, etc.

4. Salts, which are concrete juyces, and of all the chief, begotten of what
is humid, with a terrestrial exhalation, adust by heat, but not decoct; and
it is either natural or factitious, and both caused by the concoction of humors
or exsiccation thereof, and it is marine, stagnatick fluvial, pureal, fontane,
arenary, ammoniack, bituminous, montane, lignary or carbonary, or terrene; and
according to qualities, red, white, rufous, purple, shining, croceous,
translucid, odorate, sharp, dry, pure, adulterate, hard, soft, fossil, sweet,
bitter, or florid, the Sarmatick which is pellucid is white; and the fossil
black; that is Black that is made of wood, the spanish fossil is pellucid; the
dryer, the salter it is; the ammoniack is unpleasa^t; the sodomine is Bitter,
the Arabian is Odorate; the fossil is more Thick; the marine and lakish, less,
and those are of thin parts that are made of salt water; the Sarmatick and gemm
salt is Quadrangular, and the white indian is Piramidal. The tarentine was most
used in physic, and the Humid for meat, but the Dry preserves it longest. The
Fossil is strongest, which is white, pellucid, thick and equal; and of the
marine, the thick, white and equal. Of salts, as to medicine, some are Hot 1.
as flos salis; others 3. as alum, salt, nitre; and some 4. as vitriol; some
Bind, as vitriol, and alum; others Glutinate and cicatrize, as alum, which
works also by an Occult quality.

5. Sulphurs, which are the fat of the earth, which is concocted by moderate
heat, and joined together, having in it air and fire; therefore they are
easily inflamed, especially Naphth, being more fiery and the flower of bitumen,
as the luteous sulphur is of the rest; but Auripigment and Sandaracha arise of
a fat and sulphurous juice mixed with a sharp earth, and when burnt yield a
certain sulphurous fatness, and seem sharp to the taste. It Is begotten, where
metal is, it being the Father thereof; it is quick, and native, or factitious
boiled out of water, or with squamms of iron till thick, which makes the
caballine, and it is of a hot and dry nature, citrine or white color usually,
dry, of a fattish unpleasant taste, and smell, of a different fatness, rarity,
and levity, and the Fossil is usually dugg up in knobs; and of Sulphurs, as to
medicine, some are Hot as brimstone, parmacity, and sweet amber; some Bind, as
amber citrine; and others Mollify, as asphalt, bitumen, naphth, and
pissasphalt, etc. and some work by an occult quality, as bitumen, etc.

6. Stones, which are dry fossil bodies and hard, which are not mollified by
water in a long time, but may be burned by the fire, and may so be powdered;
and the matter of those that are not perspicuous, is earth, having a mixture of
what is humid, unctuous, and viscid; but of the perspicuous, that which is
aqueous and humid with a mixture of a most subtle terrene exhalation, which is
very dry, and caused by a mineral virtue, by heat persistent in a terrene
matter and tenacious humor, and cold consistent in an aqueous substance, and
terrene having it is superfluous humidity pressed out, and that in diverse
places: and the colors, of the perspicuous, arise from much matter of water
and air, which apprehended by the terrene is congregated and congealed, as in
the crystal, berill, and diamond; of the Black, from burnt earth; the Red is
when an incended thin fume is spread upon a perspicuous luminare; the Yellow
from a perspicuous substance, with which is mixed a subtle terrene combust
exhalation; the Sparkling and Ceruleous is caused by a lucid perspicuum, with a
superinduced thin, and a mean aqueous incended vapor, as in the topaz,
chrysoprase, and chrysolite; and the Green, as the emerald and chrysolite,
though of a diverse viridity, yet it is caused by an aqueous perspicuum with a
terrestrial much adust. As for the hardness of stones, it arises from
siccity, caused by heat evaporating the humidity, and a most cold siccity
vehemently apprehending the humid perspicuum, and pressing out the moisture
thereof, and so hardening, as in perspicuous stones. The porosity arises from
the evil mixture of the humid part with the terrene. As for Gemms, they are
precious stones, and as to their color, some are Green, as the emerald,
chalcosmaragdus, prasius, berill, chrysoberil, chrysoprase, jasper, topaz,
callaica, molochites, beliotropius, sagda, myrrhites, melichlores; others Red,
as the coral, onyx, sardonyx, hematite, amber, and lyncurius; some Purple, as
the amethist, sapphire, jacinth, hyacinthizon, amethistizon, chelidonia,
cyamea, and roditis; others White, as perls, paederus, asterites, galactites,
galaxia, solis gemma, selenites, cynoedia, belioculus, epimelas, and exebenus;
the Black are achates, absyctus, egyptilla, medea, veientana, baroptis,
mesomelas, dionysia, piritis; others Chrystalline, the crystal, diamond,
galatias, ceraunius, iris, astrion, alectoria, enhydros, carbuncle, antracites,
sandactrus, lychnites, carchedonius, alabandina, draconites, chrisoprase,
phlegontis, syrtites, ermiscion; the Golden, are the chrysophis, chrysolite,
chrysalectrus, chrysolampis, ammochrysus, leucochrysos, melichrysos,
chrysocolla, argirites, androdamas, chalcites, chalcophonos, balanites,
sideritis, ideus dactylus, aethiopicus, zmilacis, haephaestitis, ostracites,
and glossopetra; the Various are, panchus, olea, mitrax, droselitus, opalus,
pontica, hexecontalithos, and murrhina. As for medicine, amongst stones some
are precious, and alter by a manifest first quality; and so some are Cold 1. as
jacynth, sapphire, and the emerald; 2. the rubie, carbuncle, granate, and
sardonius, etc. and 4. the diamond; others alter by a manifest second quality,
as the bezoar stone, jacynth, sapphire, emerald, carbuncle, granate, sardonius,
and amethyst, in amulets, etc. and some Occultly, as the bezoar stone, topaz,
snake stone, toad stone, emerald, alectorius, chalcedonius, amethyst, sapphir,
jasper, nephritick stone, and lapis tiburonum, etc. others are less precious,
and alter by a manifest first quality, and so are Hot, as the hematite, fire
stone, asian stone, thyites, smyris, and cleaving stone, etc. or Cold, as
crystal, phrygian stone, and samian, etc. or Dry as sand, etc. others by a
second quality; so some Bind, as the asian stone, naxeus, geodes, and pumice
stone, etc. others Mollify, as the alabastrites, gagates, and thracian stone,
etc. Some Stupify, as the memphites, jasper, and ophites; others are
Abstersive, as the arabian stone, etc. some Glutinate, as the galactites, and
melites; others Cicatrize, as the morochtus, etc. some Break the stone, as the
lynx stone, jews stone, and sponge stone; others Retain the foetus, as the
eagle stone, and jasper; some Provoke the menses, as the ostracites; and others
serve as Amulets, as the selenites, amianth, and myexis; and some act Occultly,
as the spongites, chelidonius, load stone, fishes stone, snaile stone, vulture
stone, merlucius, lyncurius, coral, gagates, eagle stone, crabs stone, amber,
and crystal, etc. others Purge thick humors, as the load stone, or
melancholic, as the armenian stone, and cyaneus, or lapis Lazuli, etc. here
Note that waters flowing by any of these minerals retain their nature, as the
salt, nitrous, aluminous, sulphurous, bituminous, ferreous, aureous, cupreous,
and gypseous, etc. Of the aforesaid Minerals, some are Solar, as solar sealed
earth, gold, solar antimony, amber, eagle-stone, carbuncle, chrysolite,
jacynth, and ruby. The Lunar, are white sealed earth, all that are white and
green, marcasite, alum, white coral, crystal, pearl, mother of pearl, amber,
camphire, and parmacity. The Saturnine, are lead, antimonie, marcasite, alum,
auripigment, loadstone, and all terrene things fuscous and ponderous. The
Jovial, are silver, tinn, tutty, alum, coral, jacynth, emerald, green jasper,
and the sapphir. The Martial, are ostiocolla, salt armoniack, all things red
fiery and sulphurous, the amethist, diamond, and loadstone. The Venereal, are
copper, silver, tutty, amber, beril, chrysolite, coral, corneol, calaminare,
eagle-stone, emerald, lapis lazuli, and sapphir. The Mercurial, are
quicksilver, silver, tinn, marcasite and the emerald; and as for their
contraries, See the contrary Planets aforesaid, concerning Animals.

Thus Reader, having performed what is promised in the Title, desiring thy
health, I rest, Thine.

R. L.

Faults escaped in some few sheets.
IN the book p. 1. l. 7. r. Cluna. p. 3. l. 21. r. cold. p. 6. l. 18.
therefore, d. p. 7. l. 31 Faxus r. Tassus. p. 16. l. 33. r. help. p. 42. l. 37:
magicians. p. 43. l. 5. helps scaldings. p. 81. l. 35. are hot. p. 105. l. 32.
eyes. p. 110. l. 12. d. it. p. 118. l. 6. r. ribs. l. 24. d. spread upon bread
with lime. p. 229. l. 22. hemlock p. 23. ^.l. 14. pani. p. 258. l. ult. in
August. p. 281. l. 4. into. l. 7. wear. p. 297. l. 16. membrane. p. 301. l.
ult. malleus. p. 309. l. 29. outward. p. 312. l. 22. rise. p 342. l. 26. d.
its. p 354. l. 4. syrup. p. 364. l. 13. aloeticks. p. 405. l. 25. be. p 433. l.
28. crisis or lysis. p. 459. l. 35. loss. p 466. l. 14. farfara. p 479. l 10.
equina. p. 290. l. 39. magistralis. p. 512. l. 14. odorata. 513. l. ult. long.
In the second part p. 38. l. 18. balsame. p. 40. l. 8. rupeum. p. 54. l. 37.
fume. p. 62. ult. new. p. 63. l. 8. Sardachates. p. 70. l. 33. lessen. l 40. if
laid. p. 79. l. 2. its own. p. 84. l. ult. from. The rest the Reader may be
pleased to mend with his pen. A Direction for such Abbreviations as are used.
P. place. M. meat. p. second, matter. N. name. T. temperature. V. virtues. H.
hurts. C. choice. Ib. a pound, unc. an ounce, drach. a dram, scrup. a scruple,
gr. a grain, ob. obolus. an. p. aeq. a like. sem. half. 1. 2. 3. 4. in the 1.
2. 3. or 4th degree. q. s. a sufficient quantity.

A CATALOGVE Of Authors, as they are cited in the Panzoologie, with the
explication thereof.
A.
ABsyrt. Absyrtus. Actuar. Actnarius. Aeg. Aeginaeta. Aelian. Aelianus.
Aesculap. Aesculapius. Aet. Aetius. Afric. Africanus. Aggreg. Aggregator.
Agric. Agricola. Albert. Albertus. Albuc. Albucasis. Alex. Ben. Alexander
Benedictus. Alex. Julius Alexandrinus. Aldrov. Aldrovandus. Alpin. Prosper
Alpinus. Amat. Amarus Lusitanus. Ambros. Ambrosinus. Anatol. Anatolius. Andern.
Andernacus. Anon. Anonymus. Ant. Mus. Antonius Musa. Apic. Apicius. Apollon
Apollonius. Upon. Petrus Aponensis. Arab. Arabum. Archest. Archestratus.
Archig. Archigenes. Archip. Archippus. Ardoyn. Ardoynus. Aret. Aretaeus.
Arnold. Arnoldus. Asclep. Asclepias. Athen. Athenaeus. Aver. Averroes.
Augustine. D. Augustinus. Avic. Avicenna. Auson. Ausonius.
B.
BAc. Baccius. Bapt. Fire. Baptista Fiera. Bapt. Port. Baptista Porta. Barth.
Ang. Bartholomaeus Anglus. Banh. Banhinus. Begu. Beguinus. Bellon. Bellonius.
Bell. Bellunensis. Bertrut. Bertrutius. Blond. Blondus. Bont. Bontius. Boter.
Boterius. Bras. Brasavolus. Brendel. Brendelius. Brunsfels. Brunsfelsius.
Bruyer. Bruyerinus.
C.
Cael. Aurel. Caelius Aurelianus. Cael. Rhod. Caelius Rhodiginus. Calep.
Calepinus. Camerar. Camerarius. Card. Cardanus. Car. Bovill. Carolus Bovillus.
Cato. M. Cato. Cay. Dr. Cay. Cells. Celsus. Chain. Chainus. Chald. Chaldaeorum.
Cog. M. Cogan. Columb. Columbus. Columel. Columella. Column. Columura.
Constant. Constantinus. Cord. Cordus. Crat. Crato. Cresc. Crescentius. Croll.
Crollius.
D.
DAmoc. Damocrates. Demet. Constantinop. Demetrius Constantinopolitanus. Diocl.
Diocles. Diod. Diodorus. Dionys. Miles. Dionysius Milesius. Diosc. Dioscorides.
Diph. Diphilus. Donat. ab Alto mar. Donatus ab Alto mari. Dor. Dorion. Dubrav.
Dubravius. Dur. Durandus. Durant. Durantes.
E.
ELluchas. Elluchases. Empir. Empiricus. Encel. Encelius. Epaenet. Epaenetus.
Epicharm. Epicharmus. Eumel. Eumelus. Evon. Evonymus.
F.
FAb. Faber. Fav. Faventinus. Fernel. Fernelius. Fest. Festus. Ficin. Ficinus.
Florent. Florentinus. Forest. Forestus. Fracast. Fracastorius. Freitag.
Freitagius. Fumanel. Fumanellus Furner. Furnerus.
G.
GAdald. Gadaldinus. Gall. Gallorum. Gal. Galenus. Garc. Garcias. Gariopont.
Gariopontus. Gassend. Gassendus. Gattinar. Gattinaria. Gaz. Gazius. Geopon.
Geoponicus. Gesn. Gesnerus. Gilbert. Gilbertus. Gil. Gillius. Gluckr.
Gluckradr. Gord. Gordonius. Grapald. Grapaldus. Griuner. Griunerus. Guain.
Guainerius. Gyrald. Gyraldus.
H.
HAl. Haly. Hartm. Hartmannus. Heb. Hebraeorum. Hemelberg. Hemelbergius.
Helmont. Helmontius. Heraclid. Heraclides. Hermol. Hermolaus. Herod. Herodotus.
Her. Herus. Hess. Hessus. Hesych. Hesychius. Hices. Hicesius. Hieroc.
Hierocles. Hieron. D. Hieronymus. Hippiat. Hippiatri. Hipp. Hippocrates. Hisp.
Hispanorum. Holler. Hollerius.
I.
JAc. Olivar. Jacobus Olivarius. Joh. de Vigo. Johannes de Vigo. Jonst.
Jonstonus. Jos. Michael. Josephus Michaelis. Joub. Joubertus. Jov. Jovius. Is.
Isaac. Isid. Isidorus. Ital. Italorum. Jun. Junius.
K.
KEntman. Kentmannus. Kief. Kiefer. Kiran. Kiranides. Kircher. Kircherus. Kusn.
Kusnerus.
L.
LAnfrank. Laurenb. Laurenbergius. Laur. Val. Laurentius Valla. Lemn. Lemnius.
Leonel. Leonellus. Libav. Libavius. Lib. Germ. Liber Germanicus. Linschot.
Linschotten. Lonic. Lonicerus. Lul. Lullius. Lum. Ma. Luminare Majus.
M.
MAc. Macasius. Manard. Manardus. Marcel. Marcellus. Marian. Marianus.
Marcgrav. Marcgravius. Mart. Martialis. Mas. Massarius. Matthew. Matthiolus. Med.
destil. Medulla destillatoria. Mercurial. Mercurialis. Merul. Gaudentius
Merula. Mesarug. Mesarugie. Mes. Mesue. Minsh. Minsheu. Mizald. Mizaldus. Mon.
in Mes. Monachi in Mesuem. Montag. Montagnana. Montu. Montuus: Mnesith.
Mnesitheus. M. SS. Liber Manuscriptus. Muff. Muffet. Mundell. Mundellus. Munst.
Munsterus. Mus. Musa. Myreps. Myrepsus.
N.
NEmes. Nemesianus. Nicand. Nicander. Nic. Mass. Nicolaus Massa. Non. Nonnus.
O.
OBscur. Obscurus. Ol. Mag. Olaus Magnus. Olivar. Olivarius. Olymp. Olympias.
Oppian. Oppianus. Oribas. Oribasius. Ornithol. Ornithologus: Orph. Orpheus.
Osthan. Osthanes. Oswald. Oswaldus. Ovid. Ovidius.
P.
PAllad. Palladius. Pandect, Pandectarius. Par. Paraeus. Paul. Paulus. Paul.
Ven. Paulus Venetus. Peiresc. Peirescius. Pelag. Pelagonius. Petr. Petraeus.
Pet. Upon. Petrus Aponensis. Philag. Philagrius. Phil. Phile. Philost.
Philostratus. Philot. Philotimus. Physiol. Physiologus. Pictor. Geo. Pictorius.
Pithag. Pithagoras. Platear. Platearius. Platin. Platina. Plin. Plinius. Pol.
Pollux. Polyd. Polydorus Virgilius. Pon. Pona. Ponzet. Ponzettus. Porphyr.
Porphyrius. Poter. Poterius. Propert. Propertius. Prosp. Alp. Prosper Alpinus.
Psel. Psellius.
Q.
Querc. Quercetanus.
R.
RAb. Moys. Rabby Moses. Ranz. Ranzovius. Reisch. Reischius. Renod. Renodaeus.
Rhas. Rhases. Rod. a Cast. Rodericus a Castro. Rondel. Rondeletius. Ros.
Anglic. Rosa Anglica. Ruel. Ruellius. Ruff. Ruffus. Rus. Rusius. Ryff. Ryffius.
S.
SAlern. Salernitani. Salv. Salvianus. Savon. Savonarola. S. Barolitan. Sanctus
Barolitanus. Scalig. Scaliger. Scap. Scappius. Schrod. Schroderus. Schwenckf.
Schwenckfeld. S. Closs. S. Clossaeus. Scrib. Larg. Scribonius Largus. Script.
de not. rer. Scriptor de natura rerum. Sen. Sennertus. Serap. Serapio. Seren.
Q. Serenus Samonicus. Sest. Sestius. Sever. Severus. Sext. Sextus. Simoc.
Simocratus. Sipont. Sipontinus. Solin. Solinus. Soran. Soranus. Strab. Strabo.
Stumpf. Stumpfius. Sylvat. Sylvaticus. Sylv. Sylvius. Sym. Seth. Symeon Sethi.
Sir. Syrorum.
T.
TAgault. Tagaultius. Tarentin. Tarentinus. Tentzel. Tentzelius. Theomn.
Theomnestus. Theoph. Theophrastus. Timoth. Timotheus. Tops. Topsel. Trag.
Tragus. Tral. Trallianus. Trot. Trotula. Turneb. Turnebus. Tzetz. Tzetzes.
V.
VAleriol. Valeriola. Varig. Varignana. Var. Varro. Vartoman. Vartomannus.
Veget. Vegetius. Villan. Villanovanus. Vincent. Vincentius Bell^^censis. Vital.
de Furn. Vitalis de Furno. Volateran. Volateranus. Voss. Vossius. Ursin.
Ursinus.
W.
WEck. Weckerus. Weikard. Weikardus. Wier. Wierus. Wotton. Wottonus.
X.
XEnoc. Xenocrates. Xen. Xenophon.
Z.
Zacut. Zacutus Lusitanus:
Authors cited in the Pammineralogie.
A.
ABraham. med. Lus. Abrahamus medicus Lufitanus. Abulens. Abulensis. Acost.
Acosta. Aet. Aetius. Agric. Agricola. Albert. Mag. Albertus Magnus. Alcas.
Alcasar. Aldrovand. Aldrovandus. Alex. Ped. Alexius Pedemontanus. Alvar. Torr.
Alvarus Torres. Amat. Amatus. Ambros. Ambrosius. Andern. Andernacus. Anon.
Anonymus. Anselm. Anselmus. Anton. Antonius Londinensis. Ardoyn. Ardoynus.
Aret. Aretas. Aristot. Aristoteles. Arnold. Arnoldus. Avenz. Avenzoer. Aver.
Averroes. Augen. Augenius. August. Augustinus. Avic. Avicenna.
B.
BAcc. Baccius. Baco. Rogerius Baco. Barb. Barbari. Barth. Ang. Bartholomaeus
Anglus. Basil. Basilius. Bauh. Bauhinus. Bayer. Bayerus. Begu. Beguinus.
Berchor. Berchorius. Bicker. Bickerus. Boer. Boethius. Bov. Bovius. Bras.
Brasavolus. Brud. Brudus Lusitanus.
C.
CCaesalp. Caesalpinus. Caes. Caesius. Calep. Calepinus. Callist. Callistratus.
Campeg. Campegius. Cardan. Cardanus. Cato. M. Cato. Cause. Causinus. Chain.
Chainus. S. Closs. S. Clossaeus. Conciliat. Conciliator. Constant.
Constantinus. Corn. a Lap. Cornelius a Lapide. Crat. Crato. Croll. Crollius.
D.
DIomed. Diomedes. Diosc. Dioscorides. D. Land. Dispensatorium Londinense.
E.
ENcel. Encelius. Epiphan. S. Epiphanius. Erast. Erastus. Eustach. Eustachius.
F.
FAb. Faber. Fabric. Fabricius. Fallop. Fallopius. Fernel. Fernelius. Ficin.
Ficinus. Fink. Finkius. Fierov. Fierovant. Florent. Florentinus. Forest.
Forestus. Fornes. Fornesius. Fragos. Fragosus. Fren. French. Fuch. Fuchsius.
G.
GAl. Galenus. Garz. Garzias. Gebelch. Gebelchoverus. Gesn. Gesnerus. Glauber.
Glauberus. Gluckr. Gluckradt. Greg. Nyff. Gregorius Nyssenus. Guain.
Guainerius.
H.
HArtm. Hartmannus. Helv. Helvicus Dictericus. Heurn. Heurnius. Hieron. S.
Hieronymus. Hippoc. Hippocrates. Holler. Hollerius. Horning. Horningius. Horst.
Horstius.
I.
IOdoc. Jodocius. Jordan. Jordanus. Isid. Isidorus. Jun. Junius.
K.
KEll. Kellerus. Kesl. Keslerus. Kirch. Kircherus.
L.
LAcun. Lacuna. Langel. Langelot. Lapidar. Lapidarius. Lemn. Lemnius. Linscot.
Linscottus. Lonic. Lonicerus.
M.
MAiol. Maiolus. Manl. Manlius. Marbod. Marbod^^u^ Mauritan. Mauritanus. Matthew.
Matthiolus. Market. Mercatus. Mercur. Mercurialia. Merul. Merula. Minsh.
Minsheu. Mizald. Mizaldus. Monard. Monard^^. Montan. Montanus. Montu. Montuus.
Muff. Muffetus. Mull. Mullerus. Myl. Mylius. Mynsicht. Mynsichtus.
O.
OFfic. Officinarum. Oribas. Oribasius. Orthol. Orthelius.
P.
PAncirol. Pancirollus. Paracels. Paracelsus. Par. Paraeus. Patrit. Patritius.
Penot. Penotus. Perer. Pererius. Pet. de Osma. Petrus de Osma. Pet. de Spin.
Petrus de Spina. Phaedr. Phaedro. Pier. Pierius. Plin. Plinius. Popp. Poppius.
Port. Portus. Poter. Poterius.
Q.
Quere. Querceranus.
R.
RAb. Moys. Rabbi Moses. Rauwolf. Rauwolfius. Renod. Renodaeus. Rhas. Rhases.
Rhenan. Rhenanus. Rib. Ribera. Rich. Richardus. River. Riverius. Rod. a Cast.
Rodericus a Castro. Ru. Rueus. Ruland. Rulandus. Ryff. Ryffius.
S.
SAl. Angelus Sala. Salmoth. Salmuthus. Sar. Saracenus. Saxon. Saxonia. Scal.
Scaliger. Scheun. Scheunmannus. Schrod. Schroderus. S. Closs. S. Clossaeus.
Schol. Salem. Schola Salernitana. Senn. Sennertus. Serap. Serapio. Solinand.
Solinander. Solin. Solinus. Strab. Strabo. Sylvat. Sylvaticus.
T.
TEntzel. Tentzelius. Theoph. Theophrastus. Thevet. Thevetus. Thold. Tholdius.
Tileman. Tilemannus.
V.
Wales. Valesius. Vieg. Viegas. Villanov. Villanovanus. Vincent. Vincentius.
Vitruv. Vitruvius. Untz. Untzerus.
W.
WEck. Weckerus. Wirtz. Wirtzius. Wittich. Wittichius.
Z.
Zanard. Zanardus.
TETRAPODOLOGIA. Of fourfooted Beasts.
A.
Ape. Simia.
Place. In Libya, Mauritania, and the Indies: in Caves. Meat. Apples and Nuts.
Jonst. Herbs and Wheat. Name. (...). Heb. Koph. (...) Jonst. Clunas.
APe. Rhas. T. The flesh is cold and austere, also it generareth bad humors.
V. Gesn. being baked and drunk, sc. the heart thereof in the q. of drach. 1.
with Melicrat strengthens the heart, and increases its acrimony and audacity.
It helps pusillanimity and the beating of the heart: it whetteth the
understanding, and helps the falling sickness. Seren. The biting thereof is
helped by betony drunk in pure Wine, or the rind of a Radish being applied.
Sext. So the gall of a Bull: Avic. as also those things that draw out poison,
sc. a cataplasme with ashes, Vinegar, Honey and an Onion; and the root of
Fennel; or with bitter Almonds, and unripe Figgs, or litharge with salt. The
Apostume thence is cured by litharge and Water: and may be opened with Nigella,
and Honey, the same also may be drunk, as also leeks. Ponzet. Beans chewed help
the same, and Goats dung, fod in Vinegar and applied, betony and plantain being
drunk in old Wine. Tops. An Ape eaten by the Lion cures his diseases. They are
taken with heavy shoes, having gins in them; by breeches, or Lime water,
imitating those that use them. Jonst. Also they are made drunk by Wine. As for
the description it is needless. They generate about the vernall Equinoctial,
and summer solstice, and bring forth two young ones, of which they love only
one: They are friends to the Crow, and Conies: to the Cock, Tortise, Torpedo,
and Snailes they are enemies, and troublesome to the Lions. They long remember
injuries: they are very peart in the new of the Moon, and sad in the
conjunction.

Ass. Asinus.
P. In Italy, France, Germany, Greece, and England, etc. M. Any food, so
Tzetzes. Columel. Aldrov. N. (...). Heb. Chamor. Ason. The wild, Onager.
Ass. Gesn. T. the flesh is of very bad juice, hardly concocted, hurtful to
the stomach, and unpleasant to the eater; as also those of Horses and Camels.
V. The Milk is most temperate, next to that of Women and of Goats, next to it
is that of sheep and cowes. Archig. Philag. All Milk is bad for the stone,
except that of Asses, which is of a most thin substance, and dissolving
faculty. Therefore it wonderfully helps the swellings and nodes of the
joints, which are in Children caused by use of corrupted Milk, making them
plain and smooth. So a Hemina thereof being drunk in the morning after walking
by those that have the stone helps them being constantly used, and is
excellent to preserve from the same. So Aet. Milk with Honey helps suppurated
reins, especially that of the Ass, or Mare: cleansing ulcers, after which the
acrimonie being removed, to cause nutrition that of the Cow is to be taken in a
double q. Milk from the Cow, Ass and Mare are most agreeable to the belly, but
trouble it, so Diosc. It Is most purged by the Mares, then the Asses, lastly the
Cowes and Goats, so Var. The young Ass grows best when bred by Mares Milk.
Plin. The sweetest Milk is that of the Camel, and the Asses the most wholesome,
or effectual. The Milk of the Cow is the fattest, that of Sheep and Goats
less fat, and the Asses least, and is therefore very seldom coagulated in the
body, being taken fresh and hot, neither can it if Salt and Honey be added
thereto; for the same cause it looseneth the belly more, having more serum and
less of the caseous, or cheesy matter, so Gal. therefore it as also Mares Milk
descends sooner, being the thinnest of Milks; yet Pliny affirms the same of
that of Camels and Mares. Marc. Plin. A little of the water being drunk, of
which the Cow or Ass has drunk, does effectually help the headache. Plin.
Vnc. Sem. of the dried brain of an Ass being drunk daily in water and Honey
helps the Epilepsie in 30. days. Plin. The Ephemera fever is cured by 3 drops
taken from an Asses ear, being caused to bleed, in two hemina's of water; also
the lungs burnt drive away venomous creatures. Haly, being powdered and drunk
it helps the cough, and shortness of breath. Plin. the heart of a black male
Ass, being eaten with bread, helps the falling sickness; so the liver being
taken fasting; so Diosc. Plin. so mixed with a little alheale, and dropped into
the mouth, for 40. days together. Marcel. Plin. Being dry, powdered with stone
parsley, two parts, and 3. of walnuts, and taken with honey, fasting, it helps
the hepatick. Avic. The powder thereof with oil, helps botches, and chops
caused by could, with that of the flesh, which Rhas. and Diosc. attribute to
the powder of the hoof. Plin. The old spleen of an Ass helps the vices of the
spleen, most effectually in 3. days; so Marcel. Sext. The spleen powdered and
applied with Water, causes Milk in the breasts, Plin. and burnt helps the
womb. Rhas. The alcohol of an Asses spleen, with Bears grease and oil, mixed
to the consistence of honey, and applied, causes hair on the eyebrowes. Their
old reins powdered and given in wine, help the bladder, and restrain the flux
of urine; so Plin. Marcel. and the strangury. Plin. The Ashes of the genital
thicken the hair, and help hoarines, applied after shaving, with lead and
oil. Osthan. The right stone of an Ass causes venery, being drunk in wine or
worn: so the foame taken in a red cloth, or enclosed with silver; so the ashes
of the genitall. Plin. The stones being kept with salt, powdered, and put upon
drink, Asses milk, or water help the falling sickness. The gall, as also that
of the Bull used in water helps spots in the face, the sun and winds being
shunned after the coming off of the skin. The blood helps the flux of blood
from the tunicle of the brain, which Diosc. attributes to that of cocks. 3. or
4. drops of the same drunk in wine help quotidian agues, Plin. and the
epilepsie if of a young Ass. Diosc. The fat makes cicatrices of the color of
the body; so Plin. or removes them. Also if old it helps exulcerations of the
matrix, and in a pessary mollifieth its hardness, and with water is a
psilothron, Rhas. anointed in a warm place it helps the falling sickness,
so the marrow. Plin. And helps the Scab. The fat helps S. Anthonies fire: the
leprosy and adustion by the sun; applied with goose grease, it causes venery.
Sext. It helps the fundament. Plin. The skin used prevents the fear of infants.
The bones decocted help against the poison of the Sea hare, the ashes of the
hoof being drunk for a month in the q. of two spoonfuls help the epilepsy.
With oil they help botches, and the dry powder helps kibes, as also creeping
ulcers. The suffumigation thereof hastens the birth, though abortive, and
kills if living. The ashes thereof with the milk, applied help cicatrices of
the eyes, and white spots, or with women's milk. The white ring thereof prevents
the epilepsie, as that of the Elke. The lichens applied with oil cause hair
in a bald place; applied with vinegar it helps the lethargy. It helps the
heaviness of the head, arising from any cause, the powder being used with
vinegar. So Marcel. The flesh taken with broth helps the phthisick, and in
Achaia many use it for the same purpose, so Plin. Marcel. The milk of Asses
being drunk with honey does easily and without hurt loosen the belly. Diosc.
Asses milk does fasten the teeth, and gums being washed therewith, or the
powder of the teeth: For it is not only harmless to the teeth, but helpful by
the tenuity and abstersion. Plin. The old stones of a Ram being powdered and
drunk in water, in the q. of an half penny, or 3. quarters of a pint of Asses
milk help the falling sickness, abstaining from the drinking of wine three
days before and after, so Plin. So also the curd of a Sea calf, with Mares or
Asses milk, or the juice of a pome granat, mulled vinegar, of taken in pills.
Gal. The milk, given after a bath helps the tabes. Plin. It helps the
phthisick, being drunk warm with honey and water; also being drunk it helps the
pain of the duggs, and with honey helps the purgation of women. It helps the
exulceration of the stomach, so that of the cow: or three oboli of birthwort or
agarick, drunk in hot water, or Asses milk: with as much aniseed as can be
taken up with three fingers, and as much henbane, it helps the orthopnoea. It
is also commended against the cough, extenuation, spitting of blood, dropsy,
and hardness of the spleen. H. Yet it hurts a weak head; and such as are
troubled with the vertigo, or ringing of the ears: also it helps against
gypsum, cerusse and sulphur, quicksilver, and costivenesse in fevers. Being
gargled it helps the exulceration of the jaws, and drunk helps the atrophy,
and fever that is without the headache. Being given to children before meat, it
hinders corrosion. It helps the coeliack, and the dysentery with honey. Being
drunk it helps the tenesmus, so that of the cow. It helps the gout in the
hands or feet, so the Serum. Honyed water therewith helps against henbane. It
resists poison, especially that of henbane, misseltoe, chameleon, hemlock,
sea hare, juice of carpathum, dorychnium, or pharicum, or curdling, being used
fresh. Crabfishes being poudered and drunk in water, or the ashes help against
all poison, especially against the wounds of Scorpions being taken in Asses
milk, Goats, or any other, with wine. As also ruptures and convulsions. It
whiteneth the skin in women, (therefore it was used by Poppea, the wife of
Domitius Nero for that purpose, who kept many Asses for that use,) it extending
the skinn, making it tender and removing wrinkles. The urine of an Ass helps
gallings by the shoe, the itch, and scabbed nails. As also the leprosy and
scales, or scurse, about the rising of the Dog star; so Plin. Diosc. Being
drunk it helps those that are nephritick. Plin. The same with S. Katharines
flower helps all violences and suppurations; as also swellings and
impostumes. It helps earing and moist ulcers. The urine of a young Ass
applied with spicknard, helps blasting. The same thickneth the hair. Marcel.
It helps corns, and brawny flesh. Plin. The fresh dung of an Ass being
dropped into the ears with the oil of roses luke warm, helps the dullness
of hearing. Marcel. The juice thereof, with squills pounded, and as much cows
fat, being applied as a cerot, helps ulcers of the head, that quickly do arise.
Diosc. Both the dung of Asses and Horses, whether crude or burned, with vinegar
helps eruptions of blood. Plin. So if applied dry to the nostrils, or any
other part, if fresh. Rhas. So the juice with wine applied with cotton. A
plaster thereof applied to the forehead helps fluxions. Diosc. Their dry
dung when at grass, dissolved in wine and drunk, helps against the bitings
of the Scorpion. Plin. The ashes of the dung drunk in wine help the coeliack,
and those troubled with the dysentery. And if of one newly brought forth, being
given with mulled vinegar, it helps the vices of the spleen also. The decoction
mightily helps the colon. The quantity of a bean being taken in wine helps
the jaundise in three days; so also that of a young colt. The ashes of an
Asses dung applied with butter helps the eruptions of phlegm. The membrane
of the young, especially if a male, being smelled to helps the falling
sickness. Plin. The wild Ass T. is of worse nourishment than the common. Gal.
The flesh is like that of the heart, bull, or sheep, causing an evil juice, and
being hardly concocted. Plin. V. The milk and bones, are more effectual against
poisons. The stone which arises out of the urine when killed helps
impostumes: The same being worn by women helps suppurations. The gall does
assuage the signs of abscesses, being applied: Also it is mixed with plasters
against S. Anthonies fire, which it is affirmed to cure, especially it cures
the elephantiasis, and varices: The fat with oil of costus, helps the pain
of the reins and back, which are caused by thick humors: And the spots of the
skin. so Avic. The flesh helps against the pain of the back bone, and
hipps, so Rhas. Avic. The flesh applied with oil, sc. that of the back,
helps aching parts; so Avic. Gal. Avic. The urine breaks the stone in the
bladder. Vincent. Bell. The ashes of the hoofes burned help the falling
sickness, therefore mixed with oil it dissolveth botches, and the alopecia in
cataplasmes. Rhas. The marrow anointed cures the gout, and eases the pain.
The dung mixed with the yolk of an egg, and applied to the forehead, stops
the flux of blood, and with a Bulls gall curleth the hair. Being drunk when
dry with wine it is very effectual against the hurt of Scorpions. Gal.
Aldrovand. The flesh of Asses being eaten, does infatuate, making the eater
like, both in body and mind, all meats altering the temperature, and nature,
and the manners naturally following the temperature of the body. As for
medicine, there is scarce any other creature yields more remedies. The milk
sucked out of the teats helps the tabes. Aelian. The flesh helps the tabes.
Marcel. The hoofes serve to catch fish with. Apollon. The urine of an Ass
helps the luxation of the uvula, and the quinsey, being given very hot.
Tarentin. The dung of an Ass with the juice of Coriander, and fine flower made
into a past, is very good to catch Ruffes and Perches with. Aldrovand. Aelian.
The flesh of the wild Ass is bitter. Scalig. The flesh when boiled continues
long hot, and stinketh, and being cold neither stinketh, or tastes well. Pol.
They are taken by hunting on horseback, till tired. Jonst. Heart. in Prax. The
blood used behind the ears is very good against the mania; a clean linen
cloth being dipped into the same, and dried is used, a part thereof being
steeped in spring water: The same Aelian. affirms of the flesh. The lichen
burned, powdered and applied with old oil, is so strong in the producing of
hair, that it will cause it even on the chinns of women. Savon. The urine
helps the stench of the nostrils. The Ass also is used to carry burdens, to
plow, etc. The shanks serve to make pipes of. And the chalked skin for a
palimpsestus, serving in stead of a table book: of the hair, the Arabians make
a certain cloth. As for their differences and kinds, some are great, some
little, some swift, and some slow etc. They are all libidinous, and bear hatred
to the bird called aegithus, usually pecking the gald places of their backs, as
also to the si^ken, and to hemlock amongst plants. They have a sympathy with
the Scorpion and vine, and live usually 30. years. Their noise is unpleasant
called braying. Their diseases are catarrhes, and the boulimie, they fear the
water, yet are very thirsty. Their generation is like that of the horse. There
are diverse other things concerning their moral and divine use, etc. which may
be seen in Gesner. and Aldrovandus etc. But neither concerning meat or
medicine, they are here omitted, and left to the further search of those that
love frivolous and impertinent curiosities. Schrod. The Ass is a melancholic
beast, and brings forth the young in twelve months. The hoof is used in
stead of that of the elk, and is given for a month together, in the quantity
of drach. sem. Outwardly it helps kibes, with oil; it consolidats clefts,
discusseth apostumes, and helps wefts of the eyes with women's milk, the
epilepsy also, and hysteric passion is helped by the savor thereof when
burned. The blood causes sweat, helps the unrulinesse of melancholy, and
diseases from inchauntments, etc. As for the description it is needless, the
beast being well known.

Badger. Taxus.
P. In the Mountains of Italy, Helvetia, and England. M. Of hornets, worms,
apples, grapes, conies and birds. N. (...). Heb. Tesson. Faxus. Daxus. Melo.
Badger. Platin. T. in Italy and Germany they are used in meat, and are by some
much commended, some boil them with pears: they as also dormise, are not in
quality much unlike the porcupine. Savon. Assimulateth them to the wild Hog.
Gesn. V. Seren. The ashes thereof, as also of eggs, or Snailes, help the
spitting of blood from the breast. Plin. The decoction, as also of the Cuckoo
and Swallows, drunk helps the bitings of a mad dog. The blood with salt being
dropped into the horns of cattle keeps them from the plague and mortality,
so Brunsfels. The liquor distilled from the blood helps against the plague.
MS. The fresh blood mixed with Armenian earth, saffron, and tormentil, being
powdered and kept, and taken in the quantity of a bean, with the fourth part of
a golden denarius filed, preserves from the plague: also crowfoot or
spearewort may be applied under the botch. Car. Bovill. The dry blood being
powdered does wonderfully help the leprosy. Bras. The fat does mightily
mollify. Silv. It is betwixt that of a Bull or Hog, so that of a Dog or
Catt being more thick than that of a Hog, and thinner than that of Bulls: and
some think them more heating and digesting than the other two. Seren. It
helps against fevers, and too much heat of the body. Aesculap. Being applied
it helps those that are feverish. Albert. It helps the pain of the reins.
Some also use it against the Nephritick pain, stone, and other aching parts.
Agric. Applied or used in a clyster it helps the pain of the reins. Leonel.
The fat, as also that of the Fox, and wild Cat, is used by some, in arthritick
remedies. Farriers use it with Dogs grease to mollify contracted sinews.
Aesculap. The brain boiled with oil cures all griefs. Plin. The liver with
water, helps the stinking of the mouth. Aesculap. The testicles boiled with
honey cause lust. Albert. The biting is sometimes venomous, feeding upon
venomous creatures, though Arnold. thinks that the hurt is more by the biting
than by the poison, as also of the Lynx, and Cat, etc. Jonst. The fat helps
the rifts of the dugs. Weck. The oil helps contracted parts. Car. Bovill.
The dry blood helps the leprosy. The same distilled with salt, and the horns
of living creatures, is used in the plague. Lonicer distills it only in the dog
days, the D. is drach. 2. Albert. The brain, testicles, tooth, or left foot,
tied to the arm helps the memory; which is frivolous. The skins serve to
make garments, and dogs collers of. As for its Description it may be omitted,
the beast being common. The generation is like that of a Fox, to which he is an
enemy he turning him out of doors, by defiling his habitation. He has a
thick skin, tender nose, and one foot shorter than the other. They are either
tame or wild; doggish, or porcine, so Schrod.

Bear. Vrsus.
P. In Germany, Lithuania, Polonia and Norway, etc. M. Of any thing, also
woodsorrel, and wake robin. N. (...). Heb. Dob. Arab. Dubbe. Chald. Duba.
Bear. Albert. T. is very cold, moist and pituitous. Rhas. The flesh is mucous,
hard of concoction, and not praise worthy: Isaac. Also very viscous, and of
very bad nutriment, rather fit for Physic, than food. H. It hurts the liver
and spleen, engenders many excrements, and causes nauseousnesse; so Platin.
The flesh boiled when they lie hid, and kept increases; so Theoph. The
forefeet are very sweet and pleasant being in motion, and are a dish for the
Gentry, so Her. in Germany. Also the fore feet being salted and hung in the
chimney and eaten, are very pleasant. V. Plin. Bears blood discusseth apostumes
in any part of the body, Gal. and concocteth abscesses, as also that of Goats.
The blood helps hairs that grow in the eyes. The fat is used in stead of the
foxes. Sylv. Of fats the Lions is the hottest and dryest, next, that of the
Pardal, then the Bears, and after the Bulls. The later Physicians mix Bears
fat in Medicines that help convulsions and resolutions, and acopons. Marcel. It
takes away spots and blewnesse. Plin. With Lilly roots it helps burning, so
also used with Wax. It mollifieth and suppurateth hard tumors. Plin. It
helps the pain of the loins, and whatsoever has need of emollition. It
helps the erysipelas, especially that of the reins: this as also that of the
Fox, or Bull with vine Ashes, and boiled with lie, does attennuate all high
tumors: a soap also is thus made, serving for the same purpose. With red lead
it cures ulcers in the legs. Marcel. So with Alumme: Plin. Also kibes, and
clefts in the feet. Diosc. It helps Chilblaines. Rhas. The fine powder of the
spleen of an ass, with Bears grease and Oil, mixed to the thicknes of Honey
causes hair to grow on the eye brows. Diosc. Avic. Bears grease helps the
alopecia; so with the burned head of an hare and vinegar. Gal. Also with the
ashes of a mouse, or used after rubbing with fig leaves, or with the ashes of
an hedghog. Rhas. So with the gall and a little pepper. Plin. Marcel. Seren.
Also with oak balls. Plin. Or wild roses. Gal. Or ashes of the root of a reed.
Marcel. or with ashes of barley, the part being first rubbed with a sharp
Onion. Sext. With ladanum and old wine it helps the falling off of the hair,
and makes it more thick. So Marcel. Plin. So with Maidenhair, or the sout of
Lamps, with wine it helps scurfe; and with the ashes of a Lizard it helps the
alopecia, and with the oil of Myrtle. Plin. So with salt and a stamped Onion,
also it is used in diverse other prescripts, used by Galen, in his composition
of remidies, Sec. Loc. Marcel. The grease with that of a Bull and wax an. Is
very good against swellings behind the ears, Plin. Also some add hypocystis.
Se^en. also it helps the pain of the jaws: Plin. and neck as also
flatulencies caused by crude phlegm, and the pain of the back; and loins:
Marcel. so with the stamped root of gladiol, and live brimstone. Plin. applied
with nettle seed, and old oil it helps diseases of the joints; and gout:
Marcel. So with that of a Bull and Wax, an. Plin. to which some add
hypocistis, and galls. Heraclid. The ashes of the hairs of the Bear mixed
with their grease help the alopecia. Soran. with the leaves and roots of reeds
burned, the burned hairs of the Ass, Maidenhair, tar, the hair of Goats
burned, the rosin of Cedar, and Bears grease, an. mixed and applied, may the
alopecia be cured. Aet. The skin is useful to those that are bitten by a mad
Dog, or that of a Sea Calfe. Plin. The brain is poysonsome; so that of a Cat.
Rhas. The left eye of a Bear dried, and hanged about the necks of Children,
preventeth the fears in their sleep. Aesculap. The eye bound to the left arm
of a Man helps the quartan ague. Diosc. The Lungs of a Hogg, lamb, or Bear
applied, defend gallings by the shoos, from inflammation: which Gal. affirms
of the two former. Physiol. the gall of a Bear separated from the liver, and
dried may be kept two years: Diosc. it is less effectual (though, serving for
the same purposes) than the Bulls; or Goats, so Gal. Seren. Bears gall drunk in
warm water helps the body though almost frozen. Damoc. drunk 3 days fasting
it helps those that are bitten by a mad Dog. Plin. this as also that of a
Boar helps apostumes in any parts and spots in the face. Marcel. it cures
cankers, that are about ulcers: which Plin. affirms of the curd of an hare
being applied, and gangreens. Marcel. it helps the leprosy being applied
every day, Rhas. being anointed with the fat, and being applied with a little
pepper it helps the alopecia. Marcel. the gall is good against the pains of
the joints, Diosc. in a lohoch it helps the epilepsie. Sext. so taken in warm
water: it is also commended by Arnoldus. Physiol. it is hot and dry, and
helps the palsy. Plin. applied it helps suffusions of the eyes. Marcel.
with that of a hyena and Honey mixed, it helps the dimnesse of the sight,
being constantly used. Gal. It helps rotten teeth and the toothach being
applied. Sext. being drunk in hot water, it helps shortness of breath, in a
few days, so Marcel. Plin. drunk in water it opens the parts for
respiration. Rhas. gr. 6. being drunk with Honey and hot water help the Asthma.
Plin. with Honey it helps the cough. Gal. Sec. Loc. there is an antidote made
thereof against the hardness of the Liver. The q. of a Greek bean helps the
jaundise, drinking water after it. So Gal. Eupor. Aet. a pessary thereof, as
also of that of a Lion, or Hyena, or Bull sc. of the vesicle filled with the
narde ointment, Flowerdeluce, Rosate, and Honey an. melted together on coals
helps the conception, being used after the purgation of the menses, before
copulation. Rhas. the Gall being bound upon the left thigh, causes strength in
venery without damage. Plin. with fat it helps the vices of the fundament;
some add the spume of silver, and frankincense. Rhas. gr. 6. drunk with Honey
and hot water help the Hemorrhoids. Plin. the testicles help the falling
sickness. Myrepsus, makes a suffumigation thereof with other things against
the Epilepsie. Marcel. the Milk as also that of a bitch when fresh dropped into
the ears, helps the pain thereof: as for the remedies against the bitings of
a Bear, as also of Lions and Panthers, see in that of Lions. As for the
description, it may be omitted the beast being common. They are very venerious,
and copulate in February, or beginning of Winter, after the manner of
rationalls, they go 30. days, and bring forth 5. young sometimes, they are
enemies to the Sea Calfe, Horse, Boar, and the dead, their noise is terrible.
Having eaten the apples of Mandrakes, they eat pismires. When wounded, they
feed on dry herbs. As for the differences, they are great, or little, black, or
white. Jonst. Bears blould kills fleas. Their fat is used in the weapon
salve, some use the skin for garments and coverings, as also to seem terrible
in war Pallad. The grease preserves iron tools in Winter: Mizald. and vines.
Schrod. the fat does heat, resolve, mollify, and discuss. Being anointed on
the os sacrum it helps the Enterocele, and falling down of the womb. Also it
makes hair white. In Finlandia the Rusticks use the dried Gall, in stead of a
Panacea.

Beaver. Castor.
P. It Is an amphibion: in Helvetia, Russia, and Prussia, etc. M. Fish, fruits,
and barks of Trees. N. (...). Fiber. Arab. Albednester. Canis Ponticus.
Beaver. Gesn. T. the flesh is bitter. Albert and all abominated, except the
tail. Some boil it first, and then roast it, or fry it, in open vessels, that
the stinking smell thereof may evaporat. The tail and hinder legs are sweet,
tender and fat, like the tuny, having a solid and certain tenaceous fatness: in
taste almost like the Eele. Gluttons desire much the membrans that are betwixt
the toes, being betwixt fish and flesh, and they are therefore used in the time
of fasting. Some roast the tail and casting a little Ginger thereon, serve it to
the table, others boil it and season it with some thick broth. Schrod. V. The
fat is peculiar to the nervous parts and womb; also it helps the falling
sickness, convulsions and resolutions of the parts, and the apoplexy, etc.
The Castor, or testicles, being taken out and well cleansed, are dried and so
kept, hung up in some shadowy place, and last 7. years. It is adulterated
sometimes with gum ammoniack, kneaded with Castor, and the Castors blood, and
so put into little bladders and dried. As also by the reins thus used: yet it
may be thus discovered; the light testicles arising both from one beginning:
also the adulterine are greater, and the genuine are of a strong and unpleasant
smell, and of a strong, sharp, biting, and bitter taste, and of a brittle
substance; besides, that is bad also, which is black and moldy. As for the
virtues of Castor, T. it is hot 3. and dry 2. it attenuats, opens, and
discusseth flatulency. V. It strengthens the nervous parts, and head. It
awakeneth the dull animal spirits, resists poison, provokes sneezing, is
anodyne, and provokes the terms: therefore it is good in the lethargy,
apoplexy, epilepsy, palsy, vertigo, trembling of the joints, defluxions to the
same, strangulation of the womb, and colic being used both inwardly and
outwardly: also it helps the ringing of the ears, difficulty of hearing, and
pain of the teeth being dropped into the same. In the suffocation of the womb,
it may be used to the nostrills, bound to the armepits, or put into the Navill:
also it corrects the virulency of opium. The skin being dressed and worn
helps the gout and palsy. The D. of the extract is from gr. 5. to 12. Gesn.
Plin. The skin of a beaver being burned with tar to ashes, and mixed with
the juice of a leek stops bleeding at the Nose. Plin. The urine resists
poison, and is put into antidotes. Gesn. The Gall is very useful: and the curd
helps the falling sickness; so that of the Sea Calfe. Castorium drunk in
mulled water q. drach. 2. looseneth the belly: it is of very thin parts, and
best for cold and moist bodies. The suffumigation helps the affections of the
Lungs, and head, if without a Fever. It helps scirrhous dispositions. It
helps against poison, as of the Chameleon drunk in vinegar, etc. And of the
Scorpion in Wine, and the common and field Spider in mulse, causing them to be
evacuated by vomiting, also against Lizards, and the cerastes and prester with
panax, or rue and wine, and other Serpents in wine, and against misselto,
drach. 2. being given in vinegar, also against aconite in Milk and Water, as
also against white Hellebore in mulled water with nitre, so Plin. Avic. It
helps also against the biting of small venomous creatures. Plin. scr. 1. sem.
taken in unc. 6. of wine helps those that are infrigidated. Applied diverse
days with Honey it is a psilothron, the hairs being first pulled away. Plin.
With ladanum it helps fistula's. Avic. It helps cold abscesses and
malignant ulcers. Plin. It causes sleep with oil of roses and sowsennell, the
head being anointed therewith, and it drunk in Water, therefore it helps the
phrensy, and pains of the head. Avic. Applied plaisterwise it helps the cold
and flatulency of the head. Gal. So the fume taken. Hippoc. It helps the
headache caused by the womb. Being given in unc. 4. sem. of mulled vinegar
fasting it helps the falling sickness, which if often troubling, it way be
used in a clyster, sc. drach. 2. being added to a sextary of Honey, Oil, and
Water; but those that are presently affected, it helps with vinegar: applied
it helps diverse affections of the nerves, and other vices: or pounded to the
thickness of Honey with the seed of vitex in vinegar, or rose Oil, as also
against the falling sickness: so Plin. Also it helps the epilepsy, and other
cold affections of the head, Scrup. 1. 2. or 3. being taken with the juice of
rue, or Wine in which it has been decocted, so Platear. Also applied it
helps the vertigo, so reduced to the thickness of Honey, with the seed of
vitex in vinegar, or oil of Roses: the same helps against the palsy, (and
other cold affections of the head) Opisthotonos, trembling, spasme, vices of
the nerves, sciatica, and stomach griefs. Diosc. Plin. Avic. Being injected it
helps the Lethargy, and sleepy evil. So with vinegar and oil of Roses, or
smelled to. Platear. As a sternuratory it helps the Lethargy, it moving and
strengthening the brain: or boiled with rues juice, mint, and a little vinegar,
and so applied as a cataplasme, the head being shaved: the powder also may be
taken by the nostrills with the juice of rue, or the fume. Those that are
troubled with oblivion, after sicknesses, as the Lethargy, or plague are best
helped by hiera Ruffi, and Castor applied with oil to the hinder part of the
head; as also drach. 1. thereof being drunk with melicrate after purging. So
Aet. Platear. the wine in which it has been decocted with rue and sage,
helps the palsy of the whole body. The powder held under the tongue till it
be dissolved helps the palsy of the same. The wine in which it has been
decocted being often used to the genitall, effectually, with a cataplasme of
the same helps the palsy. Plin. being drunk and applied it helps
tremblings, convulsions, spasmes, and vices of the nerves. With oil it helps
the trembling, of the members. Gal. Yet it is to be used and applied where
there is a convulsion, or trembling by plenitude, and not when dryness, or
emptiness. Plin. The stiffenesse of the neck is mollified by Castor drunk with
pepper in mulse mixed therewith, and Frogs boiled with oil and salt, that the
juice may be drunk, so also it helps the opisthotonos, tetanos, and spasme with
pepper, so Plin. also with Honey it clears the eyes. With the juice of poppy
it helps the ears: and stamped with oil, or meconium it eases the pain
thereof. Avic. It helps the difficulty of hearing from a could cause, or
spirits contained therein, the q. of a lintel being dissolved in nard-oyl, and
put in. Plin. it helps the toothach, being put into the ear of the same
side, Hipp. so held in the mouth with pepper. Plin. being taken with a little
ammoniacum in mulled vinegar fasting it helps the shortness of breath. Avic.
It causes thirst. Plin. Diosc. Avic. In vinegar it stops the hicket. Plin.
with a little ammoniacum and mulled vinegar drunk hot, it helps the spasmes of
the stomach, Gal. so if by plenitude. Plin. Diosc. it helps against
inflations, and pains. Avic. drunk with vinegar it helps the pricking pain of
the belly, and dissolveth flatulencies, so for the latter with the seed of wild
Carrot, and stone parsley, as much as may be taken up with 3 fingers in unc. 6.
of hot mulse, for the other, with vinegar and wine. Gal. with oxycrat it
helps flatulency, pain, and hickets, caused by cold and thick humors, or
gross and flatulent spirits. Archig. it helps the colic Aet. 2. spoonfulls
given in mulled water, and that of Aniseeds is also used, and is most
effectual. Veget. farriers use the fume for the difficulty of urine in Horses.
Platear. Decocted in the juice of vitex and a little vinegar, and applied to
the pecten and genitalls in a plaster it helps the Gonorrhea. Plin. being
smelled to with vinegar and pitch it helps against the womb. drach. 3. being
drunk with water and penny royal expel the menses, and secundine: Diosc. And
the birth. the same drunk by men heateth the genitalls, so Albert. against the
secundine it is used with panax, or alheal: Gal. so with melicrat. Plin.
beaver-stone being walked over by a woman, causes abortion. The Diacastorium
of Myrepsus helps those that are vertiginous, epileptick, apoplectick,
paraplectick and resolutions. There is a plaster also thereof for the same. It
is also put into oils and errhines. H. Matthew. Pet. Upon. corrupted Castor
causes madness and rage, a putting forth of the tongue, and Fever: the cure
is by butter, and muld water to cause vomiting sufficiently, sc. till the scent
be gone, and then use Diamoron, the rob of limons, or syrup thereof or juice of
Citrons, else Coriander seed, Avic. vinegar and Asses milk, or Philo his
antidote. Jonst. the fore parts of the Beaver are hot, the hinder are very
cold. Rondel. the suffumigation helps conception. The Gall causes venery. The
tail helps the wounds of the intrails. The teeth hanged about the neck are an
amulet against falls. The fat takes fishes. The skins are used by some to make
garments of. As for the differences some are black, reddish, or mixed, those
are counted Masters, these servants. They generate in the beginning of summer,
and bring forth in the end of autumn, if they bite, they leave not till the
crackling of the bones. They are cleanly in their houses, love their young, use
their fore feet like hands, when bound in their body they put their hinder
parts into the water. They gnaw down trees to build with, and draw them on the
bellies of their ancients. Their cry. is like that of an infant. As for their
description, they are of an ash color, blackish on the back, sharp toothed,
forefooted like a Dog, and like a goose behind, and tailed like a fish with
skales thereon.

Boar. Aper.
P. In Egypt, Macedonia, and England. etc. M. Acorns, chestnuts, fearn, roots,
etc. N. (...). Heb. Chasir. Arab. Kaniser.
Boar. Cells. T. the braun is of light concoction, and the Domestic is the
best. Also it is very strong and of much nutriment. Avic. Hoggs flesh either
Domestic, or wild is of easy concoction, quickly decending, polytrophick, and
of a thick and viscous juice: Others say it is cold and viscous. Hippoc. The
wild dries and strengthens. Schrod. V. The wild Boar is of the nature of the
Domestic, but stronger in faculty. The fat thereof is used in the weapon
salve, and to help the pain of the sides, mollify matter, and help the
excreation of blood drunk in Wine or Vinegar, in which also it helps ruptures
and convulsions, and luxations with rose vinegar, so Diosc. The tooth is
specificall in the plurify; given with line seed Oil, or applied it helps
the quinsey: the D. is drach. 1. The genitalls and testicles help against the
impotency of Venus. The gall discusseth botches. The dry dung drunk stoopeth
the evacuation of blood, so applied. The Urine does specifically break the
stone of the bladder, and expel the same. The tooth is mucilaginous, and
therefore does sometimes congeale. Hartm. in pract. Some commend the water
distilled out of the blood, with refrigerating and moistening plants against
the atrophie. Gesn. the parts of wild beasts are more hot and dry than the
tame. Plin. the brain of a Bore is good against Serpents with the blood, so
against the botches of the privities. The lard boiled and applied does
presently consolidate what is broken; with Honey and Rosin it helps against
Serpents: applied with the Lungs, it helps the galling and contusion of the
feet. With Oil of Roses it helps night wheales. Sext. the brain boiled and
drunk with Wine helps all griefs. See the Sow. Plin. The ashes of the jaws
of a Boar help phagedens the same help fractures. Vrsin. The tooth helps
the cough. Diosc. The curd of a kid, lamb, bore, or stagge etc. Are of like
effect, and drunk against aconite in Wine, and coagulated Milk in Vinegar.
Sext. the Lunges mixed with Honey help the ulcers and gallings of the feet.
Diosc. the Lungs, as also that of the Sow, Lamb, and Bear help inflammations
by such gallings. The fat helps drunkenness. Diosc. The Liver, fresh, dried
and powdered and drunk in Wine helps against the biting of Serpents and
Dogs: Plin. if old, drunk with rue in Wine it helps against Serpents.
Nicand. So the fillet of the Liver next the Gall, drunk in Vinegar, or Wine.
Plin. the Liver helps the lethargy and drowsiness. Sext. it helps purulent
cares being dropped in. Plin. it binds the belly being drunk in wine without
salt, when fresh. Sext. and helps the flux. Plin. The stone therein, drunk in
wine helps the stone. See Sow. Plin. The gall as also that of a Bull, applied
warm discusseth botches, or wens: which Marcellus affirms of that of the
Goat, Plin. with Rosin and Ceruse it helps creeping ulcers. Marcel. being
dropped into the grieved ear with a like q. of the Oil of Almonds, it helps
it; also drunk it helps the spleen. Marcel. applied with fat it helps the
Gout. See Sow. Plin. The testicles drunk in Mares milk, or water, as also those
of a Bear help the falling sickness: Sext. So with wine. Remedies from the
huckle bone see in Sow. Marcel. the Ashes sprinkled upon Beer help the
difficulty of Urin, sc. of the Claws. Gal. Also it helps pissing of the bed.
The dry dung of the wild, drunk in water or wine helps the rejections of
blood, and the old pains of the side, and ruptures and convulsions drunk in
vinegar. Diosc. with the rosate cerot it helps luxations. Boars dung applied
and drunk helps spasmes, bruises, and wounds. When fresh and hot it is very
good against the flux of blood out of the nostrills. Marcel. being applied with
wine like a plaster it draws forth any thing sticking in the body, and
quickly heals it. Boiled with course Honey it helps the joints. Plin. It
fills and cleanses all ulcers except in the legs. The powder drunk helps
the spleen and pain of the reins. The Ashes help the pain of the loins, and
serve where there is need of emollition. Sext. that of the wild Boar and
Sulphur being drunk in wine helps the hipps. Marcel. so strained into Wine,
and drunk, it cures the sciatica. Boiled with vinegar, kneaded with Honey and
applied to the soles of the feet, or ankles, it helps the pains thereof.
Plin. The urine drunk with oxymel helps the epilepsy, or in mulled vinegar.
It helps the pain of the ears, and deafness. Marcel. It helps purulency
being dropped in warm. It Is to be kept in the bladder, or glazed vessels. Dried
in the smoke, melted with Honey and dropped into the ear, it helps its pain
and deafness. It may be mixed with the juice of Leekes, cyprine Oil and so
dropped into the ears warm. Diosc. drunk it helps the stone. Plin. Sext. the
bladder being taken helps the stoppage of urine. Gal. and helps the pissing
of bed, being used 3. days together. Marcel. It helps the pain of the
bladder, in man; and that of the Sow in women. Some say the urin, or bladder
taken in beer helps the Dropsy. Sext. the foame of a Boar, with the fat being
taken in about 3. pints after a 3d. part has been boiled away, helps
vometing, and sleep. Aet. their wound is not to be cured by conglutinating but
suppuratory remedies. Jonst. the Gall causes venery. In the time of generation
they set up their brissels, and some gnasshing their teeth. They copulate in
the beginning of Winter, and bring forth in spring. They are destroyed by
aconite. They cure them selves with juy: and are taken by Music. They whet
their teeth before fighting, and love to releeve their crying confederats.

Buck. Dama.
P. Almost every where, in Parkes and Forests. M. Of Grass, Hay, and Leaves
of Trees. N. (...). Platyceros. Platogna, Cervus Palmatus.
Buck. Platin. Aldrov. T. does almost agree with the Capreol in qualities, and
is of good nutriment, yet inclining to Melancholy. Albert. The flesh is cold
and dry, and causes the hemorrhoids, except used with pepper, Cinnamon and
Mustard. Rhas. Or with Honey, and galingal. V. Diosc. the curd has the same
virtue with that of the Hare. The dung increases the hairs, with oil of
myrtles. The fume of the tongue dry causes Horsleeches to fall off. Rhas.
Albert. the dust, or ashes of the huckle bone helps the Fistula. So Topsel,
also some of the late Writers prescribe the fat of a Moul, Deer, and Bear
mingled together, to help the memory, being rubbed on the head. Muff. the flesh
when young is restorative, that of a gelded Dear is temperate, without
excremmentitious humors, therefore their horns grow not after. When young and
in season they are a wholesome Meat, Having no bad juice of themselves; when
old its dry, too cold and full of gross humors; But it may be corrected by
Butter, Pepper and Salt.

Bugil. Bubalus.
P. In hot Countries. Italy and Europe and other parts. M. They feed as Oxen.
N. (...). Heb. Jachmur. Buffalus.
Bugil. Cresc. T. is of a Melancholic juice, and unpleasant taste, therefore
it is not much commended. Albert. Cheese made of the Milk, is sollid and
terrene. V. Rings made of the Horns, or Hoofes of them, worn upon the
fingers, or toes, are very much commended by some against the spasme: Some also
fabulously report that the same break in the time of copulation. Schrod. the
extract of the Liver, is like that of the Bulls Spleen; but more effectual,
the D. is the same; so Hartm. in Croll. Gluckr in Begu. Tops. Some Husbandmen
burn the horns, or dung of their bugills, on the windy side of their Corn, or
Plants, to keep them from Cankers and Blasting: their Horns serve to make
bows of. As for the description they are of the kind of wild Oxen, but
greater, and taller, thicker and stronger, than the ordinary. They fight with
the feet like the Horse, and when angry run into the water. Lonic. Aldrov. the
Vrin with Myrrh and Oil, helps the ears the dung helps tumors.

Bull. Taurus.
P. Almost every where, in all Countries. M. They feed on Grass, Hay, Leaves,
etc. N. (...). Heb. Tor. and Taur. Arab.
Bull. T. Gal. The flesh of Goats is the worst, both for juice, and to be
concocted, then that of Rams, and lastly the Bulls flesh: of all which the
gelded are best, and the oldest the worst, both for concoction juice and
nutriment. Plin. V. The slough of Serpents with a Bulls skin helps the
Convulsion. Gal. Rhas. the filings of the Horn drunk with water stop the flux
of blood: Gal. and the flux of the belly. Sext. Aesculap. the Horn burned where
Serpents are, drives them away. Diosc. The blood discusseth and mollifieth
hard tumors with Barley flower. Plin. being powdered and applied it helps
impostumes, as also that of Bugils. Gal. it helps abscesses, as also that of
Bores, and Goats. Aesculap. it kills Serpents. Sext. Aesculap. Applied it
helps all spots of the face. Applied hot it helps broken bones; so Gesn.
Plin. being powdered it helps swellings behind the ears. Some commend it
against the gout. Used dry with penny wort it helps phagedens and fistula's.
Gesn. the fat is in a mediocrity. It helps spots in the face, as also the
Gall of a Calf, with the herb Cunila, sc. the seed thereof, and the powder of
Harts-horne burned in the beginning of the Dogg-dayes. Sext. Applied with Rosin
and Fullers earth, it discusseth all hardnesses: Aesculapius appoints Wax for
the same purpose. Plin. With that of Bares and Wax it helps the swellings
behind the ears. With rue it helps the Morphew, Warts, Wens, and the Like,
with that of a Hog and night shade. It helps the botches of Women with the
ashes of Aspes. With that of the Bear and Wax an. With Hypocistis and Galls it
helps the Gout: some use it for the same purpose with that of geese and
oesypus. Diosc. The Marrow is next to that of the Heart and Calf, next to which
is that of the Goat and Sheep. It is dryer and hotter than the two first; or
sharper. Sext. Drunk in Wine it helps the tormina: Aesculap, or rather
tremblings. Rhas. So being mixed with a fourth part of red rue, and Oil of
bays; the hands and feet being anointed therewith morning and evening. Marcel.
with that of a Dormouse and Hen melted, and put hot into the ears, it is very
good for the same. Diosc. The Gall is better than that of the Sheep, Sow, Goat,
or Bare; being of the same nature, but less effectual. It is dryer than that
of the Ox, and hotter. Mixed with Honey it is used in plasters, and Theriack
remedies ourwardly, that are vulnerary: Rhas. As also in Malignant ulcers:
Plin. Also other ulcers with Oil of Cypress. Diosc. And Phagedens. Plin. It
helps Fistula's with the juice of leekes, or Women's Milk; as also Phagedens.
It cures burnings. Sext. It cures the biting of the Ape. Marcel. It helps
ulcers in the head applied with warm Vinegar, and hot Scabs with Nitre Wine
and Oil: Plin. As also the Alopecia with Egyptian Alum. Diosc. With Nitre and
Fullers earth, it helps the Leprosy and scurse. Plin. In water it helps the
spots in the face, the skin being taken off, and Sun and Wind avoided: also
it takes away Freckles. Decocted with the fat of Goats an. and drunk in water
it helps the falling sickness. Rhas. The stone in the Gall does the same,
sharpneth the sight, and preventeth humors flowing thither. Plin. the Gall
with the white of an Egg, serves for collyries being used 4. days together
in Water. Aesculap. With Honey and Balsame it helps the vices of the eyes: and
the dimnesse and weft with mulse: Sext. And pain of the ears: Plin. As also
with the juice of Leeks warm, or Honey if there be a suppuration, and stench
being heated in the rind of a pome-granat: Diosc. Also dropped in with Goats,
or Woman's Milk; as also ruptures: Marcel. So with Laserwort and Oil of Cedar.
Avic. It helps the ulcers of the ear. Rhas. 2. or 3. drops help the ringing
of the same. So Diosc. With the juice of Leeks. Plin. It helps the teeth, as
also the Milk of Goats. Diosc. applied with Honey it helps the quinsey, so
Marcel. also salt vinegar and old oil may be added. Cows milk boiled and drunk
helps the dysentery, with Honey, and the ashes of the horn if there be pain;
or else the Gall mixed with Cummin seed, Gourds being applied to the Navil.
Marcel. Applied with a cloth to the Navil it kills Worms. Diosc. It
cicatrizeth the vices of the fundament, so Plin. and Avic. some use it to open
the Hemorrhoids. Gal. Put into the fundament in a cloth it loses the belly:
so applied to the Navil of Children. Plin. So with wormwood: or lupines
pounded. Applied from the Navil downwards with Honey it helps the pains of
the scrotum, and genitalls. Plin. It helps the pterygia dissolved in hot
water, some add Sulphur an. and Alum. Marcel. With butter, the marrow of a
Heart, and Oil of Cypress and bays it helps bruised knees. Avic. It helps
the pain of the womb. Applied with new shorn wool it helps the purgations of
Women. Some add Hysop and Nitre. Plin. So the powder of Harts-horne applied,
and Bulls Gall with opium. Hippoc. Being drunk with Wine in the morning
fasting, and pills made thereof used, it provokes the terms. Rhas. Given in
water of coloquintida, it presently expels the birth. With Serpents grease,
rust of brass and Honey applied it helps sterility caused by Child birth.
Sext. The genital of a Bull soaked in vinegar, and applied, causes the face to
shine so the glue thereof. Rhas. That of a red Bull drunk by Women causes a
lothing of venery; yet the later authors affirm the contrary. Gal. The Horn
burned stops blood. Aesculap. The dung discusseth tumors, and hard
swellings. Sext. Drunk with hot water it cures all griefs Applied hot it
helps the Alopecia. Burned and cast upon Wine, or hot water it helps
burnings. Plin. Applied it makes the Cheeks reddish being fomented with cold
water both before and after. Diosc. The fume helps the falling down of the
Womb. Plin. Marcel. The urin helps the Leprosy and Scurf. Marcel. And if old
also the head, being washed therewith. Plin. With Goats Gall it prevents what
troubles Cattle. It helps running ulcers of the head, and Scurfe with
Brimstone. Diosc. Dropped into the ears with Myrrh, it helps the pains
thereof. The fume as also of that of Man, helps deafness: with a third part
of vinegar, and a little stale of a young Calfe, it causes venery being drunk
and the dung applied to the genitals. Hippoc. makes a purgatory remedy
thereof, for Woman that cannot conceive. Plin. The glue is made of the ears
and genitals and is most excellent against burnings. Avic. Uses it with
vinegar and Honey Plin. With Lime it helps the itch: And ringworme, with
vinegar. Marcel. So boiled with vinegar, and live brimstone, boiled to the
thickness of Honey with stirring applied twice in a day. Plin. being dissolved
it helps fresh wounds made by Iron. Avic. With Honey and vinegar it kills
Nits. Plin. The fabrile glue decoct in Water and applied, helps the teeth,
being presently washed with Wine in which the barks of a sweet pomegranat are.
Plin. 3. Oboli being drunk with hot Water help the spitting of blood. Marcel.
It helps the colic. Being injected with hot Water it helps the dysentery
and the dung of a Calf decocted in Wine helps inflations. Gesn. H. the blood
is counted poysonsome. Gal. The antidote is vinegar, with vomiting. Such things
also as hinder coagulation and are laxative, fat, and slippery. As also Cabbage
seed, Calamint, Nitre, Pepper and Time, etc. Jonst. As also flower gentle, wild
figgetree. Laserwort, Oil of Peeter, Sowthistle, Bramble bush. Diosc. Yet the
blood applied with Barley meal mollifieth hardnesses in the body: dry it
discusseth impostumes in any part, and kills Worms, and being applied it
takes all spots out of the face, notwithstanding it is dangerous to be taken,
it presently coagulating and growing hard. If drunk the Symptoms are
difficulty of breathing, strangling, stopping of the jaws, and tonsils.
Redness of the tongue, and infection of the teeth, etc. Hereto may be referred
the Bison: and Vre-oxe, whose parts though not experimented, are thought to be
more effectual in physic, as also the bulls of Florida, called Butrones, the
skin of which the Barbareans use against the cold of winter, and the horns
against poison. Muff. Bulls beef except very young, is utterly unwholesome, and
of hard digestion, the blood is extreme hard and binding as appears in the
ground where they are killed, it glasing, it making it of a stony hardness,
therefore they weere wount to be baited before the slaughter, that violent heat
and motion might attenuate their blood and soften the flesh; yet it is then fit
only for strong stomachs, and hurts others.

Calfe. Vitulus.
P. Almost every where, in any country. M. They are fedd with milk. N. (...).
Vaccae proles. Heb. Egel.
Calfe. Gesn T. In all kinds of living creatures, the flesh of the aged is
hard, dry, and hardly concocted: Those of the younger are tender and moist, and
therefore more easily concocted, except such as are eaten, as soon as brought
forth; for all such are mucous, especially those which are moist in their own
nature, as Lambs, and Sows Pigs; but Kids and Calves, being of a dryer nature,
are better concocted and nourish; so Gal. They are to be killed 15 days after
calved, and their flesh then is temperate and of easy concoction, also
wholesome for those that lead an idle life, so Crescent. Therefore it is often
used by the gentry; so Platin. It may be boiled as that of other beasts, and
eaten with butter and vinegar; so the plux. The head is eaten with the brains
and sage, at the first course, and is much better than that of the Sheep. The
feet are eaten with vinegar and pepper: there are also diverse other things
taken notice of by Platina, Apicius, and others, which belonging to cookery,
are here omitted, as belonging to the dypnosophistick art. V. Plin. The flesh
of a Calf keeps green wounds from swelling. Marcel. New boiled and applied
with vinegar to the armpits, it helps the stinking of the same. Plin. Applied
it helps the bitings of Men, being so used for five days together: Cells. As
also of a mad Dog; and Serpents, the broth being drunk, as also that of a Goose
or sheep. Plin. The same helps the disentery and coeliack passion. The flesh
eaten with birth-wort roasted, by women about the time of conception, causes
males. The Ashes with Women's milk help filthy ulcers. The marrows of living
creatures, mollify what is hard or scirrhous, either muscles, tendons,
ligaments, or bowels; but the best is that of the Heart, then that of a Heiser
or Calf: And that of Goats and Bulls is more sharp, and drying, and therefore
are not used for this purpose. Also of the marrow of the heart or Calfe may
pessaries be made, to mollify diverse evils of the matrix, and remedies to be
applied outwardly: Also the marrow of the back may be used, which is more dry
and squalid. Plin. All marrow, mollifieth, fills, dries, and heateth. Plin.
It helps the dysentery with other things, and exulcerated wombs. Gal. They
do loosen and discuss. As for the way of preparing and keeping them, see in my
Isagoge phytologica, etc. Plin. The marrow of a Calfe with a like weight of wax
and oil, or oil of roses with an egg helps, the hardness of the cheeks:
Which Marcellus affirms of the eyebrows. With comin seed instilled it helps
the pain of the ears, and deafeness. It helps the ulcers and clefts of the
mouth, so that of the heifer. Boiled with a little meal, wax and oil, it
helps the coeliack, and dysentery, being drunk. Marcel. So that of a heifer
with meal and cheese. With suet it helps the running ulcers of the privities.
Plin. The same in wine decoct, with water helps the exulcerations of the womb
applied. Gal. Diverse remedies are made thereof to mollify the womb being used
inwardly or outwardly. Diosc. The fat is something astringent. Marcel. With
salt it helps the lousy evil. Plin. And evils of the head. Marcel. Applied it
extenuateth the eyebrows: Plin. So with Goose grease and the juice of basil, as
also pains of the ears and deafness, so with the marrow of a Heart, and
leaves of white thorn; with wild cumin and honey, it helps the sound and
ringing thereof. Marcel. Drunk in water it helps the coeliack. so Plin. And the
dysentery. With rue it helps inflations in the fundament. With niter it helps
the swellings of the testicles, so Marcel. Plin. It helps rough nails, and
warts with salt: and the gout, as some affirm. Diosc. The curd has the same
virtue as that of a Hare, Kid, or Lamb. Plin. A little thereof drunk in wine
helps the lethargy, which some affirm of the Sea Calfe. The destilled water
of the race with p. aq. Of sage and bawme, helps cold parts, resolved or
pined, being applied daily morning and evening with hot cloths, wrapped about
them. The water distilled out of the liver of a he Calf, with as much sage
drunk by men or women, that have a hard swelling overthwart the bottom of the
belly, above the privities, helps the same. Plin. The gall helps the
leprosy and scurfe, with the seed of cunila, and powder or ashes of hearts
horn. Marcel. Applied it kills nits. The stale urine of man helps the
alopecia, with sowbread and brimstone, but this is more effectual. Being warmed
it extennars cicatrices, with myrrh, honey, and saffron, to which some add the
flowers of brass, which Marcellus the Empirick appropriateth to the eyes.
being boiled with vinegar, with a like quantity of the slough of a Serpent, and
put into the ear with a cloth dipped therein, being first fomented with hot
water by a sponge, it gives great ease. It loosneth the belly, used as that of
the Bull, and helps the womb, to which some add oil of almonds. Plin. The
spleen boiled in wine, pounded and applied helps the small ulcers of the
mouth. Marcel. The glue dissolved in vinegar with a little unslacked lime, to
the thickness of honey, applied helps the leprosy, being left to dry
thereon: Plin. So boiled with vinegar and honey. That made of the genitals,
dissolved in vinegar with live brimstone, helps the tetters of the mouth,
used twice in a day. Plin. It helps broken ears dissolved in water. Plin.
The fume of the dung helps those that are hurt by the Scorpion. The ashes
with vinegar stop blood. Marcel. With Women's milk it helps sordid ulcers.
Plin. Applied fresh it helps S. Anthonies fire. The ashes, with the boiled
bulbs of lillies, and a little honey, help the pains of swelled veins, and
all inflammations and suppurations. The ashes with vinegar help warts. The dung
kneaded with oil and gum, helps the skin discolored in the summer time.
Marcel. With new oesipus, honey, butter, and a dogs gall mixed, it takes all
spots out of the face. Plin, Boiled in wine it helps melancholy. Marcel. And
when fresh helps those that are collerick. Plin. That of the male applied
helps the dropsy. Boiled in wine it helps the inflation of the intestines.
It helps late luxations, so that of a Boar or Sow. Marcel. And the joints:
with the dregs of vinegar it helps the gout. With vinegar it helps the
swelling of the testicles. The ashes with the decocte^ bulbs of lillies, and a
little honey help the gout, and articular diseases. The urine when first
calved, with that of a Goat, or Bull, and a third part of vinegar made to fume,
helps the pain of the ears, and deafness. Jonst. The blood of a Calfe,
with meat cut small, being set in a pot for 10. days is a very good bait for
fish.

Camel. Camelus.
P. In Africa, and Asia. India, and Arabia. M. Of rushes, barley, grass and
thistles. N. (...). Heb. Gamal. Arab. Gemal.
Camel. Gal. T. Aristot. Plin. Both their milk and flesh are of all the
sweetest. Their milk is drunk with twice or thrice so much of water; yet some
commend the milk only as sweet. When nere the time of bringing forth there milk
is more thin. All milk does obstruct, especially the liver, except that of
Camels when great, and the Asses and Mares, so Avic. Also it is something salt.
Being used it causes freckles, or the morphew, sc. All but this. It looseneth
the belly as the other two. It is the thinnest of all, and of a better and more
thinner juice. It extenuats thick excrementitious humor, and frees from
obstructions, by reason of its vehement heat, so Rhas. Also the flesh is hot
and dry. V. Gesn. One that is poisoned being put into the belly of a Camel or
Mule new killed, is helped thereby, the heat thereof resolving the poison, and
strengthening the spirits, and all parts of the body; so Ponzet. Avic. The flesh
provokes urine, yet some affirm it of that of the heart. The fat in the bunch
burned helps the hemorrhoids by its fume. Hal. The blood dried helps the
disentery, and long flux of the belly. Avic. It stops fluxions: drunk after
the purging of the terms it causes conception, so Gesn. Though he doubts of
the same. It helps the epilepsie: Plin. So the brain dried, drunk in
vinegar, so Gal. de There. The teeth help the excoriations of the intestines,
and hemeroides applied. The froth drunk makes demoniack. Rhas. The powder of
the lungs drunk causes blindness: Plin. The Gall drunk with honey helps the
falling sickness, and quinsy. Marcel. Applied to the forehead it helps dimness
of the eyes, some add honey and saffron thereto, and then it cures
excrescencies, and cicatrices there. Plin. The tail dried looseneth the belly.
The hairs thereof twisted together and bound about the arm help quartan
agues. Avic. The milk when they are newly impregnated helps the asthma, and
shortness of breath. It helps against the dropsy and hardness of the spleen,
as also that of the Goat and Ass. Rhas. It strengthens the liver, opens
obstructions, leasoneth the hard spleen, and helps the dropsy being drunk
hot, especially sugar being mixed therewith. Avic. The milk when first great,
with oil of mock-privet helps the inward parts. Except the same, all milk is
unwholesome for those that are splenetick, and hepatick, and those that want an
attenuating diet: For this agrees with most distempers of the spleen, and
liver, and increases the same: Also it is very good in the dropsy, especially
drunk with their urine. Avic. It causes a good stomach and thirst, also it
provokes the terms, and helps the vices of the hemorrhoids. Haly, the milk
of a Camel is a good antidote against poison. And it helps the decayed temper
of the body, mollifying the belly. Some say the ashes of the dung, with oil
curle the hair: And applied help the dysentery: And the epilepsy so much as
may be taken with three fingers being drunk. Avic. The dung hinders the marks
of the small pocks, and takes away warts; also it stops the flux of blood
out of the nostrils. The white dung powdered and applied with honey represseth
tumors, and purges dry wounds, also it resolves ulcers and schrophula's. The
urine helps running ulcers. Plin. Being drunk it moves the belly. Applied it
helps dandriff. Avic. It helps the loss of smelling, also it helps the
dropsy, as also that of a man. Matt. Some say that sal ammoniack is made of the
urine thereof. Jonst. As for the description, the foot is divided, back
knobbed, tail like the Asses, they are teated like a Cow, the genital is back
wards, the buttocks narrow, and gall venous. They can abstain from drink 15
days. They engender backwards a whole day together, and go twelve months.
They are enemies to the Horse, Lion, and Oxe-fly. Their deseases are the gout
and baldness. They live a hundred years. They are revengeful, docible, love
music, are bashful, and compassionate. They knele down when loaded, and carry
about 600 weight. The Dromedarie will run 100 miles in a day. Some are brown,
some white as to their differences.

Capricerve. Capricerva.
P. In the Indies, Persia, and Peru and like places. M. Of a herb like Saffron,
and Hermodactils. N. Capra Indica. Montana, Sylvistris, Pazon Pers.
Capricerve. Jonst. T. The flesh of the last is not very pleasant, yet eaten by
the Indians. V. A piece thereof applied, presently helps the pain of the
eyes, being applied fresh. Their stone called bezoar, Garc. applied to any bare
part of the body, it preventeth the hurt by poison. The powder cast upon the
bitings of venomous beasts cures the same, and benummeth the beasts being cast
thereon; also it helps all poison and malignant fevers. It helps
melancholy, quartan agues, the syncope, epilepsy, vertigo, stone, and kills
worms. And is more effectual for women than for men. The. D. is gr. 12. Of
which see more in my Pammineralogie. The beast is about the bigness and
likeness of a Stagg. Their hair is very fine, like silk: it helps when hot,
and prevents the inflammation of the reins, therefore they fill beds
therewith: It is said also to help the gout: sc. Of that called Vicunas, which
may be here reduced.

Cat. Catus.
P. Almost every where, In all Countries. M. Of flesh, fish, mice, birds,
lizards, rabbits. N. (...). Heb. Catul. and Schanar. Feles.
Cat. Anon. T. The flesh of Conies is like that of the Cat, both being sweet.
It was used formerly in banquets, and is still used in other Countries, after
they are hung out in the air, that they may be more tender, and sweeter. V.
Some count the Cat an unclean, and poysonsome beast. Plin. The ashes drive
away Mice. Ponzet. H. The brain of a Cat causes madness, being very dry, in
respect of man's. And it so obstructeth the passages thereof, that the animal
spirits cannot pass to the ventricles of the hinder part, so that memory being
hindered, those that are so affected seem distracted. The cure is by drinking
twice a month drach. 1. of the earth of Lemnos with the water of sweet
Marjoram: Also spices are to be mixed with the meats, to recreate the spirits:
Wine also is good and sometimes drach. sem. of Diamoschu dulce there with; yet
a good order of diet may be sufficient. Matthew. The brain causes the vertigo,
and stupidity, which is cured with much difficulty: It is to be cured by
vomiting, and the aforesaid remedies, or drach. sem. of musk powdered and drunk
in wine. Aet. The biting of a Cat is cured by those against that of a mad dog;
But properly, honey, turpentine, and oil of roses mixed and applied: Or
centaury applied with honey, also the dung of a Cock applied with the fatt of
the same. Some use man's urine with Goats milk and origanum. Matthew. The Hairs
are poysonsome. The breath also is offensive: In so much that some affirm that
diverse having kept them in their beds, have got an hectic fever or marasmus
thereby: And do therefore often carry the plague about in pestilential times,
and offend many merely by their sight, whom Matthiolus supposes may be cured
by such remedies, as serve against the brain thereof. Gal. The flesh of Cats
salted and bruised draws out things fixed in the flesh. Their flesh is hot
and dry, helps the pain of the hemorrhoids, heateth the reins, and helps
the pain of the back: Which Iac. Olivar. Affirms. Vrsin. The loins help the
like parts: So Gesn. Although, the truth hereof may be questioned. Rhas.
Albert. The flesh of the wild Cat applied helps the gout. Anon. The blood of
a Cat applied helps the soars of the nails, and kills the worms thereof.
Rhas. The fat of a wild Cat, is of like nature with the flesh. Sylv. The fat is
betwixt that of a Bull and Sow. Ms. The ashes of the head of a black Cat burned
in a glazed vessel, and put into the eye with a quil, thrice in a day, help
the haw, weft, and web in the eye. And if there be heat in the night, two or
three oak leaves applied wet in water, help the same. Gal. The liver burned
and drunk helps the stone. Plin. The same taken in the decrease of the moon,
and drunk in wine after long salting, helps the fits of quartans: Which
Sextus attributes to the dung, hanged about the neck with an Owls claw. The
gall of a wild Cat is very good against the wry mouth: The fume extracts the
dead birth: So applied with coloquintida water, by a sponge, or put in as a
pessary; so Rhas. and Albert. Sext. Aesculap. The dry dung applied with an
equal q. of mustard seed and vinegar helps the alopecia. Plin. Some say that
rubbed outwardly, it causes bones sticking in the throat, to avoid, upwards or
downwards: So Sext Plin. Also it helps the exulcerations of the womb: Which
is affirmed also of the fat of the Fox and marrow of a Calf in wine, decoct in
water with sewet. Jonst. The dung with rosin and oil of roses applied stops
women's flux. A fat Goose being stuffed with the flesh thereof and salt, so
gently roasted, yields a liquour good against the gout, or joint aches. They
usually generate in Jannuary and February, making a noise, by reason of the
heat of the sperme, and scratching of their nails. They go 56 days, and
usually bring forth 5 or 6 young ones. They are enemies to Mice, Toads,
Serpents, the Vulpanser, Eagle, rue, to their own gall, sweet smells, and
moisture, therefore some use rue to affright them from Pigeon-houses. They love
valerian and catmint. Their eyes increase and decrease according to the moon and
shine in the night. Also they hide their excrements, and love their old
habitations, which they will find out though carried away blindfolded. Schrod.
The fat of a gelded Cat, heateth, mollifieth, discusseth, and mightily helps
the diseases of the joints. Schwenckf. Three drops of the blood, out of the
caudale vein of a boor Cat drunk help the falling sickness. The blood of the
ear helps the shingles. The skin is woorn to warm the stomach, and help
contractions of the joints. Some use the secundine about the neck, to prevent
the distempers of the eyes. Obscur. The fume of the dung, it being applied
also, expels the dead birth. Aldrov. The flesh draws things out of the body,
and helps the hemorrhoids and pains of the back. Querc. The distilled water
of the urine helps deafnes.

Chameleon. Chamaeleon.
P. In Asia, Africa, and India, or the Indies. M. Flies, locusts, beetles, the
Ancients said of the air. N. (...). Murilacertus.
Chameleon. T. Jonst. They are used for meat, being cast into the fire, and
broiled. The skin being taken off, the flesh is very white, which being boiled
in a liquour like our butter, is after eaten. V. Trall. It is also used in
Physic, sc. against the epilepsy being boiled in a new earthen pot, with oil:
He also makes an unguent thereof against the gout. Arnold. Aldrov. The tongue
applied on his that is forgetful helps the memory. Some apply it to avoid the
danger of childbirth. Marcel. The gall helps suffusions of the eyes. Plin.
The heart in new sheered black wool helps the quartan ague. With the root of
the herb of the same name, and hounds-tongue, it causes silence. The liver
dissolveth love: And the intestines and excrements, mixed with the urine of
Apes, cause hatred. There are also diverse other things affirmed thereof which
deserve not writing. Gassend. The teeth are in good order, the intestine
crooked, the excrement liquid. The liver slit, the lungs puffed up, without an
inner rim in the lower belly, spleen, bladder, or reins: and tongue of a foot
long. Peiresc. Kept some thereof to see their formation and eruption in which
he observed a great number of eggs. They are enemies to the Hawk, Crow,
Elephant, and Vipers. Celsus Says that their mouth is always open. In the
winter they lie hid like the Lizard. They are of the color of what is next,
except red and white; yet Gassendus affirms it not of those of Peirescius.
Some thereof are pale, some black, and of other colors, as to their
differences.

Cony. Cuniculus.
P. In Germany, France, Italy, and England, etc. M. Grass, trefoile, lettuce,
sowthistle, etc. N. (...). Heb. Schaphan. The young Laurix.
Cony. T. Anon. Some count the flesh sweet and like that of a Cat. Platin. It
nourishes better and more easily; than that of the Hare. The brain as also
that of the hare is commended against poisons. V. Gesn. Marcel. The powder of a
Cony burned alive in a pot, with the like quantity of costus, being drunk in
wine, sc. one sponeful, and the jaws rubbed with the same, helps the
quinsey. Sylv. The fat is betwixt that of the Bull and Sow; as also that of the
Fox, Badger, and Cat, etc. It serves to assuage the nerves, which is affirmed
by Vrsin. Schrod. And helps the hardness thereof, and of the joints. It is a
very fearful and prolifick creature. Jonst. The fat in some helps the
difficulty of urine. The description is not necessary, by reason of the
commonnesse thereof. They generate in half a years time, or in a year, then
every month, in hot countries. If one departs from a place the rest follow.
They chew the cud, are emulous, and easily tamed; they stop their nest with
sand, that they may not be discovered, and go to them only in the morning and
evening. Their difference is from their color, magnitude, intralls, and place.
Aldrov. Dur. Their flesh is cold initio primi, and dry 20. The fat helps vices
of the urine, Wecker makes an ointment thereof for the same purpose: the skin
helps against cold.

Cow. etc. Bos.
P. In England, Scotland, Ireland, and almost all Countries. M. Of grass,
shrubs, and leaves of trees. N. (...) Heb. Bakar, Vacca. Junix, the Heifer.
Cow. Gesn. T. The flesh nourishes much, and the blood generated thereof is
more gross; therefore it causes diverse melancholic diseases, in those that
are of that temper, it is difficultly concocted, but then it mightily
nourishes: and compared with sheep flesh it is cold, and causes melancholy
blood, but it may be taken with vinegar, garlic and rue: it is fit only for
hot and strong stomachs, and those that labor; so Sym. Seth. Gal. The flesh is
not moist, pituitous or tender; but hurts much by reason of its hardness,
and difficulty in alteration: Also it yields not a mean aliment, or that may
be easily dissipated, but causes too gross blood, and so hurts those of the
same temper, feeding too largely thereon: Causing cancers, the leprosy, scab,
quartane ague, and melancholy, also swelling of the spleen, after which in some
follows a cachexy or a dropsy. The same flesh is so much thicker in substance
than the Hogs, as that is more clammy than it. The young is best for young
people, and therefore the swines flesh being more moist than beef. Also beasts
are fattest, and fittest for man's body when they go to grass, and after, are
more lean and of worse juice: So those that feed on shrubs and branches of
trees. The flesh of Hares causes gross blood; but is of better juice, than
that of Cowes, and Sheep. Beife is of little and slow nourishment, being cold
and dry, so generateth an impure and melancholic juice, and causes diseases
thereof arising. Isaac. Platin. It stays long in the stomach, and stops
the belly: Especially the old, the young is temperate of good nourishment and
strengthening, so Cresc. Plat. Beife ought to be boiled. Celsus counts it of
the most nutriment, and fittest for the stomach amongst domestic creatures,
and is not so subject to corruption. The Cows milk is the fattest, the Sheeps
and Goats less fat, so Gal. The milk of a Cow, Ass and Mare, do more loosen
the belly, than the Sheeps; which is sweet, thick, and fatt. The three former
are most fit for the belly; but trouble the same, so Diosc. Crescent. The milk
and cheese of Heifers, is not so fit nutriment for man, as that of Sheep. Var.
The milk that is most purging is first the Mares, secondly the Asses, thirdly
the Sheeps, fourthly the Goats. Bapt. Fire. The best is the Goats, next the
Sheeps, and then the Cows. Aeg. The most temperate is the Woman's, then the
Goats, Asses, Sheeps, and lastly the Cowe's. The Goats is temperate in
substance, less purging than the Cows, which is the fattest and thickest, fit
to nourish, and penetrates moderately. The cheese is styptick, to which that of
mares is like, and of much nourishment. V. Plin. The ashes of the tip of a
Cowes horn, helps the cough. Two spoonfuls thereof made into pills with
honey, help the phthisick. Rhas. If of a heifer, applied with vinegar it
helps the morphew, and stops the bleeding at the nostrils. Marcel. Two
spoonefuls of that part next the head, with water warmed, and a little vinegar
drunk three days together help the spleen, taken fasting. Plin. The ashes of
the hoof applied with water discuss hard swellings in the body. Rhas. That of
a heifer, causes milk in Women and strengthens them: That of the huckle bone
of a Cow drunk stops blood and the menses. Gal. So the ashes of a Bulls thigh.
Avic. That of a heifer binds the belly: which Galen affirms of the filings
of a Bulls horn. That of the ankle applied in wine, fastens the teeth; Plin.
Rhas. Hal. affirm it of the ashes, and that it fastneth the gums. Plin. And
with myrrh is a dentifrice. Gal. The same powder drunk with honey, kills
worms: Rhas. And with wine those like gourd seeds. Gal. Rhas. Hal. The same
with mulled vinegar looseneth the spleen. Gal. It also helps white spots,
Hal. and the leprosy. Gal. Hal. It gently causes venery. Plin. The liquour
helps wrinkles. The flesh applied for five days when boiled helps the
bitings of men; but veal is more effectual: The same applied helps tumors,
when hot it helps impostumes; so the gall, and blood. Marcel. Plin. Applied
fresh to the privities, it helps the ulcers thereof, and epiphora's: The same
boiled in water and vinegar an. and eaten, tempereth the stinking savor, and
corrosions of the stomach. S. Seth. The broth helps the flux of the belly,
caused by yellow choler: Plin. if of a heifer, as also the marrow. It helps
the ulcers and clefts of the mouth. Plin. The ashes of a Cowes hide with honey
help phagedens: that of an old shoe soale, helps gallings by the shoe;
Diosc. as also burnings, and other gallings; so Hermol. with lineseed oil.
Plin. Also kibes. As for the glue, see Bull. Rhas. The marrow and fatt serves
against the commotion of the nerves, and mollifieth the same. Plin. The marrow
of the right fore leg with sour, helps the hairs, diseases of the
eyebrows, and corners thereof, and serves for a calliblephary. Marcel. The
marrow put into the ears helps them. Plin. The marrow of a heart or heifer
with rolin helps the ulcers of the mouth. The marrow of a heifer with fine
meal, baked, helps the dysentery, Marcel. especially the milk of Cowes being
eaten. The marrow boiled with meal and wax, and a little oil, that it may be
drunk, helps the coeliack and dysentery: See the fatt of Calves. Plin. The
tallow, as also that of Calves, helps poisons, which hurt by exulceration.
With the flower of frankincense it helps corns, as also the leprosy, fellon,
wild fire and scurvinesse, sc. with salt and raisins, organy, and leaven: So
also the fatt of Goats, and helps adustions with oil of roses. Rhas. The
marrow: and blood concocteth abscesses with the fatt made into a plaster, and
mollifieth hard tumors. Marcel. applied in a cerot with the juice of an Asses
dung, and scillae or squills, q. s. it helps the ulcers of the head. Plin.
Boiled with oil it helps epiphora's. The fatt warmed with Goose grease,
helps the hearing: Marcel. and the clefts of the mouth. Plin. So with the
juice of basil. Plin. Marc. It helps the stiffenesse of the neck, and botches
with oil, mollifying the same. Plin. The fatt helps the diseases of the
fundament. Diosc. The fatt of a Cow, Calfe or Bull is something astringent.
Gesn. The blood taken with vinegar stops the spittings of blood. Hal. So
that of a Goat being dropped into a wound. Rhas. It concocteth abscesses, used
with the tallow, and mollifieth hard swellings. In Arcadia the milk of cows is
used by those that are phthisical, and cachecktick: That of the Goat is fit for
the stomach, the Cows is more physical and most looseneth the belly. Plin. The
same helps those that have drunk meadow saffron, hemlock, venomous trefoile,
or of the Sea Hare: The Grecians say that it vanquisheth all poisons,
especially such as burn and corrode, and helps against the ephemeron, or
cantharides, causing the evomition of the same; so Plin. and Diosc. The bark
of an oak boiled in Heifers milk, helps the stinging of Serpents. Plin.
Nitre with the same and honey helps exulcerations in the face. The milk
helps fresh ulcers of the mouth. Plin. Exulcerated tonsils washed with Cows
or Goats milk are helped by the same, used as a gargarisme as soon as
strained; but that of Goats is best boiled with mallows and a little salt.
Marcel. The milk of Goats Cows or Sheep new milked being used as a gargarisme
helps the pains of the tonsils, and aswageth the swellings of the same.
Marcel. Cows milk newly milked, heated, and used as a gargarisme, helps the
throat straightned by catarrhes, and the exasperated jaws: the same with
tar, pissasphalt, with Harrs sewer, or with Sheeps milk an drunk or eaten
effectually helps the phthisick. The milk taken boiled helps the
exulcerated stomach: Plin. So that of an Ass. Diosc. It helps the exulcerating
flux and tenesmus, red-fire stones being quenched therein, so that of Sheep or
Goats: The same helps bilious fluxes, boiled to a third part, having flints
and gadds of steel quenched therein; Aet. It hurts those that are feverish,
turning into acrimony. Plin. With the ashes of Hearts horn or Bulls gall mixed
with cumin seed, and applied with a gourd to the navil it helps the pain of
the belly: Being injected it helps the corrosions of the bowels by strong
remedies, and if there be a hot dysentery, boiled with the stones of the Sea,
or prisan; so the same having steel often quenched therein and so drunk warm,
some use flints. Aetius prescribes Asses and Mares milk in the suppuration of
the reins to cleanse them, and Cows milk after for nutriment. Plin. Some say
the drinking of Heifers milk helps conception. Hippoc. Milk and wine drunk
help the wounds of the intestines, with an equal part of water; so also in the
fracture of the scull. The liquour drawn thence and wine in B. M drunk certain
days, helps quartain agues. Some Women drink it after their purgation. The
whey with honey and salt q. s. drunk moves the belly, so Marcel. Plin. with
cresses it helps the orthopnoea. Marcel. The marrow of an Heifer mixed with
fine dough, baked and eaten, helps the dysentery, especially with the cheese
of Cowes milk, fresh: So fresh cheese applied, drinking potions in which steel
has been quenched. So the butter with turpentine or boiled with mallows, or
oil of roses: Some attribute the same effects to Mares milk. Plin. Some
affirm that there is a stone in the head, which being worn helps the
breeding of teeth, or the brain applied. Plin. The tophus found in the second
venture of a Heiser, is counted good against the difficulty of birth: Which some
affirm of that of Staggs. The broth of the tripes gargled helps the
exulceration of the tongue and arteries. Plin. The liver of a Heifer helps
the coeliack and dysentery. Hal. burned and drunk it helps the flux of the
belly and blood. Plin. Some adulterate the Indian Lycium with the gall hereof.
The gall of an heifer is stronger than that of other foure-footed beasts. Avic.
It is mixed with plasters against ulcers, joined with the crysipelas, and
great pain. Gal. The gall of a bull is hotter and more drying, than that of
Oxen. The gall mixed with honey, draws forth iron or splinters sticking in
the flesh. Rhas. With bdellium dissolved therein and vinegar it helps
fistula's. With alum and mirrhe mixed to the thickness of honey, applied, it
presently helps the ulcers of the yard: Also beete boiled in wine may be
applied, as also beef applied. Plin. The gall applied, as also that of a Boar
discusseth botches, and impostumes: So the blood, and flesh. Plin. The seed of
rocket therewith whiteneth black cicatrices. Avic. With nitre and fullers earth
it helps scurf, the head being anointed with the same: It is also used in
collyries against the haw of the eye. Rhasis affirms that taken by the
nostrils it helps the falling sickness. Applied with cotton it helps the
ringings of the ears, and with oil helps the pain thereof, if caused by
cold. So Hal. Marcel. The gall of a Cow with the stale of a Goat helps the
loss of hearing being dropped into the same; Plin. so also if there be a
purulency in the same: The gall of the Tortise with the cast slough of snakes
mixed with vinegar, may be added thereto. The skin of Serpents burned and
dropped into the ears with oil of roses is good against all griefs; but
chiefly the stinck of the same, with vinegar, or better with the gall of the
Goat: Also the gall of the Boar, Sow or Cow helps the pain of the ears
with oil of Palma Christi, and roses an. especially that of the Bull, with the
juice of leekes, or with honey if there be suppuration. It helps the pain and
vices of the ears, and stench thereof being warmed in the pill or rind of a
pomegranate, so Plin. Avic. The gall anointed on the palate serves as an
apophlegmatisme, drawing phlegm from the head. Some use a linen girdle about
their midles, dipped into the gall using it three days, against the jaundise,
renewing it every day. Hipp. in lib. de not. Mul. Makes a remedy thereof to
cause conception in women. Plin. Mixed with oil of roses, and turpentine, and
so applied with wool, it opens the hardened womb. Rhas. Mixed with wine, the
flesh of a Gourd, and honey, and so anointed on the fundament, it looseneth the
belly. Avic. It opens the hemorrhoids: Gal. Especially that of the Bull.
Applied it helps the piles. Gal. It helps malignant and eating ulcers
especially in the legs, called lupus, being applied as a cataplasme with the
juice of carline thistle, and the greater celandine, an. Plin. The Spleen eaten
with honey, and applied helps the pain of the spleen, and running ulcers
with honey. It may also be drunk in wine against the spleen. The cleaning
applied helps ulcers in the face. Plin. Twenty heads of garlic being bruised
with vinegar, and put into the bladder of a Cow, and applied help the pain of
the spleen. Marcellus adds verdigrease, and mustard seed. To help the colic
apply a hot brick to the feet, wrapped in a cloth, the patient being in bed:
then put some Goats milk into a Cows bladder, and apply it very hot to the
navil, to cause sweat: and that the belly may not be stopped; give the patient
a little oil to drink warm. Afric. The foame applied keeps flies from them.
The urine of an Ox with the ashes of the tamariske tree drunk or taken with
meat, resists venery, Used as a bath it helps the coldness of the stomach,
and hemorrhoids, so Hal. That of Heifers used as a gargarisme helps ulcers in
the mouth, among soldiers, that are infectious, called die brune. That of a
Cow is good against wounds made by fire. Their suppurations are better cured by
Surgery, than Medicine: also their urine is good for the cavity used hot: So
Columella. Plin. It helps bees fluxes, caused by tasting of the flowers of the
cornel tree: so that of man. Gal. The dung of living creatures is very
digestive, but that of man by reason of its extraordinary stinck is not much
used; that of the Cow, Goat, and certain other creatures being without much
smell, is much used. That of the Cow is of a drying faculty, and drawing, as
appears when it is applied to the stingings of Bees, or wasps,
notwithstanding it may help also by the property of its substance. Some have
cured the dropsy therewith, plaistering the patient therewith, and setting him
to dry in the sun. That when they go to grass when moist, helps phlegmons
in rustic bodies, being applied. That when they feed on chafe is in a
mediocrity as to the other: and they are fittest for the most rustic bodies,
sc. against the kings evil, and all scirrhous tumors, applied with vinegar, as
a cataplasme, so Gal. Plin. Being heated it may be applied, where there is need
of breaking, or that of Goats being boiled in vinegar or wine. Avic. Gal.
Applied with vinegar it helps all tumors, and hot abscesses. Plin. Applied it
helps S. Anthonies fire; so that of a Calfe also. Applied fresh it helps
the inflammation in wounds. Diosc. Applied with vinegar it helps hardnesses,
and botches. Plin. With honey it prevents swellings in gree^ wounds. Some say
that it will assuage any swelling with barley meal; so that of Goats. The same
in May, being dry with egg shells, and the soles of old shoos, powdered, and
cast on the wound or ulcers, helps those in the legs, that are old; also Cats
tails may be added for exiccation. Rhas. The dung blown up into the nostrils
Stops their bleeding, some add vinegar for the same purpose. Haly commends
the ashes thereof. Rhas. Being wrapped up in a leaf and heated in the ashes it
helps the swellings of the veins: Avic. Also it helps swellings behind the
ears. Plin. Being boiled warm with vinegar it discusseth botches, or wens.
Marcel. The ashes mixed with beat help the scurfe of the head. Plin. The fume
taken helps the phthisick. Avic. It is used also in diseases of the lungs, and
its tabes, etc. Rhas. Drunk or used in a clyster it helps the flux caused by
the ulcers of the intestines. The distilled water thereof drunk helps the
yellow jaundise. Marcel. The liquor thereof strained when fresh being drunk
helps the colic: Some add ginger, cloves, mace and cinnamon. Gal. Three
spoonfuls of the dry dung, burned and drunk help the dropsy; so Rhas. Some also
observe the sex: The dry, with vinegar and water mixed and applied as a
cataplasme to the belly helps the dropsy, so Rhas. So that of a Calfe. Diosc.
The fomentation therewith helps the sciatica, so Plin. Marcel. and Avic. it
being applied; And the gout when fresh and hot. Plin. Diosc. The fume of that
of a Bull helps the falling of the matrix. Hippocrates adds other things
thereto. Plin. The water of which they have drunk helps the pains of the
head. Hartm. in Chymiat. The extract of the spleen helps the suppression of the
menses. Prosp. Alp. In Egypt some women, take the gall nine days in baths, to
cause them to be fat. Jonst. Vital. de furn. The butter T. Is naturally hot and
moist, with the prevalency of heat, viscous and unctuous. V. The same eaten
often moisteneth the stomach, looseneth the belly, lenifieth the breast, and
helps it, as also ulcers thereof, and of the intestines, especially, when
fresh it is good also to lenify the lungs, and cure its impostumes, it having a
property to maturate, dissipate and cleanse all humors and superfluities of
the breast; especially eaten with honey and sugar. It resists poison,
moisteneth the body, mollifieth and helps the roughness of the eyes,
dissolveth and ripeneth impostumes, mitigateth the wounds of the breast, lungs,
and gripings of the intestines: And mollifieth and looseneth contracted nerves.
It is very good against inward poisons being drunk with warm milk, in a great
quantity: it obstructing the passages by its fatness, that the poison cannot
get to the heart. The best is the freshest. Cheese helps the dysentery, Hipp.
and 3d species of the tabes. Donat. ab Alto mar. A suppository thereof anointed
with honey helps the ascarides in children. The whey does extenuate thick
humors, cleanse and loosen the belly: Therefore the ancients did often use it
for the same purpose, especially in those which they would purge without
acrimony, sc. The melancholic, epileptick, leprous, and against the
elephantiasis, and breeking out of pushes in the body. The urine of an Ox
having amber quenched therein, helps impotency. The fume of the blood with S.
Katharines flower, helps the hemicrania. Their horns serve to make lanthorns
of. Their nerves to make whips of. The powder of their bones helps the catarrhe
and gout. The Chinois use the dung to feed fishes with. The hoofes drive away
little beasts from vines. Schrod. The horn filed helps the epilepsy. The fume
helps the contagion of the air. The blood helps the dysentery, it discusseth
and mollifieth. The marrow helps trembling members. The oil of the hoofs
mollifieth tumors, and eases pain and luxations. The fume of the hoof
drives away mice. The dung cools, dries moderately, discusseth, and
mightily eases pain. The juice is used by some against burning fevers and
the colic. Querc. The stone in the ventricle helps the jaundise. The powder
of that of the gall is a good errhine. The milk is windy, helps the rains and
diarrhoea. H. And hurts the splenetick, hepatick, epileptick, vertiginous,
feverish, and headache. Coagulated it helps the scurvy. Fresh-cheese helps
the gout and heat, the tincture of the gall is a cosmetick. The extract opens
the spleen, the D. is scrup. 1. the bones strenghten.

Crocodile. Crocodilus.
P. In Asia, Africa, and America, especially Nilus. M. Of Fishes, and man's
flesh, and other Creatures. N. (...): Lacertus Palladii. Heb. Koah.
Crocodile. Jonst. Some eat them as also their Eggs. V. Their Decoction helps
those that are bitten by Spiders. Kiran. Their canine teeth filled with
frankincense help the Types of Fevers: and if taken from them alive, applied
to the right part of a man, and left of a Woman cause venery. The blood
clears the eyes, and helps the bitings of Serpents. The fat applied helps the
shiverings of agues, as also old ulcers and the Canker. The Ashes of the skin
mixed with the mother, or lees of oil, make any part so stupid, that it cannot
be felt when dismembered. Some say that being anointed with their fat, a man may
safely swim amongst them. Some in the Indies nourish them for punishment,
casting the prisoner bound, unto them. Their skin is impenitrable, except under
the belly: their length 20 cubits, the head broad, the nose like the Sows, the
teeth close set, the upper jaw moveable: they generate by resupination, bring
forth 60 eggs, and young in 60. days. They are enemies to the Ichneumon,
Bugil, Tiger, Hawk, Hogfish, Dolphin, Scorpion and Man; But love the Wren.
Aldrovand. The excrements help freckles.

D.
Dog. Canis.
P. Almost in all Countries in the whole World. M. Of any thing, chiefly
flesh. N. (...). Heb. Keleb. Arab. Kelbe.
DOg. Gal. T. he thinks the flesh to be something like that of the Hare,
being dry, as the Fox also. They are eaten by some: the Indians eat the
Milk. V. Gesn. A young Puppy applied to the bowels helps the pains thereof,
attracting the disease. The Melitean applied helps the pain of the stomach, so
Plin. and Seren. as also Marcel. And often dies of the same. Sext. Dissected
and applied they help the pain of the spleen, and all pain, a blind whelp
being eaten. The Liver thereof helps madness. The ointment, or fat helps
the palsy. Sext. The worm under the tongue of a mad Dog worn about the
neck, helps the bitings of a mad Dog: So Plin. The blood of a tick taken from a
Dog is a Psilothron; which some attribute to that of a Dog. The ashes of a
Dog applied with Oil, color the eyebrows black. The skin of a Dog worn
on the hands prevents destillations: put thrice about the neck it helps the
quinsey, so Marcel. Worn about the middle it helps the pain of the belly.
Blood. The nervous flesh of a Dog drunk, helps the biting of a Dog, so the
flesh hereof salted: Diosc. So the blood drunk, and helps against poison, so
Plin. Sext. Drunk it helps the tormina, and some say trembling also. Plin. It
cures the itch. Sext. The grease with old oil and juice of wormwood gently
put into the ear helps deafness from any cause, so Marcel. and Plin.
Aesculap. Dogs grease helps the Gout also. Plin. And Nits. With Alum the q. of
a bean it helps the incontinency of urine, so the Milk of Bitches. Marcel. The
Marrow of a Dog kneaded with old Wine, and applied, will help the swelling of
the fundament. Plin. The hair applied with a cloth helps the headache. The
ashes thereof applied help against their biting: Blond. And stop the blood.
Plin. The brain of a Dog, applied with a linen cloth, and wool thereon, will
in 14. days consolidate broken bones. Some say the brain of a whelp will cure
the glaucoma in 7. days. Plin. The ashes of a Dogs head will take away all
excrescencies; erode and cure them, serving in stead of spodium. Marcel. And is
better in ulcers of the genitals. Plin. It helps Cancrous wounds. Rhas. The
ashes of the upper part of a Dogs head, being made into a plaster with Oil of
Roses, applied help and dry ulcers of the head. Plin. It helps burnings: The
same helps the wounds of Dogs, or fine salt torrified with tar. Sext. It
helps those that are bitten by a mad Dog. Plin. The powder of the same without
the flesh helps the testicles, also tabid and humid ulcers sprinkled on, or
applied with vinegar, and is useful as spodium, so Marcel. Plin. It helps the
vices of the fundament. Sext. It helps the piles, chaps in the fundament, and
all uncleanlinesse. Pelag. It helps the falling off of the hairs on Horse
tails, being first anointed with butter. Plin. It helps whitlows, and the
Pterygia: Sheeps butter being applied with Honey. Sext. It takes away
cicatrices. Absyrt. The sum of a Dogs head helps the plague of cattle. Plin.
With mulse it helps the jaundise. Sext. So that of a mad Dog drunk, also pains
of the teeth, and the ashes with Cypress Oil dropped into the aching ear help
the same, so Plin. Albert. Their ear Wax mixed with Wine does inebriat. The
greatest left Canine tooth helps the toothache after scarification. Plin. So
the decoction in Wine. The ashes help Children not easily breeding teeth with
Honey, there may also be made a dentifrice thereof. Sext. The ashes with Honey
repress the Gummes, that the teeth may grow without pain: Aesculap. The tooth
touched with the same does presently come forth; the powder helps the toothache
and gums. Sextus uses it in a gargarisme with Wine. Aesculap. The powder helps
the cicatrices of the eyes. Serap. Sylvat. The grinders bound to the arm in
the skin help the bitings of a mad Dog. Pliny uses the longest tooth of a
black Dog against quartans. Rhas. The long teeth also help the jaundise. Blond.
By licking they cure both their own and others wounds and ulcers. Plin. The
froth, or slime under a mad Dogs tongue, being drunk, hinders the
hydrophobie, or fear of water. Sext. The same drunk with Wine helps the
Dropsy, though it is rather affirmed of the former. Rhas. The curd of a little
whelp, mixed with Wine presently helps the Colic. Plin. The vomit of a Dog
applied to the belly, presently draws the water thereof: Sext. And so cures
the Dropsy. The Liver of a mad Dog eaten, helps the biting of the same. With
oesypus and Honey the Gall helps spots in the face: and roughness of the skin,
with Oil of Roses, and the Morphew. Aesculap. The Gall of a Dog with Honey
helps the eyes: Plin. And white spots therein. Marcel. Drach. 2. thereof or
of the Milk, and as much Honey, heated and dropped into the ear, and stopped
in with wool: are excellent, even though there be a Cancer therein. Plin. The
Gall used with a Feather helps the Gout. A little q. of that of a mad Dog,
quickly kills, so Bertrut. That of a black Dog, is used by Magitians as an
amulet. Sext. The spleen drunk in Wine helps the spleen: so applied, Plin.
Some use very young whelps, with vinegar of squills, or the spleen of an
hedg-hog. The genital of a Dog also is used by Magitans as an amulet. Plin. The
womb of a Bitch boiled in Oil, being spread over with Sheeps butter and Honey
helps the white-flow: The secundine draws forth the birth. Diosc. The first
Milk of a Bitch helps against poison. Plin. The ashes there with hinder the
growth of hair. Marcel. So it helps hairs troubling the eyes: Some add ivy
gum, and the Milk of spurg with wine, after evulsion, so Sext. Diosc. Aesculap.
etc. The Milk dropped into the eyes, helps the spots thereof Plin. and pains,
of the ears: Marcel. So that of Bears. Sext. The Milk applied facilitats
dentition in Children. Plin. And scaldings of the mouth. Diosc. It expels
the dead conception, some add Honey and Wine, so Sext. Aesculap. Rhas. Sext.
The urine is a psilothron: with wool it helps Corns and Warts. Diosc. With
Nitre it helps the Leprosy and Itch: as also the Jaundise. Pliny affirms that
he that mixeth his urine with that of a Dog, shall feel a numnesse of the
loins, and be hindered from venery: as also that the Herb near which it is
evacuated, helps Luxations. Gal. The white dung, called Album graecum helps the
quinsey, dysentery, and old ulcers, and malignant. Rhas. Pounded with the juice
of Coriander, it helps red abscesses. Blond. The hair of a Dog, stops the
blood. Plin. The ashes of the dung help all sorts of Warts, with Wax, or Oil
of Roses. The bones out of them applied help the siriasis, or inflammation in
the heads of Children. The white dung drunk with the lie of the ashes, helps
the epilepsy. With salt, rue, sout, and sugar mixed and applied it helps the
Rannula of the tongue, being a broad black ulcer of the same, killing in 9.
days; and it is known by the falling out of the spitle. Diosc. It, as also man's
applied help the quinsey, so Gal. and Rhas. it is an excellent remedy. Some use
it with the ashes of Swallows. Blond. With Honey it helps the inflammation of
the tonsils also. Some use it against the falling of the uvula, with long
Pepper, the yellow roots of mountain lilly, and nightshade. Diosc. Drunk with
water it stops the belly: So taken with the decoction of galls, or water of
pome granats: so with Milk in which steel has been quenched. Sext. The ashes
applied with Honey help the Tinea of infants: sc. applied to the Navil, so
Gesn. With Lilly water it helps the pain of the womb. The powder with red Wax,
and a little Oil helps the sciatica, coloquintida and centaury being used
before it, so Marcel. Plin. with Oil of Roses it helps the Rhagades, so Sext.
Marcelius adds beets. The same helps the piles being first anointed with
grease, and having the ashes of Garlic, sprinkled thereon: or both applied
with Oil. The biting of Dogs is helped by washing with the urine thereof, as
also Walnuts with Onians, salt, and Honey, some add organy: Others use Nitre
and Vinegar, and fill the wounds with dry burned Anet. See more in Aet. and
Aeg. And outwardly; Vinegar, Garlic, beete, dogs urin, Dane wort, Figtree
leaves, Garum, Tornsole, Flower deluce, Horehound, Nitre, Bramble leaves, Man's
hair, with vinegar. Inwardly, Garlic, Calamint, Bawm. If of a mad Dog,
outwardly, the compounded remedies of Gal. and Aet. And treacle. The simples
are Vinegar, Betony, Lime pounded with grease, bitter vetch with Wine, crude
beans eaten. Cocks dung with vinegar. A Goats liver. Horehound leaves.
Walnuts. Dungs of Cattle. Rue. Sealed Earth, and Vervin, etc. Inwardly the
Antidote of Esdra. Mithridate, that of Walnuts, and the triacles. Simples,
Garlic, Wormwood, Madwort. Pimpernel. Onions, Leekes, Dogs rose. Dry pitch of
India. Hellebore, Honey, Plantain, sealed earth, the root of the white Vine:
After cauteries, etc. Schrod. Dogs grease taken inwardly is hotter than the
rest, and helps wounds and ulcers, cleanses and consilidats, and therefore
helps the phthisick, and bruises. Album graecum dries, cleanses, discusseth,
opens, breaks impostumes, and cleanses exulcerations. It helps the
colic, etc. outwardly, it mollifieth hard tumors: applied to the belly it
attracteth Hydropick water; with Oil of Roses it cures Warts. The balsome of
Whelps, made thereof suffocated in white Wine, and boiled with Arthritick
herbs, Oiles, and Rosins, helps contracted parts, the Sciatica, and
Arthritick pains. Wecker makes an ointment of the Whelps, which serves
against wounds made by warlike engines: and Furnerus distilleth a Water, serving
to hinder the grouth of hair, thence, Jonst. They grow mad by eating corrupted
meat, and full of worms, especially in the Dog-dayes: Then they have no
appetite to meat, and fear the water, they wander about, bark hoarsely, foame
at the mouth, look angrily, and hang down the tail. They are cured by blood
letting in the legs: annoniting with the poplar ointment, and use of some
colagogick remedy, and bath of the decoction of fumitory, sharp pointed docks,
and the root of Elicampane: Pliny preserves them by giving them Woman's milk.
They are enemies to the Hiena, Crocodile, and Woolfe chiefly. Aldrov. Album
graecum drunk in Wine helps the Epilepsy. With red Wax and Oil, it helps the
Sciatica, and so he agrees with Gesner, etc.

Dormouse. Glis.
P. In woods, and about old houses. In England, etc. M. Of beech nuts, etc. And
Apples. N. (...). Heb. Akbar. Arab. Pir. (...).
Dormouse Platin. T. in qualities it is not much unlike the Porcupine, or
Badger, and the flesh is eaten by some. V. Plin. The ashes with Oil help
burnings; Sext. A Dormouse applied takes away warts. Their ashes, as also of
the Rat, mixed with Honey, and eaten every morning cleanse the eyes. Marcel.
Roasted with Oil and Salt, and eaten by those that have the peripneumony, or
are empyematous; it woonderfully helps them, and those that spit forth
empyematous matter. Their ashes, as also of Rats and Earthworms applied with
Oil help kibes. Their fat with that of a Hen, and Cows marrow melted, and
dropped warm into the ears is very good also. Plin. It helps the palsy, so
Sext. Plin. The dormouse boiled with Spikenard, ad tertias, and dropped warm
into the ears helps the old griefs thereof: so Aldrov. Marcel. Or with
Honey; which some affirm of woodlice. Jonst. They were dainties amongst the
Romans. Their flesh eaten, helps the Doglike appetite. The fat applied to the
soles of the feet causes sleep. Their dung drunk helps the stone. With vinegar
and Rosemary it helps the Alopecia. They are like; but less than Squirrels.
They sleep in hollow trees in the Winter, and can hardly be revived.

E.
Elephant. Elephantus.
P. In Africa. Asia. Libia, and Getulia, etc. M. Of fennish Herbs, Leaves of
Trees, and Fruits, etc. N. (...). Heb. Behemah. Arab. Behiz.
ELephant. Aelian. T. only the trunk, lips, and marrow of their horns are
edible. Gil. Yet the Aethiopians ear their hinder-parts. Vartoman. Also in
some Countries they eat their reins. V. Marcel. Vergil. The ashes of a
Weasel, mixed with the blood of an Elephant help the Elephantiasis. Plin. Isid.
The blood especially of the Male helps all fluxions, or rheumatismes. Plin. It
helps the sciatica. Albert T. the flesh is cold and dry, and very unpleasant.
Rhas. Also heavy and fat. V. the decoction made thereof with vinegar, and
fennel-gyant, being taken by a Woman with Child, causes abortion: Rhas. The
same helps the old cough. The fat helps against poison some things, being
anointed therewith, and a suffumigation made, so Aelian. and Avic. so Diosc.
With that of a Heart. Albert. Rhas. Applied it helps the headache. Isid. The
fume made of the hoof and hairs drives away all venomous beasts also.
Schrod. The Ivory T. is cold and dry ( Sylv. 1.) moderatly, it binds,
incideth, and strengthens the bowels. V. it stops the whites in Women,
helps the jaundise, kills worms, helps old obstructions, and eases the
pain and weakness of the stomach. It helps the epilepsy, drives away
melancholy, and resists putrefaction and poison. The filings thereof are used
in infusions, and the powder is given in substance: the D. is drach. sem. When
burned it is called the Spodium of Ivory, to difference it from the mineral,
hereof are made troches, often used. Sylv. Ivory does strengthen the heart by
its whole substance, and helps conception, but heed must be taken, that it be
not adulterated by the bones of fishes, and other Creatures. Spodium is cold 3.
dry 2. which some deny. It is sometimes adulterated by Dogs bones burned, and
Marble, the best is the whitest and very light, so Platear. This Spodium is
used in cooling Syrups, and against poison, as also Hearts horn: Both of the^
also are good against the Elephantiasis. Nemes. Ivory and Gastoreum in milk,
given to a mad Horse, help him thereof. drach. 1. given in mulse, helps the
Lethargy, or plague after the taking of Hiera Ruffi, and the hinder part of the
head has been anointed with Oil and Castor: taking after drach. 1. of Castor
with Melicrat, so Aet. Diosc. Serap. Plin. The powder applied helps the
paronychia. Plin. With Honey, it cleanses the face; so Sext. Rhas. drach. 1.
thereof with 10. of the Water of Mountain Horsmint, helps the Leprosy. Gesn.
mixed with Hearts horn it helps against Worms. Agric. Drunk fasting Macerated
in Wine, or some opening Water it helps the Jaundise, long obstructions, and
pains of the stomach. With mulse it helps the epilepsy. Some say that the fine
powder of burned Ivory drunk with the blood of a Goat, does break the stone in
the reins, or bladder. Combs made hereof are thought to he best for the head,
which some say, is because they have small scent. The touch of the trunk helps
the headache. Plin. The lest part thereof with the rubric of lemnos, abateth
venery. The Liver helps the falling sickness. The tip thereof eaten with
Water and Leaves of sumach helps the pain of the Liver, so Rhas. and Albert.
Diosc. The gall is commended by some against the bitings of Serpents. Albert.
taken into the nostrils it helps the falling sickness: Rhasis adds an equal
part of Musk. Rhas. Albert. The dung applied kills Lice: the fume of the same
drives away Gnats. Hal. The suffumigation helps the belly of those that are
Feverish: used with wool it hinders conception. Jonst. The Nitre of Ivory is
made dull, by Women's courses. Aldrovandus also confirms what was affirmed by
Gesner. As for their skin, it is wrinkled and scabbed. The head deformed,
ears little, and eyes by way of comparison, so the tongue, with 4. teeth
within for to eat with, and a trunk serving in stead of a hand. They have
short joints, two tears under their shoulders, a genital like a Horse, but
little, testicles inward about the reins, 4. venters, a liver fourtimes as
big as an Oxes, so the lungs. They generate when 5. years old, in the water,
and some go 3. years, or more as is affirmed. They are enemies to the
Rhinoceros, Lion, Tigre, Ram, Hog, Serpents, and Dragons, as also to the fire.
As for their age some say they live an hundred, or two hundred years. Their
diseases are inflations and fluxes, also Leprosies. They often fight furiously,
revenge injuries, love their keepers, naturally fear men, and are very
teacheable. Their differences are according to place; so some live in fenny
places, some on mountains, some in fields, others in woods, etc.

Elk. Alce.
P. In Rusia, Prussia, Hungary, and Illyria. M. They feed upon grass. N.
(...). Magna bestia Caes. Equicervus, Albert. M.
Elk. Jonst. T. is of a thick and melancholic juice; yet it is eaten by the
inhabitants of their Country, both fresh, and powdered. The Horn's are
astringent and antepileptick. V. The nerves are used against the spasme, being
worn like a girdle about the grieved part. The hoof helps the Epilepsy and
hysteric passion, the first it does being worn as a ring: and the last, the
scrapings thereof being given with a like part of zedoary: more antepileptick
forms may be seen in Authors. Schrod. The shavings may be drunk against the
falling sickness, outwardly a piece of the hoof may be set in a ring, to be
worn on the finger next the least, else in the care, applied to the pulse, or
hung about the neck; so that it may touch the skin. The D. is Scrup. sem.
drach. 1. or more: it may be known by the smell, which is sweet when burned:
and some say it must be taken from the male, when adult, and venerious, betwixt
the feast of the assumption of Mary, and her nativity; from the right hinder
foot, when alive. As for the description, he is almost of the making of a Heart;
but bigger, fearful, and subject to the Epilepsy; yet some distill an
epileptick arcanum out of the brain thereof. Jonst. Also the fore parts are
lower than the hinder parts, they hanging down the head: the hair is long, of a
whitish ash color, the head is long and lean, the lips are prominent and
thick, especially the uppermost: The mouth long, the teeth indifferent, the
ears long and broad, the skin thick and solid, the Horns about lib. 12. not
ramous as the stagges. When hunted he flies to the Water, and sucking it up
casts it on the Dogs. In the Snow they tread in one an others foot steps. Tops.
They graze backwards, the upper lip otherwise dubling over their mouths.

F.
Ferret. Viverra.
P. In England, France, Italy, and Germany, etc. M. Of Conyes, Pigeons, and
Fishes, Tops. or milk. N. (...). Furo, Furus, Furunculus and furectus.
FErret. Tops. T. the flesh and teeth are counted poisons; V. the Gall helps
the poison of Aspes: the same is commended against the falling sickness:
Marcellus, so the whole Body, if it be tosted, dressed, and eaten fasting like
a young Pig. Plin. The Body mixed with a Goats gall, helps against the long
fly called a Friar, slying into the flame of Candles burning in the night,
which is counted poison some. They are of a very hot temperature, and therefore
quickly digest their meat: and being wild by reason of their fear, they rather
seek their meat in the night than in the day. Rhas. Albert. They are kept out
of dove-coats by hanging the head of a Woolf there, so Cats, etc.

Fitch. Putorius.
P. Almost every where in England about houses. M. Of Hens, Birds, Mice,
Rabbets, and Fishes. N. (...). Catus, fuina Scaligeri.
Fitch. T. V. The part of use taken from them is the skin, which is used in
garments; it is of a rank smell, so that it offends the head, and causes pain
therein: therefore it is sold cheaper than the Foxes; the fattest is the worst,
and they are best in Winter, their flesh and lust being then lower, and so hurt
less by their smell. They live in tops of houses and secret corners, woods, by
the Sea sides, and caves of hollow trees; especially in the stalls of cattle,
hay houses, and where they meet with Eggs. When taking the prey, they feed
first on the head.

Fox. Vulpes.
P. In Russia, the Alps, and England, etc. M. Of Hens, Geese, Conies, Hares,
Mice, and Grapes. N. (...). Heb. Schual. Arab. Thaleb. Volpes.
Fox. Gal. T. the flesh is dry, somewhat like that of the Hare. Rhas. It is
hot, viscous, hard of concoction, and of bad juice, and is best in autumn.
Aet. It is of exceeding bad aliment, being unlike man's nature, and stinking. V.
Gesn. Plin. Marcel. The decoction of the flesh helps the Gout. Sext. So the
Oil: Gal. And that of a Hyena, abiding some time therein after evacuation, or
purgation, that it may not attract the humors to the joints, so Aet. Hal. The
Oil of a Fox decocted helps nodes: and the joints hurt by moisture, so Rhas.
So decocted skin and all till boiled to pieces. Mesue prescribes it with Sea
water, etc. With anet and time: so also the decoction of a Hare, or hedg-hog,
L. Favent. The decoction of a Fox excoriated, and unbowelled having his bones
broken, used as an embrocation to the nucha and paralytick part, helps the
same. Myrepsus also makes an excellent ointment thereof, against the
incontinencie of the nerves, gout, joint ache, and all affections and dryness
of the nerves. Avic. The skin, is hotter than the rest, useful for parts too
much moistened by humors, or fluxions, having a resolving and discussing
faculty. Sext. Shoos lined therewith ease the podagrick, sc. by cold; so with
that of the Sea Calfe, Lion, or Woolf. Albert. The ashes of the flesh of a Fox
drunk with Wine help the asthma. Sylv. Their blood drunk fresh breaks the
stone. Myrepsus makes a nephritick antidote thereof: Some drink the dry blood
in Wine for the same purpose with sugar. Absyrt. Being used as an errhine with
gentle oxicrate it helps the Lethargy in Horses. Sylv. The fat of a Fox is
betwixt that of the Bull and Sow: Avic. Sometimes it atrracteth more than it
resolves. That of the Bear may be its substitute, mixed with that of a Woolf,
it helps the spasme: Her. Also the pains of the nerves, and tremblings. Aet. It
helps high tumors, being mixed with the ashes of vine branches, and boiled
with lie. Sylv. Her. It helps the alopecia: Plin. Also ulcers of the head,
especially the gall and dung applied with a like q. of Mustardseed. It helps
the ulcers of the Womb. Diosc. And the pains of the ears, being first melted
at the fire, and dropped in warm: so Sext. Avic. Albert. and Rhas. Gal. With a
like q. of lard it helps the diseases of the nerves; And ears troubled with
water, so that of Geese, or Hens, as also sounding of the ears and sharp
pains. Hal. With the Oil, of Oily pulse, it helps the teeth also, and other
vices of the ears, except fractures, which may be helped by Calves glue,
relented in water. Plin. It helps the diseases of Cows. Absyrt. Theomn. And
falling off of hair from an Horses tail. Aeg. The ashes of the head with the
some of the Sea, and leaves of black Alkanet, breed hair in the alopecia when
brought to the cicatrice. Sext. The brain often given to Children preventeth
the falling sickness. Plin. Some say that the tongue preventeth blearednesse
of the eyes. Marcel. And worn about the neck in scarlet, it helps white spots
in the eyes. Applied after soaking in Wine it draws out darts. Diosc. Gal.
The powder of the Lungs drunk helps shortness of breath: Plin. So the Liver
drunk in red Wine: and Marcel. in old Wine: so Paul. and Avic. drach. 1. being
drunk: after purgation give the ashes. Rhasis uses the powder with cold water,
or that of raisins. Sylv. It is to be washed from the blood, dried in an Oven,
and so to be kept, and to be powdered when to be used: Some wash it in Wine,
then dry it, and preserve it with sugar: Others take away, the rough arteries
also, and wrap it in wormwood that it may not putrify, so Cord. hereof is made
a Lohoch used in the shops. Rhas. Albert. Some use the lungs of a Woolf, in
Milk with Pepper, for the same purpose. Sylv. It helps the phthisical, by the
property of it is whole substance. Plin. Sext. The ashes drunk in water help the
spleen. Archig. The liver of a Fox drunk in Oxycrate helps the spleen, Marcel.
and Sextus also commend it. Plin. Drunk with black Wine it opens the
respiratorie passages; as also the lungs, Plin. The fat helps ulcers of the
head; but especially the gall, and dung with a like q. of Mustard seed. Sext.
Dropped into the ears with Oil it helps the pains thereof; and mixed with
Honey, so applied to the eyes, it wonderfully helps the dimnesse thereof. Rhas.
drach. 1. Being used in the matrice for 3. days, causes conception of a male,
being used as a pessary. Plin. The reins applied with Honey help the tonsils;
so Sext. Plin. Sext. The genital bound about the head, helps the pains
thereof. Plin. It, as also that of Woolfes, Weasels and Ferrets, is bony, and
therefore good against the stone. Sext. Being boiled in old Oil, with bitumen,
and applied as a pessary, it helps the suffocation in Women, anointed on the
head it helps the alopecia, and dropped in helps the pains of the ears.
Plin The testicles help the swellings behind the ears, and discuss wens.
Sext. They help the groin often rubbed therewith. Gal. A spoonful of the
powder drunk, helps the erection of the genital. Montagnana mixeth them with
a remedy to cause venery in men, and conception in Women; but this may rather
be attributed to the Satyrion called Foxstones, which serve also against the
tetanos. Rhas. Two of them taken by a Woman cause conception. Sext. The tail
woorn on the arm causes venery. Marcel. The dung stamped with vinegar and
applied, helps the Leprosy. Rhas. With Oil of Roses applied on the genital,
it increases the strength of salacity: so used in a pessary by Women, so Gal.
Or applied to the privities of either, with Cows tallow. Schrod. The Lungs
consolidate and cleanse. The liver helps the Hepatick. The blood applied to
the abdomen, groin, and reins, helps the stone. The ashes of the flesh help
the vices of the breast: Jonston mentions not any thing but what has been
already related. As for the description it is needless. They generate lying on
the ground, and copulate sometimes with Dogs, and bring forth 4. or 5. young
ones, blind, which they then lick. They are friends to the Serpent, and enemies,
to wild Rue, the Kite, Vultur, and Eagle, as also to the Crow, and Badgers,
which they drive out of their hoales, by defiling them with their excreme^ts.
They imitate the Dog by houling and barking. They are very subtle, and keep
diverse hoals open. When troubled with fleas they gently sink down in the
water, having a little Hay, or some other thing on their backs for them to
crepe to. They kill urchins by injecting their urine into their mouths. They
seem to play with the hares, and so suddenly catch them, when hungry they
tumble themselves in red earth, and so lie as if dead with their tongues out,
and when the birds of prey come to feed on them, they suddenly take them.
Being taken by the foot they will bite it off to escape; and if they cannot,
they will seem dead. Coming into a Henroost, they will shake their tails, to
affright them, and when off their pertches they each them. When hunted they
will run up into a Tree, where often they show much sport, and when constrained
to leap down, they fall on the best Dogs, to wound them or be killed by them.
Their differences are according to magnitude, and color, being either back
white, or crossed; hither may the Indian Foxes also be reduced, of which, etc.
See the Appendix of unusual exoticks.

Frog. Ranunculus vir.
P. Almost every where, in woods, and among reeds. M. Of the Leaves of Trees,
bushes. and reeds. N. (...). Calamites. Agredula Isid.
Frog of the Land. Jonst. T. the green Frog is sometimes eaten. V. It helps
many diseases. Pliny says, that it helps the cough, the mouth being spitten
in. Sylv. Held in the hand, it takes away the heat of fevers. Guainerius
feeds Hens with their flesh boiled, made into a pap with Barley meal, which
then serve for those that are hectic. Timotheus applied them dissected to the
reins of those that are Hydropick, to bring forth the water. Plin. The Liver
tied in the skin of a Crane causes venery. The fat applied to an aching tooth
breaks it: The blood hinders the grouth of hair after evulsion. It is of the
same virtue as the water Frog. The blood is a Philtron. Weikard: the ashes stop
bleeding in wounds.

G.
Goat. Capra.
P. In Wales, Africa, Sardinia, Spain, etc. M. Of the Arbute-tree, Evergreen
privet, Oak, etc. N. (...). Heb. Ez. Arab. Dakh.
GOat. Gal. T. the flesh is less dry than beef; yet much exceeds man's
temper. The Kids is of easier digestion. The Goats is sharp and of ill juice,
but is best in spring and summer, feeding then on shrubs. The older they are
the worse: it is of much nourishment, strong juice, clammy, and so lasts
long; but of hard concoction, and generateth melancholic diseases; it has all
the evil proporties of beef, and is more flatulent, causing belchings and
choler. H. it is bad for Women that have ulcers in the Womb, so that of Hogs
and beef, so Hipp. Rhasis connteth it more cooling than Motton, and of little
nourishment. The milk does but little trouble the belly, feeding on astringent
food, so its good for the stomach, so Diosc. The most nourishing is Woman's
milk, then Goats, hence happily arose the fable of Jupiters being nourished
thereby. Gal. It is nothing near so fat as Cows milk. If the Goat feed on
scammonie, or spurge, the milk will loosen the belly. It is moderate in respect
of other milks, being not very fat or thick, so in a mean. It is not good to be
taken without Honey, it usually curdling otherwise, and causes griefs: some
also add water, or salt, so Gal. The milk of Women is most, temperate, then
the Goats, Asses, Sheeps, and lastly the Cows, so Aeg. the Goats is temperate
in substance, less purging than the Cows, otherwise good enough, and not a
little nutritive, next is the Sheeps, and lastly the Cows. So Bapt. Fire. Mant.
Var. Of all liquid things that man uses Milk is the most nourishing, and so,
first the Sheeps, then the Goats: the most purging is, the Mares. 2. The Asses.
3. The Cows, and lastly the Goats. Cheeses most nourishing are the Cowes, and
of difficult descent, next the Sheeps, and the Goats, of least; yet easily
descend. V. Gesn. The Goat yields a multitude of remedies, which is to be
wondered at, some affirming that they are feverish. Plin. The decoction thereof
with the skin, and the Frog called rubeta helps the diseases of all
fourefooted Beasts: Magicians use the right eye taken from a living green
lizard with the head cut off afterward, which applied in the skin of a Goat,
helps against quartains. Marcel. The ashes of a Goats skin applied with
Oil help kibes: Plin. The same help gallings by shoes. Marcel. The scrapings
of the skin, pounded with Pumice stone, and mixed with vinegar, help pushes:
Also a thong of the skin tied about the Dugges of a Woman, helps the bleeding
of a Woman's nostrills. Plin. The decoction thereof, boiled with the hair
stops the belly. Aesculap. The ashes of the hairs stop all fluxes. Sext.
mixed with vinegar they stop bleeding at the nostrills: Marcel. So with pitch
and vinegar. Sext. and the Lethargy, being put into the nostrils. Plin. The
dung in mulse expels the stone, so the ashes of the hairs: The stinck of
the Horns, or hairs helps the Lethargy. Marcel. The ashes drunk help the
strangury. Plin. The hairs, or horn burned drive away Serpents, and help
their wounds being drunk, or applied. Plin. Magicians use the flesh roasted at
the fire wherein a man's body is burned, against the falling sickness: so Sext.
Plin. The Sanies, or matter of a Goats liver roasted, helps the dimnesse of
sight, or the gall thereof, the flesh being eaten, and the eyes held over the
steme whilst boiled. Plin. The Grecians used the broth against cantharides. As
for the blood see that of Bulls. Marcel. Applied it takes away spots. Diosc.
Drunk it helps against Toxicum, being drunk with Wine. Aesculap. Drunk it
resists poison. Plin. So decoct with marrow: Some mix it with earth of
Lemnos. Diosc. commends that of kids also used in antidotes, Sext. Drunk it
helps humors, or fluxes of the belly, as some say: though Pliny affirms it
looseneth the belly, as also the marrow, and Liver: which is denied by Diosc.
and Gal. Who affirm it helps the pains of the belly also. Some give it with
Honey against the Dropsy: it being of thick terrene essence and dry with heat.
Plin. Boiled with the marrow it helps the dysentery. With Barley meal and
Rosin, spread upon the belly it helps the pains thereof. Marcel. With the
branne of meal it stops the dysentery. Marcel. It breaks the stone; with
Barley meal it helps all vices of the fundament. Dios. The fat is astringent,
and therefore helps the dysentery, and mordacity in the strait gut, and
Colon, being of a thick substance. Gal. That of Kids is less hot and dry: and
that of she Goats, than of the Masculine, or male Goat. Rhas. It is more
astringent than that of Cows. Diosc. It helps those that have drunk
Cantharides. Plin. Applied with Wax it helps the wounds of Serpents.
Aesculap. It helps all bitings and hurts. Columel. For the most part, griefs of
the Body if without wounds are helped by fomentations, the old by cauteries,
butter, or Goats fat being dropped in, sc. in Cattle, Plin. It helps Kibes:
with Lime it discusseth Wens, so Marcel. Plin. With Sandaracha it helps rough
nails, so Sext. Plin. Applied to Ringwormes with Cantharides and the juice of
the grapes of the wild vine it helps them: with Wax it helps creeping
ulcers, so with pitch and brimstone: with Honey and the juice of the bramble it
helps running ulcers of the privities. Applied with salt it helps
whitelows, or fellons; and if there be pain, with Oil: so that of a Cow.
Aesculap. With Roses it helps night wheales. The same dropped into the ears
helps deafness. Plin. The meal of spelt, in red Wine helps the stingings
of Scorpions, applied warm: and the cough with Goats fat, or butter. Diosc.
The broth of the fat decoct helps the phthisick, being drunk; So with the
pulp of Alica, and the cough, or with new mulse. Marcel. Decoct with Ptisan. it
helps the tormina in the declination. Diosc. With Barley meal, rhoe, and
cheese, it is given against the dysentery, and may be injected with the juice
of Ptisan. Plin. Drunk with any liquour it mightily helps the intestines, or
being drunk in cold Water. Sextus commends the same against the Dropsy, which
is not probable. Marcel. The fat of the reins, mixed with Barley bran; Cumin,
Anet, and Vinegar an. and so decoct in water strained and drunk does speedily
help the dysentery. Plin. Applied with pellitory and Cyprus Wax it helps the
Gout: So with the dung and a little Saffron, boiled. Diosc. As for the Marrow.
It has the 4th. place amongst Marrows sc. after the Hearts, Calves, and Bulls,
the last is the sheeps. See that of Calfe. Plin. The blood of a Goat boiled
with the Marrow helps against poisons, that do intoxicate: the same helps
the Dysentery and Dropsy. The blood, Marrow or Liver looseneth the belly; but
others rather affirm the contrary, all marrows having a gentle drying and
emplastick faculty, for the most part: therefore that of the Goat may be used
against the Dysentery. The right Horn of a Goat is used in Mesue his Athanasia
magna, and antidotes of Serapio, Haly, and Avicen. The fume thereof, as also of
the hair drives away Serpents, and the ashes drunk or applied help the
wounds, so Plin. Sextus so the powder and milk with organy and Wine. Plin. The
ashes anointed with Oil of Myrtles hinder sweating. With Vinegar they stop
bleeding, so that of the dung. Sext. The crusts thereof made by burning it in
the flame stamped with vinegar of squills mightily help St. Anthonies fire. The
Horn laid under the head of a sick party, causes sleep. Mixed with branne and
Oil of Myrtles, it helps the falling off of the hair, and causes it to
grow. Plin. So the ashes with nitre, the seed of tamarisk, butter and Oil, the
head being shaved first: the smell thereof when burned discovers the falling
sickness, so Sext. Plin. The same awaketh those that have the Lethargy, so
that of the hairs. Gal. The ashes whiten the teeth, and fasten the gummes, so
those of the Hearts, so Rhas. Albert and Avic. Sext. The shavings mixed with
Honey stop the flux of the belly. Plin. The fume helps the Womb: to which
some add Galls, Lard, and Rosin of Cedar. Pallad. The hoofes burned drive away
Serpents. Diosc. Rhas. The ashes thereof with vinegar help the alopecia, so
Gal. Aesculapius uses them with tar. Plin. The juice of the head boiled with
the hair helps the rupture of the intestines. The ashes of the huckle bones,
serve as a dentifrice, as also, those of almost all hairy creatures. Plin.
Magicians use the brain, drawn through a gold ring, giving it to children
before they suck, against the falling sickness, and other diseases. Aesculap.
with honey it helps carbuncles in the belly. Sext. The water coming from the
pallat mixed with honey and salt, rubbed on the head, etc. kills lice,
helps the pain of the belly, and looseneth the same. Plin The broth of the
paunch gargled helps the exulceration of the tongue and arteries, which some
understand of that of the Cow. Gal. The liver roasted helps the nyctalops, and
discovers the falling sickness, causing a convulsion; so that of a he Goat.
Diosc. Being eaten it helps the former evils, so also the vapor thereof:
Rhas. some boil it with water and salt. Plin. When roasted it helps the
coeliack, especially that of the he Goat, boiled with Austere wine and drunk
or applied with oil of myrtles to the navil, some add rue to the same:
Marcel. Some boil it with old wine. Hippoc. Being roasted in ashes and eaten,
for four days, drinking old wine it helps the inflation of women delivered.
Plin. The gall used three days, the hair being pulled up is a psilothron.
Marcel. It helps botches. With the ashes of alum it cures the scab. Applied
it helps the elephantiasis. With fullers earth and vinegar it helps scurfe.
Seren with honey it helps the dimnesse of the eyes, so Sext Diosc. that of a
wild Goat, with a third part of white hellebore helps the glaucoma, and
cicatrices, white spots in the eyes, dimnesse of sight, the weft, and argema.
With Women's milk it helps broken tunicles. Applied to the eye brows it takes
away hair, so Albert. Marcel. With honey an. scrup. 1 put into the ear and
stopping it after with wool, it helps the ears, though cancerd. Plin. With
the ashes of a Serpents skinn it helps purulent ears. With the leaves of
leekes, or a like quantity of wine it helps the vices of the ears: Some add
the oil of roses, or Woman's milk. Anon. With Ants eggs honey and celandine,
put into the ears, it helps deafness. With honey it helps the quinsey,
so Marcel. It helps the swellings of the neck with the yolks of eggs boiled
and Goose grease, an. With the juice of sow-bread and a little alum, to which
some add nitre and water, it loses the belly. Marcel. Applied to the navil
with wool it expels worms. It helps the vices of the fundament, and
inflammation of the same. With honey it helps the pains and ulcers of the
yard. It mollifieth the callus of the womb. Plin. The spleen roasted helps the
coeliack. Sext. Being drunk it helps the tormina. Sext. The dung with a Man's
own applied, helps the grief of the thighs. Marcel. The ashes with water and
wine, sc. of the bladder help the sheeding of urine. Sext. The secundine drunk
in wine, expels that of a Woman. Plin. The milk with the ashes of crevises,
with water or wine, helps against all poison, especially the wounds of
Scorpions. Plin. Sext. It helps against cantharides. Plin. And the quick
fading flower, drunk with the grapes of wild vine. Sext. Drunk it helps
quartan agues. Plin. Some magicians use drach. 1. of Swallows dung therewith,
against the fitts of a quartan ague. Columel. It helps the fever in lambs.
Plin. With the gall of an hedghog, and brain of a Bat, it is a psilothron.
Drunk with the powder of betony it stops blood flowing out of the duggs.
Columel. It eases the erysipelas in Sheep. Boiled with the root of the greater
fearne it helps gangreens: Or with the meal of wheat, and camomil flowers.
Aesculap. Drunk it helps the itch and bitings. Anon. Boiled with lineseed it
helps the pain of the joints. Plin. It kills nits. Marcel. If boiled it
helps the alopecia. Absyrt. With crevises and oil it helps the headache in
horses, being drunk. Plin. Being drunk with the juice of cabbage, salt and
honey, it helps the opisthoronos: With the right eye of a Chameleon, taken
out alive it helps the white spots in the eyes. Diosc. Dropped into purulent
ears, and apostumated, it helps the same, with Bulls gall. Marcel. It
helps the same, as also their pain, and hearing, being washed therewith and
laser, dropping in after, warm Bulls gall, with an equal quantity of oil of
cedar. Plin. It facilitats dentition, the gums being washed therewith. Sext. It
fasteneth the teeth. Marcel. When fresh it helps the strokes of the same. It
helps the tonsils and exulcerated arteries, washed therewith; so the Cows
also. A little salt also, and the decoction of mallows may be added. Being
gargled when warm it helps the tumors and swellings of the tonsils, so the
Sheeps. Plin. Boiled with the seed of cresses it helps the griefs of the
breast: Var. The most purging milk is the Mares, then the Asses, Cows, and
lastly the Goats. Plin. With honey and salt it loses the belly. Marcel. Some
add salt amoniack and drink it fasting; walking after it. Hipp. Boiled with
honey and given with some phlegmagogon, it helps phlegmatike women, when great,
and troubled with the headache. The schiston helps the epilepsy, melancholy,
palsy, leprosy, elephantiasis, and diseases of the joints. Plin. The milk
boiled with mallows, and a little salt, adding some curd does mightily help the
vices of the intestines. Marcel. Being tempered with the curd and drunk warm
it helps the dysentery, being used for three days: so with barley meal.
Plin. Being taken after half has been boiled away it helps the colic also.
Marcel. Being boiled with butter, it helps the tormina and coeliack, so the
fatt broth of a Hen boiled therewith. The injection thereof with amylu^, helps
the dysentery. Diosc. Having hot pebles often quenched therein, it helps
exulcerating fluxes, and the tenesmus, so that of a Sheep or Cow. Plin. Boiled
with panick, and taken twice in a day, it helps the tormina. Marcel. Boiled
with stale bread, it helps the flux, taken twice in a day. Plin. Drunk with the
juice of skirrets it stops the belly. It helps the spleen, taken from a
Goat that has eaten ivy, drunk for three days, after two days fasting: so
the whey thereof. The milk also half boiled helps children. Sext. With the
curd it helps the dropsy. Applied to the belly in a Cows bladder hot it
helps the colic: Some apply it with a sponge, and a wooden vessel applied
thereon. Aesculap. Drunk it kills worms. With Creet wine, and the seeds of
cucumber well poudered, it helps the pain of the reins. Anatol. with
amylum, eggs and oil, it is given to horses that piss blood: Pelagonius
adds the juice of pellitory of the wall. Plin. With the softer root of dog
stones, it provokes venery: with the harder it preventeth it. Sext. Drunk with
honey it helps women to conceive; as also the flux, aqueousnesse of the seed,
and impotency. Anon. Applied it helps the prominency of the muscle of the
fundament, and clefts thereof. Plin. The cheese taken fresh helps those that
have drunk misselto: and helps against bitings, except those of a mad dog,
being applied dry with origanum, and drunk. applied dry with vinegar and honey,
it purges ulcers. When fresh with honey it helps quartans. Aesculap. applied
it helps all punctures and pains. Marcel. Applied with honey and covered
with cloth it presently cleanses bruises, and blackness of the skin, Plin.
When dry applied with leekes it helps S. Anthonies fire: With honey and
vinegar it helps black pimples or wheales. Marcel. Applied to the eyes when
fresh, it presently eases griefs: Also it helps the pain of the head or
feet, so Sext. Marcel. Being applied after boiling with honey it helps the
pain of the yard, being used twice in a day, the place being first washed with
old wine. Plin. Stamped and applied it helps the carbuncles of the genitals.
Hippocrates, makes many remedies hereof for the use of women: in the book
thereof. Gesn. Of all dungs the Goats is most used, being of a digesting and
sharp faculty: so that it helps scirrhous tumors, of the spleen, and other
parts. When burned it is of a thinner essence, and not manifestly sharper:
Therefore it helps the alopecia, and other maladies that require extergent
remedies, as the leprosy, scurvy, and ring-wormes, etc. It is also mixed with
digesting cataplasmes, which are applied to swellings behind the ears, and
long continuing buboes: for it has an abstersive and digestive faculty, both
burned, and not burned, but varieth according to the feeding. Some use it with
vinegar against the bitings of vipers, and that of other beasts. Some use it
against the yellow ^aundise drunk in wine; and the flux of women with
frankincense. Plin. Worn in a cloth it helps unquiet infants, especially
girls. Diosc. Boiled in vinegar and applied it helps the bitings of Serpents:
so the bitings of mad dogs, with honey. Diosc. With vinegar it stops the
violence of the blood. Sext. Applied it preventeth tumors. Anon. Boiled with
barley meal it helps all tumors. Mixed with honey it helps luxations, and
discusseth tumors. Plin. Boiled in vinegar it discusseth wens. Gal. It helps
old buboes. Plin. Boiled in wine or vinegar it ripeneth what is to be broken.
Diosc. Boiled in vinegar and applied it helps creeping ulcers, S. Anthonies
fire, and swellings behind the ears. Sext. Mixed with honey and applied it
helps cancers: as also carbuncles which arise in the belly. Marcel. Warmed in
vinegar and applied it helps all ulcers of the legs: the butter of Cows being
after added with oil of cypress or bays. Plin. Applied with wine it draws
out thorns, etc. out of the body. With the rose cerot, it being burnt brings
the burnings of ulcers to a cicatrice. Plin. With honey it helps luxations:
With old wine it helps broken ribs, and after apertion and extraction cures
the same: Boiled with vinegar and honey it helps the pain of the nerves, or
putrefaction of the same. Sext. With vinegar it helps the diseases of the
joints, so with Barley meal and Vinegar in rustic Bodies. With Honey it helps
swellings behind the ears, so Sext. and with Vinegar it helps the contractions
of the nerves, so Marcel. and tremblings. Diosc. Burned and applied with
vinegar, or Oxymel, it helps the alopecia, so Rhas. and Gal. Paul. Plin. So
with Honey. Marcel. 7. pills thereof with vinegar applied to the fore head,
help the headache. Plin. Marcel. Applied to the neck with bulbs it helps the
opisthotonos. Marcel. Sprinkled with strong Wine, stamped, applied and bound to
the eyes it helps all pains and swellings thereof. Plin. Applied with Honey it
helps the warring of the eyes. Diosc. Applied with vinegar it helps swellings
behind the ears, and applied with axungia: also drunk in Wine it helps the
jaundise. Plin. Boiled with Honey and used to the belly it helps the coeliack,
Sext. and the colic. Marcel. And strained in water with mulse and pepper,
taken for 3. days. Gal. Many use it against hard tumors of the Spleen, and
Dropsy. Marcel. Being powdered and drunk with Honey, and drunk in hot water it
kills Worms. Plin. In mulse it helps the stone. Anon. The dry balls
powdered and drunk in sack, evacuate phlegm and help the cough. With barley
meal and vinegar it helps the sciatica in rustic bodies, so with axungia.
Some add saffron, mustard seed, stalks of ivy, flowers of the wild cucumber,
and pellitory of the wall. Drunk with spikenard it provoks the menses, and
brings forth the birth: powdered and applied in wool with frankincense, it
stops the flux of women, and other fluxes of blood, with vinegar, so Diosc.
With the hairs of a Hare and fat of a Sea Calf, to which some add the
scrapings of cedar, used as a fume it brings forth the menses and secundine.
Plin. The urine of a Goat drunk, helps the great flux of women, the dung being
applied. Drunk with the vinegar of squils it helps the stingings of Serpents.
Applied with wool it discusseth apostumes. Marcel. Put into the ears it helps
the opisthotonos: so Dios. It helps the pains thereof. Sext. So with mulse.
Plin. With Cows gall it helps the difficulty of hearing. With the fume it helps
swellings behind the ears. Diosc. With spicknard it helps the dropsy. That of
the mountain Goat helps the difficulty of urine and the stone, taken warm with
wine and water. Sext. It provokes the terms in women. The description may be
omitted, they being common. Jonst. They are very venereous, and generate when
seven months old. They go five months, and usually bring forth one young one.
They are friends to the Sheep, Tiger, Penny royal, and Sea holly: and enemies to
the Woolf, Pardal, Elephant, Schrich owl, man's spittle, honey, spindletree,
the vine and fleabane. Their noise is like that of the Sheep: they feed in
rough places. They so hang on rocks that they seem to stick to the same, sc.
the Rock Goat.

Gulion. Gulo.
P. In Lithuania, Muscovia and the North parts. M. Of any dead carkases. N.
Vultur quadrupes Scalig. Boophagos Crol.
Gulion. Tops. T.V. Their skins only are in use, being white, spotted, and
changeably interlined like diverse flowers; therefore the greatest Princes and
richest Nobles use them in garments in the winter time, sc. the Kings of
Polonia, Sweeveland, Goatland, and the Princes of Germany; also it soonest
takes a color of all skins, and retains it longest. The outward
appearance of the said skin is like a damask garment. Some think he is
generated of a Woolf and a dog: he eats all the prey before he departs, and
emptieth the belly betwixt two trees, till he has done.

H.
Hare. Lepus.
P. In England, Lybia, and other places. M. Of grass, corn, and the like. N.
(...). Heb. Arnebet. Arab. Ernab.
HAre. Gal. T. The flesh begets thick blood, but it is of better juice than
beef or mutton. It Is good to be used in a drying diet. Celf. It Is of a mean and
good juice; it binds the belly and provokes urine. Isaac: Though gross and
dry, yet it is better than that of Goats. Anon. It Is hot and dry, and roasted
helps the ulcers of the intestines. It is good for old men, and those of a cold
temper. Hal. It Is hot and dry 2. it is best when taken by hunting, in the
winter, and in cold countries. It is good for those that are too corpulent, and
causes watching. It ought to be dressed with attenuating spices. Some also
count it cold and dry, the former of which is conjectured from their timidity.
The way of dressing them may be seen in Platina and Apicius. Gesn. Plin. V. The
ashes of a Hare with oil of myrtles help the pain of the head: Pounded with
honey it helps the enterocele. Rhas. Albert. The ashes help the stone. The
ashes of the blood and skin, burnt in a pot, and a spooneful thereof drunk
fasting in warm water, do presently help the same. So Sext. Those of the Hare
help pissing of blood also. Hereof Nic. Alexandrinus makes an antidote for
the same purpose, and Montagnana an electuary. R. Mos. A Coat of the skin,
strengthens the body of young and old men. The skin wrapped about a horse
foot, that has a tread, helps the same, being let blood in the pasterne.
Marcel. The blood of a Hare applied warm helps spots in the face caused by
the sun, it being after a little while, washed off, using oil after it, so
Cells. Vrsin. It produces hair, beautifieth the skin, and eases the gout.
Some use the ashes of the head, or belly burned with the intestines, against
the falling off of the hair: Some use the blood against their growth, the
hairs being first eradicated. Diosc. It helps the dysentery, and fluxes, being
fried and eaten; drunk in wine it helps against poison. Avic. Fried it helps
the Apostumes of the intestines. Marcel. When fresh boiled with barley meal
and taken it helps the dysentery and flux of the belly: so the curd. Avic. The
flesh roasted helps the ulcers of the intestines. Rhas. Albert. It dries, and
therefore helps the pains of the intestines, stops the belly, and helps
the ulcers of the intestines. R. Mos. It breaks the stone. Albert. Fried with
oil and used in a clyster it helps the flux of the belly, and ulcers of the
intestines: Rhas. Albert. So baked in an oven, or fried. Avic. The broth or
decoction thereof helps the gout and joint ach, as that of a Fox. Gesn. The fat
is used to draw out things fixed in the body: Some add the flower of beans,
and crabs for the feet. Plin. The ashes of their hairs stop bleeding. Marcel.
So the white hairs of their bellies, being rolled together, and put into the
nostrils. The ashes with oil of myrtles, Bulls gall, and alum, applied warm
help the falling of the hair. Plin. Boiled with honey they help the vices of
the intestines. Marcel. The hairs made into pills with honey, being often
swallowed down single, conjoyne the ruptures of the intestines: Some add the
dung. Plin. The fume of the hairs bring out difficult excreations out of the
lungs. Hippocrates uses them against the exulceration of the womb. And Aetius
to cause conception, the fume being used. Plin. The ashes help the coldness of
the feet. Diosc. The ashes of the head, applied with Bears grease or vinegar
help the alopecia, so Avic. Rhas. and Albert. Gal. The ashes prevent the aching
of the teeth: The same whiten the teeth with fennel, and the powder of the
boanes of a cutle-fish. With spikenard they help the stinck of the mouth.
Platin. The brain of a hare, as also that of a Coney, is very good against
poisons. Diosc. It helps tremblings, some add castoreum. R. Mos. As also
against numnesse and the palsy. Sext. Rubbed on the gums of children it
helps to facilitate the breeding of teeth: some add Goats milk also. Marcel.
Drunk in wine, and the testicles roasted, help the vices of the bladder: Plin:
As also the incontinency of urine, so Marcel. Seren. and Gal. Rhas. Albert. The
tooth applied helps the toothach. Sext. The ventricle boiled and applied with
oil and myrtles, hinders the falling of the hair, and causes it to grow.
Marcel. The pills of the dung drunk with old wine help the dysentery. Nicand.
The curd helps against poisons: It is the chief of all, and dissolveth blood
curdled in the body, which is the property of all other curds also. Avicen also
prefers this, Arist. And it is best when stalest. In vinegar it helps against
Serpents, and the Scorpion, and shrew mouse, etc. Sext. And it resists
poisons: Some use it with wine. Plin. And drach. 1. drunk helps against the
bitings or wounds of all marine creatures, and aconite, misselto, and
chameleon: with vinegar it dissolveth milk in women's breasts. Plin. With
Snailes stamped, it draws out darts, and the like that stick in the flesh:
Some also add oil, frankincense, birdlime, and be glue, or mallows. With
vinegar it stops bleeding; so that of a Heart. Seren. Applied with wine it
heals old ulcers: Plin. and exulcerated botches: and cancers with a like
quantity of capers. Plin. Magicians used it against quartans, with other
things: so Seren Diosc. It helps the epilepsy, so Plin. and Gal. and Avic.
drunk with vinegar. Plin. With a half quantity of sagapenum, and wine, it
helps the want of hearing. Sext. Put into the ear it helps the pain
thereof, which some affirm of the teeth. It dissolveth coagulated blood in the
lungs. With terra samia and myrtle wine it helps spitting of blood; so Plin.
Diosc It helps the coeliack, dysentery and flux of women. Avic. this (as also
all other curds,) dissolveth thick humors, and coagulats the liquid: some add
galls to stop, with wine, or warm water if there be a fever. Aver. Applied to
the bellies of infants it does the like. Aristot. It has a certain fiery
faculty, disjoying things that are heterogenious: It does the same in cheese,
as leaven in meal, a little thereof communicating its taste and quality to a
great quantity thereof: old cheese also has such a kind of faculty, and
therefore serves for the same purpose, to stop and dissolve. Plin. It is given
in the coeliack with bread, and with barley flower if there be an evacuation of
blood. Marcel. It may be drunk in wine, or taken in soft eggs against the
dysentery. It helps the tormina. Plin. With Goose grease and barley flower it
stops the flux of urine. Gal. All curds hinder all fluxes of blood also. Plin.
Applied with faffron, and the juice of leeks with wool it brings forth the
dead birth. Simoc. used in a pessary it causes secundity in women: Sextus
applies the same against the falling sickness, some use it with frankincense
and white wine. Plin. The lungs so, help the same: and pains of the eyes, so
Sext. and Albert. Plin. Drunk when dry it helps the womb. Sext. Albert. Being
powdered and applied it helps kibes, and the feet hurt by the shoes. Plin. The
heart of a Hare bound to the hands, and the dung of a Cow with the urine of a
boy applied to the feet helps the quartane ague. The heart dried, powdered
and drunk with a third part of the manna of frankincense drunk in white wine
for seven days helps the epilepsy, by those that fall oftener it may be used
thirty days together. Gal. It helps the pain of the womb. Plin. That or the
liver being given with hot water to women fasting, with the earth of Samos,
helps women's fluxes. Sext. It also helps those that spit blood. Plin. The
liver boiled and eaten helps the coeliack: so in austere wine. Rhas. drach. 1.
taken helps the hepatick. Albert. And unc. 1. helps the epilepsy. Sext. The
gall, with the liver of a weezel mixed sc. an. drach. 3, of castoreum drach. 1.
of myrrh drach. 4. with drach. 1. of vinegar and with honey, or bastard wine
drunk helps those that are vertiginous. Sext. Applied with honey it
clarifieth the eyes, so Plin. and Hemelberg. Gal. With an equal quantity of
honey, warmed in the pill of an onion, and put into the ear, it helps the
loss of hearing. The spleen eaten helps the spleen. Avic. The belly with the
intestines powdered, mixed with the oil of roses and applied, repaireth the
hair. Plin. The reins drunk in wine expel the stone. Marcel. As also the
pain of the reins. Montag. The testicles and womb help to coiture in men, and
conception in women, with other remedies: Plin. some think, that they cause
conception of males. Marcel. They help the pains of the bladder. The powder of
the testicles taken by a woman in wine, after her purgation, causes the
conception of a male, so Sext. Plin. The testicles roasted help the incontinency
of urine. Marcel. So the cerebellum drunk in wine. Marcel. The testicle boiled
and eaten fasting, presently helps the pain of the hipps. Gal. The powder of
the matrice drunk by a woman purged of her flowers causes conception. some use
the womb in meats for the conception of males. Sext. The blood issuing from the
womb of a Hare, with the curd, being applied, causes the conception of a
femal: and the first being drunk by both causes a male, and an hermophrodite
if by the woman only. Plin. The huckle-bone used, prevents the pain of the
belly: so Sext. and Marcel. Some use it against the stone. Trag. Being drunk
out of the water of pennyroyal, it is an ocytocion. Anon. With misseltoe,
coral, pearls, the seeds of peony, and the stones of Crabs. an. it helps the
falling sickness. Plin. The feet applied to the vices of the joints, help the
same. Plin. The dung helps burnings: the magicians drink or prescribe 9. gr. of
the dung to cause a constant stretching of the dugs. Rhas. Dissolved with
vinegar and applied it cures the ring-worme. Plin. The ashes drunk in wine in
the evening help the cough in the night. Gal. Stamped and taken in hot wine it
helps the vices of the columella, and difficulty of breathing. Plin. The
ashes strewed on warm wine help the coeliack and dysentery: So the pills
thereof made with wine. Plin. Boiled with honey and taken daily in the quantity
of a bean it helps the rupture of the intestines. Aetius makes a pessary
thereof to cause conception. Rhas. Worn by a women it hinders conception:
Albert. And a little thereof applied to the womb dries up the menstruous
blood, and mightily desiccats the matrix. Schrod. The D. of the powder of a
Hare is from scrup. 1. to drach. 1. their eyes when taken in March, drive forth
the birth and secundine, being dried with pepper, and the apple being applied
to the crown of the head. The gall is an ophthalmick and oralgick. Jonst. The
gall with sugar helps the wefts of the eyes. Their description is needless.
They generate aversly, at any time of the year, and bring forth in copises,
two or more at a time. They are enemies to the Eagle, Crow, Weasel, Fox, and
Dogs. They live six or seven years; Their noise is shrill. They sleep with
their eyes open, and hear well; they disturb their course, and leap about
before their sitting. They use certain places; they are seldom fat when wild,
by reason of their fear. In the winter they lie in sunny places, and toward
the north wind in summer. They use to avoid bushes that their furre may not
stick thereon, and squat on plowed lands when hunted, being of the same color;
and make rings to avoid the sagacity of the hunter. They are presently made
tame, and suddenly return when loose to their former wildness. The female
has a longer head and ears, as also a fatter body than the male. They differ
in color, fatness, magnitude, smell and place. Tops. When they are awake they
shut their eyes. They seldom look forewards going by jumps. They rest in the
day time, and feed in the night. When they are hot they feed upon hares
lettuce. They never drink; but content themselves with the dew, and so often
become rotten. They copulate backwards, and often though great. They bring
forth their young blind, like other cloven footed Beasts. They keep them not
all together, that some may be preserved. When hunted they are to be kept from
the upper ground, they running faster up the hill than downwards.

Heart. Cervus.
P. In Africa, Apulia, Batavia, and Britain. M. Of grass, etc. and hay. N.
(...). Heb. Aial.
Heart. Platin. T. The flesh is almost like beef, for it is slowly concocted,
nourishes little, and increases melancholy; it is most pleasant to eat, in
the summer, especially in August; being then fattest. Cells. Being concocted it
nourishes much. The best are the Faunes, and are best when gelded, being less
hot and dry. H. Sym. Seth. Being much eaten it causes a shaking in the body.
Avic. And quartan agues. Rhas. It is hot, Avic. it provokes urine. Vicent.
Bell. The liver is very bad, and ill tempered. The young horns help against
aconite. The way of dressing it may be seen in Apicius and Platina. Plin. The
blood stops the belly, Diosc. and helps the dysentery and coeliack, as
also that of a Goat, or Hare. Albert. Rhas. Being injected with oil, it helps
the ulcers of the intestines, and old fluxes. Gesn. Applied it stops fluxions.
Gal. Applied with vinegar it is a psilothron. Rhas. Drunk in wine it helps
against venomed arrows. The flesh in rutting time stinketh, like that of a he
Goat, and is then vitiated. Sym. Seth. The powder of the blood drunk helps the
bitings of venomous beasts. Plin. Solin. The flesh eaten preventeth fevers. As
for the marrow. See that of the Calfe, and Bull. Solin. Ointments made thereof
help the burnings of those that languish. Gal. It is a paregoricotaton.
Aesculap. It eases pain. Used as an ointment it drives away Serpents. Sym.
Seth. It mollifieth hard cankers. Gyrald. It discusseth. Plin. It fills and
purges other ulcers, as well as in the legs; so the ashes of the horn. It
helps fistula's with Venus navil-wort. The same helps purulent ears. With
rosin, lime, Goose grease, and the fat of an he Goat it helps the chaps in
the lips: some add onions. With that of a Calfe, and the leaves of a white
thorn stamped, it helps the ulcers and clefts of the mouth. Sext. Drunk in hot
water, it helps the pain of the intestines, though there are tormina. Cells.
Used downwards in an old dysentery, it helps it, takes away the pain, and
helps the ulcers. Marcel. With butter, Bulls gall, and the oil of cypress,
or bays, it helps bruised knees. Hipp. Melted with fat, and applied with
wool it mollifieth the womb: he makes also a purgatory remedy of the same. A
pessary of the same, with that of a Calf mollifieth the womb also: so applied
outwardly. Rhas. It helps the pain of the hipps and sides, and fractures also.
Agric. Used in a pessary it draws forth the menses. Albert. It helps the
beating of the heart, though some deny it. Gal. The fat is inferior to noe
mollifying remedy. Rhas. It heateth and mollifieth or lenifies. It softeneth
hard cankers, so Sym. Seth. Absyrt. given to a Horse with wax, it helps their
cough of a cold cause, used with wine after purgation and suffumigation.
Marcel. With tar, pissasphalt, and the milk of a Cow or Sheep, used every day
it mightily helps the phthisick. Anatol. With a little wine and bean meal,
given three days to a Horse it helps their pissing of blood. The tallow
burned with oister shells mightily helps kibes being applied, Sext. Hipp.
when fresh the fat helps exulcerated wombs; he uses it also to purge the womb
with other things. Plin. The fume of the hair helps the womb also. Sext. It
helps against abortion. Plin. The shavings of the skin, done by a punice
stone, and stamped in vinegar help S. Anthonies fire. Magicians bind many
amulets in the skin. Gal. Applied to the right thigh with the juice or seed
of henbane steeped in Asses milk it helps pissing in bed. Aetius uses the
bones of the legs in the antidote of Philagrius against the gout: And in that
of Julian being burned against the stone and epilepsy. Gal. The bones stamped
and applied to the belly help the flux thereof. Solin. Plin. Of the horns the
right is the best; yet Aristotle prefers the left: the tops also are most
effectual; as being more solid. They are used crude or when burned. Being
calcined, and washed as cadmia, it helps the ulcers and defluxions of the eyes,
so Diosc. Sym. Seth. It is cold and dry; yet it helps obstructions of the
spleen; and the jaundise, arising commonly from the obstruction of the liver,
by reason that it, (as also all things burned, except washed) retains a
certain Empyreuma, and hot thin parts by reason of the fire; but when washed it
only dries and is emplastick. Sylv. Being burned and washed, it whiteneth the
teeth, helps moist gumms, the dysentery, and fluxes to the eyes, clensing
without corrosion; yet it does not mitigate pain, or concoct, being cold and
dry. Brasav. Being calcined and washed, many sell it for spodium. Being burned
it drives away Serpents: applied with vinegar it helps the bitings of the
same: also some add the roots of reeds, ciches, and cypress berries burned
together, and then they are to be drunk with vinegar and the juice of leekes,
so Gal. Plin. The Heart burieth the right horn in the ground, serving against
the poison of Toads. Gal. Burned with the heart and skin, and applied with
oil it helps wounds. Sext. The horn dries up all humors, and therefore it
is used in ophthalmick collyries. The decoction thereof hinders the grouth of
the hair, yet Orpheus says that being applied with oil it causes hair even
on bald heads. Marcel. Some add the seeds of black myrtle, with butter and
oil, after shaving. Plin. The ashes with wine help scurfe, and lousinesse in
beasts. Gal. The filings boiled with vinegar to a third part, help ringworms,
Sext. so burned. It helps the elephantiasis, see Elephant. The ashes fill and
purge all ulcers, except in the legs, so Plin. And applied with water, they
help wheales. The fine powder thereof with a like quantity of the fatt, and a
greater of lentills, being stamped, boiled, and applied to the face before, or
in the bath often, helps specks in the same, so Mercel. Sext. so the ashes:
the same with those of a sheeps jaw and wax softened with oil of roses, help
the fractures of the joints, so Plin. Sext. drach. 3. with drach. 2. of
litharge mightily help paineful gallings. Marcel. The filings drunk in wine
prevent nits and lice in the head: so applied, and scurfe. Plin. Marcel. Gal.
The ashes applied to the forehead with vinegar, oil of roses, or wine help the
pain of the head: Sext. So drach. 1. drunk with wine and two parts of water.
Plin. It discovers the falling sickness, so the stink thereof, so Solin. as
also bitumen, the agath stone, the Goats horn and liver. Blond. The largest
horns are excellent against the epilepsy: some use drach. 2. of the tipps,
with unc. 1. of misseltoe of the oak, and drach. 1. of the heart of a Woolf,
with some powder of the hinder part of a man's skull. Aet. It helps
forgetfulness, after purgation with the hiera Ruffi, and drach. 1. of ivory
drunk in mulse. The powder with an equal q. of sponges, that have stones in
them, drunk daily in wine or water fasting, helps the kings evil or swellings
in the throat. Plin. The ashes help the roughness of the eyes, especially
those of the Tips. Gal. Burned and blown up into the nostrils with sandaracha
it helps the polypus. Burned and washed it cleanses the teeth. Diosc. Warmed
in vinegar when crude, and used to the gums it helps the pains of the jaws,
caused by the breeding of teeth, or it fasteneth the teeth, and binds the
gums, so Gesn. Some use the powder of the crude horn; so that of a Goat: and
the ashes with wine. Rhas. Alb. or boiled with vinegar, so Marcel. sc. drach.
2. thereof being used with unc. 3. of vinegar: some add salt armoniack,
pepper, and flower deluces with mastick. The ashes drunk, help the empycma, and
haemoptysis. Sym. Seth. being much used it hurts the lungs: for the former
purpose some add gum dragant. Being burnt and washed, it helps the dysentery
also, the coeliack and yellow jaundise, two spoonfuls being used, so Gal.
Marcel: the filings, with a little live brimstone, taken in a reere egg, stop
excessive vomiting: Plin. It helps the rheumatisme of the stomach. Plin. The
ashes in vinegar help the spleen. It has the same virtue as a Cows ankle.
Rhas. Albert. The ashes drunk help the flux of blood, and ulcers of the
intestines. Gal. unc. 2. of the powder, burned, with unc. 1. of burnt Snailes,
and plantaine water help the dysentery, the quantity of a bean being taken
with wine by those that are not feverish, or else with water: or so taken with
an equal quantity of oil, Marcel. or with austere wine: He commends the powder
of the young horns calcined, with gr. 9. of white pepper, to three spoonefuls
thereof, and a little myrrh etc. against the colic, so Aet. Gal. The filings
drunk in old wine kill worms. Some use it with Ivory: so the powder when
burned, being drunk in wine or water. Albert. Rhas. or taken with honey: Some
add chalk, worm seed, and the yolk of an egg roasted hard. Sym. Seth. It
helps the strangury. Gal. The powder of it when burned, applied as a
cataplasme, helps aqueouse ruptures, drinking vinegar: Some mix it with
remedies against pissing of blood. Rhas. Albert. It helps the pain of the
bladder; and restrains the moisture of the womb; yet it provokes the terms.
Drunk three days in wine it helps the hysterical passion, or drunk in hot
water if there be a fever, so Sext. Gyrald. Worn by a woman, it facilitats
the birth. The bezar stone, or lachryma Cervi Agric. resists poison: They are
produced by standing in the water up to the neck, after their devouring of
Serpents, which they do to cool themselves, not daring to drink; these tears
falling into the water, congeale, and are thence taken by those, that do
observe them; the quantity is as that of a walnut: the D. is gr. 12. Physiol.
it helps the panting of the heart. Plin. The lungs help corns, clefts and
callosity, being applied three days; so the dung also: it helps gallings by
the shoes: Marcel. yet that of a hare is more effectual. The powder with that
of the gullet dried in smoke, and made into a Iohoch with honey, helps the
cough: and the phthisick the powder being taken in wine: Marcel. so the former
also. Marcel. The ashes thereof burned in an earthen pot help the dyspnoea or
difficulty of breathing. Plin. The stone found in the womb when great,
preserves the foetus in women: so the bones, and those in the heart. Sext. The
same bones tied to the arm hinder conception. Actuar. Arab. The bone of the
heart, comfort man's heart, by the similitude of its whole substance: some
sell that of a Cows tongue, in steed thereof: it is generated of the blood in
the heart, it is of a reddish color, and serves to expel melancholic fumes,
and helps the cardiack passion, syncope, and hemorrhoids, so Platear. Gal. the
powder taken helps sterility in women. Gal. The ashes of the heart, with that
of the skin and horn applied with oil help wounds. The curd of a Hind has
the same virtues, as that of the Hare; so that of the he Goat, Lamb, Heart,
Buck, and Ibex, Plin. The curd of a hind slain in the womb, is very good
against the bitings of Serpents, so Solin. so drunk in vinegar, Damoc. It Is
good against the bitings of madd dogs. Hal. So against hemlock and Toad
stools. Marcel. It helps the empyema, and spitting of blood. Plin. Drunk in
vinegar it stops blood, so helps inward bleeding. Gal. Drunk in wine or
taken with the cremor of rice it helps the coeliack, and dysentery. Plin. The
curd of a Heart mightily helps the vices of the intestines, being decocted
with lentils, and beet, and so taken in wine. Diosc. The curd of a Hind taken
three days after purgation helps against conception. Plin. The genital is
given in wine, as also the belly, against the bitings of Serpents. Diosc. It
helps against the bitings of Vipers. Sym. Seth. So dried, filed, and drunk with
wine; Sext. or so, taken with an egg. Sext. The same causes venery being
drunk. Xen. The ashes with wine applied to the genital of an admissary animal
make it more strong for copulation. Rhas. Albert. The powder drunk helps the
dysury and colic. Aristot. The ashes of the dung being drunk in the quantity
of three spoonefulls in mulse help the dropsy. Hal. The urine helps the spleens
pain, inflation of the stomach and intestines; and dropped into the ears it
helps the pains thereof. Aristot. The cleaning is eaten by them presently
after bringing forth, and therefore it is counted medicinal, Bertruc. The
extreme part of the tail is venomous, and being drunk causes a contraction in
the stomach, and intestines; also a fainting and death. It is cured by vomiting
with butter, the oil of the oily pulse and anet; and afterward with walnuts,
and fisticknuts with lycium, so Avic. Ponzet. This is caused by an adust humor
carried thither, that the rest of the body may not be infected. It also causes
sadness: and the eye is an antidote. Pet. Upon. As also triacle, and the
powder of the Emerald. Schrod. The horn crude helps putrefaction, corrects
malignity, provokes sweat, and strengthens the natural balsam: therefore it is
useful in the small pocks and measells, putrid and malignant fevers, and other
diseases requiring sweating, sc. being decocted or infused. Being prepared S.
A. by its drying faculty, it resists putrefaction, stops fluxes of the
womb, kills worms, provokes sweat, and is convenient for Children, the D. is
Scrup. 1. to Drach. 1. or more. Being Philosophically calcined, it provokes
sweat, and helps malignant diseases: the D. is to Drach. sem. the D. of the
volatile salt is from gr. 5, to scrup. sem. The water distilled out of the
young Horns, helps burning malignant fevers: the D. is cochl. sem. a girdle
of the skin serves women to tie about their midles against hysteric
passions. The genital is diuretic, aphrodisiastick, and helps the dysentery,
and pain of the colon, being decoct or boiled in water. Schwenchfeld. The dry
testicles drunk in wine help to venery. Gluckr. in Begu. The antipodagrick
balsam of the blood applied helps contractures also from any cause, having a
very great resolving faculty, by reason of its salt. The tears found dry in
the corners of the eyes; dry, bind, strengthen, and cause sweating; therefore
are good against poison, and contagious diseases, being counted of equal
virtue with bezoar stone: they also provoke the birth. The D. is gr. 3. or 4.
The marrow helps malignant ulcers: as in the legs. The fat mollifieth
tumors, binds wounds, helps kibes, and eases pains: the destilled oil
thereof mollifieth, lenifieth, and mightily eases the gout used once or twice
in a day. The ankle bone helps the dysentery. The stone found in the hearts
ventricle, or intestines is counted equal to the bezoar in virtues. Jonst.
(The description being omitted as needless) They are libidinous a whole day
together, chiefly in August, and September, they go about 8. months, and
bring forth one young one for the most part. Some say they live 3600. years.
Their noise is unpleasant. They have friendship with the heath-cock; but enmity
to the Eagle, Vulture, Serpent, Dogs, Tiger, Ram, and noise of Foxes: to the
Artichock, Rosewood and red Feathers. They delight in woods, and places of
their first education: they follow their leader. They are fearful even to a
proverb. They rest themselves in their persuit, and run into the footsteps of
the rest. They use dittany against their wounds: they are fat in the summer and
hide themselves when sheeding their Horns, they love their young and Music.

Hedghog. Erinaceus.
P. Almost every where, except Creet, so Plin. M. Of Apples and Grapes, which
it carries on the pricks. N. (...). Heb. Kipod. Acanthio ter. Gal.
Hedghog. Gesn. T. The skinn being pulled off, the flesh larded, and stuck with
cloves, may be roasted, and so, some commend it as a pleasant meat. V. the
ashes of the Body burnt, are extersive and digesting, as also of a drawing
nature: Gal. Therefore some use them against excrescencies, and to cleanse
foul ulcers; but Dioscorides attributes it to the Sea Urchin; Avic. Yet the
Ashes of both do cleanse, resolve and dry. Gal. The powder of the skin and
head with Honey helps the Alopecia. Albert. The ashes of the whole mixed with
pitch cause hair in cicatrices: so with Tar, or Honey and Vinegar:
especially with Tar, so Diosc. Aelian. Avic. Rhas. and Albert. Marcel. So
with Bears, and it is own grease; so also the fresh dung with Sandaracha,
Vinegar and Tar: Albert. Some add Galls, bitter Almonds, and Mouse dung.
Soran. The powder of the shells of Sea Vrchins, with Honey and Vinegar helps
gallings. Rhas. Albert. The powder of an Hedg-hog applied helps the Fistula.
Plin. The ashes applied with Oil help Ringworms in the face; the face being
first washed with Nitre and Vinegar. Aelian. The ashes of a Land Vrchin, drunk
in Wine help the pains of the Reins, and Dropsy. Diosc. The salted flesh
drunk with mulled Vinegar, helps the convulsion, Elephantiasis, cachexy, and
fluxions of the bowels; so Gal. Rhas. Albert. But that of the Mountain is more
effectual, better to help the stomach, mollify the belly, and provoke urine, so
Rhas. and Albert. Avic. Rhas. Some use the flesh salted, with Oxymel, against
the Dropsy: Albert, even of all sorts, sc. the carnose, tumid, and citrine.
Philes says the ashes drunk with white Wine, help the pains of the Reins.
Rhas. The flesh botled helps the phthisick: a plaster thereof helps the
contraction of the nerves and pain of the belly, caused by gross flatulencies;
and the difficulty of digestion. Plin. The ashes applied with Oil prevent
abortion. The flesh eaten hinders the strangury, and preventeth the pissing
of bed in Children, so Rhas. Avic. In so much that being eaten often it causes
a dysury, though some say it cures the same. Plin. That of the Sea, drunk with
the prickles, expels the stone. Avic. Scrap. The flesh of that of the Land
helps long fevers, and venomous bitings of Serpents. Avic. The fat (Diosc.
or rather the flesh dried) helps the fluxes of the bowels. Aetius makes a
remedy thereof against hairs pricking the eyebrows, sc. of the blood:
Archigenes adds the Gall of the same, and castor. Rhas. Albert. The blood
with Honey and hot water, used as a gargarisme helps hoarsenesse. The liquour
of the left eye fried in Oil, put into the ear causes sleep, so Albert.
Rhas. Albert. Diosc. The Liver dried in the Sun serves as the flesh dried:
Avic. or against fluxions of the bowels. Aelian. It so, helps the
Elephantiasis. Plin. The Gall is a Psilothron, so also mixed with the brain of
a bat and Goats milk; or other milks. Rhas. The collyrie thereof helps the
eyes. Plin. With water it helps white spots in the eyes: and Warts. The Spleen
used for two days with Vinegar of squills, helps the pain of the Spleen:
Marcel. so being roasted and eaten. The Reins dried help the Leprosy,
phthisick, dysentery and cough. Marcel. the fresh dung, and Sandaracha, with
Vinegar, and Tar being applied, stops the falling off of the hair.
Marcel. the prickles of a Hedghog, sticking in any part of the Body, or feet,
are removed, the feet, etc. being held in man's urine warm. Schrod. Hartm. The
grease helps the hernia; the inward skin of the ventricle helps the
colic. Jonst. The flesh dried helps the like: The fat helps the stone.
The blood helps the heat of urine. As for the description it is needless,
being known to all people. It is an enemy to the Bear, Woolf, Fox, Viper, and
Pondweed. When assaulted it contracteth the Body: it changes the place of
abode, according to the change of the wind. They generate after the way of
rationals: they are either Sow-like, or Canine, as to their differences.

Hee-goat. Hircus.
P. In most Countries, of the World inhabited. M. Of Herbs, Trees, and
Shrubbes, etc. N. (...). Heb. Atud. Arab. Teus and Maez.
Hee-goat. Aegin. Gal. T. the flesh is of bad juice and hard to be digested;
the next is that of Rams, and that of Bulls worse: amongst all which the flesh
of the gelded is better, and that of the oldest the worst. The flesh is very
hurtful by reason of its hardness, and difficulty in alteration. Isaac, the
flesh is of worse juice than that of Goats. Aristot. Bapt. Fire. it is vitiated
and stinketh in the time of lust. Albert. by castration, it becomes more cold
and moist. Aegin. The testicles resist concoction, and cause vicious humors.
H. Platin. the liver, as also of the Goat causes the Epilepsy. V. Sext. The
fume of the hairs helps the pain in the groin. Plin. The powder of the
horn, with nitte and the seed of tamarisk with butter and oil, helps the
falling off of the hair, the head being first shaved. Sext. The ashes applied
with meal, help the scurfe and itch of the head. Marcel. Mixed with the gall
and an equal weight of myrrh, they help the stinck of the arm holes, being
applied after the removal of the hair. Matthew. Some sell the blood of a
Hee-goat, with dry services, etc. made up, in stead of Sanguis draconis, with
rosin. Diosc. Avic. The blood dried and drunk in wine, helps against poison.
Avic. It presently ripens hot abscesses: See that of the Bull. Aetius mixeth it
with remedies against the Gout. Marcel. Applied it helps the Leprosy. Applied
fresh it helps against hairs that trouble the eyes, after evulsion. Plin. It
helps dimnesse of the eyes. Sext. It stops bleeding. Plin. Eaten it helps
the pain of the liver. Dios. When well dried it helps the dysentery, and flux
of those that are coeliack. See that of Goats. Marcel. So roasted an the coals.
Sext. mixed with rofin and fine wheat flower, and so applied to the belly, it
helps the tormina. Plin. With marrow it helps the Dropsy. Avic. Drunk, it
breaks the stone: Albert. So with stone parsley and wine; some add the
powder of an hedge sparrow. Some call it Manus dei: so Aetius, Alexander, and
Avicen. Trallianus uses it outwardly also: and it helps the dysury. Marcellus
adds time also pennyroyal, the ashes of a polypus, white pepper, parsley, and
the seed of Alexander. Marcel. It dissolveth the Diamond. some use it with
vinegar or curd that it may not coagulate. Plin. The flesh boiled in water
helps impostumes in any part: As for the marrow see that of the calfe: but that
of the hearts is the best, then the Calfes, Hee-goats, and Shee-goats. Gal. The
fat of kids is less hot and dry, than that of Goats; that of Goats, than of
the hee-goat; and the hee-goats, than the Lions. Diosc. It is very discutient:
Avic. It resolves more, than the rest. Plin. With St. Katharines flower,
brimstone and flower-deluce, it helps freckles and spots; and chaps of the
lips, with goose grease, hearts marrow, rosin and lime. Columel. melted with old
oil, tar, and Cows marrow, an. it helps swellings in the necks of cattle:
Plin. stamped with the feet of locusts it helps the Leprosy. Applied with
locusts it helps scabbed nails. Marcel. Injected with green oil it helps
the dysentery. Dios. Rhas. Applied with the dung of a Goat, and saffron it
eases the gout: some add pepper, the stalks of ivy, pellitory of the wall, or
the flowers of wild cucumbers: as also the stalks of elder, and the juice of
torn sole. Gal. The liver is of the same effect as the Goats. Plin. It helps
against the biting of a mad Dog, so Ponz. this, as the ashes of the horn or
dung drunk in vinegar stops bleeding: or applied to the nostrils. Plin. Applied
hot it helps the Leprosy. Boiled and drunk in austere wine, it helps the
coeliack, or applied with myrtle oil to the navil: some add rue thereunto:
Marcel. The same helps the dysentery. Diosc. Being eaten it helps the
Epilepsy. The gall is more weak, than that of the Bull. It helps thyme
warts; and extuberancies in those that are Elephantick. Plin. With Bulls urine
it helps scurfe; so with brimstone: as also freckles, with cheese, crude
brimstone, and ashes of a sponge, mixed to the thickness of Honey. Diosc. It
helps the dimnesse of sight: Gal. As also ulcers of the eyes, and white spots
therein: and hinders the grouth of hairs that trouble the eyes, they being
first eradicated. See that of the Sow, or Hog. Plin. The spleen roasted
helps the coeliack: Marcel. And applied warm eases pain. Albert. The
testicles roasted and eaten cause the generation of males. Plin. The dung boiled
with Honey helps apostumes: Anon. mixed with vinegar, it helps black
pushes. Sext. Applied with wine, it draws out what is fixed in the flesh.
Plin. It helps ulcers, except those in the legs. Gal. 15 globuli thereof
drunk help the falling sickness. Applied with mouse dung, and Honey, it
helps bare eyebrows, that want hair: the same helps the morphew. Marcel.
Applied to the forehead and temples with vinegar of squills it helps the
pain of the hemicrania. The urine with the gall of an Ox, helps the
difficulty of hearing, being dropped into the ears. Gal. Drunk with Hyssop it
provokes urin. Sext. Drunk with spikenard and dry danewort, it helps the
Dropsy. Anon. Drunk with the ashes of Ivory, it breaks the stone in the
reins and bladder. Schrod. The blood is alexipharmick and binding; so helps
the dysentery, dissolveth congealed blood, and helps the stone: Used outwardly
it ripeneth. The oil thereof is good against the stone; so the tincture, and
against coagulated blood. The fat helps the gout, strangury, and pain of the
hemorrhoids. The powder of the bladder helps the incontinency of urine; drach.
1. being given. The kell applied warm helps the ebullition of the spirits; so
helps the colic, and madness, and expels urine. The decoction of the skin
stops the hemorrage, and diarrhoea. Jonst. The blood with the juice of
groundsel, mollifieth glass, steeped therein. Mixed with vinegar it helps
the vomiting and spitting of blood. The Description is useless, the beast
being well known.

Hornd-snout. Rhinoceros.
P. In the deserts of Africa, and in many places of Asia. M. Of Herbs, and
prickly shrubs, etc, N. (...). Heb. Reem and Karas.
Hornd-snout. Schrod. T. V. the horn is good against poisons, contagions, and
other affections, that have need of evacuation by sweat; and therefore it may
be used in stead of Unicorns horn, when that is wanting: the D. of the powder
is Scrup. sem to Scrup. 1. Jonst. Some eat the flesh, which is very nervouse.
Zacut. The skin steeped in wine, is drunk in malignant diseases. As for the
description, they are almost of the form of a Boar. They have one horn on
their nose. They are as long as an Elephant, yet they have shorter feet, and a
Boxe-like color: they are enemies to the Elephant, and are not firce against
man except provoked. before they fight they rub their horn against stones; and
strike at the belly, it being the softest part. Bont. When provoked by men,
they will throw them down: when on horse back, as if they were but fleas: the
flesh of which they then like off, by reason of the roughness of their tongue.
When wounded in the woods, they cast down whatsoever is in their way, even
ordinary trees. Their noise is like that of the Hogs.

Horse. Equus.
P. In England, France Spain, and almost every where. M. Of grass, hay, and
oats. etc. N. (...). Heb. Sus. Arab. Bagel. Pers. Asbaca.
Horse. Gal. T. Some eat the flesh thereof, even when old; but it is of very
bad juice, of hard concoction, unpleasant to eat, and hurtful to the stomach;
so that of Asses and Camels. The milk is drunk by the Tartars. It, as also the
Asses, and Cows is more fit for the belly, than the sheeps which is more thick;
but they trouble the same, so Diosc. Var. Mares milk is most purging; then the
Asses, Cows, and lastly the Goats. Plin. Being drunk it looseneth the belly.
The Camels is most thin, to which this is next, the Asses is most thick, so
that some use it in steed of curd, so Plin. Yet it as also the Mares presently
descends. Marcel. The whey of Mares milk, does easily and gently purge the
belly. The cheese nourishes much, and answers in proportion to the Cows, so
Sestius. V. Plin. The blood of a Horse corrodeth the flesh by a septick
strength: that of a colt drunk in wine helps the jaundise. being let blood in
the mouth and swallowing it, it cures their worms. Anon. The blood out of the
spur vein, being taken by them with salt, helps their plague. Veget.
Applied it helps their weak parts. Theomnest. And fractures and luxations.
Anon. Applied it helps their cold, and convulsive nerves, being used warm.
Plin. The flesh and dung when going to grass, helps the bitings of Serpents.
Sext. The fume of the fatt, expels the dead birth and secundine: some use it in
remedies against the spasme. The ashes of the bones with verdigrease, and the
seed of henbane, sprinkled on their abscesses after opening with a cautery help
the same. Albert. The teeth of a stoned Horse, laid under the head hinder
snorting in the sleep: Plin. The powder thereof helps kibes, and clefts or
chaps in the feet, so Marcel. Plin. The same helps the vices of the
privities, and warts; as also the coeliack and dysentery. The first teeth
applied help the toothach, and facilitate the breeding thereof being applied,
so Rhas. and Albert. a Horse hair tied about warts kills them, causing a
privation of aliment. The ashes of a Horse head stop bleeding. Avic. The ashes
of the Hide applied help pustules, by refrigeration. Plin. The old tongue of an
Horse drunk in wine, eases the spleen, so Marcel. Matthew: The curd drunk in
wine, helps the bitings of Serpents. Aesculap. The same drunk helps all
pains: Dios. it helps the coeliack and dysentery, so Gall. Avic. and Haly.
Plin. It looseneth the belly; as also the blood, marrow and liver: Gesn. but
they all rather bind. Plin. The teeth help the toothach. Gal. The liver kept in
a Cedar box, and given with wine of Chia and Water, helps the ulcers of the
liver. Plin. The spleen drunk in sweet water brings forth the dead birth. The
powder of the testicles causes venery. The ashes of the hoof, applied with
oil and water discuss impostumes in any part of the body; and wens with warm
urine, so Marcel. Plin. Applied they help redness with the itch. Hipp. The
filings of the foremost hoofes given with water help the frettings in Horses:
Hieroc. Veget. the same being injected into the nostrils, provoke urine, Plin.
The ashes drunk in wine or water help against the stone, so Marcel. Plin. The
fume of the hoof brings out the dead birth. The gall is counted poysonsome.
The milk of a Mare, helps against the poison of a Sea Hare, and Toxicum. Diosc.
Avic. Being drunk it looseneth the belly: Plin. And helps also the falling
sickness, so with Boares testicles. Aet. It purges ulcers. Plin. The bath
thereof helps the womb. Rhas. Albert. It causes conception being drunk.
Marcel. The whey thereof gently purges the body. Aesculap. The cheese of Mares
milk stops the belly, and helps tertians. Plin. The foame of an Horse used
40. days, before the grouth of hair, restrains the grouth of the same; the
same helps the pain of the ears, and deafness thereof, or the ashes of the
fresh dung, with oil of roses: Marcel. The same helps gallings. Plin. The
foame helps redness with itching; as also the disease in the tongue and jaws
called die brune: sc. that of a Horse eating oats or Barley, using the liquour
pressed out of Crabfishes after it, or the powder thereof applied: the same
helps the cough being drunk 3. days, Marcel. and the phthisick. Rhas.
Albert. The sweat of an Horse mixed with wine causes abortion, being drunk by
a Woman that is great. Anon. Drunk with the urine in a bath it drives away
worms and Serpents: sc. out of the belly. Avic. The dung is of the same effect
as the asses. Diosc. That of a Horse feeding on grass being dried, steeped in
wine and drunk, helps against the wounds of Scorpions: Plin. So the flesh;
and curd of a Hare with vinegar; and against the shrew mouse. The dung applied
with vinegar, and a Fig, helps against the poison of a mad Dog. The
digestion thereof, with vinegar, made in Horse dung, helps the eruptions of
blood: So if crude, according to Diosc. Rhas. and Albert. Aesculp. So the
powder applied. Ruf. so applied warm; to which some add chalk and sharp
vinegar. Pelagon. That of the same Horse hinders too much bleeding, after
phlebotomie, being applied: Albert. Rhas. So smelled to. Plin. And the bleeding
of wounds, the ashes being applied with egg shells. The juice taken by the
nostrils helps bleeding thereat. Aesculap. Dropped into the ears it helps the
pains thereof: Plin. So the ashes of that which is fresh, with oil of roses;
as also the want of hearing. Plin. That of a Foale, used within 3. days after,
in wine helps the jaundise, so that of an asses colt. It helps the colic.
sc. that from oats or Barley, a handful thereof being boiled in unc. 17. of
wine, to the consumption of an half, and drunk by degrees, so Empir. Anon.
Plin. The ashes of the dung drunk in wine stop the belly: Sext. So the juice
drunk: Marcel. The ashes help the dysentery taken in wine, or in water if there
be a Fever: Plin. As also the coeliack. Hal. The fume brings out the
secundine and dead birth. Plin. Some use the urine of an Horse, with steeled
water against the epilepsy and to help the lymphatick. Empir. With wheat meal
an egg and butter it helps the bleeding of cattle, by the fundament, womb, or
nostrils. Diosc. Gal. The lichens in the legs of Horses, powdered and drunk
in vinegar help the epilepsy: some use the same against the biting of any
beast. Plin. Put into the ears with oil they fasten the teeth. Drunk in wine
or mulse 40. days, they help the Soda, and falling sickness. Schrod. The
blood, especially of a breeding Mare is mixed with septick and caustic
remedies. The milk of a Mare helps the epilepsy, phthisis, cough, and
asthma's. The curd helps the coeliack and dysentery; the dung outwardly
restrains the eruptions of blood, inwardly it helps the colic,
strangulation of the womb, and expels the dead birth and secundine. The fume
of the lichens, helps the suffocations of the womb, and falling sickness; the
powder helps the stone. The D. of the extract of the lichens is from gr. 5. to
Scrup. sem. the powder of the testicles presently helps the colic and expels
the secundine. The fat helps the luxation of the joints. The fume of the hoof
drives away lice. The hairs stop the flux of blood. The foame of the mouth,
helps the heat of the jaws. Hartm. in pract. The water coming out of the mouth
of a stoned Horse, preventeth sterility. The powder of the teeth is a
dentifrice. The stone found in the stomach, called hippolithus, is of the
virtues of the occidental bezoar. Jonst. Paul. Venet. The blood helps hunger
and thirst. Theophrast. The cheese with liquorice, will preserve life, an
eleven or twelve days. Aet. The whey of the milk purges the ulcers of the
reins. Some say that the breath preserves from the plague. As for the
description it is needless, they live sometimes to 20. years of age and are
the most salacious of all animalls, after two years of age: It is known by
often pissing, and moving of the tail. They are 12. months in breeding, and
are provoked to venery, a nettle being put into the mouth, or rubbed on the
matrix. Their conception may be known, by the cessation of the menses, and
refusal of the Horse: It Is thought they will bring forth a male if Horsed the
3d. day before the full of the Moon, and a female if 3. days after: Their
noise is called neighing, they beat the ground in their going, they thrust
their noses deep into the Water when they drink, and they are easily
flattered; they observe their enemies, are very docible, of good memory; love
their keepers, and are magnanimous: they love Hens, and bustards; but hate the
Camel, Elephant, Woolf, Bear, Lion, Sow, Sheep, Ass, Serpent, Sea Calf,
Apples, Figs, Gentian, black colors, and dead bodies. Their difference is
according to places, parts, and accidents. Adrov. They or hot.

Hyena. Hyaena.
P. In Africa, Arabia, Caesaria, and Aethiopia. M. Of the flesh of other
Beasts. N. (...). Glanos, Belbus, Arab. Akabo.
Hyena. Gesn. T. the flesh is hot and moist: Gal. V. The oil thereof,
discusseth like that of the Fox, so Aet. Gesn. the flesh boiled with oil,
helps the gout, and pains of the joints caused by cold: being of a thin
substance and diaphoretick: Rhas. Albert. So decoct in water. Plin. Magitians,
used the skin under those that were bitten by a mad Dog. Marcel. Shoes made
thereof help against the gout: that of the head helps the headache, so Plin.
Rhas. Albert: the blood with Barley meal helps the tormina: being taken, and
applied hot it helps the Leprosy. The flesh and liver eaten, help against the
bitings of a mad Dog. The nerves drunk with Wine and frankincense cause
fecundity in those that have been disabled by witchcraft: and the fume thereof
helps the pain of the nerves; so the marrow, and lassitude of the reins,
Democ. Marcel. Plin The marrow of the back, mixed with its gall, and old oil
boiled to the temper and thickness of an Acopon, helps all vices of the
nerves, and pains. Applied it helps against vain species. The fume thereof
drives away Serpents; and it helps the bitings of Dogs being applied. The left
part of the brain being used to the nostrils, helps dangerous diseases, of
man or beasts. The eye taken with licorice and aniseeds, helps sterility in
women. The teeth applied help the pain thereof. The left applied with sheep
skin help the pains of the stomach: the greater being worn help against
fears in the night: the fume helps those that are mad, the breast being
anointed with the fat of the reins or liver. Rhas. Albert. Used to the right
arm, it resists forgetfulness. The jaw taken with aniseed; helps horrors:
the fume of the same draws out the terms of Women. The dried Pallat used
with Alum helps the stink and ulcers of the mouth. The flesh of the neck
being drunk when dried, or eaten helps the pains of the loins. The shoulders
applied, help the pains thereof. The lungs taken in meat help the coeliack.
The heart eaten helps all pains of the Body; as also tremblings, spasmes,
and the palpitation of the heart, the ashes of the same being applied with the
brain: it takes away hair also, so the gall, they being first pulled up. The
fume of the flesh or bones of a man found in the stomach thereof helps the
gout. The kell with oil helps inflammations in ulcers. The ashes of the back
bone, with the tongue, and right foot of a Sea Calfe, and Bulls gall, being
boiled and applied with the skin of an hyena help the gout. The bones of the
back help those that bring forth. The fume of the first and eigth ribb helps
ruptures. The flesh and liver eaten, cure the bitings of a mad Dog. The liver
eaten before the accessions, helps quartans. The sanies of it roasted, with
despumated Honey helps the glaucoma. Diosc. The gall is very effectual. Gal.
It Is used in ocular remedies, as also that of a Cock, Partridg and certain
other creatures; it is also stronger, than that of a Bull which exceeds, the
Hogs, Sheeps, Goats, and Bugils; yet it is inferior to that of the fish called
Callionymus, Sea Scorpion, or Tortise. The gall applied after evulsion
hinders the grouth of hair, so Marcel. and Gal. Also it sharpeneth the
sight, and discusseth the beginnings of suffusions, with Honey: Plin. And white
spots in the eyes: Marcel. Some add that of Bears to it. Applied to the
forehead it helps bleare eyes with Honey, and saffron: Also it helps the
argema, roughness, excrescencies, and cicatrices therein. Marcel. Used to the
forehead it helps all pains of the eyes. Rhas. Albert. That of the male bound
to the left thigh of any one causes coiture: drach. 1. thereof drunk with the
decoction of spikenard helps the tympany: the membrane thereof, drunk in Wine
by those that are cardiack, helps the same. With the Asian stone it helps the
gout. The spleen helps the spleen. The flesh with oil, sc. that of the
loins, helps the loins. The fume of the fat, hastens delivery. The bladder
drunk in Wine, stops the urine. The womb with the bark of the sweet
Pomegranate, helps the womb. The fume of the genitall helps the spasme. The
substance taken with Honey causes venery. The feet applied, help the bleared
eyes, ruptures, and inflations. The dried dung drunk, helps the dysentery:
and applied with Goose grease helps the whole Body, hurt by evil remedies.
This as also that of an Hog may be put into plasters against the bitings of a
Crocodile, Hieron. Vincent. Bell. It cures putrid wounds. Tops. as for the
description, they are about the bigness of a Woolfe; but rougher haired,
having bristles along the back like a Horses mane; the middle of the back is
dented: the color yellowish; but speckled on both sides with blew spots, which
cause him to look terribly. Their eyes change their color at the pleasure of
the beast. They see best in the night. The neck cannot bend except the whole
Body be turned about. Their heart is great, and the genital like a Dogg's. They
procreate with Dogs, Lions, Tigers, and Woolves. Their teeth are like Sawes.
The female is most subtle: she counterfeits man's voice, etc. in the night, and
so gets a prey. They are enemies to the Pardal.

I.
Ibex. Ibex.
P. They are bred in the Alps, in Clifts. M. Of Herbs as other Beasts. N.
(...). Heb. Ako. Arab. Ohal. Aegoceros.
IBex. T. the flesh is not mentioned as to use. Gesn. V. the blood helps the
stone in apiate Wine, taken thrice in a day. Marcel. The dung with Pepper,
Honey, and old Wine, helps the sciatica, and joint aches. The curd is like that
of the Hare. So Serapio. and Jonston, etc. Tops. Against the stone, one part of
the blood is used with 6. parts of the aforesaid Wine, and Honey, and so made
luke warm, using a bath at noon and in the evening after it, for three days
together. As for their description, the neck and hair is like a bucks, with a
beard under the chin; the Horns are 16. palms long bending backwards: in other
parts the Body resembles the hearts. They are very swift, and of incredible
agility in leaping: if they fall they couch their Bodies, betwixt their horns.
They love cold, and otherwise would be blind. Their color is yellowish, and
the hoof cloven like a Goats. Hunters drive them to the smooth rocks. They
copulate by standing on their hinder legs, and leap on the hunters: their
horns serve for bows.

Ichneumon. Ichneumon.
P. In Egypt, near Nilus, and other places. M. Of Mice, Serpents, Snailes,
Lizards, and Birds, etc. N. (...). Mus Pharaonis, Indicus, Lutra Aeg.
Ichneumon. T. the flesh is not used. Aegin. Avic. V. the fume of the hairs,
helps against worms. Gal. The dung may be used in steed of the Cats. Marcel.
The urine with the milk of a black heifer, presently helps the colic. Jonst.
The ashes of the skin steeped in vinegar, help against the bitings of
Serpents, men being anointed there with. As for the description, he is of the
bigness of a Cat, but longer, haired like a Woolf, and nosed like a Hog, with
short round ears, and black legs, with 5. toes in the hinder. He is long
tailed, with testicles, tongue and teeth like a Cat. He is an enemy to the
Crocodile, breaking the eggs when finding them: It hates the Asp, and all
kinds of Serpents, and the wind. He bends together like the urtchin, to defend
from cold: he sets up the hair, when seeing any creature, and sets upon all,
with the rest: and the Asp when dirty.

K.
Kid. Hoedus.
P. Almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of milk, after of shrubbs, etc. N.
(...). Heb. Gedi. and Arab.
KId. Gal. T. it is next to Hogs flesh in goodness, Avic. it is less
excrementitious than that of Rams. It is temperate, easily concocted, meanly
nourishes and begets thin and moist blood; it helps those that are of a
hot and dry temperament. Plin. The lungs prevent drunkenness. The flesh is
best in the Summer. As for the dressing thereof: it may be seen in Apicius and
Platina. V. Gesn. The flesh applied warm helps the bitings of Serpents. The
fume of the hair drives away Serpents. Plin. The fresh skin helps stripes.
The fume of the hairs helps the womb. Gal. The broth made of the flesh,
helps the quinsey, and inflammation of the tonsills. Diosc. The dry blood is
very profitable in antidotes: Plin. It helps against poison. Drunk warm with
vinegar it helps the spiting of blood. It is used against the coeliack and
dysentery. Gal. The fat is less hot and dry, than that of Goats. The French
make a pomatum thereof with camfire and rose water against chaps of the lips,
and to defend Women's faces from the Sun. Some add musk, gum dragant, ceruse,
and Goats milk, with cloves: And it is then of the nature of the unguentum album
camphoratum. Some add washed lime, Goose grease, hearts marrow, onions, and
rosin for the same purpose. Plin. The ashes of the thighs, help the ruptures of
the intestines, stop blood, and cure biles with Women's milk. Marcel. The curd
is next to that of the hind, or hare. Diosc. It Is equal to that of the Hare,
being drunk, in wine against aconite; and coagulated milk in vinegar. See Hare.
Hal. drunk it helps against toadstooles: Plin. And misseltoe, white Chameleon,
and Bulls blood: and all bitings or wounds of all Sea creatures drach. 1. being
drunk in Wine. It helps the spitting of blood, so with vinegar. Marcel. The q.
of a bean taken in myrtle wine fasting, helps the coeliack, Plin. And the
dysentery. Gal. With vinegar it helps the fluxes of Women. Sym. Seth. The lungs
preserve from drunkenness. Marcel. The ashes thereof help itchings of the
eyes, and rough eyebrows, being applied as stibium. Plin The ashes of the
bladder help the incontinency of urine. The spleen applied helps the pain
thereof, Marcel. And swellings in Children. Some adulterate euphorbium with the
milk of a Kid; but it may be known, by its ill savor when burned. Tops. If
they keep together they show a storm at hand, else fair weather, and when they
leap and jump. If geese swallow their hairs they dye thereof. They are not to
be separated from their dams till 3. months old, they are then to be fed with
milk, three leaved grass, ivy, and the tops of lentils, tender leaves, or
small twigges of trees. The hide serves to make glue of: and the hair to
stuff beds withal. The red or sandy colored are the best; but their flesh is
hurtful to the colic, else they are wholesome fod, roasted, or baked.

L.
Lamb. Agnus.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of milk first, then on
grass, as the sheep. N. (...). Heb. Kebes. Adasia. Bidens.
LAmb. Crescent. T. the flesh, is good, when taken from the dam. Platin. It is
more humid, than hot; but that of a weather is temperate. Gal. Amongst land
fourefooted Beasts, the flesh of Hogs is best, then the Kids, and lastly the
Lambs; which is moist and mucous, causing phlegm; but the sheep, is more
excrementitious, and of worse juice. Here Note that the flesh of all of them
when newly brought forth, is mucous; but especially the Lamb and Pigges. See
Ram, and Sheep. Their flesh is moderately hot, and superfluously moist, and
therefore hurts those who are of a moist temper; but helps those that are
more dry: Also the younger it is the moister it is also, and more hardly
concocted; so in other creatures, so Sym. Seth. and by its lubricity it quickly
passes out of the stomach. See weather. It is good meat for those that are
strong and in health; but for those that are sick it is bad, for though it
quickly passes out of the stomach; yet by reason of its viscous humor, it
sticks too tenaciously in the parts. Athen. It is soon corrupted, by reason
of its fatness; so Swines flesh. V. Aet. The flesh of a Lamb applied warm,
after cupping glasses, helps venomous bitings, so that of other small and
young creatures; as that of Hens, Kids, and Pigges. Marcel. The decoction of
one that has a white head applied, helps baldness. Avic. unc. 1. of the blood
mixed with vinegar, and drunk 3. days helps the vomiting of blood, so that
of a Kid. It helps the Epilepsy with Wine, so Avic. Yet Gesner denies it;
antepilepticks, having a^tmetick, or inciding faculty. Aet. With fat, the curd
of a Goat, Kid, Hare, and the gall, together with Hearts marrow, and oil of
roses and spike, being used to the matrix after purgation, it causes
conception. Plin. The grease applied with the slough of a Serpent water and
bitumen, helps St. Anthonies fire; yet some affirm it of the Bears fat.
Rhas. The marrow melted at the fire, with oil of nuts, and white sugar, being
drunk, dissolveth the stone of the bladder, and helps pissing of blood,
Albert. As also pains of the genital, bladder and reins. Aet. The skin
spread with pitch, and applied to the belly helps the dysentery with
coldness. R. Mos. A garment made of the skins, strengthens the Body of
young men. They heat more than those of Goats, and are better for the back and
reins. Marcel. The ashes of the Bones cure ulcers, that will not easily be
cicatrized. Gal. Plin. The lungs help gallings by the shoe: Diosc. And keep
them from in flammation. Marcel. The ashes of the same with oil help the
ulcers of Kibes. Plin. The curd of a Lamb resists all evil medicaments, and
poison. Drunk in Wine it helps against aconite, and curdled milk with vinegar,
so Diosc. Avic: it helps all venomous bitings, and those of all marine
creatures drach. 1. being drunk in Wine, so that of an Hare or Kid. Plin. Drunk
in Wine it helps the bitings of the shrew. Drunk in water it helps the
curdling of the milk in the stomachs of infants: Plin. And the vices thereof,
with vinegar. Injected into the nostrils with water, it stops its bleedings.
See Kidde. Plin. Samon. the gall with honey helps the Epilepsy. Albert. Applied
it helps Cancers. Plin. The blood that issues out after gelding, applied
hinders the grouth of hair, after evulsion thereof: The decoction of the
feet, helps the pains of the bladder. The dung before they eat grass,
being dried and applied plaster wise, helps the pain of the uvula and jaws,
so Marcel. Schrod. the wool with the skin helps the quinsey, and other
swellings in the neck, being applied. Tops. They know the voice of their dammes
though amongst a 1000 Sheep, and the Sheep them by smelling on their back
parts. They wagge the tail whilst sucking. If they suck not their mothers
their lips are to be anointed with butter or Hogs grease and milk. Salt is to
be given to them after eaning; but the first are not to be nourished. The best
are bred in the spring: and ivy preserves them.

Linx. Lynx.
P. In Europe, America, Lithuania, and Polonia, etc. M. Of the flesh of beasts,
Cats, and chiefly the brains. N. (...). Lupus Cervarius. Oxyderches.
Linx. T. The flesh is not yet used. V. Schrod. The fat helps the resolution
of the sinews, convulsions, and luxations. The claw is usually put into silver
or gold, against the falling sickness or spasme. Gesn. The ashes of the claws
with that of the skin, being applied help luxury in man or woman. The urine
helps the loss of the same in man: Plin. As also the pain in the throat.
Their claws are thought to help the spasme by signature. Plin. He hides the
urine, being medicinal, which after turns into a stone, called lyncurius,
(see my Pammineralogie) which being drunk is said to expel the stone, and to
help the jaundise. Solin. It helps the pains of the reins. Jonst. Weck. The
ointment of the fatt, expels the stone. Crollius makes a salt of the stone
and crabs eyes. Euonimus mixes lithontriptick herbs with the blood thereof to
wast the stone. As for the description, their head is little, eyes shining, and
countenance courageous. They have teats in their breasts, and spots on their
skin which is about three foot long, the hair is soft with a kind of a
down; the ends of the hair on the back are whitish, to the midst of the belly:
the ears are little and squarish, the beard is of white hairs, like a cats;
the feet are shagged, with five toes before, and four behind. The crunium has
three futures, the teeth are twenty. They generate like dogs, and bring forth
two or three. Their sight exceeds that of all other animals; therefore they are
said to see through solid bodies. They are very swift, and forget their prey if
they look back; and are rough in the winter.

Lion. Leo.
P. In Mauritania, Parthia, Getulia, and Syria, etc. M. Of the flesh of men,
beasts, or birds. N. (...). Heb. Ari. Arab. Asad. Pers. Gehad.
Lion. Albert. Isaac. T. The flesh is hotter than that of other creatures,
gross, and slowly digested; causing pain, torsion, and inflation. Plin.
Solin. The Agriophagi in Egypt eat the flesh, as also that of Panthers. Rhas.
Note, the flesh of all rapacious creatures inclines to dryness, and easily
generates melancholic blood in the body; but of all the rest that of Woolfes
and Dogs is most condemned, causing corrupt humors. V. Rhas. Albert. The blood
of a Lion rubbed on a cancer, cures the same. Sext. The blood rubbed on the
body defends it from all beasts; but Pliny attributes the same to the fatt.
Sext. The flesh eaten defends from fancies. Aesculap. it helps all pains,
Albert. and the palsy. Gal. Shoes made of the skin help the pain of the
feet. Aesculap. Being sat upon it helps the hemorrhoids. Diosc. The fatt is
to be prepared as that of Bulls, and is the hortest of all, and grows more
hot by keeping, and digesteth more than that of other fourefooted beasts; being
more hot and of thinner parts; therefore it hurts ulcers and phlegmons; but
helps old tumors, scirrhus's and spasmes. That of the Bull is so much less
hot, than the Lions, as it is more hott than the Swines; so also in dryness,
so Gal. the fatt resists poison; used with wine it expels evil beasts, and
the smell drives away Serpents. Aesculap. The fatt of the reins used to the
body drives away Woolfs, Rhas. and flies. Plin. With oil of roses, it
preserves the skin of the face, causes whiteness, and helps snow
burnings, and pains of the joints. Albert. mixed with unguents it remooveth
spots of the face, which others affirm of the dung. Sext. The fatt eases all
pains, as also that of the nerves and knees, being mixed with Hearts marrow and
lettuce. Plin. With oil of roses it helps quotidian fevers. Sext. Being
dropped into the ears it helps the pains thereof: Marcel. and the tonsils
being anointed therewith. Being injected into the body in a clyster, it helps
the dysentery. With the gall it helps the epilepsy. The brain eaten causes
madness; and dropped into the ear with oil it helps deafness. Rhas. The
dog tooth of a Lion hung about the neck of a child, preventeth the toothach.
Plin. The heart eaten helps quartans. Albert. The liver drunk in wine,
helps the pain of the liver. Bertrut. The gall drunk causes present death;
though some attribute it to that of the Leopard. With water it clears the
eyes; and with the fatt it helps the epilepsy, being tasted. Albert. A little
drunk, cures the jaundise. Gal. With honey it helps the ulcers and white spots
in the eyes. Used in a pessary it causes conception. Albert. The testicle
taken with roses causes sterility. Aristot. Their bitings and wounds are
cured, as those of dogs, that are mad, and Woolfs. sc. By scarification,
washing with vinegar, taking out the splinters; and applying plasters, to
suppurate, purge, and cicatrize, as Aetius informs. Jonst. The powder of the
heart helps the epilepsy. The fatt helps kibes. The powder of the bones drunk
with agrimony water cures simple fevers. As for the description he has a
mean head, square forehead, high eyebrowes, eyes not very voluble or prominent,
nose thick, jaws equal, wide mouth, neck large and thick, breast strong,
metaphren broad, and the middle of the belly narrow, legs strong and nervous,
hair yellow and crisped, with five toes in the foremost feet, and four in the
hinder. The Lioness is smooth and teated, the bowels are like the Dogs, the
spleen black, the marrow in the bones is little. Their temper is most hot and
dry, by reason of the heat of the heart. They drink little. They generate with
the Panther, Leopard and Hyena, sc. the Lioness; and with the Dog. They bring
forth after six months, and six young ones at once. They love the Dolphin; and
hate the privities of a Woman, bristles of Hoggs, wild Ass, Bull, and Ape.
They look on the earth that they may not fear the hunter. They sleep with the
eyes open, wagging the tail. Their noise is hideous. They will oppose a
multitude of opposites: and run only when not seen, drawing in their nails.
They are taken in pits.

M.
Mole. Talpa.
P. Almost every where in pastures, and other places. M. Of Worms, earth, and
roots of herbs, etc. N. (...). Arab. Pelagoz. Mus terrenus.
MOle. T. The flesh is not used in meat. Plin. V. They help the bitings of the
shrew; so applied, so Plin. Valor. Hal. They help the wounds of Scorpions.
Sext. Applied they help glanduls. Arnold. Olivar. Their excrements with honey
help the kings evil. Furner. The water in which they have been soaked till the
hairs come off, used twice or thrice, takes away hair. Ruf. The oil in
which they have been boiled, till dissolved, causes grouth of the same in
horses. The lie in which they have been often boiled used warm, causes white
hairs in horses. Anon. So the fatt after long boiling. The ashes applied with
the white of an egg to leprouse parts, help the same, so Albert. Olivar. So
with oil or honey. Plin. Marcel. The ashes with honey help the Kings evil:
Vincent. And the fistula: Sext. Also it fastens the teeth. The blood causes
hair on a bald head, so Albert. Anon. applied with paper it helps the
paronychia. Plin. Applied it helps the lymphatick. The earth he casts up with
the head helps wens and impostumes, so the liver. The tooth helps the teeth.
Schrod. The ashes of a mole or want taken inwardly with beer or wine help the
running gout. The D. is scrup. sem. daily. The heart helps the rupture, one
being taken at a time for three or four days. Jonst. The ashes help
fistula's: They have little sight, but excellent hearing. Their description is
needless. Tops. Usually they have a black dusky color: when they digg after
worms they creep out of the earth to avoid them. In July they run upon the
earth to seek food, worms then being scant. Their enemies are Weafels, and Wild
Catts. They may be taken by fastening pikes over the places where they work,
with a bridge. They are killed by putting white hellebore and hemlock into the
holes: also burn sulphur to drive them away.

Mouse. Mus.
P. Almost every where, in houses and barnes, etc. M. Of bread, cheese, corn,
and tallow, etc. N. (...). Heb. Achar. Arab. Phir. Chald. Acbe.
Mouse. Arnold. T. The flesh eaten causes oblivion, and corrupts the meat;
yet those of Calechut eat them; it is hot, soft and fattish, and expels
melancholy, so Rhas. and Albert. yet Gesner doubts therein. V. Plin. A Mouse
dissected and applied, draws out reeds, darts, and other things that stick in
the flesh. So Marcel. After being flead: and helps the wounds of Serpents.
Diosc. Gal. Avic. Rhas. Albert. The same helps the wounds of Scorpions. Plin.
Applied fresh it helps the bitings of the shrew; as also it self applied. It
kills warts, so Rhas. and Albert. Some use the fatt thereof roasted in a Goose
against the scirrhus. Young Mice bruised, and reduced to the consistence of an
acopon with old wine, cause hair on the eyebrows. Diosc. Rhas. Avic. Albert.
being eaten by children when roasted, they dry up their spittle. Plin. The
Magicians eat them twice in a month against the pains of the teeth. Marcel.
The water in which they have been boiled helps against the quinsey. Plin. So
boiled with vervain. Boiled with oil and salt, they help the vices of the
lungs, and spitting of blood. Being boiled and eaten, they help childrens
pissing in bed: Seren. So the ashes with wine or Goats milk. Being dissected
and applied they help the gout. Plin. The ashes help burnings, Marcel. and the
falling off of the hair, with that of cypress balls, the hoose of a Mule,
myrtle oil, that of a hedg-hog, sandaracha, vinegar, and tar: the same with
oil help the tetter. Archig. Applied daily plaister-wise with axunge, it
helps the alopecia, being first rubbed with garlic, Rhasis and Albertus add
oil of bays. Galen uses them with honey and Bears grease. And Heraclides,
with those of hair cloth, and of Horse teeth, with hearts marrow, reeds
powdered, and honey. Plin. tho ashes dropped into the ears, with honey or oil
of roses help the pains of the ears. Marcel. Plin. With honey rubbed on the
teeth, they sweeten the breath; but some add the roots of fennel Gal. The
flesh stamped with the yolk of an egg, to the consistence of a ceror, and
applied with a linen cloth, helps the carnose inflammation of the cornea.
Plin. Marcel. Gal. Avic. The fresh blood kills warts. Gal. With the gall of a
Cock, and Women's milk an. it mightily helps suffusions. Plin. The ashes of
the skin, applied with vinegar help the pains of the head. Rhas: Albert. The
head worn in a cloth, helps the headache and epilepsy. Gal. The ashes of the
head with honey help the alopecia. Some use them with hellebore and pepper
after cantharides, tar, and nitre; as also flies torrified. Sext. The ashes
with honey used ten days, clear the eyes. With that of a hare, and spikenard,
they sweeten the breath. Marcel. The brain being steeped in wine, and applied
to the forehead helps the headache. Used with water it cures the phrensey.
Sext. The heart taken out of a Mouse when alive, worn about the arm of a
Woman, causes no conception. Seren. The fillet of the liver drunk with austere
wine helps quartans. Gal. The liver roasted in the new of the moon tries the
epilepsy. Plin. Marcel. Seren. The gall with vinegar dropped into the ear,
brings out living creatures in the ear. Plin. The dung is corrosive. Aet. It
is mixed with remedies against ringworms. Plin. With vinegar it helps lichens
in the face, being first fomented with nitre and vinegar. Marcel. So it helps
tettars. Myreps. With earthworms, white pepper; and myrrh an. unc. sem. mixed
with vinegar, and applied it helps the hemicrania. Plin. With frankincense
and sandaracha it discusseth the pani. Marcel. Seven of the pills applied to
the forehead or temples, with vinegar, help the pain thereof: Marcel. Stamped
with the herb strumus, and applied to the forehead with vinegar, it presently
helps the pain of the hemicrania. With vinegar it helps scurfe. Plin. Var It
helps the alopecia. Diosc. So with vinegar, so Asclep. and Gal. some add tar
also. Rhas. Albert. Some add the juice of rocket, cresses, onions or garlic.
Avic. And honey, Gal. and frankincense, white hellebore, and pepper, with
tosted barley. Applied with that of a Goat and honey they help bald eyebrows.
Plin. Seren. With rain water it helps the swellings of Women's teats, after
child birth. Marcel. Given in any liquour it helps the colic. Vincent. Bell.
It looseneth the body: Therefore some nurses use it for children, in
suppositories, so Diosc. to which some add salt, oil, or honey. Marcel. Drunk
with wine it helps the hip-gout. Diosc. With frankincense, and mulse it
expels the stone. Avic. So with the water of honey. Plin. So applied. Avic.
The fume of the decoction helps the difficulty of urine. Plin. Applied it
hinders venery in men. Hippocrates makes a pessary thereof to bring out the
foetus dead or putrified in the womb. Avic. The ashes with honey help the
alopecia. Gal. It helps the morphew. Plin. With that of flies, an. with stibium
and oesipus, they cause hair on the eyebrows. Plin. Seren. It helps hollow
teeth being put therein. Plin. And the diseases of the fundament. Arnold. The
urine corrodeth even to the bones, so Albert. Yet some attribute it to that of
the Ratt. Diosc. The bitings of Mice are helped, by green figgs, and garlic,
so Plin. Arnold. they hurt rather by their biting; than by their poison.
Schrod. The fatt helps the nerves, contractions, and cold. Jonst. They are
often generated out of the filth in houses. They are enemies to elaterium,
squils, coloquintida, Weasels, Hawks, and Catts, etc. And friends to marjerom,
the roots of which they eat when sick. They hear quickly, and hate light in
the night, if in the water they hang by one an others tails that they may be
drawn out. Their difference is according to magnitude, color, hair, smell and
place. Gesn. The ventricle of the Alpin mouse helps the colic being applied:
some use that fatt in septicks, and ointments against the malignant ulcers in
Horses, and worms, with things that dry. Matthew. The same mollifieth the
nerves, and helps contractions. The flesh helps the womb; yet its hot and
hardly digested.

Mule. Mulus.
P. In Capadocia, Persia, and Babylon, etc. M. Of herbs and fruits, as also
grain. N. (...). Heb. Pered. Arab. Beal.
Mule. Aldrov. Plin. T. V. Some affirm that the dust in which a mule has
tumbled, helps the desire of love, being sprinkled on the body. Ponzet. The
infection by poison may be helped by putting the patient into the belly of a
Mule or Camel newly killed, the heat thereof resolving the poison, and
strenghtening the spirits and all the parts. The ashes of the skin and the
like, applied help parts burned by fire, they heat ulcers without impostumes,
and help the gallings of the feet, and hips, as also fistula's. Rhas. Albert.
The marrow makes stupid. Aldrovand. The parts cause sterility. The dry heart
sprinkled with wine and drunk, after purgation, hinders conception: Albert,
so the testicles worn in the skin of the same. Diosc. The ashes cause
sterility in virgins. So the reins drunk with the bark of white poplar, as
also the matrix boiled with flesh and eaten; and the excrements of the ears,
taken alone or with castoreum: or the urine drunk with assa foetida, and the
sweat used with wool in a pessary, as also the skin and ears, are all atocia
together with the herb called hemionos. Plin. The hairs of the tail cause
conception. The ashes of the skin help adustions, and heat ulcers, without
impostumes: also they help gallings of the feet, hips, and fistula's. Plin. The
ashes of the hoofes with myrtle oil help the alopecia; Marcellus adds
vinegar and tar, Sewtus uses the liver in steed thereof, with the aforesaid
oil, and the ashes of the cones of cypress; so Matthew. Marcel. the ashes of the
hoof help the vices of the privities. Marcel. The dung drunk with oxymel
helps the spleen, and eases the pain. Hippoc. The ashes of the same drunk
with wine help fluxes of the womb. Aegineta makes a remedy of the urine
against the gout. Plin. Applied with the dung it helps corns. The lichens
drunk in oxymel help the epilepsy. Marcel. The foame of the mouth drunk in
warm water helps shortness of breath. So Aldrov. Gesn. Their bitings, are
cured as those of the Cat, and to be fomented with the decoction of nep.
Schrod. The fume of the hoof stops the menses.

Musk-catt. Moschius.
P. In China, Africa, Egypt, Cathai, and Pegu. M. Of sweet things, as
spicknard, etc. N. Moschi Capreolus. Dorcas Moschi. Gazella Ind.
Musk-catt. Schrod. T. Musk is hot 2. dry 3. it does attenuate, discuss, and
is cordial, alexipharmick and cephalic. V. It Is used chiefly in all
affections of the heart, as the palpitation thereof, drunk or applied, it
cherishing the vital spirits, exalting and recreating the same: therefore it is
good in diseases of the head and nerves, caused by cold, and thick humors, it
is also very good in the colic, etc. Outwardly it extenuats thin wefts in the
eyes, and dries up humid defluxions. It provokes to venery, and helps
hearing, being put into the cares with cotton. The D. is gr. 4. or 5. H. By
reason of its sweetness it attracteth the womb, and therefore it is not to be
given to Women: sc. those that are troubled with the rising of the mother; but
it may then be applied to the privities, with good success. Hereof is made the
species diamoschu dulce and amarum in the London Dispensatory, and musked oil:
Gesn. Sym. Seth. Constantin. Musk is hot and dry 3, and of thin parts. It
heateth also, applied outwardly. So Brasav. Its dryness appears by its
excess in odor, this having its foundation in siccity; yet it has many humid
parts, with a thick moisture, so Aristot. Constant. it is agreeable to old men
in the winter. Platear. It dissolveth and consumes. Mon. in Mes. a small
quantity thereof is of great efficacy, and therefore it is put sparingly into
medicines, and then not stamped, but being first dissolved in rosewater, etc.
Avic. It is a theriaca against poisons, especially napellus. Sym. Seth. etc. It
strengthens weak parts. Sylv. Aet. It Is used therefore in analeprick remedies.
Sym. It helps against lipothymie, and weakness. It strengthens the liver,
and helps the pain of the stomach caused by cold, being given with wine, or
diamargariton, or pleres archonticon, in the aforesaid dose, so Platear and
Isid. It strengthens the heart and all the bowels applied as a cataplasme; it
strengthens all the members, yea even the very bones, as some affirm: applied
it helps the heaviness of the head, and vertigo caused by the abundance of
humors, and causes sleep, Avic. Aver. It strengthens the heart, and
exhilerateth. Sym. It helps those that are cardiack. Avic. It helps the
trembling of the heart, and the temperate brain. Sym. It helps the head when
cold, but hurts it when hot, Rhas. causing the headache, Sylv. and epilepsy,
Brasav. and suffocation of the womb: Also it causes heaviness and repletion,
and headache. It heateth and dries the brain; but strengthens it with
sternutatories. Constantin. Used in ptarmicks it helps the palsy. Mesarug.
It helps the soda (that is an old head ach,) followed by great humidity. With
saffron and a little camphire it helps the cold soda: As also musk used alone
by reason of its resolving and confirming faculty, so Avic. it helps
stupefaction in the body, and deasenesse. Avic. Aver. It helps the careful
melancholy. Constant, It expels melancholic fear, and makes courageous. It Is
used in collyries and dry ocular remedies, cleansing white spots, drying up
noxious humors, and strengthening the eyes, so Avic. Rhas. it helps
nauseousnesse and the appetite. Aver. It dissolveth thick flatulencies in the
intestines: and helps the suffocation of the womb. ( sc. being applied
downwards.) So Platear. sc. the fume: applied to the nostrils it helps the
precipitation thereof. To bring forth the menses, and cause conception hindered
by a cold cause, it may be used downwards with triphera magna, as also a
pessary made of styrax calamita, amber and this; so cotton, with moscheline
oil and musk. Also it has a certain humidity, causing coiture, especially
applied to the yard, with the oil of Palma Christi: Brasav. or in Women
anointed on the colon. therefore, (it being aphrodisiastick) some use it in
diasatyrion. Platear. Being eaten it palliats the stink of the mouth, so
moschardins: and the smell of the armeholes, they being rubbed therewith.
Jonst. Mercurial. Applied to the nostrils it draws forth blood, it opening
the nostrils; but it is much used in analepticks, tremblings, sweet balls,
flatulencies, the syncope, fumes, smegma's, trageas, and ointments. Schrod. As
for the description they are not much unlike Goats. As for the musk it is an
excrement contained in an impostume, about the navil, produced in the time of
venery, which by reason of the pain, they rub against stones or roots of
trees, and so break it that the sanies may run forth, which then sticks to
the same, and by reason of a further elaboration by the Sun, it becoms most
sweet musk. Some also cut off the vomice and hang it in the Sun; but this is
more immature, and worse. C. Platear. The best is of a spikenard color.
Brasav. The sweetest is the blackish. Jonst. It may be adulterated many ways,
especially the black and reddish, sc. with four parts of Goats blood, to one
thereof, Alex. Benedict. Or with a Kids liver, Gesn. or the root of angelica.
Some feign a vessicle and so fill it, seasoning it with musk, but this is twice
so heavy as the true, and is sooner softened in water. Some adulterate it with
nutmegs, cinnamon, cloves, and spikenard an With musked rose water, or benjamin,
storax and Ladanum. Its scent is recovered by hanging it in a jakes, and is
kept in glasses.

O.
Oryx. Oryx.
P. In Lybia and in Egypt, also in other places. M. As of the wild Goats. N.
(...). Orynx. Orix. (...). Oxyceros.
ORyx. Jonst. T. V. The water in which their horns have been infused certain
days being drunk, helps those that have been bitten by a venomous fish, or
beast. Tops. As for the description it differs little from that of wild
Goats, but only that the hair grows averse. In quantity it is like the Roe.
The horns are upright, black, and so sharp that they pierce brass or iron,
Herrod. Pol. Laur. Val. and serve to make musical instruments of. They are
accounted enemies to the rising of the Sun or Moon; and love the little dog
Star, cold and rain then passing away. When they see a Boar, Bear, or Lion,
they bend their horns to the earth, till the assault be made, and so goare the
beasts, so that they forget the combat licking up their own blood. They fight
till victors or overcome, they fight with all beasts, and kill one an other.
It Is said to be always thirsty, yet having a bladder in it that quenches
thirst in others. They are taken by snares.

Otter. Lutra.
P. Often in Europe, as in England by rivers. M. Of fishes, tops of plants,
fruits, and barks. N. (...). Canis fluviatilis. (...).
Otter. Gesn. Albert. T. The flesh is cold and foetid; Hier. Trag. yet some eat
them in Germany. V. Aelian. The blood mixed with vinegar and water, helps
swellings of the nerves. Shoes made of the skin, are very good for the
sinews: Aet. And mightily help pains thereof, and of the feet: Pliny
attributes the same to that of the Beaver. Albert. The skin helps against the
palsy. Her. So caps made thereof; as also the vertigo, and pain of the head.
Gesn. The liver baked helps the dysentery. Hermol. The testicles help the
epilepsy, and have the virtue of Castoreum, so Aet. But are less effectual, so
Brasav. Herodot. They are useful in remedies for the womb, or to help the
matrix. Jonst. The flesh is gross and pituitous. Holler. The fat, the body
being stuffed, with digestive remedies, and roasted, helps the pain of the
nerves. Stools covered with the skin help the hemorrhoids: they breath often
after diving, and smell fish far, and fish-pools. As for the description he is
more long and slender than the Beaver, headed like a Dog, toothed like a
hound, and eared like the Beaver, with a long tail; legged like a Fox, short
haired, and of a chestnut color.

Ounce. Vncia.
P. They are bred in Lybia, and other places. M. It lives upon flesh. N.
Vnzia. Vnctia, Lozanum Tops.
Ounce. Tops. T. V. the gall is deadly poison; it hates all creatures and
destroys them, especially men: and loves none but it is own kind. Dr. Cay,
as for the description, it is most cruel, and of the bigness of a mastiue
Dog: with a face and ears like a Lion; Body, tail, feet, and nails like a
Cat; a terrible aspect, teeth so sharp that they can cut wood, and strong
nails for defense, and betwixt an oak and ash color with black spots. They
fight at the head.

Panther. Panthera.
P. In Africa, Asia, Pamphylia. and Bengala, etc. M. Of Flesh, especially of
Dogs, Apes, and Lambs. N. (...). Leopardus. Pardus. Pardalis.
Panther. Rhas. Albert. T. the flesh is hot and dry: Solin Yet the Agriophagi
of Egypt eat them. Gal. and others. V. Gesn. Some say that the skin of a
Leopard being lain on, drives away Serpents. Sylv. The fat of a Pardall is
hot, and dry, next to that of Lion, and the Bears next to this. Rhas. The sat
of a Leopard is gross and sharp, it is subtlety appears in those that have a
pulse in their temples, and the vertigo, the smell thereof being taken whilst
it is rosting: Albert. Also it helps against the palsy, and palpitation of the
heart. Albert. With oil of bays, it helps the Scab and Ringwormes. The blood
helps the swellings of the veins or varices, being used warm. The flesh is
hot and dry. The brain with the juice of rocket applied to the genital of a
man, causes lust, but the marrow drunk helps the pains of the womb. Bertrat.
The gall of a Leopard drunk does presently kill. Matthew. It presently causes a
vomiting of green and pale choler; as also the smell and taste of aloes in the
nostrils and mouth, and the jaundise. The antidote after vomiting, is of the
earth of Lemnos, and bay berries, an. p. 1. of the curd of a Capreol. p. 3. of
the seed of rue, and Myrrh an. p. sem. made up with honey, the D. is the q. of
a Nut with vomiting, and a sweet bath: It causes all the Symptoms that
Napellus, and the bitings of vipers do, and is so cured. Gesn. The Leopard is
a most hot creature, as may be conjectured from his black spots, and swift
motion: therefore the gall burns the humors by its heat, and kills within
6. hours. Sticking to the muscles of the ventricle it causes spasmes. The
Scythians poison their arrows therewith that they may kill the sooner, so
Ponzet. Matthew. the stone called lingua Serpentis by its sweat shows the gall
of a Leopard, Viper or napellus. So Math. and Upon. Albert. The sixth part of
drach. 1. taken with water, hinders generation and causes sterility. Rhas.
Albert. The right testicle of a Leopard, being drunk by a Woman, though
ancient, causes the menses, and the more, being often used; the same may be
stopped by the fresh seed of fleawort. The remedies against Panthers and
Bears, see in Lion, Avic. They are cured by attraction, and then as other
wounds. Jonst. The fat is cosmetick. As for the description they have a little
face, great mouth, little shining wandering eyes, long forehead, round ears,
long and thin neck, breast with small ribbs, long back, fleshy buttocks and
thighs, various color, and an asymmetrous body. They accompany with the Lion,
Dog, or Woolf, and bring forth many. They hate Men, Serpents and garlic, and
the Hyena.

Porcupine. Hystrix.
P. In all Africa and India, also in Italy and France. M. Of apples, rapes,
pares, parsnips, and bread. N. (...). Arab. Adaldal. Acanthocoiros.
Porcupine. Gesn. T. The flesh, as that of an hedg-hogg, though it be not much
eaten; yet it helps the stomach, looseneth the belly, and helps the leprosy,
and scab; being salted it cures the dropsy, and preventeth pissing in bed, so
Platin. and Plin. also the ashes drunk preserve the birth, and prevent
abortion, so that of an hedg-hogg applied with oil. Jonst. Agric. They have
mouths like the Hare, four long teeth, fore feet like the Baddger, and hinder
like the Bear; on the back and sides diverse colored prickles, partly black
partly white, of two or three hands length, which they erect as the Peacock
does the tail, and ejaculate, when entering into their harbor: And they seek
their prey in the night chiefly. Women use their quils to part their hair,
Pliny uses them to pick the teeth withal, they strengthening the same. They
are terrene or marine as to their differences.

R.
Rainger. Rangifer.
P. In Iapponia, Swecia, Norwegia, and other places. M. Of mountain moss,
leaves, and herbs. N. Reingus. Franc. Raingier. Germ. Rein.
RAinger. Jonst. T. The milk is a domestic nutriment, and the whey serves as
drink. V. the skin serves as a covering for the body and beds, as also to
make bellows of, being tough; the nerves serve in steed of flax to sow withal:
the bones and horns to make bows of. The flesh dried in the smoke lasts
many years. The hoofes help the spasme. The hair serves to stuff cushions
withal. As for the description, their head is like a Calves, the mane like a
Horses, the horns ramous, smooth, slender, longish, and stretched backwards;
in other things considering the proportion, they are like the common Hearts.
Tops. They change their color according to the time of the year, and quality
of the place in which they feed. Their hoof is moveable, which they spread in
the snow and so avid their enemies. They are used to draw when tamed; they go
in herds, and live hardly. The females are without horns, and yield milk.

Ram. Aries.
P. Almost every where, in all countries. M. Of herbs, leaves, hay, and
grains. N. (...). Heb. Ail. Arab. Kabsa. Pers. Nerameish.
Ram. Gesn. T. The flesh in respect of concoction and juice is the worst, next
that of Goats; and the Bulls the worst of all: amongst all which the gelded is
best, and the oldest the worst, so Gal. Avic. that of Goats is less
excrementitious, this is stronger and less excrementitious, this is less
moist than the flesh of Sheep, and harder of concoction. The young are less
humid and viscous, and so better, than that of Lambs or Sheep; for being well
concocted, they generate much and good blood, especially the castrate, being
temperately hot and moist, and therefore of good taste; but it is worst when
old, being then most cold. This is best when of a year old, sc. for young
people, of a hot and dry temperament, and those that live in such countries, so
Isaac. Aet. the lungs powdered are very hardly digested. Arnold. The marrow is
thought to be venomous, and so contrary to man's nature; so that it will destroy
the memory; the antidote is the flesh of a Pheasant. V. Gesn. The skin of a
Ram hot, helps wounds by strokes, and bruises. Arnold. The plaster made
thereof helps ruptures. Plin. The testicles of a cock anointed with Goose
grease, applied therewith hinder venery. The wool washed in cold water and
sprinkled with oil, helps the evil inflammation of the womb, and the fume
helps the falling down of the same, so Sextus. Myreps. the fume of the wool,
that grows betwixt the horns helps the hemicrania. Some use the ashes
thereof with vinegar. Marcel. So against the headache: also the ashes of the
wool mixed with water and applied help the vices of the privities, so Plin.
being new shorn and applied to the hands and feet, it stops bleeding. The
flesh with the broth of coleworts, helps against cantharides: The ashes
thereof help the morphew and ringworms, as also the bitings of Serpents and
Scorpions, and those of a mad Dog with wine. Avic. The same help white spots
in the eyes. Sext. The fatt with sandaracha, helps kibes, mixed with alum;
and the scab without it. Plin. With the ashes of a pumice stone, and a like
quantity of salt, it helps fellons. The lungs help the color of cicatrices,
and the fatt with nitre. Plin. Marcel. The gall with the fatt helps the gout.
Marcel. The ashes of the horns, mixed with oil and applied, after shaving,
curle the hair. Some use the head with aromaticks against folly arising from
the distemper of the brain. Plin. The lungs consume excrescencies in ulcers:
Marcel. So applied warm. Plin. They help the discoloring of cicatrices, so
Sext. And help gallings, Marcel. As also kibes and ruptures of the feet. Sext.
The liquour thereof, applied helps clavicles in the hands or privities. Plin.
The sanies helps ringworms also Aesculap. the liquour of it boiled helps
tertians, and the diseases of the reins. Marcel. It helps kibes applied
crude. Albert. The belly boiled with Wine, and mixed with water, and given to
drink to Sheep, helps the pestilence of the same. Hal. The gall helps the
pain of the ears, caused by cold. Plin. Marcel. With the fat it helps the
gout. Plin. The old testicles, the q. of a penny weight being taken in water or
Asses milk, help the Epilepsy, abstaining from Wine 5. days before and after.
Plin. The ashes of the thighs applied with Women's milk with clean clothes help
biles. The ashes of the claw with honey cure the bitings of a Shrew. Sext. The
Sordes which the Ram has betwixt the thighs, with equal parts of myrrh and
birthwort, drunk help the jaundise, Pliny affirms the same of that of the
ears also. Jonst. the lungs roasted prevent ebriety. Hippoc. the liver helps,
wefts, or blood shotten eyes, blowed in. Tops. The best for breed are the one
colored, tall, straight, large bellied, full of wool, long and rough tailed,
with a broad forehead, large testicles, and broad shoulders and buttocks. They
should be 2. years old before they copulate, and kept apart before the time of
conjunction, being fed with Barley, Onions, Solomon's seal, Satyrion, and salt
water: the fittest time for admission is in October, the cold of the Winter
being then over before the time of ening: they may be kept 8. years for that
purpose; but then they seek the eldest yewes chiefly.

Rat. Sorex.
P. In England, and Spain, and other places. M. Of Bread, Corn, Pulse, Flesh,
Cheese, etc. N. (...). Rattus. Ital. Rato.
Rat. Plin. T. V. the Body being eaten by those that are great, causes black
eyes; so Seren. Plin. The fat helps the palsy, so that of the dormouse. The
ashes with the fat and honey, help the watrings of the eyes. Sext. And being
taken every day clear the eye sight. Marcel. Applied with oil they help
kibes. Tops. Their flesh is far more hot and sharp, than the flesh of the
vulgar Mouse; so it is more likely to expel and dry more. Their excrements also
are of the same virtue. The dung helps the falling off of the hair. They are
most venomous in the time of lust and copulation, the very urine falling upon
a bare place causing a rotting of the flesh; even to the bones: neither will it
suffer any scarre to be made upon the ulcers. They are killed by the same
poisons and meats, that the common mice are killed by, except Woolfs bane which
they vomit up.

Rock-goat. Rupicapra.
P. In Persia, and the East Indies, etc. M. Of Alpish herbs, and the black root
of doronicum. N. (...). Capra Alpina, Montana, and Sylv.
Rock-goat. Jonst. T. the flesh is dry, and of melancholic juice. V. The warm
blood helps the vertigo, so Schrod. the fat taken with milk helps the
phthisick and exulceration of the lungs. The powder of the liver helps the
flux of the belly. The gall cures the weft in the eye, and nyctalops. The dung
wastes and expels the stone. The stone found about the stomach, like that of
Bezoar, of a black color, sweet smell, and of the bigness of a Wallnut:
helps malignant fevers, poisons, and the plague, etc. in so much, that some
call it the German Bezoar. The D. is gr. 15. to 20. and as a prophylactick 4.
or 5. So Casp. Bauh. de lap. Bez. Tops. They are in bigness like the common
Goat, but higher, their color is between brown and red, they are of the first
color in Winter and the last in Summer. Their horns crook backwards to their
shoulders; they leap far, and love their young exceedingly.

Roe-buck. Capreolus.
P. In Africa. Egypt, Germany, Arabia, and Lycia. M. Of fresh pastures, rushes
and bulrushes. N. (...). Heb. Zebi. Capreus. Arab. Gazel.
Roe-buck. Gesn. T. the flesh is better than that of other wild creatures,
being familiar to man's Body, and is fit for humid Bodies, and those that have
many superfluities, as also for the colic, and Epilepsy; but it stops the
belly, and helps the worms by its siccity, so Sym. Seth. Rhas. The flesh
engenders little excrement, being dry, Arab. The nutriment thereof is cold and
dry: as for the cookery thereof, See Platina and Apicius. V. Plin. They are of
the virtues of the tame Goats; but more strong, as also (for the most part)
other wild creatures are, in respect of the domestic. Marcel. The Caprea used
in meat helps the tormina, and dysentery, by drying. Diosc. the curd of the
Dorke, is of the same virtue as that of a Hare. Gal. Drunk with Wine, and
injected with the cremor of rice it helps the coeliack and dysentery. Sext. The
powder of the liver drunk with Wine, and hot water, helps the pains of the
eyes, as also the nyctalops; the ashes applied stop bleeding. Drach. 1. of the
gall mixed with drach. 4. of the meal of Lupines and Honey, applied, clears
the face, though burnt by the Sun, as also freckles: so with Honey, nitre,
the ashes of a sponge, and quick brimstone, reduced unto the consistence of
honey, and applied. Drach. 1. With a little Wine and Honey, helps the dimnesse
of the eyes, cicatrices, white spots, the Nephelion, Glaucoma, and Pterygion,
as also the ruptures of the tunicles, with Woman's milk: and the older it is,
the better, so Sext. with oil of roses or the juice of leekes, dropped warm
into the ears, it helps the ringings and sound thereof. With oil of roses it
helps the toothach, and that of the jaws with honey; and all vices thereof,
with Myrrh, Saffron, and Pepper p. aeq. being boiled in Wine till thick. It
looseneth the belly used as a suppository, with the juice of Sowbread, Anet and
a little Alum, if there be no trouble by the hemorrhoids. With honey or the
juice of brambles, applied, it helps the exulceration of the privities. The
spleen drunk cures the tormina, Plin. and coeliack. Gal. The dung dried and
sifted, taken in the q. of a spoonful in sweet or odoriferous wine fasting,
helps the jaundise, and fevers drunk in water. Schrod. In other parts it
agrees with the Goat; but is more strong, and effectual. Jonst. The blood
with the Sea palm takes away hair, Marcel. and ripeneth abscesses. The gall is
like a treacle against venomous bitings, also it smootheth the cheeks. Tops.
They are somewhat like other bucks, and very swift, their belly has black
strokes, their Body is of a yellowish color, their feet are long; but ears
longer, their eyes are black and horns comely. They swim as with oars,
therefore love Rivers. The horns are only on the Males, and have 6. or 7.
branches: the Femals have none. They live chiefly among the Rocks. They agree
with Hares and Swine; but fear woolfs. They are taken with nets.

S.
Scinck. Scincus.
P. In Arabia, and about Nilus. M. Of Odoriferous flowers. N. (...). Crocodilus
ter. Diosc. minor. Bell.
SCinck. Jonst. T. V. the flesh is used in great antidots against poison, as
the Diascincon. Rhas. The creature being worn by little Children, preventeth
the fear in dreams. Drach. 1. drunk causes venery. The flesh is used in
India against the Elephantiasis, and makes fat. Some use the heart with black
wool against quartans. The gall with honey helps suffusions. The reins
increase sperme. The blood applied with borax helps the spots in the face. The
fat helps the pain of the reins. The ashes of the skin are cast upon parts
to be cut, to hinder the sense of pain. Aegineta uses the tail in the
ointment called entaticon. The fume of the intestines, helps those that are
hysterical. Serapio makes an antepileptick remedy of the dung. Plin. The same
cleanses spots in the eyes: C. The best is white. They lay eggs, which breed.
They may be seen at the apothecaties shops.

Seahorse. Hippopotamos.
P. In Egypt, and Gofala: in the Sea, and on Land. M. Of Corn, and Grass. N.
(...). Equus Niloticus, Bos, Porcus, Elephas mar.
Seahorse. Jonst. T. they are eaten by the Aethiopians. V. Colemn. The tooth
worn, or a ring thereof, helps the hemmorrhoids. Plin. And eases the
toothach. The fat helps against the rigor in agnes. The ashes of the skin
applied with water, dissolve spots. The skin of the forehead applied to the
groin hinders venery. Diosc. The testicles dried help against the bitings of
Serpents. Their fat used defends from Crocodiles. The skin defends from
lightning. Plin. The skin is so thick, that spears may be made thereof. As
for their description their belly is plain, the legs 3. foot long, or more,
and of the same compass, the foot is a foot broad, the head 2. foot and a half
broad, 3. foot long and 7. foot about, the wideness of the mouth 1. foot, with
little eyes, one inch broad, and 2. long, the ears 3. inches, the body fat,
with claws like a Cow; but quadrifide, tail like a Bear, and nose like a Lion.

Sheep. Ovis.
P. Almost every where, in all Countries. M. Of Grass, Hay, Leaves, and Grain.
N. (...). Heb. Zon. Pecus.
Sheep. Gal. T. the flesh is of worse juice than that of the Hare, or Lamb, and
more excrementitious; it is best in spring. Sym. Seth. Beef compared
therewith, is cold, and of melancholic juice, it is best of a year old,
afterward it is hardly concocted, and hurts those that have a moist and
pituitous stomach. It Is good for Women, that have ulcerated wombs, so Hippoc.
Crescent. It Is too moist. Muff. The best mutton exceeds not above 3. or 4.
years in age, and that is taken from a short and dry feeding, and then may be
sodden with buglosse, borrage and parsely roots. It is worse than the flesh of
weathers, being too excrementitious, and soon corrupted, so that of Rams,
being too hot and dry. Crescent. The milk yields wholesome nourishment, and is
so much the better when newer, and more nourishing when thick; also it is better
than the milk of Cows, so the cheese. The milk is thick, sweet and very fat;
yet not so fit for the stomach as the Goats: Diosc. Also the milk of an Ass,
Cow, or Mare, does more loosen the belly, than the Sheeps, this being more
thick. Gal. The fattest milk is that of the Cow, the Sheeps and Goats is less
fat. It is thicker than the Goats; but the frequent use of it causes the
morphew. Of milks the Woman's is most temperate; then the Goats, Asses, Sheeps,
and lastly the Cows, so Aeg. Var. Milk is the most nourishing of any food we
use, that is liquid, especially the Sheeps, then the Goats. Plin. The Goats is
most fit for the stomach, feeding more on Leaves than Herbs; the Cows is more
medicinal, the Sheeps sweeter and more nourishing, and less fit for the
stomach, being fatter, and yielding the fattest butter. Var. The Cheese is next
to that of the Cow: Crescent. And is best when new, and better, than that of
the Cow. V. Plin. The warm skins, help the wounds of strokes, and such as are
beaten, Gal. in a day and a nights space, it concocting and digesting the blood
under the skin, so Rhas. and Albert. See Ram. Sylv. The skin of the feet,
and snowt of an Ox or Sheep, being boiled by a gentle fire, till like curd,
and dried in the air helps ruptures. Plin. The blood drunk helps the falling
sickness. The flesh burnt, with water helps the vices of the privities, so
Plin. Cells. The broth with vomiting; as also that of a Goose or Calf, helps
venomous bitings. Anon. A cloth dipped in the tallow and applied, helps
burnings. Plin. with nitre it helps the colors of cicatrices. Marcel. With
salt it opens panicles. Plin. When old, with the ashes of Women's hairs it
helps fellons. With cantharides, and the juice of the berries of wild vine it
helps ringworms or tetters. The fat cures the roughness of the nails.
Marcel. Applied as a cerot with alum, it helps adustion by cold, and kibes,
Gal. Applied with hot water it helps diverse vices of the eyes. Plin. With the
ashes of a Woman's hair it cures luxate joints. Marcel. Being boiled and drunk
with austere Wine it helps the cough. Absyrtus used it for Horses also. Plin.
It helps the dysentery and iliak passion, Marcel. or coeliack. Diosc. The fat
helps the gout, so that of a Goat discussing much, applied with the dung and
saffron. Marcel. The fat of the reins with the ashes of a pumice stone and
salt, helps the pain and swellings of the privities, Plin. And other vices
thereof. Plin. Marcel. That of the kell applied stops bleedings at the
nostrils. Diosc. The marrow is praised in the 5th. place, after the Hearts,
Calfes, Bulls, and Goats. The liver cures the nyctalopie, the eyes being
washed with the decoction, and the marrow being applied to the pains and
tumors. Hippoc. The powder of the borne of a Sheep or Goat, being
suffumigated, with tosted and shaled Barley with oil, brings forth the
secundine and menses, Rhas. Albert. The brain applied, helps the watering of
the eyes. Plin. It facilitats the breeding of the teeth; but Galen adds honey
thereto, to make it more strong and effectual. The lungs help black and blew
spots, so Marcel. being applied warm, and discuss the same. Plin. Being
roasted and taken they prevent drunkenness, and used hot to the head they cure
the phrensy, and lethargy. Marcel. They help the dysentery, boiled with
line-seed, the flesh being eaten, and the water drunk: and applied hot they
cure the gout, or ease the same. Plin. The liver helps the nyctalops, and the
decoction used: Marcel. So that of a white sheep boiled, bruised, and applied
with water. Hippoc. Being roasted in warm ashes, and eaten 4. days, drinking
old wine it helps the inflation of Women that are great, so that of a Goat.
Diosc. The gall is not so good as that of a Bull. Gal. It is a little sharper
than that of a Hog, and helps old and purulent ulcers of the ears. Plin.
With honey it purges the ears. Marcel. Being mixed to the consistence of a
clyster with mulse, and injected into the ears, the ulcers being purged, it
most certainly heals the same; and being dropped into the ears with Woman's
milk, it helps ruptures therein, Plin. And convulsions. Rhas. Albert. applied
it cures a canker or corrosion of the flesh. Being applied to the head with
fullers earth till it be dry it helps scurfe, Marcel. or the itch. Plin. With
honey it cures the Epilepsie, especially that of the Lamb. Plin. The Magicians
used the spleen against the pain of the spleen, so Plin. being tosted and
stamped in Wine, and drunk it helps the iliack passion, as also the wringings
of the guts. Plin. Marcel. The ashes of the thighs with wax help the breakings
of the joints. Plin. So of the jaws burnt, Harts-horne, and wax, mollified
with oil of roses. The decoction of the thighs drunk, with linesced, helps the
dysentery. Gal. The ashes or dust of the huckle bone whiten the teeth, and help
other vices of the same; those of the bladder, or of that of a Goat drunk with
oxycrate, by those that piss in their sleep help the same. The secundine helps
many evils in Women, See Goat. Plin. The milk of Sheep helps against all
poison, except that of aconite, and fly called wagge leg. With oatmeale,
water, and honey, it helps long diseases and wastings. Drach. 1. of swallows
dung being taken in 3. cupsful thereof, or of that of the goat before the fit,
helps quartains. A gargarisme thereof helps the tonsils and jaws, Marcel. So
that of a Goat or Cow when warm, and helps the pain and swellings. It is used
against the phthisick: being boiled and drunk with bastard saffron, it
looseneth the belly. With wake robin it cures the exulceration of the
intestines. Diosc. Being boiled, and having pebles quenched therein, it stops
exulcerating fluxes of the belly, and the tenesmus, so Marcel. and boiled,
taken alone, or with butter it helps the tormina and coeliack passion. It is
in^ed also against corrosions caused by medicines, so that of the Co^^, so
Plin. Crescent. the whay thereof moves the belly, and purges forth choler.
Plin. The butter thereof with honey, with the ashes of a Dogs head, or Womb
decocted in oil, helps the cl^fts of the skin about the nails, Marcel. So
with elicampane; and hard swellings also. Plin. With honey, and an owl boiled
in oil, it cures ulcers. The old cheese thereof helps the dysentery: Marcel.
And drunk in Wine it cures the coeliack. Med. Mys. The dung with vinegar helps
warts, fellons, and the Thymi: And burnings in ulcers with the rose-cerot,
Diosc. and corns, so Rhas. fere, and Albert Marcel. and Plin. as also all
sorts of warts, and carbuncles newly arising. Gal. Applied with oil as a
cataplasme it cures green wounds made by a sword, or wood. Plin. Applied with
vinegar it helps the bitings of the field Spider, and of Serpents boiled in
Wine. Veget. With vinegar it cures the falling off of a Horses hoof. The ashes
thereof with Nitre, or those of the bones of Lambs thighs, help cankers,
especially in those ulcers that will not be cicatrized. Plin. The dung being
heated and molded together helps tumors in wounds, cleanses fistula's, and
cures night wheales. The ashes with Cyprus oil and Honey help the Alopecia,
Rhas. Albert. A plaster thereof with Goose, or Hens grease helps abscesses
about the roots of the ears. Anon. Applied warm it cures the swelling of the
dugges in Women. Drach. 1. drunk with the decoction of woodbind, or with oxymel
cures the jaundise. Marcel. With Wine or Water it helps the pain of the
Colon. Rhas. The ashes applied help the increasing of the spleen. Marcel. Lib.
1. of marsh mallows with p. 2. hereof, and as much axunge, stamped, and applied
to the reins with new shorn wool plaster wise, helps the stone. Plin. The
soft dung eases the gout. The dung also helps the diseases of Women. Albert.
The urine of a red or black Sheep with honey helps the Dropsy: Rhas. So being
drunk also. Plin. The q. of a penny weight of the sordes of the ears or duggs,
with a little Myrrh and 2. cupsfull of Wine helps the jaundise; as also
fellons. Sylvat. Serap. The sweat with vinegar cures the Epilepsy: New shorn
wool especially that of the neck of a black Sheep, is good against wounds in
the beginning, strokes, desquammations, bruises, and broaken bones, being
soaked in vinegar, oil or wine, and is used in embrocations, and by reason of
grease and excrements therein called Oesypus, it softeneth, and is v^^y
effectual with vinegar and oil of roses against pains; of ^e head, stomach,
and other parts, so Diosc. Plin. and inflations of the stomach; also it
defends from cold, and is used with oil, wine or vinegar, according to the
intention, either, to assuage, bite, or bind; or to help the pains of the
nerves or luxations, for which purpose some add salt, or rue and fat, so Plin.
as also for contusions and swellings. With cold water it helps the pilling of
the skin about the nails. Marcel. With hot oil it helps humid parts, and old
ulcers with honey; and wounds with wine, vinegar, cold water or oil: Plin. The
fume thereof helps the phrenetick. Applied it helps bloudshotten eyes, the
blood of a Pigeon being first put therein. With the white of an egg and the
powder of frankincense it helps epiphora's. Gal. Being wanned in vinegar, the
moisture crushed out and put into the ear after it, it helps the pains
thereof Marcel. Being put into the nostrils with oil of roses and the ear
stopped there with, it stops bleedings. Plin. Being rubbed on the teeth with
honey it sweetneth the breath, Marcel. And makes them white. Gal. Being
torrified in a linen cloth, and mixed with a third part of salt it preserves
from the toothach being used as a dentifrice. Plin. Being dipped into Tar,
Nitre, Sulphur, Oil and Vinegar, and applied twice a day very hot it helps the
pains of the Ioines. That of a black Sheep applied to the testicles helps the
swelling thereof. Plin. Applied with Bulls gall it causes purgation in Women:
some add Hyssopp and Nitre. Applied it brings forth the dead birth and stops
the courses in Women. Also it helps the Hemorrhoids. Seren. The same with live
brimstone helps the yellows. Plin. With the root of marsh mallows, it helps the
Kings evil and suppurations. That dyed of the purple color put into the ears,
helps the same; some add Nitre and Vinegar. The ashes cause crusts, remove
excrescencies of the flesh, and cicatrize ulcers Diosc. It Is to be washed for
the eyes, until it binds the tongue and biteth not. The ashes are hot and
sharp, with tenuity of parts, therefore they presently eliquate the soft and
moist flesh of ulcers, and are put into drying medicines: It is used in
gallings, wounds, burnings, fistula's, and suppurations of the ears, and to
cleanse the face. Marcel. And with vinegar to help the pains of the head. Gal.
Those of the hinder part of the wool drunk in Wine help the difficulty of
breathing. Plin. They cure the vices of the privities, and the passions of
Sheep, so Aggreg. The aesypus, quasi (...), or sordes and filth sticking in the
wool, arising from sweat (and therefore the wool is called succida, quasi
sudoris sordibus, and succo imbuta,) is of a concocting faculty, like butter,
and a little digesting, so Gal. Marcel. It helps bare eyebrows. Note it is
drawn out of the wool by hot water, and so taken off the top, and clarified.
Aet. It has a little acrimonie, and mollifieth, and is of the smell of wool,
and like ceruse when rubbed, so Diosc. It Is used against inflammations, and
callus of the cheeks, and inflammation of the Hypochondria: It heateth, and
fills ulcers: With the ashes of Barley, and verdegrease p. aeq. it helps
wounds; also it helps cankers, and creeping ulcers, and wastes the brimmes, and
equalizeth the excrescencies, fills, and cicatrizeth the same. Plin. With
tuttie and oil of roses it helps the holy fire: And with a little Myrrh mixed
in two cupsful of Wine, or with Goose grease and myrtle Wine it provokes
sleep. With Corsick honey it extenuats spots in the face, and helps the
roughness of the skin with oil of roses. Some add butter also, and the
gall of a Dog. Marcel. Applied to the head it cures the Phthiriasis, or
lowsy evil. With Wine and a little Myrrh it helps the Epilepsie. It helps the
corrosions of the corners of the eyes, scabbed cheeks, and fallings off of the
hair of the eye liddes: so the sout thereof, so Aet. Marcel. With Myrrh it
causes hair to grow upon the eyebrows. Plin. With honey it helps contusions
of the eyes, being first anointed with the fat of a Goose, and blood of a Duck.
With Goose grease it helps the ulcers of the eyes, mouth, and genitals.
Aetius mixeth it with the cerot against the phthisick and against the pleuresie
in epithems. Diosc. It brings forth the menses and birth. Plin. With melilot
and butter it cures the inflammations of the womb, and swellings and clefts of
the fundament; some add tuttie and oil of roses also. With honey and the
squams of lead it helps carbuncles in the privities and other wounds therein.
With ceruse and Woman's milk it eases the gout, Marcel. So with Wax; some add
axunge, Goose grease, and bulls tallow. Plin. The filth of the tail, that is
hardened into pills, being powdered and applied, helps the teeth, fastens them,
and helps cankers of the gums, aesypus drunk with Wine and a little myrrh,
helps, the Dropsy, some add Goose grease, and the oil of myrtles; so the
sordes of the Dugges. Myrepsus makes a cerot thereof against the gout,
phlegmons, and hardness. Aetius, Aegineta, and Dioscorides, show the way of
the preparation thereof. Schrod. The gall applied with wool to the navil
looseneth Childrens Bodies, and dropped into the ear with Woman's milk, it
helps the purulencie thereof. Vnc. 5. of the urine cure the Dropsy. N. 9. of
their lice taken help the running pains of the joints. As for the former its
affirmed by Jonston and Aldrovandus, etc. As for the description it is
needless, they love the Goat, and hate the Woolf, Bear; Tiger, Elephant,
Crow, Eagle, Serpents, Bees: and Rocket. They are hurt by aconite, hereon,
prick-wood, savin, knotgrasse, money-wort, sheere-grasse, pimpernel, bitter
vetch, acorns, and scortching fennel. They will live about 10. years, their
noise is called bleating, they are very simple even to a proverb, yet the Rams
are very fierce; but they may be made to leave off their butting, by hanging a
board with little pricks in it, over their fore heads. They love cold springs,
and bite up the very roots of the grass: they have milk half a year. They know
their Lambs by smelling on their hinder parts.

Shrew. Mus Araneus.
P. In England, Italy, Germany, and other places. M. Of the roots of herbs,
thistles, and flesh. N. (...). Heb. Hanaka. Hisp. Musganho.
Shrew. Gesn. T. they are venomous, insomuch that Cats will not eat them. V.
Marcel. The ashes with Goose grease cure the swellings of the fundament, some
use them against fellons, and swellings behind the ears. Plin. The ashes of
the tail help those that are bitten by a mad Dog. Applied it cures its own
bitings. The sign of their bitings are inflammation, pricking pain, redness,
a black pustule, and livid color of the next parts; and after it turns to an
eating ulcer: It is cured by oxycrat, cupping glasses, and scarification; if
not ulcerated, use mallows, mustard, and pellitory; else use the decoction of
the bark of a sweet pomegranat, and apply the same. Also use wormwood,
vinegar, garlic, hot water, colewort, album graecum, cuminseed, barley meal,
leeks, and vervain drinking the decoction of southern wood, also lambs curd,
myrrh and storax.

Sivet Cat. Catus zibethi.
P. In Africa, Aethiopia and India. M. Of Sugar and other things. N. Zibethi
feles. Catus Zibethicus. Civetta.
Sivet, or Civet Cat. Jonst. T. V. gr. 1. Applied to the navill helps the
colic; applying hot bread threon. It Is commended by Crollius in an ointment
against the vertigo and apoplexy, being used to the extremities of the
nostrils, temples, and crown of the head. In the suffocation of the womb it is
used downwards. It may be adulterated with the gall of a Bull, liquid storax,
and honey. Its used also in powders, sopes, waters, oiles, essences, and
suffumigations, as may be seen in Ambrosinus. Schrod. Civet is hot moist and
anodyne. It Is applied to the navils of Children, in the pain of the belly.
Jonst. Cardanus Counts it dry, Renod. and Amat. Lus. It Is near to Musk, sc.
hot and dry 20. and helps the phlegmons of the Dugges, Buboes, and hard
impostumes. Applied to the glans it causes great delectation in Women. And it
prevents sterility, so the fume. Put into the ear it cures the pain. The smell
cures the epilepsy, and cold soda; it inebriats in wine, helps the heart, warms
the matrice, and causes the courses. They yield it as the Musk Cat.

Sow. Sus.
P. Almost every where; but hated in Scotland. M. Of Grass, Fruits, Roots,
etc. N. (...). Ital. Porco. Scrofa.
Sow, or Hog. Gesn. T. the flesh is the best of all fleshes, and is best when
not too fat; Pork is worse, but the other is of easy concoction, and generats
good blood. sc. that of a middle age; but the old and young is very bad, it
being the moistest flesh, and phlegmatic: the other yields great
nourishment, and near to the temper of man, and is better than that of Goats
or Calves; yet it is glutinous and causes obstructions. When young it is mucous
and too humid; yet the parts of motion are best: The rest is soon putrified,
especially in stomachs filled with bad humors, causing viscous phlegm, and
thence the Gout, Iliack passion, stone of the reins and palsy, etc. the old
is cold and hard, causing melancholy and long fevers. Muff. The flesh of a
sucking Pigge, is moist 3. and causes crudities, agues, apoplexies, weakness
of memory, and corrupt humors, and is hardly digested by weak stomaks, not
the coat by the strong; it is best dressed being stuffed with salt and sage.
Pork however prepared is thought by some to have quid flatuosum, cacochymicum
and febrile; when powdered it is best to be eaten with green sauce, to cool the
salt, and qualify the malignity of the flesh. The bacon is of harder
digestion, therefore both, as also brawn, are not to be eaten without wine or
strong bear spiced with ginger, and exercise after them. The har^net is
stopping and of bad nourishment; yet the liver of Pigges is counted nourishing,
but their Lungs are very phlegmatic and waterish. V. Aet. Young Pigges applied
warm help venomous bitings, drawing forth the poison and easing the pain.
Pelagon. The blood given warm helps pneumonick Horses, see Boar. Aet. The
decocted old salt flesh stamped with old sharp cheese helps the hardness of
the joints. Scrab. The wounds of Elephants are helped by butter, drawing out
Iron; fomenting the ulcers with Swines flesh. The ashes of the salted flesh is
drying. The blood of Swine is moist, and less hot very like to man's temper.
Eumel. The blood being given hot to Horses with wine helps the coolness
thereof. Some use the distilled liquour thereof with juniper berries, agrimony,
rue, phu, scabious, fluellin, burnet, succory, pennyroyal, and treacle, against
the plague, apostumes of the sides or ribes, diseases of the liver or spleen,
inflation of the spleen, corruption of the blood, fever, swellings, trembling
of the heart, dropsy, heat besides nature, ill humors, and chiefly poisons
and pestilent fevers, drinking 4. or 5. drops thereof. The warm blood kills
warts. Plin. With the brain it helps the carbuncles of the privities. That of
a Sow applied to the teats helps the growing of the same, Gal. or that of a
Hog. The fat is less hot than that of the Goat, and less moist, as also
than that of other beasts, being less hot and dry, and nere to the nature of
man: that of Bulls is much more hot and dry. Plin. Axunge is used to mollify,
heat, discuss, and purge; and is more strong when salted, Diosc. And helps
the pleuresie being washed in Wine: With ashes or lime it cures inflammations,
fistula's and tumors. Aeg. It Is of the nature of that of Foxes; yet that is
more hot and less moist. Plin. With the ashes of Vines it helps against
tumors, the bites of Scorpions, and Dogs with oil; or with castoreum and
hore-hound. Diosc. So with the froth of Nitre. With quicksilver it helps the
french pocks. Seren. It helps the stiffenesse of the neck, the hammes being
anointed therewith. Myreps. With quicksilver it cures the scab and itch. With
quicksilver oil of bays and the juice of fumitory used to the palms of the
hands and soles of the feet thrice in a day it expels the matter of the french
disease by the urine. Marcel. Applied it expels things that stick in the
Body. Gal. With the roots of buglosse stamped it is used in wounds. Seren. With
Earthwormes and Frogs it helps the wounds of the nerves. Plin. The lard
joyneth together broken bones. Spread upon bread with lime; it helps fellons,
hardness of the Dugges, ruptures, convulsions, spasmes, and luxations: also
corns, clefts, and the vices of callus with white hellebore: also it helps
the inflammations of ulcers, and creeping thereof with rosin. With ceruse, or
the spume of silver it helps the colors of cicatrices: and with brimstone, the
roughness of the nails. When salted, with accorns it helps hardnesses, that
are called cocoeth. With the milk of fig leaves it cures warts. With that of
a Bull, rue, and nightshade, it helps the Morphew, and Kings evil; so with
feather few or wild burre or dock. Diosc. It helps burnings. Avic. And
abscesses. Plin. And kibes with barley ashes and galls. With tosted barley and
the white of an egg it cures ulcers caused by burnings. It helps gallings,
lassitude or weariness. With the ashes of Women's hairs it cures St. Anthony
his fire, stops bleeding, and helps ringworms. The gall helps kibes, so
the Boares the lungs being applied with the fat. Columel. With salt, vinegar
and oil, tar and the bark of the pine tree, it helps the broaken horns of
cattle: Also it helps the hoof or pastern with pitch, Sulphur and new shorn
woole being burned in, when wounded with Iron. With Tar it defends the
ears of Dogs from flies, and tikes. Being warmed with verdigrease it helps
the scabs in Goats or Sheep. With brimstone powdered it helps the scabbe in
Horses legs in the Winter; Also it cures bruises, and suppurations. Plin.
With the ashes of bean coddes it helps the pain of the hippes and old
griefs of the nerves: Also some use it with Goose grease and Bulls tallow with
oesipus against the Gout; and if the grief remains, with Wax, myrtles rosin
and pitch: Others use it with old oil, together with the stone called
Sarcophagus, and cinquefoile bruised with Wine or with chalk and ashes. Some
use it with Litharge, others with Water and cuminseed, so Sym. Seth. Plin. It
helps the falling off of the hair, and ulcers in the heads of Women, with a
third part of galls, so Aeg. Plin. And with the roses of the bramble bush. With
the ashes of Adders tongue, it works the same effect. so with those of the
Sea Horse being mixed with Nitre, or else with Vinegar. Marcel. Applied to the
corners of the eyes, it kills Worms therein. Being put into purulent ears
with a fine cloth, sometimes fomenting the same with warm water, it quickly
heals the same: So with oil, and helps the pains of the nerves. The same
cures swellings behind the ears. Plin. Some use it with Iron wort. Anon.
Being used warm with Wine in a gargarisme it helps swellings in the neck.
Diosc. Washed with wine it helps the pleurisy. Plin. With wild rue it helps
ruptures: that which is taken off axletrees helps the vices of the fundament.
With broom stamped it cures the pain of the knees. Diosc. It cures the
vices of the womb, and applied strengthens the birth. Applied with vervin it
helps the suffocation of the womb, and retention of the terms. Hippoc. It
cures the pain and ulcers of the matrice, with rosin, being applied with a
sponge or soft cloth; also honey may be added if there be exulceration. Diosc.
Drunk with salt Wine it helps against henbane, Plin. And the wagge-legge, as
also against quicksilver. Plin. The lard helps phthisicks, Marcel. So with
wine; some add a little honey, taking after some tar in an egg. Plin. With
the yolks of eggs, honey and wine it helps the coeliack: Hipp. with butter and
honey it helps the cough in Horses. Columel. mixed with Hyssop and given to
calves it helps their Worms. The skin of lard rubbed on the tongue helps
the disease called die brune, qualifying the heat, so Anon. Plin. the marrow
applied helps bleare eyes, and causes venery. The ashes of the bristles with
the fat help burnings: Seren. The same stop bleeding in wounds; Aet. And
applied help the falling down of the fundament. Plin. The ashes of the jaws
help broaken bones: Marcel. And troublesome ulcers of the legs: So of a Boar.
Plin. The brain drunk in wine is commended against Serpents, and carbuncles
applied after rosting, so those of the privities, as also the blood. Gal. The
perforated bone of the care woorn about the neck preventeth the cough. Plin.
The lungs roasted and taken fasting hinder ebriety. Diosc. Applied it helps
gallings by the shoe, and prevents inflammation, so Gal. Sym. Seth. and Hal.
Plin. It helps corns, chaps and the vices of callus, and kibes with the fat;
so the gall. Sym. Seth. The liver taken with wine, helps the bitings of
venomous Beasts. Plin. And against Serpents, being drunk with rue in wine. The
ashes cure creeping ulcers of the privities. Being eaten it stops the belly
(See Boar:) Marcel. So the ashes taken in wine. Diosc. The gall is less
strong than the Bulls gall, Gal. And is the moistest of all. Aeg. It Is
substitute is that of the Partridg. Hal. It helps poysonsome bitings, and
looseneth evil humors. Plin. Applied with a linen cloth it helps the
gallings of the joints. Marcel. With the juice of Sowbread and a little
brimstone, it helps dandraffe: Aetius makes a Pfilothron thereof with other
things. Plin. It discusseth apostumes in any part. Gal. Applied dry it helps
the aegilops. Diosc. It Is very good against the ulcers of the ears, and
others; that of a Sheep is sharper, and that of a Goat more sharp, to which
that of the Bear and Cow is almost like, so Gal. Plin. some add the oil of
Palma Christi and roses an. Marcel. As also honey, and vinegar, and nitre,
being boiled: or warm it in the rind of a pome granat: Gal. Or melt it with a
like quantity of honey, so Alex. Ben. Plin. being drunk it eases the spleen.
Sym. Seth. When dry it helps the piles. Applied with yolks of eggs it helps
fissores in the feet of Horses. Plin. Applied it cures kibes. Plin. The
bladder applied to that part, provokes urine, Marcel. And being eaten or drunk
it causes a retention of the same. See Boar. Lib. Germ. The same with the
urine and fatt, helps running ulcers of the head. Plin. The milk with the
testicles of a Boar, drunk helps the falling sickness. Montag. The same
mixed with honey causes coiture in men, and conception in Women. Plin. The
loins bruised and applied help the dry lippitude. Gal. The powder of the leg
helps the cough, and spitting of blood. Aet. The broth thereof helps the
gout. Aegineta makes a plaster there of called diapternes against hard
swellings. Plin. The buckle bones are used in dentifrices; the ashes are given
to kill worms in cattle, and strengthen the teeth, being dry, binding, and
defending from humors and swellings; the decoction is used to provoke urine:
Diosc. The powder of the huckle bone, being drunk helps the inflations of the
Colon, and old wringings of the bowels, so Gal. and Aet. Sym. Seth and helps
the headache. Plin. The same helps corns, clefts, and the vices of callus.
Plin. The ashes of the bones in the claws are used in dentifrices, Marcel.
Avic. And fasten the same, some add spicknard thereto. Plin. Being drunk it
helps the incontinency of urine, Marcel. And the dysentery drunk in wine.
Plin. The milk of a Sow drunk with mulse causes birth in Women, and drunk
alone it fills their breasts with milk. Plin. It Is good against the tenesmus,
dysentery and phthisick. The magicians used it with the ashes of the foot of a
Chameleon against the gout being applied. Aet. The dung of a Sow boiled in
vinegar helps poysonsome bitings, it may be used in steed of that of a Hyena.
Anatol. It helps the stingings of Scorpions or other reptiles. Veget. Some add
honey and wine, and give it to cattle against venomous bitings. Marcel. The
powder applied mith honey helps blew marks. Plin. When fresh it helps
luxations, Diosc. so with the rose cerot. Plin. It helps wounds by iron. When
old it helps burnings. It cures the itch, wheales and scabs. Being stamped
with oil it helps all hardnesses of the body. Marcel. With wine and the
juice of roses it kills nits and Lice. Plin. Given in wine it stops bleeding
in cattle. Applied warm with a toad stool it helps the bleeding of wounds. So
Rus. Hippiat. Hier. With honey it helps the quinsey in horses. Marcel. Being
worn about the neck in a scarlet cloth it helps the cough. Nic. Myreps.
Stamped with water and applied, it helps the breasts of Women, that are
inflated after child birth. Plin. The ashes help creeping ulcers of the
privities. Applied with oil it helps the inflation of the womb. When dry it
cures ulcers in the legs. The powder of Swines dung drunk in vinegar is good
against ruptures, and wounds. Plin. With cumin seed boiled in the water of rue
it helps the colon: and the dysentery and coeliack passion with wine. Plin. The
urine applied with wool helps any impostumes. Hal. It helps the whiteness of
the eyes and breaks the stone, so Avic. Marcel. applied with new shorn wool
it helps the pain of the groine. As for the description it is needless. Tops.
Their choice is by their face, race, and region, they are to be thick, round
and well set, their buttocks fleshy, belly large, snout short and turning
upwa^ds; but the large fided sow is best: in cold countries, the hair should
be rough and thick; they are hot and fatt so loose not their hair in winter.
They delight in woods where there are fruitful trees, they feed best after
fasting, then having variety in a dark fly. A Boar will serve three years, and
a Sow seven.

Sciurus. Sqirrell.
P. Almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of apples, chestnuts, and walnuts,
etc. N. (...). Nitela. Pirolus.
Squirrel. Albert. T. The flesh is sweet and good. Stumpf. The black is the
best. It may be compared to the flesh of Goats, or Coneyes, being tender and
sweet. V. Jonst. Some counted them dainties. The fatt mollifieth, and is much
commended by Galen against the pain of the ears. Prestigiators use the teeth
in the prediction of things to follow. As for their description, They are a
kind of Mice, and their lower teeth are long. They generate in the spring, and
have their nests in trees. They bring forth three or four young ones, which
wander abroad after three or four days. They use their fore-feet like hands,
when they go they draw their tail after them, and cast it over their backs
when sitting, the same serves them as a wing in leaping. They obscure
themselves with it in trees, and use it as a sail in the water, swimming upon
a bark. They differ by color and place.

T.
Tiger. Tigris.
P. In the East Indies, Java, and Bengala. M. Of all kinds of animals, chiefly
Goats. N. (...). Ital. Tigre and Tigra. Gall. une Tigre.
TIger. Philost. T. The buttocks were used in meat by the Indians, as also
those of the Lion and the Boar: some say also that the flesh is as sweet as
beife; so Gesner. and Jonston. As for the description they are greater than a
gray hound, their eyes are shining, nails crooked, teeth sharp, feet multifide
or with many toes, and they generate aversly. Linschot. They spare fair men,
and hate Elephants, and the sound of drums. They are extraordinary swift, when
they have lost their young, they follow the swiftest Horse, and therefore
hunters cast down one of the young; which the femal carries first back to the
den and so returns, even to the shore as is affirmed by the Ancients, they
so loving their offspring. They may be tamed by the juice of mandrake or opium.
They differ according to quantity, fierceness and species.

Toad. Bufo.
P. It Is an amphibion, chiefly in dark places. M. Of earthly moisture, herbs,
worms, and bees, etc. N. (...). Heb. Tsabh. Rana ter. venenata.
Toad. Schrod. T. V. The powder used inwardly draws out hydropick water by
urine, Petr. in Nosol. and Wier. The D. is drach. 1. it is used outwardly also
against carbuncles, being a little steeped in vinegar, to draw out poison, and
it swells after it; It Is used also in amulets against contagious air, and to
stop the hemorrhage of the nostrils, being applied behind the ears, or held in
the hand till hot, put under the arm pits, or hung about the neck; so being
cast upon the place affected. Being applied to the reins it brings out
hydropick water by the urine: if for the womb, it is to be applied to the
navil, and so hinders hysteric fluxes, and reduces the same. Being applied
to the soles of the feet it helps the diseases of the head, and heart, phrensy
and fevers. As for the stone see my Pammineralogie, amongst stones. The salt
of Toads is of the nature of the powder, the D. is gr. 3. etc. The oil is much
commended against spots in the face, the morphew, and other affections, and to
cleanse old ulcers (as some say by signature) being applied once in a day, so
Hartm. in Pract. Kief. The compounded oil is very good to digest tumors, and
help the dropsy. Marcel. Toads boiled with Bears grease help the gout, and
kings evil. Jonst. Being boiled and applied plaister-wise they help the
quinsey; their fatt being roasted, stuffed with laurel, Hens dung, salt, and the
ointment of marshmallows, helps fistula's: The powder also being applied. The
ashes help the flux of the hemorrhoids; it is woorn dry about the neck as an
amulet. Crollius uses the powder against all venomous bitings. The ashes given
to Falcons keep their feathers from worms. The bone of the left side is used
by some to provoke venery. As for their description it is needless. They are
engendered of eggs, and a putrid matter, man's flesh, and menstruous blood, etc.
They hate salt, and stinks, the Cat, Mole, and Spider. They walk in the night.
The antidote is mithridate, and triacle, etc.

Tortise. Testudo.
P. In the deserts of Africa. Lybia, and Mauritania. M. Of a roscid liquour,
herbs, worms, snailes. N. (...). Heb. Homet. Chersina.
Tortise. T. Jonst. Scapp. Ambrosin. The flesh is often eaten in the Indies,
with saffron, and aromatic powders. V. Plin. The flesh is used in
suffumigations in physic, and against poison. In Africa, the head and feet
being cut off, they are used as an antidote, and being boiled and eaten
discuss botches and help the spleen and epilepsy. The blood clears the eyes,
and helps against the poison of Spiders and Froggs, etc. the pills thereof
being taken in wine. The gall with attick honey helps the glaucoma, and wounds
of Scorpions. The ashes of the shell with wine and oil help the clefts of the
feet and ulcers. The scales drunk restrain lust. The urine helps the bitings
of Asps. The eggs help botches and ulcers, and the pain of the stomach being
drunk. Gal. The liver is used in a pessary against the strangling of the womb.

V.
Unicorne. Vnicornu.
P. In the East Indies, and West Indies, and other places. M. Their meat is not
observed. N. (...). Heb. Reem. Arab. Alchercheden.
UNicorne. Gesn. T. The flesh is bitter and unfit to be eaten, like that of the
Indian Ass. V. The horn being powdered and drunk in water expels poison,
with amber, ivory, leaf gold and coral, etc. It Is much commended against
pestilent fevers, Mundel. and the bitings of mad Dogs, and other poysonsome
beasts, as also against worms, and many great sicknesses, and the epilepsy.
Schrod. The horn is sudorifick, alexipharmick and cardiack, and is therefore
good against contagious diseases, etc. the D. is from gr. 4. to scrup. sem. and
more. Bac. It Is woorne also as an amulet. As for their description, in body,
they are not much unlike a horse; but cloven hoofed, and have a long horn in
their foreheads. Tops. They are of a dusty color, with a maned neck, hairy
forehead, and a white and smooth horn, serving to expel and dissolve all
poison, if put into the water after the drinking of any poysonsome beast. It
sweateth if venim be nigh. It weighs thirteen pound. They fight with their
mouth and feet. They hate the female, except at the time of lust; but love
stranger beasts, and maids, and are taken by them dressed with sweet herbs.

W.
Weasel. Mustela.
P. Almost every where, In England and other places. M. Of Mice, Moles,
Serpents, Hares, eggs. N. (...). Heb. Choled. Chald. Chulda. Arab. Caldah.
WEasel. T. V. Vrsin. The flesh cures fevers. Aetius makes an acopon thereof
against the gout and pain of the joints; so the ashes, and with wine help the
epilepsy and headache. Albert. It Is good against the stingings of Scorpions.
Marcel. The blood helps exulcerated botches. Gal. It Is of the nature of the
Hedghog. Avic. And drunk in wine helps against poisons, drach. 2. being taken
in wine, so Diosc. And Gal. Albert. Some add rue also. Gal. It helps the
epilepsy. Plin. Sext. Aesculap. The blood and ashes help the elephantiasis,
Marcel. some add the blood of an Elephant. Plin. The ashes help botches with
those of swallows. Plin. They help suffusions in the eyes, and catarrhes with
honey, so Marcel. Plin. Marcel. with wax it helps the pains of the shoulders.
Diosc. The ashes with vinegar help the gout. Plin. Marcel. So with the oil of
roses, amylum or gum dragant. Plin. The old brain drunk helps the epilepsy.
Rhas. So with vinegar. Rhas. The blood applied helps impostumes behind the
ears, so Archig. Sext. And evils of the throat, so Isid. It mollifieth
contracted nerves, and helps the pain of the joints. Gal. The liver helps the
epilepsy drunk in water. Sext. With the gall of a Hare, castorcum, myrrh,
vinegar and honey it helps the vertigo. The gall is good against aspes. Rhas.
Taken inwardly it kills. Plin. The testicles and womb help against the
epilepsy, and the lethargy smelled to. The ashes of the dung may be used in
stead of spodium. Stumpf. Their biting is venomous, but it may be cured by
onions and garlic, being applied and eaten: Figs also are good with the meal
of bitter vetches, and triacle applied; also figg leaves. Camerar. Their
bitings in cattle may be cured by oil in which it has been steeped, giving
treacle inwardly. Jonst. The decoction sprinkled on seed corn, keeps Mice
from it. The lungs help diseases of the lungs. Matthew. The gall with the juice
of sennel, clears the eyes and skinn. The genital helps the strangury. As for
the description it is needless. They hate the Crow, Hen, and Cat. When they
fight with Serpents they use rue.

Weather. Vervex.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other countries. M. Of grass, hay, and
shrubs, etc. N. (...). Aries castratus. Sectarius.
Weather. Avic. T. Of mutton, that of the weather is the best, especially when
about a year old. Cresc. And is worse after. See Ram. Platin. It is better
than Lamb, being hot and moist, and tending to temperatenesse. See Sheep. V.
Leonel. Fav. A bath made of the head with the feet, intestines and barley boiled
in water, helps spasmes; all fatt and moistning things being good for the
same purpose. Tops. They are loved by the Lambs; and being unapt to generation,
therefore they keep company with them; but the Ewes forsake them for that
reason, and the Rams cannot endure them. The time for castration is in the wane
or decrease of the Moon, at five months old, so that they may not be troubled
with heat or cold: they may be libbed also at two or three years of age, and
then their horns grow not; but their flesh, and lard or sewet, is more
acceptable than of any other Sheep, except very old, being neither so moist as
Lambs, nor so rank as a Rams or Ewes: And is hot and moist.

Woolfe. Lupus.
P. In the north countries, Scotland and Muscovia. M. Of flesh, chiefly
mutton, and man's flesh. N. (...). Heb. Zeeb. Arab. Dib. Chald. Deeba.
Woolfe. Gesn. T. The flesh as also that of all wild beasts, that feed on
flesh, and are rapacious, is nor used in meat, except by Pagans: It is cold,
foetid, dry, and gross. So Rhas. and Albert. Colder than that of a Dog. Avic.
Bell. Some commend the flesh, as good for a cold, moist, and weak stomach, and
the hemorrhoids. The flesh of all rapacious creatures causes black choler:
the worst is that of Woolfes and Dogs, corrupting both the humors and mind;
so Rhas. Albert. Rhas. With a little pepper and despumated honey it helps the
colic. V. Plin. The decoction helps the gout. Hal. The skin worn by him
that is bitten by a mad Dog, prevents hydrophoby. Rhas. Albert. The skin
worn about the belly of one troubled with the colic, helps it. Gal. Shoes
made of it help the pain of the feet. Albert. The blood with oil helps
deasenesse. Anon. It helps the colic, so the dung. Sext. Being powdered and
eaten it prevents phantasmes, so Aesculap. the flesh eaten provokes the birth.
Sext. Aesculap. The fatt of a Woolfe is as strong as that of a Dog. Some use it
in ointments with other articular remedies. Plin. Applied it mollifieth the
womb, and helps bleare eyes. The ashes of the head fasten the teeth.
Magicians use the right eye salted against intermitting fevers, so Sext. also
the eye applied extenuats the glaucoma and stigma's. Pithag. The dog- teeth
of a Woolfe help the Lunatic. Blond. The tooth extenuats the gums of children,
and so facilitats the breeding of the teeth. Agric. Drink taken through the
rough artery of a Woolfe helps the quinsey. Rhas. Albert. The lungs of a Woolfe
dried and powdered with pepper, drunk in Cows milk help shortness of breath.
Albert. The heart dried is said to become very sweet in smell, and helps the
epilepsy; so Script. de Not. Rer. the liver helps those that are hepatick. It Is
used in the hepatick antidote therefore, by Nich. Myrepsus. Avicen Uses it in
medicines against the hardness of the liver. Plin. Taken in warm wine it
helps the cough, Marcellus adds honey and warm water. Plin. In wine it helps
the phthisick. Marcel. Being boiled in water, dried and powdered it helps the
pain and inflation of the stomach. Platin. It helps the dropsy, Sylv. so being
drunk in white wine. Plin. Drunk or eaten it helps the pain of the womb. Sext.
Aesculap. The gall has the same operations, as that of a dog. Albert. Being
used in the nose with musk it helps the epilepsy. Plin. Being tied to the navil
with elaterium it looseneth the belly. With wine it helps the swellings in the
fundament. Rhas. Albert. The genital dried causes the desire of venery. Rhas.
Albert. The right testicle with oil, applied to the womb with wool, prevents
it, though in Bauds. Solin. The excrements help the suffusions of the eyes; so
with attick honey, being burned. Marcel. or with common honey: the ashes of the
head fasten loose teeth Gal. The dung drunk helps the colic; sc. the white
drunk in white wine, so Aet. and Avic. Albert. Rhas. Marcel. Plin. and Haly.
Blond. So the great intestine. Albert. Bertrut. The biting is like that of a
Dog, and so cured. Schrod. The heart helps the epilepsy: the liver helps those
that are lean. The fatt is hot, digesting, antiarthritick, and ophthalmick.
The bones help stripes and punctures. The intestines and dung help the colic,
drach. 1. being taken, or applied; so the skin, used. The oil helps the
gout. Hartm. in Pract. The essence of the blood dissolveth coagulated blood. As
for the description, they are bold, rapacious, voracious, and not much unlike a
Dog. Their eyes are shining, teeth sharp and unequal, the neck is short, the
brain increases and decreaseth with the Moon, the liver is like a Horses
hoof, the genital is bony, the fore feet have five toes, the hinder four, and
the reins are like those of other creatures. They generate like dogs for
twelve days, they go two months, and then bring forth a blind offspring like
bitches, n. eight or nine. They have an antiphathy to Man; Their diseases are
madness, the gout, and quinsey. They feed on herbs, having weak bowels, they
observe their enemies, and love their young. Coming into a sheepfold they kill
all before they eat any.

Beasts less used in meat or medicine.
Carygneja. Jonst. T. V. The tail is used in physic. drach. 1. being drunk
several times in water, fasting, cleanses the ureters, expels the stone,
causes venery, engenders milk, helps the colic, eases breeding Women, and
expels the faetus, and being chewed and applied, it draws out thorns in the
flesh.

Tajibi. Jonst. T. The flesh smells very strong, yet by some it is eaten; so
Marcgrav. Hist. Brasil.

Tamandua. 1. Maregrav. T. The flesh smells like that of the Fox, but is not
eaten.

Upalim. Ambrosin. T. The flesh is eaten by some after it has been well
beaten, to make it tender.

Tlacaxolotl. Jonst. T. The flesh is edible.

Cabim. Jonst. T. V. It yields a little bone which stops bleeding.

Danta. Jonst. T. The flesh especially of the feet, being well concocted, is
very sweet to the taster, and yields good aliment.

Cajotl. Jonst. Or Indian Fox, so called. T. V. Some say that the genital helps
the toothach, the teeth being cleansed with the same.

Izquiepoel, or an other kind thereof. T. V. Yields a dung and flesh, good
for those that have the Hispanick disease.

Tatus. Jonst. T. The flesh is very fatt, sweet, and of a piruitous aliment,
and abounding with excrements. V. drach. 1. Of the shell taken inwardly
provokes sweat, and mightily helps the Morbus Gallicus; yet some of them are
noxious and poysonsome, in so much, that causing vomiting and flatulency in the
belly, they cause a syncope, and at last death. The antidote is oil olive in
the beginning. They are distinguished by lamina's, the harmless shells having
eight and the hurtful but seven.

Igvana. Jonst. T. The flesh is of good taste, being boiled, and long fried
with butter, and tastes as well as that of Chickens or Rabbets.

ORNITHOLOGIA. Of Birds.
B.
Barnicle. Branta.
P. In Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and other places. M. Of corn, and in fennes.
N. Bernicla. Chenerotes. Bernichia.
BArnicles. Muff. T. V. They breed unnaturaly by corruption, and the taste is
very unsavory; yet they are eaten by poor men, hated by rich men, and rejected
by those that are wise, when they have other meat to feed upon. Jonst. As for
the description, it is less than the wild Goose, and of an ash color, Aldrov.
it flies like the wild Goose, making a noise in the flying. And some affirm
it is bred of the apples of a certain tree. Gesn. They are somewhat less than
common Geese, and so he agrees with others.

Bat. Vespertilio.
P. Almost in all dark places, and they fly abroad in the evening. M. Of gnats,
flies, flesh, candles, etc. N. (...). Heb. Ataleph. Arab. Baphas.
Bat. Strab. T. The flesh though abominable, yet is eaten by some people; so
Scaliger. V. Avic. Aldiov. The flesh helps the scirrhus. Galen used it against
the gout, also it is a psilothron with bitumen. Avicen makes an oil thereof
against the gout. Plin. The blood is a psilothron. Archig. Ant. Mus. Seren.
With other things, it helps the trichiasis, so Marcel. and Kiran. Gal. The
brain with Woman's milk does the like; so with vitriol, or the seed of hemlock,
Which serves also to hinder the growth of the duggs, and breasts. Plin.
Magicians used the blood against the pains of the belly. Avic. The brain,
Kiran. or blood applied with the juice of black thorn and honey, helps the
suffusions of the eyes, in the beginning. Plin. The gall with vinegar applied,
helps the bitings of the shrew mouse, in beasts. Belluens. The milk or urine is
abstersive, very hot, and helps spots in the eyes, and wefts. Some say the dung
causes blindness: also the heart and tongue sometimes cause hydrophoby. The
urine is counted commonly, to be of a venomous and septick faculty. Some say
that the heart preventeth sleep, so the head, and hinders waking if applied
when a sleep. H. Their bitings are reported by some to be venomous; yet are
cured by Sea or warm water, or hot ashes applied. Their are diverse other
faculties hereof, recited by the Ancients; but superstitious and frivolous. So
Jonst. As for the description it is needless, the creature being very common.
They fly abroad chiefly in the morning and evening. They see best in the
night, Their visory spirit being most thin, and lucid; but it is more thick in
the evening. Their voice is very loud and shril. They are great friends to the
Pigeon, and enemies to the Stork, plaine-tree, juy, and ants. Aldrov. They are
zootokons, only, amongst all flying creatures, and bring forth in holes, two
young ones at a time, having two teats; yet some say that they are generated
out of some putrid matter. Gesn. Some say the urine is venomous; yet some have
used it without danger.

Birgander. Vulpanser.
P. About lakes and rivers, and such like places. M. Of things to be found in
the rivers. N. (...). Chichelinches.
Birgander. Plin. T. The flesh was formerly in account. Their eggs are worse
than those of Peacocks, but better than Henns eggs, so Epaenet. Heracl. Athaen.
V. Ares. the fait with vine ashes, helps the elephantiasis, and swellings of
the face. So Gesn. Jonst. As for the description, it is red breasted, and
lives in the water. Aldrov. It has the form of a Goose and craft of a Fox;
they defend themselves against the injuries of the Eagle, Cat, and other
enemies: they love their young, and defend them as the Partridg, seeming to be
young ones, and so leading the fowler from the young ones, they escape.

Bistard. Vrogallus.
P. In high hills and woods, in Germany and the North. M. Of leaves, of trees,
etc. N. (...). Heb. Dukiphat. Tetra^.
Bistard. Aldrov. K. As the greater and lesser. T. Some affirm that the flesh
is as sweet, and pleasant as that of Pheasants, in so much that it is counted
fit only for the table of the Gentry: Therefore Caligula would have it
sacrificed in his Temple, as Suetonius relates, sc. the greater Bistard; Jonst.
Some confound it with Otis and the Ortygometra. As for the description, the
(...) is about nine inches long, the head is black, and bill short, gibbous and
broad. The eye lidd's are red, the breast and belly black, the feathers of the
wings blackish and five hands in length, with white feathers on the thighs, and
sufcous on the legs, and they have white spots on the tail; there are some of
them weigh twenty Italick pounds. Encel. Some report that they generate by the
mouth, by eructation of sperme.

Bittor. Asteria.
P. About the banks of lakes and fenns, and other places. M. Of fishes, frogs,
and worms, etc. N. (...). Botauros. Bos palustris, and aquaticus.
Bittor. Muff. T. The flesh, as also of Storks and Herons, breeds no good
nourishment; They feeding upon Froggs and Worms. Jonst. As for the description
it is needless. They build their nests with reeds, they fly not quickly from
the fowler; but dive in the water; or hide themselves amongst the reeds; they
fly not before they leap. Where there is a scull of fish they stand as still
as if they were dead, gently bending their necks, by incurvation: when taken,
they stand unmovable, and on a sudden wound the careless fowler. So
Aldrovandus.

Blackbird. Merula.
P. In thick woody places, and angles, or corners. M. Of the same meat as the
Thrush: as hawes, etc. N. (...). Nigretta.
Blackbird. Elluchas. T. Some dislike the flesh, they feeding upon Worms and
locusts; therefore there is a certain acrimony therein, and unpleasant smell.
Platin. It is slowly concocted, nourishes little, and causes melancholy; yet
the Salernitan Physicians reckon it amongst the laudable birds; and although
Galen says that it is harder, than that of the Partridg, Pigeon, or Hen,
etc; yet where he speaks of meats of good and bad juice, he affirms the
former, as also that it is neither thin nor gross, and Savonarola prefers it
before the Bustard or Thrush, so Bapt Fire. Yet the Ornithologer and
Volateranus deny it. The flesh of both are said to be hot, and dry initio 2di.
The best are the fattest. As for their cookery, see Apicius. V. Cells. Aldrov.
The flesh helps the looseness of the belly, Plin. and the dysentery, being
roasted with myrtle berries. Alex. Ben. The flesh is good to be eaten in the
time of the plague. Marcel. It cures the tormina, Rhas. and melancholy, by
signature. Hal. The dung with vinegar helps lentils, the bird being fed with
rice. Kiran. The old oil in which the flesh has been boiled, helps the
opisthotonos and sciatica. Some use the head with the feet of a Hare as an
amulet, and to make men audacious, bold and active. As for the description it is
here needless. They make their nests of a longish hemispherical figure, of
little twigs, and then lute them, with some soft matter in the bottom; they
hatch four or five young ones at a time. Their note is known. They are friends
to the Robbin red-breast, which follows her, and roosts by her at night, or
in the next tree. They hate the Owl, and follow her when making a noise.
Gesner Agrees with Aldrovand in what has been above related; as in the rest,
being followed by him.

Buzzard. Buteo.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of herbs, as Clary,
and woodbind; and of Animals. N. Triorchis. Millo Marcelli.
Buzzard. Aldrov. T. The flesh is good and tender, especially in winter; the
flesh is usually very fat and is therefore used both roasted and boiled. Albert.
It Is very sweet and of good taste, so Gesn. Therefore they are sold when
dressed, in the markets, in diverse places in Italy. V. Bapt Port. The
testicles boiled fresh with honey help those that are infirm in procreation,
very suddenly; so also all plants, having the same signature. As for the
description, it may be omitted: They fly slowly, and are easily taken, so
Jonst. Aldrov. They are taken by tying a Mouse in the field with lime twiggs
about it.

C.
Cock, etc. Gallus, etc.
P. Almost every where, in England and other places. M. Of corn, flies,
snailes, and seeds etc. N. (...). Avis Cohortalis, and Lucis. The Hen, Gallina.
COck, etc. Aldrov. T. The flesh when young, is in a mean, betwixt that which
does attenuate and make thick; for it is easily concocted, begets laudable
blood, causes a stomach, and is agreeable to all stomachs, especially if fat,
and before coiture; they then growing more dry, and saltish; therefore they are
to be gelded sooner, they being then more cold, and of easier descent; yet not
of much nourishment, or such as will last long, consisting then of a thin and
fluxile blood: therefore they are naught for such as are troubled with the
gout, being attracted and received by the weaker parts. The brain is to be
eaten with salt. The liver is moistish. The testicles are easily concocted. The
eggs of Hens are best when fresh, and may be known by plenitude; they are best
boiled, and when softish. Gal. They then being light of digestion, of good
juice, not heating, but strengthening, and clearing the throat: When hard, they
are more gross, viscous and styptick. Muff. Young Cockrels, are the best of
the chickens, which leave no excrements in the body; and therefore are used in
burning fevers; it is of all flesh the most commendable, nourishing much,
causing sperme and lust. They are best roasted, being a moist meat; and with
sorrel and sugar, or with white wine vinegar: They are a most temperate meat,
for weak stomachs. The hardest of digestion are the white, so Gilbert,
Griuener. Yet they are best for hectic persons, being most cold and moist.
They are best in summer, and Pullets and Hens in winter, the Cock-chickens are
best before they crow loud, and the female before trodden: Cocks flesh is best
when young: it helps consumptions and hectic fevers. Their testicles, livers,
and loins, are of very good nourishment; if sodden it is not good; the broth
looseneth, and the flesh binds; which is contrary in that of a Hen, so Gal.
C. those are the best that are of the game under 2. years of age. As for Hens
they are best before they have laid, and when full of eggs; as also in
January, and cold months, sleep and rest making them then fattest. When young
the flesh is very temperate, of good juice, much nourishment, strengthening
natural heat, engendring good blood, sharpning the appetite, quickening the
eye sight, nourishing the brain and sperme, and agreeing with all ages and
complexions, turning wholly, for the most part, into blood, making a lively
color, and quickening all the senses. Avic. The flesh of Pullets helps the
wit, clears the voice, and increases the sperme, so is of much nourishment.
They are best when meanly fat, and fed with corn cast into chafe, that by
exercise they may consume their superfluous moisture. The flesh of Capons of 7.
or 8. months old, is preferred before all meats, by most Physicians. It helps
the appetite, opens the breast, clears the voice, fatteneth lean men,
nourishes all men, restores sicknesses, hurts none; but the idle, tastes
pleasantly, and digesteth easily; also it is more solid than that of pullets,
more tender than that of Cocks, more agreeable than Pheasants, or Partridges,
not so dry as a Cock to be slowly digested, not so moist as a Chicken to be
soon corrupted; but temperate, causing much in offensive blood, and much
sperme, without unnatural sharpness or heat: therefore Faventinus made it the
basis in his Analeptick Electuary, and Alois. Mundella thinks that consumption
desperate, which Capons gellies, and cullises cannot recover. They are best
roasted for moist stomachs; if boiled in white broth, they are of speedier; but
not stronger nourishment. The Italians make Hen-copenets, by sering them in the
loins. Note, Freitag. As for the name, it is called Capon, and Capo, quasi
caput omnium; or the chief of all other meats. As for eggs, the best are the
Hens, the shell of which is like the earth, cold and dry; the white like water,
cold, and moist; the froth therein like air, hot and moist; the yolk like
fire, hot and dry. Yet all together is temperate. The best are those of Pullets
engendered by the Cock new, white and long, such nourishing much, clearing the
voice and breast, strengthening the stomach, curing consumptions, and causing
lust by nutrition. They nourish quickly being liquid flesh, and much, by a
proportionable heat and moisture, they are best in the morning being newest,
and in the Winter Hens being then fattest, and worst in Summer by reason of ill
feeding: it is best to eat them alone, they otherwise corrupting, and filling
the face with pimples and freckles. H. they are naught for Children, their hot
bodies turning them into over hot nourishment, whence the itch, scabs,
inflammations, and corruptions do arise: also for old men, being hardly
digested in a cold stomach; they are best for temperate young people, not
feverish. Eggs serve also in fluxes, bridle sharp and griping humors,
restore spirits in the weakness of the heart, and speedily pass from a
clean stomach. Note the longest are usually Cock eggs, so of best
nourishment, also those that have greatest yolks nourish most; but the other
are fittest for hot stomachs. Furthermore rere eggs are of lightest digestion,
The hard of slowest, and the softish of strongest nourishment. The fried are
hot and malign in quality: the potcht are best for hot complexions, or those
that are aguish. Sodden reere in the shell they are soonest converted into
blood, and if roasted reere in the embers they make thickest and strongest
blood, and are fittest for cold weak and waterish stomachs. Ficinus calls
them the quintessence of flesh. Finally, of all creatures, those eggs are most
wholesome that are most temperate, they being like their venters. They chiefly
in use, are those of Hens, Turkies, Peacocks, Pheasants, Partridges,
Berganders, Ostriches, Ducks, Geese, Pigeons, and Sparrows. As for the way of
dressing them, it may be seen in Apicius, Platina and Aldrovandus. V. Hipp.
The white of 3. eggs being taken in water, helps the heat of fevers. Gal.
The yolks help the syncopal fever before the fourth day, using the flesh
after, chiefly that of a Capon, being more friable, and tender. So the cullise
of the same. Tral. The testicles help the hectic fever. The broth with other
things helps the fever called Epiala, so with the fat of a Duck: if of an old
Cock it is laxative, cleansing, and opening. It dissipats flatulencies, and
purges melancholy, so Serap. Bras. It brings out those things that are in
the stomach and intestines. With seen it purges melancholy, phlegm with
turbith, and choler with citrine myrobalans: Mesue adds bastard saffron also
to purge phlegm, in the gout, and against melancholy, dodder of time, and
polypody, with time, Hyssop, Anet, and sal gemme for the same purpose. Plin. It
helps long fevers, stupidity, tremblings, diseases of the joints, diseases and
pains of the head, Epiphora's, inflations, nauseousnesse, the tenesmus, liver,
reins, bladder, against crudities, and shortwindednesse being boiled with
Capers, Parsely, Mercury, Polipody, or dill, etc. The best is the old red Cock,
and sattish. Rhas. the brain of a Hen, helps the trembling of the brain, wit
and memory. The young Chicken dissected and applied to venomous bitings,
draws out the venom, and helps the Epilepsy caused thereby. Plin. The
testicles with water and milk, help the falling sickness abstaining from wine,
Ornithol. so the gall. Amat. Lus. Ornithol. Being dissected and applied to the
head of a Woman they help melancholy and folly. The white of an egg helps
pains, so Avic. sticking to the parts by its gluten. Applied to the forehead
with a linen cloth it causes sleep: So the feet eaten. Diosc. The white
taken warm helps destillations and rheumes. The same applied to the forehead,
hinders defluxions thence, it having an excellent astringent faculty, in so
much that Pliny says, that being mixed with live lime it will soder glasses,
Hermol, and that being put upon a stick or garment it will not burn. Therefore
Galen, Avicen and Serapio mixed it with things that hindered the flux of blood
from the brain: and it helps the pissing of blood being taken crude, Plin. And
spitting of blood; so the brain and blood. Gal. Eupor. So the shell with other
astringent remedies. Plin. The powder thereof drunk in wine helps eruptions of
blood, so Kiran. And bleeding at the nose, with frankincense and the white of
an egg. Ornithol. So with sour or horse dung. The dung which is white
expels coagulated blood. Avic. a reere egg helps hoarsenesse of a hot
cause. Diosc. And roughness of the throat, so Gal. as also the inflammation of
the trachea. It Is mixed with things that incide humors contained in the breast
or lungs. It also cures all asperity of the stomach, belly, intestines and
bladder. Elluch. Marcel. a forbile egg clarifieth the voice; so when newly
laid. Hipp. The flesh of a roasted Hen is good against exulcerated arteries.
Avic. And clears the voice. Myreps. The white dung taken with water or
melicrate, helps occult quinseyes, or used with honey inwardly. Plin. The
yolk of an egg applied, helps the destillations of the breast. Avic. A reere
egg helps the dyspnoea. Arnold. The pulp of the flesh with ptysan, helps the
Asthma, and other affections of the breast, so with Rose water, Almond milk,
Amylum and Rice flower. Avic. A new reere egg, helps the pleurisy; so Joub.
Diosc. and spitting of blood, Plin. Especially with Amylum. Avic. Sorbile eggs
help the cough, pleurisy, phthifick, hoarsnesse of heat, shortness of breath,
and spitting of blood, especially the yolk being taken warm, so Marcel. with
old wine. Marcel. a crude egg drunk with the juce of cut leeks and honey
helps the spitting of matter. Hipp. The flesh of a Cock helps the breast.
Plin. Seren. Marcel. An egg with the juice of hore-hound and honey breaks
vomica's, purges and cures them. Marcel. The fat taken inwardly helps those
that are empyick. Some add the powder of dill. Avic. Sorbile eggs help the
phthisick, Marcel. Some add oil, and bastard wine. Marsil. The white Chickens
are best for those that are hectic: being colder. An egg with honey helps the
cough, so Plin. and Seren. So with brimstone. Marcel. The powder of the inward
skin of the ventricle drunk with wine helps the humid cough. Gal. The yolks
of eggs help the syncope, they causing soddain and much nutriment: so the
feather put into the nose with vinegar. Diosc. The inward tunicle of the
stomach strengthens the stomach; so Guainer. Leonel. Sylv. being washed in
wine, dried and powdered. So eggs being half boiled. Marcel. And with oil
the yolks quench thirst. Being taken with live brimstone and the shavings of
Hearts horn it stops vomiting, so with a wall louse; but the dung causes
vomiting, therefore it is drunk against poison, being mixed with line seed, or
that of netles decoct in water, or with water and butter, so Guainer, and
Villan. Archig. the powder of the yolk of an egg taken with barley meal eases
the pain of the stomach. Rondel. The ashes of the intestines of a Hen, help the
pain and moisture of the stomach. Tral. The broth of an old Cock purges the
hollow part of the liver. The oil of eggs helps the pain of the liver caused
by flatulencies. An egg taken with brimstone helps the jaundise, Ornithol. So
the tunicle of the stomach. Hipp. Cocks flesh roasted helps the dropsy. Marcel.
The yolks of eggs boiled hard in vinegar, and taken with pepper help those
that are coeliack: so Seren. with meal; or the membrane of the ventricle taken
in austere wine. Eggs boiled in vinegar stop fluxes of the belly. So Gal. and
Sym. Seth. Constant. so applied with vinegar: Seren or the shell drunk in wine.
Hipp. And the flesh eaten. Avic. It is boiled sometimes with astringent
remedies against the dysentery, and with milk against ulcers of the bladder.
Crude eggs with oil of roses help the dysentery, with heat. Plin. The yolks
of 5. eggs taken raw, with the shells, juice of poppies and wine, help the
same. Calf. Eggs roasted hard stop the belly. So Gal. especially with ^mach,
galls, powder of snailes, the fruit of myrtles, medlars, balaustins, and
Hyppocystis. Marcel. The powder of the skin in an egg shell drunk in wine
helps the dysentery also, and the broth of a young Cockrell, so the white of an
egg used in a clyster with melilore, preventing ulcers and putrefaction.
Seren. the ashes of an egg shell help the pain of the belly. The roasted liver
of a Cock with the membrane of the ventricle and juice of poppies helps the
iliack passion. Eggs boiled in vinegar help ulcers of the reins and bladder.
Alex. Tral. Raw eggs help the inflammation of the reins, Plin. And the yolk
helps the erosions thereof. Aet. The white dung drunk helps the colic.
Ornithol. So the decoction with carminatives, used in clysters Avic. or the
broth with polypodie and dill. Diosc. So the dung with vinegar, so Gal.
Andernacus makes a potion of the decoction of an old Cock, for the same
purpose: with things against wind. Kiran. Eggs boiled in the urine of an Ass
help nephritick pains; so the inward membrane of the ventricle drunk with wine
and salt. Avic. The powder of egg shells drunk breaks the stone, sc. of
those that have contained Chickens Plin. The white of an egg expels the
same. Diosc. A warm egg taken helps corrosions of the bladder, and
exulcerations of the reins. Some affirm that the ashes of the throat taken in
warm water, help the incontinencie of urine, and Galen uses this to stop the
same, sc. the membrane of the stomach, with frankincense, accorns, balanstins,
galls, with honey of roses, and cold water. Rhas. The dry comb of a Hen
stops the pissing of bed; Gal. So the testicle Eggs boiled in vinegar, help
the heat of urine. The shell provokes urine, so Gatiner. Leonel. so with
saxifrage water: mixed with wine it helps burstings. Marcel. The yolk of an
egg helps the exiture of the fundament. Plin. Eggs boiled hard in vinegar and
taken with peppper stop the belly. Rhas. They cause venery, so the testicles.
Gal. Egg shells boiled with cuminseed help the pain and inflammation of the
genitalls. Some commend the powder thereof against the Gonorrhoed Eggs steeped
in vinegar stop the terms being taken with meal and water. Kiran. So if taken
raw. The ashes of the shells, with that of Hearts horn, powder of Amber, and
aneifeed, an. Drach. 1. taken in water help the whites. Being applied with
myrrh they stop the courses. So Plin. the yolks boiled and drunk in wine do
the same. Ornithol. The fume of eggs made by a fire hot brick causes the
menses; but the contrary is more probable. Plin. The yolks of raw eggs applied
with oil and wine help inflations of the womb. Hipp. The fat of a Cock
anointed an a suppository, of nitre and rosin, brings forth the dead Child;
Kiran. So the heart of a Hen, applied to the hip. Plin. or eggs drunk in wine
with Anet, Rue, and Cuminseed. Myrepf. A crude egg drunk with warm water
expels the secundine. The powder of egg shells applied helps the falling
down of the matrix. As for the external use. Plin. The white of an egg with
Amylum helps St. Anthonies fire, so with oil applying beete leaves, so Seren.
Gal. A raw egg applied presently helps burnings: it moderately cooling and
drying without biting: some add barley meal and a little salt. Ornithol. So
the yolk with oil of roses. Arnold. The oil of eggs helps the pain thereof.
The fame helps the itch, or the destilled water thereof. Galen for the same
purpose mixeth eggs with other things. Sext. The red dung of a Cock breaks
fellons and eases the pain. So Plin. With vinegar. The white of eggs with
white frankincense applied, helps broken bones. Myrepsus uses eggs in his
Medicine against eminencies. Plin. Mixed with Sow-bread they help moist ulcers
in the head. Ornithol. the powder of egg shells and of the soles of old
shoes, with Cows dung stamped, dries up old ulcers in the legs. Arnold, The
oil of eggs help fistula's, and melancholic ulcers. Avic eggs with oil of
roses help impostumes of the fundament, they are used in plasters also, and in
clysters against ulcers, apostumes, and the crysipelas with oil. Pet. Upon.
Eggs help the increasing of tumors. Rhas. The green dung of a Cock applied
plaisterwise with the yolk of an egg and a little saffron, opens any
porulent abscesse. Ornithol. The skin of the ventricle of a Capon powdered,
is good in mortified fistula's. The whites of eggs purge wounds, and
constringe what is laxe. Plin. The powder of the shells helps all eruptions of
blood. The liquour of the whites distilled helps cicatrices and other spots,
being often used, so the oil of eggs. The egg used to the head, and
afterward using water, or the juice of Sowbread, kills nits. Plin. The fresh
dung helps the alopecia. Kiranides and Rhases use it with vinegar, after
rubbing with an onion. Oil of eggs causes the hairs to grow. The gall of a
Cock helps the weakness of the eyes, sharpning the sight, and helping the
spots thereof; especially with the juice of celondine and honey. Gal. An egg
steeped in vinegar, dissected and applied to the eyes, causes sleeping.
Constant. The white injected into the eyes, helps the prickings thereof, as
also all their heat and itchings. Diosc. The white of an egg applied to the
forehead with frankincense stops and diverts defluxions. Plin. So with woman's
milk and wool. It helps the Epiphora, also some use it with saffron, or with
snailes. Diosc. The white injected into the eyes helps the inflammations
thereof. Gal. So those of the eyebrows, ears, Dugges, and nervous parts, the
whole being used. With milk and oil of roses it helps phlegmons of the eyes.
The chymicall liquour of the whites cools the eyes, strengthens them, and is
useful in ocular remedies. Gal. Plin. The white helps lippitude. The gall
helps suffusions, especially with honey, and the juice of fennel, rue, eye
bright, swallow-wort or vervaine. Some say the dung of a white Cock with honey
and vinegar injected into the eyes stops the weeping thereof. Archig. Gal. The
white helps bloody and bruised eyes, so the yolk, some add honey; so used with
Wine. Marcel. The gall with honey helps darkness. Constant. The blood of a
Cock also helps the eyes. The fat injected helps the vices of the ears, if
stopped by water, or are purulent, as also if of difficult hearing. Kiran With
spikenard, it helps the pains of the ears, and passions of the nerves, being
hotter and dryer than that of Swine. Avic. The yolk of an egg helps hot
impostums in the ear, and the oil helps the pain thereof, and opens the
same; though Galen says the white eases pain: To which if there be
inflammation, he adds opium and Woman's milk; so the pellicle of the ventricle
with wine, and opium. The fat of a Hen helps the asperity of the tongue. The
oil of eggs with Goose grease helps the toothach. Plin. The powder of egg
shells serves as a dentifrice. Aeg. Hens fat mollifieth the gums and
facilitats the breeding of teeth in Children. Kiran. So the brain. Marcel.
Plin. The fat helps the chaps of the lips. Ornithol. An egg applied with a
linen cloth and wine helps tumors of the Duggs. Gal. The broth of a Hen or
Kid, helps the inflammations of the tonsills, and quinsies, so with other
things, in Eupor. Kiran. A crude egg helps the ruptures and inflammations of
the fundament. Diosc. Plin. So the yolk. Diosc. The fat helps the pain of the
matrix, and impostume of the same. Avic. A pessary made of the white with the
oil of Alcanna helps ulcers of the womb. The bath and fume from a Hen stuffed
with wormwood helps the gout: Marcel. Plin. So the dung applied fresh: Aetius
used eggs also in his podagrick cerot. Kiran. The liver of a Hen applied with
barley meal does the same. Marcel. The ashes of the dung applied with oil
help ulcers of the feet: with oil and Nitre it helps corns. Thus of the
outward and inward remedies hereof. Furthermore, Aet. The broth of a young
Cockrell after vomiting, helps against poison, and that the white and yolk will
show in the urine. Diosc. Eggs drunk with oil help against aconite. Nicand.
The broth of a fat Hen helps against dorycnium. The dung helps against
Frogstooles with wine and vinegar, or oxymel. So Aet. Plin. and Rond. The D. is
Drach. 1. or 2. The same helps against the bitings of a mad Dog. Aet. or of a
Cat. The Body dissected helps the bitings of Serpents, or of other venomous
beasts, so Gal. So the brain drunk with a little pepper. Kiran. The blood of a
Cock helps those that have drunk the Sea Hare. Plin. Eggs applied with cresses
help the wounds of Serpents. The brain drunk with Pepper helps the bitings of
the Phalangia, so Rhas. The gall also helps against venomous bitings and
wounds, as of the Scorpion, the fish called Callionimus, Sea Tortise, and
Hyena. The rumps of live Cocks being successively applied help Buboes, in the
plague. Hens fed with vipers help the Elephantiasis. The dung helps plague
botches. A Cock dissected and applied helps the Frenzy. Some cast the dung
into the nostrills of Horses against their phlegm. Having eggs given to them
steeped in vinegar they recover from their cough, after using Fenigreek, Prisan
cremor and Honey. Absyrt. Hier. The dung used in a clyster with Wine and Nitre
helps their Iliack passion and inflation of the belly, using Cows dung by the
mouth. Anatol. The dung used to the privities of a Mare with Turpentine causes
her to go to Horse. Eggs given raw to kine cause appetite, putting Garlic
into their nostrils. The powder of the dung helps their ulcers, with the juice
of elder, after washing with the decoction thereof with wine and salt. The
broth of a Cap^n is good in weaknesses, fevers and the Pestilence with
appropriate herbs, so the distilled water. The grease helps the colic.
Aldrov. Jonst. The powder of the pellicle of the stomach helps fistula's: the
bones of the legs are used against the whites in Women. Schrod. The gelly is
nutritive, the fat is betwixt that of Geese and Swine. The white of an egg is
cold, binding, and glewing: the yolk is anodyne, degestive, loosening and
maturative. It is used in Clysters with salt.

Colemouse. Ficedula.
P. Almost every where, in all Countries. M. Of Figs. and Corn, etc. N.
(...). Melancoryphus. Carbonarius parus.
Colemouse. Schrod. T. The flesh eaten sharpneth the eye sight. As for the
description, it is needless, the bird being common, nor the note, it being
often heard; as for the rest, see Titmouse. Aldrov. They are best in the
autumn, being then fattest. Aristot. They build in hollow trees. They bring
forth many young, and usually an odd number: They feed their young very fat:
they are taken by nets, and birdlime.

Coot. Fulica.
P. In Fennish and watery places, and reedy pooles, etc. M. Of Herbs and
Seeds, and the like. N. (...). Phalaris. Mergus niger. Pullus aquaticus.
Coot. Aldrov. T. They have a rank and moorish smell, therefore they are used
to be boild in an open pot, and roasted afterward; so they are more pleasant,
tenderer and of easier concoction: they are best in autumn; but never good for
temperate Bodies. V. some use the heart against the Epilepsy. The flesh is used
also against bitings by Spiders. The description is needless. They build their
nests on the ground, lay eggs of the bigness of those of Hens, in the summer
time. They foretell storms by their noise, and winds by their diving, and
clapping of their wings; so Jonston.

Cormorant. Mergus.
P. (...) the Sea, Rivers, and Fennes, and such like places. M. Of Eeles, and
Congers, etc. N. (...). Dypres. Poynges. Bunges.
Cormorant. Aldrov. T. the flesh is black and hard of digestion. V. Kiran. The
flesh roasted and eaten helps the Elephantiasis and spleen. The blood is
alexipharmick and resists venomous beasts: the powder of the ventricle helps
concoction, sc. of that called Aethyia. Seren. So of that called Mergus; though
Galen and Wotton deny it. Plin. Magicians use the heart against quartans.
Diosc. The old liver drunk with hydromel, brings out the secundine. Aet.
Being roasted, with oil and a little salt it helps those that are bitten by a
mad Dog. Kiran. The gall with rosin of Cedar hinders the growing of hairs on
the eye-liddes, after evulsion: the eggs help the dysentery, reins, and
stomach. Jonst. Their young presently get their living. The old are often
fished with, having a string tied about their necks, to hinder them from
swallowing. Their noise about the banks predicts tempests. The Water Crow may
be reduced hither, the skin of which is used to be worn upon the stomach,
causing concoction, their ventricle presently concocting all meat.

Crane. Grus.
P. In Lybia, Egypt, and Aethiopia. M. Of Fruits. and Herbs, etc. N. (...).
Avis Palamedis. Heb. Sas.
Crane. Gal. T. The flesh is fibrous and hard. Aeg. The lesser are more moist,
easierly concocted, of stronger meat, and sooner pass through the Body. Rhas.
The flesh causes melancholy. Sym. Seth. It Is hot and dry, therefore they are
to be eaten 2 days after killed; but it seems rather to be cold, and dry, of
a gross substance, and hard of concoction. They are best after they have
hanged in their feathers, and are after used with Aromatic sauces, drinking
sack after it. Ornithol. The flesh is moister, than that of the Stork. The
eggs are eaten by the Indians. Barth. Ang. But they are insiped, of a strong
smell, ungrateful taste, and of hard digestion. V. Avic. Port. They defend from
venomous creatures. Villanov. They help against cankers, the palsy, and
ulcers. Marcel. Used in meat they help against the tormina. The broth
clarifieth the voice, and increases the sperme, so Sym. Seth. Arnold. The
powder of the head, eyes, and belly helps fistula's, cankers, and all ulcers.
The brain is used against vices of the fundament. Rhas. The liver helps pains
of the reins, drach. 1. being drunk with the water of ciches: also the
testicles with sal gemme, spume of the Sea, dung of a Lizard and Sugar, help
white spots in the eyes, and bruites. The gall helps spasmes. Hal. Being cast
into the nostrils with the water of sweet marierom, it helps the palsy.
Constant. The fat helps all hardnesses. Sym. Seth. That arising from boiling
helps deafness, and the hardness of the spleen with vinegar of squills,
taken in a bath. Applied it helps swellings. The dung is of the nature of that
of the Pigeon. Some say that the feathers stupifie Serpents. Schrod. The flesh
is good for the nerves and membranes, as also against the colic. The fat
helps the stiffnesse of the neck, and is of the nature of the Goose grease. The
marrow of the shanks is used in ophthalmick unguents. As for the description,
the neck is 18. inches long, the sides are black, the neathermost parts white,
the Crown black with a red spot, the rest ash colored, except the greater
feathers of the wings, and are crisped toward the tail. The rough artery is
inserted in the flesh to the bone sternon, therefore they are heard so far.
They generate as Sparrows. They lay 2. eggs, their noise is great and loud,
they live 40. years, run fast, usually fly with the wind, in a triangular
form, and vary according to the wind. They follow the most robust and ancient
leader, and when weary, substitute the next, the hindmost always make a noise
for the rest: they watch in the night with a stone in their feet. The rest put
the head under the wing: also they hate Eagles.

Craye. Cornix.
P. About Cities, Houses, and Rivers, etc. M. Of Fruits, Nuts, Worms, fishes,
and flesh, etc. N. (...). Gaudes. Kokis. Berositis. Rooke.
Craye. Aldrov. T. the flesh is of ill, stinking, and bilious juice; yet it is
eaten by the poor people in Italy. Demet. Constantinop. The flesh hurts Hawks
also. V. Plin. Marcel. The brain boiled, and eaten, helps great and old pains
of the head, Plin. And causes hairs in the eye lids. Kiran. The dung helps
the dysentery. The bellies laid 3. days in fresh dung, and left after to
ebulliate in oil till resolved, cause the hairs to be white. Ornithol. The
putrid flesh draws shrew mice unto it, which then may be killed. Jonst. The
flesh is thought useful in Chronical diseases. As for the description, it is
about the bigness of a Jay, with black feathers, bill, and legs, and whitish
about the neck, with hairs about the eye lids. They breed in the tops of
trees, and sometimes join with Crows. They lay 2. eggs, they love their
young, they are scabbed in the summer solstice, they fly swiftly, and they love
the Stork and Crane, but hate Owls.

Crow. Corvus.
P. Desolate, humid, and high places that are tilled. M. Of Corn, Apples,
Cherries, and Worms, etc. N. (...). Satyra avis. Heb. Oreb. Arab. Gerabib.
Crow. Aldrov. T. the flesh is counted unwholesome, they feeding upon dead
bodies. So for Hawks also. V. Drach. 1. Of the ashes drunk thrice in a day,
with the water of Castoreum helps the Epilepsy. Philes, the eggs with myrtles
make the hair black; so the blood and brain with black wine, Rhas. So the fat
with rue and oil. Ornithol The brain with vervaine water helps the Epilepsy.
Rhas. The gall prevents venery, with the oil sesamine. Rhas. The fume of the
same makes the hair white. The heart is said to cause watchfulness. Plin.
Marcel. Sext. The dung with wool helps the toothach, Plin. And the cough in
Children: the fume helps the white scald also. Kiran. The eggs cause abortion.
Arnold. The eggs help the spleen, with those of a Pigeon applied to the
spleen. Schrod. The ashes of Crows help the gout. The description is needless.
Jonst. They lay 4. or 5. Eggs, sit 20. days, live 40. years, and hate Kites.

Cuckoe. Cuculus.
P. Almost every where, in England, Holland, etc. M. Of Flies, Birds, Flesh,
Eggs, and Fruits. N. (...). Heb. Kaath. Gugulus Albert.
Cuckoe. Aristot. T. The young are fat, and of good taste; the flesh is used by
the Italians. V. Plin. Being applied in a Hares skin it causes sleep. Some
use the dung decoct, and drunk, against the biting of a mad Dog. Rondel. The
ashes help the pain and moisture of the stomach. Schrod. And the stone; it
also helps the epileptick, and those that have agues, being given in the fit:
the description is useless. Jonst. usually they lay but one egg, chiefly in
the nest of the Hedg-sparrow, which bred, some say, after, does devour the
damme, their flights are short, interrupted and low. Their voice is known. They
are enemies to birds, and friends to the Kite. Their feathers come off in
Winter, and they are scabed.

D.
Duck. Anas.
P. In watery, and Fenny places, and the like. M. Of the roots and seeds af
aquatick plants. N. (...). Pappos. (...). Hisp. Anade.
DUck. Aldrov. T. The flesh is hot, moist, gross, hard, not easily concocted,
and excrementitious. Gal. It Is harder than that of the Hen or Pigeon; yet
Archigenes commends it for those that are stomachick. Avic. It sometimes
causes fevers, and descends slowly out of the stomach, loading the same:
but if it be concocted, it yields much nourishment, and nourishes more than
that of other foul, making far; yet it is not of so good juice. The best part
in them is the wing: the liver is good, sweet, and of good juice, but this
rather agrees to Geese. Its in moisture like Mutton, and hotter than that of
other domestic souls. Mes. It Is very moist, clarifieth the color and voice,
helps flatulencies, and strengthens the body: Elluch. It Is good for those that
are hot and young, and chiefly in the winter. It Is hot and moist 2. it is best
roasted, with spices. Plat. It Is hotter than the Goose. Jul. Alex. The liver
helps fluxes caused by the vice of the liver. Alex. Ben. H. the flesh is naught
in times of the plague. Fracast. And for the french pocks. Savon. Also it
causes nauseousnesse. Bruyer. Those are worst that are bred in Cities.
Villanov. They are best in autumn, but never good for temperate bodies. The
wild are better than the tame and the young, than the old, a days after
killed. They are bad for those that are melancholic, but good in cold seasons
and for those that labor: As for the cookery thereof it may be seen in Platina
and Apicius. Muff. Young Ducks fed with grinded malt are of good nourishment,
clear the color, help hoarsenesse, increase sperme, and expel wind. V. Marcel.
The flesh eaten helps the termina, so applied alive to Cows, Horses, or Men.
Avic. It causes coiture. Gal. The blood drunk with oil helps against poison
some potions, and bitings of vipers, so Kiran. and Myreps. Diosc. Therefore its
used in many antidotes, as the Diahaematon, etc. it helps the bleeding of the
nostrils, and confusions of the eyes, being after anointed with Oesypus and
honey. It stops the belly. Serap. The fat, is hot subtle, and better than
the rest; but this rather agrees to Goose grease. Myreps. It Is used in
plasters against the pleuresy. With oil of roses it stops bleeding.
Villanov. The dung applied helps venomous bitings. The womb is used in the
Antidotus Ecloge of Myrepsus, against the coeliack passion and spitting of
blood. Schrod. Applied alive they help the colic. The fat heateth, moistens,
softens, digesteth and resolves, therefore it is used in inward and outward
griefs, sc. of the sides, joints, and cold distempers of the nerves, etc. As
for the description it may be omitted. Jonst. They generate in March and are
very salacious. They sit near waters. They go showly, by reason of the
shortness of their feet, and they are almost of the nature of Geese. They shun
the Eagle by diving. They foretell wind thereby: and rain, by their noise.

E.
Eagle. Aquila.
P. In Peru. Germany. and Polonia. and other places. M. Of the flesh of
Pigeons, Geese, and Swans, etc. N. (...). Heb. Nescher. Chald. Nisra. Arab.
Alneser.
EAgle. Aldrov. T. The flesh is hard, fibrous, and excrementitous, begetting a
black juice, therefore it is fitter for Medicine, than meat; so D. Hieron. V.
The skin dressed like that of a Swan helps the colic and vices of the
stomach. The nerves help pains of the nerves and gout. The bones help the
Hemicrania. Those of the scull ease the headache. The wings put under the feet
accelerate delivery. The feet help the pain of the loins. The brain drunk in
wine helps the jaundise. With oil and a little Rosin of Cedar it helps the
Scotoma, and all affections of the head. The tongue helps the incontinencie of
urine. Being hung about the neck in a linen cloth it helps the rough artery,
vices of the Columella, difficulty of breathing and the cough, so Gal. the
heart is said to drive away wild beasts. The powder of the ventricle helps
digestion; but it emaciats. The powder of the liver drunk with the blood, and
oxymel 10. days, helps the Epilepsy. Diosc. The gall is the strongest of all.
Gal. It Is used against swellings and suffusions in the eyes. An errhine may be
made thereof for Children, against flatulencies in the head. With water it
cleanses white spots in the eyes. Applied it helps the bitings of the viper,
and venim of Scorpions. The powder of the testicles causes venery. The quills
kill warts. Serap. The fume of the dung brings forth the Foetus. Port. It
drives away Serpents. Jonst. The brain is so hot, that the powder thereof
taken, causes madness. As for the descripton, the body is thick, and upright;
the bones have little marrow, the bill is crooked, eyes little, quills hard,
claws aduncate, gall eruginous, blood thick and fibrous, and dung very sharp.
They copulate often, they can fly from morning to night very high, they see
well, they hate the Swan, Crane, Stork, Vulture, Dragon and Serpents: they live
long, but when old, dye by reason of their crooked bills.

G.
Goose. Anser.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of Grain, Grass, and
the like. N. (...). Ganza. Hisp. Ansaron.
GOose. Muff. T. Galen commends only the giblets, stomach, and liver of a
Goose sodde^ in broth. The flesh of Goselings well fed is nourishing and
pleasant; but the best is the stuble Goose, being of a middle constitution. If
it be above 4. months old it cannot be well digested without Garlic sauce,
exercise, and strong drink. Their moisture is corrected by stuffing them with
spices and hot herbs, Savonarola counts the flesh hot, Albertus, cold, and
Galen, more moist than of any water foul; but their feeding shows them to be
hot and dry, they drinking often, delighting to be in the coldest water, and
eating lettuce, endive, purcelane, trefoile, ducks meat, and sowthistle.
Aldrov. The Jews delight in the flesh thereof. The flesh is hard, musculous,
and not easily concocted, also they cause little laudable juice. Therefore they
are not often to be eaten, by those that love their health, being
excrementitious also, and more gross, hot, and moist than any domestic foul,
being of the nature of the Ostrich; so Elluch. Rhas. Avic. Savon: it causes
fevers. Jul. Alex. It causes obstructions; but if well digested, it is of much
and strong nourishment. Alex. Ben. H. they are naught in the time of
Pestilence, Villanov. And for those that are troubled with the hemorrhoids,
Fracast. or with the french pocks as also those that have the gout, and in all
diseases. They are best in the Winter, as also all other hot and strong flesh.
The eggs are worse than those of Hens, Sim. Seth. Gross, and hardly
concocted. V. Bapt. Port. The flesh eaten causes length of life. Fi^in. So the
fat. Port. It makes loquacious, and to tell what is done, in dreams. It
cures Hydrophobie, and causes venery Gal. The fat is more fit for use, than
that of Cocks, but more digesting, being of a thinner substance, it is the most
emollient of all wild foul's, more loosening than lard, drying, and easing
pain and lassitude; yet that of Hens or Hogs may be its substitute. Aet. Its
hotter and dryer, than lard, Aeg. or Goats fat, and of thinner parts. Goose
grease if not salted, helps the pain of the matrix, and is mixed with
plasters for the eyes, and chaps of the lips, pains of the ears, roughness
of the face, and color. It eases pain, helps biting humors, all tumors,
inflammations with pain, and phegmons with oil of roses. Aesculap. Constant.
Also against all hardnesses, scirhus's, S. Anthony his fire, and bruises with
mustard seed, honey and wax; in wounds: to stop bleeding with butter, and to
help gallings with the brain, alum and oesipus. Hippocrates uses it against
cicatrices. With honey it helps the biting of a mad Dog. With hot water and
butter it helps against poison. Avic. It helps the alopecia; so Marcel. and
Gal. With the seed of cresses it helps scurse, Plin. Sext. and ulcers of the
head. Apollon. It helps the pain of the head and temples. Plin. Injected into
the nose with oil of roses it stops bleeding. With oesipus and myrtle wine it
causes sleep, and it preserves the skin of the face; so Diosc. that it be
not hurt by the sun or weather, so Ruel. and Marcel. Virg. It helps the vices
of the ears. Pliny and Marcellus add earth worms. Pliny uses it with the
juice of Basil. With woman's milk it helps contused and fractured ears, so with
myrrh, butter or rosin: with the former it helps their inflammations, tumors
and redness. Marcel. With earth worms decoct it helps purulent ears. Bapt.
Fort. It helps deafness, some add the juice of onions also, or of garlic;
the same helps the sounding of the ears, so with honey. Sext. Also with Bulls
gall. Apollon. And the pain thereof with the fatt: and it helps deafness
with saffron: with nitre, rosin, and oil it helps the inflations of the ears.
It helps when any thing is fallen into the ear, and brings out any humidity
with saffron. With butter it helps diverse affections of the nostrils. It helps
the ozaena, and chaps of the lips, so Diosc. Sym. Seth, Plin. and Marcel. Avic.
So those of the face, and ulcers of the mouth. It helps rigors of the neck, and
tumors thereof with the yolks of eggs. With that of Mice it helps crump-backs.
Plin. With oil of roses it preserves the duggs after childbirth, with milk
it restrains them. With tar and the powder of anet it helps the empyema.
With Sea crabs it helps the phthisick. Plin. With oesipus, urine, myrrh, and
oil of myrtles it helps the dropsy. Marcel. With the brain, butter, alum, and
oesipus, it helps the reins. In clysters it helps the colic. The former
composition helps all vices of the fundament. Marcel. With agrimony it helps
the condylomata. With warm water, the tosted spume of silver, galls, white
wine, and oil, it helps the hemorrhoids in Women: and pain of the fundament
with oesipus, as also the ulcers of the genitals, so Diosc. with the curd of a
Hare and barley meal it helps the incontinency of urine. Avic. It cures the
vices of the womb, sc. without salt, and fresh. with Woman's milk and oesipus it
helps the pains thereof. Hippocrates mixeth it with other things. Plin. Hip.
It helps its swellings and hardness; he mixeth it with other things to purge
the womb, To draw out the difficult birth, and the dead infant, to expel the
secundine, stop reds, help the dropsy of the womb, inflammation, suffocation,
pustules, inflamed ulcers, to cause conception, and to hinder abortion, as also
to help the falling down of the womb. Plin. Applied it helps the pain of the
duggs, breaks the mola, and eases the scab or itch, with wall lice. Furner.
Used fresh with ligature, it helps the wrinkles in the bellies of Women. Kiran.
It Is also used in pessaries. The liquour is used with other things, against the
palsy, and gout, Extenuaton of the joints, and spasmes. The broth helps
against poisons, as the cantharides, toxicum, coriander, aconite, and
dorychnium. Diosc. The blood is used in antidotes. Myreps. It resists poisons
with vinegar. Diosc. It helps the poison of the Sea-Hare, Plin. So with oil,
and all evil medicaments, with the earth of lemnos, and the juice of the white
thorn, with water. When dry it is used against long agues. Plin. The gall helps
contused eyes, using oesypus and honey after it. Kiran. With that of a Bull,
and the juice of Daphne, it helps deafness. With elaterium and honey it helps
the quinsey. that of the wild Goose with the juice of knot grass, helps
toward conception and venery. The marrow is more liquid, than that of
fourfooted beasts. Hipp. It helps diseases of the womb, as the hardness
thereof, with the rose ointment; so with Woman's milk. their eggs are gross,
not easily concocted, and of bad juice. Sym. Seth. Yet they help the wit of
those that use them constantly with honey and butter. Gal. drach. sem. Of the
shell taken in wine helps the dysentery. Fernel. The dung is of the same nature
as that of Pigeons; but stronger, for it attracteth, heateth, and is
rubifacient with barley meal, and discutient with vinegar. Being dried and
stamped with the seed of cresses, it helps old pains of the hipps, sides, neck
and loins; it helps the gout and arthritick pains. Mizald. It helps
impostumes. Ornithol. Newly taken it helps inflammations called griggelen by
the Helvetians. Rusius uses it against the morphew and ring-worms in Horses.
Kiran. Drunk it helps the cough. Hipp. With the rose ointment it causes
conception: it helps the scurvy with rheinish wine, Bulls dung, nutmegs, and
cloves. Some use it fresh against the jaundise. The powder of the feathers of
the belly stops bleeding. The feathers indented, put into the nostrils cause
the nose to bleed. Weck. a sacculus of the feathers helps the crudities of the
stomach. Alex. Ben. The powder helps the stone. The brain helps gallings, the
reins, rhagades, and hemorrhoids, with the fatt and honey. With the fatt, oil
of roses, and the shells, it helps tumors of the matrix: with Hearts marrow it
helps chaps of the lips. It cures the aphthae. With spikenard it helps the
rheum of the ears: And carbuncles with cleansed raisins. Injected with oil
of lillies it brings forth the dead child, so Kiranides. The tongue is
counted good for the bladder, Gal. one being eaten every day, stops the flux of
urine. So Plin. and Marcel. Being roasted, the same helps the hydrocele. Sym.
Seth. It helps the strangury being eaten, and it causes lust in Women. The
ventricle helps those that are stomachick. The intestines help the coeliack.
The heart and lungs cure the phthisick, and the liver helps the hepatick. Sym.
Seth. The testicles help to generation, so Gaudentius Merula. Schrod. The fatt
applied, looseneth the belly of children. The D. of the blood is drach. 1. or
2. The dung incideth, and opens; it brings forth the menses, secundine, and
urine: it is much used against the yellow jaundise, scurvy and dropsy. The D. is
drach. sem. to drach. 1. and if fresh drach. 2. in some convenient liquour. The
powder of the cuticle of the feet is astringent, therefore it is counted good in
the flux of the menses. The D. is drach. sem. it is used outwardly to kibes. And
some mix it with antiicterick remedies.

H.
Hawke. Accipiter.
P. In England, Prussia, Livonia, and Russia, etc. M. Of birds, and foul: the
worst on frogs, etc. N. (...). Heb. Netz. Arab. Basi. Pers. Bas.
HAwke. Aristot. T. The flesh of the young ones, is fatt and sweet, especially
of Buzzards; therefore it may be used as diet. V. Kiran. Being roasted and
eaten, the flesh helps the epilepsy. Plin. Being boiled in oil of roses, it
helps all vices of the eyes. Rab. Moys. The flesh of the young Ones,
strengthens the mind, and resists melancholy, and the perturbations of the
mind. Aesculap. The fat with oil, helps the dimnesse of the eyes. Vrfin. And
the junctures. Kiran. Some wear the eyes about the neck against tertian agues.
Anon. The powder of the ventricle steeped 3. days and nights in wine not
allayed, with 3. spoonfuls of the juice of Fennel and Honey, drunk before bed
time, helps any evil affections of the body. Gal. The gall is very sharp and
eroding, so that some say by it is cleansing quality it helps the eyes. Plin. So
the dung, or ashes thereof with atrick honey: with wine it is taken as an
antidote against the hiring of the Stellion. Hipp. Being drunk fasting in wine,
it helps toward conception. Villanov. With the slough of a Serpent, Opopanax,
myrrh, Galbanum, castoreum, citrine sulphur, and madder, it causes delivery,
sc. the fume thereof being taken, with the gall of a heifer. Wecker in his
Syntaxis, prescribes it with Cinnamon, Cassia, Saffron, and a little white
wine. Schrod. The oil helps all vices of the skin. As for the description it
is needless. Jonst. They are falacious, they lay 4 or 5 eggs, and sit thereon
for twenty days. They live long and have many diseases, sc. difficulty of
breathing, then they gape and vomit: worms, then the feathers fall off the
breast: choler, then the vomit is green: the fever, then there are wheales
in the mouth: as also with stypticity, trembling, etc. They see sharply, fly
swiftly, and live solitarily.

Heath-cock. Attagen.
P. In Creete, Cyprus. Spain, and England, in diverse places. M. Of Corn
and-Fruits, and the like. N. (...). Perdix Asclepica.
Heath-cock. Aldrov. T. the flesh is easily concocted, and causes good juice.
Jul. Alex. It has the deserts of all commendations therein, it causing clear
and strong spirits, both in respect of the quantity, and facility of
concoction: Gal. The nutriment thereof is neither thin nor gross. Muff. When
young it is little inferior to that of a Pheasant, and well relishing; but
when old, the flesh is black, except that next the breast bone, which is white,
tender, firm, and wholesome. V. Gal. The flesh helps those that are
stomachick, or nephritick, so Alex. Ben. Avic. it increases the brain,
intellect, and sperme. Jonst. The flesh is without fibers. Tral. It helps those
that are purulent: The description is needless. They love Hearts, and hate
Cocks.

Heron. Ardea.
P. In France, and England, and other Countries. M. Of Fishes, and Oisters,
etc. N. (...). Heb. Scholach. Arab. Babgack.
Heron. Bellon. T. The flesh is better, than that of the Crane, being more
sapid and tender: though some, count it foerid and not very healthful. It Is
best when young, it smelling rankely when old, Alex Also being fibrous and
hard. Bruyerin; yet its eaten by the nobility in France. V. Plin. Some think
the bill causes sleep. Ornithol. The fat clears the eyes. Villanov. H. the
flesh is not good for those that have the Hemorrhoids. Schrod. The fat helps
the pain of the gout, and deafness, the same serves to catch fish withal.
The description is needless. Jonst. They generate moving their wings, and
breed in woods and fenny places. They fly holding their legs backwards and
their necks contracted, and that very high. They hate the Lark, and kill the
Hawk with their bills.

Houpe. Vpupa.
P. In Mountains and Woods, on the Earth. M. Of Worms, Beetles, and Flies,
etc. N. (...). Phylincopteros. Heb. Anapha.
Houpe. Rhas. T. The flesh is austere. V. Marcel. The ashes drunk in wine, help
the colon. Rhas. Applied as a cataplasme it helps the bitings of a Crab. Plin.
The heart helps the pain of the sides. The blood used to the temples causes
sleep. The fume of the feathers expels worms. The tongue helps oblivion. The
skin helps the pain of the head. Rhas. The eye as an amulet cures the
leprosy. Schrod. The feathers help the pain of the head. Jonst. As for their
description, they are a little bigger than a Quail, and of a duskish color,
which they change in the autumn. They have a tuft on their heads. They make
their nests in foggs. They lay three eggs, like, but less than those of
Partridges, and of a stronger smell. They fly gently. Their noise shows rain.

K.
Kingfisher. Alcedo.
P. Almost every where by rivers, and ditches. M. Of fishes, by diving under
the water. N. (...). Halcyon. Avis Possideonis.
KIngfisher. Kiran. T. V. Some affirm that being roasted and eaten, the flesh
helps those that are demoniack, which seems to be fabulous: As also that the
eyes, applied in a linen cloth, to the head of those that sleep too much,
cause waking. Bapt. Port. So the flesh eaten, the bird being wakeful. Schrod.
Some say, that the heart dried and hung about the necks of infants, helps the
falling sickness. As for the description, it may be omitted, as useless.
Jonst. They lay five eggs, and build on the shore. They love the Males and keep
company with them all the year. Some say that their breast always turns to
the wind, being hung up by the bill with a thread, in the house.

Kite. Milvus.
P. Almost every where, in England and other places. M. Of birds, and carrion,
and the like. N. (...). Heb. Daah. Arab. Cheda.
Kite. Avic. T. The flesh is gross. Aldrov. Yet it is eaten by poor people in
Germany. V. Some say that a twig of the nest, laid under the head, eases the
pain thereof, and the opisthotonos. The powder of the flesh helps the gout,
Gal. and the epilepsy, Plin. so the liver eaten, as also the opisthoronos
drunk; applied it helps the vices of the eyes, so Bapt. Port. Marcel. the
testicles drunk fasting with spring water and honey, help toward fecundity or
venery. Plin. The dung helps the pains of the joints: Florent. The fume of the
same with storax drives away creeping things, Port. and Serpents. The worms of
the flesh help the gout. The gall takes away the spots of the eyes. Schrod. The
D. of the powder is scrup. sem. or scrup. 1. The blood applied with nettles
helps the gout, so the fatt. Jonst. They love the Cuckoo.

L.
Lark. Alauda.
P. In England, France, and Italy, and other places. M. Of Corn and worms,
etc. N. (...). Cassita. Galerita.
LArk. Durant. T. The flesh is hot and moist without excess, and is fittest to
be eaten, when fattest, sc. in autumn and winter: And is of good nourishment.
When roasted they help the appetite, and are easily concocted, especially with
sage, if not too stale. Cardan. It Is hot and dry. Savon. 2. sc. The Cristed.
Elluch. That without the Criste is the best, V. Aldrov. The Cristed lark helps
the colic, being eaten roasted or boiled, so Gal. and Diosc. Marcel. Virg.
Seren. and Plin. So the powder, so Alex. Tral. and Port. They discussing their
flatulency by garrulity. Note, They are fattest in the winter, having ratified
bodies, and the winter hindering perspiration. Schrod. The heart applied to the
thigh helps the colic. The fresh blood drunk in vinegar helps the stone. As
for the description it is useless. Jonst. They build with dry herbs on the
ground, and breed thrice in a year. Their disease, is the epilepsy.

M.
Moorehen. Gallina corylorum.
P About rivers, pooles, and marshes. M. Of grain, but their diet is not much
observed. N. Gallina vitium. Bonasa. Orix.
MOorehen. Ornithol. T. Some count it a noble meat, and the best of all wild
foul, and say there are three colors in the flesh. Albert. It Is black
without; but white within; tender, and of a very pleasant taste. Auth. de not.
rer. Mundel. In the goodness of the juice it may be compared to the Partridg.
V. Stumpf. The flesh is good against the epilepsy. The ventricle helps the
asthma in horses. So Jonston.

N.
Nightingal. Luscinia.
P. In woods, almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of worms, ants, eggs and
bread. N. (...). Acredula. Ales Daulia.
NIghtingal. Aldrov. T. The flesh is sweet and wholesome. V. It causes
watchfulness. Kiran. The gall with honey clears the eyes. Alex. Ben. The
flesh eaten helps the cachexy. The description is needless. Jonst. They breed
in May. Their voice is known. They hate the Viper and Hawk, and are docible.

O.
Ostrich. Struthiocamelus.
P. In Africa, Lybia, Aethiopia, and Arabia, etc. M. Almost of any thing. N.
(...). Avis Lybica.
OStrich. Gal. T. V. The ventricle taken in the quantity of two spoone fulls
with wine, helps the flux, if there be no fever; but else with water. Kiran.
The stone taken out thereof, and hanged about the neck helps concoction. R.
Mos. the inward tunicle helps the stone. Avic. The flesh is hot and fatt,
causes appetite, strengthens the body, and causes coiture; for it is of very
hard concoction, much superfluity, grosler and harder, than any flesh. The fatt
is more efficacious than that of the Goose. With the diacinnabar plaster it
helps hard swellings: And is used against arthritick pain. Hermol. The urine
takes out the spots of ink. Kiran. The eggs help the gout. Schrod. The fatt
helps the nervous parts, and softens the spleen. Jonst. They generate as the
Camel.

Owl. Noctua.
P. In England, France, Germany, and other places. M. Of wasps, bees, lizards,
and mice. N. (...). Heb. Kos. Nyctimene.
Owl. Aldrov. T. The flesh is little used in meat, and if so, by the poorer
sort of people, wanting better victuals. R. Mos. Yet if young it is of good
savor; But Rhasis says it is cold, dry and gross. V. Some commend the blood
against the orthopnoea. Aet. It Is a psilothron after evulsion. The flesh helps
those that are paralytick. R. Mos. As also those that are melancholic, and
troubled in mind. The brain eaten helps the headache: The same as also the
liver infused in oil, and put into the ear, helps its impostumes. Rhas. That
of the male helps the nyctilops. Plin. It helps the quinsey. Schrod. The gall
helps the spots of the eyes, and the fatt quickens them.

P.
Partridg. Perdix.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of snailes, chickweed,
corn, and ants. N. (...). Heb. Kore.
PArtridg. Muff. T. The flesh is temperately hot; but inclines to dryness,
20. The old, are as bad as old beef. When young and tender they agree well
with cold, weak, watrish and pale bodies, drying up a moist stomach,
strengthening the retentive power, easily turning into pure blood, fatning the
body, and increasing lust. Gal. They must not be eaten when newly killed, but
hang a while in the cold air. Their wings and breasts are best, as also of all
birds that trust to flight, except the Woodcock. The best are the young, and
fatt, killed by the Hawk after a long flight. Their broth is good for a weak
stomach, for the jaundies, and a tainted liver. The panado thereof with Capon
broth, marrow, eggs and bread, is very nourishing eaten first in the morning,
or with chines of mutton. They stop fluxes roasted, and are best at the end of
harvest, before they have trod or laid. Gal. The flesh is of a middle nature,
neither too thick nor too gross. The old are cold, dry, binding, and resist
putrefaction. Avic. The eggs strengthen the heart, are temperate, quickly
turned into blood, leave little excrement, and generate clear and thin blood;
but Elluchases counts them more subtle and of less nourishment than those of
Hens. They are better boiled, than fried. V. Aret. The flesh helps those that
are elephantiack. Cardan. Roasted it helps the french pocks. Being boiled with
quinces, eaten, and the broth drunk with styptick wine, it helps the coeliack
and stomachick persons. Taken alone it binds the body, dries up the humidity
of the stomach, and resists putrefaction. Some use the pulp to restore the
decay of strength in sick persons, though it is not now much used. Plin. The
broth helps the stomach, Seren. also the pain of the liver, Plin. and the
iliack passion and jaundies. Sym. Seth. So the marrow, with wine, so Sext. and
Constant. Plin. The powder of the ventricle drunk in black wine helps the
iliack passion. Sym. Seth. Hal. The liver dried and drunk helps the epilepsy.
Plin. The blood helps suffusions of the eyes. Diosc. The gall is one of the
chiefest, Gal. and helps the dimnesse of the sight, and suffusions, so Aet.
Donat. ab Altomar. So with honey and the juice of fennel. Or with opobalsamum.
Kiran. The gall used to the temples once in a month strengthens the memory.
Myreps. It being dropped in warm, helps the want of hearing: The fume of the
feathers smelled to, helps the strangling of the womb: Orinthol lib. Germ. And
the apoplexy with wild cumin, and white frankincense. Plin. The eggs make
fruitful, cause milk, and help the eyes. Schrod. Crat. The liver is an antidote
against fevers, being taken often in yarrow water. The fume of the feathers
helps the colic and other pains. Applied with mints and southernwood in a
sacculus it helps the pains of the belly. As for the description it is
needless. Jonst. They are very libidinous: in so much that the males, ejaculat
sperme, only hearing the noise of the female, and seem to copulate with their
own image in a looking glass, therefore they use to break the eggs of their
mates. The females also are no less salacious. They fight often, and make
their nests in bushes. They lay 10 or 15 eggs, and sit twice in a year; the
young, run abroad drawing their shells after them, and seek their meat. They
live 15 or 16 years. Thy fly low, and not far. Their call is known. When the
fowler comes near, they run like young ones, and lead them from their
nests, and teach the young to squat, when, they hear their note.

Peacock. Pavo.
P. In Asia, Suecia, England, and other countries. M. Of corn: chiefly barley,
herbs, and serpents. N. (...). Pavus. Avis Medica, and Junonis.
Peacock. Marcel. Ficin. T. The flesh is in a middle nature, betwixt that which
is moist and dry. Gal. It Is of most hard concoction. Some count it hot and
moist. Aldrov. Cardan. But it is rather cold and dry: for that which is hot and
moist, presently putrifieth; but this lasts long so D. Augustine. It being
melancholic, gross and fatt: therefore it yields strong aliment, and is
hardly concocted. H. It is naught for those that are hepatick, splenetick, or
troubled with the hemorrhoids. The eggs are much of the temper of the flesh,
which is nidorulent, hard, fibrous, and so, bad; yet not of an unpleasant
taste. Muff. The young are very good meat, of a pleasant and strange taste, and
good nourishment; Aldrov. V. The broth if fatt, is commended against the
pleuresy: And the tongue against the epilepsy. Sym. Seth. The fatt with the
juice of rue and honey helps the colic of cold humors: Also the powder of
the bones applied with vinegar helps the leprosy and morphew. Gesn. The fume of
the feathers helps bleare and red eyes. The dung helps the eyes, and heat of
the gout. Sext. Kiran. Drunk, it helps the epilepsy. Schrod. Querc. Pharm.
Rest. The fume of the feathers helps the rising of the womb. The eggs help the
running gout. The D. of the dung is drach 1. The description is needless.
Jonst. The males are salacious, requiring five hens, etc. or else break the
eggs. They copulate from February to March. They live twenty or thirty years,
and they fly little. Their voice is known. They carry their tails out of the
dirt, and spread them chiefly against the sun. Their diseases are the
toothach, and falling off of the feathers, at which time they hide themselves.
When they cry much in the night, they foretell rain.

Pheasant. Phasianus.
P. In Media, England, France, and other places. M. Of Corn, seeds and
berries, etc. N. (...). Heb. Piseon, Munster.
Pheasant. Gal. T. The juice of the flesh is neither thin nor gross: as for
nutriment and concoction, it is like that of a Hen. Sym. Seth. It Is of good
juice, and engenders good and laudable blood. Some prefer it before the
Partridg, others count it in the midst betwixt that and the Capon; but Averroes
prefers it before that of any foul; yet Isaac, makes them inferior to the
Partridg, also Elluchases counts them less subtle and temperate: some say
it nourishes more; but is less strengthening and restorative: And Aldrovand
prefers it before the forementioned fleshes, it being of a good taste, and so
more greedily received by the stomach, also it is quickly concocted, and yields
little excrement. The eggs are next to those of Henns. Muff. They are best in
winter, and when young, and they are fittest for weak stomachs. The flesh is
good after recovery in hectic fevers. V. Alex. Tral. The decoction helps
those that are purulent, being cleansing and loosening. Leonel. Fav. The flesh
is used in remedies against the Phthisis. Villan. It Is an antidote against the
virulency of the marrow of a Ram. Kiran. The blood resists all poison. Aeg. The
fatt is used in the plaster diapyranu, the same helps the tetanos, and passion
of the matrix. The gall sharpens the sight. The dung drunk, causes erection.
Gal. The fatt helps the affections of the reins. As for the description, it
may be omitted. Jonst. They copulate in March and April. One Cock serves two
Henns. They lay twenty eggs. They sit once in a year, and hatch in thirty
days. They roll themselves in the dust, that they may kill their lice: And
they love their own images.

Pigeon. Columba.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of corn, cumin, and
other seeds. N. (...). Heb. Jonah. Arab. Chamamah.
Pigeon. Aldrovand. T. The old are of hard aliment, and not to be used, because
of their excessive heat and dryness. Gal. They are of a middle juice, and the
young, of a subtle chyme. Ruffus places them in the second order of laudable
birds. Sym. Seth. They are excrementitious. Gal. the flesh is good for
languishing persons. Aver. The young are hot and moist, and of gross juice, as
may be conceived from their gravity in motion, and celerity of concoction. Aet.
The flesh is used in the cold, and phlegmatic colic: Aret. And the
cephalaea. Hipp. It helps the hepatick grief. Florent. The young are good
after diseases. H. they cause inflammations and fevers: Sym. Seth. They hurt
the head and eyes, and cause the leprosy, if too much used; Rhaf. and the
quinsey, therefore Avicen and Rhasis grant the flesh to the cold and moist,
etc. the young, are more temperate. The tame are best boiled, but the wild when
roasted. Avic. The eggs are very hot, and of a badd taste. Muff. Pigeons are
very hot and dry when old; but hot and moist when young, and the wilder sort is
most wholesome after flight, their foggy moisture being lessened by exercise,
and are best when bleeding to death under the wing, the same roasted cause great
store of blood, increase heat in weak persons, cleanse the kidneys, and quickly
restore decayed spirits, especially in phlegmatic and old persons, for whom
they are most proper; yet some use them in agues, so killed. V. Aristot. the
flesh is most hot. Aldrovand. It is of harder concoction, than chickens, and
generateth melancholic juice, and is excrementitious also. Being often eaten
it preventeth the plague. It helps the epilepsy and palsy, relaxation of the
legs, trembling, and want of sense. Cardan. The broth helps those that are
cold. Amat. Lus. The parts after dissection applied presently, to the head,
help those that are melancholic or foolish. Sex. Empyr. Villanov. and help all
venomous wounds; so chickens: The same help the pain of the reins, and
corrupted blood. Some commend Wild Pigeons against the gout. The flesh helps
the tenesmus. The brain causes venery: so the testicles. The blood stops
bleeding at the nostrils, Gal. and helps stripes of the eyes, so the diasmyrnon
of Democrates. Avic. The blood helps the gout. Alex. Ben. The fatt helps the
dysury: So the ashes of the feathers with netles. The eggs help the rhagades,
and hemorrhoids. Diosc. The same help against Ceruse, being given with
frankincense and the decoction of barley. Plin. The yolks cause venery. The dung
is most hot; Therefore Galen used it in phoenigms, against inveterate cold
diseases. Fernel. It Is very hot, attracting rubifacient with barley meal, and
discutient with vinegar. Being stamped with the seed of cresses it helps old
pains of the hipps, neck, loins, gout, and joint aches. Aesculap. It eases
all griefs, and dries up humors. Gal. It helps old pains of the head, as the
hemicrania, and cephalaea, also it is used in pains of the ears. Marcel.
Stamped with barley meal, lard, the white of an egg, and boiled, it helps the
pains of the reins. With barley meal and vinegar it helps all tumors. Diosc.
Plin. etc. It helps carbuncles, some add honey and oil, Marcel. and swellings
behind the ears. The same opens botches. Oribas. It whiteneth cicatrices,
being mixed with frankincense, soap, fullers earth, or vinegar. Plin. So with
honey, and the morphew. Marcel. And all cicatrices with vinegar. Plin. The same
helps corns. Furner. The distilled liquour thereof with other things, is
cosmetick. Aesculap. It helps ringworms. Hipp. It helps the baldness of Women.
Marcel. It helps the alopecia, Myrepsus also uses the same. Plin. The ashes
with oil help burnings, and discuss hard swellings with barley, and dry up
humors: with vinegar it helps fistula's of the eyes and white spots, Galen
adds frankincense unto it: And uses it with salt and oil to discuss
defluxions of the knees. Villanov. Applied it helps venomous bitings, Tarentin.
and the wounds of the Forke-fish. The parts dissected and applied to the fore
part of the head, help the apoplexy. The dung with Crows eggs helps the
epilepsy from black choler, applied to the spleen; using leeches before it: it
attracting the matter from the head to the spleen, and so causing an ague,
especially in Autumn. Myreps. Applied it helps the inflammations of the
tonsils: Plin. So with dry figgs and nitre. Aret. The fine powder causes
suppuration in the quinsey: Gal. So with honey: Plin. Also with wine and oil
it helps the same. Gal. Applied it helps the coeliack passion: Plin. So drunk,
which some affirm concerning the colic. Avic. So used in clysters. Plin.
Applied with honey it helps the iliaca passio. Gal. It helps old pains of the
loins, and those of the joints. Galen uses it with other things against the
dropsy. And Myrepsus in plasters, as also against the spleen and cachexy.
Marian. Sanct. Barolitan. The powder helps the stone: So made into an Electuary
with that of Mice, and honey etc. So the water. Gesn. or vinegar in which it
has been infused. The fume with castor, myrrh and opopanax, brings out the
dead birth. It helps the hemorrhoids. The dung of Hens is counted by some much
less effectual; but of the same nature, so Diosc. the ashes with honey and
arsnick consume dead flesh, and help all ulcers of the feet. With vinegar it
helps the hemorrhoids. Schrod. The body dissected and applied, mitigateth the
fierceness of humors, and discusseth melancholic sadness, used to the head;
it is good therefore in the phrensy, cephalalgy, and gout. The warm blood helps
pains of the eyes, suffusions, and the gout. The powder of the tunicle of the
stomach helps the dysentery. The dung burns and discusseth, therefore it is
used in vesicatories, and rubifacient remedies against the gout, hemicrania,
cephalaea, vertigo, and old pains in the sides, shoulders, neck, and loins;
as also in the colic, apoplexy, and lethargy etc. It Is given against the
stone, from scrup. 1 to 2. Jonst. That of those that live on Mountains is
strongest. Their description is needless. They kiss before generation. They
hatch two youngones, and sit both. They drink like beasts, and are troubled
with fleas.

Pie. Pica.
P. Almost every where, in England, and Holland, etc. M. They are amongst the
Pamphaga. N. (...). Heb. Raham.
Pie. Rhas. T. the flesh is too hot, and abominable; yet the young Ones are
eaten by poor people. Demet. Constantinop. But it is good for Hawks. V. Aldrov.
They are of a very hot temper, as may appear by their salacity: later writers
commend them being boiled and eaten, as helping the visory spirits, and the
asperity, obscurity, redness, and pain of the eyes: Gordon. So the powder, or
any way used. Ryff. So the liquour used with a linen cloth, and the holy
fire. The powder of the eggs helps white spots in the eyes. Some use the parts
dissected to weak joints, others against the nyctilops, cardiack passion,
melancholy of a cold cause, and canker in the yard. Kiran. The heart with ivy
helps the dysury. Schrod. The powder helps the Epilepsy, so the water.

Q.
Quail. Coturnix.
P. Almost every where, in England, and Holand, etc. M. Of Millet, Wheat, and
other Fruits. N. (...). Heb. Schelau. Arab. Salui. Currelius.
Quail. Aldrov. T. the flesh being eaten often and largly of, they generate,
gross, pituitous and viscid humors, fit for the generating of Epilepsies, and
spasmes, etc. But if eaten moderately, it begets good blood; but such as is apt
to putrify, if very fat. They are most wholesome and best tasted when roasted.
Manard. Muff. In the spring and summer they cause melancholy, in Autumn and
winter they are too moist: they are of small nourishment, causing loathing of
meat, and corruption thereof: Muff. Yet when young they are counted a good and
dainty diet. V. The brain with the myrtle ointment used to the face helps the
Epilepsy. Kiran. The eggs drunk cause lust. Kuefn. So the fat with hellebore.
Aetius uses it in pessaries to cause conception. Gesn. With myrrh, white
vitriol, and honey, it helps the eyes. Schrod. The dung helps the Epilepsy or
falling sickness. The description is needless. Jonst. They are salacious like
the Partridg, and breed 4 times in a year. They fly but little; but run
fast, their voice is known. They love not the Pelican. Their chief disease, is
the Epilepsy.

R.
Ring-dove. Palumbus.
P. Almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of Beans, and Acornes, and the
like. N. (...). Arab. Guarascen.
RIng-dove. Muff. T. the flesh is good when young, of very good taste and
nourishment. Aldrov. Yet some count it excrementitious. V. Hipp. The flesh is
good for Women that have pituitous menses, it drying and binding the belly:
Gal. It Is harder then that of Pigeons. Note here, the flesh of Birds is less
nutrient, than that of beasts; but more easily concocted, especially that of
the Partridg, Heathcock, Pigeon, Hen and Cock; but that of the Turtle,
Ring-dove, and Duck, is harder, Paul. C. The first place amongst Birds is due
to the young Pigeon, Heathcock, Hen, and Pheasant: the second to Thrushes,
Blackbirds and Sparrows: the third to Ring-doves and the Duck: the fourth to
the Peacock, and the last to the Goose and Ostrich. Mart. The flesh eaten
hinders venery. Archig. It helps those that are stomachick, Tral. Also the
tympanie, Aret. And Elephantiasis, and cold and phlegmatic colic. Alex. Ben.
It Is good in the time of pestilence. Hipp. It helps those that have lately
conceived, and the laxity of the womb, as also the lientery. Bapt. Port. The
eyes help cicatrices and ulcers of the eyes. Plin. The flesh boiled with
vinegar helps the dysentery and coeliack, Tormina, and contractions of the
nerves. The blood is like that of Pigeons, and helps the gout. The dung operats
as that of Pigeons, and provokes urine. Schrod. So the ashes of the feathers,
and help the jaundies. As for their description, they are sufficiently known.
Jonst. They generate after 3. months old, after the manner of Pigeons. They
build in trees, and lay twice in a year, 3 eggs at a time. They live 30
years. Their noise is like groaning. They are simple and hate adultry.

S.
Sparrow. Passer.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of Corn, Seeds, and
Flies, etc. N. (...). Passerculus, the Hedg-sparrow, Troglodites.
SParrow. Plat. T. the flesh is to be condemned in meat, not nourishing well,
by reason of its too much heat, difficulty of concoction, and salacity: some
count it hot and dry 3. Gal. It Is harder than that of Partridges. Elluch. It
binds, especially if lean; but the broth looseneth the belly, it is not good
for temperate Bodies. Muff. It engenders hot and aguish blood. The best are
the youngest, fattest, and wildest. The Red, and Hedg-Sparrows are unwholesome.
V. Aldrov. H. they are naught in fevers; yet they may be used in quartans of
natural melancholy: being eaten when fat, they make salacious. So Plin. and
Marcel. Especially the eggs and brains, so R. Mos. Bapt. Port. Avic. Hal.
etc. Some therefore preserve them with honey. The flesh is good against the
Epilepsy, consuming humors by it is siccity and heat. Trall. It helps the
tympany: Gal. As also the stone in the reins, and vices of the joints.
Myrepsus uses the fat in his plaster against hard swellings. Rhas. The gall
applied causes venery. Plin. The dung put into the next ear with warm oil,
helps the toothach. Archig. The powder thereof drunk helps the laxation and
nausiousnesse of the stomach. Kiran. And causes falacity drunk with wine; and
applied with lard it helps the Alopecia, and breaks carbuncles. Some use the
dung in remedies against the worms, in Hawks. That of the Hedge sparrow
cleanses the face, and extirpats varices, applied with man's spitle. Plin. The
ashes of the flesh drunk with mulse water, help the jaundise, two spoonfuls
being taken; those of the young Ones with vinegar help the toothach, Schrod.
The Hedge sparrow breaks and expels the stone. A few grains of the dung of
the other loosen the belly in Children. As for the description, it is useless.
Jonst. As for their generation, they are most salacious, copulating 20 times in
an hour. They build under the tiles of houses, or in holes in the wall, they
live 3 or 4 years. They are very fearful. They hate the Vultur and Weasel, etc.

Stare. Sturnus.
P. Almost every where, in all Countries. M. Of Berries, Grapes, and almost any
thing. N. (...). Heb. Sarsir. Arab. Alzarazir.
State. Aldrov. T. Some count the flesh hard, not yielding to the stomach, with
a kind of a virouse odor, especially in the time of hemlock: Platina refuses
the use of it; yet Galen, reckons it amongst meats of good juice, when young
and feeding on Mountains. They are best in Autumn; so Jul. Alex. Cardan. They
are to be dressed without their heads. Aver. They are hot and dry, Muff. Yet
savory, and good against all poison, so Kiran. V. Aldrovand. The dung is
cosmetick: Aeg. It helps the Morphew: also it helps Ringworms; so Gal. Diosc.
Serap. Porta, as appears by its spots. It is abstersive and drying: So that of
the Crocodile; but it is more effectual. Kiran. The flesh helps those that have
drunk poison; Arnold. But hurts the Hemorrhoids. Jonst. They build almost like
Sparrows, fly together in a round circle, and chiefly in the evening. They
fear Hawks.

Storke. Ciconia.
P. In Egypt and Aethiopia, and other places. M. Of Frogs, Snakes, and
Fishes. N. (...). Heb. Chasidu. Arab. Zakid.
Storke. Aldrov. T. the flesh is almost like that of the Crane, their flesh is
fibrous, hard, and of bad aliment, especially the old, without spices. etc.
Muff. The flesh is rather to be used as physic, than food, by reason of their
evil feeding. V. Kiran. The flesh is counted good for the nerves and joints,
helping all the passions thereof, either roasted or boiled. Plin. Marcel. Also
it prevents lippitude. Kiran. The ashes of the young Ones help the spots,
Epiphora, and roughness of the eyes. Leonel. Fav. The oil helps the palsy,
like that of vipers; so the distilled liquour, after the use of the decoction
of Crabs, it extending the nerves. Furnerus uses it with Camphire and the best
Amber, to beautify the face. Trall. The nerves with those of the wild Ass and
Bore, help the fistula's of the feet, and pains thereof. Plin. The ventricle
helps against all poisons; so the brain, with wine and spikenard. Blond. The
powder of the ventricle with water, helps the pestilence of Dogs. Plin.
Boiled in wine it helps fellons. Kiran. The intestines taken in meat help the
colic and nephritick possion: the gall helps the sight. Diosc. The dung drunk
in water helps the falling sickness. Aeg. And the Orthopnoea. Aetius uses it
in plasters against the gout, with axunge, so Myrepsus, and Marcellus,
Kiranides adds the leaves of henbane, and wild lettuce: also the eggs with
wine, black the hair, the forehead and eyes being covered with meal,
applying oil omphacine with Boares grease after it. Aet. Apollon. The feathers
cause sneezing. Schrod. The flesh is alexipharmick, and yields an antepileptick
water. Jonst. They build in the tops of trees. They fly not when the south wind
blows, they sleep standing upon one foot, laying the head upon the other
shoulder. They are Enemies to the Quail, Eagle, Diver, and Bats.

Swallow. Hirundo.
P. Almost every where, in all Countries. M. Of most kinds of insects. N.
(...). Heb. Agur. Arab. Chatas.
Swallow. Aldrov. T. The flesh is eaten by some poor people: their aliment is
hot and hurtful, therefore they are to be used physically. V. Plin. The Wild
are better than the Tame. Magicians used them against quartan agues, so the
heart or dung drunk in Sheep milk. Marcel. So the stones found in their
ventricles. Plin. Some wear the head in a linen cloth against pains of the
head, Marcel. So the fore mentioned stones. Gal. or the dung applied to the
forehead with vinegar. Jac. Olivar. Hieron. Montu. The heart helps the memory,
taken with Cinnamon, amomum, and aloephangin pills: Vrfin: and whet the wit.
Sext. Kiran. The flesh often eaten helps the Epilepsy: Plin. Sext. So the blood
with frankincense: Myrepsus uses the fume thereof, so the ashes with those of
a Weasel, so Seren. and Plin. Gesn. So with Castoreum and strong vinegar: or
the destilled water. Sext. Diosc. or the stone worn about the arm, so Plin.
and Tral. Plin. Seren. or that found in their nests. Plin. The ashes of the
young Ones, with the milk of spurge and froth of snailes, prevent hairs in the
eyebrows; after evulsion. The blood is a Psilothron. Gal. The dung with Bulls
gall makes the hairs white. Oribas. The same with water helps black
cicatrices; but makes them black with Bulls gall. Marcel. So digested with
vinegar, anointing the face with Hearts suet, and having oil in the mouth.
Kiran. So the eggs. Marcel. The flesh of the young ones eaten often, roasted,
or boiled, helps dim eyes. Plin. So the ashes applied with cretick honey.
Sext. The same helps their pains, and lippitude, so Diosc. Sext. or the gall
and blood, Marcel. It helps the stripes and suffusions of the same, so Cells.
The stones in their ventricles expel things fallen into the eyes. The brain
with honey helps suffusions. Kiran. The eyes of a Swallow used to the forehead
help the Ophthalmia, and all rigors of fevers. Albert. The dung helps white
spots in the eyes, but it is sharp, digesting, and burning. Gal. the ashes of
the flesh with honey help the putrefaction and crusts of the bones. Aesculap.
The heart helps diseases of the jaws. Myreps. The nest helps inflammations of
the tonsils. So Gal. With vinegar; for that of the wild is discutient. The
ashes of Swallows with honey, help all affections about the jaws, and swellings
of the uvula or tonsils, so Marcel. Diosc. and Pliny. Kiran. The same helps
ulcers in the throat and tongue, as also all that spread, and gangreens.
Archig. The young ones roasted and eaten, prevent suffocation, and inflammations
of the tonsils. Diosc. Drach. 1. Of the powder drunk in water, helps the
quinsey, so Avic. and Cells. Marcel. So the broth thereof. Kiran. Or the earth
of the nest applied with water; so the plaster thereof, so Amat. Lus. Aet. The
nest with honey helps the Erysipelas of the face. Some use the powder against
the quinsey, either drunk or taken by a reed. Avic. The ashes used to the
pallat help the quinsey. The dung is discutient: some use the ashes of the
flesh, with Saffron, Indiannarde, and honey: others with myrrh and the juice
of myrtles. Leonel. Faventinus uses it with Album graecum, and others apply it
with the nest. Plin. The ashes help the eyes. Kiran. With melicrate it helps
hoarsenesse also. The stones of the ventricle worn, help those that are
hepatick: Gal. Those of the nests help the cough. Marcel. The dung taken helps
the colic: Myresp. As also the difficulty of urine with other remedies, and
the stone. Kiran. The flesh eaten facilitats the birth. The dung drunk helps
white flows. Sext. Constant. The ashes with honey or mulse help ulcers of the
tongue and lips, the same help old ulcers. Trall. The blood helps the gout. The
decoction helps the biting of a mad Dog. So the nest, and that of vipers. The
flesh helps drunkenness. Schrod. The dung looseneth. As for the description,
it is needless. They generate not like other birds, and twice in a year, laying
5 eggs at a time, with duskish specks, and the young are blind, at the first.
Their noise is known, they sing early in the morning, flying abroad; but
seldom go, by reason of the weakness and shortness of their legs. They
foretell rain, when they fly about lakes and water, or near the ground. They
have scarce friends or enemies, unto them.

Swan. Cygnus.
P. Almost every where, and is an amphibion. M. Of Grass, Grain, and Fish
spawne, etc. N. (...). Olor. Heb. Racham. Arab. Rakam.
Swan. Albert. T. The flesh is black and hard, as also that of all aquatick
foul that have great Bodies: Aldrov. But they are counted unfit for the table
upon a twofold account, sc. because they live in the water, so the flesh is
excrementitious; as also being greater than Ducks or Geese, and so are of more
hard concoction; yet the young are sometimes used in banquets: Muff. But
naturally they are unwholesome. Note, all flesh the blacker it is, the heavier
it is, and the whiter the lighter; the more red, the more inclining to
heaviness; the less red, the more light and easy of digestion. The flesh of
the wild also, is black, melancholic, and hard of digestion, though not so
hard as the tame, by reason of his much flying. V. Aet. The tender young boiled
in oil are a very good remedy for the nerves; but the fat is oftener used,
Plin. It purges and erugates the face, Seren. And helps the Morphew: the same
helps the vices of the fundament, mollifieth the hardness of the womb and
helps the Hemorrhoids, it is of the same nature as that of Geese. Seren. The
eggs help the holy fire. The skin dressed with the down helps concoction,
used to the breast. Schrod. And helps the colic. The fat mollifieth and
attenuats. The description may be omitted, Jonst. Before the time of pleasure,
they bend their necks together, and after they often cleanse themselves in the
water. They bring forth in the spring. They swim slowly by reason of the weight
of their bodies. Their voice is known, they fly in a cuneons figure. Some
affirm they live 200 years. They sometimes so fight, that they kill one an
other, and spoil their eggs. They are enemies to Serpents. They foretell
fair weather, when they thrust their necks deep into the water.

T.
Thrush. Turdus.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of Hawes, Sloes,
Misleberries, etc. N. (...). Cichla. Alchamari Sylvat.
THrush. Gal. T. The flesh is of of laudible nourishment, of neither thick or
thin juice. Bapt. Fire. It Is hotter than that of the Blackbird, and preferred by
many. Muff. When young they are wholesome. Aldrov. The flesh roasted with myrtle
Berries, helps the flux of the belly, Plin. And the dysentery, and urine.
Alex. Ben. Steeped in vinger they help the plague. Their description is
needless. Jonst. They build in the tops of bushes: Their voice is sufficiently
known.

Turkey. Meleagris.
P. In Boeotia. Arabia. England, and other places. M. Of Grain, and other
things. N. (...). Gallina Africana, and Numidica.
Turkey. Aldrov. T. The flesh is very pleasant and dainty, yielding much and
lasting aliment, if well concocted. Muff. They are best after hung up 24.
hours in their feathers, and when young, the flesh recovereth strength,
nourishes plentifully, kindles lust, and agrees with every temper and
complexion, except too hot, or troubled with rheumes and gouts. It becomes of
more speedy digestion, If stuck with cloves, and well roasted.

Turtle-dove. Turtur.
P. In Aethiopia, Peru, and other places. M. Of Fruits, Olives, Milium, and
Accorns. N. (...). Heb. Tor. Arab. Saphnina.
Turtle. Aldrov. T. The flesh is very acceptable. They are more hot and dry
than Quails; But not of gross or thin juice, especially when young, and are
called wise men's meat. Muff. Avic. The flesh is of good nourishment, easily
digested, quickening the wit and memory, increasing sperme, and strengthening
both the stomach, and intestines; but Isaac understands this of the young
ones. V. Aldrov. Some commend the flesh in the time of pestilence: Archig. It
helps the stomach. Tral. As also the colic, tympany, and nephritick passion.
It helps the dysentery, especially the blood. Avic. Used warm it helps the
pains of the ears. Plin. The dung extenuats white spots in the eyes,
Kiranides uses it with honey, so Marcel. Boiled in mulse, and applied as a
cerot, it helps the belly and reins. Myreps. Drach. 1. Thereof drunk with
honey helps those that cannot make water. Gal. And the stone with mulse. Plin.
So the broth. Durantes uses it to facilitate the birth. Georg. Pictor. The
flesh roasted helps the flux of the belly. Mizaldus uses the heart against
venery. Schrod. The Turtle agrees with the Pigeon. It helps the flux of the
menses, the ashes or extract being used. Forest. The fat is used to the belly,
reins, groine, and breast, etc. Some count them good against the Gout. They
are like Pigeons; but lesser. Jonst. They generate like the Ring-doves, and
bring forth twice in a year, after a quarter of a year old: they both sit on
the eggs, and they build in trees. They live 8 years, make a groaning noise,
fly and run swiftly, and love the Parret, Blackbird and Peacock, but not the
Crow. They love not second Wedlocks.

V.
Vulture. Vultur.
P. In Creete, Arabia, and other places. M. Of dead Bodies, and Birds. N.
(...). Heb. Ajah. Arab. Rachame.
VUlture. Aet. T. V. the flesh is used with other things, against the
Elephantiasis, abscesses, botches, swellings of the Body, steatoms, the fellon,
bronchocele, and all malignant risings in any part of the Body, as also the
gout and convulsion. Gal. The brain used to the head and temples helps the
headache. Aret. Being eaten it helps the Epilepsy. Kiran. Used to the belly it
causes sterility. Albert. The stone Quandros is found therein, the virtues of
which, see in my Pammineralogie. Pliny uses the lungs to cause venery, and
stop bleeding with other things. Anon. It, as also the heart helps the
Epilepsy. Plin. So the liver drunk with the blood, Sext. Aesculap. Being used
seven days. Seren. It helps the pain of the liver: and is a prophy lactik
against the bitings of Serpents. Plin. The ventricle helps the nerves. Seren.
The gall helps the eyes and cleanses the same, as also the falling sickness.
Marcellus and Pliny, add honey: And Gallen adds the juice of hore-hound.
Marcel. The reins stamped with honey and applied, help the tonsils. Diosc. The
fume of the dung brings forth the Foetus. Sext. So the feathers, Plin. And
drive away Serpents. Kiran. The same helps the Lethargy, suffocation of the
womb, and phrensey. Rhas. The fat has a dissolving faculty. Plin. With the
belly dried, and lard, it helps the pains of the nerves and nodes: Marcel. As
also the gout with the gall and honey. The ashes of the bones help all ulcers,
Kiran. And pains with wine: some use those of the head against the headache and
dimnesse of sight. Rhas. The leg helps excoriations of the legs. Alex. Ben.
The skin helps concoction. Levin. Levin. The same helps nauseousness, stops
fluxes, and helps levity of the intestines, strengthening the natural
faculties. Tral. The nerves help the gout. Plin. The blood helps the Leprosy.
Schrod. The flesh helps the head. Jonst. They are like Eagles. Their bills are
crooked, the neck without feathers, the throat large. The legs feathered, and
the claws crooked. When they want meat for their young Ones, they wound
themselves, that they may drink their blood. They live an 100 years. They look
toward the Sun setting in the morning, and toward the rising at night. They
will smell dead carcases many miles. They fly slowly, by reason of the
greatness of their Bodies, and together. They shun cold, follow armies, and
hate sweet things. Their diseases are obstructions of the liver, and lice.

W.
Wood-cock. Gallinago.
P. Almost every where in Hedges, and Bushes, in the winter. M. Of Worms, and
the Like food. N. (...). Perdix rustica. Gallinella.
WOod-cock. Anton. Gaz. Pat. T. They are of the nature and temperament of
Partridges; so Savon. They are better also in the Winter, than in the Summer,
they being then fattest. So Villanov. Gesn. V. The ashes of the flesh, being
burned in an earthen pot, help the stone. They are taken by nets, in Cock
shoots.

Brids less used in meat or Medicine.
CAstrel. Tinnunculus. Aldrov. T. V. Plin. The dung helps white spots in the
eyes.

Clotbird. Coccothraustes. Aldrov. T. The flesh is used in meat, it is sweet,
grateful, and not disaproved of. They feed upon Olives and Berries; but
chiefly on Cherries and their Kernels:

Curines. Arquatae Ornithol. (i. e.) Gesn. They are preferred before Hens: the
flesh is solid, dry, and almost like that of hares. Bell. It Is like that of
Dear; but it is a dainty in France. Bell. They live on Worms.

Feldefare. Turdus exoticus. T. V. Muff. They feed like Thrushes, and give
(almost) as good nourishment. Yea better, when juniper Berries are ripe, all
their flesh being then perfumed therewith.

Goldfinch. Carduelis. T. V. Platin. The flesh if fat, and before breeding is
of good aliment; but Wecker disaproveth of it; yet Kiranides uses it roasted,
against the Iliack and colic passion.

Godwit. Fedoa. Muff. T. When fat it is a light and fine meat, they are a fenny
fowl, and live of Worms, about River banks: they are plentiful in Lincolneshire.

Gluts. Muff. Glottides. T. V. They are of no bad taste or evil nourishment.
They feed in the fennes upon red feeds, bents and worms.

Howlet. Vlula. Aldrov. T. V. the flesh being boiled in oil, with Sheeps
butter and honey, helps ulcers. The gall helps white spots in the eyes,
suffusions, and the dimnesse of fight; Plin. So the fat.

Hickwal, Jynx. Hieron. Trag. T. The flesh is eaten, and of no unplesant taste.

Jay. Gracculus. Albert. T. the flesh is eaten after excoriation: They are
eaten by the rusticks, in France, yet Aldrovand, says little of the taste of
the flesh. Muff. It Is of bad nourishment, causing the Epilepsy: they feed upon
mast, and worms, etc.

Jack Daw. Monedula, Muff. T. The nourishment is as bad as their conditions,
their feeding is sufficiently known.

Ibis. Albert. T. The flesh and eggs are venomous: Kiran. But they rather
drive away Serpents. Plin. The ashes of the flesh drunk, help the tormina. The
feathers resist Serpents. The dung is a substitute for the leaves of the wild
Fig Tree.

Lapwing. Vannellus. Aldrov. T. V. Some, buy, eat, and commend the flesh; yet
Rhasis counts the same anstere. V. Marcel. The ashes drunk with wine help the
Colon: a calaplasme thereof helps the bitings of mad Dogs. Plin. The heart
helps pains of the sides. The blood applied to the temples causes in sleep to
see wonderful things. The fume of the feathers expels worms. The tongue helps
oblivion. The skin helps the headache. Rhas. The eye helps the Leprosy.

Martinet. Apos. Aldrov. T. They are not unpleasant when fat: the young ones
are dear at Bononia. Plin. In wine they help the tormina.

Mavisse. Turdela Anglicana. Muff. T. When young fat and in season, they are
wholesome meat. They feed upon hawes, sloes, misle and privet Berries.

Osprey. Haliaetus. Aldrov. T. The flesh is not in much use. V. Plin. The gall
with attick honey, helps wefts, dimnesse and suffusions of the eyes; yet some
attribute this to that of the common Eagle.

Ox-eye. Parus Major. Muff. T. Their flesh is unwholesome, they feed as
ordinary Titmise do, upon caterpillars, blossoms of trees, bark-worms, and
flies.

Phenicopter. Phoenicopteros. Aldrov. T. The tongue, and brain, were chiefly
used in meat. The cookery may be seen in Apicius.

Percnopter. Percnopteros. Avic. The gall with oil of violets helps the pain
of the head. As an errhine, it helps flatulency in Children. The alcohol with
cold water helps white spots in the eyes. The gall used outwardly helps the
bitings of the Scorpion and Viper. Diosc. Serap. The fuffumigation of the dung
expels the Foetus.

Pelecan. Pelecanus. Aldrov. T. The flesh is hard, excrementitious, and of a
strong nature. V. Kiran. The gall mixed with nitre whiteneth black cicatrices,
taking away and cleansing all the blackness: the same gall whiteneth rusty
silver.

Plover. Pluvialis. Gesn. T. The flesh is very pleasant, and better than the
green Lapwing. Bellon. And much eaten in France. Muff. It Is best when fat, in
the wintertime.

Parret. Psittacus. Christ. Columb. T. The inhabitants of Grachane, count the
flesh when fatted, very acceptable.

Poole-suite. Totanus. Muff. T. They have a strong and unpleasant relish, and
live wholly upon fish.

Puffins. Pufina Brit. Muff. T. They are of ill taste, and worse digestion; how
dainty soever they seem to strainge appetites, and are permitted by Popes to be
eaten in Lent.

Railes. Rallae. Muff. T. Those of the Land may be placed next the Partridge,
for their flesh is as sweet, as their feeding good, and are therefore preferred
to noble men's tables. The water Railes are preferred in Italy before Thrushes,
or Quails. They feed upon water-snailes and water-flies, and the worms
breeding in the roots of reeds: they are very sweet and pleasant of taste,
yielding a fine and wholesome nourishment.

Redshanks. Erythropodes. Muff. These, as also Gluts, feed in the fennes upon
red seeds, bents, and worms, and are of no bad taste, or evil nourishment.
Redlings or water red-shanks, feed as water Railes, and are of the like
nourishment.

Robin-red breast: Rubecula. Muff. T. Is esteemed a light and good meat: they
feed upon Bees, Flies, Gnats, Wallnuts, Nuts, and crummes of bread.

Rooks. Corvi leguminales. Muff T. They cannot be ill meat, when they are
young; feeding chiefly upon Corn; but their skin is tough, black, and
bitter.

Sea Pie. Picus marinus. D. Cai. T. The flesh is of a bad taste, they feed upon
Spawn, Frogs, and Fry of Fish.

Sea-mew. Larus. Aldrov. T. The flesh is lean, black, of a stinking smell, and
almost abominable. V. Cael. Aurel. The dry brain smelled to by infants helps
the Epilepsy, so taken with mulse and vinegar by the adult. Kiran. It Is of the
nature of the King-fisher, and the heart facilitats Child birth. The venture
dry, causes concoction, being tasted of.

Shovelar. Platea. Muff. T. They are not inferior to fatted Gulls, being
dieted with good meat. They feed upon Shellfish.

Smirings. Ochropodes. Muff. They are a fine and delicate meat, they live in
waterish copses with worms.

Snite. Sneppa. Albert. T. The flesh is sweet. Gesn. yet not so good as
Partridge. Muff. They are of so light digestion and good in temperature, that
they agree with most men's stomachs, especially a month after their first
coming; they are dryer and worse at their departure, they require not so
strong a stomach as the Woodcock. They live upon worms, which they get out of
their holes by blowing into them.

Stone Chatters. Arquatulae ter. Muff. T. They are of a very good taste and
juice. They feed as Witwals.

Teales and Widgins. Querquedulae. Muff. T. Commonly they are very fat and
sweet of taste, much better than wild Ducks or Geese; yet suspected of ill
juice by many. They feed upon worms, herbs, roots, and seeds.

Titmouse. Parus. Aldrov. Gesn. T. They are eaten, though not very pleasant.
Some say it has the virtues of Galgulus. Schrod. The flesh helps the stone and
colic.

Wagge-taile. Motacilla. Leonel. Fav. The ashes bring forth the stone. Drach.
1. Being taken in white wine or saxifrage water. So Nic. Mas. Gesn. Villan.
Auth. Lum. Ma. Alex. Ben. and Schroder.

Witwall. Oriolus, Muff. T. The flesh is of excellent good nourishment, feeding
upon all manner of good fruit.

Wood-pecker. Merops. Aldrov. T. It Is not good as meat, Rhas. Gesn. The flesh
is austere and hard of concoction. V. it helps inflammations. The gall with
galls and oil omphacine, blacks the hair. Kiran. The heart causes love.
Being eaten it helps the cardiack, icterick and stomachick. The gall with honey
and the juice of rue, helps suffusions of the eyes.

Wren. Regulus. Muff. T. They yield no good nourishment. V. Their flesh salted
cures strangulions, and the stone. They feed upon flies.

Yellow-hammer. Galgulus. Muff. T. In the winter time being fat, they are
counted, wholesome, at other times they are lean and bitter. They feed upon
seeds and grain.

Ossifrage. Gesn. Ossifragus. T. V. the belly dried and drunk helps concoction.
The intestine applied, helps the colic. Tral. The ashes help the Epilepsy,
and stone, and provoke urine with wine. The gall helps the Leprosy. The dung
dry, and drunk, helps concoction, as also the stone and dysury; so the Harp.

Avis Daje. T. V. the eggs roasted or boiled are of fat aliment; if fried, bad,
and hardly concocted.

Mayae. Jonst. T. V. Are of pleasant and much nourishment.

Hoactzin. T V. The bones help pains of the body. The ashes of the feathers,
help the french pocks, taken.

Aura. Jonst. T. The flesh eaten helps the french disease; the ashes of the
feathers hinder hair. The dung helps melancholy, and the flesh is sweet.

Cozquauktli. T.V. The flesh is not much used, the feathers help ulcers, and
the flesh the french pocks.

Quetzaltototl. V. The feathers are very dear.

Picicitli. T. V. Is acceptable to the stomach, so Chicuatli.

Tomejus. T. V. The powder taken helps the Epilepsy.

Acacalotl. T. V. Yields good nourishment, but thick.

Jacacintli. T. V. Is edible; but not good, so Achalalactli. and Amalozque.

Flamenco De Laet. T. Is of good nourishment.

Curicaca. T. The flesh is good fried with butter, so Jaribuguacu. Cariama is
good: and Maguari, edible; so Guarauna and Aiaia, Cocoi and Mareca: the rest
are of little use, or fabulous.

ICHTHYOLOGIA, Of Fishes.
A.
Anchovae. Encrasicholus.
P. In Provence, Sardinia, and other places. M. They feed about reedy banks. N.
(...). Felliceps. Lycostomus.
ANchovaes. Aldrov. T. They are of a very pleasant taste, help decayed
appetites, attenuate thick phlegm, loosen the belly, and help phlegmatic
agues. Muff. They are fittest for stomachs oppressed with phlegm, they cutting,
ripening and digesting it, and warming the stomach exceeding well. They are of
little nourishment; but very light if not over salted. They are best, dressed
with oil, vinegar pepper, and dried organy, having the outward skin and
ridgbone taken away, so washed in wine and laid in the dish. They are to be
powdered with salt, wine-vineger and origanum, and so barreled up. Their
description is needless. Jonst. Their name, they have from the bitterness of
their heads, as is plain. Bell. Therefore it is to be pulled off with the gall.
They are taken in the night, by the light of the ships.

B.
Barbel. Barbo.
P. In rivers, as nere Oxford, and other places. M. Of reits, snailes, fishes
and dead bodies. N. (...). Barbus fluv. Mystus. Mustacatus.
BArbel. Card. T. Is very base; being good neither cold or hot, boiled or
roasted; so Plat. Aldrov. Yet being taken in a gravelly river, and clean, they
taste well, are render, easy of concoction, and of good juice, then the flesh
being white and tender, yet full of bones. Salv. They taste best in spring,
Auson. and are best when biggest. Rondel. They are best boiled with their
scales on. If roasted they are often to be irrorated with sharp vinegar, and
oil, with a sprig of sage. If fried they are to be sprinkled with the juice of
an orange Plat. H. Their eggs or spawn are poysonsome, troubling the belly and
subverting the stomach, especially in May. Causing inflations, swounings, and
unequal temper of body, with the choleric passion. Muff. The fish is cold,
moist, hurtful to the sinews, and quenches lust. It may be sod with vinegar,
time, and savory. Jonst. They live under high banks: and love the Scate.

Bleye. Alburnus.
P. In most large rivers, In England and other countries. M. Of worms, and
flies, etc. N. (...). Scaverdinus. Arborinus.
Bley, or Bleak. Muff. T. They are soft fish, but never fatt, fitter to nourish
pikes than men: in the summer time they being troubled with a worm in their
stomachs, like that growing in Oxes skinns, fall mad and frantic: Therefore
they are counted tender, but never wholesome. Sea Bleakes are called Variatae
also, changing with every light and object, like changeable silk, Muff. T. They
are as sound, firm and wholesome as any Carp, therefore they are best sodden.
They are called Sea Chameleons also, and are plentiful about the Southern Seas,
betwixt Rye and Exceter.

Bream. Abramis.
P. In clayey rivers, and pooles: in England, and other places. M. Of mud and
herbs. N. Scardula. Cyprinus latus. Rond.
Bream. Plat. T. Being boiled any way, they are insipid, and troublesome to
eat, by reason of their bones. Gesn. Yet they are esteemed of by some. They may
be broiled on a gridiron, or baked with spices, so Aldrov. Muff. Breames seem
no other than flatt Carps, yet they are whiter, and of finer nourishment. The
Cud-breame, called Scarus ruminans, seeming to chew the cud, T. this of all
other is the lightest, sweetest, and best fish of the river, fitter for weak
and sick persons, than such as are in health, being so fine. They are best
boiled alive, with a nutmeg in their throat, in white strong vinegar and stale
ale, with salt, mints, organy, parsley, and rosemary. Breams of the Sea. Muff.
T. Are of a white and solid substance, good juice, easy digestion and good
nourishment.

C.
Carpe. Cyprinus.
P. In rivers, ponds, and lakes in the deep. M. Of mudd, fishes, and
excrements. M. (...). Lepidotus. Bulbulus. Carpa.
CArpe. Aldrov. T. They have a soft, moist, glutinouse, and in sipid flesh. Yet
differing according to their places. Those that are in rivers nere towns, are
of bad juice: Yet some like them because they are fatt and large; but those are
better that live in swift running streams, those that live in standing waters
are more muddy. Albert. It Is a fatt, sweet, and soft fish; but not wholesome.
Jov. They have a humid substance, yet harmless, abounding with an aqueous
humidity, so they are neither the best or worst fishes. They are best in March,
and the male is better than the female, and the white than the yellow. The
spawn serves to make red Caviare of. Muff. The middle sized is ever best,
agreeing with all times, ages, and complexions. The tongue is most nourishing,
the spawn heavy and unwholesome, the fish sweet, and nourishing; and is best
when boiled; yet some bake them with spice, fruit, and butter, the head of
which is most esteemed; as the tail of a Pike, and the belly of a Bream, for
their tenderness, shortness and well relishing. Gesn. The fatt helps pains in
hot griefs. Kiran. The same causes venery, and conception, being applied: The
gall helps dimnesse of the eyes. Jov. The tongue increases venery. Rondel. The
stone in the head helps the heat of fevers, quenching thirst, and cooling:
some Affirm that being held in the mouth it stops bleeding at the nose.
Schrod. It helps the colic, stone, and falling sickness; so the two stones
above the eyes. Jonst. They are best when fresh, and somewhat like a Salmon or
Trout.

Cooke-fish. Merula.
P. Amongst rocks, and in holes. M. Of the same, as the Thrush-fish. N. (...).
Merulus, Tinca marina. Aspratilis piscis.
Cooke-fish. Plin. T. It Is mentioned amongst laudable fishes, being tender,
soft, and of easy concoction: it nourishes little, and begets good juice. V.
Being sod they help such as have fevers. Tral. It Is good for such as have the
epilepsy, and the hepatick dysentery, of a cold cause, as also the Thrush-fish
and Mullet. Plin. They help the heat of the liver. Gal. They are not only
easily concocted; but very wholesome, and cause blood of a middle consistence.
Salv. In white broth they help those that are sick. By those that are well they
may be eaten fried with oil. Muff. They have their name, seeming to season
themselves with salt and spices when sod. And their Latin name, because always
alone. Jonst. They are like Tenches. They are taken by angling with Shrimps,
which they hate.

Cocks, etc. Pectines.
P. In Normanie, in sandy places. M. Of little Cuttles, and other small fishes.
N. (...). Novacula, Plin. Pavo Gesn.
Cocks, and Cokles. Scrib. Larg. T. Strengthen the stomach. Plin. They increase
flesh, Muff. and lust. Being of so hot a nature, that they fly above the water
like an arrow, in the summer nights. Alex. Ben. Some by too much eating of them
have become fools. Their broth looseneth the body; but their substance stays
it. Gal. They are very good meat, but bad for such as are troubled with the
stone or epilepsy. They are best in May, being then fullest, lustiest, and
cleanest of gravel, which they may be made to cast out by keeping them a day in
brine, renewing the same. The greatest and whitest are the best, and best
fried; but good also, sod in water with salt, pepper, parsley, dried mints and
cinnamon, after the French fashion. The Cockles are called Pectunculi. Jonst.
V. They are easier of concoction than Oisters, and provoke urin. They nourish
best, roasted in their shells, and help the colic. Muff. Scalopes, Pectines
veneris, are of the same nature.

Crab. Cancer.
P. In soft and stony places, in England and other places. M. Of shelfishes and
the polypus. N. (...).
Crab. Jonst. T. Their substance is hard, therefore they are hardly concocted;
but of firm aliment; so Gal. Athen. etc. V. Plin. They help the bitings of
Serpents, they help carbuncles in the privities of Women, with salt. Their
juice boiled in vinegar helps the strangury. Their juice with the distilled
water of the flowers of blewbottles, facilitates the breeding of teeth in young
children. The powder of Ranzovius helps dissections of the nerves. Schrod.
Crabs refrigerate, moisten, ease pain, and fix troubled spirits: therefore
they are of very good use in heat, and pain of the head and reins applied as
a cataplasme. The juice helps the quinsey. Taken with the water of celondine it
helps the atrophy. Applied they draw out arrows and splinters. They help S.
Anthonies fire and burnings. The eyes or stones, cool, dry, cleanse, discuss,
break the stone, and resolve tartar and coagulated blood: therefore they are
of great use in pleuresies, asthma's, and the colic, etc. the powder thereof
being taken crude, or burnt and prepared: the same cleanses the teeth. The
shell is of the same virtue; and also helps the itch in children; caused by
salt humors, being applied with oil of roses: it drives away the paroxismes
of intermitting fevers. They are best when new. The ashes of Crabs is drying;
it helps against the biting of mad Dogs, Being taken with the root of gentian.
With honey it helps the clefts of the feet and fundament, and warts thereof.
The same helps the dysentery. The D. is a little sponeful for some considerable
time. The water of Crabs is diuretic, lithontriptick, and dipsosbestick. That
of Querc. Pharm. Rest. Helps inflammations, burnings, and cancers; especially
if impregnated with the fatt. Heart. in pract. The D. of the oil of the eyes is
g. four to six. Of the claws hereof, etc. is made the Gascoigns powder. Pharm.
L. Crabs of the Sea. Muff. The great ones are called Paguri, and the best sort
thereof Hippeis. The little sort, are called Pinnotheres, defending themselves
by Oisters. These of all, are the lightest and wholesomest, next to them are
the ordinary Crabs, but of harder digestion: both nourish much, and help
consumptions of the lungs and spitting of blood, so Diosc. Plin. Avic. etc.
Especially Asses milk being drunk with them. They are to be sodden in water
(having their vents stopped,) for such as are costive, and in wine if loose:
the femal having spawn are best. The greater Sea Crabs, either smooth or rough,
are strong and lushish, of hard digestion, overheating and inflaming the body;
but the lesser cool and moisten: the brooth of all of them consumes the stone,
and helps quartans drunk every morning fasting. They are best in season at the
spring and fall, as also at the full of the moon. Jonst. drach 2. of Sea Crabs
drunk in nurses milk help the strangury in children: Avic. As also quartans,
the itch, weeping of the eyes, Plin. and cankers. The River Crabs, are edible
at any time, but are best in summer. Avic. Being eaten with barley water they
help those that are hectic. V. They have the same virtues as the rest, for the
most part. Their ashes help against all poisons, especially of the Scorpion,
with milk, so Plin. and Diosc. Aeg. And of vipers in wine. The same helps the
bitings of a mad Dog. Galen uses them with asarum to draw out water, and
Hippocrates for the womb. That called Majas is dressed as the former. Their
description is needless, being a round, large shellfish. They copulate by the
sore part, they go thwartwise, they fight like Rams, and feed on Oisters etc.
by casting in a stone when they open themselves. They lie hid when they cast
their shells.

Cramp-fish. Torpedo.
P. In Nilus, and muddy places of the Sea. M. They feed on fishes. N. (...).
Stupefactor. Stupescor.
Cramp-fish. Gal. T. This as also the Forkfish, amongst those that are
Cartilagineous, have soft and pleasant flesh, and meanly passing through the
belly, and easily concocted: also they nourish meanly, as also all others that
have soft flesh. They are used sometimes in steed of the saxatile fishes, and
to help the epilepsy. Plat. Athen. The first is a very acceptable fish.
Epicharm. The least are best. Hices. Their cartilage is very acceptable to the
stomach, the rest yields but little juice. Diph. It is of hard concoction,
except those parts that are about the head, which are render, acceptable to the
stomach, and easily concocted. Yet Rondelerius disliketh the use thereof, it
being of ill juice, unpleasant, moist, soft, and fungous, though some eat the
hinder parts thereof with garlic and onions, amongst poor people. Diphilus
commends them boiled, and Archestratus boileth them in oil and wine with sweet
smelling herbs, and a little cheese. Gal. But if they are used as attenuating
diet, they are to be taken with beets stamped, or white broth, with a leeke and
a little pepper, otherwise they are commonly fried, and eaten being sprinkled
with the juice of an orange. V. Plin. Being eaten they loosen the belly, Hipp.
and help the hepatick disease being boiled, as also the Forkfish, and small
Rays. The same helps the third kind of tabes, so the Skate. Being roasted they
help the dropsy. Diosc. Applied to the head, they help old pains thereof, and
restrain the falling out of the fundament; so Gal. Aeg. Avic. and Kiran.
Marcel. Empyr. sc. the Black applied alive, till the part be torpid. The same
helps the gout being trod on till the stupidity reaches the knee. Aet. They
help inflammations and pains, Being boiled in oil; and used with a little wax
and oil it helps the gout. Aegineta makes his diaturpane hereof; and Myrepsus
plasters for the same purpose, some also use it with daffodils. Aldrov. Some
substitute the Tench unto it. Hol. The gout also may be cured by putting the
part into snow water, after anointing it with petroleum. Aelian. Being
putrified in vinegar it is a psilothron, Plin. so the brain with alum. Aet.
The skin applied helps the falling out of the matrix. Plin. The gall used to
the geniral hinders venery, when newly taken. Jonst. As for their
description, they are black or reddish, with or without spots, their body is
all orbicular, except the tail, they weigh about 6. pounds, their skin is
slippery, black and yellowish, their mouth is upwards and little, so their
eyes. They have no tongue, but gills in the midst of their bodies. They have
two fins nere the tail, and a cartilage within. They bring forth eighty young,
and hide themselves in the mud to stupify fishes, etc. which they do at a
distance.

Crevisse. Astacus.
P. In brooks, lakes, and rivers, in England, etc. M. Of fish, waterherbs,
clay, and flesh. N. (...). Caranides. Locustella.
Crevisse. Muff T. These as also Shrimps, are used for queasy stomachs. They
are a fine temperate and nourishing meat, they are best from the spring until
autumn, and at the full of the Moon, also the females are better than the
males; for consumptive persons, they are first to be washed in barley water, and
then to be sodden in milk till they be tender, being first discaled, and the
long gut pulled out by the middle finne in the tail. They are to be sod in
water with salt, being first dieted with crummes of white bread in a cistern,
for three or four days. Jonst. They are hardly concocted, and send cold and
moist vapors to the head. V. They are used against the bitings of mad dogs,
the phthisick, hectic fever, retention of urin, the stone, inflammation of
the tongue and throat, as also the cancer in the duggs. The distilled liquour
thereof, with that of endive, roses, and erratick poppies, helps the quinsey;
the tongue being washed therewith, and a draught drunk: also the tongue being
anointed with lard, and the juice thereof being still used. Hartman prepares
them against the cancer of the duggs. Their stones are diuretical, expel agues,
and are vulnerary, so Helmont. They are used also against the stone, with the
stones of peaches and medlars: And against clotted blood, with the coals of the
Line tree quenched in vinegar, etc. Their description is needless. They
generate by ascension, and bring forth spawn by the fundament, which sticks to
the tail, often till animated. They lie hid in the winter, and they have
antipathy to Hogs.

Crowfish. Coracinus.
P. In the Sea and Rivers, chiefly in Nilus. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Corvulus. Gracculus.
Crowfish. Aldrov. T. That of Nilus is reckoned amongst the better sort of
fishes, but the Marine is less acceptable. The black also is better than the
white, and the boiled than the roasted, agreeing better with the stomach and
belly. So Diph. Aristot. And they are both best, when they are great with
spawn. They are to be boiled in white wine, water and vinegar; and to be eaten
with the juice of sorrel or vinegar. They may be kept longer with vinegar, and
a little pepper, with the leaves of bays, myrtles or walnuts. Salv. Or they
may be put into hot oil, and being seasoned with salt and vinegar may be put
into barrels, having myrtle leaves stratified. V. Rond. The stones in the head
help the nephritick pain or colic, and the jaundise. They help the stone of
the reins, by drying up the phlegm, or dryving it out by its weight, like the
Jews or Lynces Stone. Jonst. Hices. they nourish little, are easily evacuated,
and of indifferent good juice. As for the description, it is about a foot long
and black. They are great in autumn, and are best in a squalid year. Coel.
Rhod. And help against the pismires of trees.

Curre. Cuculus.
P. They are to be had, betwixt Brasil and Portugal. M. Their meat is not
observed. N. (...). Coccygium: their noise, (...).
Curre. Aldrov. T. It is a sweet fish, but not the best, it has much flesh,
white, hard, and dry, so Philot. Diph. yet it is preferred before the Sea Kite,
as less hard, and being friable. Hipp. They are good in pituitous and gross
diseases, as also the Scorpion, Dragon, Callionimus and Gudgion. Epicharm. Dor.
They are to be broiled, after dissection, and seasoned with parsley, cheese,
silphium, salt, and oil, and sprinkled with vinegar. Rond. The greater may be
fried, those of Montpelier boil them in water and wine, and eat them with
vinegar or the juice of sorrel, or with oil omphacine, saffron, pepper, and
the leaves of parsley, sc. being seasoned therewith. Jonst. As for the
description. The whole fish is round, carnose, and not above three pounds
weight. The back is bald, the head great, bonie, angulous, and prickly. The
nose has two long eminencies, the jaws serve as teeth, the belly is plain, the
head, back, sides, and finns are red, The ventricle is carnose, the intestines
broad, and fatt, the liver whitish without a gall: And the spleen is red and
little. When taken they make a noise like Cuckowes.

Cuttle. Sepia.
P. Their abiding is in the septentrional Ocean. M. Of little fishes, and the
Mullet. N. (...). Theb. Opistholia. Arab. Sarathan.
Cuttle. Jonst. T. They ware and are still used as meat, they are best when
great, chiefly in January, February, and March. For the most part they are
boiled, and are better than the roasted, in Illyria the greater are salted, and
are thence carried to Venice. Some use them with nuts to cause venery, the
spawn may be fried. Sym. Seth. They are hardly concocted, and have little
juice. V. Gal. With the shells of eggs and oil they help the toothache. Hipp.
They are often used in Women's diseases. Cells. Diosc. Their ink mollifieth the
belly. Plin. The spawn provokes urin. Marcel. And takes away tinctures and
spots in the skinn. The bones are used in dentifrices: Gesn. and drunk in water
help the vices of the breast. Schrod. The bone dries and cleanses, sc. the
powder, it helps spotts, moist itch, and the eyes applied with honey. It helps
swollen gumms in dentifrices; it helps the asthma: taken, it stops the
gonorrhoea, it expels the stone, and provokes urin: the D. is scrup. 1. The
spawn cleanses the reins and ureters, and provokes the terms. Jonst. As for
the description, they agree very much with the Poulp and Calamire. They
generate by embraces, in the spring, and go fifteen days, their eggs are
first white, till they put forth their black liquour thereon, and the male
ejaculats his sperm. The young are excluded as birds. The males are known as
being rougher. The male helps the females: and being in dainger, they cast
forth their atrament. They catch fishes, after the manner of angling, by
letting down a line, as it were, from the neck, with a crook at the end of it.

D.
Dace. Leuciscus.
P. In most rivers, in great streams. M. Of red worms, Cod-worms, maggets, and
young wasps, etc. N. (...). Leucorinus. Albicella. Vindosa.
DAce. Muff. T. Is of a sweet taste, a soft flesh, and good nourishment, either
sod, or broiled; or pickled like Anchovaes after the Italian manner, Aldrov.
Gal. So they loose what is mucous and virulent. Some catch them and use them
like Herrings. Bell. Gesn. They are best in April and May, as also in February.
In Italy they take them chiefly in the winter. Grapald. They are good roasted,
and seasoned with salt, vinegar, oil olive, pepper and cinnamon. V. Rondel.
The fatt helps pains of the ears, and mixed with the gall cleanses the
dimnesse of the eyes. As for the description it is needless. Jonst. In the
summer they have worms in them, and are unwholesome. They spawn in June, and
copulate with the Carp. Muff. Those of the Sea called Javelings are of the same
nature.

Dog-fish. Canis cetaceus.
P. In the deep Sea, and near the shore. M. Of flesh and fishes, which they
catch by craft. N. (...). Canis Carcharias, and branchiatus.
Dog-fish. Rond. T. The flesh is white, and not of a ferine taste. Mnesith.
It Is of easy concoction. Gal. It Is hard and excrementitious, yet eaten by the
Country folks, being salted; but it is mucons and of an unpleasant taste,
therefore they are eaten with mustard, or some sharp sauce. Also when salted it
engenders melancholy blood. Alex. Ben. It, as also the condemned meats, sc.
the Hoggs, Cows, Asses, Dogs, Dog-fishes, and all cetaries salted, have made
many Idiots. V. Their teeth are set in silver, to cause dentition, as many
think. Rond. the same are used as dentifrices; by their asperity to whiten the
teeth, and by their dryness to preserve and strengthen the same. The fatt may
be used in steed of that of the Crocodile: and used in a gargarism with water
and vinegar it helps the tooth ach. Some weigh four thousand pound: as for the
description, their skin is rough, their mouth supine, head great, teeth
triangular, eyes great and round, and the optic nerves hard, and the tail of
a cubit long, so Jonst.

Dolphin. Delphinus.
P. They are to be found, in most places of the Sea. M. They live of fishes,
for the most part. N. (...). Porcus Marinus. Delphis. Berellus.
Dolphin. Albert. T. They are not eaten by the Italians; but by the Germans,
Rondel. And are of great account amongst the French. Therefore they are sent to
Lions, having a hard flesh, and such as will not soon putrify. The most useful
parts are the liver and tongue. The liver is of a tender substance; but of evil
juice; the tongue is more tender and fatt, and to be prefered before the liver.
Card. The bowels are like violets, both in taste and smell. V. Plin. The ashes
of the fish applied with water help the leprosy and ringworms, cicatrizing the
same. Kiran. The liver roasted and eaten helps tertians and quartans: Plin. so
taken before the fit; or the fatt anointed: The same drunk with wine helps the
dropsy. The fume helps the strangulation of the womb. The ashes of the teeth
with honey, cause dentition, and help fears. Kiran. The powder of the belly
helps the spleen. As for the description, they have a flat nose; a moveable,
short, broad, and carnose tongue; sharp and little teeth: great eyes. A spout
betwixt the eyes. Two strong finnes. The privity like that in beasts, so the
womb, the genital as in four footed beasts, and they are without a gall. They
live 300. years: generate like rationals, and have a groaning voice: a sharp
sight, and love music and men; but hate the Whale, etc.

Dragon. Draco.
P. They live in the Sea, amongst the sand and rocks. M. Of the smaller kind of
fishes. N. (...). Maris Vastator.
Dragon. Gal. T. The flesh is hard and dry; but if prepared, It Is pleasant,
nourishing much, and begets good juice. Rond. V. The ashes of the fresh head
thereof help against all poison. Plin. The toothache may be cured by
scarification, with their bones. H. Their wound, causes fevers and
inflammations: Plin. The remedy is a Mullet eaten or applied. Diosc. Gal. Or
the fish applied, Aeg. or sulphur with vinegar. Aet. or lead.

E.
Eele. Anguilla.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of froggs, worms,
fishes, roots, herbs, etc. N. (...). Plota. Enchelys.
EEle. Muff. T. Their flesh is sweet; but unwholesome. So hurts diverse,
yielding much nourishment; but very corruptible. H. They loosen the belly; but
cause fluxes. They open the windpipes, but stop the liver. They clear the
voice, but infect the lungs. They increase sperme, but not good; lastly, they
cause agues, hurt the stomach and kidneys, engender gravel, cause the
strangury, sharpen the gout, and fill the body with many deseases. They are
worst in summer; but never wholesome, the elder are better, and the silver
bellied and sandy, worst. Villanov. They have all a venomous malignity, and
gluish suffocating juice; yet those of Jovius by Cremona are counted good.
Note, Their sinking to the bottom when dead, shows them to be of a muddy
nature, and wanting that aerial substance that lightneth other fishes, as also
that they are melancholy, feeding in the night. Great Eeles are best roasted and
broild, their malignant humor being next the skin, and so evaporated by the
fire: the next best, are those that are powdered, and sowced, and baked with
butter, salt, and pepper; but worst sodden, in water, ale, and yest, as
commonly: the last hurting the stomach, liver, and blood. Aldrov. They are of a
slimy and pituitous juice. H. Hipp. They hurt the third kind of tabes, and
disease of the spleen, and cause inflammations in the lungs. sc. The Feculent.
When used, the black vein is to be taken from the back. The Ancients did eat
them with beets, for abstersion, so salted. Salern. They are to be dressed with
spices, also with wine in the winter; and vinegar in the summer. They are good
roasted with bay leaves, having crummes of bread, salt and spices sprinkled
thereon. If boiled, it is to be done, with stone parsley, sage, bay leaves, and
pepper. Other ways of dressing them may be seen in Apicius and Platina. V.
Gal. The fatt is good against stripes. Salv. That when roasted dropped into the
ears helps their old pains, Rond. and those of the nerves. Gesn. Anointed it
helps bald heads. Ms. Germ. With that of a Goose, the juice of roe, wormwood,
ground ivy, and hounds-tongue made into an unguent, it helps wounds: the same
with the juice of house-leek, dropped into the ear, stopping it with a warm
linen cloth, and applying bread warm, helps deafness. Rond. The gall helps
suffusions of the eyes. With oil of roses it hinders the grouth of hair
after evulsion. Salv. The fume of those that are salted, their skinns being
burnt and taken by the fundamer, helps gripings caused by the dysentery. Kiran.
The liver drunk causes a loathing of wine. Marcel. The blood taken with a
double quantity of red wine, and warm water fasting, helps and preventeth the
colic; their fat and liquour applied help the hemorrhoids. Hippiat. A live
Eele given to horses, helps their asthma. Schrod. The head helps warts. Some
say that the wine drunk, in which they have been killed, causes abstinency.
Jonst. Horse coursers give the young-ones to Horses, to make them more lively.
As for their description it is needless. They are generated of slime and
putrefaction. they feed in the night, and lie in the mud in the day time. They
live seven or eight years, fear thunder, and are taken best when there are
floods. Muff. T. The Conger, or Sea Eele, Conger. has a white, fatt and sweet
flesh. The little are taken betwixt Gloucester, and Tewkesbury; but the
great-ones only in the salt Seas. They feed as Eeles do, upon fat waters, at
the mouths of rivers. They are hard of digestion for most stomachs, causing
collicks if eaten cold, and leprosies if eaten hot, after seething. It is not
amiss first to boil it tender in water with salt, time, parsley, baies, and
hot herbs, then to lay it covered in vinegar, and after to broile it, it then
yielding good nourishment in summer for hot stomachs. Eele-powte. Mustela.
Muff. T. Is best in April, May, and September, their spawn is very hurtful;
but the flesh white, sweet, firm, and of good nourishment, and their livers
most sweet and delicate. They may be sod as a Dorry, and broiled a little, that
they may be of easier digestion, or they may be boild as Storgian and eaten
cold. Aldrov. Encel. The ventricle drunk expels the secundine, and helps all
vices of the matrix, and colic. The oil of the liver helps suffusions and
spots.

F.
Flounder. Rhombus.
P. About fatt earth, and shores, in England and other places. M. Of fishes and
Crabs. N. (...). Turbotus Arnold. Villanov.
FLounder. Aldrov. T. By the Ancients they were used in luxury; whence arised
the proverb; nihil ad Rhombum. Gal. They have a soft flesh, therefore they are
to be roasted. Rond. Yet the Aculeate are hard, especially if larger, for the
smaller are more moist and soft. Xenoc. They are hardly concocted; but nourish
much; yet Villanovanus counts them inferior to good fishes; also gross and
viscid, hardly concocted, excrementitious, but agreeing to strong young men
with Sauces to correct their viseous and cold nature. Gal. Boiled in broth with
a little Salt, Leekes, and Anet, they help those that recover from sickness
and are good for the sound broiled, and with vinegar or fried with wine: now
it is boiled and eaten with the juice of an Orang. Plin. Applied it helps the
spleen. Jonst. As for their description, they have a quadrate form, and
oblique angles.

Fork-fish. Pastinaca.
P. In muddy and dirty places of the Sea. M. Their meat is not much observed.
N. (...). Glorinus. Opisthokentros.
Fork-fish. Aldrov. Their Radius only is poysonsome, which being cut off, the
roasted may be eaten. Gal. The flesh is soft and pleasant, and may be
substituted in the steed of other saxatile fishes; So the Cramp-fish; yet
others count it soft, unsweet, ferine, and of evil juice; therefore it is eaten
only by poor people. It may be eaten with vinegar, boiled; and sprinkled with
Meal, if fried. Note, the head and tail are to be cut off. V. Hipp. Those
that have the third kind of tabes may eat them in the 4th. month; and in the
hepatick grief, like the pleurisy. Their liver sod in oil helps the leprosy
and ringworms, Plin. And the itch. Diosc. Aeg. Plin. Cells. The weapon helps the
toothach. Aet. With henbane it helps the falling out of the matrice. Plin. And
facilitats delivery. Rond. Their wounds may be helped by applying the liver,
and the ashes of the Radius used with vinegar. Diosc. The signs of their
wounds are great pain, convulsions, lassitude, and imbecility, dumbness,
dimnesse of the eyes, blackness, and stupidity of the part. Diosc. yet the
Fish applied being dissected is good. Tarent. So Pigeons dung, the seed of
Lettuce, Butter, and Similage. Aet. Also vinegar, and live brimstone moistened
with old urine, hore-hound, leaves of Laurel, Vipers buglosse, the root of
clowns alheall and sage, or acid leaven with tar: the compounds are the
emplastrum piscatoris. Aet. Gal. and Isis. Diosc. Also what helps against
Vipers: and scordium drunk, and Mithridate, etc. Vid. Aet. Aeg. etc. Aldrov.
They are taken by the hook, and nets.

Frog. Rana marina, etc.
P. In herbose places and the shore, etc. M. Of flesh, even that of man. N.
(...). Diabolus marinus.
Frog. Card. T. That of the Sea is not edible. Rond. Salv. But the flesh is
soft, unsweet, serine, mucous, excrementitious, virulent, and of evil juice,
and therefore scarce eaten by the lowest sort of people: yet Archestratus
commends the liver. V. Marcel. Their gall eradicats hair after evulsion.
Rond. it helps suffusions; Plin. Their juice boiled in wine and vinegar is
good, drunk against poison, but Gesner thinks it belongs to the fluviatile.
Schrod. Those belonging to rivers, are an antidote against all poisons of
Serpents, being eaten with salt, oil and butter; and their broth drunk. They
help against old rigors of the tendons. The wine in which the green are killed,
helps to the loathing of wine. Applied alive they help pestilent biles, the
heat of causons, and mitigate the pains of the joints, and quench St.
Anthonies fire. Their Gargarisme helps the toothach: applied to a torminated
belly they ease it. The heart applied to the back bone helps algid agues: and
some apply it against the heart, to help causons, and heat. Crat. The liver
powdered, is good used in quartans. The livers of the green, help Epilepsies.
The gall helps the eyes, and drach. sem. of the powder taken helps quartans.
The fat dropped into the ears helps the pain thereof. The sperm, called
sperniola, does cool, constipate, thicken, ease pain, help the itch of the
hands in March, kills creeping ulcers, and helps the Paronychia, it helps the
erysipelas, burnings, and other inflammations. It helps the redness of the
face, flux of the menses, and hemorrhoids, put into the womb or fundament. The
ashes of Frogs, stop bleeding in wounds, or the nostrils: the fume helps
hemorrhages of the nostrils: it helps the alopecia with tar. Drach. 1. taken
helps the gonerrhoea. The water of the sperm, helps the bladder exulcerated by
the acrimony of humors: also it repelleth and stops blood, helps redness
of the face, and cures ringworms, the erysipelas, and gangreens. French, the
compound helps all pains, and hot and cold swellings. The powder of the sperm
helps malignant ulcers, and all inflammations. Jonst. They of the Sea, as to
their description, are all head and tail, their mouth is great, teeth many and
sharp, jaws semicircular, the tongue longer than the upper jaw, and eyes large
in the top of the head, Kircher, Art. Magnet. They have a kind of finne in the
midst of their nose. They live alone and amongst stones, where they lie with
open mouth, seeming to have a worm therein, which the Fish seeing, are taken by
them. So they are called, Piscatrices.

G.
Grailing. Thymallus.
P. In cold, frigid and gravelly waters. M. They live upon aquatile insects. N.
(...). Aschiar. Thymus piscis. Temarus.
GRailing. Gesn. T. They are to be preferred before Trouts, Salv. They are
tender and sapid, and therefore dearer than other Fishes, especially in May.
They are also very wholesome, and therefore prescribed by Physicians to their
patients, in steed of saxatile Fishes. Plat. They are good fried, Gesn. But the
fatter are better tasted when roasted, Salv. And the greater are best boiled,
and eaten with butter. V. Gesn. Ms. Germ. The gall is used in diseases of the
ears, as that of the Eele, and Tench; for being dropped in, it breaks the
pellicles, cures fluxions, and kills worms. Salv. The fat dropped in helps
deafness, and wounds. Gesn. It helps the eyes, lippitude, redness, heat and
wefts, a drop being dropped in daily. The fat helps spots in the eyes and
adustions and marks of the pocks, so Schrod. It Is a kind of Troute.

Groundlin. Aphya.
P. About Rocks in many places in the Sea. M. They live by licking one an
other. N. (...). Apua. Hepsetus. Liparis. Genitura.
Groundlin. Rond. T. They yield a moist aliment. Athen. And are flatulent,
being of unequal concoction. Mnesith. They loosen the belly, and are to be
eaten sodden. The Phalerick is very fat, which serves for lamps. Jonst. They
are generated of putrified mud and showers. They swim together in great sholes,
that make the water white. They are taken with fine nets.

Gudgin. Gobius.
P. Almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of Worms, Cad-worms, and Grubbes,
etc. N. (...). Cobio. Gobio. Cothus.
Gudgin. Muff. T. They are either white and little, or else bigger and blacker,
yet both are as a Perch; but the yellowish are dry, lean, and unseasonable.
Gal. They are much to be commended, being short, pleasant in taste, fat,
friable, soon concocted, nourishing much, and increasing good blood, and of a
mean juice, and softer than Mullets. The best live about Rocks, but those that
live in fennes and lakes are not wholesome. Hices. They generate much, but not
good juice, they are easily evacuated, and nourish not much. The white are
better, than the black, the yellow are of a more hollow substance, less
corruptible: of thinner juice and not so copious; and by reason of their
largeness, are more nourishing. Aet. They are good in the colic from cold
and pituitous humors, yielding much aliment and strength to the body. V. Aeg.
The Marine being sodde loosen the belly. Kiran. So the fluviatile with salt, or
milk. Sym. Seth. If roasted and without salt, they help dysenteries, lienteries,
and painful egestions. Diosc. Applied they help the bitings of mad Dogs, and
Serpents. Schrod. Nicand. Being eaten they help against dorycnium. Diocl.
Saxatil fishes yield a dry aliment, but solid and corpulent. Muff. Sea
Gudgions, called Paganelli, and by some Sea-cobs, are a most sound, light,
wholesome, and nourishing meat. They are brought to Exceter. Groundlings called
Funduli, are of the same nature.

Guilt-head. Aurata.
P. About Berenice, and the Seas. M. Of Flesh, and Shell-fishes. N. (...).
Orata. Chrysos. Joniscus.
Guilt-head. Hices. Athen. T. They are the sweetest of all Fishes, and most
acceptable to the Pallat. Mnesith. They are hardly concocted; but if so, they
yield much aliment. Rondel. They are of a middle flesh, good juice, and a little
harder, than Saxatile fishes; the best are the Marine: in France they boil
them in water and wine or vinegar, some add oil, Saffron, Pepper, and
Raisins: or they may be roasted, with oil and vinegar, often sprinkled thereon.
See Plat. and Apic. Muff. Those called Lucernae, or Golden-Poles, are almost
like the Gurnard. Gal. But of harder digestion. Jonst. As for their
description, they seldom exceed 10 l. their back is of a ceruleous blackish
color, the sides silver colored, the belly milkie, the upper part of the eyes
golden. The fore teeth are long. They breed in the summer near the mouths of
Rivers. And they are taken by bows placed, on the Sand.

H.
Herring. Halec.
P. In the Baltic Ocean, and Germany. M. Some say they live only on the water.
N. (...). Halecus. Harengus.
HErring. Aldrov. T. They have a fat and soft flesh. Being fried fresh in
butter, they are very delicate, and much desired by the Hollanders, some use
them the back bone being taken out, with Onions, Apples, Vinegar and Oil: they
are eaten also roasted, or broiled after watering, being salted, Schrod. V.
their animae taken, provoke urine. The salted, applied whole to the soles of
the feet, draw humors from the head, and ease feverish heat; and the ashes
break the stone. The pickle is used in clysters, in pains of the hips and
dropsy, it cleanses foetid ulcers, and helps gangreens, quinsies, and botches.

Horn-beake. Acus.
P. They live in the salt waters. M. Their meat is not observed. N. (...).
Ablennes. Acicula.
Horn-beake. Diph. T. That of Aristotle is of hard concoction, moist, and of
good juice, though Hicesius says they are juycelesse. Alex. Ben. They are good
in the time of pestilence. Rond. The vulgar has a dry and hard flesh. V. Gal.
The ashes of the Marine drunk, help the flux of urine. Kiran. Whole, with the
Irine unguent it inspissats; and the ashes help diseases by the whale, or
wounds. That of Oppian is soft or moist: being fried and irrorated with the
juice of an Orange it is grateful to the pallat. Jonst. As for the
description, the first is long, sc. of one cubit, a finger thick, and of a
yellow color, with a little head, long nose, eyes little, gills on each side,
and ventricle in the middle, also they bring forth eggs.

K.
Keeling. Milvus.
P. They live in the Seas, only. M. Of flesh, though without teeth. N. (...).
Milvago. (...). Landola.
KEeling. Muff. T. They differ in nothing but in name, from Cod. Aldrov. The
flesh is unpleasant: Athen. Harder than the Gurnard; but if any will eat them,
they are better boiled than roasted. V. Rond. The gall helps suffusions in the
eyes. Jonst. They are like Kites as to their description.

L.
Lamprey. Lampetra.
P. They live in the Sea and Rivers. M. Of water and moss, and the like. N.
(...). Alabeta. Galexia. Lumbricus marinus.
LAmpreys and Lamprons. Muff. T. Differ in bigness only, and in goodness:
both are a sweet and nourishing meat, increasing lust through much nourishment;
but they are evil, even for strong stomachs, and quickly cause furfeits, Vid.
Polyd. Virg. L. 11. H. they are best in March and April, being then sattest; in
the summer they are harder and leaner. They are to be well sod or baked, else
they are of hard and very dangerous digestion. H. they are hurtful for those
that are old, gouty, aguish, and troubled in their sinewey parts. The Italians
beat them on the tail till almost dead, then gagge their mouth with a whole
Nutmeg, and stop every oilet hole with a clove, and then cast them into oil
and Malmsey, with crummes of bread, a few Almonds blancht and minced, to
correct and better their flesh. These are best baked, and the Lamprons broiled.
The best are those in Severns, being whiter, purer, sweeter, fatter and of
less malignity. Alex. B. it is of good juice and to be preferred before all Fish;
Albert. But it is rather unwholesome, and to be seasoned with spices. Aldrov.
The flesh of that called Muraena is in a Mediocrity. Aet. They are difficultly
concocted, and cause inflations and bad humors. Their dressing may be seen in
Apicius. V. Kiran. eaten with broth they help the Nephritick, Leprosy, and
Scabs with Pepper. Plin. The teeth worn help breeding of the teeth: also their
ashes with honey help lichens and the Leprosy. Marcel. The ashes of their
skins, applied to the forehead with vinegar help pains of the head. Jonst.
As for their description, they are about 2. cubits long. Salv. They are about
12. pounds weight. They live in the Sea about petrose places, and the mouths of
Rivers. They live with flesh. When taken they are said to fly at the fishers.
They hate the Locust, Polypus, and Conger, etc.

Lobster. Locusta marina.
P. In the Sea, and in most places. M. Of little Fishes, and Congers, etc. N.
(...). Gammarus.
Lobster. Muff. T. They are of a strong and hard flesh, and hard of concoction.
The belly, claws, and upper parts are most tender, and the tail parts tough.
When they are seething, their mouth and lower vent should be stopped with towe,
that they may be more pleasant in taste. They are for strong stomachs. The
least are tenderest, and the middle sized best flesht: the greater are old and
tough and hardly concocted. They come in season with the Buck, and go out,
with the Does coming in. Also they are best in the full of the Moon. Clove and
gilly-floure vinger is their best sauce; also buttered with vinegar and Pepper,
they give a strong nourishment to an indifferent stomach. They are best when
their spawn lies greatest in their head. Hipp. They purge childing Women. Sim.
Seth. The ashes of the shells drunk with pure Wine, purge the reins from the
stone. So Jonst.

Lumps. Orbs.
P. In the septentrional Ocean. M. Their meat is not observed. N. Orchis.
Lumpus Angl. Aldrov. Batus rotundus.
Lumps. Muff. T. They are crude, raw, and phlegmatic meat, like a Thorne-back
half sodden. They are best being boiled and pickled like a Sturgian, and so
eaten cold, Jonst. They are round, as to their description, and without scales.

M.
Mackrel. Scombrus.
P. They live in the Ocean and Mediterranian Sea. M. They feed near sandy
shores. N. (...). Piscis Iberus. Macarellus.
MAckrel. Diph. T. It Is a light Fish, and quickly descends from the stomach.
Hices. It nourishes much, and is of better juice than the Colias; but less
easily evacuated. Arnold. But they are rather no wholesome fish, being gross,
viscous, hardly concocted, and excrementitious, and are not therefore to be
used; except by young strong men, and with sauces that may correct their
viscous and thick juice. Tral. H. they are naught for those that are troubled
with the Epilepsy. Athen. They are fat; but load the stomach, and are best
broiled. Muff. They have a suffocating substance, and are offensive to the
brain, head, and breast, though pleasant to the taste, and acceptable to the
stomach; yet they cause drowsiness, in the best stomachs, and apoplexies,
palsies, lethargies, or dullness of sense and sinews in them that are weak.
Tral. They hurt those that are phlegmatic or obstructed. They are best sod in
wine vinegar with mints, parsley, rosemary and time; and if after they be kept
in pickle, made of Rhenish wine, ginger, pepper and dill, they are dainty and
wholesome; but worst buttered. The French lay them upon southernwood and broil
them, basting them with wine and butter, and so serve them in with vinegar,
pepper and butter, as hot as may be, which lessens their malignity, and
increaseath their goodness. V. Aelian. Being eaten they help those that are
troubled with the liver and jaundise. The pickle dropped in warm, helps all
diseases of the ears. Being putrified in vinegar, they help the suffocation of
the womb. As for their description it is needless, they being common.

Maids. Raiolae.
P. The place of their living and abode is in the Sea. M. Of Flesh, Livers and
Spawns of Fish. N. Their names are not much observed.
Maids. Muff. T. Are as little and tender Skates. They are very nourishing and
of good juice, fit for weak stomachs, and those that have through wantonness,
spoiled themselves. They are to be boiled in wine water and salt with a sprig
of rosemary, and then to be eaten with vinegar, pepper and sweet butter. Note,
these, as also the Skate, and Thornback amongst Fishes, bring forth their young
ones without eggs, after the kind of propagation of beasts.

Mullet. Mullus.
P. Their abode is in the septentrional Ocean. M. Of the Sea Hare or any thing.
N. (...). Triglis. Mulio. Barbus marinus.
Mullet. Gal. T. In the goodness of their juice, or pleasantness of their
taste, they cannot be compared with the Jack, Umber, or Sturgian, etc. Yet
others commend them as fit for the stomach, of good juice, pleasant taste,
fleshy, hardly corrupted, and mean as to excretion. Cells. These, as also Pikes
have a middle flesh; but most other approved Authors count them hard. Psel. They
are hardly concocted; but nourish much. Gal. The flesh is the hardest of almost
all other Fishes, and friable: it nourishes well, when concocted; so other
hard meats, and those of thick parts; but those that are fat, fill presently,
and destroy the appetite, as also the viscous. Aet. They are good in the
colic from cold and pituitous humors, as also the Scorpions and Sparrows.
Diph. The flesh is acceptable to the stomach, a little astringent, hard,
styptick if roasted, and heavy fried, and hardly concocted. Muff. The Sea
Mullets, mugiles mar. differ little in Shape from Barbels. They are of a light
and aerial substance. They hinder venery, sperm, courage, and conception; but
their flesh is wholesome, white, sweet and tender. They are much nourishing
being first sodden in wine, salt, and water, and then sowced like a Gurnard, or
kept in a gelly like a Tench, or eaten hot with vinegar and pepper. Of their
eggs and blood with salt is made the Italians Botargo, Aldrov. Which recovers
the appetite, causes thirst, and helps the taste of wine. V. The ashes of the
head with honey help gallings of the fundament: that of the ventricle
strengthens the stomach, and consumes its humidity, so dried in an Oven and
washed in white wine, and the water of Mints and Wormwood. being boiled in
wine, and taken in vinegar, it stops vomiting; so the intestines, the fat
being taken off; for all fat things laxate the stomach. Rond. The stones found
in their heads help against the Nephritick passion. Aet. The Mulli are not to
be used in the colic from cold and pituitons humors, as also in the
hemorrhage and hemorrhoids: Diph. For they attenuate the blood; yet are
astringent if roasted. Plin. Diosc. H. eaten often they dull the eyesight. They
hinder venery, and the love of wine. Roasted, they help the tormina. So Marcel.
and Tral. Alex. Ben. They are good in the time of the plague. Gariopont. They
help the Dropsy. Marcel. The flesh of their heads with honey helps vices of the
fundament; and the head discusseth carbuncles. Diosc. Applied fresh they help
the bitings of the Sea Dragons, Scorpion and Spider, as also of the Fork-fish
with Laser. Jonst. They breed thrice in a year. They hate the Sea Hare.

Mussels. Mytili.
P. They live in sandy places, in England, etc. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Chamae. Arab. Amarchas.
Mussels. Wott. T. The least are whitest, softest, and soonest digested; but
the greater are of stronger and larger nourishment: the red ones are very
daingerous, and the yellow ones are suspected; but the white are wholesome and
much commended, except unto hot and destempered stomachs: They are best sodden
in the water out of which they were taken, else in water and salt and a little
strong ale and vinegar. Boiled Mussels increase heat and drouth: if fried they
easily corrupt in the body, and turn to a bad juice. If they are kept in Srt.
Goodrons pickle for Oisters, (made of Sea water, Wine, Vinegar, Bayleaves,
Mints, Pepper, Ginger and Cinnamon,) they are as wholesome, and more pleasant
than Oisters Horse mussels, are not a wholesome meat, Plin. Tasting brackish
and strong, and having a hidden poison in their flesh. Jonst. They loose their
virulency, being boiled, with mustard and cresses. The worst are in sandy
places. Plin. their broth increases the body. The greater are hard, and
therefore hardly concocted. They beget thick blood and no good juice; but they
nourish much, and moove the belly and urine. V. In physic they have the same
use as the Musculi. Diosc. Applied they help the bitings of a mad Dog. The
broth opens, purges the reins, and lesseneth the blood and fat: therefore
they are very good for such as have the dropsy, jaundise, joint ach,
inflations, etc. And to purge Women. The shell is used to take up oil with
all, like a spoon.

O.
Oister. Ostrea.
P. In the Sea and Rivers, about Rocks, etc. M. Of Sea water, Mud, and Dew. N.
(...). Ostreum Minsh. Gal Huistre.
OIster. Muff. T. They are a common and wholesome meat. They differ in color
substance and bigness; but the best are thick, little and round shelld, not
flaggy through abundance of gellied humors; but short, firm and thick of
flesh, rising up round like a Woman's breast, being in a manner all belly, and
short find, of a green color, and listed about as with a purple hair, and may
therefore be called Calliblephara: such are our Walfleet and Colchester
Oisters, which in good relish, substance and wholesomnesse, far exceed those
of Vsk, Pool, Southampton, Whitestable, and Rye, etc. Gal. They are somewhat
heavy of digestion and engender phlegm; but he knew not the goodness of our
English Oisters, which are the second best in the World: every man loving them,
and they offending no indifferent stomach, though eaten raw, but rather settling
a bad appetite, confirming a weak stomach, and giving good nourishment to
decayed members, through their own goodness, or being much desired: they were
also always counted of light digestion, being to be eaten first. The fattest
are taken in salt waters at the mouths of Rivers; but the wholesomest and
lightest are the marine upon Shelfs and Rocks; which also procure urine and
stool, and help the colic and dropsy eaten raw; but if sod they bind the
belly, stop urine, and increase the colic. They are to be eaten drinking
wine, or strong and hot beer after them, else they concoct hardly. Little
Oisters are best raw; and the great stewed with wine, onions, pepper, and
butter; or baked with onions, pepper and butter, or else pickled with white
wine vinegar, their own water, bays, Mints, and hot spices; but they are worst
sod except in Seawater. All Oisters are worst when full of milk, which is
commonly betwixt May and August: raw Oisters are best in Winter and cold
weather, when the stomach is hottest, sc. from September to April: yet the
Italians never eat them raw; but broile them in their shell with their water,
the juice of an Orange; Pepper and Oil, and so they eat daintily. Pickled
Oisters may be eaten at all times, and to the taste and judgment of some, they
are more commendable; chiefly to cold, weak, windy, and queasy stomachs, than
any way else prepared. Some affirm Oisters may be kept all the year in Snow,
and so be eaten cold in the Summer, so Pliny. Bell. Jonst. They are the best of
all Shell-fishes. Gal. Their flesh is moist and tenacious, of thick juice, and
engendring a thick cold and crude humor; being raw, they have a salt humor
which mooveth the belly and causes Satyrisme: Being boiled and loosing their
moisture they cause murmuring; so Jov. Jul. Alex. by reason of their great
softness of flesh they are easily concocted, and rather beget phlegm, than
crude humors. Being broiled on a gridiron with spice and salt, they are not
hurtful. Plin. Being crude they recreate the stomach and help loathing of
Meat. They are best at the decrease of the Moon. V. Being boiled with mulse
and Pepper they help the tenesmus. Myreps. The ashes of their shells help
ulcers of the lips, etc. And whiten the teeth. Plin. With old urine, They
help eruptions and running ulcers. Rond. A lixive made therewith helps
oedematous tumors of the feet and knees; for it dries, digesteth much, and
heateth if not washed. Schrod. They attract the poison of pestilent buboes to
them, used to the arms or thighs, so Holl.

P.
Perch. Perca.
P. They live in the Thames, and Avon, etc. M. Of Fishes, even of their own
kind. N. (...). Persicinus. Hisp. etc. Perca.
PErch. Muff. T. They are a most firm, tender, white and nourishing Fish,
Ausonius prefers them before Pikes, Roches, Mullets and all other Fish: they
are commended also by Hessus, Diocles, Hippocrates and Galen. They are ever in
season, except in March and April, when they Spawn. As the oldest and greatest
Eele is best, so the middle sized Pike and Perch are always most wholesome.
They may be sod in wine vinegar, water and salt, and then eaten hot, or covered
with wine vinegar and eaten cold: they so, both cooling a distempered feverish
stomach, and giving much nourishment to a weak body. Aldrov. The stones in
their brains help the stone in the reins, and other pungent griefs in the
sides. Aldrov. The Sea-perch is as the former. The broth loosens the belly. The
head with honey helps pustules, etc.

Perwinckles. Cochleae marinae.
P. Their abiding place is about the Seashore. M. Of the finest mud and best
weeds. N. Their names are not much observed.
Perwinckles or Whelks. Muff. T. Are very nourishing and restorative, being sod
in their own Sea water. The whitest flesht are ever best and tenderest, and
those that are taken in clean creeks eat pleasantly; but those of muddy shores
strangly, and offend the eyesight. They are best in Winter and the spring, for
a resolved stomach and liver. Apicius would have the covering of their holes
taken away after boiling, being unwholesome. For sound persons they may be sod
with water, salt and vinegar also: for the sick they may be seethed, and
steeped in new milk, or fried in a Pan with butter and salt.

Pike. Lucius.
P. In Rivers and Pooles, almost every where. M. They feed upon Fishes and
Frogs, etc. N. (...). Oxyrynchus Strab. Esox, Plin.
Pike. Lon. T. They are so wholesome that they may be given to sick Women.
Arnold. These as also the Perch, are best when of a mean size, and in the
first degree of goodness. The flesh is more white, friable, and subtle than
that of the Carp. Note, Physicians choose the lesser Fishes and those of a
middle age. They are best in July and October. The hinder part is best. Plat.
The greater are best boiled, they may also be fried or broild, so Gesn. Their
spawn is as bad as that of the Barbel, causing the choleric passion. The
powder purges the belly. Drach. 1. of the ashes of the jaws helps the stone:
it dries up ulcers of the privities. Alex. Ben. Drunk in wine it is diuretic;
applied it cures the piles. The powder of the teeth helps the whites, so the
jaws, also the pleuresy, and secundine. Muff. The great are hard and tough: the
little, moist. Schrod. The gall taken cures the ague, outwardly it helps
spots, and dimnesse of the eyes, etc. The heart helps the paroxismes in
fevers. Their mandibles, dry and cleanse, and help difficulty in Childbirth.
The powder used outwardly helps the Synovia, and mundifieth old ulcers. The
cruciforme bone of the head taken, helps the Epilesy, some use it as a periapt
against enchauntments. The fat is used to the soles of the feet and breasts of
infants to revelle catarrhes, and ease the cough. the destilled water of the
gall helps the eyes. Jonst. The ashes of their bones if salted, serve in steed
of spodium. They live 200. years. Dubrav. They bear antipathy to the Frog.
Pikes of the Sea; Lucii Muff. Are a most dainty Fish, and more sweet, tender
and crisper than River Pikes, and may be eaten by aguish persons, weak
stomachs, and Women in Childbed. They feed upon young fry and spawns of Fish.
And by continual swimming against the surges, they become tenderer than fresh
water Pikes, though not so fat. Gal. Those in the pure Sea are sweet, in taste
and smell, and last long. Hices. They are of good juice, but not of much
nourishment. They are best, in Winter. Xenoc. Those of a mean bigness are
best, being tender, of good juice, sweet, acceptable to the stomach, nourishing
much, being of easy distribution, and quickly carried through the Body. Diocles
prefers the broiled, and Platina says they have a superfluous moisture. The
diverse way of dressing may be seen in Apicius. The venture helps digestion,
the Fish, botches: the stone, headaches, and the nephritik: the gall helps the
eyes; and the eggs, the stomach.

Pilchers. Alausae minores.
P. Their abiding is in the Sea, and near the shore. M. Of the excrements of
the Sea, and love beets. N. (...). Sarda, Minsh. Gall. Sardine.
Pilchers. Muff. T. Are firmer and fuller than Herrings, and their bodies
rounder: neither are they of so aguish an operation; they are best broiled,
having lien a day in salt, and eaten with butter, salt, and pepper.

Plaise. Passeres.
P. In the Sea, Lakes, and Rivers, in England and other places. M. Their meat
is not much observed. N. (...). Platessa Ausonii. Platusa Minsh.
Plaise. Muff. T. They are of good, wholesome and fine nourishment; Arnold.
Vill. They as also Soles, are to be numbered next to Rochets and Gurnards, being
eaten in time, else they are carrion-like and troublesome to the belly of man.
The best Plaise have blackest spots, as the best Flounders reddest, and the
thicker is most commended, and such as are taken upon the Eastern coast, as
Rye, Sandwich, and Dover, Philot. They are a soft fish; but Diocles counts
them more dry. Xenoc. They have a hard flesh, not subject to corruption,
engendring a good juice, and meanly mooving the belly. Gal. They are betwixt
hard and soft. Aet. They are to be shunned in the colic from cold and
pituitous humors. The Marine are the best being more firm, dry and delicate,
then those of Pooles, and lastly those of Rivers. Plat. They are to be boiled
with stone parsely: and if broiled, to be used with the juice of Oranges.

Porpaise. Phocaena.
P. Their abiding, is in all Seas, chiefly near Creete. M. Their meat is not
much observed. N. (...). Tursio. Piscis ater. Porcus marinus.
Porpaise. Aldrov. Tursions, or Sea-hoggs are fatter than Dolphins, of wose
flesh, and of hard concoction. Muff. They are of the nature of Swine, never
good till they are fatt, contrary to Tunies, which are best leanest. It is an
unsavory meat, engendring many superfluous humors, augmenting phlegm, and
troubling an indifferent stomach; yet many of the Gentry love it exceedingly
baked like Venison.

Poulp. Polypus.
P. Their abiding place is in the Adriatic Seas. M. They live upon the flesh
of shelfishes. N. (...). Anosteos. Onos. Multipes.
Poulps. Muff. T. Are of hard digestion, and naught howsoever dressed.
Hippocrates commends them to Women in childbed, and Diphilus, Aegineta and
Aetius, saying that they nourish much, and excessively provoke lust. Being well
sodden in salt water and wine, with sweet herbs, it is dainty, and more
wholesome than a Mackrel. Jonst. The head is very sweet, and the flesh is of a
crude juice. They are better boiled than broild. V. Applied they stop bleeding.
Myreps. The ashes with that of an olive, and an half of vitriol, help the
polypus. They are given to cause conception. In white wine they move the
menses. They mollify the womb, and help its dislocation: They are somewhat like
the Cuttle. The males have longest heads. They spawn, swim obliquely, and
change their color.

Purple. Purpura.
P. They live in the Sea, and near unto the shores. M. They feed upon little
fishes, weeds and moss. N. (...). Roncera. Vngella.
Purple. Jonst. T. They are of the nature of Shel-fishes, containing a salt
juice, and loosening the belly; but they are of a hard juice. Their necks are
hardly concocted, their extreme parts are acceptable to the stomach. If boiled
they make thick broth. V. Plin. They help against poison. Nic. As doricnium:
the slime gleweth fresh wounds. The ashes of the shells with honey help
pustules of the privities: With roses and cloves they are used in dentifrices.
with the juice of licorice, seed of poppies, cremor of barley and white wine,
they help the lungs, and stop fluxions. The powder helps malign ulcers. With
honey it attenuats the hair. Aetius uses them to cause conception. They are
about the quantity of an egg.

R.
Roche. Rutilus.
P. Almost in all Rivers: and in the stream. M. Of Redworms, Cod-wormes,
Maggots, Sheeps blood, etc. N. Lentiscus fluviatilis. Gall. Rochette, Minsh.
ROche. Muff. T. Their flesh is thought to be light, sound, and wholesome, if
sodden like a breame: They are full of bones which makes them less regarded.
They are a very healthful fish, and thought incapable of any disease, whence
arised The old proverb, as sound as a Roche. Jonst. They are naught in May,
they may be dressed as the Carp. So Gesn. Rochet. Rubellio. Muff. Is redder and
lesser than Gurnards and Currs, and of the like flesh and goodness; yet better
fried with onions, butter, and vinegar, than sodden; seething soaking out their
best nourishing substance. Aldrov. They are sweet, good, of much aliment, and
middle substance, easily concocted, and not moving the belly; but cause venery,
and help fevers.

Ruffs. Cernuae.
P. They live in the Avon, etc. and Charwel. M. Their meat is worms, etc. N.
(...). Acerina. Plin. Porcellus. Porculus, Minsh.
Ruffs. Aldrov. T. They are sweeter and more wholesome than the greater
Perches, they may be boiled or fried. Gesn. The stones in their heads help the
stone of the reins, and pricking pains of the sides. Muff. They are not much
unlike to Perches; but lesser: the best live in sandy places, where they grow
exceeding fatt and sweet; they may be dressed as Perches.

S.
Salmon. Salmo.
P. At Gloucester, and Worcester, and other places. M. They feed upon, little
fishes. N. (...). Gall. Saulmon, Minsh. Hisp. Salmon.
SAlmon. Aldrov. T. Both in taste and tenderness, they are inferior to no
fish, either marine, flaviatile or lakish. Massarius prefers them before all
fishes; but they are to be eaten moderately, otherwise by reason of their
excessive fatness, they cause surfeits: they are best in April and May, and
when little, and those taken in Rivers. They are worse at the time of spawning.
H. They are naught for those that are sick, and have weak stomachs; for they
are viscous, hard of concoction, as are for the most part, all other fishes
that leave the Seas to go into the rivers, so Mnesith. Plat. They taste well
boiled. The sides may be pickled, and the chine broiled or fried. Some reech
them. Muff. They are of a fatty, tender, short and sweet flesh, quickly filling
the stomach, and soon glutting. If they go too high into the rivers, they wax
lean. They come in season, and go out with the Buck; for toward winter they
wax kipper, full of kernels, under their throat, and loose both their redness
and taste. They are best sod in wine vinegar and salt, or else parboild being
cut into pieces, stuck full of cloves, broild upon a gridiron, basted with
butter, and served in with sauce made of vinegar, cinnamon and sugar. If pickled
it is like Sturgian. When hot it is counted a leprous meat. The Salmon peales or
Sea Trouts, are a more light, wholesome, and well tasted meat. So the Shuins or
Salmunculi. Which are to be boiled in wine vinegar with salt, and sweet herbs.
They are taken at leapes.

Scorpion-fish. Scorpio.
P. They wander abroad, in the depth of the Sea, etc. M. They live upon weeds,
crabs, and flesh. N. (...). Spinula. Rascassa.
Scorpion-fish. Aldrov. T. They are not the worst of fishes, especially if
taken in the winter, in stony places, and the pure Sea. Philot. They are of
hard flesh. Gal. They may be substituted to saxatile fishes; but yield a dry
nourishment, and that copious, solid, of easy concoction, and abound not with
excrements, or cause flatulency, if duly ordered. Hices. It Is better than the
Scorpaena, being abstersive, esily evacuated, and of much juice. They are
tenderest kept a while, and boiled in water, with oil and sweet herbs, if
great; else roasted. Cato, V. The broth looseneth the belly, with oil, salt,
and aniseeds. Hipp. They help gross and pituitous diseases, as also the
Dragon, Curre and Gudgin. The gall brings forth the menses and secundine,
Marcel. and helps the eyes, and the alopecia. The stone helps the stone, So
their ashes. Their biting is helped by wormwood, sulphur, and themselves
applied etc.

Sea-Calfe. Phoca.
P. They live, both in the Sea, and upon the Land. M. Their feeding is upon
fishes. N. (...). Vitulus and bos marinus. Bocas.
Sea-Calfe. Aldrov. T. The flesh is soft, spongious, and very fatt; therefore
it quickly satiats, and causes nauseousnesse; it is of an ill juice, and ferine
taste, or smell, therefore they are not much eaten by those that live near the
Sea. V. Plin. the right finns laid under the head, cause sleep. Shoos made of
the skin help the gout, so of that of the Lion, Woolf, Fox, or Hyena. Avic.
The flesh helps the epilepsy and suffocation of the matrix. Hipp. The fatt
helps women's diseases, used inwardly or outwardly, with bitumen, barley chafe,
Goats dung, and Hares furre burnt, etc. Plin. The same helps the leprosy and
mentagra. Plin. The curd with penax helps the epilepsy, in wine it helps the
lethargy, and the quinsy with peucedanum. They differ in shape from all other
fishes.

Sheath-fish. Silurus.
P. They live and abide in muddy waters. M. They live upon flesh and small
fishes. N. (...). Glanus. Solaris piscis.
Sheath-fish. Salv. T. They have a hard flesh, and not very sweet: The greater
are hardly concocted. Kentm. They are of good taste, and useful in meat, both
fresh and salted. The lesser may be boiled: And the greater used as the
Sturgian. Note, the vein in the back is to be taken out, and then they are to
be prepared as the Eele. Jonst. As for the description. Their body is of a
dim color, the mouth blunt, and the jaws rough: they grow to the weight of
200. pound. They generate like Froggs, and the males look to the spawn 40. or
50. days, till they are of the bigness of a pease.

Shrimp. Squilla.
P. They live, and remain in muddy places. M. They live upon oisters and
reets. N. (...). Scylla. (...). Gibba.
Shrimp. Muff. T. The healthful, recover sick and consumed persons, and are of
the best juice. For healthful persons, they may be boiled in salt water with a
little vinegar; but for the sick, first wash them in barley water, then scale
them alive, and sees them in chickens broth; so they are as restorative as the
best Crabs or Crevises. If sodden with their scales they cause venery. The
great Shrimps also are good for the purpose aforesaid; but the cruckt backed are
sweetest and most temperate. Jonst. They are hardly concocted, and hurt the
stomach. V. applied they draw out things fixed in the flesh. They serve to
catch Mullets and Pikes withal.

Skate. Squatina.
P. They live, in dirty and deep places. M. They live upon flesh and fishes. N.
(...). Squatus. Lima Vallae. Celtes.
Skate. Aldrovand. T. They are friable; but not of sweet smell, yet yielding
moist aliment. Gal. They are hard, difficultly concocted, and nourish much.
Diph. They are cartilaginous, and all cartilaginious things engender
flatulency, are carnose, hardly concocted, and if much used dull the eye sight:
in so much that Rusticks meddle not with them, for their ferine smell,
hardness, and want of sweetness. V. Hipp. Boiled they help gross disseases
from phlegm, as also the third kind of tabes. Rond. The oil of the liver
helps the hardness of the liver, with celtick spike, storax and wormwood. The
dried eggs stop all fluxes of the belly, the skin helps scabs, the ashes help
running ulcers of the head, and the alopecia. Plin. Applied they hinder the
dugg's growing. Muff. They are venerious, and like the Thornback in form, and
quality, but better, and skind file-like. Jonst. As for their description. They
sometimes grow to 160. pound, they are of an ash color, their skin is used as
a file to polish ivory and wood with. They bring forth twice a year seven or
eight young ones at a time, they catch-fish, by hiding themselves in the sand,
and mooving their Rades, like worms, which the fish take, and so are taken.
They often copulate with the Thornback.

Smelts. Violaceae.
P. They live about Kew, Brainford, and Westchester, etc. M. Of gnats, nitts,
and lice, etc. N. Eperlanus Rond. Epelanus. Viola. Perlanus Minsh. Gal.
Eperlon.
Smelts. Muff. T. They are of finest, lightest, softest, and best juice of all
other fish. They are best in winter and when full of spawn. The western are the
greatest and best. Their gall is to be taken away, and then their livers,
gutts, bellies, and fatt are great restoratives. They are to be sod in hot
boiling water and salt: Their sauce is butter and verjuice with a little gross
pepper; but civil oranges, if fried. They smell like violets. Aldrov. And are
about half a foot long.

Sole. Solea.
P. Their abiding, is in most Seas, about England, etc. M. Their meat is not
much observed. N. (...). Lingulaca. Saraulis. Sandalium.
Sole. Aldrov. T. They are of a most sweet taste, and therefore compared to the
Partridg. And are of a mean juice, Gal. and therefore are substituted to
saxatile fishes: in sweetness and the quantity of aliment, and goodness of
juice, they are better than the Plaise, but of more hard and solid flesh; they
are easily concocted, and not excrementitious; but they are a little glutinous
and of hard flesh, not being easily corrupted, and being long preserved:
whereas all flesh first grows tender, at length putrifieth by external heat;
so insipid tastes, are first gentle and pleasant, and after troublesome by
acrimony: So Xenocrates. they are best in the winter, and fried and eaten with
the juice of oranges and pepper. Muff. They are good for sick people, and of
few excrements. They are to be fried with parsley, butter, and verjuyce, and
sauced with oranges.

Sprats. Chalcides.
P. They are near the shores of England, and other places. M. Of the
excrements of the Sea. N. (...). Sardina. Sardella.
Sprats. Aldrov. Hices. Athen. T. They are squalid, lean, and not of copious
aliment. V. They help against the biting of the prester. Marcel. The powder of
their heads helps against botches, and pains of the throat, as also against
the swelling, stench and Canker of the gummes. Bras. Taken before meat they
loosen the belly as also other salt Fishes. So the head used as a suppository.
Muff. They smell well when new and fresh; being like the River Smelt; but their
flesh is queasy, corruptible, and aguish, especially in a weak stomach. They
are worst being smoaked or fried, indifferent sodden, and best broiled.
Spurlings, Chalcides Majores, pickled like Anchovaes, exceed them; after
Turners way. The red cause appetite and help it: Apuae infumatae.

Starre-gazer. Vranoscopus.
P. Their abiding place is in the Seas. M. Of Flesh and unpleasant water. N.
(...). Pulcher. Tapecon.
Starre-gazer. T. Aelian. Some commend the Fish as edible: others deny it.
Diph. They have an unpleasant smell and taste, or rankish. V. Hippocrates uses
them against white phlegm, diseases from obstruction, and the dropsy, as also
the Dragon, Scorpion, and Curre, being most dry: Diosc. Therefore their galls
are very useful in Physic, above the other, and help suffusions of the eyes,
therefore some say it helped the eyes of Tobias. Plin. It helps cicatrices and
consumes supervacaneous flesh. With oil of roses it helps the ears, and
Apollonius uses it with the slough of a Snake, and Bulls or Goats gall. Jonst.
They seldom exceed a foot in length, and look upwards, having a great head
like Bulheads.

Sturgian. Sturio.
P. They live in the Sea and mouths of Rivers. M. They feed upon mudde and
excrements. N. (...). Aquipenser. Stora.
Sturgian. Plin. T. It was counted the most noble of all Fishes. The female are
best when full of spawn, and in fresh waters. They are of hard flesh, being fat
and glutinous; so are hardly concocted, and engender thick juice, therefore
they are not good for those that are sick or sickly. Albert. The liver is so
sweet that without the gall it causes nauseousnesse. Some also salt them. They
are to be sod in water, white wine and vinegar, with a little salt. Their spawn
with salt makes Caviare. Muff. The Fish is thought by Mr. Cogan to be of hard
substance, not much better than Bacon or Brawn; sc. the old; but the young is
preferred before other Fish, therefore Severus had it served up gilded, and
attended with minstrels, and carolling. Galen affirms it to be of sweet,
delicate and good nourishment. Cardanus Compares it with Veale; but it is far
better. Some commend the greater as the best, and the males living at the
mouths of Rivers. H. they, especially the forepart, hurt those that are aguish,
being fat, oily and soon converted into choler. They may be roasted if stuck
with cloves, and eaten with Venison sauce, or they may be broiled and basted
with oil and vinegar after salt; but it is best pickled being eaten with
vinegar and sweet fennel. When cold being boiled as aforesaid, they are to be
cut into Jouls and rands and so Barrelled up with Rhenish wine, wine vinegar,
and Sea water for half a year: And then they are a light, toothsome, and good
meat, for temperate stomachs, It Is best for hot stomachs, young men, and in
the summer time, then helping thirst, appetite, and heat, and yielding
temperate and good nourishment. V. Plin. The flesh clears the voice. Diosc.
And applied salt it draws out things fastened in the flesh. If stamped with
Sandaracha it helps phagedens. The fomentation with the pickle helps
dysenteries, drawing fluxions to the outward parts. Used in clysters it helps
the Sciatica. It may be used in putrid ulcers of the mouth. Their fat helps
kibes. Schrod. The bones are given in the running gout; so For. and discuss
colic griefs. The rest Pliny affirms of the Silurus. Jonst. As to the
description, Their body is betwixt round and broad, the head pyramidical, the
mouth without teeth, eyes little, the belly is smooth and silver colored,
tongue thick and hard, throat rough, two finns before and backwards. And the
tail divided, with scales toward the head; yet they swim fastest against
the stream. Usually they are of a 100. pound weight, and are most strong in
the water, breaking great stakes, etc.

T.
Tench. Tinca.
P. They live in standing waters amongst reeds. M. They feed on the
putrefaction of mudd. N. (...). Tencha. Merula lacustris.
TEnch. Aldrov. T. Their flesh is not unsweet; but it yields impure and
illaudable aliment, and often hurtful; also Physicians count it feverish,
feeding on, and living in dirty places: and they are hardly concocted and of
bad juice. Muff. They are a muddy and slimy fish, as appears by the touch;
therefore they are stopping, viscous, and very unwholesome. Gazius counts a
fried tench, a secret poison. Therefore Dr. Caius, called them good plasters;
but bad nourishment. V. For being laid to the soles of the feet, they often
draw away the ague, but taken inwardly H. they cause palsies, stop the lungs,
putrify in the stomach, and cause many diseases, being of hard digestion, heavy
to the stomach, and causing apoplexies, Yet hot and laboring men may eat
them. They are best in jelly of strong wine and spices. Gesn. Ancient
Physicians used them to ease the pains of the head and limbs. They help the
jaundise, applied alive to the liver or navil. The gall is used with remedies
against the pain of the ears, helping fluxions and killing worms. Schrod.
The fish dissected and applied to the pulses and feet, cools burning fevers,
and serves to divert pestilent poisons, so also in the pains of the head or
joints. The ashes help the whites. The stone found in the head operats as that
of the Carpe. Aldrov. That of the Sea, Tinca marina, is not a sweet fish, it is
soft enough; but not friable, easily concocted, but excrementitious: being
fried or broiled, they are less ungrateful to the pallat, than when boiled.

Thornback. Raia.
P. They live and abide in dirty places of the Sea. M. They live upon fishes.
N. (...). Thalis. Rubus piscis. Rex. Papilio.
Thornback. Muff. T. It Is of a pleasant taste; but of a stronger smell than
Skate, and over moist to nourish much; yet increasing lust. Hipp. It helps long
consumptions. The liver is very sweet and of great nourishment, as appears by
its taste and consistence. The liver is good sodden; but the flesh is best
broiled after seething to consume the watrishnesse. Gal. They are harder, more
hard of concoction and more nourishment, than the Crampfish or Forkfish. If
boiled they loosen the belly; Yet the Hollanders eat them so with butter,
vinegar, and mustard. They are best in winter. V. Plin. The gall with wine
helps the ears, also the itch. The Stellate Raie is less hard, and of less
ill juice, than the Smooth.

Trout. Trutta.
P. They live, not only in the Sea but Rivers. M. Of the excrements of the
water, etc. N. (...). Aurata. Variolus.
Trout. Aldrov. T. Is equal to any fish, that lives in fresh waters. Those of
lakes are more fatt than the fluviatile, some commend them chiefly in April
and May, and they are worse in October, breeding then. They are to be eaten
fresh, soon putrefying. Gesn. Their fatt applied with a sponge helps the
piles, etc. Muff. Both the Salmon and gray trouts are very pleasant, and good
for sound persons, but in agues they are not comparable to the Perch, they are
best if sodden like a Breame and eaten hot, for if cold they loose much of
their grace, and more of their goodness.

Tunie. Thunnus.
P. Their living is in the Mediterranean Sea. M. Of Weeds, Acorns, and Fishes.
N. (...). Cordyla. Auxus. Pelamides. Orcynus.
Tunie. Muff. T. They are best when leanest, sc. At the fall and dead of
Winter. When at the best, they are unsavory, cloying an indifferent stomach,
and engendring most gross and superfluous moistures. As Porpesses must be
baked when new, so Tunie is never good till powdered with Salt, Vinegar,
Coriander, and hot spices. They live not above 2. years, waxing so fat, that
their bellies break, and of the fat then is made Traine-oile for Clothiers.
Aldrov. They are sweet and hard of concoction. Diph. They nourish much. Xenoc.
Oribas. They are unfit for the stomach, of evil juice, flatulent, hardly
evacuated, and generate crude humors. Myreps. They hurt those that have the
gout. Tral. And the Epileptick: Gal. Having a thick and tenacious juice. The
lesser are more tender. Mnesith. They are best roasted their fat being so drawn
away. Platina seasoneth them with Pepper, Cinnamon, and Coriander stamped,
boiled Onions, honey and oil. Some comend the belly, throat, head, and tail
as the best. V. Plin. The blood, gall, and liver are Psilothrons. Gal. Some use
the blood with the juice of henbane. Card. It being cold and gross. The fat
helps ulcers. The ashes of the head, help pustuls of the privities. Diosc. The
old flesh helps the bitings, of the Prester; drinking much of it, and drinking
much wine after it. Applied it helps the bitings of Dogs. Plin. The Cybium
stamped helps the toothach; purges the belly, brings forth phlegm and
choler, and helps eating and putrefying ulcers. Jonst. Plin. As for the
description they are a slipery Fish, having great scales so joined, that they
seem to be without them. They live 2. years. They copulate in February. They
are swift, and sleep in the deep. They see best with the right eye.

V.
Umber. Vmbra.
P. They live, in sandy places, in the salt and fresh water. M. They are
carnivorous. N. (...). Vmbrina. Ovis Marina. Sciadeus.
UMber. Aldrov. T. At Rome it is counted a well tasted and noble fish: And is
best and fattest in the dog-dayes, and then the head is the best. Salv. Being
any way seasoned they are sweet; if stuck with cloves and roasted, being often
sprinkled with oil, they are more sweet and pleasant. Jovius counts them of
the nature of Sturgians. They are not so soft as saxatile fishes; yet
Xenocrates, says they are of good juice, easy digestion, pleasant taste, and
not of much nutriment, Salv. yet not excrementitious. V. Plin. The intestines
and scales burnt discuss the panni. The stones in the head help the colic.
Muff. They have a dry and whitish flesh, like that of Gray Trouts, being of the
like substance, quality, and goodness, and needing no other preparation. The
belly is preferred, it is soon concocted, spermatogenetick, and helps young hot
stomachs, they weigh 60. pound, and swim like a shadow.

Urchin. Echinus.
P. Their abiding and living is in the Seas. M. Their meat is not observed. N.
(...). Carduus marinus. Piscis spinosus.
Urchin. Jonst. T. The ashes of the shells help sordid ulcers; if stamped and
applied they compresse luxuriant flesh, Rond. they help running ulcers of the
head. Aet. And abortion. Paul. Jov. They help the dropping of urine. Hipp.
Their stones expel the secundine, being drunk in sweet wine. The ashes with
Hoggs fatt or that of Bares, helps the alopecia. They are so full of prickles,
that they cannot be held, therefore some call them the Sea Thistles. Aristotle
says, that being cut asunder their parts will join again. In tempests they
poise themselves with sand.

W.
Whale. Cetus.
P. They live in the large Seas, about Greenland, etc. M. They live upon
fishes, especially Herrings. N. (...). Cete. Pistrix. Bellua marina.
WHale. Aldrov. T. Their flesh is the hardest of all fishes, difficultly
concocted, excrementitious, of evil juice, as also all other cetacious
creatures, as Dolphins, Sea Calves, and great Tunies, etc. Therefore they are
to be eaten salted: For being crude they engender abundance of raw humors.
They are fatt also, relaxe the ventricle, and cause nausiousnesse. The
Ichthyophagi made bread of their flesh, and houses, etc. of their bones. The
flesh is better boild then roasted, especially, with wine, vinegar, parsley,
hyssop, and organy, or onions, leeks, and anet. Muff. The livers of the
Balaenae as also of Sturgians and Dolphins, smell like violets, taste
pleasantly salted, and competently nourish; so Card. yet Galen says they have
an ungrateful and mucous taste, and melancholy; but the greater are not
edible. Schrod. The stone Manat helps the stone and colic, the D. in drach.
1. Jonst. They generate like quadrupeds, and see and hear slowly.

Whiting. Oniscus.
P. They live, in the deepest places of the Sea. M. Of fishes, which they take
by craft. N. (...). Albula, Mollicula. Bacchus.
Whiting. Muff. T. All physicians allow them for a light, wholesome, and good
meat, not denying them to sick persons, and much commending them to such as are
in health: they are good sodden with salt and time, and their livers are very
restorative, more than of other fishes: They are good also broiled and dried
like Stockfish; but are then better to dry up rheum, than to nourish.

Y.
Yards. Colybdaenae.
P. They live in the Seas, and salt waters. M. Their nutriment is shell-fishes.
N. (...). Mentula marina. Cauda marina.
YArds. Gal. T. Are as agreeable to weak stomachs as Crabs, Shrimps, and
Crevises: the flesh nourishes much, is light of concoction, and increases
nature.

Fishes less used in Meat, or Medicine.
ALderling. Apium. Muff. T. The flesh being well sod smells like wild
parsley, and is of indifferent good nourishment, and provokes urine: they are
betwixt a Trout and a Grayling, and lie ever in deep water under some old and
great Alder.

Black-taile. Melanurus. Athen. T. Was counted a poor fish; Hipp. And is bad
for the 3d. kind of tabes. Yet Xenocrates says it is good for the stomach, of
good juice, easily digested, nourishing much, and not difficultly evacuated.
Diphilus makes them equal to the Guilt-head, if living in petrose places. They
may be broiled or fried. Kiran. If broiled they sharpen the sight, the broth
helps the colic.

Cod-fish. Piscis Capellanus. Asellus medius. Muff. T. Is of a tender flesh;
but not so dry and firm as the whiting, and is a great Sea whiting, called
also a Keeling or Melwel. They have a bladder in them full of spawn, which the
northern people call the Kelk, and count dainty. They have also a glewish
substance at the end of their stomach called a sown, more pleasant than good,
the toughest Fish-glew being made thereof. When fresh the head lips and pallat
are best, being light though slimy.

Haberdine. Muff. Asellus Islandicus. T. Is an Island Cod, bigger somewhat than
ours, and firmer.

Haddocks. Aselluli. Muff. T. Are little Cods, of light substance, crumbling
flesh and good nourishment, in the summer time, especially when Venison is in
season.

Hakes, Aselluli longi. Muff. T. are of the same nature, resembling a Cod in
taste; but a Ling in likeness.

Harp-fish. Lyra. Rond. T. Has a hard and dry flesh; yet sweet enough; if
eaten boiled with vinegar. Salv. They may be fried and eaten with the juice of
an Orang, but they are better boiled.

Ling. Asellus. Muff. T. is counted the beef of the Sea, and nothing else but
a long Cod: wherefore the greater are called Organe Ling, and the other Cod
Ling; whilst new it is called Green-fish, and Ling when salted, called so by
lying, being the better if in pease-straw. They are taken in the far Northern
Seas; but Cod Ling near Bedwell in Northumberland shire.

Liver-fish. Hepatus. Gal. T. is of a mean flesh. They may be fried, or boiled.
If boiled in white broth they are easily concocted. V. Kiran. The liver stamped
and applied helps all tumors and the gout. The ashes of the head help old and
eating ulcers. The gall drunk with Melicrate helps those that are hepatick; yet
Athenaeus denies they have any.

Loche. Locha. Muff. T. They are very light and of excellent nourishment; they
have a flesh like liver and a red spleen, which are delicate in taste, and as
wholesome in operation. They are good for Childbearing Women.

Mother of Perle. Matter perlarum. Schrod. Besides the virtues of shel-fish,
they have a cordial virtue, some use the^ as an antefebrile.

Mole. Mola. Aldrov. T. The whole Fish is of a ferine savor, and very
unpleasant, the flesh is like that of a Centrine, the hardest of all fishes,
and of evil juice; but the liver is tender and not insipid if fried, and
sprinkled with the juice of Oranges and Pepper they are desired by many, so
Salv. The fat is used in lights; but smells ill, so Rond. The same fat helps
the pains of the joints and contraction, or rigor of the nerves. Applied with
meal it helps suppuration. It helps hard swellings of the liver or other
parts, with storax. The teeth burnt may be used in steed of spodium.

Millers thombs Capitones. Muff. T. Are very sweet, tender: and wholesome,
especially when with spawn; their eggs being many, and fat, and yielding good
nourishment: and though Albertus counts their flesh hard, yet it never
putrifieth, and is well digested; they are a kind of jolt-headed gudgins.

Minoes, Apuae cobitae Gesn. Aliniatae Caii. Phoxini Bell. T. Are a most
delicate and light meat either fried or sodden, their gall being well taken
out. They are less than Loches and feed by licking one an other, Gesner thinks
they are engendered of the waste sperme of Gudgins; and others, out of an
unknown matter. They have their name from minium, their finnes being red.

Nun-fishes. Monachae. Muff. T. Are a wholesome and delicate meat, as any
Periwinckle. They feed upon sweet mud sticking to ship-sides. They creep out of
their shell like a Sea Snaile, but straightly. Their face is white, their head
covered with a black veil like the Nuns of Saint Bridgets Order, so had the
name.

Old-wives. Vetulae. Muff. T. are dainty and wholesome of substance, and large
in body. They may be boiled with salt, wine, and vinegar, and a little time;
and so are white, firm, dainty, and wholesome.

Peacock-fish. Pavo. Aldrov. T. Is an insipid and ignoble fish. The flesh is
fat and gentle. Being broiled they are less unpleasant, if eaten with vinger,
or juice of Oranges.

Puffins. Anates marini. Muff. They are called Feathered fishes, and may be as
well called flesh as fish.

Quawiners. Aranei marini. Muff. T. Are unwholesome for indifferent stomachs;
though the poor Orcadians eat them for hunger; yet they are crafty fishes.

Rough-taile. Trachurus. Diocl. T. is a dry fish, Gal. And engenders thick
juice; but if broiled or roasted and put into vinegar they are more pleasant.

Swallow-fish. Hirundo. Salv. T. Has hard flesh, and therefore hardly
concocted; yet nourishing much when concocted. They are better boiled than
broiled; and Rondeletius says they are like the Mullet, in flesh and juice.

Stock Fish. Asellus aridus. Muff. T. The Stilliard merchants lay it 24. hours
in strong lie, and then as long again in warm waters, after, they boil it in
abundance of butter, and so serve it in with Pepper and salt, which way it is
most nourishing, being made tender, moist, and warm. Whilst unbeaten it is
called Buckhorn, and Stock Fish after.

Sword-fish. Gladius. Aldrov. T. Is a very fat fish, in the back like a Hog.
The flesh is dry, hardly concocted; but nourishes much if well concocted, as
also all other great Fishes. Sym. Seth. They are of bad juice, hardly concocted
and naufeous; but if eaten, they are to be corrected with sharp sauces,
drinking old and thin wine afterward; but if young they are better, and Jovius
compares them with Sturgian. Muff. They are much whiter and pleasanter in
taste than Tuny.

Suckstone. Remora. Aldrov. T.V. They hinder venery and abortion. They are said
also by their magnetic virtue to stop ships.

Sea Serpent. Serpens marinus. Bell. T. Is edible. V. Plin. With Lilly roots
they help the incontinency of urine.

Sea Hawk. Aquila marina. Aldrov. T. Has a very moist and soft flesh, but
Philotimus says it is hard. Bell. And rank, therefore it is to be eaten with
alliate sauce. Salv. It Is an unpleasant Fish, and not sweet, and therefore
eaten only by poor people.

Shads. Triches. Clupeae. Muff. T. Have a tender and pleasant flesh; but in
some months they are full of bones, and so, daingerous to be eaten. They
nourish much, especially those of the Severn, being less viscous, and not so
hypnotick. They are best in May, June, and July, being then fullest of flesh,
and freest from bones.

Stickle-backs, Hackles: or Harry bannings, Pungitii, Spinachiae. Muff. T. Are
naught and unwholesome, yet they serve better to quench hunger, than to
nourish. Some think they are engendered of the miscarrying sperm of other
fishes, and others of mud or rain putrified.

Thrush-fish. Turdus. Athen. T. They are very difficultly concocted; yet Pliny
counts them good. Gal. They are soft, tender, friable, of good juice, easily
concocted, and fit for those that are either well or sick. Tral. Or the
pleuritick, and epileptick, being without excrement. Gariopont. or hidropick.
Aet. or troubled with the colic from pituitous and cold humors. Salvian Used
them for the sick, boiled in water, or white broth. And fried them for such as
were well. Platina broild them, and eat them with mustard.

Alphestes. Rond. T. Is of the same flesh and substance as other saxatile
fishes. sc. tender, soft, friable and not glutinous. Their broth looseneth the
belly. They are good fried: or they may be prepared with salt, meal, and
boiled in oil. When cold they may be eaten with the juice of Oranges. They are
a good food for the sick, being easily concocted, and engendring temperate
blood. Their gemmes, by their color presage the tranquillity of the Sea, etc.
Kiran. And are used in Philtra's they are called Opisiani and draconisii.

Anthias. Aldrov. T. is sweet, a little astringent, of much nourishment, hardly
evacuated, and the more carnose, terrestrial, and less fat are most
nourishing: Kiran. The gall, applied with honey helps pushes and makes a florid
countenance; but the fat helps carbuncles, swellings, schrophula's, do^hiens
and the steatomata. Their stones worn help all passions of the head and neck.

Atherina. Rond. T. Is dry enough, and of pleasant taste. Kiran. Their broth
looseneth the belly, and helps the reins.

Amia. Archip. T. Is sweet and delicate. Archest. They are best in Autumn.
Hices. They are of good juice, tender, of mean excretion, nourishing little.
Archest. They may be roasted under embers in Fig leaves, with Organie.

Albus. Aldrov. T. Has hard flesh, and is therefore hardly concocted, it is so
insipid that it is counted the worst of Fishes, neither can it be made well
tasted, by any cookery; yet torrefied it is more pleasant; but it is used when
there are no other Fishes, so Salv.

Blatta Bizantina. Vnguis odoratus. Schrod. T. The shell smells like
castoreum. V. Used inwardly, it looseneth the belly, softeneth the spleen, and
discusseth vicious humors: outwardly suffumigated it helps the strangulation
of the womb, and Epilepsy, and works the same effects, as others shells.

Concha. Jonst. T. The flesh is often eaten crude or broiled by the Indians,
the shells serve for many purposes. Schrod. They dry, provoke sweat, and
cleanse, etc. Therefore they are used inwardly in fevers outwardly they are
used in dentifrices abstersorie, and the piles: hereof is made Crollius his
antefebrile, which provokes sweat abundantly, given before the fit, especially
against tertians, if iterated, the D. is Scrup. 1. sem. to drach. 1. It may be
give^ in a warm draught of beer with a little butter. The flesh helps quartans.

Cannes. Bell. T. Has a tender flesh; but harder than the Perch, so Diph.
Therefore it is of good juice, and not uneasily concocted; it is insipid, Salv.
And therefore slighted. It may be dressed as the Perch and other Saxatile
fishes. Xenoc. When fried they are pleasant; but hurtful to the stomach.

Chromis. Rond. T. It Is a pitiful Fish; yet that of Bellonius is good. And
Hicesius reckons them so.

Cantharus. Xenoc. T. Is pleasant, of good juice, nourishing much, and being
easily digested loosening the belly, but this rather agrees to the Fish
Citharus: Rond. This being too soft, moist and bad. If boiled it looseneth the
belly. If fried, or sod with Saffron, Cinnamon, Pepper, Ginger, Onions and
Oil, or dried it is better.

Citharus. Gal. T. Is of a mean flesh, Xenoc. ungrateful to the stomach,
engendring bad juice, and not easily corrupted. It Is good broiled.

Corax. Athen. T. Has a hard flesh; but not contemptible.

Catulus. Aldrov. T. The flesh is hard, viscid, and virulent: the greatest are
best.

Centrina. Aldrov. T. Has a nervous flesh, viscous and glutinous, unsweet, and
rank. So it is hardly concocted, and of bad juice, the liver is tender but
unpleasant, yielding an oil when fried. V. This mollifieth the liver, Rond.
And strengthens it, especially with astringents. And helps arthritick pain.
Applied with honey it helps suffusions. The skin serves to polish withal.
The ashes cleanse and dry running ulcers of the head and provoke urine.

Caper. Salv. T. Has a hard and unpleasant flesh, and is more hardly concocted
than the Citharus.

Conchylium. Jonst. T. V. All the parts are used in Medicine. Burnt; it is of
the same effect as the Purple and Buccinum. Gal. The flesh with other things
helps the ears.

Chama. Jonst. T. The flesh is hard, Diph. But it causes copious and good
juice.

Dentalium and Entalium. Schrod. T. V. Both are as yet but little used, and not
but in the Citrine ointment; but it is probable they may be used in the like
cases, as other shell-fishes.

Faber. Rond. T. Has a less hard flesh, than the Turbot. Salvian counts it
tender enough and friable, easily concocted, and of good juice enough,
therefore they are reckoned amongst wholesome Fishes, also sweet, and noble
Fish. Salv. They are to be fried and irrorated with the juice of Oranges, or
boiled in water, and a like quantity of wine with oil, salt, sweet herbs, and
spices.

Farra. Aldrov. T. Has a white and sweet flesh, not inferior to that of
Trouts.

Gobergus. Aldrov. T. Has a harder flesh, than the Fish Afinus, and less
glutinous than molva: if steeped in water, or beaten, they are eaten by poor
rusticks.

Glaucus. T. Arist. they are always a like good. The head is the best. Mnesith.
They are hardly concocted, and after yield much aliment. Trall. They help the
colic, Gal. And those that are stomachick. V. Plin. Taken in broth they cause
milk, and the liver helps warts.

Huso, Ichthiocolla. Schrod. T. The glue dries, fills and a little
softeneth. It Is used in gellies: boiled with white Sugar it becomes white,
and is called mouth glue. It Is made by boiling the dissected parts in warm
water, to the consistence of a poultise. Albert. The flesh of Huso in the back,
tastes like Veale, the belly like Porck, and when fresh, is very sweet. The
eggs serve to make Caviare of.

Ichthiocolla. Rond. T. Is sweet and glutinous. Plin. It helps night Wheales,
and smootheth the skin Drunk, it helps the Lethargy. It serves to glue
instruments withal.

Hippurus. Aldrov. T. Has a sweet, fat, and hard flesh.

Julis. Gal. T. Is a saxatile Fish, having a tender and friable flesh, as the
rest, and fit for sick persons. They may be fried, or sod in white broth. V.
Diosc. The broth looseneth the belly, Plin. And provokes urine; so that of all
Fishes.

Lupus. Aldrov. T. The Ancients placed them next the Sturgian. Rond. The liver
broiled and seasoned with the juice of Oranges is most delicate, the best are
taken in the Sea. Xenoc. The best is the middle sized, being tender, of good
juice, sweet, pleasant to the stomach, nourishing much, of easy distribution,
and soon evacuated. They are good boiled any may, or in white broth. with
spices they cause venery. V. Marcel. Applied they help hard swellings. The
stones in their heads help the hemicrania, and nephritis. The gall applied with
honey sharpens the sight, and helps their spots. The spawn helps the stomach.

Lavaretus. Aldrov. T. The flesh is white, soft, sweet, not glutinous, of good
juice, and of mean nourishment.

Loligo. Jonst. T. is edible, both broiled and roasted. V. Gal. They help those
that are stomachick. Marcel. Broiled they help the tormina.

Lepus marinus, or Sea Hare. Jonst. T. V. They are reckoned amongst the
Psilothrons. Archig. The blood applied with wool helps the Aegylops. Plin. The
blood used warm and fresh helps the gout. The antidote is black Hellebore,
Asses milk, and the decoction of mallows.

Mormyrus. Athen. T. nourishes much; yet Salvian, and Rondeletius deny it,
having a soft flesh, very moist, lutulent, and insipid, they are good with
vinegar and oil, being broiled.

Membras. Aldrov. T. yields a moist and flatulent aliment.

Molva. Rond. T. They are better when fresh, than when salted or dried. Their
flesh being then glutinous, the thin humor being then evacuated. Some make the
Fish glue of the intestines hereof.

Murex. Xenoc. T. If salted they are virouse, trouble the belly, provoke urine,
are unpleasant, hardly concocted, and cause phlegm. Yet Celsus and Scribonius
Largus count them acceptable to the stomach. V. The flesh applied helps hairs
on the Dugs. the ashes of the shells with oil help tumors. With honey they
help ulcers of the head, cleanse spots in the face, help swellings behind the
ears, and are used in dentifrices. Marcel. They help carbuncles in the
privities.

Musculus. Jonst. T. The marine yield good nourishment, those in sweet water
have hard flesh, and are hardly concocted, and of bad juice. V. They provoke
urine. The marine with oil help tumors and pains of the ankles. Gesn. The
aquatile help wests in the eyes of cattle. sc. The ashes with ginger and
vitriol.

Nasus. Aldrov. T. The flesh is white and loose, and full of little bones. They
are best in the spring; and broiled, rather than boiled.

Orphus. Athen. T. They are of good and much juice, glutinous, hardly
corrupted, nourishing much, and provoking urine. The parts about the head are
glutinous, and easily concocted; but the carnose are hardly concocted, and more
heavy; yet the tail is more tender. Tral. They help bilious pains of the
eyes: also the colic and diabates.

Orphidion. Rond. T. The flesh is white and hard, like that of the Dragon, and
with rue helps the incontinency of urine.

Pagrus. Sym. Seth. T. Is hardly concocted, and causes phlegm Hicef. They are
sweet, astringent, sufficiently nutritive and hardly evacuated; but the
carnose, more terrene, and less fat, are more nutritive.

Pigus. Aldrov. T. In taste and juice, they are like the Carp, Rond. But
somewhat better. Salv. The flesh is tender, and sapid, it is best in the
beginning of summer.

Pinna. Nakre. Jonst. T. V. They provoke urine, and are difficultly concocted
and distributed. Wott. They are best when tender, full, and carnose, young, and
in the summer. The Mean have a soft, white, and sweet flesh, in wine they are
flatulent.

Pompilus. Aldrov. T. Is thought to have the same use in meat, as the Tunie.

Scarus. Aldrov. T. Is of a soft and friable flesh; yet Celsus counts it
hard. Trallianus commends it in the Epilepsy, and Aetius in the colic. Gal.
V. The gall helps suffusions of the eyes, so the liver eaten, and the Parotides.

Sphyraena. Rond. T. Is white, sweet, hard and dry; yet some what friable, and
like the flesh of Asellus.

Sargus. Epicharm. T. They are sapid, and pleasant, of good juice, easily
digested, and nourishing much. They are good broiled, with cheese and vinegar.
Gariopont. They help the Dropsy. The teeth help the toothach.

Sparus. Diph. T. Is sharp, of tender flesh, acceptable to the stomach,
diuretic, and not hardly concocted, except fried. Salv. It Is of a middle flesh.

Scorpaena. Aldrov. T. That living in pure water is not unpleasant, they may be
eaten fried.

Smaris. Hesyc. They are very good Fishes; Aeg. V. The head helps the Alopecia.
Diosc. The ashes help ulcers of the mouth, and corns: the flesh helps bitings
of Scorpions, and Dogs. With Ptisan they cause milk in nurses. Applied they
help warts, and pustuls of the privities.

Saurus. Philot. T. Has soft flesh. Gal. or mean and sweet. It may be eaten
broiled or boiled.

Scolopax. Aldrov. T. Is of good juice, and easy concoction, like the Fish
Pagrus.

Salmerinus. Aldrov. T. Is tender, fat, quickly putrefying, not viscid, but
friable, and of good juice, easily concocted.

Sarachus. Salv. T. Is a good Fish, not easily concocted, of thickish juice,
and meanly nutritive. Their oil serves, for Lamps.

Solen. Jonst. T. The flesh is sweet; they may be eaten fried or boiled.

Trochi. Jonst. T. eaten crude with onions, they cause appetite.

Umbla. Aldrov. T. Is sweet, dry, and hard when old. They are best about
November and December their eggs being then good and solid.

Zygaena. Aldrov. T. Has a hard and unpleasant flesh. Aeg. Mucous,
excrementitious and of ill juice.

Pholas. Jonst. T. V. Athen. They are pleasant to the palate; but of evil
juice, and virouse. They live in hollow places, and so amongst stones, that
they can hardly be perceived, and are then nourished by the water through a
narrough passage. As for their description, they consist of two shells, which
are long, and roundish. Their flesh within is almost like that of Mussels. They
are generated by the appulse of the Sea water, in the hollownesse of stones,
and are so turned into shel-fishes, and retain the figure of their cabbins.

Lepas seu Patella. Jonst. T. V. They are eaten raw by fisher men: if boiled,
they are more easily concocted, especially if not boiled too much. The broth
looseneth the belly. They are used also to catch Fish withal; a superstitious
example whereof may be seen in the fore mentioned author. As for their
description, they stick unto stones, their mouth is toward the earth, and the
passage for evacuation of their excrements is upwards. Their shells are of an
ash color, they have horns like a Snaile, as also a head and mouth like
thereunto. They are great or little, as to their differences.

Tajasica. Marcg. T. V. Being boiled and roasted, it tastes well, and is of a
very white and friable flesh.

Paru. T. V. Jonst. Is edible, so Pira Acangata, Acarauna, Pranema, Acarapucu,
Pudiano vermetho, Pudiano verde, Juruucupeba, Jaguaruca, Carauna, Cururuca,
Guatacuba Juba, Pira Jurumenbeca, Tamoata, Acara Pinima, Uubarana, Capeuna,
Acarapitamba, Jaguacaguare, Tareira d'Alto, Tareira de Rio, Piratiapia,
Ceixupira, Piquitinga, Guaracapema, Miivipera, Guaibi Coara, Guaperua, Piraqu,
Pirhanha, Amore Guacu, Guacari, Pirambu, Acaraia, Acara, Guaru-Guaru,
Cucupu-Guacu, Maturaque, Carapo, Piaba, Piabucu, Nhaquunda, Amore Pixuma, Amore
Tinga, Guara Tereba, Piacoaba, Corocoro, Guatucusa, Uribaco, Camaripuguacu,
Piratia Pua, Curema, Aramaca, which are scaled, and edible: The smooth are,
Petimbuaba, Nhambdia, Curuata Pinima, Mucu, Abacatuaia, Timucu, Guebucu, Bagre,
Jabebirete, Niqui. Those that are not altogether smooth and edible are,
Guamaiacu Attinga, Narinari, Tiburonis: as also Pisces Anthropomorphos,
Axototl; Michipillin, Amilotl. These are the useful, more strange, exotic
Fishes; used in meat: but as to Medicine, very little or nothing is mentioned,
as to their use.

Zoophyts or Plantanimals.
JOnst. They are called Vrticae, T. Which are edible; yet were formerly forbid
by Pythagoras to his Scholars, they provoking venery: Aristotle, commends them
much after the Hiemall Equinoctial: now, they are usually put upon a spit, and
so roasted, being made warm in water and salt; then they sprinkle them with
meal, and fry them with butter and oil: according to Xenocrates, they are
pleasant to the mouth, but ungrateful to the stomach; but Diphilus says they
are eustomachick, but prefers the roasted before those that are boiled. They
loosen the belly, and provoke urine more. With mulse wine, they are easily
concocted and evacuated. V. As for Medicine, some say, that being drunk in
wine, they help those that are troubled with the stone: Gal. Jonst. With
vinegar of squils they are a Psilothron. As for their general description, they
have a mouth in the midst of them, which is more visible in those that are
greater; so Aristot. They have no excrements in them, and herein they are like
roots. They live, and are generated in diverse places. Some of them always
stick unto stones: others that are more perfect and loose, delight in the
shores and plain places. They live upon fishes and flesh, which they often
take. They are generated as shellfishes. They catch fishes by contracting
themselves, and when before them extending themselves, and so holding them as
in reeds. In the night they seek shelfishes. When they are touched they
contract themselves, and send forth a great heat.

Pulmo marinus. T. Is of the like nature, etc. The decoction of which is
commended by Physicians. V. They serve as a Psilothron, the powder applied
mightily purges fluxes. Boiled in water it helps the stone. A stick rubbed
therewith will seem to burn. In the Sea they are full of water, and out of it
are empty. They remain amongst stones and reeds.

Tethyia. T. If red is edible, the pale and subluteous are bitterish. Xenoc.
They yield much nourishment. V. They help the tormina and inflations, tenesmus
and vices of the reins, eaten they ease the pains of the sides. They help the
sciatica, and superior venture with rue, and the cachexie with rue and honey.
They are in the Ocean near France amongst the Sea Moss, and Sea Herbs: their
covering is betwixt a crust and a skin, they stick unto stones and are
without excrements. There are others mentioned by Jonston, as the malum
granatum, fungus marinus, pyrum, penna marina. cucumer marinus, malum insanum,
manus marina, and uva marina, which are of little or no use.

OPHIOLOGIA, Of Serpents.
A.
Adder. Coluber.
P. In Hedges, Brakes, and Ditches, and other places. M. They live upon Mice,
and Frogs, etc. N. (...). Colubra. Gall. Colenure. Ital. Scorsoni, Hisp.
Culebra.
ADder. Tops. T. They are hotter that Snakes, and therefore live more in the
shadows. V. Plin. The water wherein they have been preserved alive, helps
against the poison of a Toad: Also they, or Vipers being put into a pot, with
the Scrapings of vines and so burnt to ashes, help Wens or the Kings evil.
Pliny affirms also that the fat or gall preserves from the Crocodile. H. As
for their biting, it is very daingerous, presently causing swounings, tumors,
and mutation of color: these are the signs. R. But the remedy is white wine,
aqua vitae, Triacle and Mithridate, with scarrification. Their description is
needless they being well known. They lie round, and cast their skin by
sliding through a narrow passage, after fasting. They lay down their poison
when drinking.

Ammodyte. Ammodytes.
P. In Lybia, Italy, and Illyria, in the Sand. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...), Ammodyta. Centrites. Centria. Monoceros.
Ammodyte. Matthew. T. They are very venomous: and their harms not inferior to
the stinging and poison of Aspes; some dying thereof within three hours after
the wound received, else quickly after the blood issues forth abundantly, and
the wound swells, afterward all is turned into matter, and then follows
dullness in the head, and distraction in the mind: they never live above 7.
days, so Jonst. and those dye first that are hurt by the female, they by their
biting infusing a vehement pain, which causes swelling, and therefore to
run: thus for the signs: Aet. The remedy is Triacle drunk and applied, and
attractive plasters, with scarrification, binding the upper parts hard, and
launcing the sore, drinking water with rungwort, gourds, castorium and cassia.
Avic. Also Cinnamon, the root of Centory, hartwort, and the ^uyce of the root of
gentian; also a plaster of honey sod and dried, to pounded, with the roots of
Pomegranats, Centory, the seed of Flax and Lettuce, and wild Rue. As for the
description, they have a hard wart like a borne upon the upper chap, the head
is longer and greater than the Vipers, and the chaps wider; yet they may be
termed a kind of Vipers. They are very fierce, of a cubits length, with diverse
black spots on the skin, and small lines on the back.

Aspe. Aspis.
P. In Afrike and Spain in dry places. M. Their meat is not much observed. N.
(...). Sacer Coluber Propert. Hypnalis.
Aspe. Mercur. T. V. They are not used in Medicine; By reason of their poison.
The Femals bite with 4. teeth, and the Males with two, infusing their poison.
The Ptyas kills by spitting, smell or touch, the wound is hardly discovered,
the poison piercing inwardly and the pricks, not being much greater than the
prickings of a needle, without all swelling, and a very little blood issues
forth, and that black, afterward the eyes grow dark and heavy, with pain all
over the body, yet with some sense of pleasure; the color grows green, and
the fore head wrinkled, with stupidity, gaping, and the convulsion. Those that
are hurt by the Ptyas, have blindness, pain in the heart, deafness and
swelling of the face. The hurt of the Chalidonian Aspe is known by the often
beating of the pulse, frigidity, pain in the stomach, deep sleep and vomiting.
These are the signs: so theirs is the worst of all poisons, death presently
following. The cure is by incision, cauteries, cupping glasses, and cocks rumps
applied, also by dilatation, scarrification Mercur: and rue, etc. and against
the congelation, Mithridate, Triacle, and Aqua vitae, with fomentation,
friction, and exercise; but when the wound grows purple, green, or black,
showing extinction, and suffocation, the part is to be cut off, after cupping
glasses and scarrification, applying centorie, myrrh, and opium, or sorrel
plaisterwise, with motion, and fomentation with Seawater, or yew leaves with
butter, and a plaster of branne. Vomiting also is good, drinking juice of yew
with Triacle, or Wine, Garlic, Opopanax, Organic, bearded Thapsia,
Gilliflowers, red Violets, and avens boiled in Wine vinegar. Using unc. 3. at a
time. So Par. Aet. Also a good draught of the sharpest vinegar. Some use
Garlic and stale Ale, or Aniseeds. Some use Hartwort, Parslyseed, and Wine: or
Aron drunk with Oil of Bays in black Wine; the stomach may be helped by the
fruit of Balsam, the powder of Gentian, or juice of Mints, so Castorium, with
Lignum cassiae, and the skin of a Storks maw, or cimices: also Citrons,
Egyptian Periwinkle drunk in Vinegar, red Coral in wine, henbane, bitter
hoppes, and the urine of a man or Tortise. Matthew. Diosc. So the quintessence of
Aqua vitae. As for the description, they are like Land Snakes, but brother in
the back. Their eyes are in their temples. Their teeth are long, and full of
holes, which are covered with a skin, that slideth up when they bite, and
lets out the poison. Their skales are hard dry and red. The Ptyas is about
2. cubits long, the Chersen of the earth five. The Chelidonian one, and the
shortest kills soonest. The last resembles the Swallow, and lives in the
water. The Ptyas is of an ash color, flaming like gold and greenish. The
Chersen is green. Their voice is hissing like all other Serpents. They live as
it were in marriage, revenge injuries, and are enemies to the Ichneumon.

B.
Boas. Boa.
P. They have been taken, in Senega, and Italy. M. They live upon Cows milk and
Cattle. N. Bova. Anguis Caprimulgus. Ital. Serpeda de aqua.
BOas. Fest. T. V. The poison causes tumors and swellings in the body. As for
the description; they go upon their belly, and grow to be above an 100. foot
long: and kill not cattle till they are dry, and then they eat them,
destroying whole herds.

C.
Cockatrice. Regulus.
P. In Afric, as also in other places. M. Of Frogs, Serpents, and other
creatures. N. (...). Heb. Pethen. Chapter Armene. Sibulus.
COckatrice. Tops. T. Their poison is hot, venomous, and infecteth the air
round about; so that no other creature can live by him; he killing by his
hissing, sight, and touch, both mediately and immediately, having an universal
poison, yielding a burning fume, and therefore, they burn up the grass where
they go (which shows their dens). Their sight kills men, the beams
thereof corrupting the visible spirit. Their biting turns the blood into
choler, causes yellowness, and after the flesh falls off. V. The powder of
the flesh is said to give silver the tincture of gold. As for the description.
They go half upright, and have a comb like a Cock: they are feared by all
other Serpents, when seen or heard. Some say they are bred of the egg of Ibis
the bird, others of that of a Cock, arising from the concretion of sperm and
putrefying heat. They hate Weasels and Cocks.

D.
Dart. Sagitta.
P. In Lybia, Rhodes, Lemnus, Italy, and Sicilia. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Jacularis. Jaculus. Serpens volans.
DArt. Matthew. T. Their poison causes present death. Aet. Avic. The cure of
their bitings, if there be any at all is the same which cures that of the
Viper. V. The gall hereof, which lies betwixt the back and the liver, mixed
with the Scythian stone; yields a very good eye salve. As for the
description. They are about 3. or 4. foot long; and gain their prey, by
leaping in spires on passengers, though 20. cubits distant.

Dipsas. Dipsas.
P. Near Waters, and salt Marshes, in Africa and Arabia. M. Their meat is
not much observed. N. (...). Causon. Situla. Melanurus. Ammoatis.
Dipsas. Gal. T. Their poison is very fiery: in so much that those that are
bitten by them are intollerably thirsty, and drink till the belly breaks,
other Symptoms are like those of the bitings of the Viper: also the patient
cannot make water; vomit, or sweat. The signs of death following are, great
thirst, and inflammation of the body, so that the parts outwardly are dry as
parchment. The remedy is scarrification, cauteries, and section. If in the
extremity, apply Triacle, Tar with Oil, Hens dissected, the leaves of
purslain beaten in vinegar, barley meal, bramble leaves pounded with honey;
also plantain, hysop, white garlic, leeks, rue, and netles: abstaining from
sharp and salt meats, and drinking oil to cause vomit, and making clysters of
the same; some use the leaves, and bark of laurel. As for the description,
they are less than Vipers; but kill sooner. They are about a cubit long, the
fore part is thick, the head small, and they are smaller backwards, and the
tail very little, and black, and the other whitish, with black and yellow
spots.

Double-head. Amphisbaena.
P. They are in the Isle Lemnos, often in Lybia. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Amphicaephalos. Amphisilene.
Double-head. Tops. T. They are very venomous, their wounds are very small and
scarsly discernable; but the accidents are inflammation and a lingering death,
etc. Like to those of the bitings of Vipers; so the cure. Plin. And Coriander
drunk and applied. Grevin. H. The dead Body passed over by childing Women,
causes abortion. V. An olive branch wrapped in the skin helps numbnesse. As
for the description, their Body is of equal magnitude. Their eyes are usually
shut, the color earthy: And the skin rough, hard, and spotted. They are hot,
lay eggs, and carefully look to the same. They are soonest destroyed by vine
branches: and have an antipathy against humain nature. Hereunto is the Scytal,
Scytale, like, in poison, cure, and body, and going; but that it goes one way
only.

Dragon. Draco.
P. In India, Africa, Ethiopia, and Hesperia. M. Of Fruits, Herbs, and venomous
creatures. N. (...). Heb. Thanin. Chald. Darkon.
Dragon. T. Some say that they hurt more by their biting and striking with
their tails, than by their poison. The males bite deepest, yet no great pain
follows upon the wound. The cure is like that of the bitings of other beasts,
that are not venomous. Hay-dust is good, also the Barble, or head of a Dog with
Euphorbium. V. The fat of a Dragon dried in the Sun helps creeping ulcers, and
dim eyes with honey and oil. The eyes with honey made into an ointment, are
thought to prevent night visions. Magicians used them to cause victory. The
fatt drives away venomous beasts, some say that the Sanguis Draconis, is made
of the blood hereof. The tongue of the Sea Dragon is said to cause safety, and
the fatt with the herb-dragon helps the headache, scab, and leprosy.

Dryine. Chelydrus.
P. They live and abide in the bottomes of Oaks. M. They live upon Froggs and
the like. N. (...). Druinae. Querculus. Ilicinus. Cherisidal.
Dryine. Tops. T. Are very venomous and hot, therefore they are placed among
the first rank of Serpents: The smell thereof so stopifying a man, that it
almost strangleth him, nature refusing to breath, rather than to draw in such a
filthy air. When they hurt they cause the skinn to be loose, stinking and
rotten; and the eyes to be blind and painful: It restrains the urine, causes
neezing, and makes to vomit bloody matter. Being troad upon the foot loses
its skinn, and the smell causes all things to smell of the same; so they kill
both by touching and smelling. When it has wounded or bitten, there is a black
or red swelling about the sore, and vehement pain over the whole body, with
pustuls, madness, dryness, thirst, trembling, and mortification, thus for the
signs. The cure is like that of Vipers: Also hartwort drunk in wine, trefoile,
or the roots of daffodils, and a corns powdered and drunk. As for the
description, they are about two cubits long, full of skales, under which breed
yellow flies, which destroy the same. Their smell is like that of a wett Horse
hide: Their back is blackish, the head broad and flat, and their Captain has
a white comb on the head. They go directly on the earth, to avoid noise and
smell.

H.
Haemorrhe. Haemorrhous.
P. They live in Egypt, and the Indies, near rocks. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Affodius. Sabrine. Halsordius.
HAemorrhe. Tops. T. Their bitings cause a continual bleeding sweat, with
extreme pain till death, and bloody excrements. The place bitten is black,
from which flows first a watery humor, then pain in the stomach and
difficulty of breathing: Lastly there is a dissolution of the powers of the
body, with a cramp, after which follows death, thus of the signs. The cure
is by scarrification, ustion, and sharp meats, etc. as in that of the Dipsas:
Also vine leaves bruised and sod with honey, the powder of the head drunk,
garlic with the oil of flower-deluce, and raisins of the sun, with
plasters used to the place, made of vine-leaves and honey; or the leaves of
purslain and barley meal, eating much garlic with oil to cause vomiting, and
drinking wine alayed with water: Then let the wound be washed with cold water,
and the bladder be fomented with hot spunges. Some cure it as that of the
Viper, also by the eating of hard eggs with salt fish, as also the seed of
radishes, juice of poppy, lilly roots, daffodil, rue, trefoile, Cassia,
opopanax, and cinnamon drunk. As for the description, they are of a sandy
color, a foot long, having a small tail, flaming eyes, and small head, with
the appearance of horns. They go straight, slowly, and halting: Their skales
are rough and sharp, therefore they make a noise when they go. Their bodies
are spotted with black all over.

Horned Serpent. Cerastes.
P. They live, in the Lybian sandy Seas. M. They live upon birds, which they
catch by craft. N. (...). Arab. Cerust. Heb. Schephiphon.
Horned Serpents. Tops. T. They are immoderately dry, and therefore their
poison is most pernicious; causing death, if it be not helped within nine
days: And at first about the wound there grows hardness, and then pustules,
lastly black, earthy and pale matter. The genital stands out straight, the
patient falls mad, his eyes grow dim, and nerves immanuable, on the head of
the wound grows a scab, and there is continual pricking, as with needles:
thus of the signs, and symptoms. The cure is by cutting the flesh unto the
bone, or dismembring: Applying Goats dung fod with vinegar or garlic, and
vinegar and barley meal, or the juice of cedar, rue, or nep, with salt and
honey, or pitch and barley meal, etc. And inwardly, with daffodil and rue
drunk, radish seed, Indian cummin, with wine, castoreum, and calamint, with
emeticks. As for the description, they are two cubits long, of a sandy color,
with two horns, teeth like a Viper, and a gristle for a backbone.

L.
Lizard. Lacerta.
P. They live almost every where in the fields. M. Of grasshoppers, snailes, and
bees, etc. N. (...). Heb. Letaah. Chapter Haltetha. Arab. A^aia.
LIzard. Tops. T. Their flesh eaten causes inflammation and apostemation,
headache and blindness, ( sc. of those in Italy). The eggs kill speedily,
except helped by Falcons dung and wine. When they bite, they leave their teeth
in the place, which continually aketh, until taken out: The cure is by sucking
the place, then putting in cold water, and afterward making a plaster of oil
and ashes. V. The medicines of the flesh, are the same as of the Crocodile, and
the flesh very hot; therefore it makes fatt: The Henns being eaten, that are
fed with their fatt mixed with wheat meal, halinitre, and cumin. Card. The
same given to Hawks causes them to change their feathers. Being dissected, or
the head beaten with salt draws out nails or splents. With oil it causes
hair to grow upon the head: Dissected and applied hot they cure the stingings
of Scorpions and Wenns. Formerly they used dry Lizards bruised to draw out
teeth without pain. And sod and stamped with meal or frankincense, they,
applied them to the forehead, to cure watering eyes. The same burned to powder
and mixed with cretick honey to an ointment, cures blindness. Their oil put
into the care helps deafness, and drives out worms. The blood anointed
fasting keeps children from swelling in the belly and legs. Also the liver
and blood wrapped up in wool draw nails and thorns out of the flesh, and cure
freckles. The urine (if there be any) helps the rupture in infants. The bones
taken out of the Lizards head scarify the teeth, and the brain helps
suffusions. The liver laid to the gumbs, or hollow teeth helps their pain.
The dung purges wounds, and takes away the whiteness and itching of the
eyes, and sharpeneth the sight, the same with water is used for a salve.
Arnold. The dung with meal, the black being cast away, so dried in a furnace,
and softened with the water of nitre and froth of the Sea, afterward applied to
the eyes in a cloth, helps the former evils. The green Lizards, living in
meadows and green fields in Italy, loving to Men, and enemies to Serpents. T.
V. Are very useful, the skin hanged upon trees, and the gall used to the
apples, keep them from rotting, and drive away catterpillers. The flesh eaten
helps those that have the sciatica. They are given to Hawks without their
touching them: a has thereof causes a Hawke to cast her old feathers. Eaten
with sauces they help the falling evil. If sod with wine to a third part, and a
spoonful taken every day they help diseases in the lungs. It also helps the
loins, and may be prepared for the eyes. Brasavolus his oil hereof helps
the face, and broken pasterns of a Horse, with a little vinegar. The ashes
reduce skars in the body, to their own color. The bones cleansed, by enclosing
them in a vessel of salt help the falling evil. The blood applied in flocks of
wool cures the beatings, bruizings, and thick skins in the feet of Men and
Beasts. The eye is superstitiously used against quartans, and pain in the
eyes; so the blood of the eyes taken in purple wool. The heart helps
exulcerations of the kings evil. The gall takes away the hair of the eye lids.
They need not be described, being known.

M.
Myllet. Cenchru.
P. They live in Lemnus, and Samothracia, etc. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Cenchrines. Milliaris. Famusus.
MYllet, or Cenchrine. Tops. T. They are very hot, and therefore venomous in
the second degree. Therefore putrefaction and rottenness follow their biting,
as also more deadly and unresistable evils, as drowsiness, sleepiness, the
lethargy, pain in the belly, especially the colic, pain in the liver and
stomach, killing in two days, if it be not remedied. The cure is like that of
the Vipers biting; or take the seed of lettuce, flax-seed, savory stamped, wild
rue, wild bettony, and daffodil drach. 2. in three cups of wine: drinking also
after it, drach. 2. of the root of centaury or hartwort, nosewort, gentian, or
sesamine. As for their description, they are spotted like millet seed, about
two cubits in length, attenuated toward the tail, the color is dark like
the Millet, and is then most ireful when this herb is highest. They go
straight, therefore are avoided by winding too and fro. They are very
daingerous and strong, and beat the Body with the tail, whilst they suck the
blood.

N.
Neute. Lacerta.
P. They live in ditches, and hedges, and the like places. M. Their meat is not
much observed. N. (...). Lacerta aquatica.
NEute or water-lizard. Tops. T. Some apothecaries use them in steed of Scinks
or Crocodiles of the earth; but they are deceived, and deceive others in their
virtues and operation, not having wholesome properties. They need no
description, being well known. If taken they shut the mouth, they are bred in
fatt waters and soiles. Their eggs are about the bigness of a pease, they are
soonest killed by salt; for by strokes they will hardly dye. When angry they
stand upon their hinder legs, till the body be all white, by which their
venomous nature is observed to be like the Salamander, though the water makes
their poison the more weak.

P.
Pelias. Pelias.
P. Their place is not much observed by writers. M. Neither their meat also. N.
Or variety of names and Epithites.
PElias. Aet. T. Their bitings cause putrefaction about the wound; yet not very
daingerous, and it causes dimnesse of the eyes, having an universal
distribution. It Is cured by a ptisan with oil in drink, and a decoction of
ditch docks, etc. used against the yellow jaundise. The head and eyes may be
washed with the urin of a child or boy: After the body has been purged, anoint
it with balsame and honey, and use an ophthalmick salve: weeping also is good,
evacuating the venime.

Prester. Piaster.
P. Jun. and Tremell. Think them the fiery Serpents of the Israelites. M. Their
meat is not much observed: N. (...). Heb. Saraph, Calep.
Prester. Tops. T. Their venim is very hot and fiery: Therefore after it, the
swelling is great, with distraction, conversion of the blood to matter, and
corrupt inflammation, hindering the respiration, also dimnesse of the fight,
falling off of the hair, and at last suffocation, as it were by fire, thus of
symptoms. The cure is by wild purslain, and castoreum drunk with opopanax and
rue in wine, the diet being of Sprats. As for their description, They go about
panting with open mouth, by reason of their excessive heat.

S.
Salamander. Salamandra.
P. In Trent, the Alps and Germany, in cold moist places. M. They live upon
milk, and honey, etc. N. (...). Arab. Saambros. Gall. Salamandre.
SAlamander. T. Is very cold, and their biting is deadly, Arnold. Having as
many venims as colors. If they bite once they never let go; and if pulled
away, they leave the teeth behind them, then there can never be any remedy,
therefore they must be suffered to hang on, till they are wearied, and be put
off by medicines: After it, follows a great pain, and scabb upon the place.
The cure is by the decoction of Froggs drunk, and the flesh applied. Their
poison is not inferior to that of any other Serpent, poisoning fruit, and the
spittle causing the hair to fall off, the poison it self is hot, like that of
the cantharides, and so cured: sc. by vomits, and clisters, etc. Yet they hurt
not swine, they are most poysonsome when dead, by putrefaction. If taken
inwardly, the tongue will be inflamed, the body tormented by cold, corruption
and putrefaction, pains in the fundament and stomach, dropsies, cramps and the
ischury. The cure is by calamint, cypress, galbanum, ammoniacum, and styrax,
Cow-milk, scammony, and bacon. The powder helps corns and is septick. Avic. As
for their description, they are like the vulgar Lizard, but greater, their
legs are taller, and tail longer, they are also thicker and fuller, having a
pale white belly, and one part of their skin very black, the other like
verdegrease, but both glistering, with a black line along the back, having many
spotts like eyes, with baldness, out of which issues a humor, that quenches
the heat of fire. They have four feet; and black and yellow spotts, with a
great head, they breed like the Viper, and are bold, and very stout.

Seps. Sepedon.
P. They live in rocks and hollow places. In Syria, etc. M. Their meat is not
much observed. N. (...). Putria. Selsir, Avic.
Seps. Tops. T. They are very venomous, causing the body to rot, which they
bite with their hollow under teeth, which yield poison, The skinn being pressed
up. The signs of it are bleeding, tumors, matter smelling strong, languishing
pain, whitenesie of the body, and falling off of the hair, after which the
patient lives not above three days. The cure is like that of the bitings of
the Viper, Ammodyte, and Horned Serpent: Aet. Also a sponge wett in warm
vinegar, ashes of chafe, butter and honey, or millet and honey, also bay
leaves, oxymel, and parslain, eating salt fish. As for the description, they
are about two cubits long, slender toward the tail, the head broad, and of
many colors.

Serpent. Serpens.
P. They live in dens; and hollow places, etc. M. Of dust, and living
creatures. N. (...). Heb. Nachash. Chapter Cheveia. Arab. Haie.
Serpent. Tops. T. They are counted cold, therefore lie hid in the winter. V.
Their intestines applied help their wounds. Avic. drach 1. of the powder of a
black Serpent after long baring, taken in the surupe of honey for three days
together helps the leprosy. Plin. Cells. The middle part eaten cures the Kings
evil. Tagault. The flesh eaten helps the elephantiasis, Pliny uses the right
eye against rheum of the eyes, and the heart against the toothach. Paul.
Venet. The gall of that of Caraiam taken in a small quantity helps bitings of a
mad dog, causes delivery, and applied helps the piles. Hipp. The sperm helps
the suffocation of the belly. Myrepsus uses them against strains and
hardness. Plin. The ashes applied with oil or wax help strumes, so drunk. The
ashes thereof burnt with salt, and put with the oil of roses into the contrary
ear help the toothach. Olaus Magnus makes an unguent thereof against the
morphew. The powder helps fistula's. Plin. The fatt mixed with oil helps
strumes. Olymp. The fatt with Bulls gall, verdegrease, and honey anointed,
helps barrenness, Hipp. so used in a pessary. Mixed with the plaster of Jo.
De Vigo, it helps all hardness, nodes, and other torments of the spanish
pocks, also leprous swellings, pimples, and smootheth the skinn. Plin. With
other things it causes the hair to grow. The fume of an old Serpent helps
the monthly course. Alois. The oil with the flowers of cowslips helps the
gout. The powder of it after rosting, preserves from the leprosy, keeps
youth, causes a good color, clears the eyes, and preventeth gray hairs,
and the falling evil. It purges the head, and expels scabbinesse, etc. sc.
that of the black Serpent. Chickens eaten that are fed with their heads and
tails minced, mingled with crumms of bread, or oats, help the leprosy. The
dried skin used to the tooth, helps the pain of a hot cause; and any
impostume or noli me tangere. If washed with spittle, and tied to the belly it
facilitats delivery, if eaten it operates as Serpents. Their blood is more
precious than balsam, used to the lips it makes them red, so the face, and
prevents spots. It helps all scabs, and stench of the teeth. The fatt helps all
redness, and spots, etc. in the eyes, and clears the eyes anointed on the
lids. An ointment made of them with May butter helps the gout. They kill worms
in Hearts. Rus. The decoction helps striking Horses: the fatt helps swellings on
their backs: That which drops from them when rosting helps fistula's in their
hoofes. Albert. The flesh of the speckled Serpent, makes Hawks cast their
feathers. Gal. The cast skin of Serpents with Sea water helps blood shotten
eyes. The ashes thereof with oil of roses dropped into the ears, help all
soars thereof, or stench, adding vinegar if they are mattery: Some add Bulls
gall, and the flesh of Tortises boiled, Marcel. or the gall of a Calf. Diosc.
Gal. If boiled in wine it cures the toothache, fomented, or the ashes put in
with oil. Archig. The skin applied not burnt will make the teeth fall out. It
cures the phthiriasis, Gal. and the colic, sc. the ashes applied with oil.
With the oil of roses it helps the bloody flux, and tenesmus. Arnoldus uses
the fume thereof with opopanax, myrrh, galbanum, castoreum, sulphur, Madder,
Pigeons, or Hawks dung, and Cows gall to bring forth the birth. Cardan uses
it, to cause elequence, etc. Serpents may be driven away by the fume of horns
and hoofes, bay leaves, bitumen, castoreum, galbanum, propolis, opopanax,
sagapenum, panax, fleabane, melanthium, and all stinking things, as feathers,
and hair, etc. also wormwood, and the water wherein sal ammoniacum has been
dissolved, sprinkled about; or lime, and garlic. The cure of the poison is by
attractives, scarrification, cupping glasses, ligature, vomits, triacle,
mugwort, and balm. Also Pidgions dissected and applied, and young things, sc.
their fundament: Cauteries, Goats milk drunk and fomented; new Hoggs dung,
nitre, mustard seed. Epigonus his plaster. Fumanel's oil. Oil of Scorpions,
quicklime with honey and oil, black hellebore, garlic, sowthernwood,
coleworts, onions, figgs, barley meal, birthwort, rocket, horehound, organy,
basil, leekes, rue, and scabious. Inwardly mithridate, triacle, Galens zopyria.
Mathiolus, his Q. bettony, rhubarb, agarick, and garlic, if within. They are
generated of earth and water, and are full of enmity.

Slow-worme. Caecilia.
P. They live in Greece, and England, in fields. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Cophia. Cerula. Caecula. Surdaster.
Slow-wormes. Tops. T. Their poison is very strong. If their wound swells it
may be pricked with a brazen bodkin, and then apply fullers earth and vinegar
for cure. Oswald Some make a triacle of this Serpent, which smells like aqua
vitae, which some use against the plague. Their description is needless, they
breed young ones in their bowels. They come out of the earth in July, and go
in in. August. They are called blind worms also, and hurt not, if not provoked.

Snake. Anguis.
P. In Naples, England, and all over the fenns. M. of froggs, leeches, newts,
and fishes. N. (...). Chersydrus. That of the water, Enhydris.
Snake. Toppss. T. That of the water has a fiery poison, which presently is
dispersed over the whole body, and when it comes to the heart, the man
presently falls down dead. Therefore it is best if the foot be bitten to hang
a man up by the heels, or presently to cut off the part: The same may be said
of the land Snake. Their venom is not inferior to that of other Serpents:
When they bite, there follows great pain, inflammation, greenness or
blackness of the wound, dizzinesse in the head, and death within three days.
The cure is by organy, stamped and applied with lie and oil; or ashes of the
root of an Oak, with pitch, or barley meal, mixed with honey and water, and
sod at the fire. And in drink use wild nosewort, daffodil flowers, and fennel
seed in wine, V. The liver of a snake is said to break the stone in the
bladder. The flesh applied helps the wound. Their old skin as also of the
Adder, rubbed on the eyes, helps the sight; if boiled in wine when old, it
helps the pain of the ears, so with tops of poppies dropped in. As for their
stone called Serpentinus, see my Pammineralogy. They lay eggs about the
bigness of a bulleis.

V.
Viper. Vipera.
P. They live in Arabia, Africa, Europe, and Asia. M. Of herbs, horse-flies,
cantharides, and pithiocamps. N. (...). Heb. Aphgnath. Arab. Thiron. (...).
VIper. T. Their flesh is hot and dry, and purges the whole body by sweat,
also being eaten or drunk it helps the leprosy, so that of Tyrus, their heads
and tails being cut off: so their wine and broth, eating half a Viper at
once, and fasting six hours after, Mus. if eaten they cure ulcers. Porphyr. It
clears the eyes, helps the sinews, and represseth swellings. The ashes of
their heads beaten together with the grossest decoction of bitter lupines used
to the temples as an ointment stop rheums of the eyes, the same alone help dim
eyes. The head burned and dipped in vinegar helps wildfire. The gall
cleanses the eye; so the fatt with rosin, attick honey, and old oil. The
slough helps the ringworm; the powder thereof causes the hair to grow. The
powder of the whole drunk helps the gout, and swelling in the neck; the oil
wherein they are sodden helps joynt-aches, their liquour helps the palsy. The
male makes but two holes when he biteth, but the female makes four, and these
more deadly. There poison kills within three days, at the furthest. The
signs and effects of their bitings are first rotten matter, bloody or fatt,
swelling of the flesh round about, blisters on the flesh, as if it were
scorched, after which follows putrefaction and death. The pain is universal
as if the body were set on fire, with turning of the neck, twinkling of the
eyes, darkness, heaviness of the head, weakness of the loins, thirst,
frezing at the fingers ends, cold sweat, vomiting, color changeable, bloody
gumms, inflammation of the liver, sleepiness, trembling, dysury, fevers,
neezing, and the asthma, so Aet. Aeg. and Grevin. The cure is as in the bitings
of other Serpents. Preventing spreading, by extraction, ligature, or section.
Else the poison may be sucked out, applying Hens cut a sunder, with
scarrification, bathing with Sea water, or milk, and eating old butter, using
cuppinglasses; and a plaster of garlic, sharp onions, and triacle, drinking
triacle wine, and garlic broth; and the juice of yew leaves. The matter is
drawn out by Goats dung, powder of laurel, and euphorbium in wine, and after
with unc. 2. of long birth-worth, unc. 1. of daffodil and briony, of galbanum
and myrrh an. unc 1. with a sufficient quantity of oil of bays and wax, used
twice a day. Pareus used triacle with aqua-vitae and mithridate, and also
ligature.

ENTOMOLOGIA. Of Insects.
B.
Be. Apis.
P. Almost every where, in England, and other places. M. Of honey, flowers,
trees, and sweet herbs. N. (...). Mellis matter, Varr. Solisequa.
BEes. Aldrov. T. V. Those of Cumane feed hereon. Their ashes with Rats dung
and oil of roses cause the hair to grow speedily, so also the ashes of walnut
bark, chestnuts, beans, and of the fruit of the date tree: Honey. T. is hot
and dry, 2. of thin parts, cleansing with a little acrimony, therefore it
mooveth the belly, and provokes urine: Therefore in hot bodies it is soon
turned into choler, and becomes bitter if boiled by the fire: So it (as all
hot things penetrate sooner, than the cold,) does quickly insinuate it self
into the pores, and pleases the palate thereby. The Ancients used it for the
same purpose, in steed of sugar which we now use. The smell thereof is
strengthening, it nourishes much, and preventeth putrefaction; but it is to be
used moderately, and then it causes a good color, the sweetness thereof
pleasing the parts, which then attract, retain, and assimilate it, then the
innate heat is increased, and after the color flourishes, the natural
aliment being augmented. Valleriol. It Is good for old men, to prolong their
age, so Galen, etc. and the use of mulse also: Which if drunk warm it helps
the voice, if cold it exasperats it: Ruel. If made of old Austere wine and good
honey, it is less flatulent, and may be quickly used: If old it nourishes the
body, the middle aged helps the belly, expels urin and fills drunk first, and
recals appetite. That made of Austere wine does not so fill the stomach. The
proportion of honey is one part, to six of Must. The Melitite wine is used in
long fevers, that have weakened the stomach, for it gently mollifieth the
belly, provokes urin, and purges the stomach: It helps the joint grief,
vices of the reins, weak heads, and weak Women, it being of a good smell,
and nourishing the body: It differs from mulse, being made of old austere
wine, and a little honey. But this, of one part of honey, with five of Austere
must, and one of salt. Hydromel serves to quench the thirst. V. Plin. honey
preventeth putrefaction; having a pleasant taste, and not rough, it is most
profitable for the jaws, tonsils, quinsey, mouth, and dryness of the tongue in
fevers: If boiled it helps the peripneumonia and pleuresy and wounds by
Serpents; also against the poison of toadstooles, and the palsy in mulse; it is
dropped into the ears with oil of roses, it kills nits and lice: When
despumated it is ever better; but it causes inflation of the stomach,
increases choler, causes nauseousnesse, and is hurtful to the eyes, yet
applied it helps their exulcerated angles. Diosc. It is abstersive, opens the
mouths of the veins, and evacuats humors, therefore it is used in sordid and
hollow ulcers. Being boiled and applied it glutinats flesh, with alume it helps
ringworms. Dropped in warm with fossile salt, it helps the sounding of the
ears, and pain thereof; applied it kills nits and lice. It covers the
glans. It discusseth the dimnesse of the eyes. And used in gargarismes it helps
the jaws, tonsils, and quinsey; it provokes urine, helps the cough, bitings of
Serpents, and against meconium, taken warm with oil of roses: Against the
poison of toads-stooles, and the bitings of a mad Dog, drunk. If eaten crude it
causes inflation in the belly, and provokes the cough, therefore the despumate
is then best. Hipp. The comb macerated in water helps the second species of the
pluresy. If taken it helps the tormina. The cremor of the combs boiled in
water, or vinegar, helps those that have fallen: The same infused in cold water
helps the repletion of the lungs. It helps the falling out of the fundament.
It Is good in cold disseases; but hurtful in the hot, it being then turned into
choler, and not nourishing. It Is unwholesome for those that are young and
bilions, and all hot diseases. When depurated it is good for a cold stomach; it
helps breeding of the teeth. Confections thereof cause spitting, and remoove
filth of the skin and wounds. They cause medicines to pass quickly through
the body, provoke urine, and cleanse the ears; it is to be mixed with remedies
for ulcers, of the breast, lungs, and all antidotes. Applied it eats up the
filth of ulcers. It opens the jaws, by drawing humors. Prunes infused in the
water thereof mollify the belly; it cleares the eyes and face; but the Attick
is best to cleanse the face and eyes, to rub the rough tongue, provoke urine in
old men, glutinate hollow ulcers, attenuate thick spittle, and to cause
excreation: It helps the eating herpes, and acidity in the stomach. If it be
taken without the mixture of water, it nourishes more weakly, but looseneth
the belly. Taken more copiously alone it purges the belly, so it is to be
abstained from in tertian fevers, but may be used in pituitous diseases. It
helps the little ulcers in the mouth of children. Some say that eaten after
wine, it hinders it from flying to the head, and helps the appetite decayed
by a pituitous cause. Celsus enumerats boiled honey among such things, that
stop the belly, it then loosing it is acrimony. Nicand. It helps against opium,
Martial, and the cough: Ovid. But causes venery. Honied water causes the
beard to grow, helps the cough, and if heated it provokes vomit. It helps the
poison of cerusse, and henbane with milk. It Is used against the fistula's of
the genitals. It Is used to the womb with soft bread, sudden tumors,
luxations, and to lenify. Diosc. Melicrate has the same nature as mulse, it is
used crude to loosen, cause vomiting, and against poison with oil: When boiled
it is given to those that are weak, that have a feeble pulse, against coughs,
peripneumonies, and those that sweat immoderately. It Is made of two parts of
rain water and one of honey. If Austere it is used to quench thirst: So that of
the Arabians, as also in cold diseases, especially of the brain, nerves, and
joints. Drunk in steed of wine it helps spitting, and evacuats matter, and
thick phlegm out of the breast. It purges, cleanses, and washes the
intestines, bowels, and urinary passages, therefore it helps the pains of the
colon, loosens the belly, and prevents the stone: The proportion is one pound
of honey to eight of water, gently to be boiled, despumated and percolated; and
if but little boiled, it causes flatulency in the stomach, moves the belly
more, and nourishes less; but the contrary if more boiled: Some add spices
also to mulse, sc. ginger, saffron, cinnamon, mace, wood of aloes, gallia
muscata and leven. That made of snow-water called chionomeli, is used, in hot
fevers. Apomeli made of one part of honey, with four of water, cleanses,
digesteth, purges choler, and provokes urine; but it is bad for hot and dry
constitutions, hot diseases, and heat of the midriffe, but it neither provokes
or quenches thirst. Oxymel helps against Serpents, called Seps, against
meconium, misseltoe, and quinsies, being gargled hot, it helps the ears and
mouth, Diosc. taken it draws out thick humors, helps the sciatica, epilepsy,
and gout, it inciding and concocting. It Is made of one part of vinegar, two of
honey, and four of water. The D. is unc. 1. to unc. 3. The destilled water
helps the falling off of the hair, swollen and bleared eyes, and discusseth
their aqueous films and darkness, helping the ulcers of the corners: It
helps burnings, especially in soft and tender places. The second reddish
water purges out matter and filth out of putrid ulcers, applied with clothes.
The red helps deep, creeping, and sordid ulcers mixed with unguents, and
colors the hair: the white and yellow help suffusions and white spots in
the eyes, especially with eyebright, celandine, rue, the tops and seed of
fennel, sagapenum, white sugar, ammoniacum, galbanum, and ocular herbs. The
same hinder the falling off of the hair, make it red, and to grow. The golden
colored being six or seven times distilled, defends health, preserves life,
helps catarrhs, coughs, and the spleen, it strengthens nature, opens
abstructions, prevents putrefaction, resists poison, and stops urine. Andern.
The oil of honey distilled helps podagrick pains and cures wounds. H. Gal.
Honey is biting to the eyes and ears, it pricketh the stomach, causes
incision, and if not concocted it causes flatulency in the stomach and
intestines. Hipp. If boiled it is troublesome, if used it causes acid
belchings, and bilious fluxes upwards and downwards, also tormina, flatulency,
and repletion. It makes the liver and spleen to swell. If taken fasting it
presently satiats, it by reason of its sweetness and clamminesse so joining to
the stomach and liver, that they will not admit other meats, nor suffer it
self easily to be distributed: Some say also, that if eaten often it will
cause the scab. It preserves dead bodies, antidotes, Card. and young trees:
Being moist, thin, sweet, temperate, and not subject to putrefaction. It also
preserves flesh and fruits. As for wax, its begotten of the lachrymose and
gummose parts of plants. The best is yellowish, sattish, pure, and sweet. It
was used in writing, sealing, painting, ornaments, images, statues, candles,
also to preserve dead bodies, and to fasten things together, with colophony,
rosin, mastick, frankincense, sulphur, pitch, cerusse, turpentine, and Iacca.
Gal. Wax T. is almost in a mean betwixt things hot, cold, moist and dry; but
it has somewhat thick parts, and emplastick: Therefore it does not only dry,
but moisten by accident, sc. by hindering perspiration: Therefore it is the
matter both for hot and cooling remedies; but in its own nature it weakly
concocteth, having a little of the digesting and hot nature of honey. Aeg. It Is
a little abstersive. V. Diosc. Being taken in broth it helps ulcers of the
intestines, some use it in pills: And all wax, does mollify, heat, and
moderately fills up bodies. It Is to be drunk against the dysentery, and ten
grains drunk hinder the curdling of milk in nourses. Plin. The white helps
swellings in the groin. The fresh serves to dilate, mollify, and ease pain:
the white, to cool, dry, repel, harden, and bind. Rond. The white and
artificial is used in masticatories, the yellow in suffumigations. The softer
is used in cerots, unguents and plasters. The yellow by reason of the aerial
nature of the honey does more mollify, relaxe, and ease pain, therefore it is
used to heat abscesses, mollify, concoct, and ripen them: The white as
cooling, is more useful in inflammations of the reins, where the matter is to
be repelled. Wax used alone helps the paronychia. Arist. The horns of young
cattle warmed therein, may be easily bowed. The oil thereof softens; being
very penetrating, softning, discussing, and it helps cicatrices. It helps
the gout, wounds and ulcers, chaps of the lips, rifts and corrosions of the
nipples. Some use it against pains of the stomach, and midriffe, against the
cough, thick humors in the breast, bleeding wounds, and for the nervous parts.
That distilled with plumous alum, helps the pleuresy, colic, tumors, spasme,
and quickly cures wounds. Schrod. Bees dried and stamped cause hair to grow
and help the alopecia. Their honey nourishes, cleanses, opens, helps the
cough, and lungs, provokes urin, and resists putrefaction: Outwardly it helps
dim eyes, and other affections thereof: Gal. It Is the juice of the celestial
dew, and the best is yellow, pellucid, of pleasant smell and taste, neither
thick or too thin, but well united, yellow, and made by young bees. The yellow
and white water of honey helps suffusions of the eyes, and lengthens the hair,
it serves to extract the tincture of coral; used inwardly it opens
obstructions, expels urine, and breaks the stone. The oil helps phagedens,
and discusseth spots of the face, with the oil of camphire. The compounded
oil eases the gout. Heart. in Croll. Senn. Just. The vinegar of honey,
dissolveth flints, and other stones, without any precedent calcination. Begu.
The tincture helps the phthisick. Med. destil. The D. of the Q. E. is gr. 3. to
5. and is like a panacaea. The elixyr is of the same virtue. The oil of wax is
diuretical, the D. is 3. drops to 5. the Magistery thereof helps the dysentery,
drach. 1. being drunk. The propolis, or virgin wax is hot 2. it gently
cleanses, attracteth, and draws out things fixed in the body; it concocteth
hardnesses, eases pains, cicatrizeth desperate ulcers, and if used as a
suffumigation it helps the old cough. Jonst. Bees stamped and drunk with
diuretic wine help the dropsy, and expel the stone. Those that die in the
honey help vomicas, they mollify ulcers of the lips and help the dysentery.
Applied with butter they help breeding of teeth. With wild poppy they help
pains of the jaws, and the spleen used with their honey, also the coeliack,
and cold testicles with rosin. With nitre and Cows milk it helps ulcers of the
face, and phagedens with the ashes of their leather. The froth with the oil of
walnuts helps adustion of the skinn. Holler counts it diaphoretick. Boiled with
lentiles, green myrtle leaves or galls it helps the whitlow. Nicander used it
against opium. The wax helps bare nerves and tendons; a linen cloth dipped
therein and applied very hot, helps pains of the junctures caused by cold.
Pills thereof with the hard yolk of an egg, a few grains of saffron, and
syrrupe of wormwood help the jaundise. As for the description, it is needless,
they will arise out of the putrefaction of a Calf, etc. or honey Voss. de Idol.
But some say they are begotten by the King, which ejaculats sperm in the cups,
which then the Bees cheresh. They will live 10. years, fly thwartwise, smell
well, and remember: they hate Stinks, Sheep, Spiders, Owls, and Lizards, etc.
Their diseases are repletion, inanition, dryness, moisture, cold and heat.
They live orderly, and work in bean time. Their King is ruddish, of good form,
and as bigg again as the rest: The thieves are blak and have great bellies.

Beetle. Scarabeus.
P. They live almost every where. M. Of wood, corn, and excrements. N. (...).
Gall. Escarbot. Ital. Scarafagio.
Beetle. Aldrov. T. V. Some use their horns as amulets, and to help
contractions of the nerves, ease pains, and help quartans. sc. of those called
Tauri. Some use the earth they cast out against botches, and gouts, etc. as the
Grylli. Boiled in oil and dropped in they help the ears pains. The black
beetle dried helps the stone. The horned boiled in oil and used to the pulse
cause fevers. Their hurts are helped by man's spittle. Schrod. The pilulary
betle helps the falling down of the eyes and fundament; the powder being used
they help the pain of the hemorrhoids boiled in oil. The unctuous betle is
like the Cantharides, provokes urin, helps bitings of mad Dogs, and gouts, sc.
the powder taken. Their liquour used outwardly helps wounds, and is used in
plasters against buboes, and pestilential carbuncles; the oil of their
infusion may be used in stead of that of Scorpions. Jonst. boiled with the oil
of roses and earth worms, they help the pains of the ears. Lanfrank made a
powder thereof against the pain of the stone. Their description is needless.
They are generated of the corruption of cattle or dung. They make a noise when
they fly, and stop when touched.

Burn-cow. Buprestis.
P. They live in Italy, and other places, etc. M. Of flies, lizards, worms, and
insects. N. (...). Boubrostis. Bulpestris.
Burn-cow. Diosc. T. They are of the nature of cantharides, causing erosion,
exulceration, and heat. V. Ruel. Drunk they cause venery; yet they are used in
remedies that help the leprosy, ringworm, and canker. Plin. Applied with Goats
tallow they help ringworms in the face; and by their septick force used in a
pessary, they provoke the courses. Therefore Hippocrates used them against many
diseases in Women, as to provoke the menses, their heads, wings and legs being
taken away, with the inner parts of figgs; so with myrrh, frankincense, honey,
oil of roses, wine and aniseeds: He uses them also with the same, against the
strangulation of the womb, he uses them likewise against the hardness of the
womb, and to expel the mola. H. Diosc. If drunk they cause great pain in the
stomach and belly, as the flatulency, and suppression of urine. The remedies
are as those against the Cantharides, as must, sapes, oil, milk, lard, broth
that is fatt, nitre with water, oil of bays and oxymel: With vomiting, the
decoction of figgs in wine, also pares, myrtles, and woman's milk, the poison
being hot. Cattle are to be let blood that eat them. Jonst. Some pour oil in
their nostrils. They are a kind of Cantharides. As for the description, their
outward wings are like gold, the head little, mouth broad, eyes round, and
belly long. Bell. They are bigger than Cantharides.

Butter-fly. Papilio.
P. They live in pleasant, open, and warm places. M. Of mallow flowers, and
trunks of trees. N. (...). Campilo. Avicula Isid.
Butter-fly. T. V. Jonst. They are thought to provoke urin, they are meat for
little birds, and serve as baits for fishes. Their description is useless.
They generate in May, June, and July, backwards, and lay eggs, in the rinds of
trees or leaves, and after live till winter. Their multitude often presages the
plague. Muff. Tarentin. Geopon. Recip. unc. 1. of the venomous dung of
butterflies, annisseed, Goats milk cheese, Hogs blood, galbanum, an. unc. sem.
opopanax, drach. 2. beat them diligently, pour on good sharp wine, and make
troches thereof for fishes. They preserve castrels from consumptions. They may
be driven away, sc. those that fly in the night, from Be hives; by placeing a
candle near them, as also by the smoke of gith and hemlock.

C.
Caterpiller. Eruca.
P. They live almost every where, in England and other places. M. Of trees and
herbs, and fruits. N. (...). Bruchus. Tinea agrestis.
CAterpiller. Aeg. T. V. Those of herbs applied with oil, are said to prevent
from the biting of virulent living creatures: Diosc. And drive away Serpents,
Grev. and that by an occult quality. They may be killed by shaking them off.
Aldrov. Or by fine ashes and dung: Also by the fume of Bats dung, or of bitumen
or brimstone, galbanum, Goats claws, or Hearts horn, or Cows stale and the lees
of oil used, garlic burnt, ciches sown and the juice of wormwood, and mints.
Jonst. Their webb drunk stops the flux of Women's courses. They serve to angle
with, they help the epilepsy, so Muff. burnt and put into the nostrils they
stop bleeding: All cause vesicles and make the skin bare. If they are eaten by
a Horse. Swellings arise, the skin is hardened, and eyes grow hollow. Plin. They
are begotten of dew thickened on leaves by the heat of the Sun, so Arnold. in a
moist time: And some of Butter-flies. Muff. Those of Cabbages applied cause
teeth to fall out. Hipp. The ordinary drunk, help the quinsey.

Cheselippe. Asellus.
P. They live in moist places, under stones and timber. M. They live upon warm
moisture. N. (...). Oniscus. Tilus. Multipedes. Hoglice.
Cheselippe. Diosc. T. V. Being drunk in wine they help difficulty of urine,
and the jaundise. Applied with honey they help the quinsey. Stamped, heated, in
the bark of a pomgranate, and dropped into the ears with oil of roses they
help pains in the ears. Gal. They help the headache, and pains that are old,
therein. Sever, used in unguents they help ulcerated ears. They help
inflammations of the throat, and they help the dyspnoea, having an attenuating
quality. Schrod. T. They are of thin parts, attenuate, cleanse and open,
therefore they are very good to resolve a tartareous mucilage, and dissolve the
stone: they open obstructions of the bowels, therefore help the jaundise,
nephritick pains, the difficulty of urine, colic, the appetite hurt by the
mucilage of the stomach, and the asthma, etc. The powder outwardly helps
diseases of the eyes, and pains of the ears. Applied alive they help
phagedens. The D. is scrup. 1. to drach. 1. in nephritick water, with spirit of
vitriol. Jonst. They discuss; two of the^ drunk in wine with drach. sem. of
Mice, and Pigeons dung drive out the stone: for the jaundise they are to be
drunk in mulse, and to be taken with honey in the asthma, so Hol. and Agric.
They help most diseases of eyes outward or inward, except the cataract, drunk
fresh, or applied. With a third part of turpentine they help the pani. unc. 1.
of the ointment of poplar, with oil of roses, in which they are boiled unc. 1.
sem. and four grains of saffron, helps the hemorrhoids: Others boil them with
fatt and butter, and add the yolk of an egg, unc. 3. of the oil of violets
in which 4. of them have been boiled to the consumption of a third part, to
repress the salt humor applied outwardly. Lauremberg, and Hartman, confirm
what is said of them against the stone. Hereto belong Pollin, and Coyayahoal,
serving to draw out darts. The last of which serve also to draw out teeth.
Muff. Drunk in wine they help the kings evil: 3. with gr. 4. of elaterium help
shortwindednesse. Plin. Drunk they help consumptions. Marcel. and the cramp.
Applied alive they help any swelling, with turpentine. The description is
needless.

E.
Eare-wigg. Auricularia.
P. In cabbages, ferulaceous trees, and elmes. M. Of herbs, and flowers, as
carnations, etc. N. (...). Forficula. Mordella. Vellicula. Fullo.
EAre-wigg. Muff. Arnold. T. V. Being boiled in common oil, or oil of
Hartsease, and then used, to the arteries, in the temples and wrists, they
cause a fever, and so cure convulsions. Joseph. Michael. Being finely powdered
in Balneo, in a glass very close stopped, mixed with Hares piss, and so put in
morning and evening, it is excellent against deafness: Others use it with oil
of cloves. They are eaten by Henns and Snites. They are got out of the ears by
applying a rotten apple, and oil injected with aloes.

F.
Flea. Pulex.
P. They are almost every where, in the spring time. M. They live upon the
blood of living creatures. N. (...). Gall. Pulce, and Ital. Hisp. Pulga, Jun.
FLea. Muff. T. V. They are generated of dust, and in Dogs hair from a fatt
humor putrified, and sweat. The remedies against them are elder leaves,
fern-root, flowers of pennyroyal, rue, brambles, oleander, mints, hopps,
rape-seed, cumin-seed, staves-acre, fleabane, saffron, coriander, celondine,
arsmart, mustard, lupines, hellebore, bays, walnut-tree, with their oiles and
decoctions. Seawater, Hearts horn burnt, sublimat and lime. If in the ear; use
oil and turpentine.

Fly. Musca.
P. They live in moist, and warm places. M. Of milk, dead bodies, and honey,
etc. N. (...). Heb. Zebub. Gall. Monsche. It. and H. Mosca, Jun.
Fly. T. V. Aldrov. They help against napellus, the biting of the Taranta,
and epidemical diseases, with round birth-wort, mithridate, and sealed earth,
the which is also good against all other bitings. Some use them with dock roots
against white spotts in the eyes, and others to cure fellons. Their heads help
the alopecia, others use them with the ashes of paper or nuts, and some with
Woman's milk and honey. Soranus used them with Alcyonium, live brimstone, Hogs
gall, vinegar, and the axunge of cart wheels, after shaving and rubification:
Others use them with the roots of reeds, fern, the rough bark of walnuts, new
wool, ladanu^, myrrh, old oil, and of cedar, and Indian lease, after rubbing
with onions or squills. Pliny uses the red ones against the epilepsy. Stamped
with the yolk of an egg they help the chymosis, so their heads with wax.
Dionys. Miles. The ashes of Dogg-flies with those of the Sea Hare, help the
pricking hairs of the eyebrows. With Ants eggs they black the hair: If put
into the passages alive they make Horses stale. Schrod. Their distilled water
helps the eyes. Jonst. Two drops help deafness. Gesn. Three or four flies
taken inwardly loosen the belly. Muff. Reduced into an ointment in Horse dung
with butter, in one year, they help all pains. Also they serve for meat to
Swallows, spiders, chameleons, water wagg-tailes, Muscovie Ducks, and fishes,
as Trouts etc. Their description is needless. They generate by coiture, and
putrefaction in dunge, etc. They hate spiders, love rhododaphne, and live not
long They are soon killed by oil, and when weak recover in the Sunn, or warm
ashes. They have a flexile flight, they are audacious and indocible; they may
be driven away by onions, the fume of loose strife; with the decoction of the
lower elder, gourds, or white hellebore stamped in milk: Or the juice of
origanum, milk, Hoggs gall, etc. sprinkled on the ground: cattle may be
preserved from them by black hellebore, and the ointment of bay berries with
oil.

G.
Gally-worm. Julus.
P. They live amongst moss on trees, and under loggs. M. Of the trunks of
trees. etc. N. (...). Hisp. Centopeas. Ital. Cento gambi.
GAlly-worm. Muff. T. V. Those sound in cellers burned to powder mightily
provoke urine. Their blood with the moisture of Hog-lice helps white spots in
the eyes. As for their description, they are short scolopenders, in the number
of feet exceeding all insects: Of them some are smooth, others hairy, and their
colors are diverse as to their differences.


