A LETTER Farther and more fully Evidencing the Kings steadfastness in THE
Protestant Religion, Written by Mounsier de l'Angle Minister of the Protestant
Church at Roven in FRANCE to a Friend of his in LONDON.



London, Printed by A.W. for Joshua Kirton at the Queens Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

THe reverend Author judgeing it fit, and to good purpose to publish this
Letter of his in France, both for the comforts and undeceiving of the
Protestants of that Nation, in that great scandal cast on the King of England,
as inclining to the Church of Rome; which scandal though it be now fully
cleared, and made evident as our Author says, that it came from Hell, so that
it might seem to no purpose to publish any farther vindication of his Majesty
herein. Yet the same reasons mentioned before for publishing of the original,
together with the gravity of the Author, who is one of the ancientest Preachers
in France, and the fullness of the Letter, wherein are many things not commonly
known, were strong inducements for publishing this translation, whereby all
true English men and Protestants may also receive much comfort, and all
prejudice removed from their hearts, who in the least doubt of the sincerity of
the King, concerning the Religion he professes.

A Letter of M. de l'Angle, Divine, to a friend concerning the Religion of the
Serene King of England.
SIR;
TOgether with all known good men, I praised God, when I understood the
proceedings in Engl. tended to the reestablishment of your King; and again, I
glorified him, for the evidence appears that he will have compassion on that
miserable Kingdom, long known to me, and whereas you well know I did for some
years preach the Gospel to a people that loved me, and in whom I observed much
of piety. It Is true, the people, whereof the state at present is composed, make
up a various colored garment, which God in his Law allows not of; And this
prodigious compound of Frogs and Grasshoppers, that is, the Sectaries, which
cover almost all England, made me fear the wrath of God would not long
forbear this desolate Nation.

But God, who is rich in mercy, who for the sake of ten righteous, would have
pardoned Sodom, has yet more inclination to pardon his Jerusalem, for the
pious multitude in the midst of it, who sincerely love God, and by whom his
holy name is called on, especially I had a confidence that first or last the
Presbyterians, those who at present make the strongest party in great Britain,
would by examples of loyalty, when God should afford them opportunity, clear
themselves of the infamy they are blasted wi^h, for being accomplices in the
death of King Charles of blessed and glorious memory. And that to those of our
Religion would be restored the glory. Cardinal Ossat in one of his Epistles
ingeniously acknowledges our due, that is, never to have attempted the life of
our Sovereigns, how cruel so ever they have been to us; and notwithstanding
the massacres upon those of our Religion by their orders, these or such like
are the Cardinals own words.

Whereupon Sir, I shall tell you that discoursing some days since with a
person of Judgment, and one fearing God, of the state of your affairs, and
particularly of those affairs in this conjuncture so cross for the King, that
seem to obstruct his re-establishment, we concluded that amongst others, two
grand Obstacles concurred to hinder it, which would infallibly succeed, could
they be taken away.

The first is, the apprehension that the Presbyterians, who only are capable to
bring this about, in behalf of the Church and State, may have, that the King
distastes them, holding them guilty of the parricide of the King his Father, as
some have endeavored to persuade him; some out of malice to foment an
irreconcilible misunderstanding betwixt the King and his best Subjects, and so
to order it, that they may never hereafter have confidence in each other.
Others out of unadvisedness, being misinformed in the reality of that said
story, as the late Salmasius in his Apology for the King of England, where
this great person exasperates himself with a false generosity, when he declares
he was not born for compliance, whereof no man ever suspected him, and that he
spares neither brother, nor best friend, where he finds them deviated from
their duty.

The other obstacle we judged to withstand the Kings re-establishment, is a
persuasion that the enemies of Protestant Religion, and the King of England
have sowed amongst many, that the King is not of the Religion he professes,
but that he concurs with Rome, wherewith he has private engagements, in a
word, that he is a Papist.

To take away the first obstacle, I showed this good man a letter I sometime
wrote to Salmaslus, of whom I spoke concerning his Apology, which he did me
the honor to send me. In this letter where I showed him that as Jacob said to
Reuben his firstborn, Gen 49.
he was unstable as water, and should not excel; I have so evidently cleared
the Presbyterians of the injury he did them, and with reasons so considerable,
that the person to whom I communicated them, thought it fit the letter should
be published; whereto I willingly consented, judging the Letter would come
forth to purpose, and in season.

But the posture wherein at present I view them, and the affection they
testify to their Prince, justifies them above all the reasons I alleged, and
if their great and glorious design succeeds, as the reformed Churches in all
parts of the Wrold evidently pray, like Moses lifting up their hands, till God
makes this happy day shine from above; their innocense will appear so manifest,
that Calumny it self will not dare to attempt it. For what man of reason sees
not that if their hearts condemned them, and that they were conscious of this
crying sin, they would not be cautious of procuring the Kings return, since
they must needs have cause to fear he should retain an immortal resentment; and
though for a time finding their party, as the sons of Zerviah, too strong and
potent for him, he dissembles the indignation conceived in his heart, they must
always think he would make them feel the effects when time should favor him.

And this argument is confirmed by the example of the Sectaries, who fearing
their hands should be found stained with the blood that cries so loud,
apprehend the Kings re-establishment as a sad day for them; when this Prince
may treat them in such terms, as he, of whom the Scripture tells us, did those
who revolted from their obedience, and that in his just resentments: he says
not, Bring me hither these my enemies which would not that I should reign over
them; Though to deal ingeniously, I believe their fear will be their only
punishment, and I am confident he is a Prince, who will do by his subjects as
Joseph did by his brethren, and as he had respect to the desires of his dying
father Jacob, to pardon his brethren, and not regard the evil they had done
him, that so the King by the example of the son of God, by whom he shall
reign, God assisting, may make grace abound where sin abounds, and in
observance of the King his Fathers sage and Christian advice brought him by
some that attended at his death, which were to pardon his people, and with a
general Oblivion prevent their cries and lamentations.

But the other Obstacle stands yet, and is of more importance: that is, the
Calumny taken upon trust from hand to hand, that the King is of the Roman
Religion, and will soon make it appear, when he gets the raines of the Realm
in his hands, Sir, Upon this point I must tell you, that some years since this
slander sprung from Hell, I have made it my work to know the truth, have used
all sorts of means to discover what his heart was as toward God; and if he
were such as he was represented to me. For this cause I followed him with a
vigilant eye all the time he stayed in France after the battle he lost against
Cromwell, and again after he retired to Bruxells.

And that which drew me to this curiosity, was not the tenants of those, who
hold, that if the King prove not of the Protestant Religion, we are not only
to abandon his Interests, but with our power to oppose his return to the Crown;
for I have not so learned Christ; nor can I be persuaded that because a man is
not of our opinion in matter of Religion, it is a sufficient title to deprive
him of his Right: and I willingly leave those deformed opinions that overturn
the foundations of States, and render Chhristian Religion incompatable with all
the Polices of the Universe, to such extravagant brains as hold the earth
belongs properly to the Saints, such as they take themselves to be, and that
the portion which every one, who is not of the fraternity of these fanatic
spirits, enjoys, is detained by injustice, and absolute usurpation. And by
Consequence I cannot imagine the people of England were well principalled, to
cast their natural Prince out of his Kingdom, under color that he was of a
religion contrary to theirs. For, I know amongst the people of God there was
never any such practice. And, that under all the legal dispensation since the
state of the Jews was devolved into the hands of Kings, the people never rose
against their Prince for his Idolatry, but when obliged by express command
from God. As that given to Jehu.
And since Jesus Christ came upon earth, the Christians that first embraced his
Doctrine, never esteemed Idolatry, wherewith their Sovereigns were infected,
sufficient to discharge them from their obedience. The example of Julian the
Apostate is in this decisive, who revolting from Christianisme, and becoming an
Apostate, and plunng'd in Pagan Idolatries, and by this means had returned the
Empire, which by a singular providence of God was fallen into the hands of
Christians, to the enemies of Christ an Religion, yet received still homage
from the Christians of those times, who bore their yoke with humility, because
'twas God that laid it on them.

And it clearly appeared this submission of the Church was acceptable to God,
by his timely releasing them from the persecution of this powerful and
malicious enemy: for this change was but like a storm that soon is over, and as
a cloud, as an Ancient calls it, which for a time eclipsed the glory of the
Christian Church, but by the good providence of God was dispersed in the
turning of a hand, and the Empire restored to Christian Princes, who set the
Church in her luster again.

It Is true that in our age that unfortunate faction called the League, stirred
up by that spirit well known to all, insolently published that pernicious
heresy, that a Prince no sooner with Rome, but he loses his Rights to his
Crown; and that the greater part of France poisoned with this pernicious
belief, used their utmost endeavors to have hindered Henry the great from
ascending the Throne, which he and his Posterity have since so gloriously
enjoyed. But this doctrine went against the hair with all the good people of
those times, both of the one and the other Religion, and numbers of honest men
set their tongues, their pens, and their swords, to work to maintain the
Justice of that glorious Monarch, and beat back this dangerous Maxim down to
Hell, where doubtless 'twas first contrived.

'Twas not then, Sir, for that I had the least thought the Re-establishment of
the King of England in his Paternall inheritance ought to depend on his
Religion, and that if I found he were imbued with the errors of the Roman
Church, I should have judged him incapable of that high dignity; but for
satisfaction of my self and all good people, to the end, that if according to
the forejudgment I had already in favor of his Religion, which he derived by
tradition from his father of blessed memory, to the constant profession whereof
he exhorted him at his death, I found him according to my hopes, my joy might
be accomplished, and I might spread the rumor every way, where I thought the
welcome news might conduce to the procuring Justice for the best cause on earth,
and that if amongst his subjects that differ in this point from the common
sense of our Churches, which almost unanimously will have us give to Caesar
what belongs to Caesar, to Caesar I say, as to Caesar only, and not for that he
is a Protestant Caesar, they may learn that their King is doubly the Anointed
of the Lord, and persectly of the quality, they wish him, and so there is
nothing why they should not join with all other good subjects in the design
they appear to have of rein-throning him: since not only, there is no reason to
oppose it, but more, there is not any pretense for it with the least color of
Justice.

To proceed, I learn for certain, he adhered in his heart to the Protestant
Religion, for as much as man can judge of the profundity of that part: I had it
from such as have the honor to be near his person. I am assured of it by the
testimony of Mr. Long who had a share in the weighty affairs of the late
Charles the first, and of this likewise, and who was one of those attended him
in his voyage to Scotland: A gentleman of an Excellent spirit, not easily to be
taxed with any thing, but a person of great integrity, and who for those many
years he lived amongst us was an exceeding help to our Church, by his constant
frequenting of Sermons, and all acts of Piety can be required of a man fearing
God; and who for my particular highly obliged me, not thinking me unworthy of
his conversation, nor the honor of his friendship. He in the privacy of our
most intimate communications, has a hundred times protested to me, that the
King of England in the bottom of his heart is of our Religion, and was assured
the Church of God would ackowledge him, and the time should come she would hold
him her most precious Ornament. It Is true, this Gentleman has his soul
transfixt with the love of his King, but I am certain he has a greater love to
Truth, and would not affirm a falsehood so constantly and with such affeveration
for all the Crowns on earth.

I know likewise what he appeared in this Town, which was one of his first
retreats after his defeat at Worcester, and that all his discourse with those
who had the honor to converse with him, came from a heart sanctified with the
truth of the Gospel. He spoke the very Language of Canaan, he reproved such as
murmured, with David he concealed his deplorable condition, Because 'twas God
that did it. To some pious persons, friends of mine he showed diverse excellent
prayers for his divine entertainments, accommodated to the present estate he
was reduced to. All his discourses were seasoned with nothing but faith,
humility, patience, and absolute resignation to the will of God, who thrones,
and dethrones Kings, as it pleases him, who girds them with the sword; but when
he pleases to manifest his judgments, cries over their Crown, Subversion,
Subversion. But by these discourses it appears, that he gathered great hopes of
unexpected recovery in the mercies of God; who, when he will, can raise with as
great celerity as throw down, and when he pleases changes our Deserts into
Carmel.

In a word, all that came near him, observed a great soul not to be dejected by
affliction, who with a spirit perfectly noble and Christian fustain'd himself
in God, to whom he resigned his person and all his interests, and, who with the
same devotion kissed the hand of God that came to take off his Crown with his
Fathers head, as hereafter he will kiss it again when he shall please to
restore it. Now Sir, it is not unknown to you, that none but the true Religion
gives this temper, and none but the pure Gold stands the trial of this test.
And as in Daniel, he who walked in the midst of the Furnace was known by his
gate to be the son of God; certainly he has little skill in men that could
not observe his carriage in these times of trial to be the carriage of a true
child of God, and say of him, Thou art a Galilean, for thy language shows it.

Afterward I am assured, he testified great affection to such Pastors as had
the honor to salute him in France, and by the Lady Isabella, daughter to the
Earl of Holland, when she took her leave of him at Amiens, he sent to me to
remember him in my prayers, which must not be attributed to any converse I have
had with this Prince; for I protest before God I never had any, that I never
saw, nor spoke to him, and that I have no engagement with him, neither real,
nor verbal, nor of personal hope, and though I wish him all happenesse
imaginable, I nevertheless expect not any thing from him, But I believe some
accidental occasion brought may name to his ear, and hearing I was Pastor of a
populous Church, he was pleased to testify by this obliging request, he was of
the same Communion with me.

Again, I know him to be as you and I wish him out of the attests of his own
Ministers, Doctor Cosins amongst the rest, a person venerable both for Doctrine
and Piety. And by the testimony of the Messieurs Breuins and Durel, both
eminent Pastors, really native subjects of the King of England, and who are
honored with a share in his favors. But I have so thorough a knowledge of
them, and so well know the candor and love they bear the Truth, which they
teach with such happy success; one with the Prince of Turenne, the other with
the Duke De la Force, that I admire with as great acquiescence as a thing I had
seen with my eyes, or touched with my hands, what they have oftentimes affirmed
to me, that the King of England is a Protestant, and of the best sort, and that
it is not merely secular interests engage him on this party; but that he is so
at the heart, and that he makes the Religion he professes his Treasure; of
which they could not well be ignorant, having attentively observed his ways
and carriage from his Infancy.

I suppose 'twill not be amiss to tell you, that of these two Gentlemen,
Breuins and Durel, the King has chosen the first for one of his Chaplains,
that is his Ministers in ordinary, by reason this choice confirms the proof,
we endeavor to make of the Kings Religion: and, since he made election of one
of the most zealous Professors of the Protestant Religion, most capable to
defend it, and show the beauty of it for one of the Directors of his
conscience, it is an evident testimony, he consents with him in Religion, and
will persevere under his example and conduct.

Which is likewise confirmed by what I learn from all parts that he frequented
o^r Sermons at Rochelie and other parts of France, but particularly at this
Town, where, with the Marquess of Ormond who attended him, without sitting
down he heard the Sermon of Mounsieur Jansse my Colleague, and told one to whom
he discovered himself, he had received greated fication. And it is observable he
came incognito to these Assemblies, and by consequence for no other reason then
Devotion. If he had been known to every one, and had come in a public way, out
of the violent inclination of his enemies to a sinister interpretation of this
unfortunate Princes actions, they would have said this was but a design, and
he did it to regain credit with his people; but since he was concealed, it is an
assured testimony, he had no other aim than his particular benefit.

Then the testimony of a Nobleman of note of the reformed Religion, that is
the Count of Suze is very considerable to me, I saw him lately, and entreated
him seriously to tell me what he thought of the King of Englands Religion, I
addressed my self to him for satisfaction herein, because he was diverse years
at Bruxels with Monsieur the Prince, whose cause he had espoused, and I knew
moreover that the King of England was often with the Prince, and that there was
a great familiarity betwixt them: The answer he made me was, but what I knew
before, that the King of England while he was at Bruxels made high profession
of our Religion, and that every Sunday he diligently was very careful to
celebrate the duties thereof in his lodgings, that to his knowledge his pulse
had been often felt, but he had made them understand, he was not that way to be
taken, and that he knew in whom he believed, and that his conscience was not
like lands unknown, at the mercy of the first comer. I acknowledge I make great
account of this testimony, because I know, he that gave it is a person of
integrity, that he was ever present at the divertisements of these two great
Princes, and in familiar conversations one may best discover a man, and know
his ways. I know again with what indignation he received the Earl of Bristol
not long after his revolt. This Lord is a person of a great wit and high
courage, but I leave it to himself to decide, if his conscience has walked in
as graceful a posture, as the other two faculties, and whether he find it
very tender in matters of Religion, I will think the best I may, and will not
despair, but God may recall him, and grant him mercy; but I should make a very
sinister Judgment, if he were such as he is charactered, for I have been told
he is a man can change Religion as his clothes, not always for the better, but
the more necessary and convenient. Howsoever it is, I understood when he went
hence, he addressed himself to the King, after his usual manner; but was much
amazed when the King sharply reprehended him for the scandal he had given, and
gave him to understand he was not pleased to see him in his train or family,
since he was not a domestic of the Faith.

I had almost forgotten one passage, that may assure you the King is sensible
of this Article of Religion: and that he is not satisfied to believe to
righteousness in his heart, but he will have the world to know him for what he
is, and that he will make Confession with the mouth to Salvation. You are not
unacquainted with la Milletiere, and the vanities of that person, some years
since, he had the boldness to address one of his works to the King of
England, wherein he discoursed with this Prince, as if there had been some
great intelligence betwixt them, and as if he had been upon the point to
revolt. But the King in indignation showed him the boldness of his enterprise,
the vanity of his hopes, and the impertinency of his reasons, by a learned
Treatise, he caused the Bishop of Londonderry to compose, since translated
into French by one of ours.

But Sir, after the History of the Duke of Gloucester, I suppose there can
remain no suspicion of this Prince his Religion, it may be you know the
particulars as well as I, but truly I had the relation from the mouth of
Monsieur Durel, who had it from the Governor of that little Prince.

Here then I shall deliver what I know. The Jesuits had a design to gain this
Prince, for which purpose they sound a way to have his Governor discharged. In
pursuance whereof they made many assaults upon his Religion; they showed him a
thousand glorious hopes, they promised him the most important dignities of the
Church should court him, assured him the Abbey of S. Dennis, the Archbishopric
of Rheims, and a Cardinal's cap. Briefly, these Gentlemen assured him he should
be so rich, he should be able to restore the King his brother to his throne;
but God assisted this Prince in an extraordinary manner, and for the reproach
of Christ, whom he took for his portion, he generously despised the treasures
of Egypt. Wherefore the Jesuits carried him from place to place, as the Devil
heretofore did our Lord to tempt him. First to Pontoise, to a seminary of
Jesuits, where God gave him grace to withstand strong assaults, and by the
strength of his spirit, wherewith he ever assisted this excellent Prince, who
was not then above ten or twelve years of age, he remained victorious over his
potent enemies, who now resolved to bring him back to Paris, like Balaam that
viewed the people of God on all sides, to find a prize for his charms. But
all this succeeded not, God every where protected this illustrious Infant, and
God gave him that wisdom from above, which the World cannot resist; and God
that permits not his to be tempted beyond their strength, delivered him from
temptation; for the King of England understanding by the banished Governor his
brothers condition, sent Marquess Ormond speedily to his relief, who took him
out of this dangerous way, by the Queens orders, who had the goodness to give
way to the pleasure of the King of England her son, and caused the Duke of
Gloucester to be remitted into the hands of the Marquess, who brought him back
to the King, since which time he has taken care for his education, and
confirmed him in the knowledge of the truth.

Can there, Sir, be any thing more strong and evident to assure you the King is
not only a Protestant by profession, but that he professes it with zeal, and
that he believes it the only way to salvation, since he was so tenderly
touched when he was informed they would pervert his brother? And if the
Religion of the King of England, had been no more then formality and
countenance, the advantage he might have hoped for in his brothers change might
have brought him to consent, since he might have pretended he had no hand in
it, and have said, that being so many leagues distant, though Kings have long
arms, he could not if he would stretch his so far to hinder his brothers fall.

But we are to make answer to what his enemies alleadg to prove the King of
England of the Roman Religion. 1. He was say they brought up with Charles the
late King his father who gave him the first seasoning. 2. While he was at Paris
he never came to a Sermon at Charenton. 3. He was seen in the Jesuits house at
Antwerp, At Paris and in other places, he was seen at Vespers: 4. Then they
make a great noise of this, that they of the Roman Church conceive great hopes
in the reestablishment of this Prince, and that the Jesuits and Monks boast
alowd they shall see the Popes authority flourish again, and Mass in more
credit in England then ever.

But Sir I suppose you believe that none but the weak and malicious will give
credit to such feeble reasons, whereof some are altogether false and
blasphemous, others conclude nothing they undertake, and the rest conclude
contrary to the intention of the alleadgers.

The first of these wicked Arguments which is the education of this Prince, in
the Roman Religion by the late King his father is the most notorious calumny
that ever was, which to falsehood couples Blasphemy against the Powers, St. Jude
and to falsehood, and blasphemy, barbarousnesse and cruelty beyond example. For
was there ever greater cruelty then not to be satisfied to have made King
Charles the most unfortunate Prince the earth ever bore, having taken from him,
by ways unheard of, and such as good people cannot think on without trembling
and horror, his Crown and life, but more to traduce him as the most depraved
and artificial hypocrite that ever lived. For they make him wear a vizard all
his life, to the hour of this death inclusively, which is notwithstanding an
hour when conscience makes the man speak truth in spite of himself, nor is
there paint which melts not, when conscience approaches the fire of the
Almighties wrath.

All the world knows King Charles protested before, that were present when he
renderd his soul to God, that he dyed of the Religion authorized by the laws of
England, nor is there any one dares deny a truth so universally attested. But
such ridiculous miscreants there are, who have impudence to say this
protestation was but a fiction, and suggested by the emissaries of the Pope.
That 'twas done for policy, and that the Popes Indulgencies allow so far. But
these impertinents tell not what was the politic end the Partisans of the Pope
aimed at, nor what advantage could redound to their religion, that the King of
England even dying should openly and firmly protest he was a protestant. But
admit such an odd dissimulation was maintaind for some reasons to us unknown,
who is it these people can persuade, that this Prince, who during his life, had
ever given testimony of his singular piety, should take pleasure to damn
himself by counterfeiting before God and man, to favor the Interests of the
Roman Religion.

I do not know that the Pope ever gave indulgence for sins to be committed.
Every one, nevertheless, knows the History of the great Bullisle Texel, the
first that published such sophisticated stuff in Germany. But I persuade my
self there is no one can authorize future Hypocrisy, and false Oaths, when we
stand so near the Throne of God; before whom we go to appear.

And though Rome should grant things of this nature, which I believe it does
not, is it credible he would confide and rely more upon the Pope, who calls
Bad, Good, and justifies so profane an hypocrisy, than on God who assigns
the portion of them, who take his name in vain, and of Liars, and Hypocrites,
to be in the lake of fire and Brimstone.

Sir, It Is then most evident the King of England lived and dyed a Protestant,
and by consequence the allegation is most impudent, to say, he imbued the King
his son in the Roman Faith.

The second objection they make to the Religion of this Prince is, that while
he was at Paris, he frequented not the Sermons. If they could say while he was
there he made no profession of his Religion, the accusation were of force and
considerable, but that no man dares pretend, for it is well known the King of
England had the exercises of his Religion, which is ours, in his Palace, and
there had the Word of God preached, and the Sacraments administered, after the
manner of Charenton. I should certainly have been glad he had been there; and
it is to be wished those, who were then about him, had brought him thither. So
great an example had brought joy and consolation to our Churches, and confusion
to our enemies, who thereby had been deprived of their most specious pretext to
abuse the Religion of this Prince.

But there is no honest man excuses not this failing, (permit me so to call it,
for so in effect I judge it, and I believe the edification might have been
given to the Church of God, ought to have carried him, beyond all reasons could
be alleged for doing as they did,) if they consider the many untoward
conjunctures that hindered those who attended the Prince from giving him the
advice I speak of, which certainly was and the most sure and safe.

It proceeded, Sir, from this, They who were next his person after his
disasters were of different humors. There were many, who though they favored
the Hierarchy settled in England, under the raigns of Edward, Elizabeth, and the
two Kings who succeeded: thought nevertheless that this distinction of degrees
in Ecclesiastical functions was a government so necessary to the Church of
England, that it might not be omitted, or changed into that they call the
Presbyterian, judging that this distinction of degrees in Ecclesiastical
functions is grounded only upon a positive Law. These are peaceable people
that heartily join with foreign Churches, who, though they live not after the
same discipline as they, yet agree in all other doctrine, and I know diverse
Bishops whom their books and repute testify to be of this temper: and they who
were the more rational and more knowing, could have been content the King
should have been at Charenton. But there were others near him more passionate
and rigid for the Hierarchicall Order, who, though they justified our Religion,
as to the Doctrine, could not allow of the Order. This sort of people are
Antipodes to the Presbyterians both of England and Scotland. Who hold they must
absolutely break with the Churches that consent to Hierarchical Order, and who
are governed by Bishops, and discover in this government something of pomp,
which they hold incompatible with the simplicity of the Christian Church.

The others on the contrary hold the Hierarchicall Order so necessary to the
Church, especially to that of England, they can endure no government but that,
and have difficulty to communicate in our Churches, though in matter of
Doctrine they acknowledge them Orthodox. Now of these was the greater number
about the Prince, who prevailed upon his spirit, and hindered his coming to the
preachings at Charenton, to which I have been told he had a great inclination.

But you may observe, if you please, two occasions whereof these Hierarchicall
Gentlemen made use to divert the intention of the King: the one was, that after
this horrid revolution of the affairs in England, both in Church and State; and
that Cromwell had invested himself in the Sovereign Authority, whereof he had
despoyl'd his Master, the Agents of this Usurper possessed at Charenton the
Seat of the Ambassadors of the Kings of England. And you will judge that since
the King our Sovereign admitted them in the function of their Commission near
his person, 'twas not for the Consistory, or any Protestant to dispute with
these people concerning the Seat they possessed at Charenton: Now the party I
speak of fayl'd not to take hold on this occasion, and told the Prince 'twere
imprudence to go where he should have the grief to see his enemies in the place
due to his Ambassadors. This reason touched the young King, and he was easily
persuaded, and I believe many others were guided by the same resentment. But
howsoever, it appears, the reason he came not to Charenton was not any aversion
to the Doctrine preached there, but because he could not resolve himself
against an object so provoking and horrid, and which he judged so injurious to
his Majesty.

The other occasion these Hierarchical Gent, made use of to divert the Kings
inclination from his design of giving testimony to our Churches of his
spiritual communion with us, was that the Pastors of the Church at Paris, who
assembled at Charenton, went not to visit him; whereupon they sailed not to
intimate to this Prince, that this was an evident proof of the aversion of
those Churches, both to him and his interests, since those of Paris, who make
the most considerable part, gave no testimony of any share in his affliction.
It Is true Sir, the Parisians did so, and possibly carried themselves in this
affair, quite after another manner than the other Churches of the Kingdom would
have done. I am nevertheless far from condemning them, they are persons that
fear God, and which honor the King, and all those that bear the same character
with the King of England, but they are both wise and prudent, and know there
are eyes upon them, and must therefore live with circumspect on^ they had
doubtless good reasons that made them think it best ^o forbear this duty: Other
Churches would have thought to have as strong grounds, to have done in this
business quite otherwise than they did at Paris. Nevertheless I am well assured
that amongst their reasons there was neither neglect nor indifferency, nor any
hardness of heart to partake in his distaster, much less any inclination for
his enemies, whose way with our other Churches they ever detested as outrageous
and tyrannical. But to come back to our Subject, you may well perceive, if the
King of England were not at the Church of Charenton, 'twas not that he
disclaimed our communion, nor any dislike of the Doctrine taught there, but
because there were those had incensed him against the Governors of that Church.

The third reason scarce deserves to be spoken of, they object, who was seen
with the Jesuits at Antwerp, and at Vespers at Paris, and it may be at other
places also, and therefore a Roman Catholic. Once his enemies said he was seen
at Mass, but that they had not the impudence to speak again: If that were true,
there were more color for the consequence, but yet no necessity neither; he
might for curiosity be there to see the diverse mysterious Ceremonies of the
Mass, and hear the Music used at certain solemnities, whereof there is so
much talk. I have known many strangers that have been present without bending
knee, and far enough from approving of it, and would have taken it for a very
great injury to have been concluded Papists, because they were at Mass: but
they find more favor than the King of Engl. for against him they have nothing
but that he was at the Jesuits house at Antwerp, and to have heard the Music
at Vespers, yet nevertheless they infer he is a Papist. As much as to say,
that which passes for indifferent with other men is a qualifyed crime in the
Prince. For all this, I do not approve the frequenting places of such
devotions: For to omit the visit of the Jesuits house at Antwerp, one of the
most sump uous structures of Europe, which in effect was but an innocent
curiosity, and without the least appearance of evil: I much blame those that
assist at Vespers, for they are defiled with Superstition, and there they sing
hymns in honor of the Virgin Mary, which I hold is to rest upon the Border of
the Couch of the strange woman, and to lead himself into temptation. I do not
certainly know if the King of England were there, but if 'twere so; I cannot
justify the action. The Prince had done more like a Christian if he had not
been there at all, and he ought not at all to apply his eyes and ears to such
Gauderies of Ornaments and Music as they honor their Images with, least he
should apply his heart, which I well know he Religiously reserves for God. But
again, far be it from me to conclude cruelly with his Enemies that he is a
Papist, because he was at Vespers, and I suppose you will judge it as
unreasonable as I.

Lastly they object that the whole world believes him to be a Roman Catholic,
and that the Jesuits promise themselves to be in London in the same credit,
and freedom, as they are now in Flanders, the Apogie of their domination. I am
acquainted with one Father Talbot a Jesuit, that not long since, made bonfires
in his heart, for the great prosperities he presaged (for he is an Astrologer)
the re-establishment of the King of England should bring to the Roman Catholic
Church: But is there any thing more frivolous then to square ones opinion and
belief by the discourse of people? that please themselves with these Idea's,
and make their desires pass for Prophesies, and receive whatsoever the
Jesuits affirm and profess to believe, for sincere verities. Every one knows
the tongue is not of the same use with them as with other men, and that they
keep it not to declare what they think, but to manage and cloak their designs,
who often aim at the mark they seem to turn their back to. And in effect,
Sir, I infer this in my judgment as a demonstration, because the Jesuits say
the King of England is a Roman Catholic, therefore he is none. For did they
believe him such, they would without doubt passionately wish the rains of the
state might be put into his hands, that they might reap, what they suppose they
have sown in this agreeable government, and would be cautious of doing or
saying any thing might obstruct his re-establishment: Now the world knows there
is nothing can so much deprave the affections of the better part of the
English, nor nothing so capable to ruin their design of re inthrowning him, as
the opinion they give them that he is a Papist, which nevertheless the
Jesuits do. If the Kings re-establishment were to be wrought by a foreign
strength of neighbour-Princes, to make an invasion on his dominions, and become
Master by force, the Jesuits discourse might pass for a real rejoicing, for
the advantage they might hope should come to their Religion, and their Society
in particular. But since they know it is the People, who of themselves must call
him back, if they had so great a desire the business should succeed, they
would be cautious how they broached any thing might pervert the affection of
the people into an aversion against their Prince.

Let us conclude, Sir, this Prince is no such person as the Jesuits report
him. That his reestablishment is not a thing they hope, but fear as a
thunderbolt, because they know if he be once restored, he will rectify those
disorders they have fomented, which push on their designs, and help them to
fish in troubled waters, as they have done hitherto, and that 'twill arrive
what the wise man observes, that a King that sits in the throne of judgment
seattereth away all evil with his eyes, and by consequence their ways, and all
they shall endeavor to introduce in his Kingdom.

And to set a period to this long discourse, as we conclude the King of England
is no Roman Catholic, because the Jesuits fear his re-establishment, being to
their design, what ever countenance they put on; conclude likewise with me,
that it is an irrefutable argument his is a real Protestant, since all the
Ministers of the Protestant Religion in all parts of Europe, who are persons
ignorant in the practice of equivocations, and speak as they think, pray for
his re-establishment with so much instance, because they look upon it as an act
of sovereign Justice, and a bud of infinite future benedictions, like the olive
branch brought by the Dove, as a token the deluge was passed, and God no longer
angry with his people. I profess, Sir. I am one of these, not for any
consideration of temporal prosperity may redound to the Church of God, for God
courts us not with any such hope, our great reward being with him in heaven and
were it to be hoped for on earth, I am now become like Bazillag the Gileadite,
I am to old to taste it. I beseech God to continue in me still the delight to
taste How good the Lord is to me and the consolation of the portion he has
bestowed upon me. Amen.

Continue to love him that is YOURS etc.

FINIS.

