An Answer to the Lamentation of Cheap Side Cross. Together with the Reasons
why so many do desire the downfall of it, and all such Popish Relics. Also
the downfall of Antichrist.

By Samuel Lovedeay.



London, Printed for T. A.

The Reasons why so many desire the downfall of Cheapside-Crosse, and all such
like Popish Relics.
FOrasmuch as some have undertaken to oppose (by word and deed) such as desired
the abolishing of al Images, more especially, that of Cheapside-crosse, showing
that it is an ornament to the City, and of antiquity, which reasons are of no
great consequence: We desire to give you some Reasons why we desire the
extirpation of it and all such like.

1. Because it is in its own nature a monument of Idolatry, and may suit well
with an idolatrous place, and may be compared to Dagon, spoken of in 1. Sam. 5.
and the beginning, which when the Arc came nere he fell down flat. Intimating
unto us that wheresoever the Ark of God comes all Idols and idolatry must be
done away: now we have great cause to hope that our Arc is coming home again
which the Philistin^s have so long kept from us, and therefore good reason dumb
idols should fall before him.

2. From Gods command in Exodus 20. twice repeated in that Chapter, aand flatly
forbidden, that we should not make any graven Image in the 23. verse of that
Chapter.

And in the 27. of Deutrinomy and the 15. verse, Therr is a curse pronounced
against him that should make any Image, and so in Exodus 32. How the wrath of
God broke out upon for this sin, and how he plagued them in the last verse them
of that Chapter.

A Third Reason may be drawn from the men that stand for them, upholding of
them in their lives and conversations, according to Gods Word, the world says
our Savior loves his own.

It is prone to our natures to desire a Visible God, we cannot endure to serve
a God invisible. Therefore we may be easily drawn to Idolatry.

The fourth Reason may be drawn from the unsutablenes of them to this City, a
place of so much preaching of Gods Word. If Solomon describes the attire of an
Harlot to be answerable to her person, why not the attire of Idolatry to
Idolatrous places, and of Paul in the 5. to the Phillippians, Said, have not
covetousness nor fornication once named among them as become Saints, then let
not the least thought of Popery be seen among us as becomes Protestants.

The fifth reason is drawn from our National Protestation, We desire it may
be abollished, otherwise we shall be gu^lty of breaches of Covenant, if we do
not endeavor to suppress and also to abandon all Popery and Popish Innovaons.

The sixth Reason may be drawn from the evil consequence of its still continuing
both to our selves and others,

First to our selves, it will be smoke to our eyes, and thorns in our
consciences, while they remain amongst us, it will also scandalize our pure
profession of Religion.

Secondly prejudicial to others, it will be an occasion to keep them from
coming in to look for Christ in an invisible way so long as they see him in a
visible, it is credibly reported that some have been sent to worship that
Cross.

Therefore you that plead for it, your grounds cannot be good, it is a fitter
ornament for Rome or some such place (I mean whilst the Image and Cross
remain on it) then for this City. All which had their aims and originals from
Rome, all Crossings and such like, they may stand with a non-Reformid Nation.
Yet I do not say that it is so fit for every one to pull them down, but them
them in authority as thanks be to God the Parliament have took it into
consideration, and commanded that all in Churches should down, and so now also
the rest, for which happy Parliament let our prayers and praises be continued
to God always.

Yours. Samuel Loveday.

An answer to the Lamentation of Cheap Side Cross.
OLD Iaspar Cross of late was wronged,
As I did hear one say,
A base affront to him was gi'n
Upon the Kings high way.
For which his friends do much lament,
They writ a doleful Theme,
It grieves them much they cannot find
Who did this hurt to him.
They blame the Brownists and such like,
That did him so abuse,
But sure I think they cannot tell,
However they may muse.
Yet some they free, which I mistrust,
To be his mortal foes,
Their names I need not now relate,
You know them by their clothes.
But chiefly by their linen sleeves,
Which thing does make me muse,
That they should go in tire so like
To that which Gregory use.
But you may know them by their works,
As well as by their clothes:
If ears they lack you may conclude,
The Bishop were his foes.
But Iaspers grief is for his nose,
His leg and eke his arm:
As for his Ears, he says nothing
He thinks they had no harm.
But one thing grieves his lovers well,
Which thing I must not keep:
The deed was done as they suppose,
When he was fast asleep.
For had he been awake, it is sure
His strength was not so small,
That he should suffer such abuse,
And not for help to call.
A Coward sure he must not be,
That is for your disgrace:
Who are his friends and take his part
Against his enemies face.
But pray call back, the person that
Did act this Tragedy,
No blood he shed in all he did,
There is no cause to fly.
Old Charing-Crosse has lost its head,
And so't may be your fear,
That Iaspers noddle would be gone
But for the watch-mans care.
His case is bad, but to conclude,
If Jasper for me send,
When he assaulted is again,
No help to him I Will lend.
Because of that which here I add,
To aggravate your fears,
Such lamentation was not heard
When Good-men lost their ears.
The Doctors Judgment upon his Disease.
THE aforesaid Jasper having sufferd much by loss of his Members from his
body, your delays of relief have proved very prejudicial to his health: for
being (as I suppose put into a heat by that sudden encounter, and then being
exposed to the violence of the weather, and a cold piercing into his body
through the open Pores, and not bleeding currantly, I fear it festers
inwardly, whereby many radical humors are congealed therein, that in respect
of his age, his disease (occasioned by their delays, and obnoxious) will prove
very desperately uncutable, without one medicine can be procured to apply to
him, and that is a Parliamentarie Plaster, as a preservative of his life. You
do well to watch with him and pray to him, and comfort him as well is you can.
Only use such medicines as may preserve his present life: for as yet the
obstructions cannot be removed: if you please you may give him a vomit, and
apply a plaster to his sores.

The downfall of Antichrist.
Dear Christians, unto whom I write these lines,
I doubt not much but that these are the times,
When Antichrist, according to the Scripture,
Must yield himself to Jesus Christ his Scepture:
Though he long time has sat in Regal Throne,
Judging the earth, as none but him alone.
Yet now he must be made to lick the dust,
That always has so terrified the just.
His Kingdom now we see does much decline,
The downfall of the Bishops is a sign,
Though they did plot, as they will till they live,
Yet nothing hitherto we see does thrive.
The Lord does fool them like Achitophel,
That never yet these men could have their will.
Therefore we now must needs confess and say,
The Romish Kingdom greatly does decay.
But this you say is hard for to believe,
Because in Ireland he the Saints does grieve,
Exposing them to death and cruel pain,
And they not able for to turn again;
But there they lie imbrued in their blood,
Which does the adverse part, we know much good.
Yet unto them this eager thirst of blood,
Can be a sign of but a little good.
It is a sign they poisoned were before,
Which to their hurt does make them drink the more,
When they were in their greatest height of pride,
The Lord from heaven will their work deride,
And strike them, as he did King Pharaoh't host,
That they shall go but slow, that now so post.
The Lord to England has been good always,
But most of all in these our latter days,
By calling first so good a Parliament,
Which still the foes so much does circumvent,
The Papishes have labored might and maine
To cut them off but all was but in vain.
The prayers of the Saints have so prevailed,
That hitherto we see they have not quail'd,
Yet let not England think their sins are less,
Than Irelands sins, because of their distress:
For then the Lord may justly make us know,
That we deserve as much, though he be slow.
FINIS.

