GALLICANTVS, SEU PRAECURSOR GALLICINII PRIMUS.

Containing two ADDRESSES, The one to the KING, the other to the PARLIAMENT.

Tegether with a POSCRIPT ABOUT The affairs of RELIGION, of most high
Concernment.

By R. Lanceter, Author of GALLICINIVM, now in the Press.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ranew, at the sign of the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

An humble Address and Supplication to the Kings most excellent Majesty,
Charles the Second, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Blessed be God even the Father, who only does great wonders, that he has so
wonderfully brought and established your Majesty in your just Rights, and
Sovereignty: The some Lord bless preserve, and guide your Majesty, in this
great and high Calling, and Charge, whereinto he has brought and settled you:
And withal, advance your Throne into the high calling of God in Jesus Christ,
that you may be truly and completely glorious, both in the Father, and in the
Son.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God to train you up long in the School of
affliction and (no doubt) to fit you thereby for some special and
extraordinary work of his; as it has been his usual way toward such as he
has designed for the most gracious archievments And accordingly has
abundantly manifested the power of his grace upon your Royal heart, by those
many signal testimonies thereof already shown forth: whereat all your good
subjects exceedingly rejoice and praise the Lord. That it may appear that as
your Majesty has set your heart toward God, so himself has set his heart
toward you, to advance your Throne above all the Kings of the Earth, and above
all that ever were before you; You may please to see the evidence hereof in
what the Lord is pleased here to present you with. Wherein your Majesty
becoming highly isntrumental, if it be found to be truly of God, never was
King, or Potentate on earth called as yet to that place of eminency with God,
as is your Majesty hereby.

It has pleased the Lord Almighty, who has ordained the times and seasons for
the bringing to pass his mighty Works, and for the discovery of the hidden
things of darkness, to exercise your humble Suppliant, Subject and Servant, in
the reluctance with that darkness, all the time that he exercised your Majesty
with afflictions. And now upon your deliverance out of them, to have also given
him a release from those chains of darkness, so far as to present your
Majesty with that light, into which he has escaped The summary tender whereof
is under these three heads.

1. That it is not possible, that either at present, or in former times, for
many hundreds of yours, either we, or any other Nation, called Christian, or
any other Nation or Party in the World, can be the Church of Christ and people
of God, or in way of salvation; but absolutely either Antichristianly or
Diabolically in state of wrath and damnation. 2. That it is not possible that
any, or all the ways that men do, or can devise, to state and settle Religion
and the Church, in the wisdom that they act in, can ever do it aright, and
make the case better then it is; but in all likelihood to render all still
worse, and more Antichristian. 3. That yet there is a way, not new, but laid of
old by Christ, wherein the Primitive Apostolical Church constantly walked, but
ever since utterly lost in the World, as to a Church Way, such a way as is most
clear, easy, undeniable, which all the World will grant (if once they see it)
to be the truth of God, the only way to make all Churches, Churches of Saints,
and all people to live blessedly, an happy people both here and hereafter.
This the Lord has reserved to be manifested in your days, and your self for
such a time; and commends the same to your Royal care, for the advancement
of his glory in the Son, and of your Majesty's Throne in both.

I am not mad, or a Fanatic, but I speak the words of truth, and soberness. I
have been in the Ministerial Calling about thirty years, in your County of
Norfolk. I have lived to see, and with much reluctance and grapling with, have
passed through the calaminities of these times, especially the distractions,
and monstrous emergencies in the notion, way, and pretense of Religion. I have
been ever formerly conformable in all things, both as to Doctrine and
Discipline, as an obedient son of the Church of England. And during these
times, while the truth of Christ was more and more obseured by the devices of
men, I have given my self into all my utmost endeavor, to clear up the saving
truth unto my own soul, and consequently to the consciences of all others,
especially of my Charge. In this my search and incessant study, finding my
self more and more confounded, and the truth hidden from me in the abundance
of the rubbish of man's wit and devices cast upon it: It pleased God to recall
me from the wisdom of men to that of himself in his word, and to cast my
self upon the pure discovery of truth in those heavenly Oracles: which being
the way of his own Ordinance, it pleased the Lord to meet me therein, and by
revealing his Son in and unto me, to vouchsafe me, in the knowledge of him, that
light of truth, which is not possible to be found in all the works of men
whatsoever. And being convinced by the clearness thereof, and also by
imparting the same to others of best judgment and piety, that it was indeed the
only saving truth, but yet wholly unknown, and quite cross to the opinion and
way of the World; I thought it my duty, and thereunto, also I discerned my
self especially called, to publish the same to the World, as being of the
highest concernment unto all that possibly can be imagined, both for this life
and for that to come.

Now, may it please your Majesty, hence is my present Address and Supplication
unto you in the first place. 1. For that intending the Dedication of this Work
to your Majesty, it being so high an undertaking, might be too bold a daring to
presix your name thereto without your good liking and consent. 2. For that
understanding that your Majesty, together with your high Court of Parliament
are setting your eyes to the affairs of Religion, and that to the settlement
thereof in such a way as I cannot in conscience close with; therefore I thought
it better to appear beforehand in the case (possibly some good may come
thereby) then to be found an apposer of authority afterward. 3. For that
considering that the things which I come forth with are of the highest
concernment that ever came forth, even the same with those of Christ and his
Apostles, which the World has so long lost, and have the like need of again,
and consequently of especial concernment unto your Majesty in many regards,
both respecting God, your place, and people: necessary it is that my Address be
first to your Majesty, and thereto that I am especially called of God, I can
give evidence of sufficiently.

The whole drift of this my humble Address and Supplication to your Majesty
is, only to vouchsafe unto your humble Suppliant an hearing, trial, and
examination to the utmost. And if I be found an Imposter, a Deceiver, or one
deceived, accordingly to receive punishment, and a reclaiming from error. But
if in the truth, then to close with it as from God from on high visiting us, in
order to fulfill his promises unto the last. Ages.

The Lord Almighty confirm and establish your royal heart more and more in all
goodness, and give you the light of the knowledge of his glory, in the face of
Jesus Christ.

An humble Address unto the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
To the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone, Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons in Parliament.
SIR,
THat it has pleased God to bring home, and restore unto his Kingdoms and
Rights our gracious King, and that in so peaceable a way of settling the
Legislative power in the ancient course of King, Lords, and Commons in
Parliament; and that the care is undertaken therein for Religion, and the
Church, as well as for Laws, and the Commonwealth, I do heartily rejoice and
bless the Lord for it, and that I have lived to see the day: and accordingly
my constant and earnest prayers are for his grace and blessing, to guide and
crown all your righteous sanctions, that there may be a sweet concurrence and
continuance of your joint endeavors herein, to the settlement of all things in
a blessed way. And thenceforth his Majesty to reign over us most happily, unto
the utmost date of the life of man.

I do, withal, acknowledge and profess, that I am conscientiously persuaded,
that the power of Parliaments, as thus in complete concurrence of the three
Estates, is absolute, and illimitable, as to all things in order to the best
provision for the good of the people, the government of the State, and
whatsoever is within the circle of man's wisdom and power. But as to Religion,
it not being of man but of God, the wisdom and will of the highest powers on
earth, must of necessity be regulated, and determined by the declared will and
wisdom of God.

I do further acknowledge an abundant rejoicing in my heart, in that I am so
warrantably apprehensive that your hearts are toward Religion, and the
settlement thereof in the first place; it being not only right and due, as
being of the highest concernment, but also as in true Christian prudence to
precede, in regard that thence indeed have you the true light into all other
provision of Laws. But (withal) I profess, that what at present I see and
find, and what for future is the expectation of the general part (which ever
incline to the worst, even the will and liking of the flesh) about the
Religion, worship, and discipline, in all likelihood to be established and
imposed on all by the present authority, even the same which was before these
late Wars, and which most mainely occasioned them, I must, I say, and may
profess and declare, by warrant of his Majesty's gracious Declaration for
liberty to tender consciences, that all will be no other but plain and gross
Antichristianisme, not to be endured by any that sets his heart unto the
truth of Christ. In regard whereof I hold it better to declare my self
aforehand, to divert (if it may be) such Antichristian intrusions, then to
oppose the way of authority when their sanctions come abroad, by being put upon
that which the Apostles were forced to say, Acts 4.19. Whether it be right in
the sight of God, to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye.

We find it most true which Christ foretold, that that Generation should not
pass till all things were fulfilled, Mat. 24.34. For as in those times the
Scribes, Pharisees, and other the Jewish Grandees, exalted their own wisdom
above the wisdom of God, to correct, moderate, and change, the Laws and
Ordinances of God, as they thought best; yea, to reject the Commandments of
God, to establish their own tradit ons: Just such is the generation of men to
this present day; what arrogant affronts and despite have they done to that
wisdom of God, yea his highest wisdom in Christ? yea most proudly and
disdainfully to the height of all impudence they say, That the Church was but
in its infancy, as it was stated by Christ and his Apostles; but that the
better wits and wisdom of men have brought it now to a more perfect and
complete condition. And all merely by scornefully casting by the way of Christ
to establish their own inventions. So that I may considently say, that there
is no one thing in all Religion, Ordinances, Worship, and Discipline, remain
entire, and o^ true Christian use and efficacy, as Christ has commended and
committed them unto us. A dreadful case! And yet to see the horrible
blindness of men, and hardness of heart, that when they see and confess that
all is wrong and out of course, yet they cannot have an heart and thought to
look back to the rule of Christ, to redintegrate all things by that infallible
rule, but wholly to look to the ways of man's wisdom, what was in these
latter days, what wise men have thought suiting best to the State, and to the
humors, likings, and acceptance of people; what is gallant and specious in and
unto the eyes anb ears of men, wholly indulging the will of the flesh being no
other but the turning ^he grace of our Lord into wantonness, and utterly
denying the Lord Jesus Christ. This is all the Religion among us, and all that
can be hoped for, so long as men will act in their own wisdoms; quite without
Christ, merely Antichristian, and delusive to utter damnation.

The cause then of this dreadful estate of the Church (so called) and of
Religin amongst us being merely from hence, because that charge of Christ (and
the like) has been cast by, namely. To call none Father or Master upon earth
but God and Christ, but men have done quite the contrary: Therefore it ever
there be an heart to settle Religion aright, of necessity it is to set by all
our other Masters, and turn wholly to the teaching and rule of Christ, the
alone heavenly wisdom of God. And as himself usually said on such occasions,
Quid fuit ab initio? so must it now be. If we look to what was done by our
Fathers, or in their days it may be well applied unto us what is, Job 8.9. We
are but of yesterday, and know nothing: Sure we are, that in order to the
Jewish traditions, and innovations about the Law, Christ fell directly upon
this alone remedy, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall
be rooted up; He says not, they must be well considered of, and see what is
sit, and good, and cast by the rest, but he is for plucking up all, root and
branch. So say I, As the Father planted the Law, so Christ the Gospel;
therefore every plant that he has not planted, never consider what wise men
thought of it, how it sits the state, how it stands with prudence etc. but
without the least question or dispute, Pluck it up, it is of Hell, Antichrist,
etc. Is there nothing worth regarding, think we, in these and such like
passages of Christ, and of his blessed spirit, That God has hid the things of
Heaven from the wise and prudent: That whatsoever is highly esteemed of men is
abomination in the sight of God: That the wisdom of the World is foolishness
with God: That God knows the thoughts of men that they are but vain: And
that all the imaginations of man's heart are wholly evils, and that continually;
and abundance the like. And yet shall we, professing Christ, account all these
as nothing? not considering how he says, Heaven and Earth should pass away,
but not one word of his should fail And yet (I say) shall we turn from all the
wisdom of Christ, into the accursed wisdom of men, and into all of man's
liking and esteem? how abominable and dreadful is this? Is it not that ^eigne
and delusion of Antichrist unto damnation whereunto the latter ages were to be
adjudged and accursed? and which we all confess, that for many hundred of
years the Christian World lay inthralled? And most sure it is, that even as
damnably as ever, therein it abides still. Were I to speak to Heathens and
Insidels, these passage, were in vain; but seeing it is to Christians that I
speak, for Gods sake let our Lord Christ be the common Master to us all.

The drift of all this my humble address is. That seeing the Lord has so
happily called you together, and begun a good work by you of highest hopes and
expectation; and accordingly have set your hearts to a blessed settlement of
all things, both in Church and Commonwealth; that you would be pleased to
turn your hearts into the right way for the attainment unto your right
intended ends: for else they can never be accomplished. Look not (therefore)
what was of yesterday, what was in our Fathers times, what stand with Policies
of State, with the liking and acceptance of men, etc. set by all, and look
wholly to the Lord Jesus Christ, the author, and finisher of our Faith. Remember
(I pray You) that Christ laid the foundation of all Christianity in self
denial; even of all our wills, wisdoms, likeings, endearements, and all that
man does, or can give his heart unto. Without which, as nothing of truth can
possible appear, so, be assured, that in so doing all truth is before you, even
that holy unction whereby we know all things. Which the Lord is about to tender
unto you, if so denying self, you make way for that Grace of God.

In a word, be it considered that if in the very Apostles times, men had so
carnalized the truth of Christ, and apostatized from it, as the Apostle was
said to pluck them off wholly from all their religion then in esteem, and to
contend earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints; Jude.
3.4 Much rather may I now press the same, when far^e more into Wantonness,
and Carnalisme the whole frame of Religion is carried. Even to spare it in
nothing to please men with, but to Pluck up every plant whatsoever, that God
and the Lord Jesus Christ has not planted; and so to contend earnestly for
that Faith alone which was once delivered to the Saints, from the mouth of
Christ and his holy Apostles: Damning all the rest to the pit whence it came;
and the rather, by how much the more the carnal mind is besotted, and made
drunk with that Whoorish cup.

And thus I humbly take leave in the words of David on the like occasion, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise, and be doing, and the Lord be with you.

The Postscript.
THat which our Blessed Savior expresses, Mat. 5.15. Noman having lighted a
candle puts it under a vessel, but on a candlestick, that all may see it,
etc. intimating, that when God inlighteneth any it must not be concealed, but
set forth to open view, for a light unto others: This the Apostles found, and
expressed the power of Act. 4.20. We cannot but speak the things which we have
heard, and seen. This charge I sind imposed, and pressed strongly on my heart,
and Conscience, as to the power of that light which the Lord has been pleased
to vouchsafe me. Therefore having in the first place made my address unto the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, then unto his high Court of Parliament in some
general things, which will infer abundance more of special discoveries, I
cannot forbear the holding forth of the same light unto all others, as
previous to the discovery of far more. The things therein already declared
are of the highest nature, and greatest concernment that may be; which all
persons, especially that profess and hope in Christ, must nearly lay to heart.
The two former of which are in the address unto his Majesty, namely. 1. How
we are no Church of Christ, etc. But merely of Antichrist. 2. How it is not
possible that we can be set right in and by the way wherein it is sought, and
endeavored. Then. 3. In the address unto the Parliament is showed the reason
of both, namely, for that men have turned, and still do turn out from the
wisdom of God into their own: Then follows a 4th. of special moment,
expressed in both addresses. Which is, That there is a true, clear, and
perfect way laid forth by Christ, and his Apostles, and practiced then of all,
which wholly turning unto is the only blessed way; but otherwise, all is under
the curse and wrath of God.

To bear witness unto these truths, and many more to follow, am I now come up
unto the head City of my Nation, in a fit and due season, the Lord grant it
may be found a good and acceptable time. In which enterprise (and that not
without the Lord) I may justly use the Apostles words, Act. 20.22, 23, 24. And
now behold I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that
shall befall me there; Save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City,
saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me,
netheir count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my Course
with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God. The same measure I expect, and blessed be my
Lord and Savior who has vouchsafed me for a long time to drink of his own
cup. It is not posible but that his word shall abide in force, till this World
be no more it self. And has he not said, Ye shall be hated of all men for my
names sake: In this World ye shall have tribulation. New wine cannot be
endured in old bottles; and many the like. Much there is in that, Luke: 5.39.
No man having drunk old Wine straightway desires new: for he says, The old
is better. Surely if then it was so, much more it will now be found so, when
men have so long, and so deeply drunk of the cup of Babilons fornication, as
they are even dead-drunke with it.

As I said, so I say again, To bear witness unto the truths of Christ am I
here come up, and offer my self to all for the desence of. The least call
shall bring me forth to give appearance unto all, or any. Only this one thing
must be premonished. All that I can possibly deal with must be Self-denyers.
Namely. 1. As to the World, if they chose their portion on this side Jordan,
and be of the mind of that Chancellor of Paris, who boasted that he would not
change his place in Paris for his place in Paradise; such are dease addars,
stoping their ears, and hardening their hearts against all heavenly working. 2.
As to the Flesh, if their God be their Belly, and their lusts possess their
hearts, the belly has no ears, it is no dealing with them. 3. As to the Devil,
if they swell in pride; and abide in the gall of bitterness, they must needs
be so fast bound in the bands of iniquity, as they can never attain to judge
and discern the truth. But if they will learn of Christ to be meek and lowly
in heart, and give themselves out of the will and wisdom of the flesh, into
the will and wisdom of Goal, they shall easily learn of the word and doctrine
which I profess, that it is not mine, but of God, even of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

FINIS.
GALLICANTVS, SEU Praecursor Gallicinij primus.

CONTAINING The making good of those four dreadful Proposals laid down in
Gallicantu Primo.

I. That it is not possible that we, or any other Nation in the world, can be
the Church of Christ; but on the contrary, either Antichristianly, or
Diabolically in state of Damnation.

II. That it is not possible that all the wit and wisdom of men in the way
that they endeavor Reformation in, can make the Estate better, but rather
worse.

III. That yet there is a way, and that of old laid down by Christ, to render
all Congregations, Parishes, and Societies of People, Churches of Christ, and
all as formerly, Churches of Saints, in a blessed condition both here and
hereafter.

IV. That to bring this about, and settle it in the world, there must be an
utter plucking up of all that is now in esteem and desire in the world, and of
all that have such in the world, for many hundreds of years, and all things to
become new.

By the same AUTHOR.

Dirigente Deo.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ranew, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
sign of the Angel in Paul 's Churchyard, 1660.

THE Preface to these Proposals.
THE three former of these are expressed fully in the Address unto the Kings
Majesty; and the fourth is the main of the Address unto the Parliament, as is
to be seen at large in Callicantu primo. A more then Giant-like attempt (it may
seem) to adventure on such high Enterprises: But what cannot weakness it self
do in the strength of God, whose Power is best seen therein, and in the Light
of Christ, which enableth to go on boldly? All that I desire of my Reader, is
this, That as my heart is, and must be set in the utter denial of Self, even of
all in me, that God may do all; So also, That my Reader would set his heart in
the like frame in the perusal of all, even to set his heart at liberty out of
his self-wisdom, to yield himself into the wisdom of God, else he will see
nothing, but be more and more blinded and hardened; For God resists the
proud, but gives Grace to the humble. This premised, I fall upon the
pertieular Proposals: The Lord be my Guide therein, into the Truth.

GALLICANTVS, SEU Praecursor Gallicinij PRIMUS.
1. PROPOSAL. That it is not possible that we, or any other Nation in the
World, can be the CHURCH of CHRIST; But on the contrary, either
Antichristianly, or Diabolically in state of Damnation.
FIrst, For the clearing of this dreadful Proposal, be it considered: First,
That I understand by Church as all others do, that it is the company of those
that are called in; and by Christ, out of the estate of Damnation, into the
estate of Salvation; but withal, That this call is not only given, but also
received and yielded up into. So as the Church are those people that yield up
themselves into that call of Christ, and no other, else all the World must be
the Church of Christ; For as it is said in Scripture, The sound (namely, of the
Gospel) is gone out into all Lands.

Secondly; Be it considered, That the Church of Christ is to be looked upon
according to that distinction which Christ himself makes of them, namely, as
scattered sheep, and as folded sheep, or gathered into his Fold. The former are
such persons in particular, as in all Ages have become the sheep of Christ by
the Lamb like Birth, and so are given into the Call of Christ; So becoming, and
living as Christ sheep, and members of his Church, but yet as scattered, and
not brought into the way, and exercise of the Church of Christ, as he has
instituted in his Gospel: A Church thus stated, is never wholly wanting in the
world to Christ; but yet not properly and completely to be called his Church,
as being not embodied in order to the way and exercise instituted for his
Churches walking in Communion. The latter are such persons as being so called,
give forth themselves also to be imbodied in a Society unto the exercise of the
Church Way and Rule of Christ, so as to have their conversation in Heaven, (as
the Scripture terms it) in mutual converse one with another, and toward all,
in doing good, flowing forth in love and good works. This is properly called
the Church, and their estate even here in Grace, is often called the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Now thus the Church properly stated, must be further considered, either as
coming short of the glory of God and of Christ, or else as coming up into it
sincerely. The former sort are those who rest and stay themselves both in
Doctrine, Practice, and Discipline in a way short of the fruits thereof unto
eternal life. The latter are those who by bringing forth much fruit, glorify
God, even the Father, and are truly the Disciples of Christ, Joh. 15.8. Of the
former sort there may be many Parties and Professions of people in the world;
and some coming nearer to the glory of God then others. But these not truly to
be accounted Christ's sheep or members. Only the last are his true Church of
saved ones; and of them is this Proposal meant.

Thus having cleared the Proposal, I come to the proof of it, wherein first
let the case be considered from what all men professing Christ do acknowledge;
namely, 1. That there was a true and pure Church in the time of the Apostles,
and a good while after, so long as it abode in the Apostolical Rule and Way: 2.
That there was to be a falling away from that Rule and Way of true
Christianity, and that to be universally and damnably, as the Scriptures
declare fully and clearly: 3. That this falling away into the estate of
damnation, took beginning even in the Apostles times, as to some persons, which
afterward became a general Apostasy from the Faith; under which Apostasy the
Christian World (so called) was to abide 1260 years. 4. All Christians holding
and believing all the former things, and the Protestant Divines holding the
latter, do withal declare and maintain, that for about 1100. years before the
Reformation, the Christian World was generally in the Antichristian Apostasy;
hence then it must needs follow, that there still remains after the Reformation
began by Luther, about 160. years of Antichrists Reign, which must of necessity
comprehend all the time since, unto this day. Thus far the truth of the case is
born out by all that profess belief in the Scripture Prophesies, especially by
all Protestant Divines and Churches.

Secondly, Be it considered from what is further acknowledged, namely, That the
true Christian, Apostolical, Primitive Church, was and is called the pure
Church, for that it abode in the truth and sincerity of the Gospel; in its
naked pureness and spiritual clearness, living and walking in the new nature,
etc. But in the aftertimes, and so to this day, the Church framed it self into
an Artificial Garb and Structure, both in Doctrine, and in Worship, Ordinances
and Discipline, wherein it boasts it self of its Liberty and Power so to add
and change, as to become quite another to what it had been; alleging, That
then it was in its Infancy, naked, bare, unpollish'd, stint^sh, etc. But now is
become adult, of perfect maturity, beauteous, adorned, splendid, and in far
more complete accomplishments. Hence it must needs follow, That if the Church
Primitive were truly Christ's, and represented by the Woman clothed with the
Sun, the nakedness and clarity of Truth, Rev. 12. Then the other must be that
of Antichrist, and represented by the gorgeous Whore arrayed with earthly Pomp
and Gallantry, Lies and Vanity, Rev. 17. and 18. Which if as Babylon the Mother
of Horlots, is signified the Romish Church, then all other Churches bred out of
her (as all ours are) are no other then her Daughter-Harlots. If it be
objected, That all the Artifices, Additions, and Changes brought into the
Church, are but Circumstantial, tending to order and decency, and so alter not
the Nature and Essence of the Church. I answer, it is quite otherwise, those
Artifices have utterly mixed Christianity, even as much as Adams fall ruined
all mankind; the case is even the same, as may and will be manifested in
season, it being the utmost height of that despoyling of all, and destroying of
all Religion, which is spoken of Jude 4. and in many other places of Scripture.

Thirdly, Be it considered what is yet further acknowledged, that the Scripture
fore-speaking of the most accursed Estate of people in the last times, beyond
all others before, as no times to have been under such horrid Apostasy and
Cursednesse as those, and that all confess that these are those times; do also
declare that this condition should be universal, and in that estate men's hearts
to be so shut up, blinded, and hardened, as no working upon them should win
them out of it, being given over to so strong delusion, to believe a lie to
their utter damnation; such a delusion as to rest in a form of godliness, and
utterly to deny and turn away its Po^er; such a besottednesse in a carnal
selfpleasing Religion, as to lie drunk in it; and abundance of the like
dreadful expressions, and fore-speakings of the state of the last times. And
withal, that there should be no release and deliverance out of this woeful
estate, until the brightness of Christ dissolve and break those chains of
darkness, save only from some palpable enormities toward the end of the
Reign of Antichrist; which brightness of Christ having not yet appeared, needs
it must be that Antichrist still abides in life, power, and all his
essentials, even where much of his outward parts have been consumed among the
reformed. These things, and many more, discovered at large in Gallicinium, may
well startle and affright us. For surely, were there such Churches, and so many
precious people, yea and National Churches, as we dream of, these things could
not be, nor ever have been uttered by the Word of truth.

Fourthly, Be it considered from the clear and unquestionable evidence of the
case it self, which all men must acknowledge, and cannot possibly clude when it
be set before them. And herein,

1. Consider wherein consists the true nature and essential proprieties of the
true Church, as it stood and abode in the Apostolical and Primitive times, was
it not in the new Man, the Lord Jesus Christ in spirit and power formed in
their hearts, according to his proper Nature and Office; which Nature is Love;
and his Office is to bruise the Serpents head; that is, the Lusts, which are
the Kingdom and Power of the Devil in man; and so to restore man unto that
estate in the Image of God wherein he was first created, that so living and
walking in love, the good works flowing from thene, to be the fruits unto
eternal life; so being in the life of God, and acting God's part and work in
the world, to be ever wel-pleasing and acceptable to God, himself so becoming a
Temple and Kingdom of God, and of Heaven. Is not this to be truly a Christian?
and this course and conversation the way of the Church, and the conversation in
heaven? And did not the Primitive Church thus live? thus walk? Was not herein
their Church Way, Church-Rule, and all that denominated them truly Christian?
See at their first conversion, Act. 2. and 4. how Christ and Christianity
manifested it self purely in their out-flowing, self-denying Love; so in all
their Life, Conversation, Exercise, and whole Demeanure among the Heathen. Was
not the essential Character of their Religion and Grace, merely Love, whence
flowed all Virtue, Goodness, Holiness, etc? So as it became the allsufficient
Note and Character whereby to be known to be the Disciples of Christ, as
himself declared, Joh. 13.34. But now bring we our Church, and all Churches
now, and of long time called Christian, and see if any such character, note,
and evidence can be found: So as indeed it is utterly unknown, shut up in a
Mystery, making good that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.19. The love of Christ
passes knowledge. Sure it is, and Gallicinium will make it evident, that both
we, and all other Churches (so called) are far from the true Church of Christ,
even the pure Church of old, as Hell is from Heaven.

2. Consider wherein consists the true Nature and Essential Proprieties of
Antichrist and his Church, into which the Church (so called) did degenerate. Is
it not quite opposite to all of Christ and his Church, and that also even in
the place and pretense of Christ? So that as Christ's Office and Work in the
way of his Religion and Ordinances, is to turn men's hearts out of their Lusts,
which are the Kingdom of the Devil into the true Love, which is the Kingdom of
God: So Antichrists work and office from the Devil, is to turn all that Grace
of God into wantonness, to render all Christ's Ordinances, and the whole frame
of Religion a self-pleasing thing, suiting and sitting the car^al mind, which
is enmity against God, advancing the World, Flesh, and Devil, in all the things
of Christ and of Heaven, the healing the Beasts Head wounded by Christ unto the
death, etc. So as wholly the work of Christ became frustrated, and men in the
profession of Christianity, and backed and born out thereby, live no otherwise,
but indeed rather worse then Heathen, mere natural men, all in their own lusts
and likings: Was not this the way of Antichrist's Church in former times?
Whence arose all their Innovations, Traditions, Idolatries, Superstitions, and
innumerable abuses in Religion, beside the abundance of Heresies, Schisms,
Controversies, and also of Vice and ungodliness, not known among the Churches
of Saints that were of old? Was not hence their Lordly, self-advancing, their
affecting Honors, Power, Preferments, Riches, and all of the Worlds glory, and
that under pretense of Right from Christ himself, (O shameless lying) who
plainly declared his Kingdom not to be of this world, but denied himself in all
things, and accordingly gave the same charge unto all his, etc. And now turn we
our eyes on our selves, and on all other Churches, and see if possible any
thing can be found in the way of all, but what is of the essential properties
of Antichrist; and never worse, or the like, to what is abundant in these our
days; so horridly into Antichristianism is the carnal Church degenerated.

3. Consider wherein consists the true nature of all those Separations,
Purgings, and Reformations that have been made from time to time, both from
Rome it self, and of earh party and profession one from another, all being
under pretense and boasting of departing from Antichrist, each ever exclaiming
on other as Antichristian; and thereby they back all their seperations,
divisions, schisms, and whatsoever else they have contrived in their own choice
ways. Consider (I say) if those things they separated themselves for, were
Antichristian, as being of men's devising, Innovations, Idolatries,
Superstitions, etc. yet what are they but as the flesh and outside of
Antichrist, his carnal pussing up in fleshly Wisdom? And what is their
departure from them, but only (in the Scripture phrase) the Consumption of his
flesh and outward parts? But as for what is of his Life, Essence, Power,
Vitals, and even all that is the Root and Mystery of Iniquity, the carnal
mind, that they never departed from, but stick fixedly still therein, in every
profession, holding still the Grace of our God in wantonness, and carnal,
self-pleasing, and self-seeking, never the more attaining to the knowledge of
Christ and of his Grace, but living still in their own Lusts, making even
Religion the very fuel to their lusts, the cherishing of Pride, Wantonness,
Malice, Envy, Covetousness, and all unrighteousness, as is evident in every
Sect and Profession, to the shame and confusion of the most specious professors.

4. Consider wherein consists that glorious pretense of all parties in their
boasted of Reformations, as arrogating a conformity to Christ, and to his pure
Church of old. There is no Sect or Party but that makes this their pretense and
aim, to state their way in the Primitive purity and perfection: And therefore
the most of all parties set aside what are of later Original then Apostolical;
wherein although their way is good, if strictly so holden in, yet what have
they done, but still in the Spirit of Antichrist, speak lies in hypocrisy?
Laying all of Doctrine, Worship, Ordinances, and Discipline, low and base, in a
carnal and worldly way, wholly short of the glory of God; even as the Scribes,
Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law did of old, whence Christ called all their
Doctrine Hypocrisy. So that whereas there is nothing as from Christ, that
reach in any thing short of the Kingdom of Heaven; there is scarce any thing to
be found now in the Christian way, that reach half the way: Insomuch, as even
the best and furthest that ever is gone, or so much as driven at in Religion,
and every Ordinance, is but unto legal observance; Sanctification it self being
the highest perfection of a Christian in this life; what is it but a conformity
to the Law, as the doctrine among us state it? The Evangelical perfection is
wholly unknown, and Christ is become lost in all our Christianity. In a word,
look we to Doctrine, Discipline, and all the power of Godliness, What is it
become? but a kind of civilizing of people; besides a little historical notion,
and carnal confidence in Christ, which they call Faith. No nearer are we to the
true Christian, Apostolical, primitive pattern, then those were to Christ, whom
in high indignation he so often branded with the term of Hypocrites.

5. Consider the convincing evidence hereof from the declared consciousness of
people, that they are quite wide or short of the way of Christ, and of his
Church. For knowing well the universal departure of themselves, and all in
general from the heavenly conversation of the Church of old, that there is no
such exercise, walking, and fruit of good works in the kingdom of God, as was
ever among those Saints of Christ; ever their refuge, and conscience-cozening
boasting, is, They have Christ within them and in their devotions, in their
meetings, in their private exercises, in their withdrawing and separating from
others, and the like. But what is all this, but what Christ sore-told should
be, that men should say, Behold he is in the Desert; behold he is in the secret
ohambers; doubtless at these and the like he strikes, whereto he adds, Go not
after them; believe it not; for as the lightning, etc. intimating thereby, that
it is impossible that he can be in such secret shut^ing up; he being the Light,
and his Church in that Light is as a C^tie set on a hill, which cannot be hid.
For can love be shut up in the heart, and secret chambers? especially that of
Christ, and which is Christ; resembling the love of Parents, and of Lovers, not
possible to be without abundant manifestation in fruits: In this Love is that
glory of God into which we are called by Christ, if we be truly his; and the
power thereof in our hearts, is Christ in spirit in us, even that Spirit which
teaches all things, enableth to all things, praying, preaching, governing, and
all whatsoever is the Essence and Life of Christianity, which it is not
possible for the world to have, so long as it is scoffed at, jeered, and hissed
out of the World. And can we be the Church of-Christ then? Yes when he has
Churches in Hell. For where is our state and abiding but in Hell? Seeing we lie
(...) in the Hell Dominion of our Lusts, under which we worry, toil, serve,
and are imbondag'd, as much as if Christ never had been. Surely Christ's Church
is called to a condition above, and beyond all, and not to walk as others in
the will of the Flesh. These and abundance more are clear and full in
Gallicinium, and if required, I shall by Gods assistance clear the case yet
further; therefore at present I say no more.

I easily see that the Objection and cavil against this, and the slighting of
all that I have said, and the evasion from all, will be upon men's own devised
distinction between the visible and invisible Church, whereby they cozen
themselves and all others, into eternal perdition; but the taking away of that
is easy to be observed from what is already said, which I leave to be paused
upon. I desire to be brief, only this first Proposal being the main, and
giving light into all the rest, I have been the larger upon it; I shall be
briefer in the other. I conceive now the Proposal is made clear and good, only
this is to be added, That whereas I have showed that all Churches (so called)
are in the state of damnation Antichristianly; so all others are in the same
accursed estate Diabolically. This is the difference; The World in the geneal
lies and weltereth in the poison of the old Serpent, Lusts and Sin, and
consequently, under the curse in the Wrath of God; thus it is such
diabolically. And the Christian part thereof in special, is deluded and driven
thereinto by the Spirit of Antichrist, in the pretense and profession of
Christianity; carrying their Christ, Religion, Grace, and all into the Will and
Wisdom of the Flesh, after they have by their avowing themselves to Christ,
declared their defiance against all, professing to be his faithful Soldiers in
the Christian Warfare. And this is the most damnable and accursed condition of
all other, as the Word of Truth declares. Tremble then, and be astonished O
accursed World, especially what is called Christian; and if ever it were the
charge of Christians to work out their salvation with fear and trembling, now
more then ever need we look about us, with astonishment, horror; and
affrightment: For most assuredly all the World, and every person therein that
ever were, and now are, both may and shall attain salvation, and not one be
damned, as well as we; yea and we the last of all, if such a thing a might be;
unless from this wilful and headlong captivity under Antichrist, we break
forth with violence into the Kingdom and glory of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. PROPOSAL. That it is not possible that all the wit and wisdom of men in the
way that they endeavor Reformation in, can make the Estate of the Church
better, but rather still worse.
FOR the clearing of this, it is requisite that I show what that wisdom is,
which all endeavoring Reformation walk in the light of, and so doing not
possibly able to compass it. The only discovery of this is from the Oracles of
God, where amongst many other instances for this purpose, I shall name but one
for brevity sake, which is, Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make no Provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Where we may see
a notable distinction between the true Wisdom of God, and the false, and only
seeming Wisdom of men. It is clear that Christ is called the wisdom of God, and
in that respect as he says elsewhere, that the true Wisdom is revealed unto
Babes, who are thence called the Children of Wisdom. And this Wisdom springs
from the root of self-denial, and is unknown to the World; but so clear and
open to the truly Regenerate, as thereby, and therein they are said to know all
things, and need no other teachings. It were too long a business at present to
open the fullness of this Mystery, so as to be seen and apprehended by this
darkened World; It stands clear and full in Gallicinium, whereto I refer it.
Opposite hereunto is inferred in that fore cited place, that wisdom of men, as
consisting in making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; and
truly in the dark, shutting up in that Kingdom of the Devil, is the state of
all the wisdom of men. Hence in the highest exaltation of men in their own
wisdom, are they compared in Scripture, to the Beasts that perish, void of all
true understanding; perceiving and savouring only the provision for their
Lusts, as Beasts, and Devils; and most sure it is, that the highest Wisdom of
man can ascend no higher then to what is earthly; and hellish, and is wholly
confined within that sphere, as is at large declared in Gallicinium; and till
that come forth, let the serious consider it well, and they will find it so.

Having given some light for the clearing of this, I come next to prove and
make good this second Proposal, and that shall be from these undeniable
Arguments. 1. From that which is the inward Root of all that blindness and
error that is in the wisdom of man, whence Error is acknowledged to be of its
essence and propriety in nature; hence it is said, Humanum est errare; as if to
err, and to be truly man in statu quo, were termini convertibiles. This arises
partly from the nature and estate of man's wisdom whereinto it is fallen, in that
man is fallen into part Beast, part Devil. The wisdom in both is called properly
in Scripture, Subtilty, as of the old Serpent, wherein the Devils far exceed
both Beasts and Men; and yet are they said to be shut up in darkness, and
holden under Chains of darkness, whereas the Heavenly Spirits abiding in the
meek subject on to the will of God, are called Angels of Light: What then is
this wisdom which man lives in, but darkness? Sure it is, they were not mere
fools and idiots, as the world account such; but the wise of the world, of whom
the Apostle said, Ye were sometime darkness. Again, partly this arises from the
curse of God, and his damning Sentence upon the wisdom of men, in that he has
shut up the true wisdom from the wise and prudent of the world; and declared
all the wisdom of the wise to be foolishness. It being his just and dreadful
sentence upon the hellish pride of man, in turning from the meek subjection,
unto his heavenly wisdom, into that of the flesh; prefouring the Hell-darkness
into which the Devil has brought man, beyond the Heavenly Light, and
accordingly like the Devils to be reserved and kept under those chains of
darkness, unto the judgment of the great Day. When that light of true Wisdom
shall appear, whereby the true Judgment of all things shall be manifested,
which now are shut up in the mystery. Thus we see the proof of this from its
inward Root.

2. It is more evidently proved from the outward manifestation thereof in
constant experience: 1. As to the general, the wisdom of man standing always in
its whole bent to seek after happiness, and leaving no ways untried, no stone
unrolled to find, and obtain it; see the event and fruits of all, even nothing
but to make themselves and the world more and more miserable. If thou be
wise, (says Solomon) thou shall be wise for thy self; but see the cursed
conviction of man's wisdom, in that setting the heart wholly unto self, it
reaches unto, and attaineth nothing but trouble, turmoyle, vexation, sorrow,
woes, crosses, and miseries, what not? Hence justly is the wisdom of the world
called foolishness with God, and that God knows the thoughts of men that they
are vain, yea vanity it self.

2. As to the special and particular Instance, the reformation of Religion, be
it considered, that men are and have been sufficiently conscious and convinced
at all times since they departed from the wisdom of God in Christ, that
Religion was ever out of its due course, and that something or other was amiss,
and necessary to be amended; and withal, that from time to time they set
themselves with their utmost endeavor in all study, labor and diligence, what
might be to amend, reform, and set all right. And yet what has been done? what
has been the issue of all their strenuous endeavors, both singly by
themselves, Fathers, Doctors, Grandees, etc. by all their Writing, Preaching,
Disciplines, and also jointly in Councils, Synods, Consistories, and the like,
but to turn all into more and more confusion, by stating their Decrees,
Doctrines, Disciscipline, and all in such wise as exposed them to endless
questions, Disputes, and Controversies? Yea, what did all tend to, but to the
setting up of Antichrist and all his delusions, and working unto damnation,
which as the Scripture foretold should come so they did, and all by men's acting
in their own wisdom, despising the wisdom of God. Sure it is, that in Christ
and his way there is that Light, which whosoever walks in, cannot stumble,
much less fall, as himself expresses. And as clear it is, That all the Errors,
Deceptions, and Evils whatsoever, that came into the Church, were from those
that went out from them, that walkked in the Light and Wisdom of Christ, into
their own, as the Scripture declares. Most certain it is, that in love is all
light, and there need no teaching, no fear of error or evil, as might
abundantly be showed; and in Lusts lie all Error and Wickedness whatsoever. In
a word, seeing all the ablest and wisest of men bending themselves to
reformation, could never do it, or make any thing better since they fell to act
in their own wisdom, but on the contrary, rendered all still worse and worse;
therefore it cannot be hoped in the least, that ever it can be compassed in
that, or the like way. Experience have proved this to be true every age to this
present day; whereof most clear evidence is seen in these late years, wherein
all parties took what Liberty they pleased; and see what striving and endeavors
they used, how many ways have been tried, how many Religions, Sects, and
specious things have been stepped into, and all prove no better then the former,
but rather still worse in the acknowledgement of all. And now at present see
whereto the wisdom of men drives, how they can see nothing good but what is
provision for their Lusts and likings: A price is put into their hands to get
Wisdom, but they have not an heart unto it. Liberty and Encouragement is given
to move according to Conscience; But see by the continual Addresses and
Petitions daily coming from alll parts, that their Wisdom is set upon no
higher pitch, then with the Dog to return again unto his Vomit, and like the
foolish Israelites that cried out for the Leeks and Onyons of Egypt, when God
gave them Bread from Heaven. Thus I conceive this PROPOSAL also stands clear:
If more be required, I have enough to say for the fuller convinceing of all.

3. PROPOSAL. That yet there is a way, and that of old laid down by Christ, to
render all Congregations, Parishes, and Societies of People, Churches of
Christ, and all as formerly, Churches of Saints, in a blessed condition both
here and hereafter.
TO make this to stand clear and good, I shall resolve the whole into these
three branches. 1. That such was the estate and condition of the true Church of
old, which is called the Primitive and Apostolical. 2. That a clear, full, and
all-sufficient way for it was laid down by Christ. 3. That it is an easy and
ready thing to bring all Congregations, Parishes and People into the same
estate and condition again; and much more easy for us to compass it now, then
in those times of old.

1. For the former of these I have given some light into it already in the
first Proposal, and it stands full and clear in the Gospel. All happiness and
blessedness whatsoever that is high, heavenly, and alone the true blessedness
consists in these three things, as being the perfect Image of God; 1.
Clearness and fulnesss of Truth, to live in the light thereof, so as to know
all things, and to be guided and walk in the truth infallibly, so as not
possibly to be deceived and led into Error. This is truly Angelical, and the
true life of God, and in God. 2. Integrity of righteousness and holiness, so as
no place to be for sin and transgression. To live in perfect obedience to the
Will and Command of God in all things, and never to have so much as an heart and
will to offend God or any thing, but to do all the honor and good that they
may, both to God and man. And this is as Heavenly and Angelical perfection as
the other. 3. Perfection of Blessedness, so to live and abide in full fruition
of all joy and contentment, standing free and full in an exemption from all that
is evil, and in the enjoyment of all that is good, fully satisfactorily, so as
the heart to desire no more, but to abide ever in an abundant overflowing. If
in these be not the perfect blessedness, let all men judge.

Now most sure it is, that in a most sweet and abundant enjoyment of all these
did the Church of old live, while it abode truly Christ's Church, and
degenerated not to be Antichristian. The former is clear by many Warrants of
Scripture. Surely Christ failed them not of his promise, to give them his
spirit which should guide them into all Truth; which St. John testified that
every true Christian and Member of the Church had; being that Unction whereby
they knew all things; and that so, as that they needed no other Teaching, but
as that Anointing taught them. The second is as clear, in that all the true
Members of Christ and his Church are said to be born again, and being so born,
to be in that condition as never to sin (...) in possibility to sin. And the
third is as clear from the Testimonies of the abundant joy, rejoicing,
contentment, satisfaction, and flowing measure of all true heavenly good,
wherein the Saints and Church of Christ continually lived and poured forth.
These things are plentifully evident in the Word of the Gospel. See then if the
first branch hereof be not fully made good.

2. For the second branch, namely, That a clear, full, and allsussicient way
for it, was laid down by Christ, is as evident also in the Gospel; where we
find, 1. That this way is merely and alone Love; that Love which the world
knows not, as the Gospel affirms, wherein is all the Light unto all Truth, so
as to need no other Teaching. It is a vain Antichristian boasting out of pride
and arrogance, which blinds the heart, to advance the Learned and Learning,
into the place and Office of guiding in case of Religion. Were this Love known,
and the power of it set in the heart, it were Light and guidance enough into
all things infallibly, as may easily be showed convincingly unto the hardest
heart. Again in Love is all Holiness, Righteousness, Goodness, and not possibly
any sin. All sin is from the absence of this Love, as may clearly be evidenced;
as in the Lusts is all the blinding of the heart, so also is all the sin and
wickedness in man. And lastly, in Love is all happiness, for therein is all
contentment, satisfaction, and joy; and no joy, comfort, and contentment
comparable thereunto; as on the contrary all sorrow, vexation, and woe is stated
in Lust. 2. That this Love is the whole way of Christ. 1. It is the whole sum
of his Doctrine, wherein is the fulfilling of the Law; no other Precept or
Doctrine did Christ hold forth, but Love. 2. It was the course of all his Life,
whereby hefulfilled and perfected the ^aw, it being not possible to be truly
kept, til he in that love did it; whence all his life was a going about doing
good, as the Scripture witnesses. 3. It is truly himself in spirit and power,
whereinto the regenerate are born, and by which they perform such true
obedience to the Law, as they neither sin, nor can sin. 3. That in this Love
thus brought into the world, and into man's nature, all the truly converted
received Christ and his Gospel, and therein also preached Christ, and inwrought
him into others, whereby they became Churches of Saints. This was the work of
the Ministry, and the work of the Church and Elders, and all the ruling and
governing which the Gospel speaks of, namely, to act in Love, and thereby beget
many Sons and Daughters unto God, by strengthening one another, enlightening
the ignorant, supporting and cherishing the weak and needy, and reclaiming the
obstinate and unruly, rendering all the Church pious to God loving, ust, and all
good doing to others; loyal to their Princes and Rulers, and no such people
ever as they living in the world; whence Christ said, that the least in this
Gospel-Love, is greater then the greatest that lived in the most exactness of
Legal Obedience.

3. For the third Branch, namely, That it is an easy and ready thing, to bring
all Congregations, Parishes, and People, into the same Estate and Condition
again, even to be Churches of Saints, yea and much more easy for us to compass
it now, then in those times of old. How easily this is made good, be it
considered, 1. That the same means thereunto still remains, with us; No one of
Christ's Ordinances and means of Grace is lost and perished; what Christ planted
is still in being in the Church, though planted again by man in a false ground,
all being plucked up out of Christ the love, and planted in Antichrist, in man's
carnal lusts; but yet still they remain; it is but to remove the Plants again,
and all is done. 2. That there is the same way to effect all as formerly; For
still there remain such Societies, Congregations, and Parishes of people
meeting, and professing Christ, in the exercise of the Ordinances of Christ
unto Salvation, as are in nearest resemblance to the Churches of old, that were
called Churches of Saints. Herein is every where a Ministry and People easy to
be ordered in the way of being Elders and Youngers, to accomplish all the
blessed effects to make pure Churthes of Saints. Would but Ministers themselves
learn and know Christ, and accordingly preach him to others: And then the
Elders, or better Proficients in Grace that have gotten truly into the
knowledge of Christ, do their part to inwork also Christ into others, and so
back the work of the Ministry. Were but Christ so in the hearts of some in
every Parish, as they could say, with St. Paul, The love of Christ constrein
us; all the work unto Saintship must necessarily follow. 3. That there is the
same power to effect all by spiritnal efficacy of Christ in, and with his own
Ordinance, as well as ever was of old, is clear both by Scripture, where we
have Christ's promise to be with his unto the end of the World, and also by our
own acknowledgement, all of us resting upon that Power of Christ to carry us
unto Salvation through the use of the means; and therefore (questionless) it is
as efficacious for all other spiritual and heavenly purposes and effects
toward others. Lastly, that it is more easy for us now to compass it, then it
was of old, is clear, for that we are backed into all things by a Christian
Magistracy and Authority, which then was wanting, yea might and main opposing.
Clearly is seen abundance of advantage unto us, more then was unto them, only
that may be said of us which is in the Proverbs, Wherefore is there a price put
into the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has not an heart unto it.

Too true it is, Christ is wholly unknown, It may be said both of Princes and
people what was said of Elies sons, They are sont of Belial, they know not the
Lord, nor his Son Jesus Christ: But be sure the time is at hand, when if not
we, yet a wiser generation shall have an heart to get wisdom by the price put
into their hand. Christ shall rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron; namely, in
and by the power of the true Heavenly, self-denying Love, the Fountain of all
goodness in the hearts of all, even as now the Devil and Antichrist do in, and
by the all-commanding power of the Hell-reigning Lusts in the hearts of every
one unto all exorbitances and excess in sinfulness and woe. All these things are
abundantly set forth and cleared in Gallicinium, and much more also. The Lord
prosper both this and that also, to his own heavenly glory.

4. PROPOSAL. That to bring this about, and settle it in the world, there must
be an utter plucking up of all that is now in esteem and desire in the world,
and of all that have such in the world, for many hundreds of years, and all
things to become new.
FOR the clearing of this, because it may seem to contradict what was even now
said, namely, That the Church-Ordinances and means of Grace are still remaining
among us, and therefore if all must be plucked up, then also what Christ has
planted; be it considered, 1. That though Christ's Plants be remaining still,
yet there are more also added thereto; some surreptitiously crept in by the
devises of private spirits in all the Sects and Heresies that have been
broached, and so received by many for truths. Others there are that are
professedly maintained by a pretended Authority of the Church, which is merely
a proud and arrogant pretense and presumption. The Church of Christ hear his
voice alone, and no other. It is no other but the self exalting Whore upon the
Beast, that claims a Right and Power to change or introduce any thing of the
way of Christ, yea though under pretense of indifferencies, as that Whore hold
them forth. These all are to be plucked up, for that Christ has not planted
them, as I have expressed before in my Address unto the Parliament.

2. That though Christ's Plants be still remaining, yet they have been all
transplanted, and set in a fa^se ground. Most sure it is, and a most dreadful
thing it is to consider, that there is not one point or subject in all
Divinity, not one Ordinance of Christ, not one Grace or Duty, not any thing in
all Christianity, but has been plucked up from the root and ground of all, the
Lord Jesus Christ, and transplanted all into Antichrist in the Kingdom of the
Devil, the Lusts and abominations of Hell. The Scripture declares the Church of
Christ to be built upon the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Corner stone; but that Building is removed to a far different
Foundation, upon Philosophers, and the Wisdom of man, so as the true Foundation
is utterly lost, and Jesus Christ as the Cornerstone is more re^ected of our
Builders, then ever it was by the Jewish Builders; so as what that Cornerstone
is is as utterly unknown to the Prelates and Grandees of the Christian Church,
as it is to the very Heathens and Infidels, yea and far more. Gallicinium
renders this full and clear in every head and subject of Divinity, contained in
all Didactical Theology; making it evident how g^opingly, even in the darkness
of Hell, all the Heads and Cuides of the Church that would be themselves the
Corner-stones and Guiders of others, have constantly walked, ever since the
Church played the Whore, and became Antichristian, even for above 1200. years,
verifying that of Christ, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch; giving up themselves and all that follow them, into that delusion which
St. Paul speaks of, to believe a lie that they might be damned.

To exemplify this but in one thing of many thousands more, lest I be thought
to say more then can be proved; Be it observed how Antichristianly the most
main and heavenly Doctrine of Regeneration is stated by our learned Grandees;
For whereas the Scripture states it in such a perfection in Christ, as in a
condition above sin; so that he that is so born, sins not, neither can sin;
they state it only in a condition, not to be committers of sin; and there give
such a meaning to committing of sin, as is much like the sense that they give
of the sin against the Holy Ghost, even such as few in the world come under the
guilt of; and so most damnably delude people to their utter perdition, while
they secure them upon a conceited Regeneration by their Infant Baptism, or
perhaps some restraint of enormious open, gross crimes, and so run headlong
into Hell in the driving of their Lusts, wherein is the whole power of the
Devil unto eternal damnation. Thus stating Regeneration in Antichrist, it
become no better then damnable delusion; whereas stated by, and in Christ, it
is the very power and arm of God unto salvation, the very building on Christ,
the Cornerstone, whereby to become Temples of God eternally in heaven. These
things are Mysteries to the self-wise World, shut out from their eyes, and so
are all the saving things of Christ. See we how hypocritically base the self
wise Prelacy have stated that high power and privilege given by Christ to his
Church, above all that Authority and powers in the World, even to bind their
Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Links of Iron; which being heavenly and
spiritual, and so of efficacy beyond all fleshly power, they plucking it out as
it was rooted in Christ, and planting it in Antichrist, in an Antichristian
Carnal, Earthly Spirit, that can perceive and savor nothing of what is
heavenly; have sixed and rooted it in an affectation of Earthly Dominion and
Greatness, with such a besotted baseness, as rather then fail, seeing they can
reach to no higher eminence in worldly state (the worlds Princes not enduring
more to be allowed them) lay hold even of the Fag-end, the very Tail of the
civil Power, skipping up, and on the hanging on the Rump of the Beast, rather
then on no part above at all, and so they may reign some way in earthly power,
dote upon such base preheminences, as were they the least in their right wits,
they would utterly abhor; and all this by transplanting the Church Power out of
Christ, into Antichrist. The like is about matters of Divine Worship, to state
them in Forms, Liturgies, Ceremonies, and Gallantry, and specious things in the
eyes of the Carnal, which did they know the least of Christ and his Spirit,
they would extremely abominate. But I need not insist on these things here,
they are at full displayed in Gallicinium; and the World, though backed with all
the Power of Hell, shall never be able to gainsay them. Thus already some
discovery is made how of necessity these plantings in Antichrist must be
plucked up, ere there can be planting again in Christ; God and Belial, Christ
and Antichrist cannot stand together.

And whereas I said, All things must become new; it is not as if a new Light
were pretended unto, or new things to be brought in, but even as in Christ
formerly all things were said to be made new, that is, restored a new unto the
primaeval integrity, as God first made man: So likewise in this case all the
devices and delusions of Antichrist, now becoming old and rotten, to be
abolished, and the truths, and this way of Christ, renewed and restored.

Be it known therefore, that as this must be, so it shall be, and God is about
this great work, to overturn, overturn, overturn, the Diadem is reserved for
him to whom it belongs, even the Lord Christ, who must reign in his time, and
all Worlds whatsoever cannot hinder him when that season comes. Behold the
stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, which is to smite Babylons Image,
and overthrow all the Hel-Dominion on the Earth, is now in the cutting out, and
ere long the blow will be given. All the structures and devices of the wisdom
of man shall have their fall, and return to their first nothing. The Earthquake
has long been, wherein the 7000. Names of men (that is the inventions,
devices, and structures of men in Religion, whereby they have manifested
themselves, and made known the foolishness of their wisdom) are to be slain,
and then the remnant afffrighted shall give glory to the God of Heaven: and so
the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. God has so determined the times
and seasons unto all; say, and do all the wits and powers of the world what
they can: There is but an hour for the power of darkness to prevail, and then
comes the power of the Light eternally, to rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron:
And thus having spoken nothing but the words of Christ, and of his heavenly
spirit, I may further apply thereto that saying of Christ, The words which I
have said unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.

THE CONCLUSION.
Most Dread Sovereign,
AS in my first Address, so in the close hereof, I make return unto Your
Maesty in the first place, humbly beseeching you to consider, if what I therein
declared be not now made good; and accordingly, whether ever any thing of so
high and heavenly nature, was ever presented and tendered to any Prince on
Earth; And whether the prosecution hereof will not advance your Throne above
all the Kings that ever were before you. Look not upon it (I beseech you) as
the work of a poor simple man, but as a Message from the King of Kings, and his
Son JESUS CHRIST, who has reserved this for your time, and restored you to
your Kingdoms for so great a work. Finally, this your poor Suppliant, aged and
weak, who yet through the strength of Christ can stand on his legs before, and
against all the Powers on Earth, in defense of these Truths of his Lord and
Master, do yet as in his first Address tendered to your Majesty's hands, so
now again humbly prostrates himself on his bended knees before Your Majesty,
beseeching you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, and to set your heart
to bring all all your Kingdoms and Subjects (in what lies in you) into the same
most blessed reconciliation with God in Christ.

Right Honorable Senators of the two Houses of Parliament, whom God has now
happily joined with our gracious Sovereign. O that man may never separate
again, whom God has thus joined. To your Honors (I say) as I made my Humble
Address in the next place unto his Majesty, by the hands of the Honorable
Speaker to the House of Commons, so I again return my speech to you in the same
order, humbly besecching you to take it as an Address of the highest
concernment that ever was, or can be tendered unto you; ye profess to make
Christian Laws, to establish a Christian Government, and all your intentions
and aims to be truly Christian. Of necessity (therefore) ye must lay the
foundation of all in Christ, which this presents you with, or else all is but
building upon the Sand: Be pleased therefore to take into most deep and
serious consideration what is here presented you; and say not by any means, ye
have not yet leisure for it, and so lay it by; but bear in mind, That
Foundations are first to be considered and laid; and if ye have leisure to act
any thing, yea, to eat, or sleep, or live, then much rather ye must find
leisure for this, seeing that both to eat, sleep, live, and act any thing, are
all to be to the glory of God in Christ, which this Address wholly and alone
concerns.

Right Houorable the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, Aldermen, and all others of this
head City of my Nation, unto whom also I have made my humble address, by
casting my self into your arms; not creeping into houses to lead any Captive,
but proclaiming in your streets the Name of the LORD. O let it not be said of
you as once it was of that head City Jerusalem: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee. I say unto you,
and to all other the Magistrates and people throughout all these kingdoms and
Nations, unto whom these addresses may come; Men, Brethren, and Fathers, unto
you is the lord of this salvation sent. Never Rulers and People had more need
of it; never was God, and all that is of heaven, so lost in the world as is
now. Behold here the light of God's countenance returning upon you; Christ
proclaiming his coming in power, and great glory. Behold (I say) here a
breaking forth of that Light, which will yet grow clearer toward the perfect
day; which if it be received and embraced, will abundantly make good that of
the Prophet of old; Happy are the people that are in such a case; yea, blessed
are the people that have the Lord for their God.

Reverend Divines of this Honorable City, to whom I have also made my address,
by repairing to diverse of you, to beseech your help and concurrence in this
work of the Lord; not so much presuming to impart Light unto you, as to crave
further Light, by partaking of your grace. My humble Request, both unto you,
and to all other of Christ's Ministry in these Nations, is, That you would not
make good my jealousies and fears conceived in this case; that as it was to
Christ at his first appearing, so also now, the Priesthood to be the bitterest
adversaries. The grounds of the fears are the same which were in them, having
drunk so long, and so deep of the old wine, it is very hard to like of new. O
remember that the same word of prophecy which fore-spake of the slaughter of
7000 names of men, which we find in the executing, speaks also in the same
place of the fall of the tenth part of the City; which to be the Clergy of
Antichrist's Church is more then probable; and the making it good must be
either by their falling from Babylon, or together with Babylon into eternal
perdition; which latter cannot be avoided, if the other salling off prevent it
not; even by harkening to that call from heaven, Come out of her, my people,
etc. lest ye be partakers of her plagues.

And now in a word to all, committing you all to God, and to the Word of his
Grace, I commend to your consideration that of the Prophet, Jer. 26.13.14, 15,
16. Hatred, Tribulation, and Persecution from the World, is the bequest of
Christ to his saithful ones; an Inheritance in Christ never to be parted with
till himself appear again in power and great glory, to incline the hearts of
all to the love of the Truth. And therefore woe to those pretenders for Christ,
whom all men esteem, love, and applaud, as himself has said; They are the
false Prophets which were to come into the world; strange it may seem that this
excreme difference should be, seeing that all profess and preach by Name the
same Christ only here it differs, the one does it in jest, the other in good
earnest; the one in hypocrisy, the other in sincerity; the one basely suited to
men's carnal Lusts, the other highly advanced into the heavenly self-denying
love. And so the wide difference stands clear, the one is the Antichrist from
Hell, the other the Lord Christ from Heaven. Therefore the hatred must of
necessity be, by reason of the enmity of Hell in the carnal mind against God.
Here then is the hope and comfort, if this tender of the Lord Jesus Christ find
place in the hearts of people, then is the brightness of Christ's coming
appearing in such hearts, unto assurance or proceeding to the highest glory of
Christ; if otherwise, then the hour of darkness is not yet past, but the true
Light is reserved for a better generation, which God in his own time will bring
about, and then none shall hinder it.

FINIS.

