The persecuted MINISTER, In defense of the MINISTRY, The great Ordinance of
Jesus Christ.

Setting forth The several names of Apostles, Prophets, etc.

1. That there is a Ministerial Office. 2. That the Sacrament of Baptism by a
Lay-person is invalid. 3. That necessity is no plea. 4. That the long omission
of the Lords Supper is unwarrantable.
With many other things, plainly and methodically handled

By WILLIAM LANGLEY late of S. Maryes in the City of Lichfield, Minister.

THE FIRST PART.

Prove. 9.9. Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser; Teach a
just man, and he will increase in learning.

LONDON. Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1656.

THE PERSECUTED MINISTER.

TO The ever Honored, and truly Noble, Sir THOMAS LEIGH Knight, All Health and
Happiness, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Much Honored Sir,
AS we should write wrongs in the dust; so engrave courtesies in brass, and
marble. It were the highest ingratitude, a most heinous and horrid kind of
unthankfulness, to bury in forgetfulness you unmerited favors. I am taught,
Beneficium qui dedit taceat, Seneca de benef lib. 2. cap. 11.
narret qui accepit, Let him that gives a benefit be silent, let him speak of
it that has received it. Pliny says of Trajan the Emperor, That he never
prized his benefits.
There is that Law of difference (says that Philosopher) betwixt the Doer of a
good turn, and the Receiver of it, Alter statim oblivisci debet dati, alter
accepti nunquam, That one ought quickly to forget what he has given, the other
ought never to forget what he has received. Seneca de ben. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Ingratus est qui beneficium accepisse se negat, quod accepit. Ingratus est qui
dissimulat, ingratus qui non reddit, Ingratissimus omnium qui oblitus est. I
leave therefore to posterity this remembrance (by way of thankfulness) of your
manifold favors, and my obliged duty far short of your deserts and my own
desires: when I have done all I may truly say, as once Furnius said to Caesar,
I shall live and die unthankful. Rich presents, as you need not; so (I know)
you expect not: such as I have, I give: a few blotted Leaves void of (...) and
(...) and also (...) fond affectation. The Samaean Poet Cherillus presumed to
offer to great Alexander a few harsh Verses. Your mild and sweet disposition
gives encouragement, who, I know respects the affection of the Giver, more than
the Gift. Be pleased to accept of this poor pledge of my unfaigned thanks.
Capillus unus habet umbram suam, One hair casts its own shadow. I know you
are neither timidus, nor tumidus; fearful of frowns, Naz. Orat. 21.
nor luxurious of praises; but (...), high in worth, (...), and humble in
mind. As in Aarons Brestplate was Vrim and Thummim, knowledge and verity: so
in your breast, Scientia and conscientia, Learning and integrity: which to meet in
one man (...), Naz. Epis. 187.
is hard and rare, and would (its verily believed) fill others with pride and
vainglory. Cicero. 2. ad At. Epis. 19.
It was Bibulus his case. But that which adds not a little to the honor of
your Name, is your constancy in the Faith; not like that of the Arians, Annua
and Menstrua, but sound and solid. Orat. 35. ad Constable: Aug:
You need not fear Naz: complaint of some that did (...), fit the faith to the
times, and so made it Fides temporum potius quam Evangeliorum, as Hilary
speaks: He that hears you discourse, shall never complain with him in the
Comedy, Pol ego and oleum and operam perdidi. That you are truly Noble, (to
omit that of your Birth, known to all that know your Family) is known by three
VVitnesses. Habet hoc proprium generosus animus, Seneca.
(says Seneca) ut excitetur ad honesta, It is proper to a noble mind to be
excited to honest actions. Mierome.
Summa apud Deum nobilitas est, says Hierome, clarum esse virtutibus, before
God the sovereign Nobility is to be famous for Virtue; and Prudenitus,
Prudentius
Generosa CHRISTI secta nobilitat viros:
Cui quisquis servit ille verae est nobilis.
He Noble is that comes of CHRIST his race:
Who serves this LORD, he surely is not base.
Perhaps it was a conceit of him that said Nobilis is as much as Noscibilis,
but I am sure they deserve not the name Nobiles unless Noscibiles; and because
many discouragements in these times befall Noble spirits, and strong
temptations present themselves, able to draw away any not truly Christianized;
be pleased to remember the worth of Christian constancy in virtue, that so as
you are well esteemed of men, you may be respected of God. Nobility without
Religion dies in Infamy, and is buried in the grave of Oblivion. If I confess
my testimony is slight, and slender; yet I love to give virtue i^s due in a
true commendation. But I fear I have need to crave your pardon; for, Pictores
pulchram absolutamque faciem raro nisi in pejus effingunt, An excellent face is
very seldom drawn but with much disadvantage, much more when a Bungler has it
in hand. The Sea needs not the Rivers that run into it; so you, not mine, or
any others praise: Be pleased to accept of this Paper-gift, a poor recompense
(I confess) for your undeserved favors: were I able to give more, I would
perform it, wishing all happiness to your incomparable Lady, and blessing to
your hopeful Progeny, recommending your Honor and all yours to the protection
of the almighty, I remain

From my Study at Lichfield, July 9. 1655. Devoted to your Honor in all
Thankfulness and Service, William Langley.

To my Dearly beloved Charge, the Parishioners of St. Mary's in the City of
Lichfield; increase of Grace and Peace through our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Stand engaged to you all (few excepted) in a treble debt of love, service,
and thankfulness: The former though I daily pay, I still owe, resolving, with
the Apostle, to owe nothing but love, Romans 13.8. The second, I will be ready to
pay, willing to spend, and to be spent for your souls, 2 Cor. 12.15. And of
the latter, I will endeavor to make a full payment, and discharge my self
from the imputation of Ingratitude. Though every man cannot bring gold, and
silver to the Temple, yet courser metal may serve: as for the plainness of
the matter, it suits with the subject; and you know plain lines do best answer
a straight and even level. Politian. Epist: lib. 1. Epis: Pet. Medici Lib. 1.
de Orat.
The best Rhetoric is to use no Rhetoric, Carere figuris figurat Epistolam.

He that has fine words, words void of matter, is (as Tully speaks) like the
child that blows in a little shell a great Bubble, which is so vain that it
is marred as soon as made. St. Ambrose his Rule has been mine, Rather to speak
that the meanest may conceive, than the Eloquent commend. I have not sought
after vain flourishes, and Rhetorical ornaments, but have preferred matter and
truth, before words and phrases: if words follow the matter they are welcome;
but if they must be pumpt for, fare them well. It is said of one that loved
Ennius, that when he read him, he gathered Aurum ex Sterquilinio, Gold out of a
Dunghill. For, it is said of him, that he was ingenio magnus, but art rudis.
Prophyry relates of Socrates, that when he wrote any thing, he was ridiculous,
and stuttered like a Babe: if so; Much from me cannot be expected.

Quod decuit tantos, cur mihi turpe putem? Lib. de mundo universo.


Aeneas Silvius used to say, that there is no Book so weakly written, but that
it contains one thing or other which is profitable. If thou meetest any
obliquity; remember I am a man, and subject to error: If thou meetest any
thing worthy thy view, give glory to God.

For the censure of this carping Age, whose little judgment is accompanied with
less honesty, I value not a rush; I pass very little to be judged of them. Si
recte facis, quid cos vereris qui non recte reprehendunt? If thou do
rightly, why should thou fear them that blame wrongfully? There are some,
says S. Hierome, Qu been loqui non possunt, maledicere non cessant, Cannot
speak well, cease not to speak evil. You know the Ministers of the Gospel,
especially they that preach powerfully, are exposed to much scorn, and
contumely: but alas! they do not so much wrong us as themselves; they foame
out their own shame and bewray their wretched, I had almost said, reprobate
malice. For, such as sit down in the seat of the scornful make a low step to
their own damnation. I beseech you, esteem not those lightly that are the true
Ministers of Christ, and have them in estimation for their works sake. But
Wolves that come to you in Sheeps clothing, beware of them, because they do
not lead you, but seduce you; you may know them by three signs especially:

First by their doubling, being like cunning Jugglers, whose meaning may be
turned this way, or that way, like a Nose of Wax.

Secondly, their love to the World, more than the instruction, and comfort of
their Flock, using base indirect means for the advancement of their self ends.

Thirdly, in that they run of their own accord before they have Commission, or
Ordination, as did those spoken of, Jer. 23.21. Albeit there be some question
about the manner of Ordination, yet in all Ages, and in all Conf. Ang. Art. 27.
and Saxon. apud Melan. tom. 1. fol. 132. Calv: instit. lib. 4. cap 3
Buc.loc.com. tit. de Minis. quaest. 33. Lomb. sent. li. 4. did. 24. Melanc:
Can.loc.com. lib. 12. c. 12. Bell: lib. de Cler. cap. 21.
well ordered places, there have been certain Constitutions and Canons for
admitting of men into sacred Orders. And therefore whosoever shall prophecy
without examination, approbation, and license by present authority, comes of
himself, and it is our duties to take heed of him.

As 2 Cor. 11.14.
Satan being the Prince of Darkness, is often transformed into an Angel of
Light: so the Children of the Devil have fair vizards to cover their foul
faces. As Tertullian glossing on Mat. 7.15. Lib. de praescript. adver. haeret.
Greg: mag: Oves visu, sed vulpes astu. --
Quaenam sunt istae pelles ovium, nisi nominis Christiani extrinsecus
superficies? All these Sheeps clothing, are nothing else but precise titles of
holiness, and out sides of Christianity. False Prophets (as an ancient Father
observes) have linseywolsey garments, Bernard.
intus linum subtilitatis, extra lanam simplicitatis demonstrant, The subtle
thread of deceit is within side, but the plain web of simplicity without side:
their inside is of Fox furre, their outside of Lambs-wooll.

Beloved, Believe not every Spirit, but try, 1 John 4.1. I have exposed my self
to public view for your instruction the confutation of error, and vindication
of my practice. What is written is chiefly intended for your use what I am for
your service, when your eyes are fastened upon this poor piece. My prayer shall
be, that your hearts may be informed, and reformed by them, and that the Lord
would be pleased to inform the ignorant amongst you, reform the wilful and
disobedient, and make this City a City of Righteousness. Let it not be said of
your perfunctory reading, as it was of the Delphian Oracle, Quoties legitur,
toties negligitur, That we disregard what we read; Read to to learn, Learn to
practice, Practice to live, and live to praise God for ever.

From my Study at Lichfield, July 9. 1655. Yours unfainedly in the Lord, for
your good William Langley.

Ad Lectorem, and Lictorem.
To the Candid and Ingenuous Reader, and also to Momus and his Mates.
I Will not spare to acknowledge that I have done little in this Treatise
without good Guides, as Justus Lipsius spoke of his politic Centors in one
sense; all may be mine in another, very little touching the substance. That of
the Preacher was long since true, That that is, has been, and there is no new
thing under the Sun, Eccles. 1. My end and purpose (if charity interpret for
me) will be found nothing less than vain ostentation. If thou read with
prejudice, it is impossible thou should be bettered. If thou meetest with
any tartness, some coppresse and gall, fretting ingredients, blame me not;
for, this Age has hit into a strange course, and we live amongst a world of
mad men. The names of the Authors out of whom I have gathered any thing, I
have, for the most part, expressed: partly to give them their due, and that
their authority might procure freer passage.

There is a Generation of men, who, to be reputed something, censure other men's
endeavors, as nothing. They think their Conscience best discharged, when they
have most reviled: as St. Hierome said of Helvidius, Maledicere omnibus bonae
Conscientiae signum arbitratur; Like the Lyndians, who think they worship
Hercules the best when they rail the fastest. It is an easy thing by
misconstruction to deprave whatsoever is most innocently done or spoken. Never
was any truth so happily innocent, as to maintain it self free from calumny and
abuse. Saint Paul a saithfull, and painful Preacher, yet was slanderously
reported, Romans 3.8. There is not any doctrine so firmly grounded, and warily
delivered, whereupon calumny will not fasten and stick slanderous imputations.
Those indignities offered to the Ministers of the Gospel shall not sleep in the
dust, but rise up in judgment against them. In expuentis recidet faciem quod in
Coelum expuit, That which a man spits against Heaven, shall fall back upon his
face.

When it was told Aristotle, that one railed on him behind his back: When I am
away, says he, let him beat me too. Beza's answer to a Spanish Jesuit is worth
our observation, and worthy our imitation, who disputing about the Eucharist,
called him and Calvin, Vulpes, Serpents, and Simias, Foxes, Serpents, and
Apes. To which he answers, Non magis nos credere, quam transubstantiationem,
We no more believe it than transubstantiation. The best Apology to scorn and
petulancy, is patience and silence: but if slanders redound to the discredit of
our holy profession and calling, and truth comes to be wounded through our
sides, then to hold our peace is sinful. Meam injuriam patienter tuli;
injuriam contra sponsam Christi far non potui. Our own injuries we must bury
in forgetfulness; but wrongs to the truth of God, and Gospel of Christ, we
must not put up. To these latter I heartily wish a more sound judgment and
sober affection: To the former I submit, Non modo pium Lectorem, sed and
Liberum correctorem desidero. Saint Augustine has his Retractations,
Bellarmine his Recognitions, Baronius his Emendanda, The Disciples their
Errata. Therefore I conclude, Si quid in hoc (Lector) placet, Walfridus Strabo
de rebus Eccles.
assignare memento
Id Domino: quicquid displicet, hocce mihi.
For what is here good, praise great Jehovah's name:
For what is here bad, on me lay all the blame.


THE CONTENTS Of the ensuing Treatises.
PART I.
CHAP. I. OF the division of the Text, and meaning of the words, with the
opinion of the Orthodox touching the names of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers, and how there is a Ministerial office, men ordained,
and appointed by God for dispensing the Ordinances of the New Testament. page 1
CHAP. II. That a Ministerial Office consists chiefly in 3 things: in public
Preaching, Praying, and administration of the Sacraments. page 15 CHAP. III.
That the Sacraments ought to be administered only by a lawful Minister, one
ordained and set apart to the work of the Ministry. page 21 CHAP. IV. That the
administration of the Sacrament of Baptism by a private person (one not set
apart to the Ministry) is no Sacrament, but invalid and to no purpose; with
answer to some Objections. page 26 CHAP. V. That it is a grievous sin in such
as being not lawfully called, offer to take upon them the Ministerial Function.
page 35 CHAP. VI. That the Sacrament of Baptism lawfully administered ought not
to be reiterated. page 40 CHAP VII. That Necessity is no plea for Baptism by
Lay persons. page 42 CHAP VIII. That the efficacy of it is not tied to the
Instrument or outward sign. page 45 CHAP. IX. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper
is a special part of the Ministerial Office, that it ought not to be
neglected or laid aside. Several Reasons showing that the long Omission of it
is unwarrantable. page 48 CHAP. X. The several Objections for the long
Omission of the Lords Supper answered. page 58 CHAP. XI. Contains the end of
the Ministerial Office, which is threefold, set down by the Apostle, Ephesians.
4.12. perfecting of the Saints, work of the Ministry, and edifying, etc. page
71 The Conclusion. A short Refutation of Master Butlers practice arraigned, and
justly condemned, by all the Orthodox. And the Apology of his Friends examined
and confuted. page 79
The Contents of Part II.
CHAP. I. Ephesians. 4.13. Of the continuance of the Ministry till the end of the
world, and that as long as there is a Church, there will be Pastors and
Teachers. page 119 CHAP. II. Romans 10.15. What is required to the constituting
of Gospel Ministers, viz: three things: 1 Abilities. 2. A holy life. 3.
Mission, or sending. With some Objections briefly propounded, and answered.
page 127 CHAP. III. Romans 10.15. Contains the excellency and dignity of the
calling of the Ministry, which appears by those several Names and Titles
given to them. page 146 CHAP. IV. 1 Cor. 4.1. Contains the Respect Ministers
ought to be of amongst Christians: which consists 1. in careful attention, and
diligent hearkening to their doctrine. 2. In the Reverend estimation of their
persons. 3. In their provision and maintenance. 4. In standing by them, and
with them, helping and encouraging them. page 153 CHAP. V. Luke 10.16. Shows,
that the contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel is a great and grievous sin;
the reasons of it, and how it exposes men to the wrath of God. page 167
The persecuted MINISTER, In defense of the MINISTRY, The great Ordinance of
Jesus Christ.
CHAP. I.
Of the division of the Text, and meaning of the words, with the opinion of the
Orthodox touching the names of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers, and how there is a Ministerial office, men ordained, and appointed
by God for dispensing the Ordinances of the New Testament.

EPHESIANS. ^. II. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc.


THe words contain Christ's ordination or institution of men to the work of the
Ministry for the good and benefit of his Church. Docet enim Christum varios
quidem Ministrorum ordines in Ecclesia constituisse, Zanch. in loc.
says Zanchy; The Apostle teaches that Christ has instituted several Orders
of Ministers in the Church; Summa est, Calv. in loc.
quod Evangelium per certos homines praedicatur, ad id munus ordinatos, says
Calvin; the sum of that place is, that the Gospel is preached by certain men
ordained to that work. Beza has something to the same effect, and concludes,
Beza in loc.
That Doctors and Pastors are appointed by God as perpetual Officers in the
Church. Hem. in loc.
So Hemingius to the same purpose, Enumeratio donorum quibus Christus
potissimum ornat Ecclesiam, and significatio finis cui ista dona destinantur,
Dona sunt Apostoli, Prophetae, Evangelistae. Here he reckons those gifts with
which Christ chiefly adorneth his Church: and the Text points out 3 things,
Idem dedit, says Zanchy.
The person ordaining. The ordination it self. The persons ordained.


The ipse in the Text is Christ, mentioned ver. 7. and referres us to some
thing before, where you have Christ's Ascension, and the happy fruits of it
branched into two particulars:

First, he led Captivity captive, (...), Caeptivam duxit Captivitatem, Hicron.
in loc. Hemin. in loc. Zanch. in loc.
that is, says Hierome, the Devil and all his Accomplices, Hell, Death, and the
Grave. Nomine captivitatis regnum Diaboli intelligitur. Captivity, says
Zanchy, is taken passively, or actively: passively, for those who are held
captive by the Devil; actively, for the Devil who holds men captive: the
former, Christ redeemed by his mighty hand; and the latter, Zanch. in loc.
he brought to subjection; Illorum potentiam destruens regnumque illorum
evertens, according to that of the Apostle, Col. 2.15. Ambr. in loc.
and having spoiled principalities, etc. Sustulit illam quasi authoritatem
peccati qua homines destinebat in inferno, Christ took away the power and
authority of sin, whereby it detained men under condemnation: Calvin. in loc.
Captivitas hic est nomen collectivum pro captivis hostibus; significat quod
Deus in suam potestatem hosts redegerit.

The second fruit of his Ascension, (...), He gave gifts unto men. The Heb:
reads it, Lakachta Mattanoth Baadam, Thou have received gifts, speaking to
christ in the second Person, Psalm. 68.18. betwixt receiving, and giving, there
is a vast difference: To reconcile the Prophet and Apostle, (for Gods words
admit of no contradictions.) Hieromes answer may suffice any sober Christian.
Hieron. in Psalm. 68.
David speaks of this donation in time to come; but S. Paul, as already past,
and accomplished, Thou have received gifts a Patre hominibus distribuenda,
Zanch. in Ephesians. 4.
from the Father to be given to men; and, behold in the Gospel, the
performance, dedit, he gave; he received that he might give: such a reading we
find, Exodus 25.2. Speak unto the children of Israel that they receive an
offering for me, that is, (according to the translation of our present Church
Bible) they that bring, Bibl Hen. 8.
where receiving (as Abenezra notes) is giving: Castalion. Genebr in Psalm. 68.
Calvin in loc.
and so S. Paul alluding rather to the sense than to the words of David, says,
He gave gifts unto men: Calvin speaks to the same purpose, Rem potius ipsam
sequitur, etc.

Christ, says August. August in Psalm. 68.
is said to receive gifts in that his members received them, Mat. 25.40. In as
much as ye have done, etc. As he was man, he received gifts on earth; as God,
Aquin. in loc.
he gave gifts in heaven: the first, I conceive is more agreeable to the mind
of the Holy Ghost; whosoever desires further satisfaction may consult Calvin
and Beza.

But it may be further demanded, to give some Apostles, etc. when elsewhere we
read that God the Father ordained them, 1 Cor. 12.28. and in the same Chapter,
the Spirit works all these offices.

I answer, quoad extra without it self are common and communicable to every
Person of the three, according to that rule, In operibus ad extra tres personae
operantur simul servato ordine personarum in operando; for, we find that
Redemption, Acts 20.28. Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.2. is ascribed to the Father.
Creation, John 1.3. and Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.2. is ascribed to the Son.
Creation, Psalm. 33.6. and Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. is ascribed to the Holy
Ghost; jointly all to each, 1 Cor. 6.11. The changing of the persons is usual
in the Bible; S. Peter affirms, that the Word of God was written by the Holy
Ghost; but S. Paul says, Heb. 1.1. that God the Father in old times spoke by
the Prophets.

Secondly, we may learn, that God the Son is equal in power, Col. 1. and his
omnipotency, Mat. the last, his omnisciency, forgiveness of sins, divine
adoration and a plenary donation of gifts to his Church, do bespeak him God
the true God. To lay down some particular instances, the works which none can
do but God alone, are ascribed to him, to wit, to create and preserve, Joh.
1.3. and 5.17. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2, 3. to redeem, 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 These. 1.10. to
blot out iniquities, Mat. 9.6. to search the heart, Mat. 9.4. Mark 2.8. and
14.13. to hear our prayers, Joh. 14 14. to quicken Joh. 5.27. to judge, Joh.
5.22. Moreover, the miracles which he wrought by his own power, according to
that prophecy, Esa. 53.5, 6. unto which also even Christ himself sends us,
Joh. 10.25. Mat. 11.4, 5. and for the working whereof he gave power to his
Apostles, Mat. 10.8. Moreover, those attributes which do agree only to the
nature of God, and are ascribed unto him: as eternal, Mic. 5.2. almighty, Joh.
3.31. infinite, Mat. 18.20. King of kings, Rev. 19.26. Savior, Mat. 1.21. and
the rest, testify him to be God by nature. I might add Scripture, wherein the
Divinity of Christ is proved, Esa. 9.6. Judge. 6.11. Mat. 16 16. John 20.28.
Romans 9 5. 1 John 5.20. 1 Timothy 3.16. In which places Christ is absolutely called
God, and the name JEHOVAH given to him.

From the Person Ipse, Calvin, is signified, First, that it is not a humane
invention, but a holy institution of Christ. Secondly, that the Apostles did
not choose themselves, but were chosen of Christ. Thirdly, that none are fit for
such a work but those that are set apart by Christ.

But how is Christ said to give some Apostles, and Prophets after his
Ascension, when we read that on earth he chose his Apostles, Mat. 10 gave them
a Commission to preach, and after his resurrection confirmed them by breathing
on them, and giving them the Holy Ghost? John 20.21.

They were sent, Leo.
Eadem semper virtus charismatum, quaemvis non eadem semper mensura Donorum:
They had tasted of the Spirit before, but at the day of Pentecost they were
filled with the holy Ghost: they had infusion, but then diffusion and effusion,
as one speaks who distinguishes the gifts of the holy Ghost.

by Infusion. Diffusion. Effusion.


Again, they received the gifts of the Holy Ghost after a far more glorious
manner, multitudes were witnesses of its descending upon them in visible forms
of cloven and fiery tongues, the substance of the Spirit was invisible, the
sign visible; there must not be only a tongue, eloquence, and utterance, but
fiery tongues, courage, and zeal: Vt fervor discretionem erigat, Bern. sermon.
23. in Gant.
and discretio fervorem regat, That zeal may lead discretion, and discretion
govern zeal. If Christ had given his Apostles only cloven tongues and not
fiery, they should have been full of knowledge, but void of zeal: if fiery
tongues, and not cloven; they should have abounded with zeal, but not
according to knowledge. Christ therefore did send down the Spirit in fiery and
cloven tongues. Thus much of the Person.

Secondly, So Placid and Jacob de Val.
who besides many pledges of his love, freely and undeservedly bestows on his
Church garments of diverse colors; some excelling in explication, some in
application, some in determination of School-doubts, some judicious in
informing the understanding, others powerful in reforming the will and
affections; some the sons of consolation, others of thunder; some construing
the Scriptures allegorically, as Origin; some historically, as Hierome; some
morally, as Gregory the great; some pathetically, as Chrysostom; some
dogmatically, as Augustine.

Thirdly, the persons ordained, some Apostles etc. Abraham of stones; do more
by his absolute power, than he will by his actual: But it is his will to make
use ordinarily of means, to teach Cornelius by Peter, Lydia by Paul, Paul by
Ananias, the Eunuch by Philip, and every soul that is wise in the doctrine of
salvation, by Apostles, Prophets, etc. Lat. Confess of Helvetia, c. 18.
God has always used his Ministers for the gathering or erecting of a Church
to himself, etc. True it is, God can by his power without any means take unto
himself a Church amongst men, but he had rather deal with men and the ministry
of men. The Lord uses no Angels in this great work of man's happiness, but
men. Consultissime autem and sapientissime fieri a Deo intelligimus, Zanch.
confess. Ch^. relig. de Eccl. Milt. g^ber.
quod non per Angelos, sed per homines doceat in Ecclesia Christus: tam quia
libentius sinimus nos a nostri similibus familiariter institui, quam a long
dissimilis naturae spiritibus cum insolita majestate deceri etc. Nempe, jam
homine facto, In cod. loco.
and familiariter in Ecclesia agente, Namely, being now made man, and living
familiarly in the Church. Bucanus gives several Reasons why the Lord does not
teach by Himself, or by Angels, but by Man:

First, Buc. in 42 Com. pl. of the Ministry.
he provides for our infirmity in choosing such Interpreters.

Secondly, to make trial of our obedience, who speaks by such.

Thirdly, that he may declare his favor toward us when he consecrates the
mouths and tongues of men to himself, that in them his very voice may sound
out unto us.

Fourthly, lest without the outward Word we should expect the hidden
Revelations of the Spirit, or preaching of Angels.

Lastly, this treasure is in earthly vessels, that the excellency of the power
may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7.

We shall (considering the weight of every word in our Text) handle the persons
therein, 1. Severally: then Jointly.

[Apostles.]

To be called by God to the office of Public teaching, and administering the
Sacraments, Zanch confess. Chr. relig. de Eccl. Milit. guber.
is two fold: Extraordinary: or, Ordinary.

Extraordinary, is that which is done by God himself, or the Son of God
immediately without the work and Ministry of man, and this is done 3 ways:

First, without using any man's service or suffrage, Bucan. 42. Com. pl. of the
Ministry.
but his own voice only; of this sort was the calling of Abraham, Moses, the
Prophets, John Baptist, and the Apostles.

Secondly, when God uses some, but yet as Messengers only, showing the calling
and commandment of God; so Philip was called by the message of the Angel to
baptize the Eunuch. Ananias sent to comfort and baptize Paul the Apostle.

Thirdly, by his inward inspiration. Of this kind was the journey of Philip to
the City of Samaria, Acts 8. Of this sort was the calling of those that
preached the Gospel in Phenicia and Cyprus after the scattering of the Churches.

The 12 Apostles had the aforesaid extraordinary calling not from man, or by
man, but immediately by Christ, employed in the highest Ministry of the
Church, planters of the New Testament amongst the Nations, founders of the
future edifices of the Church, whose doctrine is the canon and rule of all
Christian Religion, free from corruption, of inerrable spirits, empowered by
the laying on of hands to give the Holy Ghost, verst in all Languages, else
they could not be isntrumental to convert all Lands, and having the gifts of
miracles, which does ever accompany an extraordinary calling, says Mayer,
Mayer, Jam 3. Doct. 3.
else how should men know they were sent of God? But Zanchy thinks Miracles not
always necessary to an extraordinary call. Zanch rel^g. Christi de Eccl. Mil.
guber.
Neque enim credimus ad hujus generis Ministrorum vocationem Ministeriumque
confirmandum semper opus esse miraculis cum neque omnium Prophetarum etc. We
do not believe that there is always need of Miracles to confirm the calling
and Ministry of this kind of Ministers, since we read not, that the sending
of all the Prophets was confirmed by miracles; but only by the Spirit of God
and zeal of his glory wherewith they burned, etc. had the Apostles done no
Miracles, yet their very preaching was not without Miracle, probatur Deus per
Apostolos. God was exceedingly glorified by such mean, poor, rude men, and out
of the mouths of these babes and sucklings God ordained praise. Leo, sermon. 1.
de pen.
We may see, Vbi Deus Magister est, quam cito discitur quod docetur, Where God
is the Tutour, the lesson is soon taught; such instruments as these God thought
fit to lay the foundation by, but employed ordinary ones for the building of
the walls and of the roof. Now this extraordinary calling, singular endowments
and miraculous actings of the Apostles, are not patterns and presidents for us,
The Church of God is not now to make use of illiterate men, unfit, unqualified,
relying on Enthusiasms and Revelations; for the same Christ that elected these
by the pen of his Apostle in that excellent Epistle to Timothy, which Hierom
calls, Speculum Sacerdotii, (as the whole Scripture is Speculum
Christianismi) sets down some directions for the choice of a Pastor, 1 Timothy 3.2.
he must be sober, vigilant, of good behavior, apt to teach; it is not enough
to be holy and well-learned, and so climb into the Pulpit and preach, but he
must have an outward ordination by the imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 4.14. God
does not in these days so enthusiastically inspire men, but sets them, 1st, to
be Cisterns in the Universities before they be Conduits in the Country, they
have an ordinary mission or calling according to the rules and Canons of the
Scripture, and not to dream of the extraordinary mission of the Apostles, which
was but temporary during the Churches infancy, accompanied with miracles,
whereunto an end was put in the primitive times of the Evangelical Church.

But it may be objected, Huss, Whitcliffe, and Luther, and some others of that
Age (in that general defection) extraordinary?

I answer, Rome; but when the filthiness of that Church was wiped away, it was
also lawful although extraordinary, for they had the gifts of true wisdom,
and knowledge of that heavenly doctrine which lay obscured. 2. They had the
gift of powerful teaching, whereby many thousands were converted. 3. The gift
of undanted resolution and constancy. 4. Gods unexpected and mavelous
blessing of their labors to the astonishment of their adversaries, so that it
may without offense be affirmed, that the calling of the Reformers of the
Church was partly extraordinary, and withstood the ordinary corruptions, wicked
and suspicious forms of an ordinary calling; A calling may be expressly and
formally corrupt, Ruth. due right of Presb.
Ex intention ordinantis and operantis, in respect of the particular intention
of the Ordainers, as Luthers calling to be Monk was a corrupt calling, and in
that respect, he could not give a calling to others. But it was virtually good
and lawful ex intention operis and ordinationis ipsius, in respect of the
intention of the Catholic Church, being called to preach the Word of God which
obliged him, and not the Roman faith intended by the Ordainers: And the same
Author concludes, that he sees no inconvenience to say, Rutherf. of the calling
of the Reformers, Com 1. ad Romans Art. 31.
that Luther was extraordinarily called of God to go to other Churches as well
as that of Wittenberg. It was not properly extraordinary, but a middle calling
between a mediate and immediate, as Parreus. To this purpose is the Confession
of the French Church, it is said, that sometimes (as it fell out also in our
days) the state of the Church being disturbed) it was necessary that some
should be raised up of the Lord extraordinarily, which should repair the ruins
of the decayed Church.

[Prophets.]

Propheta comes from (...), res futur as enunciare, to tell things to come: of
these some were Legal, some Evangelical; some of the Old, and some of the New
Testament: he is defined to be a person called of God to declare to men his
will, whether of things present, or things to come: of such we read Heb. 1.1.
In the New Testament the name Prophet is taken Generally: or, Specially.

Specially, for such an one as declares things to come, as Paul 2 These. 2.3.
and Peter, 2 Pet. 3.3. and Agabus, Acts 11.28.

Generally, For every one that has the gift of prophesying, that is, of
understanding, and unfolding the Scripture for the use and edification of the
Church, 2 Cor 14.3.4.5.29. so Mat. 23.24. Behold I send you Prophets, that is,
Preachers, such as interpret the Scripture of the Prophets. So Romans 12.6. 1
Cor. 13. We know in part, Dr. Boys third. Sunday in Advent.
we prophecy in part, such Prophets God has given to his Church till the
consummation of all things.

There are 3 kinds of Prophets according to the threefold distinction of
times: some write of things past, as Moses; some of things to come, so Christ
was foretold by the mouth of his holy Prophets; some of things present, as
Zachary.

[Evangelists.]

The name signifies, Publishers of glad tidings, and this consists either In
Writing: or, In Preaching.

In Writing: Clem. Alexan. firomat. lib. 1. interpret. Gentiano.
and so Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are called Evangelists. The Gospel is
preached as well by writing, as by speaking; as well by pen, as by tongue. The
word spoken for the time is most piercing, but the letter written is of most
continuance.

In Preaching: and so Saint Paul exhorts Timothy to do the work of an
Evangelist, to preach the glad tidings of salvation: the Evangelists were
subsidiary, and certain secundary Apostles, who had power and authority to set
Pastors and Orders in particular Churches to which they were sent, and that
until such time as they were recalled by the Apostles, of this sort were
Timothy, Aretius de Offic. Eccl. loc. 62. Calv in Ephesians. 4.
Titus, Sylas, and others, they were Apostolis proximi officio dignitate tamen
inferiores, says Aretius and Calvin, next to the Apostles in office, inferior
in dignity: Gradus officiorum in primitiva Ecclesia, says Aretius, for all are
not Apostles, Romans 12.9. The Apostles planted Churches and laid foundations of
faith, the Evangelists watered those Churches, and built on these their
foundation; So Buc. 42. pla. of the Ministry.
preaching the Gospel sometimes in one, sometimes in another place, as it were,
subsidiary and certain secondary Apostles not in one only, but in many
Churches.

[Pastors and Teachers.]

Some have made a difference about the words, Rutherf. Due right of Presb. page
141.
but I see not any inconvenience why they may not meet in one person. He that
is gifted for both may attend both, says Rutherford, and yet they differ says
he, for the Word of God does difference them. 2. We know that many have gifts
to teach, Ibid. page 158.
who are but dull and weak to persuade, and work upon the affections, as is
observed amongst the Fathers. Augustine excelled in teaching, and disputing;
Chrysostom, in exhorting: Salmeron observes, that there Thomas Aquinas was
eminent. in informing the understanding, and Bonaventure excellent for moving
the affections; and many are fitted to work on the affections, as Pastors, who
are not able to teach as Doctors in the Schools. Pastors, says Zanchy, are,
Qui alicujus certi gregis dominici curam gerunt, Zanch. in Ephesians. 4.
placed over a certain Cure: and Doctors or Teachers are such, Qui vocati
tantum sunt ad docendum, quae sit vera religionis Christianae doctrina and ad
refellendum haereticos etc. To teach the true doctrine of Christian Religion,
to confute false, to give the plain interpretation of the Scriptures, and to
rule Ecclesiastical Schools, such as Origin in the Church of Alexandria,
Clemens, and the like. The same, says Aretius, of Pastors. Aretius de effic.
Eccles. loc 62. Anselme. Beza Confess. Christ fidei de Eccles. Cap. 5.26.
And that Teachers are Catechists and Instructors of Babes in the School.
Pastors are such as feed Christ's sheep, Teachers are such as feed his lambs.
Pastors, says Beza, are such, Qui in suis conscionibus doctrinam verbi
applicent Ecclesiae usibus privatim ac public, precando, exhortando, etc. who
in their preaching apply the Word of God to the benefit of the Church
privately, and publicly, by praying exhorting, reproving, informing,
comforting, and watching, day and night, for the salvation of the flock: and
Teachers are such as, Catechumenos presertim instituere, as you heard before:
as for Calvin, Calv. in Ephesians. 4.
I find much modesty in his opinion, who is not peremptory, but concludes, meo
judicio. Pastores ergo sunt meo judicio, quibus cerei gregis cura commissa est:
quibus doctorum nomen attribui non displicet, modo interim sciamus alterum esse
Doctorum genus, qui tam formandis Pastoribus quam erudiendae toti Ecclesiae
praesunt; non quin idem interdum Pastor esse queat qui Doctor est, sed quia
facultates sunt diversae.

Pastors (says Bucanus) are such as are lawfully called, 42. Com. lo. de Minis.
and placed over one flock or Church, do preach Gods Word, and in preaching
do not simply explain it, but by teaching, admon^shing, reproving, correcting,
informing exhorting, and comforting, do publicly, and privately apply it to
the use of the Church; and besides, do labor in the administration of the
Sacraments, conceiving public prayers, and with their Consistory, are
watchful to take away offenses, and to govern the Church.

Doctors are they who applied themselves to the faithful and plain
interpretation of the Scriptures, and to rule Ecclesiastical Schools, to the
end that sincere doctrine might be kept in the Church, or they who only
explained the Word of God to deliver true doctrine, and confute false. Such
were the Catechizers as Origin in the Church of Alexandria, and Clemens, and
the like.

Ambrose says, Ambr^n Ephesians 4.^.
that by Apostles, are meant Bishops; by Prophets, Interpreters of the
Scriptures; and by Evangelists, Deacons: But, to this Calvin answers, that in
the Commentary of S. Ambrose, Calv in loc.
there are many things, Nimis puerilia and indigna Ambrosio. Childish, and not
becoming Ambrose.

Pastors and Teachers (says Theophylact) are Presbyters and Deacons. Theophil.
in loc.
Now, as some make a difference betwixt these two, so others conceive that
there are diverse names of one Office, otherwise S. Paul would have
distinguished as he did the rest, some Pastors, August. Chrysostom. Muse Whug. Bull
Piscator. Hier. Lombard. Anselme. Ruth. of Elders. Epist. praefix. oper.
August. aug. de Giv't lib ^8. cap 43. Hier advers. Ruff. tom. 2. sol. 22.
some Teachers, and not join them together, Pastors and Teachers. Of this
opinion is Augustine, Chrysostom, Musculus, Whitgift in defense of his Answer
to the Admonition, fol. 234. Bullinger, and Piscator in loc. Hierome, Lombard,
Anselme; and why not? It is granted that these Offices may meet in one person,
and he that is gifted for both, may attend both. Augustine was so wonderfully
beautified with the gifts of the Spirit, that Erasmus said, all the good parts
of a good Bishop were found in him. Hierome was homo doctissimus, and omnium
trium linguarum peritus. Hilary for his eloquence was styled, the Trumpet of
the Latin Tongue. Vincentius L^rinensis says of Tertullian, Cujus quot pene
verba tot sententiae sunt; Quot sensus, tot victoriae. What need I name the
rest of the Fathers, in their Age the salt of the earth, and the light of the
world? See Magdeburg, Cap 10. in every Century. apud Magdeb, cent. 3. col. 242.
So Martin Luther Philip Melancthon, Pet. Martyr, Bishop Jewel, and other true
Prophets in our time, were so much adorned with all kind of knowledge, that
all the world (not blinded by the Prince of darkness) might easily perceive
they were sent and separated unto their calling by God.

Now in this variety of opinion it is too much boldness to determine: as
Zanchy in a like case, so I may, Quis obsecro, ego sim, qui tot tantisque
doctoribus, in tali hujus scripturae interpretatione, quae neque vim facit
contextui, neque cum aliis scripturis, neque analogia fidei pugnat, neque ulla
secum affert absurda, contradicere audeam aut debeam? Who I pray am, that I
should dare or that I ought to gainsay so many and so learned men in such an
exposition of this Scripture; which neither does any whit wrest the text, nor
contradict any other Scripture, nor is against the Analogy of faith, nor
brings with it any absurdity?

How do Pastors and Doctors differ from Apostles,

Nothing at all in respect of the Essential parts of the Ministry,

It may be here demanded, whether these forementioned Offices are to continue
in the Church?

Some are of opinion, as Calvin, Beza, and Zanchy, Paul olds out an
Extraordinary calling and temporary, and by Pastors and Teachers, that which is
ordinary and continual, Defense of his Answ to their Admonition, fol 219.
and must remain in the Church till the end of the World. But I humbly conceive
otherwise herein, treading in the steps of that Rever^nd Father, Archbishop
Whitgift, who writing against the Schismatics of his Age, proves out of this
present Text, that those degrees of Ministers must in some sort remain till the
worlds end. Some things in the Apostles were temporary, and to remain for a
time Proper to them alone: as 1. Prophecy by singular Revelation. 2.
Discerning of Spirits. 3. The gift of Tongues, and working Miracles, the giving
of the Holy Ghost, by laying on of hands. 4. The testimony of the Spirit that
they should not err. 5. Their immediate calling and general Commission, all
which ceased with their cause, and was not passed over to their heirs, their
successors; but to preach the Gospel of Christ as they did, and to administer
the Sacraments was perpetual to their heirs. The Ministers, whose office is to
preach, and use all means possible for the good of the people, 2 Cor. 8.23.
their Office ceased not in regard of their Doctrine and Ministry, to which the
Church is perpetually obliged. Men ordinarily called are Pastors of the
Catholic Church, but not Catholic Pastors of the Church, as were the Apostles.

Secondly: Messiah. Their Office was temporary, the Law and the Prophets was
but until John. But if taken in a large sense for interpreting the Scriptures,
and unfolding the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 14.4. so it is perpetual, and must
remain for ever in the Church.

Thirdly: Tim. 4.5. there must be a watering of the Apostles planting, a
building on their foundation, perfecting their work till the consummation of
all things.

Fourthly: Hipp in verba Pauli, 2 Cor. 32. inter opuscula Hip page 671. Pet.
Martyr com. in 12 Romans Ball. in Ephesians. 4.
therefore a great Divine is bold to say, That God will always have these
degrees in the Church: and Peter Martyr is of opinion, that the Apostle
describes in that place such gifts as are necessary for the Church at all
times, amongst which he mentions as a chief one, prophesying. Bullinger
observes, that the words Prophets. Apostles, and Evangelists, are confounded;
and the Pastors of Zurick, in their later Confession of Helvetia, Harm Confess.
sect. 11. p. 339.
Chap 18. write thus, The Ministers of the New Testament are termed by diverse
names; for, they are called Apostles, Prophets, Evangelifts, Bishops, Elders,
Pastors, Doctors. Having spoken of the words severally, we shall consider them
jointly, and they teach us this Lesson, That there is a Ministerial office,
Confess Helvet. 1 Ar. 15. and 2. chap. 18. Boh. chap. 8, 9.14. Gal. artic 25,
29, 30, 31. Belg. ar. 3.31. Aug. ar. 7. Sax. ar. 11. Wittenberg. ar. 8.20.
Suev. ar. 13.15.
men ordained and appointed by God for dispencing the Ordinances of the New
Testament; of this we read, 1 Cor 12 28. Mat. 28.19, 20. besides the judgment
of all the Orthodox, it is the joint consent of all the Reformed Churches, as
Rogers observes on the 23 Article of the Church of England, a raithful incerter
of truth.

CHAP. II.
In two things, (says the Church of Helvetia. c. 18.) Teaching the Gospel, and
administering of the Sacraments. 1.
That a Ministerial Office consists chiefly in 3 things: in public
Preaching, Praying, and administration of the Sacraments.

IN Public Teaching, under which head I conclude Catechizing which is of
necessity, and of much use and benefit in the Church. That this is a part of
the Ministerial office, we read, Tit. 1.9. 2 Timothy 2.2. This Christ gives in
commission, Mat 28. Go teach; there is a necessity laid upon me, says the
Apostle: Et vae mini si non praedicavero, and woe unto me if I preach not the
Gospel, 1 Gor. 9.16. As publicly to preach before men be sent is a grievous
sin, so not to preach being sent is a mighty fault, and exposes a man to the
wrath of God. I must (says our Savior) preach the kingdom, for therefore am
I sent, Luke 4.43. The Apostles (though woefully tossed from post to pillar) yet
ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ, Acts 5.42. Our calling allows us
no time to sit still, and sing requiems. I cease not (says S. Paul) to
admonish every one day and night with tears, Acts 20 31. I cea^e not, Ecce
laborem, behold his pains; to admonish, Ecce officium, behold his duty; every
one, Ecce amorem, behold his love; night and day, Ecce vigilantiam, behold his
watchfulness; with tears, Ecce compassionem, behold his pity. As they are
stewards of Gods graces, so they must be faithful and painful in the
distribution of them.

First: Promus condus; Promus to lay out, as well as Condus to lay up; for Gods
flock must neither be starved, nor lean fed, they must have their (...), Luke
12.42. both (...) their meat, and (...) their measure. A Ministers chiefest
quality is (...), to be faithful both in accepto and expenso, to give every one
their meat in due season; for if he cut them short of their portion, the Lord
will cut him off, and give him his portion with unbelievers, (...), v. 46. Many
run curvo pede, with a swift, not a straight foot; they are in Moses chair
before they are aware: but he that is sent of God cannot so speedily execute
his Commission. When it pleased God (says S. Paul) to send me to preach his
Son amongst the Heathen, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood, Gal.
1.16. The Messenger must do the Senders business, not his own; and he that
commands us agere to do, commands hoc agere to do this: S. Paul advises
Timothy, I charge thee before God, etc. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Christ's charge to S.
Peter is tripled: 1. Lest he should not feed the flock at all. 2. Lest he
should do it negligently; Bernard comments thus on the words, John 21.15.
Unless thy conscience bear thee witness that thou love me exceedingly much,
plus quam tua, plus quam tuos, plus quam te, more than thy goods, more than thy
friends, more than thy self, thou art not worthy to undertake this office.

Secondly: Tim. 5.17. Laboring in the word and doctrine; the word in the
Original signifies not an ordinary labor, but such as is with great strife,
earnestness, and strain of all the strength, borrowed from the toil of Rowers
in galleys; Bp. of Salish.
Oportet Episcopum mori praedicantem, a Bishop or Minister should die
preaching; and the Greek name for Ministry is (...), derived of (...),
signifying dust, whence is the word (...) to serve, and (...) to minister, and
(...) a Minister or servant who labors till he be of dustysweat: not unlike to
this is the word (...) of (...) to d^e, minister, or perform ones duty: the
office of such is a worthy work, not only (...), but (...), 1 Timothy 3.1. those
several names given to the Messengers of God point out painfulnesse; he is
called a watchman, therefore not to be slothful; a Seer, therefore not to be
sleepy; a Trumpeter, therefore not to be dumb; a Labourer, therefore not to be
idle; a Steward, and therefore not to be careless; a Shepherd, and should not
a Shepherd feed his flock? Ezekiel. 34.2. Cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord negligently, Jer. 48.10. for it is a heinous fault, and procures a
grievous punishment, Zach. 11. ult. The bells in Aarons garment betoken the
voice of a Minister; and if the sound be not heard, it is the price of the
Priests life; if any soul miscarry through his negligence, then his blood will
be required at his hands. The Lord grant, that none that puts his hand to the
plough, may either be guilty of unfaithfulness, or slothfulness in his
calling, which will undoubtedly bring the wrath of God upon him. It is no
matter (amongst many) how small their flock be, so their fleece be great; how
little their pains, so their profit be much; how few souls they gain to God, if
they can gain large preferment to themselves, never proposing the end of their
Ministry, the Conversion of souls, but the satisfying of their own ends,
which will prove destructive in the end.

A second thing in which this Office chiefly consists, is, James 5.14. Acts
6.4. The Ministers are Gods mouth to the people, and for the people; to them in
constant preaching, for them in fervent praying. If people rise up against
their Pastors, let their Pastors fall on their faces for the people: Thus did
Moses and Aaron, Samuel little less, 1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid, etc. Absit a me
hoc peccatum. Christ that good Pastor and Bishop was earnest in prayer for his
own, Father keep them; and for his Enemies, Father forgive them; Precatio and
praedicatio, prayer and preaching, are holy actions, both sisters in Gods
service; the one must not thrust out the other. Saint Paul often practiced
this, as we may read in his Epistles, beginning and ending them with prayer. He
that bids despise not prophesying, says in the same Chapter, pray continually,
1 These. 5. In solemn actions it has ever been the custom of the Church of God
to begin with prayer. Christ sent not his Apostles without prayer, John 17.17.
Father sanctify them through thy truth. The Deacons are not chosen without
prayer, Acts 6.6. Nor Matthias (one of the seventy) in the room of Judas
without prayer, Acts 1.24. It was the laudable and commendable custom of the
Church to begin with prayer, Almighty and most merciful Father, etc. Every
important action requires prayer, much more the preaching of the word. Those
that represent God, and carry his message to the world, should be consecrated
by public devotions; private prayer is commendable, but public much more;
pure hands are accepted in every place, but especially in the Sanctuary. The
Lord (says the Psalmist) that made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Sion;
he says not, The Lord that made heaven bless thee upon earth, nor the Lord
that made earth bless thee out of heaven; but the Lord that made heaven and
earth bless thee out of Sion: blessings come originally from Heaven, mediately
through Sion. Humble advise of the late Assembly.
As we are to pray in every place, so more solemnly in the public Assemblies,
which are not carelessly or wilfully to be neglected, or forsaken, when God by
his Word and Providence calls thereunto.

Now that prayer may have acceptance, there is required: First, Pet. 2.5.

Secondly, Abba father, Rom 8.26.

Thirdly, John 5.14. for if we require mala, things in their own nature bad, or
not good to us, or male good things for bad ends; God will not hear us, Jam.
4.23.

Fourthly, Psalm. 95. falling down, etc. Eccles. 5.1. Not offering the sacrifice
of fools. It was a tart rebuke that the Emperor Augustus gave to a Citizen of
Rome, who inviting him to a slender banquet, no ways answerable to his
greatness and majesty, tells him. Nesciebam me tibi tam familiarem esse, I
never knew before that thou and I were so familiar: So will the God of all the
world say unto such as give not that respect unto him, befitting his
greatness, and glorious Majesty, to whom belongs all reverence and godly
fear, Heb. 12.28.

Fifthly, with humility, Be ye clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. humilitatem
insinuate, as in the vulgar Latin, that is, in sinu habete, cherish it in your
bosom with loves heat, that it may be both hearty and ready for use, when
occasion is offered. S. Augustine calls it, the first, second, and third
virtue of every Christian: the Pharisee goes from Gods door without an alms,
he was proud and arrogant; but the humble Publican receives a blessing. Never
did any that begged with humility, but either had his desire, or better than he
desired. Reverend Bid writing of the Publican, says, Appropinquare noluit ad
Deum ut appropinquaret ad illum, He would not draw near that he might draw
near. He that will not be a mountain in Christ's way, must not be a Mountebank
of his own virtue, but level himself even with the ground; for he fills the
hungry with good things, but the rich he sends empty away. So the rich in their
own conceit, and proud of their own gifts, shall be sent empty from Christ's
gates. Let us empty our selves, and deponere magnificentiam, abhor our
selves, Job 42.6. Casting our crowns, and glory, the best things we have at the
feet of Christ, Revel. 4.10.

Sixthly, it must be made in faith; for, without faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. Faith is a Mother-virtue, without which, all things are
to no purpose; therefore, we are exhorted to ask in faith, Jam. 1.6. Cain
offered a sacrifice as well as Abel, but it was Abels faith in Christ that made
Abels sacrifice accepted, Heb. 11 4.

Seventhly, it must be with fervency; Lycurgus enjoined his people to offer
little sacrifices to their gods, for (says he) they regard more the inward
affection, than the outward action; a rule which our great Lawgiver has given
us, Mat. 6.7. When ye pray, use not much babbling. It is said of the Publican,
Oravit paucis, Buter.
sed affectu multo, He couch't much devotion in a little room, and yet all the
virtues of a true penitent are found in him, confession, contrition, faith, and
amendment of life. If we bring our sheep to Gods Altar, and them alone, we had
as good have left them behind, they are not worth the carriage, Isa 1. To what
purpose is etc. When the Searcher of the reins shall find a carkas of Religion
without a quickening spirit, he will turn his countenance from it, Deus non
habet gratum offerentem propter munera, sed munera propter offerentem. God
valueth the offerer by the gift, not the gift by the offerer, Non corticis, sed
cordis Deus, He regards not the rind of the lips, but the root of the heart,
the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. integer and rectus are joined together, Job 2.3.
So we must have these two properties: We must be recti straight, not crooked;
and integri, sound, not hollow; our Tabernacles must have gold within, as well
as without, Exodus 25.11.

Lastly, it must be directed only unto God through Jesus Christ, without the
Invocation of Saints or Angels, (...) and (...) properly belong to God, Mat.
4.10. Therefore we may not so much as (...), give any adoration to Saints or
Angels.

But fearing I have been too long on this, viz Baptism, and the Lords Supper.
The Apostles and other Ministers in the purest times (whom the godly Ministers
and Preachers in these days do succeed) did not only preach, but also
Baptize, Act. 2.38, 41and 8.12, 13. for which there is a command, Mat. 28.19.
and so administer the Supper of the Lord, Last Confess. of Helv. of the Minist.
of the Church: form Confess Doctr. of the Church of England Confess Bohem. cap. 9
French Confess. Art. 25.
Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 10.16. for which there is likewise a command, 1 Cor. 11.23.
that in these things the duty of Pastors consists, is apparent by the
Confession of the Reformed Churches. The offices of the Ministers are diverse,
yet notwithstanding most men do restrain them to two, in which all the rest
are comprehended; to the teaching of the Gospel of Christ, and lawful
administration of the Sacraments.

CHAP. III.
That the Sacraments ought to be administered only by a lawful Minister, one
ordained and set apart to the work of the Ministry.

IT is the consent and harmony of the Reformed Churches, That none may
administer the Sacraments in the Congregation before he be lawfully called.

It is not amiss to set down the Confession of the Churches as far as
concerns our present purpose, first that of Helvetia; No man ought to usurp the
honor of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, La^. Confes^ of the Minist of the
Church, cap 18.
that is to say, greedily to pluck it to him by bribes or any evil shifts, or
of his own accord But let the Ministers of the Church be called, and chosen by
a lawful and Ecclesiastical election and vocation, that is to say, Let them be
chosen religiously of the Church, or of those which are appointed thereunto by
the Church, and that in due order, without any tumult, Ibidem.
seditions, or contention. And to the end that he might more fully declare
their Ministry, he adds further, That the Ministers of the Church are
Stewards, and Dispensers of the Mysteries of God; Now the Mysteries of God,
Paul in many places, and especially in the 3d to the Ephesians does call the
Gospel of Christ. And the Sacraments of Christ are also called Mysteries of the
ancient Writers. Therefore for this purpose are the Ministers called, namely,
to preach the Gospel of Christ unto the faithful, and to administer the
Sacraments.

For this function is to be given to none, Art. 17.
whom the Ministers and they to whom this charge is committed by the Church,
do not find and judge to be skilful in the Law of God, Form Confess. of Helv.
of the Minist. of the word.
to be of blameless life, and to bear a singular affection to the name of
Christ; which, seeing it is the true Election of God, is rightly allowed by the
consent of the Church, and by the laying on of the hands of the Priest.

But Ministers ought not of their own accord to press forward to that calling;
Confess. of the Church of Bohemia, page 351.
but ought according to the example of the Lord, and the Apostles, to be
lawfully appointed and ordained thereunto.

Therefore it is not permitted to any among us to execute the office of the
Ministry, And in p. 352.
or to administer holy functions of the Lords, unless, according to this
custom of the primitive Church, and order appointed by God, he come to this
function, and be called, and assigned thereunto: which thing may also
manifestly appear by the ancient Canons of the Church. S. Cyprian has in like
sort set down the manner of ordaining Priests. Engl. Confess. page 361. Art. 6.


Further, we say, that the Minister ought lawfully, duly, and orderly to be
preferred to that office of the Church of God, and that no man has power to
wrest himself into the holy Ministry at his own pleasure. Wherefore these
persons do us the greater wrong which have nothing so common in their mouths,
as that we do nothing orderly, and comely, but all things troublesomely and
without order: And that we allow every man to be a Priest, to be a Teacher, and
to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures.

This especially every one ought to take diligent heed of, Confess. of Belg. page
364.
that he do not by unlawful means thrust himself into those offices. For
every one must wait, until he be called of God himself, that he may have a
certain testimony of his vocation, and may know that it is from the Lord.

Concerning Ecclesiastical Orders they teach, Conf. Auspurg. Art. 14.
That no man should publicly in the Church teach or minister the Sacraments
except he be rightly called: according as S. Paul gives commandment to Titus,
to ordain Elders in every City.

Neither is it to be permitted to every one, Conf. Wirth. mberg. Art. 20.
although he be a spiritual Priest, to usurp a public ministry in the Church
without a lawful calling, etc.

This is the Confession of the Church of England, Of the Church of England,
Art. 23.
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of public teaching
or ministering the Sacraments, before he be lawfully called to execute the same.

To this agrees the Assembly of Divines, Humble advise of the Assemb, of
Divines, chap. 17.
There be only two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that
is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord: Neither of which may be
dispensed by any but by a Minister of the word lawfully ordained, Salvo semper
and incolumi Orthodoxae Ecclesiae judicio. Confess. of the office, dignity, and
power of persons. Art. 13.
So the Church of Sueveland. Here it is manifest that the true and fit
Ministers of the Church (such as be Bishops, Seniors, anointed and
co^nsecrated) can do nothing but in respect of this, that they be sent of God.
For how shall they preach (says Paul) except they be sent?

Secondly, Dispensatores Ministeriorum, (as the vulgar Latin) but Mysteriorum,
(as the Original) Administers of his Sacraments. 6. Tom. loc. com. de Minist.
Eccl. cap. 3.
To the calling of the Ministry belongs the Administration of the Sacraments
as a special part thereof, says Gerardus.

Those to whom the Ministry of the word is committed, their office is properly
to administer Baptism: for, to whom Christ said, Preach the Gospel; to them
also he said, Baptize. 47. Com. place of Baptism.
The Apostle enjoins the washing of water with the word of the Gospel, says
Bucanus.

And again, putting the question, What is the Ministry? 42 Com. place of the
Ministry.


It is an Ecclesiastical function upon earth, assigned to preach the Word, and
administer the Sacraments. And further, in the same place, He that has either
no calling in the Church, or not lawful calling, cannot execute any
Ecclesiastical office in the Church with a good conscience.

The power of Teaching and Administering the Sacraments does belong only to the
Pastors of the Church: 43. Com. place of the power and authority of the Church.
Christ relig. fidei de Eccles. Milit. guberna^. 20.
this is the judgment of Zanchy. Credimus enim legitimis Ministris magnam esse
a Christo datam authoritatem, ad ea nimirum, ad quae etiam vocati sunt,
praestanda, ad praedicandum Evangelium, ad sacr as liter as juxta fidei
analogiam interpretandas etc. We believe Christ has given great authority to
lawful Ministers, namely, in such matters as for which he calls them, to
preach the Gospel, to interpret the holy Scriptures according to the Analogy
and rule of faith, and (amongst other things, Christ. relig. fid de Bapt. 8.
he adds) to administer the Sacraments which Christ instituted. And again, we
believe that holy Baptism is to be administered by those by whom also the Gospel
is preached. And in another place, Externa quidem symbola per ministros homines
dispensat, Christ. relig. fid. de Sacra. Novi rest. Confess. Christ. relig. de
Spir. sanct. cap. 4.
He gives the outward signs by men his Ministers.

Of this judgment is learned Beza, Vtitur autem Spiritus sanctus seipsum
imbecillitati nostrae accommodans, etc. The holy Ghost accommodating himself to
our weakness, uses man to this Ministry that is of the Sacraments, designed
thereunto.

And again, De Eccles. cap 5.27.
he makes use of the Ministry of men both in the preaching of the Word, and
administering the Sacraments. Christ (says Virrell) committed the
administration of the Sacraments to them alone to whom the preaching of the
Word is committed. Of the Sacraments.


Of this judgment is Amesius, Bell. enerva. Tom 3. lib 2. de Bapt. cap. 1. qu.
2. page 340.
Jus baptizandi proprium effectum est vocationis, Baptism is an Act of Office.
And again, institutio simpliciter considerata non est actus potestatis, sed
charitatis; sed baptizare semper and ubique est actus potestatis; Though
teaching be an act of charity, yet Baptism is ever an act of authority,
Trelcat. instit. l^b 2. de Bapt.
Conjuncta sunt officium docendi Evangelium, and administrandi Sacramenta, The
office of preaching and administering the Sacraments are conjoined together, and
belong only to a Minister of the Gospel. Nee privato homini etiam in casu
necessitatis etc.

The same speaks Marlorat, Euch. loc. com. de Baptismo.
Baptismatis administratio ei commissae cui and verbi praedicatio. And so
Melancthon in postil: 3. of John. Bib. pars quint. cap 6. de Bapt.
Piscator institut: Bapt: Sarce. Loc: com: de Bapt: Reud: in his Isagog: I
might instance a full Grand Jury, who all give their verdict against Baptism
by private persons, as properly belonging to Ministers. Inftit. Chr. Relig.
lib. 4. cap. 15, 20, 21, 22. de Bapt. De Sac. Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 7.
But we will name no more, only conclude with Calvin, whosoever is pleased to
consult with him will hear him speak aloud for the Ministry only, debarring
all other persons from the act of Baptism, A quibus administrari debeat; Nempe
ab Ecclesiae Ministris, non a privatis aut mulieribus etc. Vnde hic abusus
invaluit. His defense of this truth occasioneth Bellar: to exclaim against him,
who wonders that any should deny Baptism by Lay persons in case of necessity,
De hoc etiam nunquam ix Ecclesia dubitatum invenio: Vnde nova est and inaudita
Calvini haeresis. Which he finds was never doubted of in the Church, from
whence then is this new and unheard of heresy of Calvin? But Calvin might well
reply, That the heresy is on Bellarmines part, and not his. What Bellarmine
endeavored to prove is learnedly answered by Trelcatius; and if I mistake not,
this great Doctor confutes himself, Jus baptizandi ex officio ordinario
convenire solis Sacerdotibus; The right of Baptizing ordinarily belongs only
to Ministers, and for an extraordinary calling the Church admits none: To
this it seems agree some of the Fathers, Munus baptizandi proprium id esse
dicunt Sacerdotum, The office of Baptizing is proper to the Ministry: so speak
Isidore, Epiphanius, Ignatius; and therefore the great Doctor does very ill to
say, Novam enim Heresin Calvinus excogitavit, That Calvin was the father of
this Heresy.

I therefore conclude this with the Greek Catechism, To whom does the
Administration of the Sacraments properly belong?

(...), When the feeding of Christ's flock, and the administration of the
Sacraments are conjoined; it is not to be doubted, but the Administration of
them properly belongs to those to whom the word is committed.

CHAP. IV.
That the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism by a private person (one
not set apart to the Ministry) is no Sacrament, but invalid and to no purpose;
with answer to some Objections.

FIrst, Buc. 46. com. pl of the Sacrament. Zanch. of the Sacr of the New Test.
11.
This is the hinge of all the rest. The Proposition is undeniable, Christ is
the Instituter and Ordainer of every Sacrament, to him only it belongs to
institute a sign of grace; a Sacrament is in the predicament of relation; and
if a man's action relate not to this institution, it is but a humane invention,
a trick and devise of man. That which gives life to a Sacrament is divine
institution; if this be wanting, it is but a piece of forgery. Zanch obs. Atho.
1. cap. 24.
Sacramentum enim (ut in Ecclesia definiri solet) est invisibilis gratiae
visibile signum (add) ex verbo hoc est ex institutione Christi ad eam rem
consecratum, hoc est a prophano usu ad hanc rem sacram translatum; A Sacrament
(as the Church has used to define it) is a visible sign of an invisible grace
(add) by the word, that is by Christ's institution consecrated to that purpose.
For, pray you, whence has water virtue to be a sign of such a thing, but from
the institution of Christ? Zanch. in eod. loc. Tom 9. in Ioh. 13. tract. 80.
Toll verbum, nullum fuerit Sacramentum, Take away the word, and it shall be
no Sacrament. Detrahe verbum, ( inquit August:) and quid erit aqua nisi aqua?
Pull away the word, (says S. Augustine) and what is the water but water? Every
Sacrament must have Gods Word to warrant it, Atters. lib. 1. of the Sacram. in
genesis cap. 4. l. 2. of Bapt. cap. 4.
or else it is no Sacrament: and such Sacraments as have not Gods command for
their institution are void, and nothing worth; the word of Institution is the
form of Baptism. For the assumption, it is most true, Buc 46. com pl. of the
Sacram. in general.
for where do we read that Christ ever gave this power of baptizing to any,
but Men in office? The Sacraments be the appurtenances of the Ministry of the
Word. None may undertake it, but such as are thereunto lawfully called. Atters.
2 book of Bapt cap. 3.
God has joined the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments together, and what
God has coupled let no man put asunder. I shall conclude this with that of S.
Augustine against Fulgentius the Donatist, Etenim Paganus Baptizat, Judaeus
Baptizat, Saducaeus Baptizat, Et multi extra regulam legis datae baptizare non
cessant: sed illud est unum, quod verum; illud verum quod Christi, Although a
Pagan, a Jew, and Saducee, and many besides the Rules of Gods Law cease not to
Baptize: yet that is one which is true; that is true which is of Christ. For a
Lay-person to baptize is a violation of the institution. Trelcat. lib. 2. de
Bapt.
Nec homini privato etiam in casu necessitatis, baptizare licet, cum nulla sit
necessitas quae nos cogat praescriptos a Deo ordines violare. But this being
fully cleared in the precedent Chapter, I think it needless to add any more.

Secondly, Baptism by a Lay-person is invalid, Non habente potestatem by one
that has no power. Zanchy speaking of Baptism, says, Fid. de Christ. relig.
de Bapt. 6.
Rite autem ac legitime administrari intelligimus, cum doctrina primum
praecedit Evangelii, juxta Christi institutionem etc. We say that it is rightly
and lawfully administered, when first the doctrine of the Gospel concerning the
true God, Christ, and his office goes before, according to Christ's
institution: and then the parties are baptized by water, and that by a lawful
Minister in the name of etc. Any act of Gods worship not rightly and lawfully
done is invalid, But Baptism an act of Gods worship (done without a lawful
Minister) is not rightly and lawfully done. Therefore, this Conclusion does
necessarily flow from Zanchy's praemisses: Seals are no seals except set to by
one formal, invested with sealing-authority, Atters. 2. lib. of Bapt. cap. 3.
unless done by one Quatalis furnished with power to that purpose: We see in
the affairs of the Commonwealth, and in passing Conveyances of Lands, how
careful, and circumspect men are to pass them where they ought to be passed,
in such Courts, and under such Officers as are authorized for that purpose;
for, whatsoever is done by him that has not a patent to warrant his practice,
is held to be void and frustrate by Masters of that profession. In like manner,
it stands us all upon in matters of higher importance than the sealing and
signing of temporal possessions to walk carefully to the diligent performance
of this special duty, that the signing of our Infants and sealing them in the
Congregation be made by the hands of such Officers as are appointed by God for
that purpose, and by no other. Atters. cod. loc.
If it be the will of a King to make a seal for the sealing of his grants, and
commit it to the trust of some Officers; and albeit another be made of the same
matter, and of the same form and fashion, yet it is none of the Kings seal,
its but a counterfeit Stamp. So the Lord has instituted the seal of Baptism,
and committed it to certain persons that they only should have a sealing
authority, so that no Sacraments can be warranted to be his Seals but such as
are signed by his Officers. I would gladly know to what purpose any man's seal
is that never was invested with a sealing power. Beza makes a supposition,
Suppose that a Princes seal should be stolen away, which he has appointed to
seal his grants withal, and should be set to by him that has no authority,
not being the Keeper thereof, what assurance has such an one by such an act?
So, if it were possible to be the seal of God which a private person should set
to, Baz. lib de Quest. in Sac. Quest 140, 141.
yet for all that he has stolen his patent and used it contrary to Gods
commandment; it is to no purpose to the party, and renders the doer of such an
act guilty of a heinous crime. The outward parts of a Sacrament are 4. the
Minister, Atters 1 book of the Sac in Genesis chapter 4.
the Word of Institution, the Element, and the Receiver. The Minister is the
first outward part of a Sacrament. There is required a Minister lawfully
called, chosen, and ordained, whosoever shall presume to set to any of the
Lords seals without a warrant or a calling, being no Officer nor Keeper of
them, prophanes those seals, and sets to a counterfeit stamp. Christ never gave
to private persons any such commandment, he never committed to them any such
office, he never commended to their care these holy actions, he never called
them to this honor, he never laid upon them this charge, and therefore have
no part in this business Now, Eqd. loc.
(says Attersol) All these 4 parts, and every of them are needful to the being
and nature of a Sacrament; take them away, or any of them, you take away the
substance and bring in a nullity of the Sacrament. If there be wanting either
Minister to deliver it, Word to institute it, Element to represent it, or
Receiver to take it, we cannot assure our selves to have any Sacrament of God,
but rather a tradition and invention of our own. What is the reason that the
Orthodox have condemned the Baptism of Women but for want of authority?

It cannot be a Sacrament at all without that which is essentially
praerequired, Buc. Bez^, Calv. Trelcat. etc.
and where there is wanting any essential praerequisite, it is a nullity.

Thirdly, Rem Baptismi, the thing offered by Baptism, which none but he can
do. To this purpose speaks Trelcatius, Lib 2. Inflit. de Bapt. pars (...).
Causa efficiens Baptismi bifariam considerari potest. Vel ut causa instituens,
vel ut causa instituta. Baptismate utens seu Baptizans, posteriori modo
Minister baptizans dicitur, Quia in Christi nomine baptismum administrans
Sacramentaliter ac Ministerialiter rem baptismi obsignat and confert, Ministri
autem nomine intelligimus eum cui in legitima vecatione Ministerium verbi
commissum est. The efficient cause of Baptism is to be considered in a double
consideration: Christ is the person instituting, the Minister the person
baptizing so called, because administering Baptism in the name of Christ, does
Sacramentally and Ministerially seal, and confer the thing offered by
Baptism: and by the name of Minister we understand him to whom the Ministry
of the Word is committed in a lawful calling: For when there is no power
Sacramentally or Ministerially to seal, to what purpose is that fealing? such
do violare praescriptos a Deo ordines, violate the orders prescribed of God. A
Minister (and not a private person) represents the person of Christ in the
Sacrament, whose Deputy and Ambassador he is; and therefore he only can offer
and deliver with power and authority the outward sign which answers fitly to
the inward matter, for he only has the key of binding and loosing, a power
that no Layman has. If you look unto men by whom this power is administered,
it is a mere Ministry; but if you look unto Christ, it is a most high
authority, than which there is on earth none greater, more profitable, or more
excellent. There are two keys, the binding and loosing, in regard of the diverse
objects and effects. The loosing key is that part of the Ministry whereby
remission of sins or absolution from sins in the name of Christ is pronounced
unto the Believers according to Gods word publicly or privately: and so Heaven
is opened and the Believer loosed by the preaching of the Gospel, from the
bonds of sin, and declared an heir of life. The binding key is that other part
of the Ministry, whereby the retention of their sins is denounced unto the
Unbelievers and disobedient, and so Heaven is shut unto them, and they are
bound, that is, they remain captived in the chains of sin, and are adjudged to
damnation, unless repentance follow; and these keys are of that weight, and
efficacy, that whosoever is remitted or retained on Earth is also remitted and
retained in Heaven, according to that John 20.23. whose sins ye remit etc. None
must imagine that this power depends upon the person or worthiness of the
Minister (for, indeed properly he can neither bind nor loose any man) but it
depends upon his lawful Ministry, or rather upon God himself, who by the holy
Ghost is powerful in the Ministry of the word, as often as the Minister does
duly execute his office: in this sense, these two places are reconciled, Mark
2.7. Who can forgive sins, but God alone? that is authoritative; and that of
John 20.23. Whose sins ye remit etc. namely, instrumentally; therefore (says
Attersol.) Take away the Minister, and it is no Sacrament.

Fourthly, Atters. 1 book c 5. of the Sac. in general.
and this is necessarily required to the substance of the Sacrament; for when
the word is added to the Element, then there is made a Sacrament. Now the
Sacramental word consists partly of a commandment proper and peculiar to
Ministers, Go teach all Nations; partly of a promise annexed, in the name of
the Father etc. In all the Scripture we never read of either command or
promise warranting the use of Baptism by Lay-persons; without the power of
Consecration, Sacraments are as a dead body without life, as a dumb show
without voice, as an empty cloud without water, and as a barren tree without
fruit, idle and dumb signs. But it will not be amiss to speak somewhat of the
Consecration of a Sacrament. To consecrate, Atters. 1 book of the Sac. chapter 8.
is to take a thing from the Common and ordinary use, and to appoint it to some
other holy use. It is the sanctification or dedication of the outward signs to
an holy purpose: without this the water in Baptism is common water, the bread
common bread, the wine common wine, and such as all men may take at their
ordinary tables. Without this it has no power, force and virtue: 1 book. chapter 4.
and if this be wanting, there is no Sacrament: for Baptism is no Sacrament,
except the word be joined to it and consecrated to that use. If either
Minister, Word, or Element be wanting; you take away the substance, and bring
in a nullity of the Sacrament.

Fifthly, There is but one baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. I believe one Baptism for the
remission of sins: we do all by this one door (and no other) enter into the
visible Church. Now this one Baptism is described unto us in the word of
truth, Atters. 3 book of the Sac. of the Lords Supper, chap. 20.
which we may understand by the Institution of Christ, and discharge those from
that number of Sacraments that want the warrant of the word; so that if there
be any other than what is there prescribed, it is none, a fiction, and humane
invention. This calls to my mind an expression of Zanchy's concerning the
Baptism of the 12 Disciples of Ephesus, Obs. in cap 25. de Bapt Aph. 6.
Cum Paulum diximus eos de quibus, Acts 19. Denuo baptizasse tanquam non rite
baptizatos: id sine ullius. interpretis praejudicio diximus etc. so goes on.
Whereas we said that Paul baptized again those of whom it is spoken in the 19
of the Acts, as being not rightly baptized: we said it without prejudice to any
learned Interpreters, for we condemn none. Only we desire the Reader to
construe favorably that word Rebaptize; for we meant not that they which were
rightly baptized, were afterward baptized again: Sed qui vero baptismo
praecedente, scilicet vera de Deo Patre, Filio, and Spiritu Sancto doctrina,
baptizati non suerant: But they which were not baptized with true Baptism,
where the true doctrine of God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost went
before. This to speak properly, was indeed not to be rebaptized, but to be
truly baptized; and presently after, Illos duodecim discipulos fuisse a Paulo,
vel saltem jussu Pauli baptizatos, tanquam non rite antea baptizatos, Those 12
Disciples were baptized of Paul, or at least by Paul's commandment, as having
not been rightly baptized before. These twelve Disciples have occasioned almost
as many opinions: the Treatises are large, I shall confine them, desirous to
finish this fourth Chapter; and so proceed to the rest, concerning which we
shall be brief. Some from hence draw an argument of Rebaptization, But August:
who held a difference betwixt John's and Christ's Baptism, yet defends his
opinion from Rebaptization. Ambrose and Hierome are of Zanchy's opinion, as
before related, that by a counterfeit Baptism, under the name of the Baptism
of John they were rather defiled than washed, or at least not rightly and duly
baptized. Chrysostom. 3 tom. in art. Hom. 40. Orig in 19 Art. August. Tom. 7. cont.
Petil. c 7. Sueg. Tom. 1. in Evang. Hom. 20.
The Fathers taught that these words [and when they heard it they were
baptized] were not the words of Saint Paul spoken of them which heard Saint
John Baptist, but expounded them as the words of S. Luke spoken of them which
heard Saint Paul, and so it seems evident from the Text. Some say that they
were initiated into the Baptism, that is, the doctrine of S. John, but were
not partakers of the Baptism of water. Others, that being baptized by S. John,
they were afterward baptized into the name of JESUS, that is, adorned with the
wonderful gifts of the Holy GHOST. Tertull. de Bapt. page 707. Cypr, de Bapt.
cap. 1. page 430. Ans. Tom. 7. cont. Petil. c. 7. col. 498.
Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, and others of the Fathers are of opinion, that
John's Baptism and Christ's were different. But Zanchy, Bucanus, and our later
Divines are of opinion that John's Baptism and Christ's are the same, In the
Author, substance, doctrine, sign, ceremony, effect, or signification, for the
same Sacrament is instituted of God, and the same forgiveness of sins, and
grace of the holy Ghost is signified, offered, and sealed: whether it be John
that administers, the Apostles, or succeeding Ministers. The only difference is
touching the circumstance and manner of the manifesting of Christ. John
baptized into him which came immediately after him, that is to say, into Christ
which should shortly suffer, and rise again; but the Apostles, and after them
all Ministers, baptize into Christ that has suffered and is risen again. But
against this truth the Council of Trent thunders, If any shall say that the
Baptism of John has the same force with Christ's baptism, Let him be accursed.
But for all this, it is a truth:

First, promise, the same repentance, the same forgiveness of sins, the same
element of water.

Secondly, John was consecrated in the person of Christ.

Thirdly, The outward form of Baptism was the same;

Fourthly, John. Apollos that was baptized with John's baptism, we read not
that he was baptized again.

Fifthly,

Sixthly, John portained to the fulfilling of all righteousness, Mat. 3.15. And
Luke testifies that the Publicans being baptized of him justified God; but the
Pharisees despised the counsel of God against themselves and were not baptized,
Luke 7.29. It is very evident that Christ's and John's baptism was the same,
that is, but one baptism, and therefore whosoever observes not Christ's
institution, but baptizeth contrary to his injunction (for so does a private
person) brings in a baptism different from Christ's, overthrows this one, and
so makes none.

It is an old received opinion, Quod debet non fieri valet factum, that it may
be valid, when done, which ought not to have been done.

The falsity of this will appear, Joab kills Abner and Amasa, and is reserved
for judgment. Phineas kills Zimri and Cosby, and it is imputed to him for
righteousness. Peter is reproved for drawing the sword, yet the Magistrate
commended, Romans 13. Phineas was stirred by God to the execution, so was not
Joab. Peter was a private person to whom God said, Thou shall not kill; But the
Magistrate is a public Officer, ordained by God to take vengeance on those
that do evil. There is more to be considered than the deed done, seeing the
same deed performed by a person that has a calling is lawful, which done
without a calling is unlawful. The Heathen Poet acknowledges this: Duo cum
idem faciunt saepe ut possis dicere, Atters. 2 book of Bapt. cap. 3.

Hoc licet impune facere huic, illi non licet;
Non quod dissimilis res est, sed is qui facit.
that is, Though two attempt an act in substance one, as does befall,
Yet one we often as lawful like, the other unlawful call.
Not that the deed is differing, the doer is all in all; so it is with a
private person, that attempts the Sacrament of Baptism: in regard he has no
calling nor commission he makes a profane washing and administers no Sacrament
of the Lord, Calv. in lib. Ep. p. 85.
but is ungodly and unlawful. What if it be administered by a Boy in sport, or
by a Fool, or Madman, by a Turk or Atheist using the words of institution? must
it be a good, lawful, and perfect Baptism? What is more unreasonable, and
absurd? I cannot see how a quod fieri non debet valet factum will make Baptism
administered by a private person valid and lawful, to whom God never committed
the administration of his Sacraments.

It is a Maxim, Accedat verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum, Join the
word of Institution to the outward sign, and there is made a Sacrament.

This Rule of the Father is undoubtedly true if rightly understood. Attersoll,
We affirm, that neither the Sons of Romulus at Rome, 1 Book of the Sacr. in
genesis chap. 5.
nor of Remus at Rhemes, shall ever be able to show, and prove, that they are
to be acknowledged and received as Sacraments of the Church, which have no
warrant of the word to command them.

CHAP. V.
That it is a grievous sin in such as being not lawfully called, offer to take
upon them the Ministerial Function.

IT is the usurpation of another office alieni muneris usurpatio. One of the
highest offices in the world, which sin God has visited with grievous
judgments, as Vzza who was smitten with sudden, and unexpected death, 2 Samuel 6.
only because he exceeded the bounds of his calling in putting up his hand to
stay the Ark from falling, which only belonged to the Levites; although his
intent and purpose was never so good, yet it displeased God, he had no word,
nor warrant for it. Azariah is made a Leper to the day of his death for
attempting one act of the Priests office, and but once, 2 King. 15. Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, had a specious pretense for their usurpation; yet fire
consumes Corah, and his company, and the earth swallows Dathan, and Abiram.
They had perverted that order that God had established to continue in his
Church, and the Lord works a strange work, altering the course of nature. Now
although God do not thus execute judgment from Heaven when his Ordinances are
violated, yet this sin is not hereby lessened, the punishment mitigated, nor
the hand of God shortened. The Sacraments of the Gospel of Christ are of much
more worth, and value than those of the Old Testament, and are therefore guilty
of much sorer punishment; Sacred Functions ordered by God, must not be
profaned by voluntary usurpations.

Secondly, the sin must needs be great, the Sacraments. Shall private persons
usurp to be the Lords Messengers to bring his Letters, and Seals, not called
nor authorized? It cannot be without dishonor to God, without the check and
controlement of Jesus Christ who is the Captain of his own host, the head of
his own body, Lord of his own house, and the great King of his own Church: if
therefore private persons administer the Sacraments they sin against God, and
go beyond the bounds of their calling. Atters. 3 book of the Sacr. of the Lords
Supper, chap 20.
If they will not be restrained, but rush forward, their sin lies at the door.

I shall here briefly discover to you the greatness of their sin that thrust
themselves into the calling of the Ministry without lawful ordination, or
deputation thereunto.

First, Luther, although he be more wise than Solomon, or David, ought to take
this honor unto himself except he be called of God as Aaron was, Heb 5.4.
though not called immediately by himself, yet mediately by Deputies under him.
Titus was to ordain Elders in every City, Tit 1.5. The Apostle ordained Elders
in every Church, Acts 14.23. Separate me Ba^nabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them, and when they had fasted, and prayed, and laid
their hands on them, they sent them away, Acts 13.2, 3. besides their
extraordinary gifts they must be set apart to this office, God commands it, his
word enjoynes it, St. Paul. St. Peter, St. James, call themselves Apostles,
implying their Commissions for both their calling and their authority, is set
down in the word Apostles, for Apostolos is as much as one sent. This sin
that we are now upon, is one of those many, that hales down judgments upon this
Land.

Secondly, have no such custom, no nor the Churches of God: St. Augustine
proposes a rule, and I think it is a good one, and it is this, he that goes
against Reason is no wise man, he that goes against the Scripture is no sober
man, and he that goes against the Church is no peaceable man; and it is
observed if any make his entrance unlawful, his course and progress is
troublesome; it is a step to much Schism and Faction.

Thirdly, it is a breach of that order God has enjoined, Decor in Domo ejus,
Beauty and comeliness are in his Sanctuary, and must they not be in his
Servants? Order it is natures beauty, the Churches ornament, the worlds
harmony, (...), says Zenoph: (...), a thing excelling all things both for use
and grace, it is in all things, in all places, in heaven, and Earth (hell
excepted) there is no manner of comeliness without it, but all out of fashion,
no kind of constancy, but all loose without it, all falls back to the first (
Tohis and Bohu) emptiness, and disordered rude Chaos of confusion. Now what
greater disorder then for a man to run unsent to the Lords Vineyard, to thrust
his sickle into Gods harvest, to step rudely into Moses chair, to climb in at
the Window, and not at the door: if none durst assume the honor of the
Leviticall Priesthood except he were called, Heb. 5 4 Evangelicall is much more
honorable, and it is great boldness to presume to assume it without a
calling. Yea, it is a breach of that order God has enjoined: As is confessed
by the Church of England.

Fourthly, Jer. 14.14. and 23.21. and 27.15. The Lord condemns them in that
they prophesied, but he sent them not; what needs this preposterous haste, this
running before God? It is surest and safest to take him along with us. Vix bono
peraguntur exitu quae malo sunt inchoata principio, Things ill begun are not
commonly well ended. Neither are the proceedings likely to be good, whose
beginnings are so greatly out of order. They which enter not into the Temple as
did Aaron, will hardly behave themselves in the house of the Lord as Aaron did.
Much have is seldom encountered with good success.

Again, Of the duty and dignity of the Minist. 2 treat.
the greatness of their sin appears in their presumption and violent boldness
to lay hands upon such a holy function. It is a doctrine of Master Perkins,
That all true Ministers, especially such as are deputed in the greatest works
in his Church, must be first of all stricken into a great fear, in
consideration of the greatness of their function, yea, into an amazement and
astonishment in the admiration of Gods glory, and greatness, whose room they
occupy, and whose message they bring; and this he grounds on those words of
the Prophet, Isa. 6.5. Then said I, woe is me, I am etc. He that steps into
this function without fear, may question his calling. When the Lord calls
any of his servants, he drives them into fears and amazements, as Moses, Exodus
4.10, 13. Oh my Lord, I am not eloquent, etc. So the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
1.6.7. O Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am but a child, etc. Thus it
was with Saul, afterward Paul, Acts 9.6. And he trembling, etc. Man's nature is
ready to take enough, and too much to it self; God therefore in his wisdom
puts a bridle into this corrupt nature of man, and makes it astonished, lest
it should presume and boast too much of it self; and how can he preach the
fear and reverence of the Lord, that was never cast down in the admiration of
Gods glory and majesty, but thrusts himself vainly and proudly into the
Ministry, not considering whose message he brings, and whose person he
represents? to assume this calling without a call, is extreme boldness and
sinful presumption. For, if a man would consider Gods greatness, and his own
vileness; he durst not thus attempt it. Upon that forementioned Text, Eod. loc.
Isay 6.5. Master Perkins makes this use, Let us see (says he) the monstrous
presumption of such as dare venture rashly into the Ministry to tread upon the
holy ground of God, with unclean feet, to handle the holy things of God with
unwashen hands; for what is it to enter into the Ministry, but to enter into
the presence of the great King? If God rebuked Moses for stepping too hastily
to the bush where his presence was, how will God check the consciences of such
as carelessly rush into the Ministry and to Gods holy Table, where God is
present in a far more excellent manner than he was in the bush? Such as
assume this calling are guilty of intrusion and presumption. Calvin on the 2d
of the Acts, and the 2d verse, And there came a sound from heaven, as of a
rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting: this,
says he, was to terrify them and to make them humble, for the Lord respects
the lowliness of his servants, and dwells with them that are of meek spirits,
he resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6.

Fifthly, it is a mocking of God, Accipite, says Christ, Receive the holy
Ghost, not assumite, Take it to your selves: it is sad, and to be lamented,
when men make sin a trifle, and mock God to serve their own turns, Jer. 23.21.

Sixthly, God punishes this kind of practice. Saul would play the Sacrificer,
but his seed for this sin was thrown from his Throne. God himself has punished
it in some with death, as in Vzza, and in the Bethshemites: it is thought of
Origin, a man of extraordinary parts, that his many errors were as Gods
judgments on him for his presumption in this particular. Let not the bold
Bethshemites look into the Arc, or Huzzah handle it, if they love their
lives. Thus have I briefly discovered the greatness of their sin, that thrust
themselves into the calling of the Ministry, without lawful ordination or
deputation thereunto.

CHAP. VI.
That the Sacrament of Baptism lawfully administered ought not to be reiterated.

OF this judgment is Zanchy. Credimus praeterea, fid. de Christ. relig. de
Bapt. 6.
sicut Circumcisio in carne semel tantum fiebat: sic Baptismum aqua qui
circumcisioni successit, semel rite ac legitime susceptum non esse denuo
repetendum. Furthermore we believe, that as Circumcision was done only once in
the flesh; So the Baptism of water, which succeeded circumcision, being once
rightly and lawfully received, Beza de spir. Sanct. cap. 4.
ought not again to be repeated. Of the same opinion is Beza. Jam vero quum
quisquis semel Christo vere datus est, quamvis interdum deflectat, nunquam
tamen for as ej^ciatur, ac perinde satis sit semel receptum esse, etc. There
are Reasons rendered for this:

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, Confess. of the Chur. of Belg Ar. 34. of Bapt. Confess of Bob. chapter 12.
of Bapt. Beza Quest. and Resp.
This is seen by the confession of Reformed Churches. To such as are once truly
baptized into the Church of Christ, there ought not to be any reiteration of
Baptism. Now if it be performed by Heretics that deny the principles of
doctrine, and corrupt the essential form of Baptism, as the Arians,
Samosatenians, and others that are not sincere in the doctrine of the Trinity,
such ought to be baptized again, the first being of no validity: for the
essential form being taken away, the matter it self is also taken away, and
this is no rebaptization, but the Administration of the true Baptism.

If done by some Heretics, as the Novatians, Donatists, Istos igitur
rebaptizares? Resp. Imo Christi Baptismonanquam bapt^z^tos bapt^zarem. sid. de
Christ. relig. de Bapt. cap 6.
or Papists who err out of the way of truth in some part of doctrine, and
using many needless and superstitious ceremonies, yet using the public
Ministry, and essential form of the institution, such ought not to be
baptized again. But where it is not done according to the form of Baptism,
denying the Trinity, or by a lawful Minister of the Gospel, such ought to be
baptized again. We have already proved it no Sacrament, and therefore Zanchy's
rule will follow. Semel rite ac legitime susceptum, non esse denuo repetendum.
We read not that the Apostles did ever baptize any except those which Paul did
baptize, who had not been rightly baptized. For says he, Observat. Aph 6.
Non enim intelleximus, qui rite baptizati fuerant, eos postmodum fuisse
rebaptizatos, sed qui vero baptismo praecedente, Scilicet, vera de Deo Patre,
Filio, and Spiritu Sancto doctrina baptizati non fuerant. For we meant not,
that they which were rightly baptized were afterward baptized again: but they
which were not baptized with true Baptism, where the true doctrine of God the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost went before it, they, after Paul had
taught them the true and sound doctrine of Christ, then they took true
Baptism; and after Baptism, by the laying on of hands received the Holy
Ghost, and the gifts thereof: and this to speak properly, was indeed not to be
rebaptized, but to be truly baptized. Which says he, is not repugnant to the
Analogy of faith, nor brings with it any absurdities, because the Fathers do
not speak of a Baptism rightly administered, and when this is, he renders one
Reason as before, when done by a lawful Minister.

CHAP VII.
That Necessity is no plea for Baptism by Lay persons.

BEllarm: De Sacra^. Bapt. lib 1. cap. 7.
and the Church of Rome teach, that it is not lawful for private persons to
Baptize, except in case of necessity, and exclaimes against Calvin for
affirming the contrary. We have already proved, that the Administration of the
Sacraments do only and properly belong to the Ministers of the Gospel, and
private persons are quite exempted. This proceeded from that harsh, and
uncharitable opinion of the necessity of Baptism, without which they taught
that salvation could not be obtained; and of this opinion was Austine, who
deservedly is called Durus pater Infantum: hence it was that Midwives and
others were permitted to baptize children, to prevent damnation, and hence from
that bloody opinion that children were damned which dyed unbaptized, grew these
curious questions, whether wanting water, we might baptize with sand, or water
distilled, and compounded, and the like. Sacraments are not the cause, Atters.
2 book of Bapt. chap. 5.
but Seals of salvation, and do not of themselves confer grace. It is not the
naked privation of the sign, but the contempt of it, that is dangerous. What
shall we think of the great number of Infants in time past that dyed without
circumcision before the Eighth day, or those who were not circumcised for the
space of Forty years in the Wilderness, or the Infants of Christians who
dyed before the Feasts of Easter and Pentecost without Baptism, Socrat. lib. 5.
cap. 21.
(for at those Feasts Baptism was administered in times past, in Thessalia;)
Baptism was celebrated once in a year, namely, at Easter. That they were all
deprived of salvation? it is harsh and uncharitable so to think. Hence I say,
proceeded Baptism by Women, which was brought in by the Heretic Marcion, Epiph
l. 1. Tom. 3. haer. 42. p. 144.
as Epipha. witnesses. Quod permiserit mulieribus authoritatem baptizandi; and
this amongst other things he calls Marcions Ludibria.

The Orthodox, in case of necessity, will not allow private persons to baptize.
Some will sooner grant an extraordinary call to the Ministry, then declare
the baptism of one out of office lawful. Zanchy upon a question started by
St. Augustine, Cont. Ep. Parm. lib. 2. cap. 13. col. 42.
Vtrum, qui nunquam fuit Baptizatus, baptizare alium possit, which he durst not
resolve without a Council, notwithstanding Thomas Aquinas dare do it, and
resolves it in the affirmative. Sed ego, says Zanchy, proponam quaestionem, in
Ephesians 5. in Quaest. de cause. ^ff Bapt. Quaest. 5.21.
ad quam facilius responderi posse arbitror. Esto Turcus aliquis, in regione
unde facile ad Christianas Ecclesias veniri non possit: Is ex lectione novi
Testamenti donetur cognitione Christi, and fide: doceat vero familiam, eamque
ad Christum convertat, atque adeo etiam alios. Quaeritur An is possit baptizare
eos, quos ad Christum convertit, cum ipse nunquam fuerit baptizatus baptismo
aquae? Suppose a Turk far distant from Christian assemblies be converted to
the knowledge and faith of Christ by reading the Scriptures, be teach and
convert his family and others, may he baptize these thus converted by him? He
answers, I doubt not but he may: Ratio est, quia Minister est verbi a Christo
extra ordinem excitatus. For that he is a Minister of the word extraordinarily
raised up by Christ. Others, in cases of extremity think when public Baptism
cannot be had, private is sufficient, and when not so much as private may not
be well obtained, votall is enough: As some of the Doctors of the Roman
Church acknowledge. Satis est si adsit mentaliter, Rhem. and Caje^. in Joh 3.
idem Cajet. in 3 Tho. Quaest. 68. art. 1. L^mb sent lib 4. d^st. 4.
ubi non potest haberi Sacramentaliter, Where this Sacrament cannot be had, the
desire is sufficient. If in extreme necessity thou can not enjoy this holy
water, assure thy self God accepts a desire for a deed. To this purpose
speaks Bucanus, Care should be taken that the Infant be baptized by a lawful
and fit Minister; J^nseu. contex. 20. Thom. part 3. Quaest. 68. Art. 2.
but if that may not be obtained, it is to be commended to God, that he may
baptize it with the Baptism of his Spirit. Constantine the great was the first
Christian Emperor, yet was he not baptized till the time of his death. And
Valentinianus, a Christian Emperor, died without Baptism; Bus. 47. com. pla.
of Bapt. Tripe. 1. H^st. lib 3. cap. 12. Orat. de ob^^u Valent.
yet does Ambrose give him his due commendation, and doubted not of his
salvation; for as he was coming to Ambrose, he died in the way, who was (says
he) baptized in will and desire, though he had never the outward means. The
Orthodox, I say, will not allow (in case of necessity) Baptism by private
persons, but looks upon it as unlawful and a violation of the order and rule
prescribed by Christ. in. Ephesians. 5. de cau. effi^. Ba Quaest. 3. Instit. lib. 2.
de Bapt. Instit lib 4. cap. 15, and 16. Instit. Bapt, ^xplic. (...) apud Marcum
cap. 16. ve^s 15, 16. and expos in Mat. 28.18. Beza Quaest. and Respons. The
lat. Cons. of Helvetia, cap 20.
So Zanchy, Nulla est necessitas quae nos cogat praescriptos a Deo ordines
violare. So Trelcatius has the same words, Non homini privato in casu
necessitatis baptizare licet, cum nulla sit necessitas quae etc. Calvin is
large to this very purpose. So is Piscator. So is Beza, propounding of the
question, Whether Baptism ought to be administered by Midwives? He answers,
Apage vero crassam and putidam hanc sacri Ministerii prophanationem, and
further adds, Sed quid si urgeat necessitas? Jam antea respondi, salutis
nestrae initium duci a Tabulis ipsius foederis, non a Sigillo iis appenso: quod
tamen si quis aspernetur, illarum beneficio merito privetur: Non videri vero
contempsisse, qui illud obtinere servato legitimo ordine non potuerit. This is
the doctrine of Helvetia, We teach that Baptism should not be ministered in the
Church by Women or Midwives. For Paul secludeth women from Ecclesistical
callings; but Baptism belongs to Ecclesiastical offices.

And seeing, says Bucanus, 47 Com. place of Baptism.
the office of Preaching is not permitted to Women, nor the administration of
the Lords Supper: Why should they take upon them to baptize? and for that
example of Zephora who circumcised her son, It is either to be held as a rash
unlawful act of a foolish and angry woman, or as a singular action not to be
followed, Atters 2 book of Bapt. chapter 3.
her example must not be drawn into imitation. The same may be judged of any
private or Lay man. Neither do we admit that case of necessity (if it compel
us to violate the orders prescribed of God) besides the testimony of all the
Orthodox, this practice was absolutely condemned in the Council of Carthage,
Can. 100. There is no plea for necessity, which by the ordinance of God is
broken and profaned. But admit a private person may administer the Sacrament
of Baptism; It will follow, that he may as well administer the Lords Supper,
for the dignity of one Sacrament is no less than the other.

CHAP. VIII.
That the efficacy of it is not tied to the Instrument or outward sign.

IT depends not upon the person or worthiness of the Ministers, Buc. 43. com.
pl. of the power and authority of the Church.
but upon God, who by the holy Ghost is powerful in the Ministry of the word,
as often as the Minister does duly execute his office. The Minister has power
of consecration and Sacramental obsignation, but not of conferring the power
and efficacy of it: a Minister may be said to cleanse from sin, and to
regenerate not effectively, but sacramentally; and to remit sins not
authoritatively, but instrumentally: for by him as by an instrument, Christ
does wash and regenerate. And we must take heed of ascribing that to the
Minister which is proper to Christ. He may offer the sign, but he cannot
bestow the thing signified. John may baptize with water, but he cannot give the
Spirit. Man sprinkleth the body, but Christ the soul, being saved by (...) the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. and this is signified by
external Baptism, which may wash away the filth of the body, but not the
conscience, without the powerful working of the holy Spirit. Doctrine of the
Church of England, Art. 26. and other Reformed Churches.
The efficacy of the Sacrament hangs not upon the fitness or unfitness, the
vices and the virtues of the Minister; his impiety and wickedness makes not a
nullity of the Sacraments, but the want of him does. I confess the Church
should endeavor that the Ministers thereof be holy, and unblamable, and woe
unto them if any perish by their vicious practices; yet we must not measure the
profit of the Receiver by the person administering. The Sacraments are good,
though the Instrument be never so bad. He may minister comfort to thee, though
none to himself. As the workmen that builded the Arc prepared a means to save
others, but were drowned themselves. I had rather make choice of an honest
godly Minister than one profane for such a work: it is more comely, and yields
more comfort; yet their power is the same. Now there ought to be enquiry made
after such as are bad. Nor is God tied to the outward sign, but is a free
Agent. Sometimes the baptism of water is without the baptism of the Spirit, as
is seen in Simon Magus. Sometimes the baptism of the Spirit goes before,
sometimes accompanies, and sometimes follows the baptism of water. The
effect of it is deferred till God see good. It does not of it self confer
grace, nor is it tied to the Sacrament.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Ephesians. 5.16. This is the channel of conveyance, but not the fountain,
1 Pet. 3.21. So that of themselves, of their own power, or any real and
essential virtue they have nothing. Grace is not contained and shut up in them
as water in a vessel, or as a medicine in a box; therefore the bare want of it
cannot bring the danger of eternal condemnation: yet let men beware of putting
a small account and estimation on them, for they are Gods ordinances appointed
by him, to which we must neither make addition nor substraction. The Sacraments
cease not in themselves to be true Sacraments, although administered by unworthy
Ministers, and received by unfaithful people. We do, says the Confession of
Helvetia, ^orme Conf: of the Minist: of the word, Art. 15.
confess that the Ministers of the Church are, (as Paul terms them) the
Fellow Laborers of God, by whom he does dispense both the knowledge of
himself, and also remission of sins, turn men to himself, raise them up,
comsort them, and also terrify and judge them; yet so, that notwithstanding we
do ascribe all the virtue and efficacy that is in them unto the Lord, and give
a Ministry only to the Ministers. For it is certain that this virtue and
efficacy is not to be tied to any creature at all, but is to be dispensed by
the free favor of God, in what manner, and to whom it pleases him: For he
that waters is nothing, neither he that planteth; but God that gives the
increase.

Therefore Ministers are to be considered, The later Conf. of Helvetia.
not as Ministers by themselves alone, but as the Ministers of God, even such
as by whose means God does work the salvation of mankind. For which cause we
give counsel to beware that we do not so attribute the things that pertain to
our conversion and instruction unto the secret virtue of the holy Ghost, Of the
Ministers of the Ch: their insti: and offices, chap. 18.
that we make frustrate the Ecclesiastical Ministry.

But we are unjustly suspected of some as though we did attribute nothing to
the preaching of the outward word, Out of the decla^ of the same Confess: which
Luther himself approved by his Letters, Anno 1537.
and to the Sacraments, or as though we did take that from them which the Lord
himself does attribute unto them, and by this means should overthrow and
abolish the ordering and guiding of those things which pertain to the Church:
Whereas on the contrary side we have a chief regard unto this, that we neither
attribute too much nor too little to these things.

Notwithstanding, The lat: Conf: of Helv. of the Sacraments of Christ, chapter 19.
we esteem not the goodness of the Sacraments by the worthiness or
unworthiness of the Ministers; so likewise, we do not weigh them by the
condition of the Receivers. For, we know that the goodness of the Sacraments
does depend upon the faithfulness or truth, and the mere goodness of God.

Also we teach this, that the Sacraments of themselves, Out of the Conf: of
Boh: of the Sacraments in general, chapter 11.
or by their own virtue, for the works sake, or for the only outward action,
that is, for the bare participation, receiving and use thereof, cannot give
grace, nor a justifying or a quickening faith to any which before was not
inwardly quickened by the Holy Ghost, and has no good motion within himself.

CHAP. IX.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a special part of the Ministerial
Office, that it ought not to be neglected or laid aside. Several Reasons
showing that the long Omission of it is unwarrantable.

THe cloth of gold with which the Church is apparelled is the righteousness of
Christ imputed. The hand that puts on this goodly Garment is faith; and the
Sacraments confirming our faith in Christ, are the buttons, as it were,
clasping the cloak close to the soul. We have already clearly proved that it
is the office of the Minister of the Gospel, and to him it properly belongs
to preach the word and Administer the Sacraments. Having spoken of Baptism I
shall now presume to offer something concerning the Lords Supper. God in all
ages has given his Church outward representations and visible signs of
inward, spiritual, and heavenly things: such were the tree of Life, and the
tree of Knowledge of good, and evil; The ratifying his Covenant to the Jews by
Circumcision, and the Passover; and to us by Baptism, and the Lords Supper;
which as visible Sermons preach unto us the love of God, and give assurance of
his promises: his Word is the Evidence, his Sacra^^^ts the Seals; and what is
promised by the one, is sealed by the other. God did not think his outward word
sufficient, but also added this Sacrament of his last Supper, for our further
assurance, and confirmation, a testimony of his faithfulness, a pledge of his
promises, a token of unmeasurable love, and remedy against all carnal doubting
and distrust; having not only his hand writing, but seal, from whence the
faithful soul draws an argument of much comfort and spiritual consolation; here
are not only promises, but the writing of God, the oath of God, and the seal
of God for confirmation. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper does more clearly
and fully (considering the manner of working) represent and paint out before us
the love of God in Christ, than the word does; for we do not only hear of
Christ, but as it were, see, handle, touch, and taste him. Now the Lord has
ordained Officers, Keepers of his great Seal whom he has deputed, and set
apart to this very end, to seal his promises and Covenant-graces to every
believing subject. And therefore if any (so deputed) shall through pride, envy,
or any sinister respects and groundless excuses no ways warrantable refuse to
put to this Seal for that use and purpose God intended it, is guilty of no
small crime, and deserves justly to bear Office no longer. At my coming to
this place I did upon the importunity of some godly Christians (considering the
long omission of this Sacrament) administer the Lords Supper, yet not without
many praevious Sermons made for the instruction and preparation of my
Congregation, at which some more precise than wise, took offense; and whereas
it was intended as a bond for further communion, it was made use of to a final
separation, and my practice extremely condemned, and my person exposed to much
calumny, being the beginning of a sad persecution. I must crave some time to
vindicate my practice, resolving by Gods assistance that truth shall never
suffer by my negligence or cowardice: as I long since satisfied my self, so I
hope I shall satisfy others in this particular. What I did in giving the
Sacrament to all indifferently, must be considered in a time when there was no
government or discipline in the Church. I shall humbly propose

First, viz: (both knowing and godly Christians) be warrantable or not.

Secondly,

First, we read or hear of Christ's passion we are greatly affected, but much
more when he is set before our eyes, and visibly crucified in our sight, this
extremely moves devout affections, and leaves behind deep impressions: No
action more than this sets out before us the great love and goodness of Christ
our Savior, in which, every believing soul must needs acknowledge the depth
of Gods mercy and love, who through Christ was reconciled to us miserable
sinners, enters into a League and Covenant to be our God, and seals his grace
and unspeakable benefits by this Sacrament; he loves us living and dying, and
leaves a perpetual commemoration of his love to mankind, being in this
exhibited not only to the ear, but eye and cast, which affords exquisite
fruition and delight. This Sacrament is not a naked, but exhibitive sign, an
objective, exciting the mind as the word does in a moral way, representing
Christ and him crucified; besides it has a consideration of (...) and non
(...) tantum, it is a seal, and not a teaching and representing sign only. I
leave it to any rational man's consideration, whether the long omission of so
great a pledge of love, or seldom administration of this necessary Ordinance
of Christ does not put a bar to a Christians thankfulness. The Lords Supper
is called an Eucharist, Luke 2.14.
because it is a thanksgiving to God, for giving his Son to die for us; and
therefore that Hymn is so fitly sung by Men on Earth at the commemoration of
his death; as it was by the Quire of Heaven at the celebration of his birth. It
was first used in the Communion (as it is thought) by Thelesphorus a good man,
Walfrid. lib. de ^^b. E^^l cap. 22. Ian. lib. 3. cap 3.
and a glorious Martyr, Anno 254, Jan. 5. That which follows in our Communion
book, We praise thee, We bless thee, Baron. annot. tom. 2 fol. 120. Cassand.
liturgi. cap. 21.
was added by that famous Bishop Hilary: singing it first in his own Church,
Anno 340. and after brought into other Churches by Pope Symmachus, An. 510. The
Churches of Scotland use the like form of thanks at their Communion.

Secondly, Romans 15.8.

First, in the Book of his Eternal Counsel, that Book S. John speaks of, Revel.
5.1, 2. which had 7 seals, to signify that it was perfectly ratified.

Secondly, in his Son our Savior, for him has God the Father sealed, John
6.29. The riches of the New Testament are confirmed to us by the blood of
Christ, Heb. 9.15.

Thirdly, by Gods privy Seal: his Spirit is called the Spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1.13.

Fourthly, God confirms his promises by this Sacrament, which is his broad
Seal to confirm our faith, and ratify our assurance in Christ: It does give
and confer faith, but more surely and strongly confirms faith; which
confirmation is not by any inherent power in it, but by the holy Spirit working
a strong persuasion and assurance in us, sealing the blessings of the Covenant,
which do chiefly consist of three parts:

First, the forgiveness of sins, Jer. 33.8. Isa. 43.25.

Secondly, the adoption of sons, Jer. 31.31, 32.

Thirdly, the promise of Eternal blessedness. And what greater blessings than
pardon to poor sinners, acceptance of bondslaves to be sons, and to have the
promise of Everlasting life? This is the Covenant written by God, to which he
has put to his Seal for our further assurance: One Tree of Life served Adam,
One Rainbow gave assurance to Noah, but to us behold Two unchangeable
Sacraments, two witnesses whereby we have full assurance. Now I conceive that
the deferring of this Seal from time to time, which does confirm our Charter,
is a great weakening of our faith, hindrance of our assurance, and ratifying the
blessings of the Covenant of grace.

Thirdly, communion, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. As faith receives him, so by this we are
joined near to him and have spiritual fellowship with him; by this (he means)
that the faithful which come with due preparation are joined and united to
Christ by Faith instrumentally, by the Bread sacramentally, and by the Holy
Ghost spiritually made one spirit, 1 Cor 6.17. or one spiritual body: as the
members receive life from the head, and the tree moisture from the root, so the
faithful from Christ.

Secondly, this seals that communion that Christians have one with another: For
we that are many are one bread and one body, because we are all partakers of
one head, 1 Cor. 10.17. It puts us in mind of our unity and concord being one
body, and to avoid discord and dissension, 1 Cor. 11.18, 20. When ye come
together, etc. This was one end why it was ordained of Christ, to be a bond of
love, and chain us together, that we break not from God and our Brethren. Of
the Church of England, Art. 28.
The Church of England says, that the Supper of the Lord is not only a sign
of love that Christians ought to have amongst themselves one to another, etc.
This are we taught by the same bread compact of many corns, the same wine pressed
out of many grapes, 1 Cor. 10.17. Oh how many great and grievous are our
distractions! Brother against Brother, Father against Son, Minister against
Minister, People against Minister; he has no part in Christ that does not
grieve at this. What a shame is it that the Sheep of the same Shepherd, the
Children of the same Father, the Servants of the same Master, the Heirs of the
same Kingdom, the Guests of the same Banquet, the Partakers of the same Hope,
the Members of the same Body, the Professors of the same Faith, should
contend, and strive one against another, fighting, quarrelling, hating,
envying, and backbiting one of another. Saint Paul condemning the abuses of the
Corinthians, exhorts them to tarry one for another, 1 Cor. 11.33. that they
would go hand in hand, and lay aside all difference and dissension. And our
Savior enjoins Brotherly reconciliation, Mat. 5.24. When thou bring thy
gift, etc. I appeal to any judicious Christian, whether this fact does not
conduce to the renewing and maintaining of love, and was by our Savior
instituted to that very end, and whether the seldom use of it be not a great
cause of that general hatred, rancour, spite and envy of one against another.

Fourthly, Art. 28.
The Church of England calls this a Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's
death. It was Christ's last word to his Disciples, the words of a dying friend,
which ever leaves behind deep impressions, [Doe this in remembrance of me,] it
was reserved till the approaching of his death, that we might the better
remember him when he was dead: God gives the Rainbow, a token of mercy to
posterity; the first born must be sanctified, that so the day of the Jews
deliverance out of the Land of Egypt might be remembered: There must be a
Golden pot of Manna reserved for the remembrance of that great mercy in feeding
the Jews with Angels food. When the Lord parted the waters of Jordan, he
commanded Joshua to set up 12 Stones in memorial of his mighty and miraculous
works, and that when the Children of Israel should ask in time to come what
was meant by those stones, they should answer, that the waters of Jordan were
cut off before the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord. Even so the Lord has left
unto his Church the Sacrament of his Supper as a visible representation of a
crucified Christ, and has commanded us to continue this holy remembrance of
his death and passion, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. to be kept in memory, and remain to
posterity that they might know the occasion of it. I desire that it may be
considered, whether the long omission of the Lords Supper does not hinder
Christians from a frequent meditation of the great work of Redemption.

Fifthly, Quid feci, quid non feci? Yet we had need of all helps to this end,
and the Sacrament being a lively representation of a crucified Christ, does
bring to our minds the remembrance of our bitter sins, that brought to Christ
such bitterness of torment, Magna amaritudo peccati quae tantam amaritudinem
peperit, Great was the bitterness of sin which brought forth so much
bitterness of torment. When we behold a crucified Savior, we presently
reflect on our sins as the proper and principal causes of Christ's sufferings,
Pilate, Herod, Judas, the Jews and Gentiles were but instruments which our
sins set on work. None are more guilty than we whose sins are those bloody
instruments that slew the Lord of glory.

Sixthly,

First, by this the Lord represents his promises, as it were, painted in a
Table, and sets them forth as in a lively picture before our eyes, that we
may not only hear, but see, handle, touch, and taste, and digest them. It is
observed, that this Sacrament does more seal the promises than the Word does,
not for the substance and matter it self, but for the manner of working, making
us after a sort to handle Christ with our hands, and see him with our eyes.
Though the Word and Sacraments agree as instruments, by which the holy Ghost
uses to make us one with Christ, and partakers of salvation, the working and
forcible power of both depending on God alone, and flowing from him as from a
fountain; and yet they differ, in that the Word is offered to all, none
excluded and debarred from the hearing of it, 1 Cor. 14. yet not all to be
admitted to this. Again, the Word begins and begets faith, but this is of
another nature. We must bring Faith with us: the Word affects the ear, but
this offers Christ to the eyes, and we see him crucified before us.

Secondly, Ames, to be the Sacrament of the nourishing and growth of the
faithful in Christ. Why should that be denied which Christ himself has
appointed as an help and means of this growth and nourishment? The Lords Supper
is to be considered under a fourfold notion: 1. As it is a spiritual medicine
to cure the remainders of our corruptions. 2. As it is a spiritual food to
strengthen our weak graces. 3. As it is a spiritual cordial to comfort our
distressed consciences. 4. As it is a strong obsignation and forcible
engagement to all acts of thankfulness, and obedience in Jesus Christ. I leave
it to any experienced Christian to judge, whether their faith has not been
greatly strengthened in the frequent receiving of this blessed Sacrament, and in
the long forbearance have found much weakness of faith.

Seventhly, Jemes.
because it is a special part of Gods positive and instituted worship. It is
more properly and immediately the worship of God than the exercise of
discipline. Discipline is necessary to the well-being of a Church, Rutherf.
Whitaker. de Eccl. contro. 2. Quaest. 5. c. 17.
but this Sacrament in some degrees necessary to the essence and being of a
Church, the administration of the Sacraments are in some sort the essential
mark of the Church, but so is not discipline. Some think the Sacraments are but
only civil and ceremonial, and to be received in obedience to Magistrates, but
are of no effect to perfect one: But it is not so, for they do greatly sin who
either do not use the Sacraments at all, or administer them when, and to whom
they list. It is a duty that lies upon all Believers to the end of the world, 1
Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Want of Chu: government no warrant, etc. p 3. Jeans, page 4.
And there ought to be fit and convenient seasons for the celebration of it
That it is a duty, Mr. Jeanes well observes, from the aforesaid Text, quoting
several Learned Authors, as Tilemanus, Hishusius, Fredericus, Baldwinus,
Peter Martyr, Calvin, Musculus, Aretius, Hipperius, Tossanus, Paraeu^,
Piscator, and others: and he adds from Master Pemble, that (...) implies
here a (...), as often as you do it, therefore do it often, as a duty
incumbent on Christians; for this we have the example of the last and purest
times: The Apostles delivered it, and the people received it every Lords day,
Acts 2.41, 42. and 20.7. This was the custom of the Church many years after
the Apostles times, as we read in Ecclesiastical story, in some places every
day, as Augustine August. in Job. ir^ct. 26. Chrysostom in Ephesians. 1. Hom. 26.
; every Lords day, as Chrysostom; in all places, So Just. Martyr and Tertull.
often in the year, as the same Augustine Aug. ad Ian. Epist. 1.9.
: Until the negligence of the Pastors and coldness of the people brought in
the seldome-use of it. It cannot be denied but it proceeded from the shop and
invention of the Devil (whosoever were the instruments) to bring in this
corrupt custom of once communicating in the year. By this word [as often] is
not meant that Christ has left a liberty to the Church when and how often they
will celebrate the Lords Supper. I will not dispute the Churches liberty
concerning prudent, fit, Ieanes, page 4.
and convenient seasons for the administration of the Lords Supper, so that she
keep within the latitude of frequency; it is not left free unto Christians and
committed to our discretions to receive or not receive. Such a conclusion is
bad from this word [as often] this were no lawful liberty, but unlawful
licentiousness. We ought to make some conscience of this duty, being a
Commandment of Christ, as we do of other Commandments prescribed, Thou shall
not steal; few but make some conscience thereof, because Gods Commandment; so
here is a Commandment from our Father, and Master, whom we should obey as Sons
and Servants: God is dishonored by a careless abstaining, as well as by an
unreverent receiving. Now it cannot be otherwise imagined, but the long
Omission is a neglect of our duty, and of that principal part of Gods positive
and instituted worship. It is the safest for Christians to conform to the
Apostolical and primitive times; and that then it was used every Lords day is
apparent: Divine Right of Church Government, page 20. Jean. 21.
And whatsoever actions (say the London Divines) were done by Saints recorded
in Scripture, upon such grounds as are of moral, perpetual, and common
concernment, are obligatory to all, and a Rule to after-generations, and how
the omission for 7, 8, 9, 10 years stands with Apostolical practice I leave to
any to judge; and what if it bind not to the same time? yet it holds out a
frequency of administration. I wish all Ministers would observe this
Apostolical practice, for we cannot have better patterns for imitation than
the Primitive Church, Out of the Conf. of Beh. of holy Bapt. cap. 12.
which is the true and best Master of posterity, and as a Guide, leads us the
way. The Lords Supper is the work or special business of the Lords day, and
the day is the special time for such a business. Shep. of the Sabbath.
It was ordained by the Canons of many Churches, that every one should
communicate at least three times in the year; but now, if a survey were taken,
it would be found not once in many years, to the great shame and beastly
slothfulness of many Ministers and Christians.

Eighthly, Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. and so we are to understand these words, So
Ieanes, p. 3. Pet. Martyr, Calvin, Musc. Arctius, and many others.
as the Orthodox affirm. Christ commands the perpetual remembrance of his
death, and it was ordained purposely to stir us up to that very end: besides
many worthy considerations, this is not the least, that it is the commandment
of Christ; and we are to make conscience of this duty, if we would bring
Christians to the Apostolical practice: and to-have the often use retained, we
must not study Arguments to frighten people from it, but endeavor how they may
be prepared and fitted for the worthy receiving of it. I wish it were
considered that he that willingly abstains from the Lords Supper, and will not
come, is as well guilty as he that abuses it. As it is a grievous sin to
present our selves unworthily to this Sacrament, without due preparation; so we
greatly offend in the frequent absenting our selves: it must not be imagined
(God forbid it should) that the abuse of this Ordinance consists only in the
unworthy receiving; if so, to avoid this, very few would receive it at all. God
is dishonored by a wilful absence, as well as by an unreverent presence. They
that may and will not, are as well guilty as they that do and should not. We
must not press sinners altogether not to come, and terrify them with
judgment, (for some scarcely hear any other lesson) but press preparation; to
teach them how to be fitted, and qualified, and to win them by the
heartbreaking, and heart-piercing love of a Savior. Atters. lib. 3. chap. 15.
of the Sacram. of the Lords Supper.
I shall conclude this with the words of a Reverend Divine, A sick Patient that
makes no account of the diet which the Physician has prescribed, is no less
blameworthy than he that abuses it disorderly; for such as being bidden to
come to the receiving of his Son, and refused, were as well destroyed as he that
came without his wedding garment: When the Passover was celebrated, such
persons as were negligent to observe the same were cut off from his people,
because they brought not the offering of the Lord in his due season, they shall
bear their sin, Numb 9.13. If this pretense were a lawful warrant to abstain
from the Lords Supper for fear of unworthy receiving, or receiving with the
unworthy, we might upon the same reason bid all godliness farewell, inasmuch
as it opens a gap for men to refrain from all the duties of piety. It is matter
of grief and sorrow to see men make so little account of the receiving of this
Sacrament, as if the Omission were nothing, and that all sin lay in the
unworthy receiving of it.

Now for commands, there can be no dispensation to bind us to obedience;
without dispute, the word [as often] does not leave us to liberty, when and how
often we please to communicate, to use or not to use it. Jeanes, page 5.
There can be no such conclusion drawn from hence, but he teaches us what we
must do, as often as according to the command of Christ, we celebrate it, viz:
to show forth the death of Christ. Now I am much unsatisfied how we can obey
this command, and yet omit this Ordinance for many years together.

CHAP. X.
The several Objections for the long Omission of the Lords Supper answered.

I Come now to those Objections I find and have heard alleged for the long
Omission of the Lords Supper, to use rather their own term, the suspension of
it for the present.

First, Affirmativa praecepta semper obligant, non ad semper, Affirmative
precepts do always bind, but not to always: so that we are not thus to
perform always what they command, but only Loco ac tempore debitis, when we
have due time and place; so that pro hic and nunc, they may cease to be
obligatory, as when scandal will ensue, or, there is not a fit season and
opportunity to do what is commanded. Jeanes of the Lords Supper, p 7.
To this I will give you the answer of a late Orthodox Divine, We must put a
difference between a transgression of a precept, and a temporary or occasional
forbearance of the matter commanded. No precept whatsoever is for the eschewing
the scandal of any to be broken or transgressed, and if a precept be not
transgressed, where what is enjoined in it is wholly and altogether omitted, I
leave it to censure: totally to abstain from what they command, is sinfully to
omit what is commanded by them. There can be no dispensation of an express
command upon any ground or pretense whatsoever: we are to make conscience of
the duty, and obey the command, observing the rule of preparation, and due
examination. This command is violated not only when the Ordinance is wholly
omitted, but when seldom or rarely dispensed.

Many wicked,

First, our charity should begin at home, Ruth. separation discussed.
We are commanded to examine our selves, and so to eat, but not examine our
fellow Communicants; to judge our selves, but not others: so that if some
receive a blank-seale, and make the Sacrament a lying-seale and damnation, the
sin is neither the Pastors nor peoples, if lawful means of prevention have
been used.

Secondly, Atters. 1 book 2 chapter of the Sac. in general.
The unbelievers and unrepentant come indeed into the Assembly of the faithful
to hear the Word of God read, preached, and expounded; and as they come without
faith, so depart without fruit, yet their company defiles not the saving
hearer, so it is in the Sacraments. Again, as the faith of the worthy Receiver
cannot sanctify the offensive Liver; so the infidelity and iniquity of another
shall not bar the faithful soul from fruitful receiving, according to that
saying, The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself, Ezekiel. 18.20. The believer is
not to omit a necessary duty because of the presence of the ungodly, though the
miscellane rabble of the profane be admitted amongst us, shall the lewdness
of those take away Gods Ordinance? God forbid. What if some did not believe?
shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? Romans 3.3. So if some
receive the Lords Supper unworthily, shall their unworthy receiving make the
Lords command without effect? In all companies there will be intruders, Satan
amongst the Angels, Saul amongst the Prophets, Judas amongst the Apostles,
Nicholas amongst the Deacons, Demas among Professors. Yea, though Thyatira
retain a Jezabel, the good are commanded to hold their own, Rev. 2.24. Did not
S. Paul command communion with the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5. wherein there
were carnal men, deniers of the Resurrection, and such as went to Law with
their brethren, and that before Infidels; Some say the place, 1 Cor. 5.11. is
to be understood of eating at the Communion Table, or if it be of familiar
eating and drinking, of civil conversing: Then much more are we not to
communicate with them at the Table of the Lord; but not to eat in that place,
is not to keep entire fellowship with him, Ruth. Reasons for Separarion
discussed.
as the phrase notes, Psalm. 4.9 John 13.18. Psalm. 55.13. so does Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and Oecumenius, expound this place. Bullinger, Contubernium, and
interiorem convictum prohibet; So Calvin, Peter Martyr, Beza, Piscator,
Paraeus. Idem.
So Erasmus and Aquinas, Haymo, Gagneius. It is no inconvenience to profess
that we are all one visible body in the Lords Supper, Reasons for Separation
discussed.
1 Cor. 10.17. though we be not one invisible, true, and mystical, and
redeemed body of Christ, as it is said, 1 Cor. 10.2. That all were baptized
unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, verse 3. And that all did eat the same
spiritual meat, verse 4. and that all did drink the same spiritual drink, the
rock Christ, yet did they not sin in this, and partake with the wicked in their
evils, to wit, in their wicked prayers, and sacrifices, because it is said,
verse 3. God was not pleased with many of them in the wilderness, because
verse 6. they lusted after evil things, and many of them were Idolaters,
Epicures, Fornicators, Tempters of Christ, and Murmurers, and there fell of
them in one day Twenty three thousand, verses 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And upon the
same ground S. Paul says in the same place, verses 16, 17. That we (speaking
of the Corinthians) are all one bread, and one body; and yet verse the 21. many
of these were partakers of the Table and cup of the Devils: and in the next
Chapter, Many came drunk to the Lords Table; many did eat and drink their own
damnation, and were stricken therefore of God with sickness and death, verses
18, 19, 20, 29, 30. etc. and yet verse 33. S. Paul charge them to come
together to the Lords Supper; so far is he from a shadow of separation. That
separation the Apostle speaks of is moral, not personal and local; its true,
we must not partake with the wicked in their evils, that is, in their
unlawful, and Idol-worship, or superstitious and Will Worship; but what makes
this for separation from ungodly men that come to a Gospel Ordinance expressly
commanded, which is enjoined to the wicked and Hypocrites no less than to the
godly, and we are to countenance their communicating as we do their hearing of
the word, and to join with them both in our real and personal presence, and
to say Amen with them, as the Disciples gave their personal Amen, and their
countenance and presence to a holy action at the last Supper, with one of their
number, whom they knew to have a Devil, and to be a Traitor, and dipped their
hand in the dish with this man, after Christ had warned them, that there was
such an one: but this is but to say Amen to the external worship, which is
lawful according to the substance of the act. Christ told his Disciples that
they were unclean, and that one had a Devil; though they knew not the man, yet
they knew there was an unclean beast in their society, yet who dare condemn
Christ, and his Disciples for communicating with Judas? Say he was not
convicted of scandal, that makes it not no scandal, but aggravates the
offense, being greater after than before conviction; for magis and minus non
variant speciem. More or less of sin does not vary the nature of sin. S. Paul
knew some of the Corinthians were carnal, Ruth. Reasons for Separation
discussed.
denied the Resurrection, and some came drunk to the Lords Supper. So that
there must needs be a pollution of the Lords Table; yet S. Paul wills them to
examine themselves and come together to the Lords Supper, and yet in
communicating there was no participating of the evils of those men. I confess
it is matter of sorrow to see such come, and all lawful means should be used
by the Minister (in the want of a settled government) of information,
instruction, denunciation of judgment, and the like: all which, if it work not
to the end intended; yet the Minister freeth himself from the guilt, and the
unworthy Receiver hales judgment on his own head. I cannot conceive how the
society or company of the wicked can debar the use of a necessary Ordinance
of the Gospel. For the last clause in the Objection to be forborne for a certain
time and season, I desire to know what is meant by a certain time, and the
latitude of it, how long it shall last, and when it shall end; if by a certain
time you mean many years, as 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. (for so long it has been
forborne in many places of the Land) I am utterly against such a time, or
forbearance: for,

First,

Secondly, Necessitate praecepti, and ordinarii medii, as an express duty, and
ordinary means of salvation.

Thirdly, Genesis 17.14. And the Lord would have killed Moses because his Son was
not circumcised: though it was a sign that seemed base and contemptible; yet
because Gods Ordinance must not be neglected, much more dangerous is the
wilful neglect of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper of greater price and
estimation, worth, and excellency, not a Legal, but Evangelicall Ordinance.

Will you have the Minister to give it to all indifferently,

First, quatenus sinners are not to be exempted. The Law must take,

First, Secundum allegata and probata.

Secondly, Deuteronomy. 19.15. Mat. 18.16. 1 Timothy 5.19. for otherwise God sees what
confusion and tyranny will follow, if one might be both Judex, Actor, and
Testis, the Judge, Accuser, and Witness. What a world of tyranny will it
introduce into the Church, if every Minister have power of suspension from the
Sacrament, either for supposed crimes which will upon proof vanish into
nothing, or else for real crimes without legal trial and proof of Witnesses?
If this open not a gap to tyranny, what does? The Minister singly by himself
has no power or authority to hinder and keep back scandalous persons: he has
the power of order, but not of sole jurisdiction.

Thirdly, Ruth. due right of Presbytery.
As Nature has given Hands to a Man to defend himself from injuries and
violence, and Horns to Oxen to hold off violence: so has Christ given the
power of Excommunication to his Church as spiritual armor, to ward off, and
defend the contagion of wicked fellowship. Chap 30.4.
The Officers of the Church are to proceed by admonition, suspension, etc. say
the Assembly of Divines; and who these are, they tell us. To these Officers,
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are committed.

We will consider here, what is meant by Keys, and to whom they are given.
Musc. in Is 22.22. Calv. Com. Ibidem. Jun. Aug. in Mat. Lib. de fide ad Pet.
Hom. 55. in Mat. Tom 2. cont. 4. cap. 5.
By Keys are meant the power and authority of Governors, so Musculus, and
Calvin. They hold out a full government, Plenam administrationem, says Junius.
The power of Ministers, says Beza and Augustine, de civit. Dei lib. 20. cap.
9. Hierom: The Key that is the power of Excellency and Eminency. The power of
Binding and Loosing, says Fulgentius. Great power, says Chrysostom. A power
of Office given to some, not all, says Whittaker. Christ speaks of Peter's
public Office. Of his Apostleship, says Calvin, Bullinger, Erasmus, Zuing.
But. 43. Com. pl. of the auth: of the Church.
and Marlorat. Not to Peter alone, but to the faithful Pastors of all Ages.
Now this power is given only to the Ministers of the Gospel, and Stewards of
the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Who are to open the doors and behave
themselves aright in Gods house, 1 Timothy 3.16. This warrant and official
authority of binding and loosing Christ gives only to Peter, as representing
Apostles, Teachers, and Elders. I will give thee the Keys, that is, the power,
to bind and loose; there is the exercise, and this was given to Peter, as
carrying the person of Apostles, Pastors, and Church-Guides. But lest the power
of binding and loosing (which is, by public Pastoral teaching to remit and
retain sins) do not fully hold this out; The power of Government belongs only
to those to whom the Keys are given, they are (...), Heb. 13.17. Over the
people in the Lord: which word the Apostle borrowed from the Septuagint; so
styling the Rulers not because of their place of preaching only, but of
governing also given unto Kings, 1 Pet. 2.14. Ministers are called (...),
Bishops, Watchmen, not only for Preaching, but for Government also, Phil.
11.1. 1 Timothy Zanch. de Eccl. Milit. Guber. 34.
3.2. Acts 20.28. We are assuredly persuaded as we learn by the holy
Scriptures, and by continual experience, that the Church cannot rightly be
governed, unless at known times there be meetings of Ministers, etc. And he
adds further, How shall this discipline have any place there, Ibid. 39:
where the Ministers do never meet together to know what is amiss in the
Church, Ibidem.
etc? This discipline (says Bucanus) has 3 parts: Increpation, or Common
faction, Suspension, and Excommunication, which power belongs to the Governors
of the Church: For (says the same Author) the power of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was in their power, which were called the chief Rulers of the
Synagogue, who did also manage the affairs of particular Churches. Let none
imagine my intention (by what has been spoken) is to eradicate Lay-Eldership,
it is an Herculean labor too difficult for me: my purpose is to show that
discipline belongs to the Governors of the Church, who are to take notice of
scandal, and those I conceive are the Ministers of the Gospel. It is fit the
Minister should have Assistants, call them if you please, Lay Elders, but a
power of Coordination of equality. I see no footsteps of it, and besides it is
likely to produce sad consequents, and engender too much confusion. I know none
fitter to rule the Church than the Ministers of the Church.

Fourthly, by way of Answer to the Objection.

First, Children that know not the nature, use,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, all Atheists, Turks, Jews, and Heretics,

Fifthly, all profane, ungodly, and malicious wretches,

But here it may be demanded whether the Minister in the want of government may
not suspend his own act, Them.
and hold his hands from giving the Sacrament to one that he knows to be
profane.

It is thought by most he may not for the Reasons before alleged: it is an act
that belongs to the Church Officers, and would introduce a world of tyranny,
and few could assure themselves the benefit of Receiving, if the Minister had
this unlimited power. Others see no reason but in case of necessity a Minister
may suspend his own act of giving it to one (whom of his own knowledge) he
knows may be drunk, and the like, and this is not a censure, but Gradus ad
censuram. The Idolaters, by the light of Nature, would not suffer all to
approach their Sacrifices, but cried out, That profane men must be packing:
such as have a clear fountain of water delivered to them must not suffer any to
trouble and annoy the water, but must endeavor to keep them back by powerful
arguments of the danger of unworthy receiving; which for all that, if they dare
go on (and there be no government in the Church) then to keep back his hand
from reaching that to him which he knows will aggravate their judgments. Every
Pastor is to have a Pastoral care of any of his flock, and he has a power of
order and jurisdiction, as a Watchman, though not of Church-jurisdiction, which
belongs to Church Officers. This is done by the Law of Charity, and not Ex
officio, by authority. Every man by Divine Law is his Brothers keeper, and must
not suffer sin to lie on him, which is no more than Sublevatio miseriae
peccantis, the succouring of the misery of a sinner; or act of prudence, mercy,
and compassion: Esse benevolentiam potius quam severitatem, Rather clemency
than severity; charitatem potius esse quam potestatem, Rather an act of charity
than power: he does but the part of a friend, Aut praevenire errori, aut
revocare errantem, Either to prevent a man before he err, or to call him from
erring.

But this I leave to the censure of my brethren, for to be determined by me is
saucy presumption.

From a promiscuous receiving by wicked and ungodly,

That which is perfectly good cannot be the occasion of evil,

Secondly, not to be admitted in a constituted Church where there is a settled
Government.

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

First, Scandal or offense will ensue the very best actions.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Scandals are accepta, or data, taken, or given; Bonum per se, and the
omission of it is only bonum per accidens in the case of scandal. Now that
which is good per accidens, cannot shut out that which is good per se: it is a
gross ignorance that cannot distinguish betwixt a fault that proceeds ex
natura facti, and that which proceeds ex abusu boni. The former is Malum
simpliciter, the other is but Malum per accidens.

But here it may be objected,

This has been answered before; Rutherford says, The Table of Idols is that
Table of Devils and false worship, kindly in respect of the Object, that we
must separate from; but a scandalous person at the Lords Supper partaketh of
the Table of Devils by accident, in respect the person being out of Christ
eats damnation to himself: but it is not per se and kindly; the Table of
Devils to others and therefore I must not separate from it. The Supper was to
Judas the Devils Table, because Satan entered in him with a sop to cause him to
betray the Lord; and Christ told before, one of them twelve had a Devil; and so
to one of the twelve the Supper was the Devils Table, yet could not the
Disciples separate therefrom. I desire to know,

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

The Minister in giving it to the wicked and ungodly gives them poison,

The Minister dispenses not poison,

Secondly, Occasio data, sed accepta, Not an occasion sinfully given, but
sinfully taken: and the Minister stands free from the guilt hereof.

Thirdly,

The power of a Minister to administer the Lords Supper is called by Divines
Potestas ordinis, or potestas muneris specialis, it is a Church Power more
special, and is distinguished from the power of jurisdiction, which is more
general and common: a Minister ought to exercise and employ for the edification
of the Church all the power and authority that he may lawfully exercise. I hold
the Church, says S. Augustine, full of wheat and chafe: I better whom I can,
whom I cannot I suffer. Fugio paleam, ne hoc sim; non aream, ne nihil sim, I
avoid the chafe lest I become chafe; I keep the floor, lest I become nothing.

Presbytery, the government of the Church is wanting,

First, the want of Discipline is to be lamented. Jewel, All Ministers have
idem Ministerium, sed diversam potestatem. I deny not the necessity of
Jurisdiction both Corrective and Coactive: the one restraining where there is
too much forwardness; the other enforcing where there is slacknesse.

Secondly, all scandalous persons convicted to be such,

Thirdly, if Presbytery never be settled, as is neither improbable,

Fourthly, Paul sticks close unto that pattern, and tells the Corinthians,
What I have received, etc. 1 Cor. 11. Now at that time (I think none will
affirm) that the Church was presbyterated, and that there were Lay Elders
amongst the Apostles: or that it appears out of Acts 2.42. and 20.7. 1 Cor.
11.24. That those that received the Lords Supper were all examined by an
Eldership, Ieanes.
otherwise no admittance; the Lords Supper has no essential dependence on an
Eldership, as that it cannot be without it. It is no such necessary antecedent
as that the Lords Supper is to be omitted or forborne for the want of it; for if
Presbytery never be established, shall the Lords Supper never be administered?
God forbid. The exercise of Discipline as I said before, is not necessary for
the essence of a visible Church, but only necessary to the welbeing of a
Church. But now, all do say, That the Sacraments are, though not absolutely,
yet in some degrees necessary to the essence and being of a Church. So then,
if you compare together these two duties, Exclusion of scandalous and ignorant
persons from the Lords Supper, and the Celebration of the Lords Supper; the
Obligation unto the Administration of the Lords Supper, is of the two, the
greater and more weighty. For the Lords Supper is more the worship of God,
less separable from, and more necessary to the Church than exclusion of
scandalous and grossly ignorant persons from the Lords Supper. Therefore it is
altogether improbable that this latter, viz: exclusion, etc. should be an
Antecedent absolutely necessary unto the former, viz: the celebration of the
Lords Supper. That the Passover and Circumcision were omitted to the Children
of Israel in the wilderness is most true, yet that makes nothing to this
purpose. For after the first celebration of the Passover all future
celebrations were by express and plain command to be in the Land of Canaan,
Exodus 13.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 16. from the 1st to the 8th, therefore this Argument
concludes nothing.

CHAP. XI.
Contains the end of the Ministerial Office, which is threefold, set down by
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.12. perfecting of the Saints, work of the Ministry, and
edifying, etc.

OF the first, Perfecting of the Saints, where let us consider what is meant by
Saints, and what by Perfection. Saint the Greek word is (...) and comes from a
privitive (...) terra, denoting that holy men should be unearthly, holiness is
in opposition to earthliness. Oh how few are the number of Saints in these
days that grovel altogether on the Earth! GOD is in their Mouth, the World in
their Hearts, like the foolish Comedian, they cry O Coelum! and point the
finger downward. Oh how is this precious name abused, and by many assumed, as
the Devil Samuels mantle, to deceive, driving on their own ends and interests,
and rising to honor and preferment by the stairs of pretended Saintship. As
Religion is the best thing, so the Corruption of it the worst. Corruption optimi
est pessima, and the greatest villainy and michief has marched under the flagge
of Religion, Either intended by the seduced, or pretended by Hypocrites, their
own hypocrisy deludes them, so that they grow amorous of their seeming
virtues: if they can appear good, there is little care taken how to be good, as
if all Religion consisted in appearance, whereas it should be from God: the
coal of our zeal should be fetched from heaven, for God and the furtherance of
his glory, not our own ends and interests, 1 Cor. 10.31. according to God both
for the quality of the matter, and quantity of the intention of affection,
according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 4.18. It is good always, there is the
quality of the matter; to be zealous in a good thing, there is the quantity of
the intention of the affection. But to come to the word Saints, it admits of a
double signification, either by External profession, or Internal regeneration.
The first is known to us, the other to God, for the foundation of God stands
sure, and the Lord only knows who are his; the one are his in the judgment of
charity, the other in the judgment of infallibility. People outwardly
professing Religion and manifesting to the world lives conformable, may be
called Saints. So was the Church of Corinth. 1 Cor. 1.2. The Church of
Philippi, Phil. 1.1. and yet there were many Hypocrites amongst them; in this
sense men may be Saints and yet damned; profess Religion, seem unblameable,
and yet want the power of godliness and sincerity. Many do woefully delude
themselves with the name when they are nothing in truth and reality; but alas!
when these are to die, and death stares them in the faces, how sad will be
their condition; it is not an empty name will serve the turn, there must be
more to the attainment of heaven.

Secondly, Perfection, or Perfecting: Perfection is a state not to be obtained
on Earth, but reserved for Heaven. Talis seeds expectat talem Sessorem, Such a
house requires such an Inhabitant: as long as we carry flesh about us sin we
will, 1 John 1.8. Non plenam induimus perfectionem donec totam exu mus
infectionem. All the stains of our infection must be washed away before there
can be perfection. So the Apostle, Phil. Auguct. Hieron. tom. 2. fol. 254.
3.12. Not that I had already attained, etc. It is true, we are said to be
perfect here, perfectione partium, sed non perfectione graduum; partially, but
not gradually: though every part be in some measure sanctified; yet we must
grow to a perfect man: we are Mundi and mundani, Clean in part, and in part to
be made clean; all our perfection consists in the acknowledgment of our
imperfection. All our righteousness in the forgiveness of sins, August. lib.
19. and 17. Chap. de Civit. Dei.
rather than in the perfection of virtue. The Author to the Hebrews tells us
of our coming to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. This is a
passive quality: Non qui perficiunt, sed qui perficiuntur; Not such as have
made themselves perfect, but are made perfect. Our purity is not in facto, but
in fieri; inchoate, not finished. The wicked are perfect imperfecti, perfectly
imperfect. The godly are imperfecte perfecti, imperfectly perfect. The Cathari
against whom Epiphanius and Augustine write in their Books of Heresies,
affirmed, that they were without sin; and the Novatians and Donatists held,
that they were so holy that they needed not say, Forgive us our trespasses.
Audes tu Novatiane mundum te dicere? etsi operibus mundus esses, hoc solo verbo
immundus fieres, Dare thou call thy self clean, though thou should be so
in regard of thy works? yet this one word (to say thou art clean) is enough to
make thee unclean. Quis melior Prophaeta Davide, says Bernard, de quo dixit
Deus, etc. Bern. in annot.
Who is better than David, of whom the Lord said, I have found a man after my
own heart? yet he had need to say, Lord enter not into judgment with thy
servant, etc. Non peccare Dei justitia est; hominis justitia indulgentia Dei,
To be without sin is the righteousness of God; man's righteousness is Gods
indulgence pardoning of sin. These kind of men thus swelled with pride,
blown with ostentation, and dreaming of self perfection, are in a most
dangerous condition. Let the Donatist drink never so deep of the justifying.
Cup of his own Righteousness. Let the Pelagian as deeply pledge him. Let the
Papist climb upon his Meritorious stairs. Let the Pharisee glory in his own
Robes. Let the Legallist pride himself in his own acquired Holiness: yet all
these will be found to sail on dangerous shelves. But not to make this
altogether our discourse, the words are read diversely: Galvin. Castalian.
Some read ad constitutionem, or ad Condendos Sanctos, The Saints are of Gods
household, and the Church is Gods House, Heb. 3.6. The chief builders whereof
under Christ are Apostles, Prophets, etc. Erasm. Marlor. Vatablus.
Some read ad instaurationem, for the repairing of such as are decayed in Gods
building. We sin daily and hourly, and therefore that we may not fall finally
from grace, we had need be repaired, and under propt by the daily exhortations
of Pastors and Teachers, lest our building fall.

Others read it, ad coagmentationem Sanctorum, Aretius. Beza. Zanchy.
for the joining and joynting of the Saints. The best of people are oftentimes
out of joint, out of order, out of square. Now the Lord out of his infinite
goodness gives some Apostles etc. for the joining and knitting of the Saints
unto the head Christ by faith, and unto one another by love.

Lastly, it is read, as most agreeable to the Syriack, and vulgar Latin, for
the perfecting of the Saints; and that in two respects.

First, strength to strength, for the word of God is profitable for correction,
2 Timothy 3.16.

Secondly,

Thirdly, the Rod of his power, Psalm. 110.2. The Law of Sion, Isa. 2.3. The
wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.7. and the sword of his Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. Now he is
stubborn, that will not be persuaded by his Rod: Rebellious, that will not be
guided by his Law; Foolish that will not submit to his wisdom; and mad, that
will despise the sword of his Spirit: they are doubtless in a mighty error
that say, they are above the Ordinances of God.

One end of the Ministerial Office, is, the gathering together, or perfecting
of the Saints. Saint Peter writes to the Elect of God, 1 Pet. 1.1. and to those
that had obtained like precious faith. Gods Elect have need to be put in mind
of their duty; even those that are regenerate and sanctified.

The second end of the Ministerial Office, is, the work of the Ministry; the
word [Worke] forbids Loytering, and the word [Ministery] Lording. Domabis
Lupos, sed non dominaberis ovibus, as Bernard told Eugenius. ^^nchy, De^consid
lib. 2.
As the first concerns such as are called, so this concerns such as are to
call: the gifts of Christ are not theorical, but practical, and given unto
Pastors for the work of the Ministry, to labor faithfully and painfully to
bring souls to God. Take heed to your selves, (says the holy Chost) and to all
the flock whereof the etc. Acts 20. The end of our preaching is not to make way
for our selves, and our own preferment, but for Gods glory; to prepare the way
of the Lord, and make straight paths for our God, Isa. 40.3, 4. We have a hard
task, Ars artium, Regimen animarum; The cunning of all cunnings is, to govern
souls. It is no easy work to make men righteous, to dispossess them of open
impiety, and close hypocrisy; to take the pillows from under their arms, to
strip them naked and bare, to show their own emptiness and nothingness. Oh!
how many are there that preach Faction, not Religion; that cry up Michael, not
Christ; that study State Affairs, not Gospel; that catch at popular applause,
and rather hunt themselves into fame, than souls into Heaven, Se praedicantes,
non Christum, Preaching themselves, not Jesus Christ. Divinity by too many is
made a shift; to dig. they are too lazy; to beg, ashamed; and therefore shark
a living out of the Church. This is not the end why God has placed these
Officers in the Church, but to be faithful and powerful in the discharge of
their duty. The only thing that should be desired by a Pastor, is, the weal
and benefit of his flock; for if the mark whereat we look be but to make our
commodity by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, wherein do we differ from thieves and
robbers? This is that whereof the Lord complains so grievously by his Prophets,
The Priests teach for hire, the Prophets prophecy for money: yet will they
lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? And again, these
shepherds cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his
advantage, and for his own purpose. Moses blessing Levi before his death, says
first, They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy Law; they shall put
incense before thy faece: and then adds, Bless, O Lord, his substance,
accept the work of his hands. As if he should have said, So long as Levi and
his Sons do not seek their own commodity, but thy glory; thou art righteous,
and can not forget to provide in large manner, both for them and theirs.

A third end is, the edifying of the body of Christ: Positi estis
dispensatores, sed in aedificationem, non in destructionem: aliter non fidelis
dispensatio, sed crudelis dissipatio, says Bernard: Ye are placed for
edification, and not the destruction of any; It is true, the word proves the
savor of death to death, but that is accidentally, and not the proper work of
it: whilst we seek to win your souls to God, give us the hearing: otherwise
it is not possible our doctrine should tend to edification. Christ delivers to
the people a parable of the Sower, and of the seed; Some fell by the way side,
and it was trodden down; some fell upon a rock, and as soon as it was sprung up
it withered away: And so Luke 8. beginning at the 4th verse, this Christ
utters for their edification: but observe the latter part of the 8th verse,
When he had said these things, he cried, He that has ears to hear, let him
hear: he cried, not only to manifest his affection, but our dullness; he is
not said to cry above four or five times in all his life. He cried as he taught
in the Temple, John 7.38. He cried when he raised Lazarus from the dead, John
11.43. He cried, John 12.44. He cried on the Cross, Mat. 27. at which time he
delivered matter of great consequence: So here, this expression being upon a
cry, must not lightly be respected of us. Men have 2 Feet, but scarcely one to
walk in the way of God; 2 Eyes, but scarcely one to see the things of God. 2
Hands, but scarcely one to work in his Vineyard. 2 Ears, but scarcely one to
hear the word of God: A good ear (says the Wiseman) will hearken unto wisdom;
whence observe two things.

First, hearken unto nothing but that which is good, unto wisdom.

Secondly, obaudire, is obedire: So Christ in the Gospel, Luke 10.16. He that
hears you, hears me; that is, He that obeys you, obeys me; and, He that
despises you, despises me. If we would make our Election sure, we must not
begin a priori, but a posteriori; such as with a good heart hear the Word of
God and keep it, and bring forth fruit, shall inherit the kingdom of God: but
it shall be taken away and be of no benefit to those that are careless and
fruitless. Now that you may edify and profit, hear Gods word, frequent the
public Ordinances, wait at the gates of wisdoms house, Prove. 8.34, 35. Lay
your Noses open to the sweet savor of Life, your Eyes unto the Day star that
is sprung from on high, and your Ears unto the voice of the wise Charmer. Do
not as some, desire to know that they may only know, which is curiosity; or
that they might be known, which is vanity; but to edify and better your
selves, which is true wisdom. Audiatis ut sciatis, (says Bernard) sciatis ut
aedificemini, and hoc integritas est; ut aedificetis, and hoc charitas est;
Hear to know; know to edify your selves; this is integrity: to edify others;
this is charity.

Secondly, that thou may edify, pray fervently, If any man (says the
Apostle) lack wisdom, Jam. 1.5. let him ask, etc.

Thirdly, Read much, and meditate the sacred Scriptures;

Fourthly, that thou may edify, lay aside prejudice, Keep thy foot when
thou go (says Solomon) to the house of God, and be more ready etc. Eccles.
5.1. By feet he means the affections; there is Oris custodia, Prove. 13.3. The
mouth wants keeping. David prays God, Psalm. 141. to set a watch before it.
There is Cordis custodia, Prove. 4.23. the heart needs keeping too. There is
Manuum custodia, Esa. 56.2. The hands do often what they should not. All the
parts of the body, yea, the powers of the soul, are in the phrase of Scripture
meant by the feet; yea all our actions.

Take notice that that which cures thee does not always please thee: thou
nauseatest that Physic that would do thee most good; do not sequester thy
Pastor, because he would sequester thee from thy hypocrisy; do not thrust him
out of his vineyard, because he brings thee sour grapes, and sharp wine of
reproofs; do not cast upon him false imputations, because thou art fretted
with just reprehensions: consider whose Word he speaks, whose message he
carries, and why God sends him: For, if you receive not the message and
Messenger, that brings the glad tidings, it is an argument of a hard and
stubborn heart; yea, I dare lay this down as a positive truth, That no child
of God comes into Gods presence to hear his Word, but with godly reverence,
due preparation, and careful attention, he leaves prejudice behind, and puts
on Cornelius resolution, Acts 10 33.

What if we convert none to God?

We shall save our souls: though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
glorious in the eyes of the Lord, Isa. 49 5. If we have labored and none be
turned by us, yet for our faithfulness there is laid up a Crown of glory, 2 Timothy 4 8.

I reap no profit by going to the Church,

First,

Secondly, this is a great discouragement and grief to a Minister that his
tongue should be the pen of a ready writer, and thy heart like a paper oyled
which will not receive the print of the pen; that his talk should drop upon
thee, and thou, like Gideons fleece, remain dry: yet the Cock does crow, though
Peter still denies his Master; and Peter knocks still, though the Damsel
does not open unto him; and launcheth out into the deep, though he has
labored all night and taken nothing. Non est in medico semper relevetur ut
aeger, Yet the Physician has his see, though the sick patient never recovers
health; for the diseased Woman spent all she had upon Physicians, yet was never
the better. Every man receives his wages according to his labor, Secundum
laborem (says a learned Friar) non secundum proventum: and therefore S. Paul
says, I labored more than they all, not profited more than they all.

The Conclusion.
A short Refutation of Master Butlers practice arraigned, and justly condemned,
by all the Orthodox. And the Apology of his Friends examined and confuted.

WHat has been spoken, extremely condemns the practice of those that durst
be so bold and presumptuous as to take upon them the Ministerial Function, or
exercise any part of it without lawful Ordination or deputation thereunto: Of
this, some I find guilty, as Master John Butler Minister of Stowe, who took
upon him a public charge of Souls at Lichfield, the boldness to Marry, and to
Baptize Infants, had the maintenance of 150 lib. per annum allowed him upon a
false Certificate that he was a Minister of the Gospel, and yet was not set
apart to this holy Function. An action that never passed without the Churches
censure, no light or small sin, repugnant to Gods word, the judgment of all
Orthodox Divines, and Reformed Churches, all which we have made fully to
appear. But lest you judge it unreasonable that any should pass verdict,
before the party be heard to speak for himself, (though an ingenuous confession
in my judgment were far better and more suitable to the nature of that
offense, and the best Apology) I will lay down what himself and others say
for him, 23 Art. of the Church of England.
which viewed with a single and impartial Eye, will be found little to avayl to
the extenuating his grievous fault, so esteemed by all the Orthodox.

First, that he was a Minister intentionally, but not actually.

What strange Evasions men find out for the justifying of their sinful
actions, which an humble acknowledgment and Christian confession might salve;
and into what gross absurdities will they run before they be brought to
confess their Error? Nemo periculosius peccat quam qui peccata defendit, No
man sins in an higher degree than he that makes Apology for sin. I wish it
may be considered,

First, Moses Chair, Primas in Rom 2.
and intrude himself into his Office, if this distinction may serve the turn?
such an easy pretense will give no small encouragement to mutinous Corahs,
Dathans, and Abirams, to invade our properties.

Secondly, a facto adjus argumentum non valet, says Zuinglius, It is not
lawful from a matter of fact to conclude a matter of Law.) Has it not ever by
the Orthodox been declared unlawful, who tell us, That it is the proper office
of Ministers ordained? and if I must use the term (actual Ministers in facto,
not in fieri) to perform the administration of the Sacraments, as has been
fully proved in the 3d Chapter, where I have fully showed, That the Sacraments
ought to be administered only by a lawful Minister, one set apart, etc.

Thirdly, Bellarmine, If a Mass Priest in his Ministration intend to do as
the Church of Geneva does, it suffices to make the Sacrament effectual, and of
force; how does this leave the conscience unsettled, and without comfort? what
small assurance can that be to the parties, if the intent of the Minister give
power to the Sacraments? This foppery brings to my mind a story, which Manlius
reports in Prorussia, Sacerdos parum doctus, cum aliquando delatus esset apud
Episcopum, Quod non juxta ritum Ecclesiae baptizaret infantes: Episcopus volens
experiri hanc rem, accusat Sacerdotem, de negotio. Sacerdos negabat, dicens se
retinere communem morem baptizandi infantes. Vt autem certus de hac re esset
Episcopus, sic exploravit; Cum nullus infans baptizandus esset, subornat
quosdam componentes (ut dicunt) ex stramine quem fasciis involvi jussit, and
sic inscio Sacerdotem ad baptizandum adferri. Cumque jam ad baptismum aestaret
Episcopus and alii, Sacerdos fraudem subolens, dixit, Baptizo te in nomine
Episcopi, in nomine meo, and in nomine compatrum. Episcopus statim erupit in
haec verba: Domine an haec est forma baptizandi in Ecclesia? Respondit
sacerdos, Qualis est puer, talis est Sacerdos. A Priest in Borussia or Prussia
is Poland, situate on the North of Mazoviae.
Borussia, of little learning, when he was accused before the Bishop that he
baptized Infants contrary to the custom of the Church; the Bishop willing to
make trial of the truth of it, accuses the Priest of the matter: the Priest
denies it, saying, That he retained that usual custom of Baptizing Infants:
The Bishop, that he might be certain makes this trial of him; when no Child
was to be baptized, he caused cunningly something to be put together and made
of straw, and commanded it to be swadled, and so unknown to the Priest to be
brought to be baptized. When the Bishop and others were come to see this sight,
the Priest finds out that deceit, and said, I baptize thee in the Bishops
name, my own, and in the name of the Godfathers. The Bishop breaks out into
these words, Is this the form of baptizing Infants? The Priest answers, As is
the Child, such is the Baptism. Here was an antique Child, and as merry a
Baptism. But in this action of Master Butler there were true Children, but an
antique Minister. One in name, not in truth; in intention, not in action.
Qualis erat Minister, talis erat baptismus, As was the Minister, such was the
baptism. The Player that misacts an inferior and unnoted part, carries it
away without censure; but if he shall play some Emperor, or some part of
observation, unworthily, the Spectators are ready to hiss him off. Truly Sir,
you foully mist it, for you were no more like a Minister, than Michals Image on
a pillow of Goats hair was like David, and your action like the Jugglers feast
in Suidas, where there was a Table furnished with all manner of Dainties in
show, whereof when they came to taste, they found nothing but air.

Fourthly, Non distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, Distinctions not warranted
by Gods word are saucy presumptions. I pray you consider that example is of
great power and force; if you drink such draughts of sin, others will pledge
you. Tutum est peccare autoribus ill is, Men will think it safe sinning after
such Authors. Example is a Copy that most men write after; your Hearers are
like tempered wax, whereon your Seal will make an easy impression: dare you
tell them of Oppression? they will clap you in the mouth with Intrusion; if you
rebuke Usurpation; they will tell you, you have taught them the way; and how to
excuse their wickedness and Apologize for sin. He that puts a light aestimate
on Apostolical precept and practice, Romans 10.15. 1 Timothy 4.14. Acts 14.23.
opens a gap to Diabolical abominations.

A second Excuse, I find in a Letter, from Mr. M. Mr. My: Mr. Ja: and Mr. Per:
dated September. 15th, 1652. directed to Mr. Tho: Vnd: for the whole Letter, it
shall be made public hereafter. I shall give you what concerns this present
occasion. He conceives that he (meaning me) has some advantage against Mr.
Butler in the particular of Baptizing before Ordination; which we believe Mr.
Butler would not have done, had he not thought it necessary, and upon the Advice of other Reverend Divines lawful. Or if he had thought it would possibly
have been made a matter of public knowledge or observation. Lab. 3. cont.
lite. (...) Petil. cap. 50.
I answer you, as Augustine Petilion, Vbi respondere conati magis ostendunt,
quod non possint respondere, Where they endeavor to answer, they rather show
that they cannot answer. None more spightfully malicious, or censoriously
contumelious than they, whom a man can neither avoid without calumny, or
encounter but with blot of infamy, nor conquer with hope of any mastery. This
answer was (doubtless) much debated, and put to vote in their private
Conclave, before it came into public view. Here is a poor pill'd Reason framed
by many pates, to excuse Mr. Butlers indirect carriage; which instead of
vindicating him, throws more dirt into his face: No man that knows their
combination, is so senseless, as to think this Spiders web was spun without Mr.
Butlers knowledge; if no hand in the framing of it: and I much wonder he should
run himself into such intricacies, and absurdities. I was credibly informed,
and that by one of the Classis, that the fist Classis, by whom Mr. Butler was
ordained, sent down a Letter to him to have an account from him of his
Baptizing Children, in which, they were unsatisfied. To whom, he (either not
daring, or disdaining to answer) made use of his friends to write, what
(probably) he indicted. We will take this worthy piece of the Letter in pieces.

First, Butler in the particular of Baptism before Ordination.

I am truly sorry, that Mr. Butler ever gave such an advantage, Jer. 14.14.
Chap. 23.21. God made a King a Leaper for attempting it, but one act of it, and
but once: Saul would play the Sacrificer, but his seed for this sin was thrown
from his Throne. God has punished it with death, as in Vzza, and the
Bethshemites: the one in handling; the other for looking into the Ark, lost
their lives. Alas Sir! it is no advantage to me to see men expose themselves to
the inflicting hand of a just God. All I desire is, to work in you a fear, and
remorse for this sin, which will (its feared) beget many monstrous ones; for,
sin never goes single. What advantages your friends have taken against me by
false aspersions, lying informations, sinful compliance, and cruel unchristian
persecution, to the undoing of a poor Wife, and Children, is known to many; and
shall in its due time and place be made apparent. But have not some of you
exclaimed against this Intrusion into the Ministry, (I appeal to your own
consciences) and have said, That no man ought to take this calling upon him but
he that was called of God, as Aaron was. A tongue and a tongue presupposes, a
heart and a heart. I am heartily sorrowful that Mr. Butler has by such an
action so lost himself, to open the gap of confusion, and as far as he can,
throw dirt into the face of so holy a Function.

Secondly, Butler would not have done it, had he not thought it necessary.]
Tully was so addicted and devoted to Euripides, that he esteemed every Verse of
him a sufficient Proof: a wedded opinion either of our selves, or others, is
not good, especially where opinion is not taught by experience.

Though some Schismatics be of malicious and incorrigible humors; De guber.
Dei, lib. 5.
yet others, as ( Salvianus writes) Errant, sed bono animo errant; impii sunt,
sed hoc putant veram esse pietatem: They think error, soundness; and
wickedness, godliness.

You stumble at the very threshold, Luther. postil. in 1 Cor. 9.24.
We must take heed, lest Meta be transposita. Such as will obtain Gods prize,
must walk in Gods path, turning neither to the right hand, nor to the left,
Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. for there is danger: Com. in Gal. verse 6.
and as Luther observes, Often the greatest peril is on the right hand. We are
not to go upon thought in the positive worship of God, but to have our
judgments rightly informed and thoroughly grounded in the truth; had you
consulted the Orthodox, you would have had other thoughts touching this action
of Mr. Butlers; you must know the first thing in the order of every building is
to lay the foundation sure. God grant your Religion be more than thought, I
fear it. This Age is strangely transported with an humorous appetite to
novelties; and rather affects variety of toys, than a constancy of plain,
and sober truth. We see many Ixions that embrace clouds instead of Juno. I wish
he does not preach by thought, as well as baptize and pick out crochets,
paradoxes, and conclusions of his own imagination, which commonly is very
forcible, and may in time bring forth Cattle ring-strak'd, speckled, and
spotted. These kind of thoughts are but dreams that proceed from abundance of
sumes, which fly into the head. Take it as a good observation, That God
judges of our words and works, by our thoughts; Men of our thoughts, by our
words and works: Every thought of evil, is not evil; only those thoughts to
which men join either consent of will, or at least, delight of affection. Prove.
12.5. The thoughts of the Righteous are right.

[Thought it necessary.]

For the necessity of it, Butlers understanding, reading, and ingenuity, (as he
is given out to be) could think it necessary; the children were not weak and
ready to die; and if so, yet no necessity for a private person to do it. There
were many Ministers about and near the City that would not have denied such a
Christian act, therefore no necessity.

Salvation may be without the Sacraments, Hell. for. and Zanc conf. Boh. Belg.
Ans. Wirt.
It has been fully proved that the Sacraments ought to be administered only by
a lawful Minister, ordained and set apart to the work of the Ministry; as is
cleared by the Confession of the Reformed Churches, Assem. of Div. chap. 274.
and all the Orthodox, see chapter 3.
of the Church of England, by the late Assembly of Divines, the judgment of all
the Orthodox, Gerardus, Bucanus, Zanchy, Beza, Viril, Amesius, Aretius,
Trelcatius, Piscator, Calvin, and others.

That necessity is no plea for Baptism by Lay-persons, Calvin, Zanchy,
Piscator, Beza, Bucanus, Trelcatius, See the 7 chap.
who saw with as clear eyes as Mr. Butler can do, and yet could not find
necessity a sufficient plea. Do they tell you, there is no necssity to violate
the Orders prescribed of God? and will you affirm a necessity? Fie, fie! Let
shame cover your face. Make not Necessity a stalking-horse to your private
ends, which (many see) you strive to promote.

But he would not have done it but upon the advice of other Reverend Divines,
who thought it lawful.

When God does directly affirm a thing, Romans 12.6. and keep that which is good.
(now good and true are all one.) The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.

Your practice is quite cross to the Word of God, Romans 10.15. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy
4.14. And therefore these Orthodox Divines (so termed) may well be suspected.
We are taught not to believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are
of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1.

Here is a story most improbable, Reverend they must be, a good word, but
foully abused. It was S. Augustines wish, that he might have seen three things
especially: Rome in her glory, Paul in the Pulpit, And Christ in the Flesh. My
wish is, to see Christ advanced, England restored to its glory, And all
Schismatical and Heretical Ministers discountenanced.

The Romish Church (it is observed) have canonized many for Saints, Reverend
and Orthodox is not sufficient: that they were such, we must take Mr. B. and
his friends words for it. Yea, I am confident they never heard any Reverend
Divines advise him so, Facile credunt, quod volunt. He had put out his own
eyes, and now the blind leads the blind.

Other Reverend Divines, Butler one, such surely as he was when he came to
Lichfield. There is a sort of people whose Entia be transcendentia, in all
things absolute Superlatives. Their Sots are Solomon's, their Black-birds Swans:
Like the vain Philosophers in old time, Popularis aurae mancipia vaenalia,
Certain creatures bred of the peoples breath; hoc ipso placere cupiunt quod
placere contemnunt, Hicron Ep. ad Eustoc.
They reak not to be contemned of the Learned for Ignorant; so they may be
commended of the Ignorant for Learned. Seeing love believes all things, it is
exceeding necessary that our love should abound in knowledge, whereby we may
discern between good and bad, between Heretic and Catholic.

It is no new thing to have Error fathered on Reverend and Orthodox Divines;
Athenagoras, Tertullian, and others. It will amaze us to see what blasphemous
seditions, horrible and odious impieties were fathered upon the ancient
Christian Divines. Many under the name of Church, overthrow the Church.
Ecclesiae nomine armant, and contra Ecclesiam dimicant. Celsus and Antiphon
writing against the truth, entitled their Treatise, [The Book of Truth.] Lib.
de carne Christi.
The most blasphemous Heretic, which is Interfector veritatis (as Tertullian
speaks) if he be buffeted for his error, presently makes himself a Gatholick
Martyr, Diosc. in Con. Chalcedon.
Ego defendo dogmata sanctorum patrum, ego eorum habeo testimonia, ego cum
patribus ejicior: boasting of the Catholic faith, antiquity, etc. Hegesippus
apud Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 22.
It is the complaint of the greatest part of the Fathers, That the Heretics,
to gain their own dreams their greater authority, vented them under the names
of some of the most eminent Writers in the Church, even of the Apostles
themselves. Marian. Ep ad Mon. Al^x. ad calcem conc. Chal. tom. 2. page 450. E.
The Eutichians vented certain books of Apollinaris, under the title of [the
Orthodox Doctors,] only to abuse the simple People. The same men abused the
names of S. Gregory of Neocaesarea, of Julius Bishop of Rome, of Athanasius
Bishop of Alexandria; so Leontius: and he says particularly, that the Book,
entitled [(...),] a particular exposition of the faith which is delivered to
us by Turrianus the Jesuit, is not S. Greg: but the bastard issue of the
Heretic Apollinaris. It is very evident what horrid things have been fathered
upon Orthodox Doctors of the Church.

Let their number be never so great, yet multitude is no argument without
verity. One Lot is opposite to the rest of his City. One Luther to the rest of
his Country. One Noah to the whole world. We must not follow wicked men in
their wickedness, nor wordly men in their worldliness, nor good men, but in
that they are good. There are two sorts of examples in Christian imitation: the
one necessary, which is CHRIST, the way, the truth, and the life: Via in
exemplo, Be^n. ser. 2. in ascens Dom. Bafil. de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 8. Leo
sermon. 2. de resurrect. Cyril. in loc.
verit as in promisso, vita in praemio: The truth in his learning, the way for
his living; as the Fathers usually gloss that place. The other are to be
followed in some things, and at some times; as Paul, Peter, Augustine,
Chrysostom, Nazianzen, and other blessed Saints of God; whose lives and lines
are so far forth to be followed, as they swerve not from one chief cople,
Christ. In sin we may not follow the good; much less the wicked of the world,
be they never so many, never so mighty. The word of Christ is quite cross to
such a practice not known to any of the Churches of God, and therefore these
Reverend Divines may be suspected, if any such, to be brainsick Schismatics
whom they adore and reverence.

But it is added,

Fie, fie! Te videt Angelus malus, videt te bonus, videt and malis major
angelis Dens; The good Angels, the bad, and he that is greater than all, God
sees thee. It is good counsel, Sic vive cum hominibus quasi Deus videat, Gences.
sic loquere Deo quasi homines audiant. So converse with men as if God saw
thee, so speak to God as if men heard thee. Of the dignity of the Minist. If.
6.5.
Ministers above all men (says Perkins) should have a tender conscience not of
great and gross sins, but of the lowest and least sins, and he must endeavor
in his calling, not only to be clear of great crimes, but as far as may be,
to be free from the least appearance of evil: For a small fault in other men is
great in them; and that which may be somewaies pardonable in other men, is no
way in them: They must therefore watch over themselves most carefully, and take
heed to all their ways: and for this end is it, that a Minister in godly
wisdom must often deprive himself even of many things (which it may be,
lawfully he might use) lest his liberty be an occasion of evil to others: and
he must abstain from the least sins, lest even they be blemishes to his
calling, and burdens to his conscience. Ibidem.
And let every Minister assure himself, that the more he makes conscience, even
of the least sins, the more he resembles the ancient holy Prophets, and the
more likely is he to work effectually in his Ministry: For his duty is to work
in his people a Conscience, not of great sins only, but even of all: But how
can he do that in them, if he have not first of all done it in himself? Hence
it is, therefore, that godly Ministers find fault with themselves, when other
men cannot, and cry out against themselves, for their pollutions (with the
Prophet here) when no other man can accuse them of the least crime: nay, when
others do magnify God for his graces in them, and praise their gifts, and
commend their good lives, even then do they condemn themselves, and exclaim
against their own corruptions; their own smallest negligences, or omissions,
are great wounds to their Consciences, and their least sins, and their most
pardonable infirmities, are sore burdens unto them; for of all men in the
world, a godly Minister is a man of the most tender conscience.

I will end with one passage more in the Letter: had we been known to any of
the Members of the Classes, as we are to you, we would have written to you, to
assure you that we never heard that Mr. Butler's practice therein ever
occasioned any perplexity or trouble to any Religious persons here; nor has it
been observed, that we hear of by any of this place, except Mr. Langley. I see
these great Supporters of Confusion have found out many shifts, which they
think are of force; but if you examine them, you shall instantly see, that they
be like Hercules tragical Club, in show massy, but in substance nothing else
but shreds and straw, as the Poet speaks, an affrighting vanity. It is a true
saying, every man loves his own, his own Children, his own Friends, his own
Goods, his own Conceit: Conf. lib. 12. cap. 25.
Non quia vera (says Augustine) sed quia sua: they have long consulted, and
now vainly insult, Parturiunt Montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.

The Hill does swell, and takes on,
As it would cleave in sunder;
And out there starts a little Mouse,
Which made all laugh and wonder.
I wish you do not as many deceitful Meteors, commend their bad Wares, and
praise their worst Commodity, as if it were the best in the world. But let us
take a particular view of this weighty Argument,

That we never heard.

There are many things, which if some of you did hear, would make both of your
ears to tingle; it is well known, that none embrace Reports more willingly
than your selves, if they tend (in the least) to your own advantage, or your
neighbor's prejudice: But admit it was not observed by any but by me; does
that, in the least, mitigate Mr. Butler's offense? For shame look at the Eye of
Heaven, and not Observances of Men: Believe it, there is none that read this,
and the former expressions of yours, but will see a great deal of hypocrisy
lapp'd up in them, and that you put the fairest side outward, and fear the
Stage of the World, more than the Theater of your own Consciences. It is a
Popish Axiom, Caute, si non cast, Let me turn their Caute into a Cavete.
Take heed, all is not Gold that glisters.

Mel in ore, verba lactis;
Fell in cord, fraus in factis.
It has not been observed by any of this place: It is strange to consider your
windings and turnings; for, is it possible that such a public Action in the
public Congregation, was not observed by any? I wonder you blush not to
affirm such untruths.

Many were Spectators of it, but not any scrupled Mr. Butlers authority, or
conceived he was so audacious, as to take upon him a charge of Souls, and
administer the Sacrament without lawful Ordination thereunto.

None observed it as done by a private person, for it was not known of above
half a year after, that Mr. Butler was no Minister; but when it was known, the
Parents were not a little troubled, and made their complaint (as I am informed)
to himself long before the date of the Letter. How can you truly say, Mr.
Butler's practice never occasioned any perplexity, or trouble, or was observed
by any? Did I not know whose Liveries you walk in, I should nothing but admire
you.

But they add no trouble to Religious persons here.

Here the Parents, and all but their own Faction, come within the Lash, and the
Author is excepted from the number of Religious; for my own part, your opinion
makes me not a jot better, or worse. I neither stand, nor fall by it; you have
traduced my person and doctrine, deprived me of my Livelihood, exposed my
family to want, and endeavored to render me as odious as may be by lies, and
calumnies. But alas! the stone of reproach will fall upon your own heads. Qui
mittit in altum lapidem, recidit in caput ejus. A stone thrown up in a rash
humor, falls upon the throwers head. Addams, The Sinners Passing Bell, page
270.
It is easy and ordinary for men to be others Physicians, rather than their
own; Statesmen in foreign Commonwealths, not looking into their own doors,
sometimes putting on Aarons Robes, and teaching him to teach, and often
scalding their lips in their Neighbors pottage. They can weed others gardens,
whiles their own is overrun with nettles. Like that Soldier, that dug a
fountain for Caesar, and perished himself in a voluntary thirst. But Charity
begins at home, and he that loves not his own soul, I will hardly trust him
with mine. With me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of you, or
of man's judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3. I comfort my self in my innocence, for, hic murus
abaneus esto, nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa. I shall endeavor how
I may have a conscience void of offense toward God and man. What a stir you
keep with Mr. Langley? An envious man (says Salvianus) esteems another good,
his hurt: Parum est si ipse sit foelix, nisi alter fuerit infoelix. Lib. 5. de
guber. Dei.
And therefore when Bion saw such an one very sorrowful, asked him, I pray
thee, whether has some evil happened to thee, Laertius in vitae Bion.
or good to thy neighbor? Seeing it cannot be helped, murmr till your
tongues are hoarse with contumelies, you know your reward. I bless God, I am
above your malice; the raging, and roaring of foes is best quelled by patience.

It is added, no trouble to Religious persons here.

For giving the name of [Religious persons] to your selves, its frequent, and
of a [Godly party] as in a Certificate from two Divines of this Country, [To
the Trustees,] writ by Mr. M. his own hand, it is observed, that Hypocrites are
great Mountebanks of their own virtue, thanking God that they be not as other
are, but men of a better conversation, and more pure note, saying nothing but
truth, and doing nothing but right: that as Augustine writes of Faustus the
Manichee, Si hoc esset justum esse, justificare seipsum, If this were to be
just, to justify themselves; assuredly this Generation of Vipers had long
since flown up into heaven; but examine their actions, and you shall find that
they travel with mischief, conceive sorrow, and bring forth ungodliness. You
show your selves to be the offall of the old Pharisee, who was his own
Trumpetter and Crier, I am not as other men are, etc. Religion I honor, and
accursed be that mouth that speaks against it. Virtue never dwelt at this
sign, she is no Dinah that roves abroad to see and to be seen of the daughters
of the Country; but rather an Elizabeth, that hides her self six months
together breeding child, and that so famous a child as S. John Baplist was:
neither did our Religion write upon her posts, My house is the house of prayer:
never did any godly Christian say, Behold my holiness: it is no speech of a
contrite heart, Stand farther from me, I am purer than thou; but, Depart from
me (O Lord!) for I am a sinful man. Boys with nuts like the Indians with
rattles own such pretty toys, and men many times are carried away with shows,
with glosses, and professions. Did not Devout women resist S. Paul, so called,
so in their own opinion, Acts 13.50. Did not the Devout Pharisees trust in
their holiness, despise others, nay persecute Christ himself? Quid audiam
verba, cum videam contraria facta? Why does Coniah break down my Cedar-work,
(says Almighty God, in Jeremy) and then paint it over with vermilion? so may I
say, Why do the fair shows of worship, and the first Table, gild over the
monstrous breaches of the second? Dear Christians, though Thraso may, let not
us boast; Nos nec pugnas narramus, nec cicatrices nostras, it is enough for us
if we be found one day amongst them, in quorum ore non est inventus dolus, in
whose mouth there was found no guile, that is, as S. Austine sweetly expounds
it, which meekly confessed that they were sinners, and built their glory upon
humility.

Let me counsel you to spare this plea, and let some other speak for you,
alienus laudet te, non os tuum, it would sound better in your neighbors
mouths: take heed to your selves, I beseech you take heed, that you do not
welcome Religion under a wrong notion; there is an Idol called Self, set up in
every corner, and men fall down and worship it; this is Englands great
abomination, men thinking themselves something when they are nothing, mistaking
the means of grace and holiness; for grace and holiness it self, formality
and mere outsidenesse in Religion are those things which breed so many
miscarriages amongst us. Here in effect thou have bestiam Pharmacopolae that
Julian the Pelagian upbraided S. Augustine with, the Beast that the Apothecary
promised his Patient of wonderful virtue, which before morning was come, had
eaten up her self. Do you desire a description of true virtue? He tell you,
Brevis and vera descriptio virtutis est ordo amoris, (says S. Augustine) it is
nothing else but the ordering of our love.

Religion is the Jewel of the Ring, and consists of two parts; Faith, and
Works: the latter demonstrates the former. You know S. James his rule, Show me
thy faith by thy Works. Believe it, it is a notable hypocrisy to boast of
Religion. Thus did the Pharisees, Joh. 8. The varnish of their own hypocrisy
did delude them so, that they grew in love with their seeming virtues, and
Narcissus-like, were enamoured of their own shadows. Every man (says Luther)
has a Pope bred in him, an opinion of his own works; albeit there be in him no
real virtue and true substance: as wickedness, so this devil of conceitednesse
is the ruin of thousands: a speckled Pharisee is all one to God, as a spotted
Publican: he dislikes the hot fever and inflammation of hypocrifie, as well as
the cold palsy, and shakingfits of impiety: there is a Generation of men that
are so proud of their worth, and puffed up with vain conceit, that when the rod
of God is shaken over the heads of a Nation, they make themselves the only men
that are fit to stand in the gap: They blaze the honor of their Ministers
preaching to be so full of life, that they, and only they know the marrow of
the Scriptures: and as for their Prayers, they think them so effectual, as if
Elias Spirit were redoubled on them, and every one of them a second Elisha.
What others in charity may give, is not modest in you to assume to your selves,
Prop^ io suo ore non sonat laus, Let others praise you, 2 Cor. 10.18. For not
he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends, Prove.
27.2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not
thine own lips. Saint Paul was so modest, that he calls himself the greatest
sinner, and the least Saint. Saint Peter, a sinful man, Luke 5.8 The
Centurion, one unworthy, Luke 7.9. S. Paul, a miserable man, Romans 7.24. Yea,
the best Saints have ever thought themselves the greatest sinners, and have
condemned none more than themselves.

Take advice from a poor man: Non contemnenda quia parva, sed metuenda quia
multa. Let us not despise our sins because they are little, but fear them
because they are many, says S. Augustine.

Secondly, Luthers, Christiana sanctitas non est activa, In his Common places.
sed passiva sanctitas: extra nos est justitia, non in nobis. A Christians
righteousness is a Righteousness without us; it is in God, whereby we stand
righteous before God. Hieron. Tom. 2.254.
All our perfection consists in acknowledging our imperfection. All our
Righteousness in forgiveness of sins, Aug. lib 19. cap. 17.
rather than in perfection of virtue. I exclude not inherent Righteousness. We
are Mundi and mundandi, Clean in part, August. lib. 9. Conf. cap. 13.
and in part to be made clean. Vae etiam laud^bili vitae hominum, si remota
misericordia discutias eam; Woe to the commendable life of man, if God set
mercy aside in judging it. Were ye sensible of your own nothingnesse, and did
but see your own nakedness, you would never so vainly boast of your acquired
holiness, and trumpet forth your selves to be Religious and a Godly party.
Pont: in 10th of John 2. says, No man ought in this life to justify, and
commend himself: if he consider the time past, he has cause to lament his
sins; if the time present, to blush at his infirmities; if at the time to come,
to fear lest he fall.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, the blossoms of profession will not serve, If we live in the spirit,
let us walk in the spirit, Jam. 2.20. Will thou know, O vain man! that faith
without works is dead? Jam. 1.26. If any man among you seem to be religious,
and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is
but vain. Whiles you style your selves Religious, you give a mighty wound unto
Religion by your censoriousnesse, malice, persecution, and uncharitableness,
no Characters of Religious persons. Would to God you would talk less, and do
more of goodness. Where God bestows a greater portion of grace, he expects a
greater proportion of holiness; Let your light shine before men, etc.

Fifthly, Gal. 1.14. so a counterfeit zeal of a true Religion. Beware ye be not
of the number of those Solomon speaks of, Prove. 30.12. that make Religion a
faction: for there are many in this City go under that name, that are unclean
and filthy. It is seen by sad experience, that many poor souls are woefully
deluded by a carnal opinion arising from their own conceit, and Satan's deceit.

I conclude then, it is unhandsome to blaze your own goodness: you may justly
suspect your own sincerity. Let your pious charitable deeds commend you. Hear
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself: If any man among you
seems to bewise in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise. But
I much admire you excuse not Mr. Butlers marrying of two, whom I much honor;
either you want a handsome excuse, or else think it not worthy the taking
notice of. Did you not hear of it? was it not observed? what a gap does this
open to disorder and confusion? no regard to the nearest Relations. May not Tom
the Tinker, Will the Cobbler, Harry the Carter plead the same liberty? Was it
ever allowed by any Church or Nation, that private persons, not in office,
might tie the knot of marriage? It is needless to relate how much I honor the
Parents of the Gentlewoman for their modesty, piety, and fair Christian
carriage. I am heartily sorry they should be so deluded, and the lowly pair
who intended nothing but chaste embraces, so abused. I wonder you do not stand
ashamed and confounded within your self, when you consider what you have done,
and how far you have exceeded the bounds of Religion, Reason, and common
civility. I have known the time (you may bless the liberty of this (for such
as you reap benefit of it) that such an action would not have passed
unpunished. I shall conclude this with an expression of Mr. Butlers to Mr.
Crafton, That at that time he came to Lichfield there was no Ordination in
London. I blush and admire at your frivolous excuses and groundless
assertions: was there no Ordination in London fron June 1651, at which time you
were motioned to Lichfield till May following 1652. Had you been as careful to
have been ordained, as you were covetous of means, you might not have wanted
Ordination. The Committee for the Universities, and the Trustees and Committee
for plundered Ministers had your name given them as a Minister, and a
Certificate to that purpose; for, they never settled any in any place but such
of whom they received testimony that they were Ministers of the Gospel. I
wonder by whose means and solicitations those Testimonies and Certificates
were procured, who was guilty of these deliberate untruths; did the Minister
subscribe ignorantly? the sin of misinformation was yours; if knowingly, then
both equally guilty: how can you free your self from aequivocation and juggling
in this kind? Upon these Certificates you were assigned to a public Charge,
and had the allowance of 150 li. per annum, preached, baptized, and married.
Are these light and slight things? have you not cause to be humbled, and lay
aside your vain and frivolous excuses; to cozen your brethren, to delude a
Committee? Oh admirable policy! to abuse a City with pretense of what you were
not, proudly to usurp the Ministerial Office, are of small account or reckoning
with you; Winesse Sir R. D. Dr. H. Mr. Crof. and Hen. H.
yet this is not all: it is a true observation, Vix bono peraguntur exitu, quae
malo sunt inchoata principio. Things ill begun, are not commonly well ended. You
have abundantly manifested this, not only by your Schism, which has caused a
wide breach in a peaceable City, though I used all possible means to prevent
it; being truly sensible of those sad effects and consequences that ensue upon
the division of Ministers, that nothing would content you but a distinct Charge
contrary to the order of settlement which enjoined a joint charge of the City
and Parishes thereunto belonging, had we continued as one, would have been a
strong motive to have persuaded the City to follow our example; but you must
needs row to the North, and leave me alone in the South. At your first coming
to Stowe you owned the people as your flock; you had not been there above two
months, but your friends sent to a member of the Council of State (doubtless
not unknown to you) to bring you to that place and people you had before
denied; you have now your longed expectation, though to my unspeakable trouble.
And let the City judge whether I ever in the least troubled or disquieted you
in your place. I shall pass by your scornful language to Mr. Cr. in which you
discovered a great deal of pride and malice. I am constrained to add one
thing, and were there nothing else, that bespeaks you most unworthy, that you
had privately a hand in my bitter persecution, for the accomplishing of your
slf-ends. You have not been good neither in gressu, or progressu, and therefore
a miracle if good n egressu. All is well, so long as you fare well and rule the
roast; you took a politic course how to be assured to feed your self, before
you fed your flock; and to have maintenance, before you were a Minister: what a
preposterous thing is this, neither lawful by Man's or GODS Laws, that such
should have Church-means that were not Churchmen, or set apart to the
Ministry? I read, that when the good Prophet wept upon Hazael, he asked, Why
weepeth my Lord? He answered, Because I know the evil that thou will do to the
Children of Israel. Their strong holds will thou set on fire, slay their young
men with the sword, dash their Children against the stones, and rip up their
Women with Child. He replied, What, is thy servant a dog, that I should do
this great thing? What I observe is this, that he thought it impossible, that
the Devil should ever work him to so horrid a mischief; yet by degrees, he was
wrought to this self-incredited mischief, as impossible as at the first he
judged it, at last he performed it. It is justly to be feared, now you are
arrived to the pitch of your desires, you will involve the poor City in much
confusion, and disorder; for, Schismatics are men of unquiet and turbulent
spirits, and your actions bespeak you a proud, seditious, and self-ended Man:
and now forsooth you are got to be a Commissioner for ejecting of scandalous
Ministers: it is a brave world, when vice rebuks sin; hopes of a glorious
Reformation. I appeal to any who have read the exposition of the Fathers, and
others, upon that text of CHRIST, Mat. 7.15. whether your practice suites not
with the character of those Wolves our Savior speaks of. You that have made no
conscience at the great sin of intrusion, will scarcely boggle at any. I have
read a story (with it I conclude) out of Sir Richard Barkley, of a Reverend and
Religious Archbp. of Mentz, who (being a long time depraved, and in fine
deprived of his dignities and office by two corrupt Cardinals, his Judges, and
a falshearted Advocate his familiar friend) out of the bitterness of his
spirit, made his appeal from them unto the Lord of Heaven. God knows (unto
whom all things are naked) that I am unjustly condemned; yet I will not appeal
here from your sentence; for that I know ye shall soonr be believeed in your
lying, than I am in speaking the truth; and therefore I receive this heavy
censure for the rebellions of my youth, and other sins: nevertheless, I appeal
from your judgment, to the Judge Eternal, and only wise, which is CHRIST
JESUS, before whom I summon you. The Cardinals fell into a laughing, and said,
That if he would go before, they would follow. It happened that within a year
and half, the poor Bishop died; the Cardinals did not long survive; the one was
slain, the other eat off his own hands and died mad. And lastly, the Judas of
all (I mean his false friend placed in his room) was mortally hated of all men,
for his sedition and cruelty, and afterward came to an untimely end. Such as
take delight in persecution, especially of Ministers, hale judgments one their
own heads; which I pray God divert. I beseech you consider, sin is habituated
by custom, and hardened by impenitency; if you cannot stay your self from going
in sin, stay your self from going on; if you will break out, timely break off
by repentance. Let God be glorified in an humble acknowledgment. It is the
voice of a friend, Aut praevenire errori, aut revocare errantem; Either to
prevent a man before he erreth, or to recall him erring. When men's wits, and
the Devils to help, have found out the fairest pretexts for sin, Gods justice
strikes off all, and leaves sin naked and punishable. Many pretenses have been
found out for many sins, besides distinctions, mitigations, qualifications,
extenuations, colors, questions, necessities, inconveniences, tolerations,
ignorances, etc. But when man has done, God begins; one argument of Gods
now, is stronger than all ours. Thou shall not do this. Consider the examples
of Vzzah, and Vzziah; for Vzzah, God had charged that none but the consecrated
Priests should touch the Arc. Vzzah seeing the Oxen shake the Arc, put forth
his hand to stay it up. Was this a sin, to stay the Ark of God from falling?
Yes, God proves it, he lays him dead by the Arc side. For Vzziah, God had
charged, Numb. 18. That none should invade the Priests Office. The stranger
that comes nigh, shall be put to death. Vzziah will come to the Altar with a
Censor in his hand to offer Incense. Why, is this an offense to offer to the
Lord? Yes. God makes it manifest, Vzziah is a Leper to his dying day.

(...), Synes. Him. 1.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
I crave thy pardon Lord for what is amiss,
And in thy word unseemly handled is.
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
The One in Three I laud, and do adore,
The Three in One acknowledge, and no more.
The persecuted MINISTER, In defense of the MINISTRY, The great Ordinance of
JESUS CHRIST.

Setting forth, 1. The continuance of it. 2. What is required to the
constituting of Gospel Ministers. 3. The excellency and dignity of their
calling. 4. What respect they ought to be of amongst Christians. 5. That the
contempt of them is a great and grievous sin.


All which are plainly and methodically handled.

THE SECOND PART.

By WILLIAM LANGLEY, late of S. Maryes in the City of Lichfield, Minister.

Vtinam ex eorum sim numero, qui pro veritate decertant, and in hominum
offensionem incurrunt,

Greg. Naz. orat.21. Greg. Mag. in Ezekiel. Nihil ad defendendum honestate tutius.
Nihil ad dicendum veritate facilius.
He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me,

Luke 10.16. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God,

2 Cor 10.4. Who so despises the word shall be destroyed: but he that fears
the commandment shall be rewarded,

Prove. 13.13. To the Right Worshipful, truly Noble, and Virtuous, Sir GEORGE
BOOTH Knight and Baront, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
I Presumed (Right Worshipful) to dedicate the former part to a Kinsman of
your Worships, and a highly Honored friend of mine; this pleads your Worships
Patronage against the oppugners of CHRIST'S great Ordinance (THE MINISTRY:)
Never did any that was in this Sacred Function (if of any merit) depart ashamed
and discontented from your face: whereas by others they are wondered at, ut
pueri Junonis avem, made a spectacle unto the world, Angels, and men; and are
the filth and offscouring of all things: these scorners of so sacred an Office
make a low step to their own damnation; for, indignities done to the Ministers
of the Gospel shall not sleep in the dust, but stand up in judgment. If policy
were my aim, some Bramble should be my Patron, under whose shadow I might (for
the present) have shelter and protection, perhaps honor and advancement; but
plain dealing is a jewel of great price, and of that worth and excellency,
that (with it) I had rather embrace a mean condition, than all the world with
indirect dealing and dishonesty. I have made choice of your Worship, whose
Name, like a precious ointment has sent forth a fragrant smell. To omit the
ingenuity of your mind, generosity of spirit, mild temper, and sweet
disposition, with many other shining virtues; I will only mention your piety
in the worship of God, and pity to all his poor distressed Members.

There are (I find) four degrees of Honor; natural by Birth, external by
Riches, internal by Virtue, and supernatural by Grace: though God has blessed
you with all, yet all must crouch to the last, and kiss the Scepter of the
Christian Noble; for what is to draw our pedigree from Noah's flood? may we not
descend as well from cursd Cham, as blessed Sem? and therefore the best
derivation is from Heaven. Tota licet veters exornent undique terrae
Atria, Juven. lib. 3, Sat. 2.
nobilitas sola est atque unica, virtus.
This moved Ambrose to tell Auxentius, Quid Honorificentius quam ut Imperator
Ecclesiae Filius dicatur? What Honor can be greater than that the Emperor
should be called the Son of the Church? Let me add, poor Man the son of God;
yet this honor have all his. Theophilus was Noble, because Theophilus a lover
of God. As this is your highest privilege, let me entreat you to esteem it
your highest honor, that so when all things cease and be not, you may not
cease to be immortal, inestimable. Bonum est suum esse, (says Seneca) It is a
Royal thing to be a man's own; but much more to be guided by the Law of CHRIST.
I grieve to see that our Age yields so few Joseph's of Arimathea to step forth
to their Pilates and speak for the honor of Jesus; so few Esthers that
adventure their lives for the safeguard of the People, upon her resolved terms,
If I perish, I perish; so few Paul's that vindicate the glory of our Israel, THE
MINISTRY: though the great red Dragon has drawn away a great part of the
stars of our firmament, yet (God be praised) some continue in their orbs to
give light to this crooked Generation, which is to your Worship, and many more,
the joy and rejoicing of your heart.

There are, I know, too many full of subtilty that seek their overthrow, and
study their final fall, but An curat oves oviumque magistros? Let your zeal
for Truth against every opposite Error remain constant to the provoking of
others, and let them say of your Worship. Ad similitudinem vivimus.

What I have done in this Treatise is for public benefit, and the discharge
of my duty, knowing, That Inutilis and mortuus aequiparantur in lege, An
unprofitable, and a dead man, the law holds both alike.

Gratitude (I find) has made it a custom wih us, even anciently practiced by
sundry Heathens, that where Greatness and Goodness have nourished the life
and sap of Learning, there by a due retaliation, Learning should honor and
etrnize your Memories to all future Ages.

You have opened to me the Fountain of your good opinion, which gives
encouragement to Dedicate these my Labors to your Worship.

Here you are only Patron, though by your natural gifts and observations you
might be the Author of a better piece.

I doubt not of acceptance, because I have received so many testimonies of
respect, and have no other means to express my grateful remembrance of your
favors, than to Dedicate this Poor PAPER to the Memory of your lasting Name.
In magnis voluisse sat est, In matters of importance the will is to be
acceppted. Praying the Lord to bless your Worship, Noble Lady, and sweet
Children, with all increase of heavenly joys, and earthly happiness, I remain,

From my study at Lichfield, June 12. 1655. Your Worships in all Love, Service,
and Thankfulness, WILL: LANGLEY.

To the Candid and Ingenious Reader.
AS worldly policy finds out means to procure and continue honor and
preferment, so Christian policy to preserve a good conscience, to stand to for
the Lord and his word, and take Moses, John, and Elias parts, before Machiavell
and all his wicked crow. The wisdom of God, only wise, has spoken it, That
such as wear soft Raiment are in Kings Courts: It is an ancient Apophthegm,
Exeat Aula qui vult esse pius: but never more verified than now adays.

There are two things (God bearing witness with my conscience) that I grieve
unspeakably for.

First, to see that there is no Religion amongst men, for the most part, but
what is tainted with a spice of Faction.

Secondly, that the faithful Ministers of the Gospel are so much slighted and
persecuted, and looked upon as a sort of abject and contemptible men.

The consideration of which, drew from me this second part, which treats 1. Of
the continuance of the Ministry till the end of the World. 2. What is required
to the constituting of Gospel Ministers. 3. The excellency and dignity of their
calling. 4. What respect they ought to be of amongst Christians. 5. That the
contempt of them is a great and grievous sin.


As in my first Part (amongst other things) I have not been slack to resist all
violent Intruders, (for sacred Functions ordained by God must not be profaned
by violent Usurpations) so I thought it my duty to put a further hand (God
knows my willingness, though ability be small) to the keeping up of the fabric
of this holy Function, the holy Order and Ordinance of CHRIST, by which the
seduced come to be regained out of the hands of deceitful workmen, the
Ignorant instructed, the Poor comforted, and the Good confirmed. It is the duty
of painful Shepherds not only to feed the Sheep, but find out the footsteps
of the Wolf: and as the Apostle exhorts, to take heed to themselves and all
the flock whereof the Holy Ghost has made them overseers, Acts 20.28. Shall
the enemies of God and his people seek the subversion of the Church under
color of the conversion of the Land? and shall not we who are in Gods stead,
resist with heart and hand these monsters in nature? yes doubtless. We know
who said, Lata porta, but adversarii multi, 1 Cor. 16.9. an effectual door is
opened, but there are many adversaries; and concerning this way, we know that
it is every where spoke against. God grant our silence be not a sin, Veritatem
celare est Aurum sepelire, to conceal truth is to bury gold, Aug: Conf: lib.
12. When Luther began the great work of Reformation, Albertus Crancius a
Bishop, (a man friend enough to Luther, but hopeless of success in that
businsse) said these words unto him, Frater, frater, abi in cellam tuam, and
ibi dic, Miserere mei Deus, Brother, brother, go into thy Cell, and do no
more, but sigh, and say, Lord have mercy on me. Many now adays (in this our
Age) are too fearful and cowardly, such is the distractednesse of the time,
that men labor to be Neuters, and study more to be indifferently disposed to
either side, than to be religious at all; such a time does Erasmus mention in
praefat: in tom: 2. Hieron: Quando ingeniosa res fuit esse Christianum, where
it was a point of policy and will to be a Christian. Though God will maugre the
malice of all opposition, maintain order in his Church, and keep fast the
stars in his right hand, Revel. 1.16. that none can pluck them thence; yet we
are not situ and otio torpescere, but to build the wall, and hold the
spiritual sword in our hands as long as breath lasts. Let us follow the old
ways; for, I am of S. Chrysostomes mind, (...), New ways are no ways.

As I cannot free my self from error, it being the privilege of mortality; so
not from censures incident to corrupt nature: for, I find there is not any
truth so firmly grounded, and warily delivered, upon which calumny will not
st^ck and fasten slanderous imputations: never was any Messenger of Gods truth
so happily innocent as to maintain himself free from the scourge of tongues.

What is here willingly offered, will (I hope) by most be as courteously
entertained; it is not possible it should find welcome by all, nor look I for
it. The Jews have a Proverb, comede dectylos, and projice for as duritiem, Eat
the date, and cast away the stone; take that which is good, and for pardonable
errors, pass them by. If Gods glory be any whit advanced, and the Reader
benefited, I have my desire; remembering that old rule, Modus orationis auditor
est, either speak profitably, or say nothing. May the great God purge his
floor, maintain Religion in purity, restore Joy to a distressed Land, make our
Nazarites whiter than snow, our Ministers purer than the Saphires, build up the
Waste places, and settle Truth and Peace upon a Lasting foundation, is the
Prayer of

From my study at Lichfield, July 12. 1655. The meanest and unworthiest Servant
of Christ, W. LANGLEY.

To M. and his Mates.
IT is storied of Publius Clodius (lest Cicero should unjustly tax him of
sacrilege) that he stepped in, and first told the Senate, That Cicero had
profaned all Religion in his house. Thus he that has the most corrupt Lungs,
soonest complains of the unsavory breath of others. I invite not such, nor you
Mr. M. and your company to my banquet; for, I know you are apter to fashion
strange Interpretations of what was never meant, than like civil guests, to cut
fairly and respctively: you stick not to say any thing that is false, and
misapply any thing that is true. Nacrissus-like, you are enamoured of your own
beauty, and judge your selves the fairst and refinedst stuff: you must be ownd
(forsooth) as the GODLY PARTY: Oh! it is an injury not to give you that title
you give your selves forth to be, The Temple of the Lord, Th Temple of the
Lord: and if reproved, presently cry, We are Abraham's children: of all men you
are the hardest to be cured; for, why should Physic be administered to those
that are perfectly sound? I must take the liberty to tell you, That you forget
to build up the Cedar-work of piety, and learn only to paint over with
Vermilion: to borrow the words of a worthy Divine, Men think you Saints, you
think your selves Angels, Flatterers make you Gods, and GOD knows you are
Devils; and will smite such painted walls, and rotten gilded posts.

It is not amiss to give some Characters of you, that you may be known and
avoided.

1. The best things published, with the best intent, escape not the lash of your
censure: he that does not dance after your pipe shall be sure to be scoured,
and scourged.

2. Malice and Envy are seated in your looks, and you let slip no advantage
that may accomplish your own ends, though to the ruin of your neighbors.

3. You are tender of no man's Reputation, (if be cross your humors) his name,
fame, and credit shall be shipwrackt, and all the scandals and contumelies that
can be imagined shall be laid to his charge to render him vile and odious.

4. Before you want matter for persecution, bare information shall serve your
turn: contrary to the Law of God or man.

5. You are known by your lofty looks, envenomed tongues, cruel hands, surly
salutations, and imperious commands.

6. Perfoetorem oris, By your stinking breath, which proceeds either from some
hot distemper of your mouth, rotten humors in the stomach, or ulceration of
the lungs.

If Mr. M. and his crew find fault with my tartness, let them know, half is
not told: Emendate vitam, ego emendabo verba, Mend your ways, and I will mend
my words. Cessate perverse agere, Cease from doing evil, and I will cease to
reprove and rebuke: I pray God give you sober judgments, peaceable spirits,
devotion with profession, Zeal without envy, love without partiality, and
Religion with Gospel. charity; for, were you guided by this (as they that will
be Judges of other men's actions ought to be) you would forbear to censure or
condemn; but if my prayers prove ineffectuall, and that your flinty hearts
cannot be broken; know, that your sharp frosts, and nipping blasts shall not
mar the beauty, or enervate the virtue of my flourishing tree, which (God
assisting) shall stand unshaken in your greatest storms. My Savior came once
with Pax vobis, Peace be unto you: at another time with Vae vobis! Woe be unto
you! The searching wine of Reprehension, to eat out the dead flesh, is for you
more necessary, than the oil of Consolation. Woe unto them that prophecy to
such as you are smooth things, and deceits, Isa. 30.10, 11. Yet if any be so
bold as to bring sour grapes, and the sharp wine of reproofs, and you once
come to be fretted with the just Reprehension of your Hypocrisy, then farewell
Pastor, expect expulsion from thy poor Vineyard, thou shall find these fiery
Serpents, (wheresoever thou go) with their venomous and burning stings,
wounding thy person, doctrine, name, fame, and whatsoever is dearest to thee.

I conclude you men of ill tempered constitutions, all earth in your hearts,
all water in your stomachs, all air in your brains, and all fire in your
tongues; your hearts heavy, your stomachs surfeited and watery, your brains
light and aerie, your tongues flaming, and fiery, you never are at rest, but
like the troubled Sea, cast up mire and dirt.

Lord deliver me from unreasonable men, for all men have not Faith.

Farewell.
The persecuted MINISTER, In defense of the MINISTRY, The great Ordinance of
JESUS CHRIST. THE SECOND PART.
HAving begun a Discourse of several things touching the Ministry, as in the
First Part of this Book, the heads of which are laid down in the Title Page, I
intend (by Gods assistance) to treat, 1. Of the continuance of the Ministry.
2. What is required to the constituting of Gospel Ministers. 3. The excellency
and dignity of their calling. 4. What respect they ought to be of amongst
Christians. 5. That the contempt of them is a great and grievous sin.


CHAP. I.
Ephesians. 4.13. Of the continuance of the Ministry till the end of the world,
and that as long as there is a Church, there will be Pastors and Teachers.

FOr the continuance of the Ministerial Office, Ephesians. 4.13.
[untill we all come to the unity of the faith, and of etc.]

This Unity, in the Text, has a double relation: 1. To Faith. 2. To Knowledge.
And the object of both is Christ.

Faith is taken passively, Adams, The Saints meeting.
or actively; either for that whereby a man believes, or for that which a man
believes; either for the instrument that apprehends, or for the object that
is apprehended. Now if we take it for the form, there is an Unity of Faith,
Ratione objecti, non ratione subjecti, One in respect of the object on which it
rests; not one, in respect of the subject in which it remains; every man has
his proper faith, and every faith has Christ for its object: he that sees,
must see with his own eyes; he that feels, must feel with his own hands; he
that enters into the mansion of glory, must have oil ready in his own lamp;
the just shall live by his own faith, and we shall all meet in the unity of one
holy Catholic faith. Now if we take it in the other sense for Christ, in whom
we have believed, we shall meet undoubtedly in the unity of those joys and
comforts which we have long expected; and all Believers since the Creation till
the worlds Dissolution shall meet in the unity of faith.

Secondly, Cant. 2.9. darkly through a glass, 1 Cor. 13.12. but in heaven we
shall know him face to face; we shall live by sight, not by faith: faith and
hope shall vanish, there shall be only fruition in heaven; and in this we
shall all meet, 1 John 3.2.

To a perfect man; full perfection is reserved for heaven, when our reunited
bodies and souls shall possess perfect glory, and reign with our Savior for
ever. We are said here to be one body whose head is Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. but
there, one perfect man; and in truth the expression is very patheticall, for
the Saints in glory cannot be called a body, for a body receives augmentation,
increase, and growth; so this mystical body increases with the increase of
God, Col. 2.19. Now in heaven there is no augmentation, increase, and growth,
therefore are the Saints compared to a perfect man.

To the measure of the Stature; not that all in heaven shall be of that age
wherein Christ died, only it denotes that there shall be nothing wanting to
make our glory perfect; here we shoot out some few boughs, bring forth some
little fruit, we grow as fast as we can, adding to faith, virtue; to virtue,
knowledge; but there we shall have a full measure of sanctity, of comfort, of
bliss, of glory, of the fullness of Christ.

Christ's fullness is to be considered personally, or mystically; personally in
himself, and so he is not only perfect, but perfection, Col. 1.19. in him
dwells not only a sufficient fullness, but all the fullness; not of any
created nature, but of the Godhead; not phantastically, but bodily.

2. It is to be considered mystically, or in relation to his Church, who shall
be gathered together to the head, and partake of the fullness of Christ. The
words thus explained, there arises from hence this truth:

That the office and function of the Ministry is not temporary, Obs.
but perpetual, that is, must remain till the Saints be perfected in glory, it
must continue till we all meet, etc.

God was the first Teacher and Doctor of the world, as he was in himself, so
in his teaching wonderful; in process of time this Divine wisdom thought it
necessary to use outward instruments, and to teach the sons of men, by Men; yet
through various dispensations, Hebr. 1.1. God can give spiritual life without
the ordinary means; he can maintain a natural life without bread, he can give
wisdom without a Teacher, nothing to him is impossible, but what is to us
natural, sin, and defects: though God can do all things by his absolute
power, yet it is his will to ordain his Word as the ordinary means of
salvation, to give men knowledge by instruction, and save by teaching. Thus
Cornelius was taught by Peter, Lydia by Paul, Paul by Ananias, the Eunuch by
Philip, Every Soul that is wise in the Doctrine of Salvation by Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelifts, Pastors, and Feachers appointed for the gathering
together of the Saints for the work, etc. When the Lord intended a blessing to
his people, he made them this promise, I will give you Pastors according to my
heaert, that shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. Now the Lord has
not at any time ceased, and left off, but from the infancy of the world to this
present hour has continued the Ministry to his Church; Christ gives his
Apostles a Commission, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations; and concludes with a
promise, verse 20. Lo I am with you always, etc. God will send shepherds till
every lost sheep be brought to his fold; the Ministers voice shall sound, till
the Archangels voice be heard. Art. 23. Pro. 4.
This is the Doctrine of the Church of England. And the late Assembly of
Divines has this expression, Unto the Catholic visible Church, chap. 25.3.
Christ has given the Ministers, Oracles and Ordinances of God, for the
gathering and perfecting of the Saints in this life to the end of the world.
You read the Ministration of the Law had an end, but the Ministration of the
Gospel has no end, till the world end; God has made us, says the Apostle,
able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the spirit; the
letter kills, but the spirit gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6. The proper office of
the Law is to terrify, to condemn; but the power of the Gospel is to convert,
to save. Moses glory is done away, the type is vanished; but Christ's glory
remains, and abides for ever: after the first Testament, there did follow a
second; but after the second, there shall succeed none: the Gospel in the
Revelations, Rev. 14.6. is called, the everlasting Gospel. The Ministry of the
Gospel (says Zanchy) begun with Christ, and shall end with the world; but the
power of it is everlasting, A condito orb usque in omnem aeternitatem
duratura, for it is the power of God unto salvation unto every one that
believes: not only is it called so in regard of the power of it; but that
everlasting life is the subject of it: it holds forth eternal life, and is the
common ordinary means of bringing us thither; as the blood of Christ must be
for the saving of sinners to the end of the world, so his Gospel must be
preached that the people may be taught how this blood must be applied.

As long as there is a Church upon earth which will be to the end of the world,
Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon etc. God can as soon forget himself, as
his promise; cease to be God, as cease to be faithful: As long, I say, as
there is a Church on Earth, so long must there be Teachers in and for the
edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 12 28. and so here he has given some Apostles,
some Prophets etc. Experience tells us, there are Wolves as full of craft as
cruelty, who desiring to devour their flock, endeavor the removal of the
Shepherds, but Pan curat oves oviumque magistros. Our great Shepherd preserves
his sheep and shepherds. He that has given the Ministry to his Church, will
(maugre the malice of all opposition) maintain that order in it, and keep fast
those stars in his right hand, Revel. 1.16. that none can pluck them thence; it
is true, the great red Dragon with his tail, Rev. 12. has drawn away a great
part of the stars of our heaven, and cast them to the earth; yet still some
abide in their orbs to give light to this crooked Generation; and let us pray
the Father of Lights to continue them, and to fix more and more burning and
shining lights in our firmament, and suffer no longer wandering stars, Jude
13. and ignes fatuos to misleade his people into bogs and precipices. What has
been spoken may serve

First, Episcopius, Ostorodius, and others. Some affirm, that the Ministers
calling is only for orders sake, but a thing not necessary by Divine
institution. Some cry it down as useless and needless, and condemn the
Ministry of the Word, and Sacraments, as poor, low, empty, and naked things.

Secondly, I will give you Pastors according to my heart, which sha feed you
with knowledge and understanding; but to deprive you of this, is a token, that
ruin and destruction is at hand, unthankful are that people that will not
acknowledge the wonderful blessing of God in the Ministry: the want of this,
doubtless, is one of the greatest judgments that can befall a people So the
Lord threatens Amos 8.11. to be debarred of the glad tidings of salvation, and
not hear the sound of the Gospel, but wander in darkness, and ignorance, must
needs be a heartbreaking and heart-tormenting sorrow: The Lord out of his love
gives Ministers to his Church, and they are for their works sake to be
beloved, and prayed for; for if the Lord should totally eclipse these Lights,
it would be the darkest, and dismall'st day that ever your eyes beheld. Divines
have several opinions upon that place of the Psalmist, Psalm 45 9. Upon thy
right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir; so the Original: but in the
other Translation of the Psalm: it is read, In a vesture of gold wrought about
etc. To clear this exposition from novelty, you must know,

1.

Secondly,

Thirdly, [wrought about with diverse colours] is nothing else but a periphrasis
of the Hebrew, Cethem.

Fourthly, David seems so to expand himself, verse 14. speaking of this Queen,
She shall be brought unto the King in garment of needlework; that is, of
various and diverse colors. Thus much for the clearing of the words. The matter
of the Churches apparel is gold; her trimming [embroydered with diverse
colours] is the righteousness of Christ; the hand that puts this on is
faith; the clasps that tie this close together, are the Sacraments: But there
are other Expositions upon the words, [Divers colors,] which is not amiss to
insert; some understand, diverse virtues, according to that of Saint Paul, Col.
3.12. Put on tender mercies etc. Some by this understand the diverse kinds of
precepts in the Scriptures: Some moral, others natural; some theoricall,
others practical; some legal, others Evangelicall. Some by [Divers colors,]
understand Contemplation and Action. Some understand this of those graces and
gifts of the Spirit, mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. Others of those degrees and orders
in the Church, Some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. These are the embroideries of
the Church; with these the Lord does clothe her, and make her happy; without
which, she is poor and naked. Oh! where is your, and the Nations thankfulness?
what could God Almighty have done more, that he has not done, sending
Laborers into his Vineyard? some ploughing up the fallow ground, others
binding the brokenhearted, leaving no means unattempted to make us happy; yet
have we not manifested our thankfulness to the Father of Lights, for giving us
such Lights Nay, rather do not many contemn and despise, revile, and rail
against them, and look upon them as the every scum and off scouring of the
earth? They, whose lips God has seasoned, and sealed to preserve knowledge,
are held contemptible; and their feet foul, that bring the fairest message:
the Prophets labor to cure Jerusalem, but Jerusalem labors to kill her
Prophets, a strange requital! Many kill us whom we would cure (though not in
our natural) yet in our civil life, our reputation; though we feel not
actual murtherings, we are sensible of cruel murmurings. Ishmaels tongue made
him a persecutor, as well as Esau's hand. I tremble to consider to what malice
and envy this holy calling is exposed, as S. Paul says, We are made a
gazing-stock to the world, to men, and Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9. Athanasius was
nicknamed Satanasius, Cyprian called Caprian, Paul accounted mad, CHRIST
reputed a Conjurer, casting out Devils through Reelzebub the chief of Devils.
In our own cause we are to be silent, in Gods cause zealous; for private
injuries we are to pass them by with a Father forgive them: but when the cause
of the Gospel suffers, and is wounded in the reproach of the Ministry, we are
not to be silent. Christ when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he was
persecuted, 1 Pet. 2.23. etc. but when accused of blasphemy, Luke 11.15. he
answers, he makes apology for himself, and confutes his adversaries by
several arguments, verse 17. and so on. But more of this in its proper place.

Thirdly, I send you forth in the midst of wolves; it is true: but the same
Christ says, I am with you always, etc. The Prophet Ezekiel is sent to a
rebellious Nation, impudent Children, stiff-necked, Ezekiel 2.3, 4. but observe
what follows, verses 5, 6. and they, whether they will hear, etc. We must
fight with Beasts, as did S. Poul, 1 Cor. 15 32. with ravening Wolves, with
Devils under the name of Saints. With unreasonable men, 2 These. 3.2. Yet we are
to comfort our selves, that he that sent us, will protect us, and being his
Ambassadors, he will requite our injuries, and look upon them as done to
himself; For he that despises you, etc. The disgraces done to them, the Lord
accounts them done to himself, Exodus 16.8. What are we? -- your murmurings
are not against us, but against the Lord. The disgraces of Gods Prophets and
Ministers are always rewarded with Gods judgments. Pashur smites, and stocks
Jeremy, Jer. 20 2. but God changes his name, Pashur into Magor, that is,
Authority into fear. Jeroboam stretches his hand against the Prophet, but his
hand presently dries up, and he cannot pull it in again, 1 Kings 13.4. The
boys of Bethel that scoffed Elisha were rent in pieces with Bears, 2 Kin. 2.
The mocking of his Messengers does hale down on their own heads the wrath, even
the remediless wrath of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. However others disrespect
them, do thou value them as the Ambassadors of God, and esteem their feet
beautiful that bring the glad tidings of peace etc.

CHAP. II.
Romans 10.15. What is required to the constituting of Gospel Ministers, viz:
three things: 1 Abilities. 2. A holy life. 3. Mission, or sending. With some
Objections briefly propounded, and answered.

THe Apostle, in the 13 verse, lays down a position, Whosoever shall call on
the etc. and descends by certain steps and degrees:

1. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?] Faith must go
before Invocation, the Object must be known before it be desired.

2. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?] It implies an
impossibility to believe on one we never heard of.

And 3. How shall they hear without a Preacher?] This is the ordinary means
that God has appointed; showing the necessity of the Ministerial Office.

And 4. How shall they preach, except they be sent?] Implying, that without
mission or sending there can be no preaching.

5. How can they preach except they be sent?] So that mission or sending is
necessary to the making up of a true Minister of the Gospel.

But before I press this, let us consider that in true Gospel Ministers, three
things are requisite:

First, Ministerial abilities, that they be (...), Men apt and fit to teach, 2 Timothy 3.2. nursed up in sacred studies, 2 Timothy 3.15. and not to be admitted, as
Chrysostom says, Antequam fidei suae and vitae dederint documenta, Before
they have given proof of their faith and life. Sisacerdos est, sciat legem
Domini; Hier. in Haggai.
si ignorant, ipse se arguit non esse sacerdotem Domini. This ability S. Paul
calls, (...), rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. The Word of God
is Panis vitae, the bread of Life, and while it is in the whole loaf, is not
so helpful as when by a good and skillful hand cut in pieces. Spice unbroken
is sweet, but pounded in a Mortar is far sweeter. Many men loath Manna,
because it is slovenly handled: And good Liquor is spoiled, being in a fusty
vessel; S. Paul in that excellent Epistle to Timothy, which Hierome calls
Speculum Sacerdotii, sets down directions for a Pastor; one of which is apt to
teach: The ground of all our Preaching must be taken out of Gods book, Scriptum
est, it is written: So August: Audi, dicit Dominus, non dicit Donatus aut
Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut Hilarious, aut August. sed dicit Dominus; It is not
what this, or that Man says, but what the Lord says. We are sent to preach on
his Preachings, to paraphrase his Lectures, and to discover that to you which
he dictated to us; and in truth, all our Sermons are nothing else, but
rehearsals of that old Spittle Sermon, (as it were) preached by God himself to
decayed Adam and Eva, Boys, The second Sunday in Lent.
Genesis 3.15. For first, all that is said by Christ and his blessed Apostles in
the New Testament, is summarily nothing else, but a repetition and explanation
of that one prophecy, Semen mulieris conteret caput Serpentis. Yet we are not
to use no other Books but the Bible, no other Commentary but the Creed; but to
read Treatises of Divinity, and the best Expositions of the Scriptures for the
better understanding of this one Book, which is (...), the Book, and must be
read. S. Paul binds Timothy to it, 1 Timothy 4.13. S. Peter shows it to be the
practice of the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.10. Jeremy read the Psalms, Jer. 10. Psel.
79.6. Daniel perused Jeremy. Dan. 9.2. S. Peter looked into S. Paul's Epistles, 2
Pet. 3.16. Nor must we despise Learning and outward helps so long as like an
obedient Hagar they serve Sarah with necessary help: the Book of God must be
the highest in our esteem, yet not to make others of contempt: it is no small
Learning to illustrate obscurities, to clear the subtilties of the School, to
confute Errors, and the like. S. Paul had his Books and Farchments, 2 Timothy
4.13. not to write in, but look on; if Calv^n may be credited. Aristippus being
demanded of one, how much better his Son should be for Learning? answered, He
should have this benefit, that there might not one stone sit upon another. And
to this alluded Tully, making the same distinction betwixt a Learned man and an
ignorant, as betwixt an ordinary Man and a Beast. (ertainly Learning is of
great and unvaluable estimate, and brings to the enjoyers thereof many
unspeakable and unsensible helps and furtherances, which as it was well spoken
of the benefits of health, Carendo potius, quam fruendo distinguuntur, their
use is best discerned by their want. Learning is like to fire and water, which
are most necessary for the daily behoof of man's life, being moderately and
discreetly used; otherwise Experience teaches the simplest, that if they be
applied to hurtful purposes there are not any more dangerous and hurtful
Elements: which gave occasion to Luther to say, Nunquaus periclitatur religio
nisi inter Reverendissimos, Religion never comes into greater danger than
amongst the right Reverend. The Canonists have a rule, Omne malum a
Sacerdotibus, No evil that comes not from the Priests. Learning (I say) is
requisite, I mean not the Cobwebs of Learning, which have more wit than art,
more art than use; nor the distorted and idle Glosses of the Canonists, which
burdens a man's memory, but bettereth not his intellect; but the Learning that
is helpful for the understanding of the deep and profound things of God.
Theologia Scholastica multis modis Sophistica, School Divinity is little better
than mere Sophistry. Plus argutiarum quam doctrinae, plus doctrinae quam usus,
It has more quickness than soundness, more sauce than meat, more difficulty
than doctrne, more doctrine than use.

Here I might take some time to decipher to you the misery of this Age of ours.

First, you have many Septicks, mere Questionists, apta, non alta, non modo
scripta, Demosth.
sed etiam sculpta, matters of weight, not notions, etc.

Secondly, some cannot do their Message aright, John and Ezekiel were
commanded to eat, Revel. 10. Ezekiel. 3. They given counsel before they receive
it of the Lord, they preach without any meditation, only turn the cock, and
let the water run. Extemporall preaching is such a levity as works a light
conceit of preaching; it should not come from a light imagination, but a
serious meditation of the heart in grounded knowledge, Bernard's faithful
Shepherd, p. 12. Fishers of men should be, as the Apostles (when they were
fishers) who were not always casting in their nets, but sometimes mending
them. So if these men be always feeding others by their preaching, and never
feeding themselves by reading and meditation, they will prove but dry nurses in
a while, and unfit to give the sincere milk of the Word. I leave these
Ciphers, which are nothing of themselves, only seem to raise the figure to a
higher number.

Thirdly, Esa. 30 10, 11 verses. So did some to Micaiah, all the Prophets,
which are four hundred, speak good to the King, Let thy word I pray thee, be
like the word of one of them, and speak that which is good, 1 King. 22.13. All
their doctrine is Placentia; and thus by their flattery they puff men up with
an opinion that they are more than indeed they are. I leave these to answer for
their cowardice, when they appear before the Lion of the tribe of Judah.

Fourthly, Issachar, who was a strong Ass, couching down under two burdens,
and saying, Rest is good. Such an one was Alexander the sixth, who was more fit
to keep the Castle of Saint Angelo against Charles the eighth King of France,
than to lead the flock of God against the invasions of Satan. Christ will not
take Peter's love to be sincere, unless he feed his Lambs: he will not have the
sheep of his fold to wander in a wilderness without a guide.

Fifthly, Moses Chair, they say, but do not; their practice overthrows all,
which makes the people think of some great mystery of Atheism never yet
imparted to them. S. John Baprist should be their pattern, who was a shining
and burning Light, shining with knowledge, and burning with zeal.

Sixthly, some minister medicines not to ease a burdened heart,

Seventhly, some minister in this place, in that place, John Baptist) these are
madding Physicians.

But what necessity is there of Learning?

First, Christ's extraordinary call is no rule to us: out of the mouths of etc.

Secondly, he chose such, to show, Saul, a Paul, and yet this no president to
us.

Thirdly, observe, Tim. 3.2. They are to be blamed, that are imperitorum
Magistri, Masters of the ignorant, before they be Doctorum discipuli, Scholars
of the Learned; they mount into Moses Chair before they sit at Gamaliels feet:
shallow pits that run so long open mouth, till their springs are quite dry.
And like Lapwings, run away with some part of the shell on their heads. Like
the Persian tree that Theophrastus speaks of, which at the same time buds,
blossoms, and bears fruit. They will be Conduits to convey water unto others,
before they be Cisterns holding water in themselves: as Hierome notably, Qui
loqui nesciant, tacere non possunt, docentque s^^iptur as quas non intelligunt.
The Minister is an Interpreter of the Law, Luke 11.52. how shall he interpret
that understands not? and wanting the key of knowledge, how shall he open to
others the kingdom of Christ? It is a sin and shame for illiterate men to take
upon them the teaching of others, that are not taught themselves; of whom may
be verified that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.7. Understanding neither what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, etc. From whence proceed strange contradictions
of yea and nay, 2 Cor 1.17. So ^arre from skilfulness in dividing the Word of
Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. that they run to gross absurdities and shameless
assertions, and had need that one teach them their Catechism and first
Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12.

To conclude, he that knows not in some measure the things of God, is but a
beast amongst men; he that knows what is simply needful, and no more, is a
man amongst men; but he that knows according to the Divine rule is as a God
amongst men; for such bear the lively image of Gods wisdom: whereas gross
ignorance is a true representation of the ugly Fiend of darkness: for it is
the Devils policy when he would rob and ransack our souls, (like a Thief) to
put out the Candle of Knowledge, that so we might neither discern his purposes,
nor decline his mischiefs: he has bad Instruments in all Ages to darken the
light of knowledge. It is said of Licinius, that he was such an Idiot, that he
knew not how to set his hand to any writing. And of Balbo, that he was such an
enemy unto Learning, that he would neither study good letters himself, nor
suffer the children of his time to be bred up therein. Domitian will turn
Philosophers into exile. Julian will shut up the School-doors. The barbarous
Soldiers under Clement the seventh will burn that excellent Vatican Library.
Habadallus, Mahomets scholar, forbad all Christian Children in his Dominions
from going to school, that by Ignorance he might draw them to Superstition. To
be destitute of Learning and outward helps of knowledge, is to dance in the
dark; for one means of attaining it, is the meditating of divine Scriptures,
and the reading of approved Authors: Arts have their use and ought not to be
despised so long as (like an obedient Haga) they serve Sarah with necessary
helps. When Aristippus was asked, what it would profit ones Son if his Father
should give him Learning? Why says he if for nothing else, yet herein it will
advantage him, that when he comes to the Theater he shall not sit like one
stone upon another. Let the Book of God be the highest in our estimation, but
let not others be in contempt. None but juggling Empricks, and sottish
Enthusiasts will condemn all Learning: for, they speak falsely that say it ties
the Holy Ghost to a Pen and Inkhorn; it is of use and may be isntrumental to
bring us to a higher pitch, Empericks endanger not more bodies, than Ideotish
Priests, souls. Barbarism is gross in an Orator, Ignorance in a Physician,
Dullness in an Advocate, Rudeness in a Minister. Christ chose Fishermen, but
made them fishers of men; gave them a calling, and virtues for it. The Priests
lipe should preserve knowledge, it is no less a precept to the Minister, than
a promise to the People. We are unfit to be Seers if we cannot distinguish
between Hagar and Sarah; but Txion like take a Cloud for Juno. We are poor
Stars, if light enough comes not from us, whereby to distinguish of colors:
to discern the Manna of Israel, from the enchanted Cup of Babel. There are too
many, sad experience tells us, strangely affected to Humane Learning, who
would deprive us of the use of it by calling it Man's knowledge, Worldly wisdom
a great enemy to Gospel simplicity, the Dagon the world worships; not unlike
the Fox dispraising the Grapes he cannot reach. If they could beat down
Learning, they might escape censure for their own Ignorance. I wish Quintus had
his desire, Soli ut artificis de artibus judicarent. If the people would not
meddle with what concerns them not, or of what they are altogether ignorant: Ne
suitor ultra crepidam, is a good note. I heartily wish these men a rectified
judgment, sober affections, and so much knowledge as to discern betwixt a hand
maid and her Mistress, it is to be feared such Children of Ignorance will
persecute all the means, and Messengers of Light, and bring both Church, and
State, to a disordered Church of confusion.

Secondly, Tit. 1.8. 1 Timothy 3.3. as Timothy; so every Minister must be a
pattern to his people, (...), both in doctrine and in conversation, 1 Timothy 4
12. they must, like Gideous soldiers, be armed with Lamps, as well as
Trumpets; as they must (...), 2 Timothy 2. cut the word aright; so (...), Gal. 2.
square their life aright; look both to their doctrine, and to themselves, 1 Timothy
4. They are called in Scripture, stars, and God never placed any Star in
the firmament that gives no liight. He went not far from this allegory, that
prescribed a Ministers duty, Gug. Naz.
Tonare voce, fulminare vita, Our words, thunder; our lives, lightning. If we
be lightfull in preaching, darksome in living; we do (as it were) propound our
doctrines, as impossible to be kept. If we have knowing minds, and dissolute
affections, it may be said of us (as of that stigmatick Roman Emperor Galba,
Igeniu^ Gtlbae male babitat.
who ws both deformed, and witty) that a good Instrument is put in an evil
Case. He that has Learning, and no good Life, is like sounding brass, and a
thinkling Cymbal. As the Lacedaemonians said of the Nightingale, (...). Nothing
but a voice. They are called Stewards, and Ambassadors, therefore should be
without reproof, and make their Masters will their Rule: as they are Way-marks
in preaching, so Load-stones in conversation.

If we consider a Minister in a fourfold regard: 1. Of God. 2. Of his
Ministry. 3. Of the People. And 4. of himself; We shall plainly see that
Holiness is requisite.


For the first, Dr. Clerk in a Ser. p^at a Visitat.
the Levite must be (...), without blemish -- for no Levite that had any kind
of blemish, might come near the Lords Altar, Levit. 21. The shadow in a Type
has a proportionable truth in the body. The blemishes in the bodies of the
Priests under the Law, were figures of the sins in the souls of the Ministers
under the Gospel: and as God removed them from ministering at his Altar; so he
repelleth these from preaching his Word, Psalm. 50.16 What have thou to do to
preach mine Ordinances, etc? Gods command is general to all, especially to his
servants in ordinary. Be ye holy, for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1. v 16. The place
where he is worshipped is called Sanctuarium; and the Chamber of his presence,
Sanctum Sanctorum, holy of holiest. The day of his worship, it is an holy day.
The persons of his worship, his Priests, (...) i. e. holy. The Ministers, they
are the Lords vessels, (...), his vessels of choice; and if they will be (...)
meet for the Lords use, 2 Timothy 2.21. they must be (...) sanctified.

Secondly, they are bearers of the Lords vessels, not material,

Thirdly, Vita Clericorum, should be Libri Laicorum, The lives of the Clergy,
the books of the Laity, says one of the Fathers, The Conversation of the
Priest, the Looking-glass of the People. The Prophet calls John Baptist, the
first Preacher of the Gospel: a voice, not a sound, Viva vox, says Bernard,
that is, both vita and vox.

Fourthly, They ought to be holy in respect of themselves; Lucrum and Damnum
will not fail. Now the loss is of the two greatest things that man has, the
loss of his name, and the loss of his soul. In the day of the general assise
of the world, the prophesying in Christ's name will not serve for an answer,
Mat. 7.22. but then there shall be a reply and sentence together, I know you
not; depart from me, etc. For God shall judge not after the doctrine, but after
the life of the Minister, and every man shall receive according to his works.
That which the Jews spoke falsely of Christ, is verified of such Prophets, that
though they save others, yet themselves they cannot save. For he that
denounces Gods judgments on those sins, which himself commits, is his own
condemner, Romans 2.1. and Christ in the last day shall say unto him, Luke 19.
ver. 22. Out of thine mouth will I judge thee thou wicked servant, etc.

Ille solus praedicat viva voce, qui praedicat vita and voce, He preaches most
that lives best. All things in a Divine should preach, his apparel, his diet,
his expressions, and actions, being walking Sermons, Epistles, and Gospels. A
Gospel-Minister must be an example in word, and conversation, according to that
of Hierome, Omnia in Sacerd te debent esse vocalia; The Prophets are said to be
holy Prophets, Luke 1. ver. 70. holy by place taken from amongst others, and
consecrated to this high calling. So Calvin, holy by grace, and sanctification,
for holy and Prophets are Voces convertibiles. As good Preachers are Lux mundi,
The Light of the world: So, Bad are Tenebrae mundi, says Bernard, Fogs and
mists; they give good Oracles out of Moses Chair, they say, but do not; their
practice overthrows all, which makes the people think of some great mystery of
Atheism never yet imparted to them: In current coin three things are observed,
good metal, right stamp, and just weight; if we preach well, and live ill,
our metal is good, but our stamp bad; if we live well, and preach ill, our
stamp is good, but our metal bad; but if we both preach, and live well, our
penny is good silver. It is Vatablus his observation out of the 30. chap. of
Exodus v. 13. that the weights and measures of the Sanctuary, that is, the
sickle, talent, and cubit were of a double bigness to those of common use;
denoting that the virtues of the Ministers of the Sanctuary should be of a
double proportion to others. Hemyngius in his Pestill, Dom. 2. post Pasch
tells us of four sorts of Ministers, The first neither teach well, nor live
well; These pull down the Church of God with both hands, of which sort S. Peter
and S Jude foretold us there should be many in the latter days, not Lux, but
Tenebrae mundi, Not the Light, as Ministers should be, but the Darkness of the
world. These are not Gospel-Physitians, but Italian Quack salvers. A second
sort are such as teach well, but live ill, these set up the Temple of God with
one hand, and pull it down with another; that build up Heaven with their Voice,
but Hell with their Life. It is the Life, not the Learning of the Preacher that
persuades the people. Suadet loquentis vita, non oration. Sin single in the
people, is double in the Preacher, for he offends both Peccato and Exemplo;
It is both Scandalum populi, and odium Ministerii, even scandalum in both these
senses; an offense unto the people, and a scandal to his calling. Thou that
teach another, teach thou not thy self? The Israelites abhor the
offerings of the Lord, through the sins of the Priests, the sons of Eli: and
such a Minister may look for at the mouths of the people the check in the
Proverb, Loripedem rectus etc. and that which is John 9.34. thou art altogether
a sinner, teach thou us? Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? What should we
heed what thou preachest, when we see how thou live? Suspecting Religion to
be but Policy, and imagining if their Doctrine were true, they would not cross
it by their practice.

A third sort are such as teach ill, but live well. John Baptists, but not with
intent to bring one soul to Christ.

A fourth sort are such as teach well, and live well, Doctores, and Ductores,
Feeders, and Leaders: to sincerity of Doctrine, there must be joined integrity
of Life; to Vrim there there must be Thummim, Light of understanding and
perfection of life. Who, says our Savior, can convince me of sin? As he was
Rubicundus passione, so Candidus sanctitate; white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10. he
was bloody in his death, spotless in his life: We cannot say, who can convince
us of sin? we are flesh, and blood, men of the like passions; in many things we
offend all. Though guilty of manifold weakness, yet let us take heed of
manifest wickedness of any sin that may scandalize our holy calling. Luther in
his Com: places, says, Hoc video, Loc. com. tse, de Minist. ver.
non esse Theologum qui magna sciat and multa doceat, sed qui sancte and
theologiee vivit, He is not a Divine, who knows and teaches much, but who
lives best. Our good deeds, says tolet, are the best gloss we can set upon
any Text, Example is above infinite Precepts Longum iter per praecepta, breve
per exempla, To teach by precept, is tedious; by example, a short cut. When
Reason sometimes cannot persuade, Example moves. All the Reason that Origin did
beat into Alexander Severus could not so soon persuade him that Christ was the
Son of God, as the Example of Origin. The Clergy-mans strict diet of abstinence
from enormities, of fasting and prayer against the surfeits of sin, of
repentance for error is a powerful inclination to his people to do the like;
Habet quantacunque granditate dictionis majus pondus vita di^entis, The
preaching of life is made more forcible by the good life of the Preacher; an
evil life is an evil engine to overthrow the walls of edification. Citharisante
Abbate tripudiant Monachi, When the Abbot gives the Music of a good example,
the Monks dance after him: as was their proverb, Plene dixit, qui been vixit,
He has spoken fully, that has lived fairly. He is no good Pastor, that is not
a good Pattern. Vox poputi has given us the names of Spiritual persons, in
some different singular respect from others; and for this there is good reason,
(though perhaps they know not that give it) for S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.37. makes a
Prophet and a Spiritual man all one, If any man think himself a Prophet, etc.
Let us show our selves to be in deed, what we are in name, and not let our
deeds make our names odious, and render our Ministry vile to the great
dishonor of God, our sacred function, and Gospel profession, whereby God shall
want his due praise, we comfort, and his people benefit. Plut. com. de exilio.
It is a good Apophthegm of Diogenes. If thou will be revenged of thy enemy,
become an honest man. Walk uprightly (says Solomon) and then walk confidently,
Prove. 10. ver. 9.

Integer vitae scelerisque purus
Non eget Mauri jaculis, Horat. carm. lib. 1. Od. 22.
nec arcu, etc.
A good conversation for a Minister is very necessary:

First, because God is glorified by it, and his name blasphemed through evil.

Secondly, it is honorable, the glory and renown of all that profess the
Gospel.

Thirdly, it is comfortable, and will sing a sweet requiem to the soul at the
last hour.

Fourthly, it is profitable to others, 1 Pet. 2.12. -- they may by your good
works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. The Lord
purge out of his Vineyard loose licentious men, who are a smoke in his
nostrils, hateful and abominable to him, who shipwreck themselves and others
on the rock of profaneness: and may the same Lord put it into the heart of
Authority to make a narrow search and enquiry after such to render them their
reward. It is seen by sad experience, that if a man be affected to the
Commonwealth, and cry up the times, they are accepted and approved of; he
fares best that (Proteuslike) can transform himself into any shape; appear
with the mantle of good affection, it matters not a pin how is the
conversation: o tempora! o mores! Enquire of the former times, and it was
otherwise. We have men now adays desire to have their heads stuff with
strange notions, and their mouths filled with new-minted expressions, to be
Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, but make not Gods law a lanthorn to
their feet, and light unto their paths. Ille sacras Scripturas rite legit qui
vertit verba in opera, Welcome light; but the Lord increase the number of them
which expound Scripture not in Leaves only, but in Lives also, turn Words into
Works. I might press this more fully, but what has been said is sufficient. I
speak not this against any in particular; but that you should show your hatred
of those loose, dissolute persons, who not only dishonor their profession,
but endanger others by their bad example.

I come to the third thing required in a Gospel-Minister, Episcopius and
Nicolaides say, That a holy life and aptitudo ad docendos alios are only
requirable in a Minister; but it is otherwise, sufficiency of Learning, and
holy Conversation, is not all: though they well learned and well lived, yet may
they not climb instantly into the Pulpit and preach: they must have an inward
Commission from Heaven, and outward Ordination on Earth by imposition of hands.
Saint Paul bids Titus ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. Timothy was
ordained, by laying on of hands, 1 Timothy 4.14. and the Apostle ordained Elders
in every Church, Acts 14.23. Christ seals his Apostles a warrant; (...), I send
you, it is not humanum inventum, but Divinum institutum, authorized under the
broad seal of Heaven; it is a badge of a false Prophet to come without his
Commission, Jer. 23.21. I have not sent them, yet they ran, I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesyed. Whosoever prophesyeth without license, or
authority, comes of himself, and we are to take heed of him. Albeit there be
some question about the manner of Ordination, yet in all Ages, and in all
well-ordered places, there have been certain Constitutions and Canons for
admitting of men into sacred Orders. Never was the pretense of parts and piety
thought sufficient to entitle a man a Minister of the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS.
B^rn Faithful Shepherd.
If we run before the Lord call, as many do, for profit, ease, and honor, we
may go without expectation of good speed; begin well, and better hope there is
to end well. They are Thieves that climb into the Church at the window, and not
at the door. No man, says Luther, although he be more wise than Solomon, or
David. ought to take this honor unto himself, except he be called of God, as
Aaron, Heb. 5.4. though not immediately, yet mediately sent by Deputies under
him, as Timothy and titus, Sosthenes and Sylvanus, and others in the Primitive
Church, Acts 14.23. And those (says the Church of England) we ought to judge
lawfully called, and sent, which be chosen to this work by such as have public
authority given unto them in the Congregation to call, and send Ministers into
the Lords Vineyard: and they that are thus ordained, are said to be ordained by
the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. ver. 28. compared with Acts 14.23. Before the
exhibition of Christ in the flesh, a sending or calling was necessary, termed a
separation, setting them apart to that office, Numb. 8.14. 2 Chro. 29.11. My
sons, be not negligent, for the Lord has chosen you. Where it is said that the
Word of the Lord came to Jeremiah and other Prophets, the meaning is not that
Jeremiah was gifted only, but besides (...) a power, the Lord gave him (...),
authority; Go speak, Lo I have sent thee: So great was the modesty of the
Prophets that they had need to be urged unto it, and threatened if they did not
execute their Office which the Lord called them to. In the time of the
exhibiting of Christ in the flesh, none ever durst attempt this Function,
without a calling thereunto. John the Baptist is said to be a man sent of God,
Joh. 1.6. The Apostles are said to be sent sorth, Mat. 10 5. The very word
Apostolos comes from (...), mitto, to send. Matthias must be chosen before he
take part in the Ministry, Acts 1.24, 25. S. Paul who was not taught his
Gospel by man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. and Barnabas
who was excellently gifted, yet besides their gifts, they were chosen and set
apart to the office of the Ministry, Acts 13.2, 3. -- Separate me Barnabas and
Saul for the work whereunto I have caued them. And when they had fasted, and
prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. This we find was
the practice of the Church, Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 4.14. The Council of
Nice, Anno 314. denies those to be Gospel Ministers that are not sent and
ordained; and this is the judgment of all Reformed Churches: How can they
preach except they be sent?

Ostorodius, and others finding this Text say, Paulum de suo duntaxat tempore
loqui, that S. Paul spoke this of his own time: But whosoever reads the
Professors of Leiden, Calv: com: Beza's annot: and Paraeus, all say, De
ordinaria vocatione de^et intelligi, it ought to be understood of ordinary
vocation: for, persons ordained by the Apostles might ordain others, and that
successively, Tit. 1.5. 2 Timothy 2.2. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. praedicate that is
good; but to make ite lawful, it goes before; How can they preach except etc?
Before we put our hand to the work, a calling is first to be had; we must pass
the Churches hands, and not leap over her head: there is a necessity of
ordination or deputation thereunto, lawfully called according to the Rules and
Canons of the Gospel. To rush without authority of the Church is presumption,
contempt of superiority, breach of order, the nurse of confusion, the mother of
schism, and bane of the Churches peace. But I have spoken fully of this in my
Part I, Chap. V. where I have showed that it is a grievous sin in such as being
not lawfully called, offer to take upon them the Ministerial Function. I shall
answer some Objections, and so end this.

Objections briefly propounded and answered.

Contrary to what has been delivered according to the universal judgment and
unanimous consent of the most eminent Orthodox Divines,

[That there is no distinct Order of Ministers in the Church, but that all
Christians baptized are equally Ministers, and have power to preach the Word of
God, admin ster the Sacraments, and perform other Ministerial offices, without
any ordination thereunto by prayer, imposition of hands, or Commission granted
by them that have lawful authority therein, by the Law of God and of the
Land.]

For proof whereof they allege,

1 Pet. 2 5. Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
Ibid. ver. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy
nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, ( Vt
praedicetis virtutes illius, as Mr. Beza turns it, which is to preach) who
has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. Where Christians are
said to be called to this, That they should declare or preach virtutem Christi,
the power and excellency of Christ: Therefore all Christians may and ought to
preach, which is the principal office of a Minister. Rev. 5.10. Thou have made
us unto our God Kings and Priests, etc. Rev. 20.6. They shall be Priests of God
and of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who also has made us able (or fit, Idoneos)
Ministers of the New Testament.

Answer.

These places are to be understood of a Spiritual priesthood, Priests in
Scripture, as I learned from the incomparable Doctor Rainolds, Conf: p. 463,
471. etc. Which priesthood is common, or rather proper to all Godly men: But
the Ministry, whereof the question is, agrees likewise to sinners, who are
not a chosen generation, a holy nation, etc. as S. Peter calls them. For
Order is Gratia gratis data, a Grace freely given for he saving of others; but
not Gratia gratum faciens, a Grace making gracious for the saving of himself.
And God forbid that the sins of the Minister should pollute or annihilate the
Ordinance of God any more, than a foul hand does hurt or hinder the growth or
fructifying of the good seed which it casts into the ground. And it is well
distinguished in the Schools, That he that has not forgiveness of sins
formally, may have it Ministerially: As he that has not in his purse one penny
of his own, may notwithstanding carry many crowns to another from his Lord and
Master. This I speak to show, That the Texts which speak of spiritual
Priesthood etc. are not appliable to the Functions of an External public
Ministry.

2. That in Rev. 5. and 20. is to be understood of the Priesthood of the
Blessed in Heaven, which consists in offering of prayers, etc. So that they
do Toto coelo errare, that make the Priesthood In patria, the same with the
Ministry In via; The one being grounded upon actual fruition of Joy and Glory
immortal; the other, upon hopes and endeavors for obtaining Grace, which may
bring us to that state of Glory.

3. The words of S. Peter seem to be taken out of Exodus 19.6. Ye shall be unto
me a kingdom of Priests, and an holy nation: Where the same thing is spoken of
the Hebrews, which S. Peter attributes to Christians. But in the Old Testament
all were not properly called Priests, but only the sons and posterity of
Aaron, and yet all were spiritual Priests, namely, those that did obey the
voice of the Lord and keep his Covenant, ibid. v. 5.

4. As well S. Peter in his Eristle, as S. John in his Revelation, do join
Kingdom with Priesthood. So that all Christians are Priests, as they are all
Kings: Not properly, in respect of civil external Government, or public
external Ministry; but spiritually, in conquering their vices, and in the holy
government and order of their affections and actions; as also in offering
spiritual sacrifices of praises, thanksgiving, good works, etc. Nay, each his
own body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, etc. Romans 12.1. But
this name is given to Ministers of the Gospel in a more peculiar sense, because
they are called to offer up the bodies of other men in like sort. See Dr.
Rainolds ubi supra.

5. That of S. Peter, That you should show forth the praises, or preach the
virtues of him, etc. is not to be understood, That all Christians should take
upon them the public Function of preaching the word of God by Explication and
Application thereof to the consciences of men; But that all should give thanks
and praises to our Lord God for his continual and innumerable benefits; And
this, not so much in words, as in good works; that so their Life may be a real
and effectual Sermon to all that know them, and a strong motive, To glorify
our Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5.16. In like manner are understood many
other places, as Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work. 1 Timothy 2.10. Which becomes women professing
godliness with good works. Or rather, (...);
Annunciantes pietatem per bona opera, By, or in their good works. And
afterward, verse 12. he says, But I suffer not a woman to teach, etc. So that
these, who are bound to preach really, are forbidden to preach verbally;
especially in the Church, where it is a shame for a Woman to speak, 1 Cor.
14.35.

6. Who has made us able Ministers, etc. 2 Cor. 3.6. The Apostle speaks not
of all Christians, but of himself only, and his other Colleagues or Copartners
in office. For, he compares himself with Moses, who was a Minister of the Old
Testament and letter, which kills; But he and his Colleagues were Ministers of
the New Testament, and Spirit, which quickneth, etc. But it appears in the
Old Testament, that all were not Ministers and Publishers of the Law, but only
Moses, and the Priests after him: For the Priests lips should keep knowledge,
and they should seek the Law at his mouth: For he is the Messenger of the Lord
of hosts, Malac. 2.7. Besides, in all the precedent Chapter, the Apostle
speaks o himself; and likewise at the beginning of this Chapter, when he
says, Do we begin again to commend our selves? Or need we, as some others,
Epistles of commendation to you, or of commendation from you?

Other Objections there be to the like purpose, which I forbear to set down,
because I would not too long trespass upon the patience and time of the
Christian Reader, and for that I conceive the Answer to these, to be a full
Solution of the rest.

Only I am sorry, that the great Light of the Church, Mr. Luther, is entitled
by the Objectors to the patronage of their Cause. Howsoever, we are not to
subscribe, with a blind obedience, to the dictates of any great Master:
Especially, when he goes single against the current of all sound and Reformed
Churches. Yet thus much I can say for him, That his opinion is so qualified,
that it affords little or no advantage to the Objectors, nor opens a door
to that Chaos of confusion which they would introduce: For albeit he might
hold, That all Christians be equally Priests, having the same power in the Word
and Sacraments; Yet he denies, that any may use or exercise this power,
without the consent of the Community, or calling of a Superior. In lib. de
capt. Babyl: cap. de Ordine. Which is enough to keep out sacrilegious Intruders.

This opinion, as it is not sound, so neither is it absurd or much
inconvenient: For, as a Minister that has that power by lawful Ordination,
cannot lose that power by Degradation, or otherwise, because it is a gracious
gift never to be reiterated, and called by the Schoolmen (how properly I know
not) Character indelebilis: So by degradation etc. he may be restrained from
the use and exercise of this power; and if he use it before restitution, he
sins. Which is a tenet so generally admitted of all hands, that I hold it
loss of time to labor in the proof of it.

CHAP. III.
Romans 10.15. Contains the excellency and dignity of the calling of the
Ministry, which appears by those Names and Titles given to them.

HOw beautiful are the feet of them etc! Romans 10.15.
This place is taken out of the Prophets, Isa. 52.7. Nahum. 1.15. though not
the same serie and ordine Scripturae, in Scripture words; yet the same quoad
sensum Scripturae, in Scripture sense; for scarcely is there any place quoted
out of the Old Testament, but it varieth in some words in the New; yet it may
be said to be the same, as it is written, Nah. 1.15.
How beautiful! The Prophet Nahum adds the word Behold: Behold how
beautiful! This is ever the Herald of some excellent thing, it is as the
sounding of a Trumpet before some great Proclamation; or like the in the
Margin of a Book, pointing to some remarkable thing of great consequence, and
imports some special note worthy our deeper and more serious observation; it is
as the ringing of the great Bell before the Sermon of some famous Preacher, it
requires, and calls for our best and serious attention, Behold. The
Philosophers are called, the Secretaries of Nature; The Prophets, the Oracles
of the Law; And the Ministers, the Stewards of the Gospel: Or as one calls
them, Gods High Commissioners, who have power to be isntrumental by the
preaching of the Gospel, to redeem Souls from the power of Hell and the Devils
claws, Job 33 24. Though in the judgment of the world, no condition is thought
to be more base or vile than this calling; yet Christ thought so highly and
honorably of it, that refusing to be King, he chose the office of a Minister:
he did not account it a slavery to serve the Lord. Now the calling of the
Ministry seems to be honorable by those several Names and Titles given to
those that bear the office.

First, John the Baptist is called Angelus Dominl, The Messenger or Angel of
the Lord, Mal. 3.1. Origin mistook in thinking him an Angel indeed; he was not
so Natura, but Officio; Not in Nature, but in Office: this is given to the
Priest of the Old Testament, Mal. 2.7. He is the Messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. And to the Ministers of the New, Revel. 2.1.8.12. Chap. 3.1, 7, 14.
verses. The Ministers of the seven Churches are called, the Angels of those
Churches. Now as Angels, so Ministers are not to carry their own message, but
the message of their Lord and Master; and to be respected, and had in esteem
for their works sake.

Secondly, they are termed the Servants of Christ: David, a King, yet boasts
notwithstanding of this title, Behold I am thy servant, I am thy servant, Psalm.
116.16. All the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, have gloried in this
service. If it be honorable to serve a King, assuredly greater to serve the
King of kings. Better to be a Doorkeeper in the house of God, than to dwell in
the tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84. All Christians are Gods servants, sworn to
fight under Christ's banner, and to continue his faithful Soldiers and
Servants unto their lives end. But Ministers, they are his Servants in ordinary
near unto him, and after a special manner employed in the service of Jesus
Christ. Other men may serve God, and yet walk in their callings: but Preachers
have no other calling, but to serve God, to bring Souls into his Sheepfold,
and to enlarge his kingdom. The spiritual Labourer is worthy of his hire; but
if he labor for hire only, he may make himself merry with his reward on Earth,
Heaven has none for him. That good is well done that is done of conscience. If
then they are Gods servants, they are not their own Masters. They have a
Master, even God, whose they are, and for whom, and from whom they come; and
therefore, for their Master's sake, to be beloved, and honored: He that
despises you, (says Christ) despises me. God will esteem the wrongs of his
Servants as done to himself; their dishonor is his own. They are Servants,
not for base uses, as Moab, Psalm. 60.8. to wash pots; but preferred to offices
of trust, and offices of honor, to bear the Lords vessels, Isa. 52.

Thirdly, Jer. 15.19. Thou shall be as my mouth: it is God in them that speak.
They are Christ's mouth, 2 Cor. 13.3. Seeing that ye seek experience of Christ
that speaks in me, etc. This may teach you to hear our voice; not as the word
of men, but as it is indeed the Word of God, 1 These. 2.13. Christ said of the
wicked Pharisees, Que dicunt facite, Do as they say, but not as they do.
August: against Pet: lib. 2. cap. 6. says, Dicunt enim quae Dei sunt, faciunt
quae sua sunt, They do their own works, but speak the Lords Word; and
therefore do as they say: So long as the Preachers deliver the wholesome words
of our Lord Jesus, you must entertain them as the Angels of God, even as Christ
Jesus. He that despises the Messengers of Gods Word, loves not the message,
nor him that sent him. He that comes into the public place to entrap the
Minister, and carp at his word; comes to affront and abuse the King of kings
and Lord of lords, whose servants they are, and whose message they bear.

Fourthly, Cor. 5.20. They are not common Ambassadors, but Legati a latere,
Stewards of his hidden secrets: If an honor to a Subject from an Earthly King,
much more to a poor Worm, [Man,] to be Ambassador to the King of kings: for,
what is an Apostleship, but the Lords Embassage? A title of such honor as
Christ himself disdained not to be called an Apostle, Heb. 3.1. They bring the
glad tidings of reconciliation betwixt God and Man. The Lord has honored us
to be instrumental to tie this knot, yet for the hand of the most High God to
perfect: He vouchsafes this honor to us as his Instruments, that we in his
name, and power, shall tie a double knot on Earth, not only temporal, but
Eternal of the believing Soul to her husband CHRIST. Not that we have power of
our selves; for, were we all Boanergeses, the sons of Thunder, we are not able
without him to turn your hearts to righteousness; it is Christ that must clear
the eye, undeaf the ear, unlock the heart, and shake the inmost power of the
soul, as the thunder shakes the wilderness: It is by our Ministry, not our
authority that your Souls are converted. Let the power be ascribed to God, not
to us. It is no small honor to be Ambassadors to the King of kings, Ministers
of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. and therefore glorious. Moses whose countenance the
Israelites might not behold for his glory; yet are the Ministers of Christ more
glorious than he, verse 8. How shall not the ministration of the Spirit be
rather glorious etc?

Fifthly, they are Gods Stewards, his high Stewards, 1 Cor. 4 1. Let a man
account of us as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God:
they are not only Ambassadors, but Legati a latere, Stewards of his hidden
secrets; not only Dispensatores Ministeriorum, as in the Vulgar Latin, but
according to the Original, Mysteriorum, Dispensers of his Sacraments, which are
mysteries; and preaching of his says, which is a deep secret, 1 Timothy 3.16 Now,
says the Apostle, Let a man esteem of such, not ascribe too much, or give too
little; not magnify them as Christ, for they are not Masters, but Ministers;
and yet not vilify them, for they are not ordinary Servants, but Stewards, and
that of Gods own secrets.

Sixthly, they are the Masters of Assemblies, Eccles. 12.11. Cor. 4 15. and
therefore to be honored; Physicians not of the body, but of the soul; to speak
properly, Christ is our only Physician who has the sovereign balm of Gilead;
but allegorically, they are called Physicians, Jer. 8.22. Not that they cure of
themselves, but that they apply Christ's saving Physic to the sickly souls of
his people; and therefore to be esteemed. They are termed Saviors, as in the
last verse of the Prophecy of Obadiah. And Saviors shall come up to mount
Zion Take heed, says the Apostle, unto thyself, and unto thy doctrine:
continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4.16. and therefore in no wise to be despised; because
he that receives these, receives Christ; and he that despises these,
despises Christ, Mat. 10.40. Howsoever man debaseth this calling, God exalts
it: and though the Minister be in the opinion of the world, as S. Paul says of
himself, (...), Ephesians. 3.8. less than the lowest; yet in Christ's judgment,
(...), greater than the greatest, Mat. 11.11.

Seventhly, stars, Rev. 1.20. in name, Stella a stando dicitur, Why? nomine,
substantia, sins, metu, effectibus.
God has fixed them in their Orbs. In substance, it is a more solid part of
his Orb light, simple and most pure; in situation being regularly carried,
finisheth its course in a determinate space of time; in motion, 1. circular: a
Deo coepimus, in Deo claudimus. 2. Incessant, without intermission. 3. Swift:
nescit tarda molimina Spiritus, the holy Ghost cannot abide delays. 4.
Orderly, keeping our own, and equal distance. 5. In effects; in influence,
light, and delight. The seven Stars which thou saw are the Angels of the
seven Churches; they are Stars on Earth; and if they turn men to
righteousness, shall shine as Stars in heaven, Dan. 12.3. Philosophers tell
us, that the Sun does partly enlighten the stars of Heaven; but Divinity
says, the Sun of Righteousness does wholly enlighten the Stars of the
Church; God has placed them high, that they may the more commodiously shine to
us: So he has put Ministers in eminent places that their light may be more
perspicuous. Candles are lighted, and not thrust into blind and dark corners.

Eighthly, Job 28. than the Gold of Ophir, than much fine gold, Psalm. 19. This
is that Jewel which the Merchant in the Gospel bought with the sale of his
whole substance; the Word, the immortal Word of God. Now that that is of price,
must needs be of estimation; that, that is profitable, is honorable: and truly
were there no other Reason but this, that they hold forth the Word of God, the
ordinary means of salvation; the Organ and instrument of blessedness, and
everlasting life, it were enough to prove the dignity of their calling. I might
proceed to other Names, and Titles, there being no less than two and twenty in
Scripture that denote their worth and dignity, but this may suffice. Truly,
Brethren, we live in an Age, whereof it may be said, Innumerae pestes Erebi
glomerantur in unum. The mischiefs of Hell are swarmed to one round; and the
abominations of Dumah, Egypt, and Babylon, may all be found in England: and
this sin of the contempt of the Ministry is not the least, it was one ground
of a day of Public Fasting not long since; and it may be one ground, of our
daily, and continual lamenting, to see this high and honorable calling so base
and vile in peoples opinion. The Galatians received S. Paul as an Angel of God,
yea as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4.14. but many prefer their Swine before them. The
Word of God is the Plow of the Lord, the People the Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9 The
Ministers are his Oxen to work at his plow, to break up the fallow ground, and
to tread out the corn. Now how be their mouths muzzled, and they that feed
others have nothing to feed themselves, tied to the rack and manger? But alas!
this is not all, how are they rayled on, reviled, traduced, their name and fame
blasted, as if they were the scum, and off scouring of the earth? It is most
unnatural for a man to despise his brother the son of his own father, it is a
brand set upon the tongue that must burn with unquenchable flames, that it
spoke against his Brother, and slandred his own Mothers Son, Psalm. 50.20. but
greater is their sin, and less cannot their punishment be, that not only
condemn their brethren, but vilify their Fathers, those whom God has chosen
as instruments of their spiritual good and salvation, 1 Cor. 4.15. When the
Lord would brand the Israelites with a mark of the greatest reproach, he says,
Thy people are as they that rebuke the Priest, Hos. 4 4. [as] is here taken
absolutely, they are such as indeed Rebuke the Priest; they were not only
impatient of reproof, but which was more, they contended with their Teachers.
They lessoned them that would not be lessoned by them, and rebuked those by
whom they were rebuked; they were grown so insolent, and impudent in their sins
that they durst defend them against their Reprovers, and speak proudly, and
presumptuously against the Messengers of God. This is a common disease, and
plague of this Nation, that in every Town, and City, the people are as they
that rebuke the Priests. That impudent and insolent claim is made ordinary in
these days; With our tongues we will prevail, for our lips are our own, no
calling or degree is free from such. I shall conclude at this time; That the
disgraces of Gods Prophets, be they in word, or in deed, are always rewarded
with Gods judgments. The boys of Bethel that scoffed at Elisha were rent in
pieces with Bears, 2 Kings 2. The mockers of his Messengers do hale down on
their own heads the wrath, even the remediless wrath of the Lord, 2 Chro.
36.16. The disgraces done to them, the Lord accounts as done to himself, Numb.
16.8. What are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.
David accounted the abuse offered to his Messengers as a dishonor to himself,
2 Samuel 10.5. And our Savior says, He that desp seth you despises me, etc.
Luke 10.16. They ought to be had in honor, and estimation, because of their
message. They bring the glad tidings of salvation; and, how beautiful are
their feet etc? I speak this to the shame of such that have no more reckoning
of their Ministers, than the Egyptians of their Sheepherds, Genesis 46.34. Every
Sheep-keeper was an abomination to the Egyptians: These, like the Devil, will
smite Job's servants, when he cannot smite Job himself: The Jews will
scoffingly say, Is not this the Carpenter's Son? Many will make use of any
thing that may disgrace them, but not consider them in the worthiness of their
calling, in the weight of their message, or in any thing that may add to their
commendation. I leave such as the mothes of a man's name and fame, the
Cankerworms of the Church, the disturbers of peace, and enemies of God and
goodness, who durst they, would as well shoot out their black tongues against
God, as against his servants.

CHAP. IV.
1 Cor. 4.1. Contains the Respect Ministers ought to be of amongst Christians:
which consists 1. in careful attention, and diligent hearkening to their
doctrine. 2. In the Reverend estimation of their persons. 3. In their provision
and maintenance. 4. In standing by them, and with them, helping and encouraging
them.

LEt a man so account of us as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of etc.]
The primitive Christians did cleave unto the Apostles, and were greatly
affected to them, Gal. 4.14. Ye received me (says S. Paul) as an Apostle of
God, even as Christ Jesus: This is a duty the Scripture enjoins; as there is a
duty from a Wife to Husband, from Servant to Master, from Subject to Superior,
so from a People to their Minister, 1 These. 5.12. so 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders
that rule well, are worthy of double honor, etc. Many in all their lifetime
never make any reckoning of them, till pain, grief, and sickness enforce them;
and then they must be sent for, and entreated for counsel and advice,
direction, and prayer; and whom they never loved living, they seem to have
respect to dying: thus the Athenians dealt with Themistocles; they used him (as
he says of himself) like a tree, in fair weather little regarded, but in a
storm fled to for shelter; God did give honor to the builders of his material
Tabernacle in calling them by name, Exodus 35.30. Barker.
and they do dishonor the builders of his spiritual Temple in calling them
out of their name. You know that in respect of themselves they have a
Commission from God, and being commissionated they are not to be slighted:
though the person be mean of himself, his Commission gives him worth. And
again, in respect of themselves, they are to be respected; for, were it not for
the Ministry, you would be debarred of the glad tidings of salvation, be never
shipped with Christ in Baptism, sail with him in the pinnace of the Church, nor
anchor at the haven of happiness. When the Lord would brand the Israelites
with a mark of the greatest reproach, (as I said before) he says, Thy people
are as they that rebuke the Priest. Hos. 4.4. They were grown so insolent, and
impudent in their sins, that they durst defend them against their Reprovers,
and speak proudly and presumptuously against the Messengers of God, and
therefore the Lord sets down the greatness of their sin, The people are as
they that rebuke the Priest.

Now this reverence and esteem due to the Ministers of the Gospel consists in
four things: Reverence to the Minist. consists in four things.


1. In careful attention, and diligent hearkening to their doctrine, Ruth,
gleaning the ears of corn, which the Laborers in Gods harvest let fall;
watching daily at Wisdoms gate, and waiting at the posts of her door, Prove.
8.34. accounting every precept, promise; every piece and parcel of Gods Word,
sweet, and delightful, digesting the bitter pills of reproof, and thunderings
of the Law, as well as the cordials, and calm voice of the Gospel: Whatsoever
precept they command and enjoin obedience to; whatsoever vice they reprove, and
would have forsaken; whatsoever duty they exhort to, and would have followed,
in all obey them, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, Heb.
13.17. God Almighty sends Laborers into his vineyard; some plough up the
fallow ground, and sow wheat in the Lords field; some bind up the
brokenhearted, power oil into their wounds; some pipe the harmonious music of
the Gospel, and others mourn, by the terrors of the Law; yet none of these
means can allure many to hearken, and attend to the things of God; You are to
hear our voice, not as the word of man, but as indeed the Word of God, 1 These.
2.13. Christ said of the Pharisees, Mat. 23.3. Quae dicunt facite, do as they
say, but not as they do; Dicunt enim quae Dei sunt, faciunt quae sua sunt,
says Saint Augustine, they do their own works, but speak the Lords Word; and
therefore so long as the Preachers deliver the wholesome words of the Lord
Jesus, you must entertain them, and their message as the Angels of God. He that
comes into the public place to entrap the Minister, and carp at his word,
comes to affront and abuse the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whose
Servants they are, and whose message they bear; He that is of God, says
Christ, hears Gods word, Joh. 8.47. and you hear them not, because ye are not
of God; you see the cause why they hear not, because they are not of God. As
men and women, they were of God his offspring, but as malicious and envious,
so of the Devil. A like expression S. John has, 1 John 4.6. He that knows
God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears not us. By this Rule, says
Hemyngius, examine thy self whether thou be Gods child, or the Devils servant;
he that with a good will and honest heart hears Gods Word, has Christ's
Record that he is of God; but he that hears the Word to carp and snatch at
it, and persecute he Messenger, is of the Devil. It is a positive truth, that
no child of God comes into Gods presence to hear his Word, but with Godly
reverence, due preparation, and careful attention. It is an Argument of a hard
and stubborn heart, of a son of Belial, to slight the Word of God, how weak
and mean soever the Organ or instrument be; I do declare that they fearfully
sin against God that do disesteem the preaching and message of the Servants
of God, and do procure to themselves the wrath and anger of the Lord. They
that hear not Moses and the Prophets, that is, the Law and Doctrine of Moses,
and the Prophets, they will not believe though one arise from the dead, Luke
16.31. It was S. Paul complaint of Alexander, 2 Timothy 4.15. He greatly withstood
our words: not our person, which had been a breach of charity; but our
preaching, which was a direct offense against piety. Much to be condemned are
they that will not hear, and so are careless; that carp, and snatch at what
they hear, and so are malicious; or will have nothing but placentia, smooth and
pleasant things spoken to them; so rip up the swelling of their hypocrisy,
make bare their wickedness, detect their ungodly proceedings, and then they
will fly in your faces with, Away with such a man from the face of the earth.
The Devil stirs not till God rouse him; as the wild Bore sleeps till he be
hunted. Let darkness cover men's impieties, and their slumber is unmolested:
produce them to light, and they cannot endure it. The ulcerous side full of
dead flesh feels not till you touch the quick. Let Elijah tell Ahab of his
Idolatries, and John bloody Herod of his Lusts, and then thou art mine enemy.
Many had rather go to Hell fast asleep, than to Heaven with their eyes open;
to be lulled in the cradle of security, than awakened by the voice of God. Thus
you see that reverence and esteem to the Ministers of the Gospel consists,
First in careful attention and diligent harkening to their Doctrine.

Secondly, Angels, Stewards, Ambassadors? Why does he parle with them, enter
them into commons, make them his fellow-commoners? one main Reason is, that you
should with the word have a reverend regard, and estimation of them, according
to these Exhortations, 1 These. 5.12. And we beseech you brethren to know them
etc. And obey them that have the rule over you, Heb. 13. ver. 17. It is
observed that the worst men of a Parish regard a Pastor the least; one gives a
Reason; they are like Legs and Arms out of joint, and so cannot endure the
touch of the Chirurgions hand, whose chief care is to work their cure. He that
is sick of a Lethargy desires to sleep though he die for it, and he that is
lulled asleep in sin cannot away with the Watchman of God. Nothing is a
greater trouble to him that loves sleep than to be kept awake. It makes the
secure soul cry out against the Minister, as those against Paul, Acts 22.22.
Away with such a fellow; he troubles the City, Acts 16.20. when as they in
their carnal security, malice, and envy, are the Ahabs that trouble Israel.
None but the scum and refuse of people, the most carnal-minded, are the
contemners of the Ministers of the Gospel, for from a loathing of their
persons, there follows a detestation of their doctrine, the instrument of
conversion and means of salvation; and so in the end, ruin and destruction. It
is a sad thing that many more affect and take delight in variety of Teachers,
than in verity of Doctrine. Brethren, the meanest Preacher whom God has sent
you, can show you that, which if you obediently follow, shall effectually save
you. The Word is powerful, what Instrument soever brings it; and Gods
strength is made manifest in our weakness: it is not we by our Learning and
Eloquence, but God by his Spirit that must work you to himself. I have observed
that this immoderate crying up of some to be Elijah's and Elisha's to have
their spirits redoubled on them, and the vilifying of others, have been a great
cause of those rents amongst us; and Factions we may see thus kindled, which
while we live, perhaps we shall not see extinguished. I am of Paul, and I of
Apollos, and I of Cephas, were such cries as bred in the Church of Corinth sad
divisions, and make the Apostle conclude them not Christians, but carnal, 1
Cor. 3.34. For ye etc. This way and course is a direct opposition to that unity
and unanimity that God would have in his Church; for observing rather the
diversity of Instructors, than the unity of truth, there arises in the end as
many minds as men, as many Sects as Cities, as many Gospels as Gossips; for,
schisms, heresies, disorder, and confusion, are the effects of Christians
unchristian divisions: and therefore if ye would not be thought carnal, cease
from partiality, and carry a loving affection and honorable esteem toward all
the Servants and Ambassadors of Christ. As Saint Paul of Epaphroditus, so I of
them, Receive them in the Lord with all gladness, and hold such in reputation,
Phil. 2.29. Do not discourage them, either by contempt of their persons, or
doctrine. I speak not this as to any one particular: I neither stand or fall,
by the opinion of any. When a Minister first steps into the Ministry, he is to
consider he is as a Lamb amongst Wolves. S. John Baptist came neither eating
nor drinking, and yet the people said, he had a Devil: CHRIST came eating and
drinking, and they said, he was a glutton, and a wine bibber; The Servant is
not greater than his Master; He must not (says S. Chrysostom in his 6. Hom:
de laudibus Pauli) enter into this high and holy calling, except he be willing
to suffer a thousand deaths. I thought good to let you know your duty in these
times, in which so much contempt and contumely is thrown upon the Ministers of
the Gospel, and this high and honorable calling is esteemed base and
contemptible. We may justly complain with the Prophet, We are wearied with men,
Isa. 7.13. With the other Prophet, that We are wondered at, Zach. 3.8. And with
the Apostle, that We are made a spectacle unto the world, to Angels, and to
men, 1 Cor. 4.9. And are as the filth of the world, and off scouring of all
things unto this day, verse 13. This contempt and disobedience of Gods message
and Messengers, may be easily perceived by comparing peoples practice with our
preaching.

I come now to a third thing: esteem and respect to the Ministers of the Gospel
consists in their provision and maintenance not only in a careful etc. For
if we sow spiritual things, is it a great matter that we shall reap your
carnal things? Do ye not know that they which wait at the Altar are partakers
with the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.11, 13. S. Paul gives a strict charge, Gal. 6.6. Let
him that is taught in the Word, make him that has taught him partaker of all
his goods; (...), is Emphatical, in all his goods. If Idolatry fed her Priests,
Genesis 47.22. let not the Gospel starve her Ministers. I am (I confess) upon an
unpleasant subject: I crave your attention, I matter not your censure. So great
was Gods care under the Law of the Levites, that he gave to his people both
mandat, and caveat, precept and counsel. Mandat, Numb. 35.2. Command the
children of Israel that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their
possession. Caveat, Deuteronomy. 12.19. Take heed to thy self that thou for sake not
the Levite as long as thou live upon the earth. Now it will follow (were
there no Texts in the New Testament) that Gods care is not less of the
Ministers of the Gospel, than of the Ministers of the Law. Observe what
inference the Apostle makes, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10, 11. I read of Christ (who came to
fulfill all Righteousness) that as he paid tribute unto Caesar, so he offered
his duties unto the Temple, Luke 2.24. The Minister is Gods workman, laboring
in the salvation of his peoples souls: his work calls for wages from the
people, or a woe unto the people, Jer. 22.13. The Ministers are both the sowers
in the seed-time, and the shearers in the harvest; The cry of their hire,
as well as others, if it be detained, it will enter into the ears of the Lord,
Jam. 5.4. The Ministers are Lamps; and shall the people look to have them burn,
and not find them oil? shall there be Oxen, where the crib is empty? or will
the Eagles fly where there is no carcass? They are Christ's soldiers, and No
man (says the Apostle) goes on warfare on his own charges; none feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock, 1 Cor. 9.7. They seem to put
out the very light of nature in themselves which repine at the reasonable
maintenance of them that minister before the Lord. Every change is full of
peril, and alterations, and in this particular (though shadowed with the
plausible name of Reformation) it threatens nothing less than the overthrow of
Learning, and Religion. It was foreseen (no doubt) by Gods Spirit, how the
Ministers of the Word should be contemned, how injuriously dealt withal, what
havoc and spoil should be made of the Church: which moved him to those
Exhortations, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. It is written of the Christians in
the life of Nero, that they preserved the state, yet dogs must devour them:
They made Aurelius his Army to prosper, yet Christianos ad Leones, Threw the
Christians to the Lions. It has ever been the posie of the Church, Facere
bonum, and habere malum, To do good, and to suffer evil: So Christ himself
sped; He healed, and was hurt; He pitied, and was mocked; He saved others,
himself was killed. The color of our Livery on Earth, is either black, or red;
mourning, or persecution; the arms of the Church is the Cross, Woe unto those
that add crosses to the Cross, and grow rich by the poverty of the Church and
her Servants. Bishop King.
It was the saying of a Learned Bishop in his Lectures on Jonas, Time was that
Religion did eat up Policy, and the Church devoured the Common wealth; but now
Policy eats up Religion, and the Commonwealth devours the Church. Men are
grown professed Politicians: Floreat Respublica copiis referta, Let the
Commonwealth prosper, and what care we for the Church? Unlike that godly man,
Me moriente vivat Ecclesia, whatsoever becomes of me, let the Church live etc.
I cannot conceive how men can plead their faith in the Gospel, and not reward
those that bring it: all the Devils in hell cannot take a directer course to
overthrow the Ministry, than by taking away all their livelihood. Perhaps some
will pity, but what is that? others will afford some bare and naked praise; but
we cannot, like Cameleons, live on the air of commendations: those that are
driven to study how to get bread to put in their mouths, will with a heavy
heart study for Sermons; and, I like not those that preach without study, that
turn the cock and let the water run. Oh unhappiness, unhappiness, misery,
misery to devour holy things, and then to make enquiry, Prove. 20.25. But to
wave this for the present, The Labourer is worthy of his hire, and woe to those
that do detain it, Jam. 5.4. if the Laborers that reap our fields, much more
those that reap in the Lords Vineyard. Maintenance to the Ministry is not due
ad modum Eleemosynae, as of alms and courtesy, but ad modum debiti, as their
right and due. I shall not here dispute the lawfulness of Tithes; they were
lawful to the Priests, (there was no question) Numb. 18.21. There is Mandat,
and Caveat; and how they come to be taken away I know not, for there was no Law
abrogated but the Ceremonial, and they were no part of it. Again, I find no
prohibition in the New Testament, but commendation of it: Ye observe, says
Christ, Mint, Anise, and Cummin, (and ye do well.) The Pharisee was in this an
honest man: our Savior condemns his hypocrisy, and so he did the hypocrisy
of the Jews in that they observed the smaller, but omitted the mightier
matters of the Law, in boasting of their little good, but neglecting mercy, and
judgment: these things they ought to have done. That which I intend to hold
out, is, that maintenance by the Law of God is due to a Gospel Minister: so you
may read 1 Cor. 9. from the 7^h to the 15th verse. Gal. 6.6. Let him that is
taught in the word etc. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be etc.
(...), double honor: countenance, and maintenance, reverence and recompense,
honor and reward. It is our duty, says the Apostle, to do good unto all,
especially to those, Gal. 6.10. and amongst the household of faith, above the
rest, unto such as have been our spiritual Fathers, in begetting us unto
Christ, 1 Cor. 4.15. for a child to let his father starve is both inhumane and
barbarous, he is not fit to live. This condemns exceedingly the practice of
some in our Age, whose chief policy, yea piety (for with the Pharisee, they
think they do God good service) is to strip a Minister whom they dislike of
his Livelihood, and expose him and his family to want, and poverty; such in the
end will hale down judgments on their own heads: for be assured, with the same
measure they mete, it shall be measured to etc. It is CHRIST'S Divine Rule, As
ye would that men should do unto you, do you also unto them; for etc. If we
consider this, we shall cease persecution and cruelty, this biting and
devouring one of another, lest we be devoured one of another, etc. Gal. 5.15.
The Merchants trade concerns our bravery, the Lawers occupation our goods, the
Physicians art our body, all these have respect; but the Ministers who have
care of souls, lie disregarded. Is not the life more worth than meat, and the
body than raiment, Mat. 6. but the soul more precious than all, Mat. 16.26?
And yet carnal-Gospellers envy not the prodigious wealth of Merchants, of
Lawyers, of Physicians; all is well if the Minister be poor, decrease his
wages, increase his work; get straw where he can find it, yet shall nothing of
his labor be diminished. They seem, I say, to have put out the very Light of
Nature; they repine at the reasonable maintenance of them that minister before
the Lord: For, who plants a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruits thereof? Or,
who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the milk of the Flock? Mark how the
Scriptures both in the Law and the Gospel do beat upon this point: In the Law
it is said, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox; does God take care for
Oxen? No, his care is for us, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10. Ministers maintenance is not
Humanum inventum, but Divinum institutum, verse 14. And this Law is reasonable,
equitable, just, and conscionable; for, if we sow spiritual things, is it a
great matter that we reap carnal things? It is an action that goes current
without contradiction, Justitia suum cuique tribuit, Justice gives to every
man that which belongs unto him: whosoever therefore converteth to any
profane use that which is consecrated to Gods service, and for his use, robs
God of his due, and takes his right from him; if you mispend his Sabbath, that
time set apart for his glory, you rob him; if you make a false entry on his
freehold, and profane the place of his public worship, you rob him. My house
shall be called a house of prayer, etc. Mat. 21.13. Belshazzar carowsed in the
bowls of the Temple, but drank the draughts of his own confusion, Dan. 5. And
if you creep into Gods right, and let them starve at the Altar that serve at
the Altar; you rob God, and are thieves, Mal. 3.8. for, what is sacrilegium,
but sacriledium, a profaning of that which is holy? Give unto Caesar, etc.
Give him part of thy substance, part of thy time, the first fruit of thy age,
the calves of thy lips, and the root of thy heart. Miserable are they, that eat
up sheep and shepherds both, that grow rich out of the ruins of poor
Ministers, that turn Aram dominicam into haram domesticam, the Lords
Sanctuaries into swine-styes and stables. William Rufus used to say, Church
bread was sweet bread, but poor King he smarted for it. Balshazzar took sacrum
de sacro, Dan. 5. but he had better been without it. Julian the Apostata took
away the Ministers maintenance with intention to destroy the Ministry, but
tasted of the fearful hand of God. Oh his death was lamentable! it may well be
verified of them all that thus deal, aurum habent Tholosanum, it will be
sweetness in the mouth, but bitterness in the belly; I speak this out of love
and compassion to him that is guilty, and for prevention of those that as yet
have not consented to so great wickedness. The question was once, What shall
we bring to the man of God? Now it is a motion, What shall we take away from
the man of God? Oh! be not proud of mischief, be not flesh't with fortunate
wickedness, and do not triumph in unblest gain, for the loser shall sit down
with content, when the winner shall lie down in torment, never value that
profit, that will in the end prove uncomfortable. Thus much of the third thing,
in what the esteem and respect of the Ministers of the Gospel consists, viz: in
their provision and maintenance.

I come to the fourth thing, wherein the esteem and respect to the Ministers of
the Gospel consists, and that is, in standing by them and with them, as much as
in people lies to encourage and help them No calling is exposed more to scorn,
and contempt; many make it their practice to broach false rumors of them, and
as much as they can to throw dirt in their faces; when the Pharisees thought
the Disciples faulty, they go and tell Christ, Mat 12.2. when their Master
Christ, then they go and tell his Disciples, Mat. 9.11. they were restless,
and wretchlesse: the limbs of Satan, boldly open their mouths to speak their
pleasure, that impudent, and insolent claim is made use of in these days with
our tongues, etc. for our lips are our own. They are most hateful people to
God, and good men, that set their tougues to sound nothing but detraction and
slanders, as though their mouths were the dung gate through which the filth of
a City was carried forth. Aquila and Priscilla stand for Paul, though they do
it with danger of their own lives, Romans 16.4. Who for my life, laid down their
own necks, hazarded their lives for saving of mine. Thou shall not (says the
Law) receive a false tale of any, Exodus 23.1. Much less of a Minister of the
Gospel, a Servant, and Ambassador of Christ. As thou must not be a nurse of
his ill fame, so let there be no room in thy heart to receive any report, for
he that opens his mouth to detraction, is a thief, and he that opens his ears
to entertain it, is a Receiver, and both of them carry the Devil with them, the
one in his tongue, the other, in his ears; it is a true saying, There would
not be so many Thieves, if there were not so many Receivers: Even so, there
would not so many rob the renown of his Minister, and clip his credit to make
him lighter esteemed, were it not that the Hearers open their ears to receive
untrue and malicious reports. As a cordial friend will speak no evil, so he
will not hear evil of his friend; it was a brand of Jannes and Jambres that
they withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8. S. Paul sighs forth a sad complaint, No man
stood with me, but all forsook me, I pray God that it may not be laid to their
charge, 2 Timothy 4 16. it was otherwise with the Galatians, Gal. 4.15. The
Apostle gives them this commendation, I bear you record that if it had been
possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes and given them to me. But now
we live in such an Age that men are so ill tempered of the four Elements that
they possess several seats in them; all Earth in their hearts, all Water in
their stomachs, all Air in their brains, all Fire in their tongues, and bent
against none more than those that they should love and cherish. The poor
Britans once tuned forth a sad song to the conquering Romans, Etio ter Consuli
gemitus Britannorum repellunt nos Barbari ad mare, repellit nos mare ad
Barbaros etc. To the Roman Consul the Britans send Groaning instead of
Greeting, the Barbarous drive us upon the Sea, the Sea beats us back upon the
Barbarous, hence we are endangered to a double kind of death, either to be
drowned, or to be killed; this is the condition of many, how are they tossed from
post to pillar, but especially Ministers, who lie liable to the greatest
persecutions, and those as thick as the fiery Serpents in the wilderness, with
their venomous, and burning stings? Christ's Cause, and Christ Cross, go most
commonly together, but here is our comfort, that if these rocks split the bark
of our life, yet our death is not mors, but immortalitas; not a death, but an
entrance to life incapable of dying. You have a sort of men that delight in
persecution, it is their meat and drink; a most unchristian quality and unlike
God, who bids us be merciful as. he is merciful, Luke 6.36. where you have a
precept [Be ye merciful,] a pattern, (and it is the best) [as your etc.] As is
a note of quality, not equality: we cannot equal God in love, for all our
mercifulness is finite, his toward us infinite; and this is seen first in his
pity, he is pitiful, None ever could justly charge God of rigor, there is
mercy even in Hell: pitiful he is in corrigendo, Not breaking the bruised
reed, nor etc. Secondly, his mercy is seen in his bounty, bountiful he is in
porrigendo, giving to all, life, breath, and all things: as the mercies of the
wicked are full of cruelty, the very judgments of God upon his servants are
full of mercy: whence then proceeds that envy and cruelty in men? he spares
them in mercy, who in their malice neither spare God, nor men. Oh that men
should do the works of the flesh, and yet seem to live after the spirit! for
so is hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, Gal. 5.20. The works of the
flesh (says the Apostle) are manifest, which are these, verse 19. Oh that men
should offend against so many known precepts! Col. 3.8. and Ephesians. 4.31. Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor be etc. Again, if we
consider Christ, we shall see he manifested abundance of mercy. I cannot
instance that unmeasurable love, which the true King, and Redeemer of the world
has made known to the sons of men; when the heart of our Savior was ploughed
up with a spear, it ran streams of mercy, real mercy; which his vocal tongue
interpreted, Father forgive them, they know not what they do: his blood Heb.
22. had a voice, a merciful voice. Beside all this, it is apparent that
unmercifulness and cruelty is of the Devil; It is true, he can transform
himself into an Angel of Light, and rather than not draw men to Hell, he will
dissemble a love to Heaven: he will speak good, that he may work evil; and
confess the truth, that he may deceive with falsehood: he is full of subtilty,
and cruelty, a Murderer from the beginning: Though he play the Fox, yet he
ends with the Lion; blood, massacres, and destructions are his softest
embraces; horror, and amazement, the pleasures of his court; kill and slay,
the language of his tongue; you see God and Christ give no such pattern.
Unmercifulness and cruelty are works of the flesh, against Divine precepts,
and proceed from the infernal pit of darkness: Oh never persevere in that
sin that is so cross to God, so repugnant to his Word, and pleads the Devil
for its Author. Command fine (says James and John) to come down from heaven:
Christ rebukes them, saying, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke
9.54, 55. You must know that persecution is as well by the tongue, as by the
hand; this wounds like a sword, or sharp spear: a foul-mouthed man or woman is
worse than the Devil: for a man may avoid the Devil, Resist the Devil, and he
will fly from you; but we cannot resist a slanderer and Railer. The world is
as full of these, as Nilus of Crocodiles, Sodom of Sulphur, and Egypt of
Lice. A good name is a precious ointment, and woe to them that bereave a man of
it. Can the wound be cured, so long as the Iron remains in it? Can the Iron be
cold so long as it remains in the Smiths forge? Can the River cease running so
long as the Fountain flows? So the tongue cannot refrain evil speaking, as
long as hatred broils in the heart, For, out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, Luke 6.45. This is that filthy sink, from whence comes
evil-speaking, reviling, scorn, and detraction; the Mouth is the Heart's
Charnel, the Index of the Mind. Good is the advice of the Apostle, Iam. 4.7.
Speak not evil one of, etc. I remember a saying of Hierome to Iovinian,
(speaking of this kind of men) Tacere nesciunt. maledicere non cessant; nunquam
enim been loqui didicerunt: They cannot hold their peace, they cannot cease
from evil-speaking, they never yet learned to speak well; there is an art in
speaking as well as in writing, for there is (...), a right speaking, as well as
(...), right writing. There is a difference betwixt speaking, talking, and
saying. Speaking comes by nature, talking by custom, saying by art: Children
speak, Fools talk, Learned men say: So Tully, Solius est Oratoris dicere, Vulgi
loqui. Oh let me then (for your souls are tender to me) persuade you, to lay
aside all malice, envy, and evil-speaking, 1 Pet. 2. verse 1. Not to persecute
any, especially those whom God has depted his Servants, and Ambassadors, lest
you hale down judgments on your heads. Oh sad, and to be lamented times that
give encouragement to licentious tongues, for wherein stands most men's
Religion, but in railing and reviling; that our Church is Babylon and Sodom,
that the Ministers have the mark of the Beast, are Baals Priests, Simon
Magusses, that our People are Swine and Dogs, they must not give that which is
holy unto Dogs, etc. That our Communion-Cup is Calix Diaboli, the Cup of the
Devil; that Mensa Christi is Mensa Diaboli, the Table of Christ, the Table of
the Devil; that our Pulpits are Tubs, our places of worship Steeple Houses.
Alas! what a sad thing is this, does the Gospel teach scorn, and derision? are
Christ's followers, railers, and revilers? No, no. Such deserve our pity, and
prayers, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Do not, like the
Pharisees, persecute Gods Church and Prophets, and when you have done, think
you have done God good service: the Devil I observe deceives under the fairest
vizard. When he tempted Judas to betray Christ, he shows him the silver, not
the halter. When he sent Gehazi after Naaman, he suggests unto him the Garments
and the money, not the Leprosy. He presents unto Christ the glory of the world,
not the vanity. He lays forth his wares to the fairest show. Do not,
Ixion-like, take a Cloud for Juno. Let not Religion be a mere fancy, deceive
not your selves under appearances, and think not that zeal which it conceits.
Oh it is a heartbreaking to a devout soul to see hypocrisy made piety, to see
men boast of Religion, and yet are but as sounding brass, and a tinkling
Cymball. A Minister, says a Father, Debet esse lugens sua, and aliena del cta,
ought still to be lamenting his own sins, and the sins of the people. Oh what
abundance of hypocrisy and spiritual pride is there amongst men, conceiting
highly of themselves, and despising others, and of all men the most envious and
censorious; if this be of the Spirit of Christ, I leave it to you to judge. I
read that Pambo, a man utterly unlearned in the Scriptures, on a time came to
S. Hierome to be taught some Scripture without book; he turned him to the first
verse of the 39 Psalm, I said I will take heed to my ways that I offend not in
my tongue: a Lesson very seasonable and to be learned as well by the Scribes and
Pharisees, as Publicans of our times. The good man being blamed for not
resorting unto his Tutour again in three months, answers, That he had not yet
learned well his first lesson; yea, and forty years after being asked the same,
Answ: that as yet he had not fully learned that lesson: And indeed, let men and
women pretend what Religion they will, unless they learn this lesson, they
learn nothing at all of goodness, Jam. 1.26. If any man among you seems to
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this
man's religion is but vain. The first lesson that the wicked learn, their Alpha,
yea, and Omega too, their first and last is to speak evil; so the Psalmist,
Psalm. 58.3. The wicked speak evil from their mothers womb. Oh that I could
prevail with the professing men and women of our Age, that would be Guides of
the blind, and Instructers of the unlearned, that they would learn themselves
this lesson to take heed to their ways, that etc. Go into your grounds in the
dead of Winter, and of two naked trees you know not which is the sound and
which the rotten at heart, the Summer will give Christ's mark, by their fruits
you shall know them. Oh that people would show less, and do more of
goodness, that they would learn not to know much, but to practice much; and as
they hear, and repeat Sermons, so learn obedience; this is the life and power
of godliness. In a word, Love all, especially the household of faith, have
bowels of compassion toward them, despise none, especially the Ministers of
the Gospel, much less persecute them, but stand by them, and with them, help,
and encourage them, for they are the servant of Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God.

CHAP. V.
Luke 10.16. Shows, that the contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel is a
great and grievous sin; the reasons of it, and how it exposes men to the
wrath of God.

THey do exceedingly aggravate their sins that dare insolently, Deuteronomy. 17.11,
12. The Lord inflicts a heavy judgment upon Corah and his Associates for this
very sin, Contempt of the Ministry, Numb. 16.11. What are we? your murmurings
etc. their sin was not against Aaron, but against God himself, and his
Ordinance. It was not men they opposed, and despised; but God, the just One,
the Lord. Seeing we are fallen upon these unhappy men, this rebellious rout;
let us take a fuller view of them.

1. You have their Conspiracy, They gathered themselves together: Surrexerunt,
they rose, and made an Insurrection. They made a schism, then a faction, and
in the end a mutinous commotion, a rebellious insurrection; the word is
passive, They were gathered together.

2. You have the persons, Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and On the Son of Pelech:
here are not Sheba and Shimei, base Bethshemites that rose against David, empty
fellows, such as rose against Rehoboam, not Faex populi, a sort of abject and
contemptible men, but Corah the Son of Levi, Aaron's Cosin-Germane, and Dathan,
Abiraem, and On, the Sons of Reuben, Isreal's firstborn; famous, eminent men,
Captains of the people, men of renown. You may note that the head of this
Conspiracy is a Son of Levi, Corah; It is dangerous when insurrection begins at
the Sanctuary.

Secondly, Reuben joins also; insurrection has sharers. Corah is for the
Mitre, Reuben for the Scepter: Let Moses look to his Throne, Aaron to his
Chair, Levi has many things that will do Reuben good; and Reuben therefore
will be sure to pleasure Levi.

Thirdly, you have the persons against whom this Insurrection is made, Moses,
and Aaron, Magistrate and Minister.

Fourthly, the Grievance; their usurping of Rule over the people, You take too
much etc. and not only Usurpation, but Intrusion too, Why lift ye up your
selves?

Fifthly, you have the ground of this Grievance, the Congregation is holy, every
one of them, and what need of Aaron? the Lord is amongst them, what needs a
Governor or Moses? Here were glorious shows, and pretenses: they charge Moses,
and Aaron with Ambition and Intrusion, Vice rebukes Virtue, Humility
challenges Arrogance; when as their main end was to rush into their rooms, to
possess themselves of their dignities. Now observe, all this is not against
them, but against God; the abuse and affront offered to them, he takes as a
dishonor to himself. ver. 11. What are we? your murmurings, etc. and
therefore he plagueth them in a strange and unusual manner, to be Ensamples to
us, that we should fear, and not do so wickedly. Their intent of a subversion
of Moses, and Aaron, ends in the destruction of themselves, for the Earth
opens her mouth, and swalloweth them down quick: We should never read of this
judgment, but it should make us tremble, and pray that thus we may not sin.
Examples of this sin are very frequent, Jer. 18.18. Come let us devise. Amos is
accused of Conspiracy against the King, Amos 7.10. It is common for the sons of
Belial to lay nets and snares to entrap the Prophets of the Lord. How great a
sin this is, hear what S. Paul says, 1 These. 4.8. He that despises, despises
not man, but God etc. Observe the words: this Argument is a Conclusion of the
former Reasons, enforcing them all (says Zanchy on this place) as if he should
say, It is not I Paul that exhort you, but Christ, and Christ is not only man
but God: he that wills Sanctification is God, he that is an avenger of
Fornication, and Covetousness, is God, he that calls unto this holiness is
God: he therefore that despises our admonition in this case, despises not man
but God. God the Father who created us in holiness, God the Son who renewed us
unto holiness, and God the Holy Ghost who keeps us in true holiness. But
how does the Apostle prove this Proposition, He that despises etc? because
says he, God has sent his holy Spirit among you. There are two Readings of
these words, (...), and (...), if we translate with Marl: and Beza [God has
given us his holy Spirit] then Paul's argument is thus framed; he that despises
us, despises not man but God, for we write not out of our own authority, but
as inspird by the blessed Spirit which is God. If according to the best Copies
[God has sent his holy Spirit among you] then the Apostle thus argues, God
has sent his Spirit to this end, that you may discern sanctification to be his
will. His Spirit is our keeper, Romans 8. Our Comforter, John 14. Our Teacher, 1
John 2. and therefore quench not the Spirit, in endeavoring to quench the
gifts of the Spirit. He that stops his ears, and hardneth his heart in the
Preachers Exhortation by the Lord Jesus, little regards the will and word of
God, despises not man, but God. Despise him not at your peril, you despise
God himself, and you shall not go Scot-free, on your souls be it that hear me
this day, whose Table-talke is furnished with jests and invectives against
Ministers, and whose study is how to vex, afflict, and torment them.
Themistocles was ever banished in peace, but sent for home in war. We are
passed over in the days of pride as useless creatures, but when the wrath of
God falls on their naked conscience, then the Minister is thought on; when your
pulse beats sickly, and you lie on your groaning beds, then are they entreated
for counsel and advise.

What a madness is it to contemn those living whom (if God own you in mercy)
you will love dying. I am sick, and like to die, is there no balm in Gilead? is
there no Physician there? tell some tidings from heaven, some comfortable
things of Sion, I beseech you: you are the Ambassadors of Christ, and bring
the glad tidings of peace, and is there no comfort, no peace for me? thus they,
that in fair weather beat us, in foul run for shelter to us. We shall be
thought to be good Ministers, until unpleasing things drop from us, and then
farewell good conceit, as Tertullian spoke merrily of the Heathen, Unless God
please man, he shall be God no longer. But alas! say some, what are you, and
what is your calling? why do ye lift up your selves, the Congregation is holy,
etc.

First, you are but men, it is true; yet men of God, called and deputed his
Officers and Ambassadors, entrusted with high, and holy mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.1.
Let a man etc.

Secondly, you are weak men, its true, subject to the like passions with
others: yet our word is powerful, and the proudest of you, if God intend you
good, is turned by our Ministry; and if the word be not the savor of life, it
is the savor of death. We have this treasure, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.7.

Thirdly, you die like men: its true, but our words live, and it is the
immortal Word of God that lives, and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born
anew etc.

Fourthly, all you say is but talk, words are but wind. Well, if you call the
preaching of Gods Word talking, for ought I know you may talk of mercy and have
none; it is such talking as will tend either to thy conversion, or confusion;
for, whom we loose on earth, are loosed in heaven; and whom we bind on earth,
are bound in heaven. Lay aside therefore contempt and disdain of those whom God
has chosen to bring thee the glad tidings of salvation. The Idolaters, and
Heathens (doubtless) shall rise up in judgment against the men of this
generation. How were Baals Priests esteemed by Jezebel, the Priests of the
Grave by Ahab, the Egyptian Priests by Pharaoh, Mass Priests by Papists, and
the Mufti by the Turks? And yet the true Preachers of the Word, that hold forth
the saving doctrine of salvation, are amongst Christians as spectacles unto the
world, as laughing, and gazing-stocks, 1 Cor. 4.9. I am afraid it will befall
many as it did Saul, who sought Samuel when he was dead, whose counsel he did
not regard, whilst he was alive. It is observed, that the contempt of the
Ministry leads to the greatest and foulest sins: for it is not possible
that any should honor the Message of God, and despise him that God has chosen
to bring it: and this very sin opens a gap to all wickedness, and ushereth in
monstrous impieties. Satan's kingdom (as is observed) stands on four props
especially, all which I find in the 8th of S. John. 1. Railing, verse 48, Say
we not well that thou art a Samaritane, and have a Devil? The Pharisees in
their wickedest actions the persecuting of Gods Prophets, thought they did God
service, and in their foulest words railing against Christ the Son of God, they
think they do well, Say we not well? It is said of the Lyndians, that they
worshipped Hercules the best, when they railed the fastest. So many in railing,
and reviling, think it an ornament, a grace, a badge of zeal, and that there is
nothing amiss, Say we not well? No, no, such saying derogates from God, the
honor of Christianity, and most unbecoming the Gospel of Christ: But who
railed thus? No Rabshakeh, no Shimei, no sons of Belial, but such as called
themselves holy, verse 33. We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to
any man. Oh the great delusion of the Devil to blind men, and women, so that
they think they say well when they sin foulest, in those words of Christ (who
condemns the Pharisees gloss who judged that murder which consisted only in
the actual depriving a man of his life) you shall find three degrees of sin,
and three degrees of punishment, Mat 5.22. The degrees of sin are angry
thoughts, scornful gestures, and opprobrious words; to the first is opposed
Judgment, to the second a Council, to the third Hell fire. It is the saying of
S. Hierome, to strip men of passion is to make them no men. Est hominem de
homine tollere. S. Paul bids Be angry, and sin not, Ephesians. 4 26. He allows
that which is natural, and condemns that which is culpable, so Gerson, Ira
non est peccatum quoad esse naturae, sed quoad esse moris. That our anger
should not prove faulty, Christ sets down two Rules for our direction: 1.
Concerning the matter, with a brother. 2. The manner, unadvisedly: the word
(...) is left out in many both old and new Translations; but some Greek Copies
(as Erasmus acknowledges, retain it) and the reverend Fathers recite it, Omnis
qui irascitur fratri suo temere, Whosoever is angry with his Brother
unadvisedly or rashly, as Cain with Abel, Ahab with Naboth, Saul with David,
shall be in danger, says CHRIST, of judgment; he alludes, as Bullinger and
Beza upon the place, to the proceedings of the Jews in their Civil ^ourts, by
whom a small matter was heard, and decided, by the judgment of three men; that
of greater importance determined in a Council of three and twenty Judges; and
the greatest of all by the sentence of threescore and eleven. Now Christ's
intent is to show, that as amongst men, so before God there are different
degrees of punishment, according to the different degrees of sin, and makes
the malice of the heart as well murder as that of the hand. Whosoever is angry
with his Brother etc.

Secondly, he condemns scornful gesturs, Whosoever shall say to his brother,
Racha, shall be in danger of the Council; some derive this word of the Greek
(...), in English as much as ragged, Others from the Syrian Racha which is a
term of disgrace, Hierome from rec, signifying Idle head. S. August: and
others make it an interjection or broken speech of an angry mind bewraying a
malicious heart. Others think that by it is signified something betwixt close,
and open railing, as a fiery countenance, such as was in Cain: a jeering
fleering look, such as was in Ishmael, bending of the brows, shaking of the
head, gnashing of the teeth, thrusting forth of the tongue, and the like.

Thirdly, Christ condemns opprobrious words, railing, and reviling, Whosoever
shall say, Thou fool, shall be etc. Bitter words are like the pricking of
swords, Prove. 12.18. And David complains of men whose tongues are as spears,
and their words as sharp arrows set on by the fire of hell, says S. James,
Jam. 3.6. and so are liable to hell fire. The railer with his venomous tongue
not only poisons his neighbors name, his box of precious ointment, but like a
sharp rasor cuts his throat, this is one prop (and that a main one) of Satan's
kingdom,

A second is hypocrisy; the Jews, vile, and sinful, yet could boast of their
Father Abraham, Joh. 8.53. This conceit John the Baptist would have beaten
down, Mat. 3. Think not to say, etc. The varnish of their hypocrisy did delude
them, so that they grew in love with themselves, and undervalued all others.
This is another great prop of Satan's kingdom.

A third is Sophistry, fraud, and cunning; Most men strive how to supplant and
overthrow one another, to undermine the walls of innocence; plain dealing is
dead, and (which is to be lamented) it died without issue; Once Orbis ingemuit
factum se videre Arianum, The world groaned seeing it self made an Arian: It
may now groan, Factum se videns Machiavellum, Seeing it self made a
Machiavell: this is that false key that opens the door of the wrath and
vengeance of God, makes the Church of God so thin of Saints, and the World so
full of Dissemblers.

A fourth prop is Cruelty, what the Fox cannot do the Lion must, when railing
fails, and patience is a conqueror, then Satan works in his instrumens by
violence, John 8.59. They took up stones to cast at him. These four are not the
weapons of a Christians warfare, the properties of a true disciple, parts of
Gods building, but the props of Satan's kingdom.

They fearfully sin against God that either despise the Messengers of God, or
his message; Preachers, or preaching; his servants, or his service: and yet a
thousand offend of mean ones, of great ones, even in this particular. Oh how
contemptible, vile, and base are the Ministers of God in the eyes of many! They
may justly complain with the Prophet Zachary, that they are wondered at, Zach.
3.8. And with the Apostle, That they are made a spectacle unto the world, and
Angels, and to men, and made as the filth and offscouring of all things unto
this day, 1 Cor. 4.9, 13. They are Christ's servants in a special manner, his
Ambassadors, Stewards, workers together with him; such as he parles with all,
and makes his fellow-Commoners, as David said to Saul's men, 1 Samuel 18.23.
Seems it unto you to be a light thing to be the Kings Son-in-law? So may I
say, Seems it a small matter to be servants in ordinary to the King of kings?
Receive them in the Lord with all gladness, and hold such in reputation, Phil.
2.29. We beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12,
13. God will revenge their wrongs, their persecution shall light on the
persecutors pates. Thou shall smite, says one of the Children of the Prophets
unto Jehu, the house of Ahab thy Master, that I may avenge the blood of my
servants the Prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord of the
hand of Jesabel, 2 Kings 9.7. Many great discouragements attend the Ministry.
We may spend our lungs, preach out our hearts, before we can pierce men's
hearts, or be instrumental to convert their souls. If the Lord close the heart,
we cannot by all our strength open it; if people conceive not the things of
God, let them not blame the Ministers dullness, but their own hardness; dig at
the root and there see the cause, for the Lord has set open the doors of
mercy, Gospel, grace, and glory, only men's hearts are shut up, and until the
Lord unlock them, we may as well preach to these walls, and move the stones, as
their cauterized and benumbed consciences. Now as stubbornness attends their
Ministry, so persecution their persons, for they are sent forth as Lambs in
the midst of Wolves: not as Wolves amongst Wolves, or Shepherds among Wolves,
or Sheep about Wolves, but as harmless innocent Lambs (...) in the midst of
hurtful, and hungry Wolves. Now from this persecuting none are free; 1. Not
Christ: of (...) it may be said by way of Anagram, (...), Tu es Ovis, Thou art
the Lamb: So says John the Baptist. Take him typically, and really, he was
slain; he was oppressed, he was afflicted, he was brought as a Lamb, etc. Isa.
53.7. The fleecers fleece him, and then the Butchers kill him. 2. Not the
Church, poor thing she has many Enemies Lions, Psalm. 58. Break out the great
teeth of the Lions oh God. Wild Boares and Beasts, Psalm. 80. The Boar out of
the wood, etc. Bulls, Psalm. 22. Many Bulls have compassed me, strong Bulls of
Basan have beset me round: thus are the sheep, Christ's Church, devoured. It is
observed, Caetera animalia armavit Natura, solum Agnum dimisit inermem, Other
living creatures Nature has armed, but the Lamb is sent into the world naked;
giving it neither offensive, nor defensive weapons. The Dog has teeth to bite,
the Bear nails to tear, the Bull his horns to dash, the Boar his tush, the
Lion his paws and jaws to devour. To these Christ compares the Enemies of his
Church. 3. Nor his Ministers, they are not free from persecution; they must
approve themselves in much patience in afflictions, 2 Cor. 6.4. This the
Apostle advises Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.5. Watch thou in all things, suffer
afflictions, this is to do that work of an Evangelist, as a good soldier of
Christ; to suffer afflictions, ready to bear bloody blows of open Enemies, and
scorns of false Friends. To preach the Gospel, says Luther, as we should, is
to stir up all the Furyes of Hell against us: It belongs to us Ex officio to
reprove, to rebuke, 2 Timothy 4.2. to pluck up, to throw down, Jer. 1. and we can
expect therefore no great favor, for we encounter with Beasts in the shape of
Men, with Wolves in the coats of Sheep, with Devils in the habit of Angels,
with unreasonable, and wicked men, and must therefore expect persecution, but
alas poor souls! they do not so much wrong us as themselves, they foam out
their own shame, and bewray their wretched, I had almost said, reprobate
malice; such as sit down in the seat of the scornful, make a low step to
damnation, God will laugh those to scorn that laugh his to scorn, and despise
those that despise us, in expuentis recidit faciem, quod in Coelum expuit, That
which a man spits against Heaven, shall fall back on his own face. Those
indignities done to the Ministers of the Gospel shall not sleep in the dust,
but stand up in judgment. Never was any truth so happily innocent, as to
maintain it self free from calumny and abuse. S. Paul was a faithful, and
painful Preacher, yet was slanderously reported, Romans 3.8. The best truths are
subject to misinterpretation, and there is not any doctrine so firmly grounded,
and warily delivered whereupon calumny will not fasten, and stick slanderous
imputations. Neither John's mourning, nor Christ's piping can pass the pikes,
but the one has a Devil, and the other is a Drunkard, and a Winebibber; John
the Baptist came neither eating, nor drinking, and yet the people said he had a
Devil, and Christ came both eating and drinking, etc. The Servant is not
greater than his Master, neither an Ambassador greater than he that sent him;
if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of
the household? Mat. 10.25. If Christ's doctrine did not? think we the doctrine of
his Ministers, and Servants can escape the stroke of men's tongues? Christ came
to fulfill the Law, and yet he was accused to be a destroyer of the Law; he
decides the question for Caesar, Give unto Caesar etc. and yet they charge him
as if he spoke against Caesar, Ioh. 19.12. The book of the Acts does witness
how the Apostles were slandered as Seducers, Sectaries, vain-Bablers,
Heretics, Broachers of new, false, and pestilent Doctrines. Nor did the Devil
here leave off, for if we read the Apologies of Athenagoras, Tertullian, and
others, it will amaze us to see what blasphemous seditions, horrible and odious
impieties were fathered upon the ancient Christian Doctors; those perilous
times instant in the days of S. Paul, are become extant in our Age, 1 Timothy
4.1. Some turn to the doctrine of Devils, Others start aside to Schism, few
love Religion in sincerity, and the high, and honorable calling of the
Ministry is vile, base, and contemptible. Now what are the Reasons or grounds
of this contempt, and despising of the Ministers of the Gospel? 1. They
discover the filthiness, and unmask the hypocrisy of the sons of men, and so
raise all the furies of hell against them: It is observed the worst men of a
Parish regard a good Pastor and his Doctrine the least, for they are like Legs
and Arms out of joint, and so cannot endure the touch of the Surgeons hand,
whose chiefest care is to work their cure: they are to reprove and rebuke, 2 Timothy 4.2. to root up, and throw down, Ier. 1.10. Men will rail, and rage,
prosecute, and persecute those that would pull down and overthrow their
pleasant, delightful, beloved, and profitable sins. The reason of this
contempt proceeds from that cursed nature of man, who is an enemy against all
good, and Ishmael-like persecutes the truth, and Preachers of it. Come let us
imagine some devises, etc. Jer. 18. verse 18. It is desperate wickedness to
contend with those that justly reprove you, to expostulate with them, cast
reproaches in their teeth, and lay to their charge, what you your selves are
most guilty of. Thus dealt Corah and his Accomplices, with Moses and Aaron, Numb.
16 Ahab with Elias, 1 Kings 18. The Israelites with Jeremiah, Ier. 18. Amaziah
with Amos, Am. 7. And the Scribes and Pharisees with our Savior, Mat. 12.24.
What a preposterous thing is it, that the Hand or Foot should guide the Eye?
The Child rebuke the Father, the Patient direct the Physician, the Scholar
check his Schoolmaster, and the Sheep quarrel with the Shepherd? no less
preposterous is it for a people to instruct their Instructor, and lesson those
that should lesson them. This contempt proceeds from a cursed heart, and is a
sign of desperate wickedness.

Thirdly, to bring all to a triplicity. This contempt of the Ministers of the
Gospel may be imputed,

First, to Satan, (...), that calumniator, who out of contempt to the
preaching would bring a loathing of truth; he is the Father of Lies, the Prince
of Darkness, and therefore hates Truth and Light, the Message and the
Messengers.

Secondly, it may be imputed to man, partly to the Understanding when the
judgment it self is weak, or weakened through prejudice: Or else to the Will,
men of corrupt minds; or to the affections overcome by carnal, and seeming
shows: Or to malicious wickedness, and this is very dangerous, God will hardly
forgive those that sin of malicious wickedness.

Thirdly, it may be imputed to God, not causing, but permitting, and suffering,

First, out of justice, as a fearful Judgment upon wicked ones, and to render
them liable to the greatest and sorest punishments.

Secondly, out of trial of faithful, painful Teachers; not to be dismayed
though briars and thorns be against them, but to evidence their constancy and
sincerity, and how they live above all the scorn, and contempt of men, willing
to suffer not the loss of reputation, but a thousand deaths. I should now come
to several Uses; but I will sum them up in two.

The first is by way of encouragement to such as are persecuted, it is their
Masters, and the Churches Lot, a Condition from which they cannot plead
exemption: If all that live godly must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. in vain
do the Preachers of Righteousness think to escape, and not drink of Christ's
cup. God has made us a gazing-stock to men and Angels. Athanasius was
nicknamed Sathanasius, Cyprian called Caprian, Paul accounted mad, and Christ
himself reputed a Conjurer. We must not fear, if Briars and Thorns be against
us, Ezekiel. 2.6. but encourage our selves in the Lord our God, and consider him
that underwent the contradiction of sinners.

A second is of bearing patiently injuries, and they are twofold, Personal or
Ministerial; what concerns his person, and what his calling. An indignity
that only touches our private person must be borne, as S. August: replied to
railing Petilian, Possumus esse in his pariter copiosi, sed nolimus esse
pariter vani, He could be as full as he, but would not be so vain. The best
Apology to scorn, and petulancy, is patience, and silence; but when slanders
redound to the discredit of their profession, and calling, it behooves us not to
be silent: When Festus scorned Paul as a mad man, he answered, I am not mad, oh
noble Festus, but etc. And the primitive Christians often did Apologize in
defense of themselves when truth was wounded through their sides. It is
observed by diverse Divines that when as the Jews objected against Christ, two
crimes, one that he was a Samaritane, an irreligious vile person; and another,
that he had a Devil: he neglects the first concerning his person, and stands
upon that especially which touched his doctrine; he answered, I have not a
Devil, Ioh. 8.49. Christ accused of blasphemy did ever Apologize for himself:
zealous we ought to be for God, howsoever remiss in what concerns our
selves. It was the saying of a Father, He would rather lose his life, than
suffer one syllable of Gods holy truth to be betrayed. Meam injuriam patienter
tuli, injuriam contra sponsam Christi far non potui, says Hierome. Our own
injuries we must bury in forgetfulness; but wrongs to the truth of God, and
Gospel of Jesus Christ, we must not put up. And further he says, in crimine
haereseos neminem oportet esse patientem, When any is accused of heresy or
schism, he ought by no means to put it up in silence, but make his lawful
defense. Hier: ad Pamma. I might here fall to lament and deplore the state and
condition of this Age, there being scarcely any Religion but what is tainted
with a spice of Faction, nor any encouragement to Ministers of the Gospel,
unless schismatic Novellists the bane of Church and State.

(...).
(...).
To the only wise Omnipotent God, and Trinity in Unity, be ascribed all power,
and praise, dominion, and thanksgiving, now and for evermore, AMEN.

THE END.
Faults escaped in the Epistles, correct thus.
Epist. Ded. p. 4. l. 9. r. their says p. 6. l. 6. r. Sir, I p. 11. l. 12. r.
That ye

In the Book.

Page 6. line 1. read by the p. 9. l. 6. r. superstitious p. 14. l. 12. r.
heirs the p. 16. l. 13. r. too speedily p. 34. l. 34. r. and ordered p. 36. l.
35. r. public preaching. p. 44. l. 28. r. fourth Council ibid. l. 29. r. which
breaks and profanes the ordinance of God p. 51. l. 11. r. does not p. 52. l. 2.
r. one head p. 64. l. 28. r. Commonefaction p. 75. l. 3. r. Machiavel p. 80. l.
30. r. Borussia p. 89. l. 36. r. Mercers p. 93. l. 18. r. a note of p. 106. l.
12. r. inestimabile bonum p 113. l. 9. r. and wit p. 115. l. 2. r. justly p.
120. l. 14. r. the former p. 134. l. 35. r. expound p. 127. l. 18. dele except
they be sent. p. 134. l. 4. r. Chao^ p. 139. l. 34. r. be well --

A Catalogue of some Books printed for Rich. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane,
London, and some formerly Printed at OXFORD.
Books written by H. Hammond, D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Test. by H. Hammond
D. D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of
H. Hammond D. D. in two volumes in 4. 3. Dissertationes quatuor, quibus
Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra
sententiam D. Blondelli and altorum. Authore Henrico Hammond, in 4. 4. A Letter
of Resolution of six Queries, in 12. 5. Of Schism. A defense of the Church of
England, against the Exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of Fundamentals in
a notion referring to practice, by H. Hammond D. D. in 12. 7. Six books of late
Controversy in defense of the Church of England, in two volumes in 4. newly
published.
The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D. D.
1. (...), Course of Sermons for all the Sundays in the year, together with a
Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, and Separation of the Office
Ministerial, in fol. 2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4. 3. The History of the Life
and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2. Edit. in fol. 4. The Liberty of
Prophesying in 4. 5. An Apology for authorized and Set-formes of Liturgy, in
4. 6. A discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacy upon all Believers,
in 4. 7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12. 8. The Rule and
Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 9. A short Catechism for institution of young
persons in the Christian Religion, in 12. 10. A short institution of Grammar
composed for young Scholars in 8. 11. The Real Presence and spiritual of CHRIST
in the Blessed Sacrament proved against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in
8. 12 The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of
the week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness. 13. The Doctrine
and practice of repentance rescued from Popular Errors, in a large 8. Newly
published.
Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of Engl. and the
late Lord Marquess of Worcest. concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle,
together with a Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright, in 4.
The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
Psalm, by the Right honorable Chr. Hatton, in 12. the fifth Edition with
additionals. Boanerges and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and
afflicted souls, in several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 12. The life of
Faith in dead Times, by Chr. Hudson Preacher at Putney, in 12. The Guide unto
true Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, directing a man
to the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crock, in 12. Six excellent Sermons upon
several occasions preached by Edw. Willan, Vicar of Hoxne, in 40. The Dipper
Dipped, or the Anabaptist duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by Daniel
Featly, D. D. in 4. Hermes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury; new Descants upon
old Records, by Theoph. ^odnote, in 12. Philosophical Elements concerning
Government and civil Society, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, in 12. An Essay
upon Statius, or the five first Books of Pub. Papinius Statius his Thebais, by
Tho. Stephens, Schoolmaster in Saint Edmundsbury, in 8. Nomenclatura Brevis
Anglo-Latino-Graeca in usum Scholae Westmonasteriensis, per F. Gregory, in 8.
Etymologicum Parvum-in usum Scholae publicae Westmonasteriensis, opera and
studio Francisci Gregorii, in 8. Grammatices Graecae Enchiridion in usum
Scholae Collegialis Wigorniae, in 8. A discourse of Holy Love by Sir Geo.
Strode Knight, in 12. The Saints Honey comb full of Divine Truths, by R. Gove,
Preacher of Henton S. George in Somersetshire, in 8. The Communicants Guide,
directing the younger sort which have never yet received, and the elder and
ignorant sort, which have hitherto received unworthily, how they may receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper with comfort, by R. Gove, in 8. A
Contemplation of Heaven, with an Exercise of Love, and a Descant on the Prayer
in the Garden, by a Catholic Gent. in 12. A Full Answer to a Declaration of
the House of Commons concerning no more addresses to the King, printed at
Oxford 1648. in 4. The Royalists Defense, printed at Oxford 1648. 4. Mercurius
Rusticus, or the Countreymans Complaint, printed at Oxford 1648. in 8. A
Relation of the Conference between W. Laud, Lord Archb. of Canterbury, and Mr.
Fisher the Jesuit by command of K. James, fol. Church Lands not to be sold,
1647. in 8. The Countrey-mans Catechism, or the Churches plea for Tithes by R.
Boreman, B. D. in 4. The Regal Apology printed at Oxford, in 4. A Fair Warning
to take heed of the Scottish Discipline by Bishop Bramhall, in 4. Sacrosancta
Regia Maiestas in 4. printed at Oxford, and written by the Archbishop of Tuum.
The Christians Directory, in 12. The Royal Slave, a Play in 4. acted at
Christ-Church in Oxford. Devotion digested into several Discourses and
Meditations upon the Lords most holy Prayer; Together with additional
Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy, The
Creatures, The souls pantings after God, The Mercies of God, The souls
complaint of its absence from God, by Peter Samwaies, Fellow lately resident in
Trinity Col. Camb. in 12. Of the Division between the English and Romish Church
upon Reformation by H. Fern. D. D. in 12. the second Edition with many
Additionals. Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John
White, M. A. in 8. The Exemplary lives and Memorable Acts of the 9 most worthy
women of the world, 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood, in 4.
The Saints Legacies, or a Collection of Promises out of the Word of God, in 12.
Judicium Universitatis Oxoniensis de Solenni Lege and Foedere, Juramento
Negativo, etc. in 8. Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolutions to
some of the late Controversaries of our times, by Jasper Mayn, D. D. in 4. New.
Janua Linguarum Reserata, sive omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum seminarium,
Auctore Cl. Viro J. A. Comenio, in 12. A Treatise concerning Divine Providence,
very seasonable for all ages, by Tho. Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8.
Observations upon Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observation upon Sir
Walter Rawleigh's History of the World, by Alex. Rosse, in 12. Fifty Sermons
preached by that learned and reverend Divine, Jo. Done. in fol. Wits Common
wealth, in 12. The Banquet of Jests new and old, in 12. Balzac's Letters the
fourth part, in 8. Quarles Virgin Widow, a Play, 4. Solomon's Recantation, in
4. by Francis Quarles. Amesii antisynodalia, in 12. Christ's Commination against
Scandalizers, by John Tombs, in 12. New. Dr. Stuart's Answer to Fountains
Letter, in 4. A Tract of Fortifications, with 22. Brass cuts in 4. Dr.
Griffiths Sermon preached at S. Paul's, in 4. Blessed Birthday, printed at
Oxford, in 8. A Discourse of the state Ecclesiastical in 4. An account of the
Church Catholic where it was before the Reformation, by Edw. B^ughen D. D. in
4. An Advertisement to the Jewry men of England touching Witches, written by
the Author of the Observations upon Mr. Hobbs Leviathan, in 4. New. Episcopacy
and Presbytery considered, by Hen. Fern. D. D. in 4. A Sermon preached at the
Isle of Wight before his Majesty, by H. Fern, D. D. in 4. The Commoners
Liberty, or the English man's Birthright, in 4. An Expedient for composing
Differences in Religion, in 4. A Treatise of Self denial, in 4. by a concealed
Author. The holy Life and death of the late Vicountesse Falkland, in 12.
Certain Considerations of present Concernment, Touching the Reformed Church of
England, by H. Fern, in 12. Englands Faithful Reprover and Monitor in 12. by
John Allington.
Newly published.
The grand Conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in four Sermons by John Allington, B. D. in 12.
White Salt, or a sober Correction of a mad World, by John Sherman, B. D. a
discontinuer, in 12. The matching of the Magistrates Authority, and the
Christians true Liberty in matters of Religion, by Will. Lyford, B D. and late
Minister of Sherborn in Dors. in 4. A compendious Discourse upon the Case as it
it stands between the Church of England, and those Congregations that have
divided from it, by Hen. Fern. D. D. New. A correct Copy of some Notes,
concerning Gods Decrees especially of Reprobation, by T. P. Preacher of Gods
Word in Northamptonshire, and published to prevent calumny in 4. New. The
History of the Church of Scotland, by Joh. Sp^tswood Archbishop of St. Andrewt,
in fol. New. Phrastologia Anglo-Latina, or English Proprieties rendered into
proper Latin for the use and benefit of Grammar Scholars, in 8. Dr. Cousins
Devotions, in 12. The Quakers wild Questions objected against the Ministers of
the Gospel, and many sacred Acts and Offices of Religion. etc. by R. Sherlock.
The Plain man's Senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil. Or, A Discovery
of the Errors and Heresies of these Times, and the Toleration of them, etc. by
William Lyford, B. D.
THE END

