AN ANSWER TO A LETTER

Written from Cambridge to Sir Thomas Lunsford, Knight and Baronet, Prisoner in
the Tower of LONDON.

July 7th Printed in the Year, 1647.

AN ANSWER TO A LETTER Written from CAMBRIDGE To Sir Thomas Lunsford, etc.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter, and give you hearty thanks for it: These parts
are full of expectation; the great actions in motion have fixed the eyes of the
Kingdom, and false rumors (the Harbingers of such designs) have taken up
transitory lodgings in the several dispositions of men; but those which have
been beaten into judgment of the times, stand upon their guards, refusing
admittance to what comes not with good authority. That an Army, and a powerful
one is on foot, is known; that (if the King be pattie in it) it will be
irresistible, is likewise out of doubt, that the Declarations of it is
unpleasing, and challenges part of the Freehold of our Parliament, we see in
print; and that the Parliament will part with nothing it can either get or
hold, we know by experience; and (that I absolutely hope the dissolution of
it,) I assure you upon my Reputation: Now the Army having thus far displayed,
and the Parliament not having power to equal what is on foot, the one standing
upon power and the hearts of the people, the other upon Thorns, and the
festered wounds of the Commonwealth; I give the one assured, the other capable
of a very speedy determination: I likewise judge a Necessity of restoring the
King, and returning the Laws into their former channel; for should the Army
be satisfied with only their Arreares, and expulsion of the Presbyterian
party, and yet continue the two Houses, (when it shall be disbanded) what
assurance have the Independents in Parliament, that the City (which is
Presbyterian, and from wherce the Army at this instant affirms would be
raised another (to countenance Presbytery) were it not for the Interposition of
this on Foot) shall not raise Forces, and destroy the Acts of these hereafter,
who forcibly may settle themselves now? That the City shall not new-mould the
Houses with Presbyterians, as perhaps the Army may now with Independents? and
that the Houses then (by virtue of the City) shall not run rigorous ways of
Revenge? For what can oppose the City, if the Army be away?

These Considerations will not admit me to gleane other Expectations from the
Courses in motion, then Honorable and Popular Conclusions. The King in
Parliament, can assure the ends of the Army, can confer Honors, can
gratify with Estates, can make an Act of Oblivion; and then, by the
dissolution of the Parliament, the parties are sure to enjoy all that is so
given them: but keep it still on foot, and disband the Army, then there is
danger of the prevalencie of the other Faction, and consequently, of the
revocation of all Grants to the former. Likewise, to keep an Army long up,
requires a Charge insupportable, as well as it gives an aspect formidable to
all who have observed the mutabilitie of these Times. Besides, without the King
nothing can be confirmed, nothing enjoyed longer then an Army is on foot; nor
can Peace be so settled, but that Seeds will be left for a new War to spring
forth, so soon as the Season can produce it.

But me thinks now there is a Miracle working: An Army (powerful to enrich
it self by Offenses) is so spotless, as the world admires it; and this Army
summons a Parliament (indeed red as Skarlet) vyes with it in Innocence, and
boldly demands Reparations of the Crimes committed against the Commonwealth:
The nature of the one is (commonly) charged with Sin and Blood, and of the
other with Pretty, Virtue, and Blessings upon the Realm. But as the one has
degenerated into the others quality and nature, so is it just it should
receive the others property. As a good Parliament might demand Accounts of a
wicked Army, so why may not a righteous Army demand the like of a wicked
Parliament? In mine opinion, Justice has laid this Scaene, to be acted in this
Antipodian Tragedy; and (so that it may be the last) he little cares how soon
it be concluded, who is,

The Tower, 16, June, 1647. SIR, Your friend and servant, Thomas Lunsford.
THough I know this will not please you, yet to let you understand, and to
possess all your University (contrary, perhaps, to its present Opinion) that
our Halcyon days are not far off, I write this, and care not if both Houses
see it, and desire you to publish it.



FINIS.

