Major General Laughorn's LETTER TO THE Honorable William Lenthall Esquire
Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.

Wherein is truly related the taking of Carmarthen Town and Castle, and the
Reducing of that County to obedience of Parliament.

Together with the several Articles, Declarations and Agreements BETWEEN The
Major and Gentry of that County.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter, Articles,
Directions, and Agreements, be forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
October. 28. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
Sce the taking of Picton Castle, and freeing the whole County of Pembroke from
the power of the Enemy: The first action worthy your knowledge, God vouchsafed
I should effect, was the taking of Carmarthen Town and Castle; it was performed
this day; at nine of the clock in the morning, Fifteen hundred Clubmen of the
County marched out at one Gate, and I entered at the other, the strength of the
Club-men in all the adjacent Counties since their last Association; my
endeavoring for Recruit in the best measure I could, and the unsetlednesse of
the Commissioners of Array, and other of the Gentry of Carmarthenshire, in
their Treaty for Peace with us lost me some time, might have been more useful
in Action: Their solicitations received birth before the taking of Carew
Castle; but after their loss of Picton I discerned more frequency and
importunity in the prosecution: It were impertinent to rehearse all particular
passages, the Copies of the Letters and conditions between us, with my
Declaration sent herewith (observing the order of them) will manifest the
effect of what I would signify: their first Letter to me and the Committee,
they sent to receive the Kings approbation before they conveyed it to us, and
all they did passed (though privately) by allowance of Major General Stradling,
and Lovelace Governor of Carmarthen, that breeds my doubt they have yet rotten
coares, and I shall try before I overmuch trust them: On Friday the
Commissioners drew Fifteen hundred Clubmen into Town, and with the Townsmen
undertook the defense, dismissing the Governor and his Soldiers: Our Forces
lying then at Saint Cleers, six miles short of Carmarthen, staying for some
Carriages that were not come up; the next day we appeared in several bodies,
Six hundred Horse and Dragoons and Two thousand Foot before the Town, and spent
the evening in interchange of Parlyes, at eleven at night we concluded, and
this morning put it in execution, some of the manifestly criminous deserted the
Town, and fled with the Enemy, some Troopers and Captains daily fall in to us,
and the Club-men in Cardiganshire resift the Enemy, detain their Contributions,
and (in compliance with Colonel Jews, who neglects no means to win them) as
I here declare for King and Parliament. Our Horse shall advance to morrow to
assist them, and in few days, I hope to give a very good account of be two
Counties: Glamorganshire Gentlemen I desired (and I heard were ready) to appear
upon the borders, to wait my actions against Carmarthen, if the surrender had
not prevented them: The Town very spacious, but strongly Fortified, requiring
no less then a thousand men in Garrison: If we could give pay we should not
want men, and those we have with little encouragement, would deem no enterprise
too hard: If it would please the State to afford some supply for money and
clothing, I doubt not they should speedily reap the fruit of them. I restrain
Plunder, and use the Country withal lenity; I shall not, I hope, repent it, or
forget that I am, Sir

Carmarthen 12. October. 1645. Your most humble Servant, ROVVLAND LAUGHORNE.

The Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners, and Gentry of the County of
Carmarthen, to the General and Committee in Pembrokeshire.
GEntlemen, We taking into consideration the unhappy effects that War (being
continued) may produce between the county of Pembroke, and these neighboring
counties of Carmarthen and Cardigan and others; the unity whereof is requisite
under many Relations, to the preservation of which you and we equally pretend,
namely our Religion, Loyalty, and Laws, though we have been hitherto so
unhappy, as to endeavor the preserving of these by destroying one another.

To prevent therefore the continuance of these miseries we have formerly felt,
and the fears of worse that may ensue (if possibly it may be) and that we may
move toward these ends, we severally profess to be the same, with better
assurance of obtaining them, and more piety toward our selves; We conceive
(that if your concurrence be had therein) that a Treaty between a certain
number Commissioned out of these two Counties and yours, may produce a better
effect to every of us, then the Hostility between us has hitherto done, or (if
continued) is like to do.

In order to this (if you approve thereof) you may name your number of persons,
with the time and place where to give meeting, sending likewise your safe
conduct for the proportionable number Commissioned out of these Counties, and
the like shall be sent to you from this: Thus desiring your speedy Answer, we
remain

September. 5. 1645. Your Servants, Ed: Vauhgan. Jo: Vaughan. Rowland Gwyn.
Robert Birt. Francis Lloyde. John Vaughan. John Vaughan. George Gwyn. John
Harr. Carbery. Rice Rudde. Henry Middleton. John Jews. Thomas Lloyde.


The Copy of the Answer from the Major General Laughorne and the Committee to
the Commissioners and Gentry of the several Counties of Carmarthen and
Cardigan.
GEntlemen, Your Letter of the 5. of Sept. we received this 25. of the same, if
your desires be answerable to your expressions for Peace, we shall upon what
terms may be warrantable admit a Treaty, conditioned you make full Declaration
of your obedience to the Authority of King and Parliament, and testify your
resolution therein, by present seizing, delivering to us, or deteining in your
own power those scattered Horse of the Enemy yet in your Country, with these
limitations, we hereby engage for the safety of any four gentlemen among you,
(so they consist not of any Members that deserted the Parliament) to repair to
this Town within the next three days, and to return with their necessary
Attendants, and we shall be ready, upon your compliance, to protect the Common
people, and such of the Gentry as we shall find Capable of protection, and
refer the exempted to superior Iudicatures, In the interim, in suspense of our
expectation; we are

Haverfordwest, 25. Sept. 1645. Your Servants Rowland Laughorne, Tho: Bowen,
Lewis Barlowe, John Lort, Sampson Lorr. Tho: Jones.


The Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners of Carmarthenshire, to Major
General Laughorne, and the Committee.
GEntlemen, expecting this day to have understood the full sense of the
Inhabitants of this County, that thereby we might have been Armed with power to
have treated as was in your Letter mentioned; you may understand the Countr^y
met not (as we expected) therefore we conceive our selves not in condition to
send unto you according to our undertakings: This we thought fit to write unto
you who are

October 2. 1645. Your humble Servants, Rice Rudde. John Vaughan. Ed: Vaughan.
John Vaughan. Henry Middleton. George Gwynne.


SIr, we hear you are advanced into this County, which makes us send this
bearer to receive your command which shall be performed by us, who profess and
declare our selves to be for the King and Parliament, and will with the best
assistance we can, aid you with our lives and fortunes, in any thing that may
conduce to the Parliaments service,

Llangendyscen, October. 10. 1645. Sir, we are your humble Servants, Edward
Vaughan. John Vaughan. Henry Middleton. John Vaughan.


For our Honored friend Major Gen: Laughorn these.
GEntlemen, in Answer to your Letter, I rest satisfied of your good intentions,
And for the better and sooner expediting the service intended, I wish two of
you would give me the meeting at St. Cleers this night, where I am advanced
with my whole Army, and shall be ready upon warrantable grounds, to do you
service,

St. Cleeres October 10. 1645. I am Gentlemen your servant, Rowland Laughorne.

For his worthy friends, Edward Vaughan Knight, John Vaughan, Henry Middleton,
and John Vaughan, Esquire these.
A Declaration to the Commissioners, Gentry, and Inhabitants of
Carmarthenshire, set forth by Major General Laughorne, at St. Cleeres the 10.
day of October, 1645.
GEntlemen, although your credulity (to the greatest Instruments of your
Ruin,) heretofore (to your dear experience) possessed you with an opinion,
the King and Parliaments forces designed nothing less, then reducing you to
obedience and settlement of your Peace, and I (with compunction) confess at my
last advance into these parts of your County, the licentiousness of my unpaid
Soldiers, might add some setlednes to that injurious conceit; I praise God
and the Parliaments providence, my men upon the present advance, rest well
satisfied with the pay they received, and are become liable to Discipline, of
that I shall not forbear the strictest execution upon apparent offenders.

My earnest wishes are, you will now at length be undeceived, and pretend not
rescue of your Estates, to color obstinate resistance of the Authority whereto
you owe all you call yours, but make present submission to the power of King
and Parliament, and join (against the common Enemy) with the Forces by their
Commission under my conduct, whose principal endeavor it is, to assert your
Religion, your Laws, your Liberties.

You so doing, in exchange of your imaginary fears, I tender my Reputation in
the presence of Heaven and Earth (for gaining your confidence,) I will not
dread to engage my life with my power and fortunes, in protection of your
persons and Estates, as well against those of mine own Command, as the
notorious adversaries of our Religion, Liberties, Peace, and Prosperity,

Rowland Laughorne.

SIr, we received your Letter, and rest your servants for the affection you
express: Our late coming into Town, prevents our waiting on you this night,
we are 1500. men in Town, which are resolved for King and Parliament, to morrow
four of us will not fail to wait on you, we desire you not to march till then.
The Castle we have not as yet, but it is promised us to morrow; which with the
hazard of our lives, we will defend and keep for the Parliament service; Your
Declaration shall be published to the people, and if they declare not as we do,
their forced obedience shall make them rue their obstinacy: The particulars of
our proceedings we refer to this bearers Relation, and Rest

Carmarthen, 10 Octobr. 1645. Your Servants, Edward Vaughan. John Vaughan. John
Vaughan. Charles Gwyn. Henry Midleton.


For our honored Friend, Major Genesis Laughorne.
IT is agreed by the Town and County of Carmarthen, and Major Genesis Laughorne,
That the works and all fortification about the Town and Castle, be utterly
demolished, and all other Garrisons within the said County.

It is likewise agreed, that no free quarter be imposed upon the Inhabitants of
the said Town and County, except one night upon a march, And that the Army may
not march through the Town.

It is desired and agreed, that all other matters and business of consequence,
may be referred to King and Parliament at Westminster, And that all the
Ammunition and Arms, within the said Town and County, may be left for their
own defense and safety.

It is likewise agreed, that the Army march out of this County, within the
space of two days and two nights, next ensuing.

These Articles being granted, the whole Inhabitants of the Town and County,
do declare themselves for King and Parliament.

It is agreed, that no pressed men be required from the said Town and County,
until there be a general press within all the Associated Counties adjacent.

It is also agreed, that the Covenant be not pressed on the Inhabitants of
neither Town nor County.

This was brought without subscriptions, and delivered Saturday evening, 11
October. By Sir Edward Vaughan. John Vanghan of Llanelly. Thomas Williams.
And Robert Toy, And George Joanes
Of the Town.

In Answer to the six particulars, desired of me by the Town and County of
Carmarthen, to obtain their Declaration for King and Parliament.
FOr the first, I should agree to the demolishing of all the Garrisons in the
County, so there might be other means for securing the Country and places of
retreat upon necessary occasions ascertained.

To the second, Soldiers cannot be maintained without free quarter, or
Contributions for pay, and without men the Country cannot be defended.

To the third, by the rearm (King) it is not evident, whether the Kings
personal residence at Westminster be intended, and other matters of
consequence must be all the difference, for here nothing of moment is offered,
and by circuit, we are where we begun.

To the fourth, the marching of the Army out of the County, and no other power
set^ed, for its preservation is inconsistent with my trust.

To the fifth, the special emergent occasions may require pressed men here, when
other places may be void of danger, and not positively to be granted.

To the sixth, A profession against the Covenant or willing declining of it, is
an open profession of enmity to King and Parliament, and the desire of
exemption manifests the Treaty on that part to be illusory, and superficial.

If upon my Declaration the Gates be opened, and the Town delivered, I shall
make good what I have undertaken; otherwise I shall leave the wealth of it, to
the dispose of the Soldier, and not make contracts for the price of their
blood.

WE whose names are subscribed, in the name of our selves, and all the
Inhabitants of this Town and County, do absolutely declare for King and
Parliament, and will with our lives and fortunes, assist the forces raised by
the Parliament against any other whatsoever as shall seek to invade these
Countries, and do desire to be received into King and Parliaments protection,
according to the Declaration of Major Genesis Laughorne, and for Contribution we
willingly submit proportionably to out Neighboring Counties, 11 October, 1645.

Tho. Griffith Mayor, David Bevan. Robert Jews. Thomas Woodford. Robert Joy.
vic. Com John David. vic. Com. John David. Robert Brand. Robert Griffith.
Richard Thomas. Edward Jones. John Hughes. Walter Chapman. Edward Vaughan John
Vaughan. Henry Vaughan. Henry Midleton. George Gwyn. John Vaughan. John Harrys.
Thomas Williams. Francis Howell. Henry Vaughan. Samuel Hughes. Thomas Howell.
John Auberry. Anthony Morgan. John Gwyn. John Lloyd. Edward Vaughan. William
Lloyd. John Newskay.


FINIS.

