PAOTANOLOGIA.

SIVE ENCHIRIDION BOTANICUM. OR A COMPLETE HERBALL Containing the Sum of what
has hitherto been published either by Ancient or Modern Authors both
Galenicall and Chymicall, touching Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Fruits, Flowers, etc.
In an Alphabeticall order: wherein all that are not in the Physic Garden in
Oxford are noted with asterisks.

Showing their Place, Time, Names, Kinds, Temperature, Virtues, Use, Dose,
Danger and Antidotes.

Together with An Introduction to Herbarisme, etc. Appendix of Exoticks.
Universal Index of plants: showing what grow wild in England.


By ROBERT LOVELL St. C. C. Ox. (...).

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM HALL, for RIC. DAVIS. An. 1659.

ISAGOGE PHYTOLOGICA. OR An Introduction to HERBARISME.
Courteous Reader,
AVoiding the Prolixity and tediousness of a Proemiall Discourse (Brevity
being here intended) thou may first consider the Quid sit of Phytologie;
which is the Art of knowing and finding out the Temperature, Virtues and Use of
Plants, as serving to the Curation or Sustentation of the Body; as also of
their Danger; and the Remedies thereof.

The parts hereof are two. 1. Therapeutick or curatory. 2. Threptick or
alimentary. In both which, Vegetables may be considered according to their
substance and consistence, or else according to their accidents.

I. According to their substance or consi^^ence, they are 1. Thin or Gross. 2.
Laxe (...) Constrict. 3. Clammy, or Brittle. 4. Heavy or Light. Tenuity of
parts is in those things which are aerious in essence and substance: which
being subtle do easily communicate their virtue unto any liquor, and are of
easy distribution in the body. Crassitude of parts is in those things which
are terrene: which being more gross, do not quickly communicate their virtues
unto liquids, and therefore the virtues thereof are exerted in the stomach, and
seldom or never pass unto the liver. Rarity is in dry bodies: hardness in
the dry and terrene. Clamminesse in moist bodies: Brittlenesse in dry.
Heaviness in thick bodies: and Lightness in the rarefied. Tenuity looseneth
and penetrateth: Crassitude obstructs: Softness lenifies and conglutinateth,
and Hardness resists and dries, etc.

II. According to their accidents, they may be taken notice of, as
medicamentous and alimentary. I. As medicamentous, and so according to their
immediate and more remote accidents. I. According to their more immediate, sc.
the qualities, and way of finding out thereof. I. The Poiotetologie or
qualities, first, second, third, and fourth.

The first are 1. Calidity or heat, which causes motion and disposes the
parts, by a right conjunction, and situation thereof. It heateth, subtilizeth,
digesteth, opens, maturateth, and rarifies, and causes agility: if
excessive, it does accende, inflame, attract and disturb, as thapsia, etc.

2. Frigidity or coldness, does cool, conjoyne, inspissate, and hinder
digestion, by the obtusion of calidity, and by shutting the passages hinders
distribution: also if excessive it so fills, that it expels the juice,
coagulates and congeales, as poison, etc.

3. Humidity or moisture, is of easy separation, lenifying and lubrifying: if
excessive, it burdeneth the spirits, and loadeth the same: and if ^queous, it
causes nauseousnesse, and suffocates the excitation of heat, causes
flatulencies, oppilations, slownesse of action, and debility of motion and of
the parts: otherwise it lenifies, lubrifies, looseneth, makes the blood and
spirits more gross, and obtundeth the acrimonie of humors, as mallows etc.

4. Siccity or dryness, does colligate, and bind, and cause a stronger
disposition of the body: if excessive, it constringeth the passages, and
hinders the excretion, presses forth the juice out of the body, and causes
tabefaction: if in the last degree, it consumes moisture, causes
interception, suffocation, and death as cresses, etc.

Here the Degrees are four. The 1. Scarce sensibly alters the body. The 2.
Manifestly, yet without trouble or hurt. The 3. Vehemently, but without
corruption. The 4. Most violently, and with great hurt unto the body: in each
of which degrees there are three Mansions, acting remisly, intensly, or in a
mean: or in the beginning, middle, or end thereof. The Chemists in stead of
these four qualities or elements, substitute 1. Their sal, from which is all
sapour or taste, which is as it were the ashes of a body. 2. Sulphur, whence
all odor or smell arises, and is like the flame. 3. Mercurius, whence is all
color, and is represented by smoke or fume.

The second Qualities are 1. The Malactick or mollifying, to which the
ecpuetick or suppurating has affinity: for both have an equal and symmetrick
heat, and a correspondent siccity, yet differing in mode. The suppurating does
produce heat most like unto that of the body without any consumption or
addition of humidity. The emollient accends heat a little beyond the proportion
of nature, and contracteth a little humidity, wherefore that rather operates by
quantity than by the quality of heat, but the emollient, rather by quality.
Therefore that which is exactly suppuratory is emplastick, yet sometimes
emollition is the consequent of humidity, if joined with moderate calidity or
heat, and is useful in scirrhus's, and tumors.

2. Scleryntick or hardening, which properly is that, which does exiccate
without any excess of heat or cold: for cold also may make obdurate, as also
too much heat, yet after another manner than only by exiccation, for though
that which is dry is hard, yet all that is hard is not dry. But Siccity does
dry and indurate two ways; sc. by altering and making more dry the essence of
the parts, which most properly; or by consuming the humors in the pores; yet
sometimes obduration may also be caused by repletion or fulness.

3. Araiotick and rarefying, or diaphoretick and resolving, which are
moderately hot, with tenuity of parts and very little resiccant or drying, for
excessive heat does not rarefie but burn, and by adustion does condensate and
dry. But moderate heat opens the passages and deeply penetrateth by the
tenuity of its substance, and eases pain: also it opens the pores and
attenuates the substance.

4. Pycknotick or condensating, contrary to the rarefacient, contracting the
pores, and incrassating what is rarefied and humid, and making it more solid,
which is in those things which refrigerate yet are not terrene, or aerious, but
aqueous, and are nothing at all, or but little astringent; for these do weakly
contract, and bind, sc. by reason of their softness.

5. Anastomotick or aperient, opening the mouths of the vessels, and is in
those things that are of gross parts, hot, sharp, and biting.

6. Stegnotick or binding, contracting, occluding, and constringing, shutting
the mouths of the vessels, and restraining sensible excretion, and is in those
things which are frigid, of gross parts, and without acrimony, as many terrene
bodies are: for those things which ought strongly to constipate and bind, must
also have a more strong and renitent faculty.

7. Helctick, epispastick or drawing, attracting the humors from the center,
and is in those things, which are hot, and of thin parts: for that which is hot
attracteth, and that more strongly which has a conjunct tenuity of parts, but
those moderately attract, which are hot and dry in the second degree, if in the
third more effectually, and chiefly those that are so in the fourth: for the
attraction is according to the degree of heat, and is either more natural, or
by putrefaction. yet some things attract specifically, and not by a manifest
quality: as things that are cathartick or purging, and alexitery or resisting
poison.

8. Apocroustick or repercutient, repelling the humors flowing from the center,
as in those things which are frigid and of gross parts. For that which is cold
repelleth, and if it has a crassitude of parts also, it is more violent, as
that which is acerbe or austere; yet those things also repel which are
astringent, especially those which are helped by the tenuity of their parts:
for the thinness of the substance does much conduce to astriction, therefore
other things that are astrictive, by reason of the crassitude of their
substance, cannot easily penetrate the more remote parts, precluding the
passages.

9. Ryptick, abstergent or cleansing, removing glutinous and clammy humors in
the superficies or adhering to the pores of the skin, or ulcers: and is in
those things which have power to exiccate with tenuity of substance, neither is
it of any great moment whether they are hot or cold, by reason that neither
quality hinders action, except excessive.

10. Eccathartick, ecphractick, and expurgatorie or removing obstructions, not
only opening the pores of the skin, but the inferior ductus of the bowels; as
in those things that are nitrous and bitter, although they have some small
astriction, and by reason of substance do not differ from those that are
absterfive, but in degree: for those things that cleanse the pores and inward
passages, have a greater tenuity of parts, and are moderately hot, as those
things which are nitrous and bitter: but those things which being outwardly
applied to the skin do cleanse the skin, or ulcers from their excrements, are
destitute of the astrictive faculty: but being taken inwardly although having a
certain astriction, yet nevertheless they may purge, and cleanse the greater
passages, and withal strengthen the same.

11. Leptyntick or attenuating and making thin, as in all those things that are
expurgatory, hot and of thin parts: extenuating gross and tough humors.

12. Emplastick, viscid or clammie, contrary to the abstersive: for being
applied, it does tenaciously inhere in the pores of the skin, fill and obstruct
the same, as in those things that are sat, and glutinous; as also terrene,
wanting acrimonie, and asperity or roughness.

13. Emphractick or obstructing, pachyntick, and thickening, which are the
same: for as those things which are detergent and purging do free the pores
and passages from obstruction, so these obstruct and fill the same, and make
the humors of the body tough and thick.

14. Anodyne, paregorick or easing pain, as in those things which have thin
parts, and are moderately hot, not much exceeding the temperate, sc. being hot
in the first degree and rarefacient: so evacuating, digesting, rarefying,
extenuating, concocting, and equalizing whatsoever humor either sharp, tough,
or gross, is inhering in the smaller pores, or grieved parts: and all vaporous
crass, gross or cold spirits not finding way of evacuation.

15. Narcotick or stupifying the parts by its coldness, and not properly
mitigating the pain, nor taking away the causes of the grief: yet stupor is
somewhat less than insensibility, or the privation of sense, the same also is
hypnotick, or somnifick and ^auseth sleep being taken, sc. its subject, which
does vehemently refrigerate, sc. in the 4th degree; so that it does not only
stupifie the sense; but being liberally taken, causes death, as opium; and
that not only by its exuperant quality; but also by a certain propriety of
substance and its concurring essence, its narcotick vehemence being but little
repressed by the mixture of hot correcters, though it has some bitter parts.

16. Amyctick, metasyncritick, or rubefacient causing redness, contrary to the
former, causing pain, as in those things which heat, and dissolve unity, of
this kind also are escharoticks causing crusts, which are hotter, caustic or
burning: not only hot and dry in the fourth degree, but also of a gross
consistence, therefore being fixed in any part, they excruciate and torment the
same by their stisnesse: like unto these are those things that are septick or
corrosive which are vehemently hot and dry, but of thin parts and consistence;
which therefore with a little pain and biting, or else without any sense of
pain eliquate the part, and are called also putrefactives.

The third Qualities arise from the mixture of the first and second, and are 1.
The Ecpuetick or suppurating, turning into matter contused flesh and humors
remaining in swellings, as in those things which are moderately hot, and next
unto emollients, yet differing in this that they have also an emplastick
faculty, obstructing the pores, increasing the substance of heat, and not
intending the quality, and are also called pepticks or maturatives.

2. Sarcotick or generating flesh, as in those things which produce flesh in
hollow ulcers, and fill the cavities, and are hot in the first degree, a little
detersive and that without biting and astriction.

3. Colletick or conglutinating, as in those things which dry in the second
degree, and are in a mean as to those which generate flesh, and cicatrize;
they are not abstersive, but astringent, and prohibit the flux of humors to the
lips of wounds, ulcers and fistula's; they are also called symphyticks,
traumaticks and enaima.

4. Epulotick or cicatrizing, as in those things which greatly dry, and bind
without biting, drinking the humidity of the flesh and contracting the same,
and covering with a thin callus like unto the skin; therefore do more dry
than incarnatives or glutinatives, for they bind, contract, constipate, and
indurate: there is also a sharp and biting epulotick that consumes dead flesh
called cathairetick, and a third, drying without astriction.

5. Porotick or generating callus, by which broken bones are ferruminated and
knit, and is neither bone nor flesh but betwixt both, being a hard, dry, white
body: to the generation of which are required a convenient dyer, and medicines
applied which are emplastick and moderately hot.

6. Diuretic or provoking urine, as 1. In those things that are moist and
liquid, and of a thin consistence, and easy penetration, increasing the
quantity of urine: so operate by accident. 2. In those things which purge and
attenuate and open the passages, some of which are cold and of thin parts;
sometimes expelling what sticks in the passages: which operate after a middle
way, sometimes by accident, tempering exuperant heat which seiseth on the
veins and resolves the serous humidity, that the humors may be more easily
attracted by the reins and descend by the bladder. 3. In these things which
purge the passages, and open the same, extenuate gross humors and the blood,
and separate what is extenuated from the more gross prts: which the reins
then easily attract and send away by the urinarie passages: which kinds of
diuretics are very hot and dry, to wit in the 3d degree, sharp, and of a very
thin substance, coactive, and separating.

7. Lithontriptick or breaking the stone, dissolving and expelling the gravel,
as in those things which are diuretic, hot, dry and of thin parts: sharp, but
more remissely, and some what bitter.

8. Emmenonagogick or drawing out the terms, as in those things which are hot
and of thin parts, that they may concoct and digest crude humors, extenuate and
incide the gross and tough, and remove obstructions by clensing the passages:
such as are all propper diuretics: which also promote the expurgation of the
menses; and if they are also stinking or bitter, they are more effectual:
stinking things depressing the womb: and the bitter being purging. There are
also accidental hystericks: as those which are analeptick or strengthening
after extenuation: or which refrigetate and humect the body dried by too much
heat: to these also have affinity, those things which expel the secundine,
and dead birth: especially those which are more strong, sc. hot and of thin
parts, stinking and bitter with acrimony, especially if taken in a greater
quantity and often.

9. Bechick or helping the cough, as in those things which cause or stop the
same: for those things which conduce to the expectoration of gross humors, do
also cause coughing; but on the crontrary, those things which incrassate thin
humors stop and ease it: but those things are hot and of thin parts, and
extenuating which expectorate tough humors; yet there are also others which in
some measure purge the breast, not much hot nor very dry, but a little
moistening, or at least lenifying what is exasperated; yet diuretics of the
middle kind also are agreeable to the breast and lungs: which if they are cold,
they incrassate thin humors and stop coughing, and especially those which are
narcotick or stupefying.

10. Galactogenetick or generating milk, as partly in meats partly in
medicines: as for meat, it is such as is euchymick and polytrophick or of good
juice and of much nourishment, and a little hotter and dryer, if the blood be
cold and pituitous; but more moist and less hot, if troubled with choler.
Medicaments causing milk, are of thin parts and hot, and of affinity to those
things which properly provoke urine, yet most gentle; but those things which
are more strong and provoke the courses, hinder the generation thereof by too
much eliquation of the humors.

11. Spermatogenetick or generating sperme, as in those things which are hot
and not very dry but flatulent, as also aliment of good juice and whatsoever
increases the quantity of blood.

The 4th Qualities are such which follow the substance, or property of the
essence, and are found out only by experience: and are therefore called occult,
latent and specific; as in poisons, theriack and alexipharmick remedies,
amulets and catharticks, things antipathetick and sympathetick, as also
appropriate to any part or adverse unto the same; the greatest sign of which
(according to some) is Signature.

II. The Poiotichnologie or way of finding out these qualities, as I. the
manifest; it is I. by reason. 1. by odor or smell, which is either sweet
familiar unto the spirits of the brain and a sign of heat, or stinking and
offensive cold and moist, the first is in hot bodies, of thin parts, among
which there is difference according to the degrees thereof; but those things
which are without odor, are of a gross essence and humid, as those things
which are salt and austere; also such things which are of a mordicant and
bitter smell are hot, but those that smell like vinegar and acerb are cold, for
in somethings the sense of odours is like that of sapors, yet not of so safe
conjecture, by reason of the inequality of substance; for most bodies are of
an unlike consistence, of each of which parts odor shows not the temper, but
where there are tenuous effluvium's or vapors, whereof, the sweet strengthen
the heart, the rank excite the animal spirits, the stinking help the
suffocation of the matrix.

2. By Color, which is either 1. Lucid, exciting the animal spirits and
drawing them outward, as the white. 2. Or tenebrose, calling them inwards, and
causing sleep, as the black. 3. Yellow, helping the jaundise. 4. Or green,
useful for the eyes: the white and pale show moistness of temper and
imbecility. The yellow proceeds from heat. The red and croc^ous etc. show
excessive siccity and calidity or heat. The green and porraceous are signs of
much moisture.

3. By sapors or tastes which (according to some) are I. More perceptible or
manifest. I. The simple, which are 1. hot, first more hot, and so first of more
thin parts, as the sharp, secondly of more thick parts, as the bitter,
^nitrous, and salt* secondly less hot, as the sweet and is diverse according
to the diversity of tenuity and humidity. 2. Cold, first of gross terrene
parts. First more gross as the acerbe. Secondly less gross, as the austere
and astringent. Secondly of subtle aqueous parts and doubtful, as the acid.
II. The mixed, as the vinous, compounded of the acid and sweet. II. Less
perceptible and almost insipid. 1. Aqueous, first more subtle, as the
aquinsipid, secondly more gross. First glutinous, as the humilent, Secondly
fat, as the oleous. 2. Terrene, 1. succulent, as the adoreous. 2. More dry as
the lignite^reous. The sapors or tastes are I. Active, 1. Bitter or Aloetick,
which is contrary to the nature of living creatures, the taste whereof does
vellicate the tongue. It consists of terrene combust parts, of which some
are, more subtle, others more gross and terrene, exiccated by exuperant heat,
or coagulated by cold, as appears in opium and aloes. It is not nutritive, it
opens the mouths of the veins, causes hemorrhages, and thirst, and makes
the blood fluxible: it attenuateth, incideth, biteth, exasperates, cleanses,
melts, attracteth, yet more moderately dries and heateth, it consumes and
resists putrefaction, drinking up supervacaneous humors, and resisting
sweetness: its hot and dry in the second degree terra usta.

2. Sharp, aromaticall or arsenical, hot, dry and burning, pricking the tongue,
and biting the mouth, it consists of thin, dry and hot parts, as pepper,
onions etc. If it be not vehement, and hot under the third degree, taken
inwardly it does penetrate, open, and attenuate thick humors, applied outwardly
it rarifieth the skin, and draws forth humors. If it be hot above the 3d
degree, it troubles the head with thin vapors. If it be of a more gross
essence it is caustic and causes blisters and scabs: and if it be of an
adverse substance, it is septick and deadly: also it is of quick operation and
strong, it attracteth from remote parts, it separates, corrodes, incideth,
heateth, burns and inflameth: it resolves, discusseth, excoriates,
exulcerates, and strongly inciteth to expurgation, if of more thin parts, it is
diureticall: if of thicker, caustic: it is more intense in dryer bodies, and
more remiss where there is an aqueous humidity. It Is hot and dry, ex aqua and
terra attenuata.

3. Acid or ammoniacall. It penetrateth the tongue with its tenuity, yet
without any manifest heat. It consists of tenuous, cold and dry parts, as
vinegar, the juice of limmons etc. It penetrateth and incideth no less than
the sharp sapour, therefore it incideth, attenuates, biteth, detergeth,
reserates obstructions, repels and dryes: and by reason of its penetrating
coldness, it repells all fluxions: and by its siccity stops all eruptions of
blood. Also it helps nauseousness, corrodeth, and condensates without heat; it
exasperates and resists putrefaction. It Is of doubtful qualities, fiery and
aqueous, hot and cold, and of all contraries. It Is cold and dry 2, aqua ignita
cum halitu terreo.

4. Nitrous, which is in a mean between salt and bitter; yet weaker than this,
and more intense than the other; it is biting and corroding, as nitre. It
opens the belly, and purges the reins, terra spiritibus compulsa.

5. Salt or serous. It corrodeth the tongue by exiccation, yet heateth not
much; it consists in a mean matter with heat and dryness, and is generated
of that which is terrene and dry, attenuate and preassate by heat with an
aqueous humidity, so not altogether terrene, as salt; therefore it contracteth
the pores, incideth, detergeth, digesteth and drinks up humidity by its
dryness, without any manifest sense of heat, and so resists putrefaction. It
opens, biteth, exasperateth, abstergeth, cleanses, troubles, provokes to
expulsion, purges, subverteth the stomach, causes thirst, dries,
deobstructs, aggregates, condenseth, roborateth, and contracteth. It Is hot and
dry in the 2d degree and corrosive.

6. Sweet or saccharine. It dilateth the tongue, and is pleasant having no
exuperant quality, and being in a mediocrity, as sugar and honey; therefore it
levigates what is exasperated, lenifies, maturates, concocts, is anodyne, and
only nourishes; also it digests, rarifies, distributes, loses, fills the
liver, stops the spleen, and is hot and moist in the first degree and of
terraqueous parts.

7. Acerb or aluminous. It contracteth the tongue, and does unequally
exasperate the same by exiccation: it is near to the austere, but more
troublesome to the tongue, astringent, cold, and dry. The matter thereof is
terrene and dry, without any manifest moisture, in which coldness is exactly
predominant with siccity, as services; therefore as cold it repelleth fluxions,
as astringent it stops the force of humors, as dry it does coarctate,
condense, and cicatrize wounds, as terrene it incrassates humors and
condensates the superficies, it shuts, corrugates, and indurateth, so the
austere. It resists poison, and is cold and dry 2.

8. Austere or vitriolate. It moderately binds the tongue and mouth,
coarctates the same with a certain asperity, and does in some measure
refrigerate and dry. It consists in a mean matter participating of that
which is terrene and waterie, in which frigidity is predominant, as medlars and
wild pears etc. It manifestly refrigerateth, extinguishes, binds and
contracteth moderately stops fluxions, and repelleth. Its subacerb, less cold
and dry, and exasperating, stopping, roborating and indurating, terra spiritu
commota, as vitriol. The astringent is weaker, as quinces. Mat. Med. sicc.
crass.

II. Mean. 1. Oleous. It Is fat, unctuous and temperate; generated of that
which is moist, aerious and moderately hot by elaxation of the waterie part,
whereby it becomes more aeriall, as oil. It Is slow and weak in operation,
stopping the gustick or tasting organs. It does humect, lenifie, and soften,
loosen, obstruct and cause flatulencies, and nauseousnesse, having a certain
obscure and remiss sweetness, and mean substance.

2. Aquinsipid. It Is scarce perceived by the tongue, hardly participating of
any terrene siccity, and consisting in a crude juice, it is rather a privation
than a sapor: it is matter is somewhat gross, yet not altogether terrene, dry,
or astringent, but moistened with a certain humidity, which also is not
exquisitely mixed by the activity of heat, as water. It is emplastick, stopping
and obstructing, lenifying what is exasperated, and conglutinating that which
is disjoined; and although it has some affinity to sweet, yet it differs in
this, that it consists in a matter a little more gross and crude: it
refrigerateth and does more moisten sc. from the second to the third degree.

III. Passive. 1. Ligniterreous, which is more gross, altogether terrene, and
unactive, yet it has some heat, spirit and humidity, but exceeding little, as
the caput mortuum, and dry bodies without juice. Mat. cras. terra absque
spiritu depressa prorsus terrea.

2. Humilent. The matter thereof is gross, tough, aqueous, in which the earth
being well mixed causes corpulency, and it is humid, little affecting the
taste, more gross and crude than the sweet. It Is emplastick, stopping the
passages, conglutinates what is disjoined, lenifies what is exasperated, and
does incrassate, as mucilages. Mat. Crass. frig. obscur.

3. Adoreous, most agreeing to our nature, it recedes from sweetness in this,
because its matter being unactive is hardly perceived, and it is more gross;
yet well tempered to a terrene equally mixed siccity, which easily becomes
passive, and is apt for distribution and solidity, as bread corn, Materia
aequalis receptibilis.

4. By the tactile quality or touch: so crassitude is a sign of the abundance
of terrestrial parts or humid and congealed: tenuity, of the fiery and
aerious: density of exciccation or congelation: rarity of dryness: hardness,
of siccity and earthinesse, except caused by the repletion of humors: softness
of humidity, gravity is the companion of density: levity of rarity: clamminesse
of humidity: aridity or friability of siccity: smoothness of an aereous or
aqueous humidity: asperity of siccity.

5. By disposition or mutability: so, that which more soon receives heat, is
counted hot; and that most cold, which is soonest congealed.

6. By age: so for the most part, those things that are young, are more humid:
the old more dry, also whilst they are growing and immature, they have an
austerity and acerbity: so, cold.

7. By the place of growth: so plants growing by lakes, are for the most part
of a cold, and moist temperature: the marshy, cold and somewhat dry: the
fluviatile, dry, and very hot: the marine, cold and dry: those of a fat soil
are hot and moist, or temperate therein: those of a hungry ground, hot and dry:
those of a mean earth, tepid and suitable to man's nature: those of a sandy
ground, hot and dry, and of thin parts: those of a doubtful growth, are of a
mixed temperature: the amphibious, if growing in springy places, cold and dry;
if in litorall and marine, hot and dry: the mountain plants, are dry, hot and
of subtle parts: the field, moderately hot and dry: they that grow in hollow
places, are cold and moist: the hilly, temperate: those that grow wild, are
colder and dryer than the domestic, (if of the same species) the domestic,
are milder and more weak.

8 By the operations of the sour first Qualities, as above said.

II. By experience, which in certitude exceeds all the rest, and must be made
with a simple body, without any external quality, and that in a temperate
subject: in all which that must be distinguished which is done per se, from
that which is per accidens.

Thus of the way of finding out the manifest qualities, sc. of the first: after
which the second are known as arising from the first: but especially by sapour
or taste.

II. Now follow occult Qualities; and these according to some, as Querc. Croll.
Noll. Bapt. Port. Coals, Schrod. Culp. etc. are guessed at. I. By Phytognomy or
Signature. I. Phytopricall or external, either in form, color or property;
and so the appropriations are as follows.

For the Head in general, Walnuts, piony, poppy, squills, larch tree its
agarick, and turpentine.

For the brain, Wood betony, sage, rosemary, lavender, marjerome, primroses,
cowslips, bears ears, lilly of the valley, and misletoe.

For restoring hair, Quinces, moss, and maiden-haire.

For the eyes, Fennel, vervaine, roses, celandine, rue, eyebright, clary, and
hawkweed.

For the ears, Assarabacca, ground ivy, ivy, poplar tree, nightshade,
sow-fennell, and sowthistle.

For the nose, Wake-Robin, flower de luce, horsetaile, shepherds purse,
willow, bistort, tormentill, cinkefoile, and sowbread.

For the mouth in general, Medlar, mulberries, mints, purslaine, and golden
rod.

For the scurvy, Scurvy-grasse, small housleek, aloes, fumitory, and cresses.

For the teeth, Pine, pomegranate, mastick, master-wort, coral, corall-wort,
restharrow, henbane and wild tansey.

For the dryness of the mouth, Flea wort.

For the diseases of the throat, roughness, quinsy, Kings evil etc. Throat
wort, date tree, winter green, horse tongue, fig wort, archangell, fox
glove, orpine, pellitory of the wall, wheat, barley, garlic, liquorice, fig
tree, hyssope, rag-wort, plantaine, columbines, cudweed, and Jews ears.

For shortness of breath, coughs, expectorations, hoarsenesse etc. Elecampane,
almond tree, vines, reeds, sugar cane, jujubes, sebestens, soabious, coleworts,
nettles, and turnips.

For contracting women's breasts. Ladies mantle, and sanders.

For breeding milk. Anniseed, nigella, mallows, dill, rampions, periwinkle,
and lettuce.

For swollen breasts. Fennel giant, gourds, basil, beans, lentills, and
lillies.

For sore nipples. Dock-cresses.

For the lungs, stoppings, consumptions thereof, etc. Hore-hound, lungwort,
tobacco, sun-dew, hedg-mustard, coltsfoot, woodbinde, mullein, cowslips of
Jerusalem, sanicle, polypody, whortle-berries, and sweet-cicely.

For the heart, qualmes, saintnesse, etc: Angelica, saffron, borage, violets,
strawberries, wood-sorrell, bawlm, marigolds, swallow wort, goats-rue,
vipers-grasse, pome-citrons, gentian, scordium, burnet, avens, cloves,
clove-gilloflowers, lignum aloes, cinnamon, and vipers buglosse.

For stitches, and pains in the sides. Carduus benedictus, our ladies thistle,
camomile, sweet trefoile, melilote, oats, valerian, stitch-wort, flax and
linseed.

For purging the stomach. Wormwood, myrobalanes, groundsell, radish, black
alder, oily nut ben, seen, daffodills, white hellebore, and purging cassia.

For breaking wind. Carrawaies, cummin, camels-hay, ginger, galanga,
cardamoms, pepper, nutmeg, coriander, and orange.

For cooling and strengthening the stomach. Apples, pears, peaches, apricocks,
plummes, cherries, gooseberries, barberries, and currants or ribes.

For the liver. Rubarb, turmerick, agrimony, liverwort, succory, alecoast, and
maudlin, docks, sorrel, beetes, smallage, cleavers, and chickweed.

For the dropsy. Elder, soldanella, bryony, mechoacan and Jalap, broom, ash,
ague tree or sassafras, palma Christi or great spurge, glassewort,
spurge-lawrell, toad-flax, and bastard marjerome or organie.

For the spleen. Dodder, black hellebore, tamarinds, spleenewort or miltwast,
hart's-tongue, fern, capers, tamariske, germander, calamint, poley-mountaine,
and lupines.

For the reins, bladder, stone, and strangury, etc. Asparagus, parsley, marsh
mallows, goats thorn, spiknard, sweet smelling flagg, cyperus or English
galingale, hops, knotgrasse, parsley pert, saxifrage, dropwort, gromell, onions,
winter cherries, dogs-grasse, butchers broom, chervill, brooklime, hawthorne,
limmons, cypressetree, kidney-wort, kidney beans, oak, buckshorne plantaine,
sampire, fraxinella, and alheale.

For the collicke. Bay tree, holly, juniper, olive tree, coloquintida, and
bindweed.

For the worms. Centory, lovage, tansey, lavander-cotton, carrots and
parsneps, spignell, bishops weed, English worm seed, leekes, and horseradish.

For loosnesse, and the bloody flix, etc. Sumach, myrtle, cistus, black-thorne,
bramble, teasell, rice, flixweed, pilewort, and water betony.

For provoking lust. Artichocks, sea holly, potatoes, skirrets, pease, rocket,
mustard, cotton, fistick-nut, chestnut, chocholate, satyrions, and dragons.

For abating lust. Agnus or the chast-tree, hemp, water lilly, hemlock,
camphire, and tutsan.

For provoking the terms. Mugwort, pennyroyall, southernwood, savory, time,
alexander, and anemonie.

For stopping the terms and the whites, Comfry, mouseare, yarrow, mede-sweet,
adders tongue, lunaria, trefoile, money wort, darnell, flower gentle, blites,
dragon tree, beech tree, and hasell nut-tree.

For the mother, Motherwort, feaverfew, calamint, burdock, butter burre, orach,
assa foetida, and cow parsnep.

For expediting childbirth, Birthwort, mercury, madder, dittany, dittander,
pepperwort, holme oak and its chermes.

For expelling the dead child, and after birth, Ground pine, savin and
birch-tree.

For ruptures or burstnesse, Rupturewort, through wax, Solomon's seal, balsame
apple, doves foot or cranes bill, and elm.

For the French pox, Guajacum, china, and sarsaparilla.

For the swellings in the groine, Starre-wort, and herb Paris.

For green wounds and old ulcers, Saint John's wort, arsmart, bugle,
selfe-heale, Saracens consound, loosestrife, daisy, and speedwell

For drawing out splinters, Pimpernell.

For fellons, Woody nightshade.

For surbated feet, Ladies bedstraw.

For excrescencies, Agarick, galls, and other excrescencies of trees.

For the jaundise, Celandine, saffron, and centaurie.

For pimples, tetters and ringwormes, The bark of the birch tree, and tree
lungwort.

For spots, Garlic, wake-Robin, friars cowle, arsmart, and spotted lungwort.

For the Polypus, The root of the lesser celandine, and of polypodie.

For the scab, Polypodie, and savin.

For yellow choler; as Aliment, Saffron, beete, figgs: as Medicine, Aloes,
seen, wormwood flowers, spurge, coloquintida, and rubarb etc.

For prassine choler, Those things that have a green and herb like color, as
blites and orach.

For pale choler, Briony having pale flowers.

For melancholy, Black blite, borrage, buglosse etc.

For phlegm, Gourds and lettuce.

For mixed humors, Things of a mixed color.

II. Astrologicall or Internal, and so the appropriations are I. To the
Planets. 1. To the Sun, which is a benevolent planet, moderately hot and dry, a
friend to Jupiter and Venus, and an enemy to the rest, and as it were the heart
of the macrocosme, and therefore it produces the vital spirits thereof, by
which the whole universe is cherished, and it is the fountain of peculiar
influences, by which it particularly helps things familiar, and hinders what
is contrary to it self. Under which are, Angelica, ash tree, bawme, one blade,
burnet, butter burre, camomil, celandine, centaury, eyebright, Saint John's
wort, lovage, marigolds, misletoe, peony, S. Peter's wort, pimpernell, rosa
solis, rosemary, rue, saffron, tormentill, tornsole, vipers buglosse, and
wallnut tree; as also all spices, sorrel, wood sorrel, mallow, borage,
marjerom, dittany, gentian, ivy, elecampane, lavender, bay tree, olive tree,
mints, date tree, oranges, pomecitrons, time, vinetree, wood of aloes,
zedoarie, mastick, frankincense, and myrrh.

2. To the Moon, which is a Planet in a mean, between good and bad: moderately
cold and moist, a friend to Jupiter, Saturn, Venus, and Mercury, and an enemy
to the other two, and is correspondent to the brain and therefore sympathetick
with the nervous parts and animal spirits: or it is the generatorie of
humidity, by which the whole universe is moistened; and is the fountain of
peculiar influences, by which primarily and peculiarly it does affect things
familiar to it self and secundarily things agreeing to Saturn, Jupiter,
Venus, and Mercury, as being benevolent unto the same: or (as some) it is as
it were the liver of the macrocosme. Under which are, Adders tongue, cabbages,
coleworts, columbines, water cresses, ducks meat, yellow waterflagge,
flower-de-luce, fluellin, ivy, lettuce, water lillies, loose-strife, with and
without spiked heads, moonwort, mouseare, orpine, poppies, purslain, privet,
rattle grass, white roses, white saxifrage, burnet saxifrage, wall flowers, or
winter gillowflowers, and willow tree: as also chast-tree, winter cherries,
garlic, reeds, brooklime, onions, cammomile, frogstolles, hyssop, mastick
tree, mandrake, nutmegs, wall nuts, line tree, water plantain, turnips, house
leek, and common leeks.

3. To Saturn, which is a malignant planet, diurnall, masculine, and very
cold, a friend to Mars, and an enemy to the rest, and answers to the spleen
of the microcosme; yet some ascribe it to the head, as also Jupiter and Mars.
Under it are, Barley, red beetes, beech tree, bifoyle or tway blade, birds
foot, bistort or snakeweed, blew bottles, buckshorne plantaine, wild campions,
pilewort, cleavers or goosgrasse, clowns woundwort, comfrey, cudweed or
cottonweed, sciatica cresses, croswort, darnell, dodder, epithymum, elmetree,
osmond royal, fleawort, flixweed, fumitory, stinking gladdon, goutwort, winter
green, hawkweed, hemlock, hemp, henbane, horsetaile, knapweed, knotgrasse,
medlar tree, moss, mullein, night shade, polypodie, poplar tree, quince tree,
rupture wort, rushes, Solomon's seal, Saracens consound, service tree, ceterach
or spleenwort, tamarisk, melancholy thistle, black thorn, through wax, tutsan
or park leaves, and wood: as also aconite, chaste tree, parsley, stinking tree,
asphodill, starwort, orach, shepherds purse, capers, cummin, cypress, fearn,
black hellebor, great dock, mandrake, mulberrie tree, opium, herb true love,
pine tree, savine, sage, seen, and sengreen.

4. To Jupiter which is a benevolent planet, moderately hot and moist, a friend
to all the rest, except Mars; answering to the liver, and cherishing the
faculties thereof by its influencies. Under which are, Agrimonie, Alexander,
asparagus, avens, bay tree, white beets, water betony, wood betony, bilberries,
borrage, bugloss, chervill, sweet cicely, cinkfoile, alecost or costmary,
dandelion, docks, bloudwort, dogs or quich grass, endive, hearts tongue,
hyssop, sengreen or housleek, liver-wort, lung-wort, sweet Maudlin, oak-tree,
red roses, sage, sauce alone or jack by the hedge, scurvy grass, succory, and
our ladies thistle: as also almonds, wallnuts, barberries, calamint, cherries,
cornell-tree, hounds tongue, beans, beechtree, strawberries, ash tree,
fumitory, liquorice, barley, white lilly, flax, darnell, mace, apple tree,
mints, mulberries, myrobalans, nuts, basil, olive tree, organie, raisins, pine
tree, peach tree, roots of peony, poplar tree, purslaine, plum tree, self
heal, pear tree, rubarb, currants, madder, service tree, spike, consound,
wheat, violets, vine tree, mastick, storax, sugar, and all other sweet things.

5. To Mars, which is a planet exceeding hot and dry, a friend to Venus, and an
enemy to all the rest, cherishing the bladder and gall of the microcosme. To
which belong, Arsmart, asarabacca, barberrie bush, sweet bazill, bramble bush,
briony, brookelime, butchers broom, broom, broomerape, crowfoot, wake Robin,
cranes bill, cottonthistle, toade-flax, furze bush, garlic, hawthorne, hops,
madder, master-wort, mustard, hedge mustard, nettles, onions, pepper wort or
dittander, carduus benedictus, radish, horse radish, rubarb, rhapontick,
bastard rubarb, thistles, star thistle, tobacco, woolly thistle, treacle
mustard, mithridate, mustard, dyers-weed, and wormwood: as also birthwort,
chamelion thistle, cornell tree, dane wort, esula, euphorbium, spearwort,
hellebore, spurge laurel, medlars, monks-hood, plantain, leekes, plum tree,
oak tree, tormentill, nettle, scammonie, and all poysonsome things.

6. To Venus, which is a benevolent planet, nocturnall, feminine, moderately
cold, a little more intensly moist, a friend to the Sun, Mars, Mercurte and
the Moon, an enemy to Saturn, and having an influence upon the genitors, and
urinarie parts. Under which are, Alehoof or ground ivy, black alder tree, apple
tree, stinking orath, archangell or dead nettles, beans, ladies bedstraw,
birch tree, bishops weed, blites, bugle, burdock, cherry tree, winter cherries,
chick weed, cich pease, clary, cockshead, colts foot, cowslips, daisies,
devils bitte, elder, dwarf elder, eringo, featherfew, figwort, filipendula,
foxgloves, golden rod, gromewell, groundsell, herb Robert, herb true love,
kidnie wort, ladies mantle, mallows, marsh mallows, mercury, mints,
motherwort, mugwort, nep, parsnep, peach tree, pear tree, penny royal,
periwinkle, plantain, plum tree, primroses, ragwort, rocket, winter rocket,
damask roses, woodsage, sanicle, self heal, sopewort, sorrel, wood sorrel,
sow thistles, spignell, strawberries, garden tansey, wild tansey or silverweed,
teasels, vervain, vine tree, violets, wheat, and yarrow: as also asphodill,
maiden hair, coriander, sow bread, figgs, ground ivy, flower de luce, all
kinds of lillies, melilot, pomegranats, daffodill, stone parsley, sweet pears,
roses, saunders, satyrion, wild time, time, vervaine, violet, ladanum, musk,
amber, and all kinds of perfumes.

7. To Mercury, which is a mutable planet, good with the good, and bad with
the bad: hot with the hot, and cold with the cold: dry with the dry, and moist
with the humid, a friend to Saturn, Jupiter, Venus and the Moon, and an enemy
to Mars and the Sun, representing the lungs, which it does sympathetically
strengthen by its influences; yet some appropriate it unto the middle of the
belly. Under it are, Calamints or mountain mint, carrots, carrawaies, dill,
elecampane, fern, fennel, hoggs fennel, germander, hasell nut tree,
hore-hound, hounds-tongue, lavender, liquorice, wall rue, maiden hair, golden
maiden-haire, sweet marjerome, melilote, money-wort, mulberry tree, oats,
parsley, cowparsnep, pellitory of the wall, chamepitys or groundpine, -rest
-harrow or cammock, sampire, summer and winter savory, scabious, smallage,
southernwood, meadow trefoile, garden valerian, and hony-suckles or woodbinde:
as also marsh mallows, aniseed, columbine, daisy, cammomile, cubebs, beans,
fumitory, wall-nut tree, juniper tree, mercury, navew, cinquefoile, stone
parsley, butter burre, burnet, peony, lungwort, elder, speedwell, wild time,
and coltsfoot. All which are said to cure diseases by sympathy, so each planet
cures its own: or antipathy, so the contrary. And are under the planets
primarily and directly; or immediately: or secundarily by the respective amity
of the rest.

II. To the signs, as follows, amongst which there are four degrees, after
the manner of the four first qualities; so they are appropriate. 1. To Aries,
which is a masculine fiery sign, or hot and dry, sympatheticall to the head.
Thus in the first degree, Red mugwort, betony, succory, larkspurre, dane-wort,
mints, peach kernells, butter-burre, wild time, coltsfoot: and fluellin; and
are to be gathered in the end of the dog days, after the full of the Moon. In
the second degree, Sperage, S. John's wort, milfoile, plantain, and peony, and
are to be gathered the Sun and Moon being in Cancer. In the third degree,
Agarick, garden spurge, mezereon tree, wild gourds, spurge, coltsfoot, gentian,
privet, nutmeg, palma Christi, elder, and sarsaparilla: and are to be gathered
betwixt S. James's and S. Laurences day. In the fourth degree, Southernwood,
calamint, capers, cinnamon, white hellebore, marjerome, horehound, wild
cresses, rosemary, turbith, and spike: and are to be gathered partly in April,
partly in September.

2. To Taurus, which is a terrestrial feminine sign, cold and dry,
sympathetick to the neck and throat. Thus in the first degree, Betony,
miltwast, germander, ground ivy, the root of white lillies, mints, daffodill,
polypody, roses, rosemary, valerian, and violets: and mollify the tumors of
the jaws, and spleen. In the second degree, Maiden hair, winter cherries,
columbines, ivy, Solomon's seal, oak tree, and misletoe of the oak: and help
wounds. In the third degree, Buglosse, our Iadies thistle, hounds tongue,
agrimon^e, the lesser docke, organie, stone parsley, oak tree, cinquefoile,
sanicle, figwort, tormentill, perwinkle. and silver weed, and are traumatick.
In the fourth degree, Mouse ear, great burdock, wild betony, great celandine,
ash tree, mallows, lungwort, scabious, and ground ivy: and have antipathie
with the sublunaries, which are under Libra, and Scorpio, but sympathetick with
those that are under Cancer and Sagittarius.

3. To Gemini, which are a masculine sign, airie, hot and moist, possessing
the shoulders. Thus in the first degree, Aniseed, marsh mallow, buglosse,
borrage, fennel, hyssop, stone parsely, self heal, and wall rue. In the
second degree, great burdock, buglosse, fern, white line tree, turnips etc. In
the third degree, Chickweed, wake Robin, mace, and dead nettle. In the fourth
degree, Sorrel, germander, cammomill, celandine, mugwort and rubarb: and they
have an antipathie with the sublunaries of Capricorn and sympathy with those
of Libra and Aquarius.

4. To Cancer, which is a feminine sign, watery, cold and moist, sympathetick
to the breast and lungs, as also to the ribbs and spleen, and cures the
diseases thereof. Thus in the first degree, Chickweed, cabbage, thistle, the
flowers and fruit of beans, ladies bedstraw, turnips, rampions, sage, and
figwort. In the 2d degree, Strawberry tree, cones of the fur tree and pine,
comfrey, nightshade, turpentine, and misletoe. In the 3d, brooklime, foxgloves,
cudweed, rushes, cresses, seed of stone parsley, purslain, willow, saxifrage,
and stone crop. In the 4th degree, water lilly, piony, housleek, and coral:
and are antipathetick to the sublunarys of Sagittarius, and sympathetick to
those of Yaurus and Libra.

5. To Leo, which is a masculine sign, fiery, or hot and dry, governing the
heart and stomach, Thus in the first degree, Basil, saffron, cypress tree,
carnations, hyssop, lavender, water plantaine, sundew, sea bindweed, and time.
In the 2d degree, Wild angelica, tway hlade, centorie, galingale, gentian; and
devils bit. In the 3d degree, stinking mayweed, carrot, mints, garden cresses,
penny royal, crowfoot, and nettles. In the 4th degree, Birch tree, box, broom
and bay tree: the 1. are to be gathered the Sun being in Pisces, the Moon in
Cancer. The 2d sort in the beginning of May; before Sun rising, or in the end
of Aug or the Sun being in Taurus and the Moon in Gemini. The 3d, the Sun being
in Leo, and the Moon in Virgo and the last ouadrature; or for refrigeration,
the Sun being, in Taurus and the Moon in Gemini. The 4th, the Sun being in
Pisces and the Moon in Aquarius, or both.

6. To Virgo, which is a feminine sign, earthy, cold, dry, and sympathetick to
the liver, intestines, and belly. Thus in the first degree, Sorrel, wood
sorrel, burdock, succory, plantain, pear tree, and and wild sage. In the 2d
degree, white beetes, medlar, Solomon's seal, and briar bush. In the 3d,
birthwort, bugle, flea bane, self heal, and oak tree. In the 4th, Carduus
benedictus, small centorie, black alder tree, adders tongue; sloe tree with all
its parts, fruit and flowers, tormentill and bistort.

7. To Libra, which is a masculine sign, airie, hot and moist, sympathetick to
the reins, and bladder. Thus in the first degree, All sorts of daisies, bugle,
fever few, cowslip, goats beard, and water parsnep. In the 2d degree, Marsh
mallow, cammomil, mistetoe, martagon, mallow, line tree, vervain, and silver
weed. In the 3d degree, Calves snout, mugwort, nut tree, and wall rue. In the
4th degree, Chickweed, great celandine, black mints, scabious, figwort, and
housleek.

8. To Scorpio, which is a feminine sign, watery, cold, and moist, and
sympathetick to the genitors. Thus in the first degree, Cross wort, hawthorne,
and service tree, as also all simples of the 1. degree of Cancer gathered in
Oct. In the 2d degree, Ashtree, all sorts of apples, and plumtree. In the 3d,
Barberrie tree, box, fever few, and sopewort: hereto belong all herbs of the
2d degree of Cancer. In the 4th, Great red beetes, mercury, daffod ill and
ribes.

9. To Sagittarius, which is a masculine sign, hot and dry, sympathetick to
the loins, etc. Thus in the first degree, Comfrey, onion, radish, figwort,
flowers of line tree, sesamum and vervaine. In the second degree, Garlic, wild
angelica, henbane, lovage, and leaves of willow tree. In the third degree, Red
beete, asarabacca, celandine, saffron, fern, ground ivy, madder, devils bit,
and turmerick. In the fourth degree, Gum thistle, oresses, and white vine.

10. To Capricorn, which is a feminine sign, terrestrial or earthy, cold and
dry, sympathetick to the knees and nerves, Thus in the first degree, Marigold,
black cherries, elecampane, mulberry tree, bramble bush, and whorts. In the
second degree, Black berries, mullein, and garden endive. In the third degree,
Acorus, wake Robin, shepherds purse, comfrey, gourds, galingale, garden
mallow, and all kinds of sowthistles. In the fourth degree, Hellebore, henbane,
mandrake, monks hood, herb true love, savin, night shade, and staves acre.

11. To Aquarius, which is a masculine sign, aerious, hot and moist,
sympathetick to the legs. Thus in the first degree, Angelica, wild carrot, fig
tree, flowers of the ash tree, ground ivy, wall nut tree, melilot, sanicle,
Solomon's seal, and perwinkle. In the second degree, larkspur, cummin, dodder
of time, cranes bill, clot-bur, rose root, wall rue, wild sage, and white
nettle. In the third degree, Agrimonie, mouseare, clurie, mercury, saxifrage,
and dragon. In the fourth degree, The leaves of asarabacca, motherwort,
hemlock, and medlars.

12. To Pisces, which are a feminine sign, aqueous, cold and moist, and
sympathetick to the feet. Thus in the first degree, long birth wort, cabbage,
gourds, elecampane, myrobalans, navew, waterlillie, purslain and turnips. In
the second degree, Artichocks, calves-snout, blew bottle, and golden flower
gentle. In the third degree, Nigella, garden and wild poppy, and sowthistle. In
the fourth degree, Hemlock, henbane, monks-hood, horned poppy, and white
mightshade.

II. The occult Qualities are found out by Peiralogie or experience, which is
most sure and safe.

II. Next follow those things which are more remote that concern plants and
other medicinalls, as commonly to be compounded therewith.

As 1. The Topologie or place of gathering them, Thus 1. Herbs, are to be
gathered in mountains, hills, and plain places, in those that are highest
especially, and exposed to the sun, and winds, except some few, as Germander
and Groundpine, which are more odoriferous, and frequent in hills; but those
that grow only in plain places, are to be gathered in more dry places, and more
remote from lakes and rivers, except they delight in more moisture, as water
caltrops, water lilly etc. 2. Flowers, are to be gathered in the same places,
in which there are the best plants. 3. So Fruits, 4. And Seeds. 5. So Roots
also. 6. Woods are to be taken from trees where they are well grown. 7. Barks,
where there plants are best. 8. Juices, are to be taken from the best herbs,
chiefly the well grown and greater (as being less excrementitious) and that
before they grow wo^ddy or rotten. 9. Liquors and Gums etc. are to be taken
from mature stalks which are the best in their kind, as the rest.

2. The Chronology or time. Thus 1. Herbs, are to be gathered in the time of
their flourishing; and beginning to go to seed, which is for the most part in
June and the beginning of July, if they are to be kept, and that at noone, in a
clear day being some considerable time, or certain days before freed from
showers and not too dewy, or scorched by too much heat of the Sun, which is
chiefly in the Spring, or beginning of Summer. But those which grow green all
the year in gardens, may be gathered at any time: and those that have neither
stalk, flower nor seed, as maiden hair, spleenwort etc. are to be gathered in
the vigor of the leaves, sc. when they are most green, and greatest; yet some
because while they flower or bear seed they are woody and dry, are to be
gathered before that time, as succory, beete etc. 2. Flowers, in the vigor of
their maturitie, when opened (except the rose) at noon in fair weather, after
the Sun has taken off the dew, and before they wither or fall off, which for
the most part is in Spring. 3. Fruits, when they are ripe, and before they
wither. 4. Seeds, out of fruits thorough ripe, when they begin to be dry, and
before they fall off, and out of plants when dry and are no longer green, as in
the Summer, sc. June or July. 5. The Juice of plants, is to be pressed out
whilst they are green and their leaves yet tender, and especially out of the
well grown and greater. 6. The Earkes of fruits, are to be taken when the
fruits are full ripe, and those of roots when the herbs have lost their leaves,
but those of trees when they are in their vigor. 7. Woods, when the trees are
full grown. 8. Liquors and gumms, etc. are taken by opening the stalk in the
vigor thereof, and gumms when congealed, and mature. 9. Roots, when the fruit
is fallen off, and the leaves also begin (which for the most part is in
Autumn) and are to be dug up in fair weather: which is necessary always
to be observed, as also (according to some) the decreasing of the moon, the
day of decreasing, and the morning, that time being halsamicall: as also the
fortitude of the planet, familiar to the thing to be gathered, and the sign of
the zodiac.

3. The Dropologie or manner of gathering them, (as some affirm) some plants
having diverse faculties, according to the diverse manner of gathering them, as
upwards or downwards; so hellebore, the leaves drawing the humors upwards or
downwards accordingly; so the root of elder also, and the budds, which being
gathered upwards cause vomiting, and purge if downwards: also some observe the
site of the regent planets, as whether they are oriental, or occidentall, etc.

4. The Parasceuologie or the manner of preparing them for asservation. Thus 1.
Flowers, are kept for the most part separated from the stalks and leaves. 2.
Herbs or leaves, if they are greater, and having more thick stalks, they are
kept apart from them; but if more slender they are kept together, and sometimes
with the flowers. 3. Fruits, as apples, etc. are to be placed with their
stalks downwards, and last longer if laid on a heap of barley. 4. Roots,
some are kept whole, as those of birth-wort, gentian, hermodactils, satyrion,
etc. others are dissected, as those of bryonie, elecampane, flower deluce, etc.
also some have the woody matter taken away, as those of fennel, stone
parsley, etc. As for the parts of living creatures, 1. The fleshy parts are
first to be washed with wine, or some other convenient decoction, and are then
to be dried in an oven, and so kept in leaves convenient, or wrapped up in
wormwood to present putrefaction; so also the lungs, the trachea or rough
artery being first taken away, and thus are prepared the liver, spleen, etc.
2. Things that are Fat and oilie, are to be washed often in water, until they
become pure, after which they are to be melted by a gentle fire, strained, and
pured out upon cold water, and are then to he kept in a cold place, thus is
hoggs grease prepared, lard, marrow, etc. and are best kept if a little salted.
3. Skinny parts, as the intestines are to be dissected longwaies, and to be
washed in wine or some convenient decoction, after which being cut into pieces,
they are to be dried in an oven, and kept in leaves as aforesaid. 4. Blood, is
to be separated from the serous humor, and to be dried in an oven. 5. Galls,
are to be separated from the liver, then tied with a thread, after which they
are to be hung up in a chimney to dry. 6. Curds, are to be dried in the smoke,
or sun, and so kept.

5. The Phylacologie or way and place of keeping them; which in general ought
to be pure, convenient, high, dry, open, of a North or South situation, where
they may not be burnt by the Sun, or moistened by the walls, etc. more.
particularly: 1. Vegetables, as 1. Flowers, are to be dried in the shade, and
then they (especially those of good odor) are to be kept in teile caskets. 2.
Herbs, are to be dried in the shadow, except those that have thicker stalks,
and moister leaves, and so subject to putrefaction, which must therefore be
dried by the more intense heat of the sun, or some other way, and when they are
well dried, they are to be kept in linen baggs, or (which is better) in
wooden caskets, that they may be defended from dust. 3. Seeds, are to be kept
in a dry place, and in wooden or glazed vessels, being wrapped up in papers,
that they may last the longer, and without impurity. 4. Fruits, in boxes,
panniers, or scuttles. 5. Gums, and dry rosins in a dry place, and in wooden
vessels, but the more liquid in pitchers. 6. Barks, in wooden coffers, and a
dry place. 7. Roots, in a dry air, and the lesser and more thin whose virtues
may be easily dissipated by the heat of fire or the sun, are to be dried in the
shadow and wind, as those of parsley, fennel, etc. but the more gross, by the
sun or wind, as those of Bryony, Gentian, Mandrake, and Rhubarbe. 2. Mineralls,
as 1. Earths in baskets or wooden coffers. 2. Things Salt, in wooden or
glass vessels, and a dry place. 3. Things watery, in glasses or glazed pots.
3. Living creatures, as 1. Their dryer parts, in wooden boxes, so bones, etc.
2. Fats and Marrowes, are to be kept in pots, or earthen glazed vessels, and
in a cold and dry place.

Things prepared by art, as 1. Vinegers and distilled waters, are to be kept in
glass sessels, or stone bottles, and in a temperate place. 2. Balsames, as the
sweet, in tin boxes, or (better) in glasses well stopped, but the more
liquid, and distilled, like distilled oiles and spirits. 3. Cerots, as
emplaisters. 4. Things condited and the like, in earthen vessels. 5. Comfeits
covered with sugar, in wooden coffers, and a place moderately hot and dry. 6.
Conserves, lohochs, and electuaries, in glazed earthen vessels. 7. Extracts,
in earthen or glass vessels wide mouthed, that they may be taken out with the
spatula; or if they are more dry, they are kept as pills. 8. Flowers and
faecula's, etc. in glasses. 9. Morsells, are kept as confections. 10. Oiles,
made by infusion and expression, in glasses, or glazed potts, the distilled
oiles in narrow mouthed glasses. 11. Pills, in wooden or tin boxes, being
wrapped in bladders, or cerate papers, and in a dry place. 12. Preparations, in
glasses, and dry places. 13. Rolls, as confections are kept in wooden boxes,
and a dry place. 14. Salts, in glasses and dry places. 15. Species aromaticall,
in leather bags well sewed, or in glass or wooden vessels. 16. Spirits, in
narrow mouthed glasses well stopped, and in a temperate or cold place. 17.
Juyces liquid, in narrow mouthed glasses, a little oil of almonds, or olives
being poured thereupon: the thicker juyces agree with extracts. 18. Syrupe^, in
earthen vessels, especially those that are acid, and are to be kept chiefly
in those that are glazed, that they may not attract any mineral tincture, as
they do in vessels of metal. 19. Troches, in wooden boxes. 20. Emplaisters
and cerots, in coffers, or dry boxes, being wrapped in a bladder, or in a waxed
paper. 21. Unguents and liniments, in earthen vessels, or tin boxes.

6. The Monelogie or duration of them. Where note, the time of keeping them
must not exceed that of their duration, which is diverse according to the
greater or lesser solidity of the substance, by which they are more or less
subject to dissipation. In particular, 1. Vegetables, as 1. Flowers may be kept
so long as they retain their color, smell and taste, which for the most part
is half a year, therefore they are to be changed every year: note also, they
are best when freshest. 2. Herbs may be kept longer, yet it is better to change
them yearly. 3. Seeds, by how much they are more hot, sharp, and aromaticall,
by so much also are they more durable, therefore may be kept two or three
years, but those that are lesser and colder must be changed every year, and
must be kept carefully, least they grow moldy. 4. Fruits, must be changed
every year; but the exotic that have a harder bark or shell, etc. may be
kept two or three years. 5. Gums and Rosins, are more durable. 6. Barks, last
a year or more. 7. Roots, if they are little, slender and thin, they are
changed every year; as those of Asarabacca, Sperage etc.; but the greater, and
having a gross substance, last two or three years, as those of Birth-wort,
Bryony, Gentian, Rubarbe, and Hellebore. 2. Mineralls, for the most part
(except some that are sulphurous and aqueous) because they are of a more solid
and durable nature, they are also of a longer duration. 3. Living creatures,
and their parts, may be kept till they are corrupted, which will appear by
their ranke-smell, taste, place, and change of color, as the rest, but those
parts are most durable, which are most dry and solid, and the softer more
corruptible, and are therefore to be changed every year.

Things prepared by art, as 1. Vinegers by infusion, are to be changed every
year, or to be renewed by the addition of new vinegar, and infusion of new
materials. 2. Distilled waters that are phlegmatic are to be changed, or
renewed every year by new plants and distillation: but those that are fuller
of spirits may be kept longer. 3. Aromaticall balsams, may last two or three
years. 4. Things condited, as fruits, may be kept two years. 5. Confections,
last longer than things without sugar. 6. Conserves, abide one year. 7.
Decoctions, last good but few days. 8. Electuaries lenitive, one year: the
solutive, a year and half, and the more pleasing, the less while. 9.
Elixyrs, being full of spirit, if carefully kept, last diverse years. 10.
Extracts that are more hard, are not easily hurt in many years, except by
exiccation or dryness. 11. The Faeculae of vegetables, may be renewed every
year, yet they will last two years or more. 12. Flowers, vary according to
the matter from which they are sublimated. 13. Juleps are to be made according
to occasion. 14. Lohochs, which take in almonds and cold seeds, apt to mould,
hardly last above one year, but the rest two years. 15. Magisteries, made by
precipitation out of hard things, last three years or more. 16. Morsells last
some considerable time; yet they are best fresh. 17. Oiles by expression that
are temperate, as of almonds, orpine, apples, etc. especially those that are to
be taken inwardly, can hardly be kept a month without moulding: the cold may
last a year; the hot, three or four, and those that are pressed out of sweet
smelling fruits, (as out of nutmegs etc.) may last half a year. Those that
are distilled last longer; but if made by insolation they are wont to be
changed every year or two. 18. Pills, by reason of the aloes and their
bardnesse may be kept two or three years, especially those that have opium as
an ingredient. 19. Preparations, being of a less hard, and volatile essence,
may last two or three years. 20. Powders, are best fresh. 21. Robs or hard
juyces are to be changed every year. 22. Rolls, are made as occasion
requires. 23. Salts, will last diverse years, especially the chrystalized. 24.
Species aromaticall, are to be renewed every year, or year and half. 25.
Spirits, if well kept that they do not exhale, may last very long. 26. Juyces
liquid, are to be changed every year, but the more hard and thick may be kept
two or three years or more. 27. Syrupes simple, are to be changed every year;
but the compound and aromaticall may last two years. 28. Tinctures, in powder
may last diverse years; but the liquid last according to the diversity of the
menstruums. 29. Troches, and dry collyries, may last one year, except those
that contain opium, or seeds apt to grow mouldie, for those with opium may
last six or seven years, and the rest hardly one. 30. Cerots, scarce endure
one year. 31. Clysters, last not long, and are therefore to be made when
useful. 32. Emplasters, hardly endure a year and half. 33. Ointments, for
the most part are kept a year, or a year and half.

7. The Criseologie or discrimination and distinction thereof; thus are to be
shunned; 1. Herbs, that are greatest, smallest, and withered, as also those
that are of an evil taste, smell and color. 2. Flowers, that are corrupted,
broken, unripe or stale, or of an evil taste, smell or color. 3. Fruits, that
are wrinkled, not corpulent, or rotten, of an evil taste and smell. 4. Seeds,
that are withered, unripe, or not corpulent, rotten, of an evil smell or taste.
5. Barks, that are worme-eaten, rotten, or soked in water. 6. Juyces, that are
stale, without good smell, taste or color. 7. Liquors and gums, that are old,
and have lost their virtues. 8. Woods, that are rotten, light or corrupted, 9.
Roots, that are worme-eaten, or withered. 10. Parts of living creatures, that
are taken from those that are sick, old, or dying by diseases: hence appears
the choice. Also 1. Emollients or the softening remedies, are known by their
temperatenesse in heat and moisture, also by the gustile and tactile quality,
or touch and taste, being in taste near sweetness, but of a fat and oilie
substance, so that they are neither sharp austere, acid, salt, or of any other
taste, that may show either astriction, or vehement heat or cold, neither do
they seem rough or glutinous being touched. 2. Indurants or the hardening, are
known by sapor or last, which is such, that neither shows heat, nor biteth
or contracteth the tongue; but is rather insipid, cold, so neither salt, sharp,
bitter, sweet, acerb, austere or acid. 3. Tendents and laxants or the
stretching and loosening, are known as emollients; yet laxants are less hot
and dry than emollients. 4. Rarefacients and densants or rarifying and
thickening, are known as emollients, sc. by sapor, showing moderate heat: so
also densants being contrary hereunto, and not vehemently cold, therefore
(according to Gallen) those things which vellicate the tongue, by a biting
sapor, or astringent, are not to be accounted among densants. 5. Aperients or
the opening, are known by their sharpness and biting, pricking and fretting
the tongue. 6. Occludents or the closing, are distinguished by their coldness,
and astriction without biting; for they coarctate and bind the tongue, but do
not vellicate or eat the same. 7. Attenuants are sharp, and bitter, yet they
rather dissolve the tongue, than contract it, being of thin parts, and without
astriction. 8. Attrahents or the drawing, are known as attenuants, both having
tenuity of parts, and no small heat, so that they differ secundum magis and
minus, yet tenuity of parts is more proper to attenuants, and heat to
attrahents, and shows the same, not only by the taste but touch also. 9.
Discutients or the dissolving, by taste which burns the tongue, being sharp,
very hot, and of thin parts, without astriction, not contracting the tongue.
10. Repellents or the resisting, by taste, acid, acerbe or austere: for these
participating of astriction, do presently contract the tongue by their contact.
11. Adurents or burning, by touching rather than by taste: for such rather
corrode the thick skin and humors, and consume the same; but the weaker are
sharp, and being tasted do prick the tongue. 12. Extergents or the cleansing,
are not distinguished by one sapor, for they may be either sweet, salt, or
bitter: but those that are cold show themselves rather by some tactile quality,
than by taste, for they are neither said to be acid, austere, or acerbe, not
having astriction, which does more impact the sordes or excrements. 13.
Emplasticks, by being without sapor, or having one that shows excess neither
of heat, nor cold: they are therefore either fat, insipid, or sweet in some
measure, and tough and viscous being touched. Furthermore medicines of the 3d
qualities, 1. Suppurants, or things causing matter, are known by not having any
sapor which may show excess of heat, and by being without astriction, and not
biting or nitrous. 2. Diuretics or provoking urine, by their sharpnes, heat
and incision: the cold by their nitrous quality, with some small sharpnes or
bitterness. 3. Emmenagogicks or provoking the courses, by heat 30, incision and
abstersion, and biting of the tongue without contraction, being sharp, or
somewhat bitter. 4. Galactogeneticks, or causing milk, by a sweet taste, and
temperate; yet some have a little acrimonie. The contrary diminish milk, as
things bitter, acerbe, austere, etc. which show excess either of heat or
cold. 5. Spermatogeneticks, or causing sperme by heat and moisture, almost like
the former, but that they are more fat and viscous or tough, and those that
stimulate the sperme, are known by their sharpness. 6. Anodynes, or easing
pain by their temperatenesse, and thinness of essence. 7. Sarcoticks, or
generating flesh by their exiccation and abstersion or cleansing of the filth
and corrupt matter. 8. Glutinants, or closing by astriction, and more
exiccation than the former. 9. Epuloticks, or cicatrizing and healing, as the
last; yet exceeding in degree. 10. Alexipharmicks, or things resisting poison
by their corroberating, contrary, or extrusive faculty.

8. The Taxilogie or way of placing them in Receipts: so 1. Those which want
longer preparation are first to be put down, as 1. Woods that are not sweet,
and barks, 2. Then Herbs, 3. Fruits, 4. Seeds, Lastly Flowers, and whatsoever
are sweet or purging, etc. 2. Things that are to be boiled or infused, before
things that are only to be powdered. 3. In things that want and are of the same
preparation, those are to be first placed, of which the greatest quantity is
required. 4. In those things of which there is the same preparation, and
quantity, those are to be first placed, which either in commodity or nobility
do exceed. 5. Those things are last to be prescribed, which have the place of
Matter, as aloes in pills, wax in unguents, and honey in great confections.

9. The Pharmacopoetologie, or way of compounding them: here, 1. Vinegers, are
made of wine vinegar, and vegetables, incided or contused, by infusion in a
warm place, or by distillation. 2. Waters, are made by distillation, infusion,
decoction or the mixture of herbs, flowers, roots, woods, spices, and living
creatures, being first centused or bruised. 3. Balsams, that are sweet are made
of sweet oiles incorporated in white wax purifyed etc. The distilled, are
distilled spirits with a little oil drawn forth of rosins, gumms, spices etc.
by the spirit of wine. 4. Boles, are made by mixture, or inspissation or
thickening etc. Of electuaries, pulps, conserves, and powders reduced into a
deglutible and less fluid consistence. 5. Cataplasmes, are made chiefly of
herbs (green or dry) roots, flowers, seeds, oiles, fruits, greases, crumbs of
bread etc. reduced with or without fire into the form of a pultise. 6.
Clysters are made of convenient liquors, among which the purging are most
usual, which for the most part are compounded, and made of 4. or 5. parts of
some emollient decoction, and 1, or 2. of oil, and some purging and
stimulating electuaries, or species etc. in a double quantity to what is taken
downwards. Note, oil is to be added when there is need of emollition, and not
when of purgation or revulsion. Hereto belong Metrenchytes, made of some
distilled water, decoction or juice etc. to which way be added powders,
electuaries, oiles etc. as also other injections to be used with a syringe. 7.
Conditures, are made of roots, barks, stalks, fruits, nuts and flowers, of
which the more gross are to be mollifyed, and dissected and then edulcorated
or sweetened with purifyed and dissolved sugar, and sometimes with clarifyed
honey etc. 8. Confections with sugar are made by dropping dissolved sugar by
degrees on things to be prepared as seeds, kernells, spices, roots, barks, as
also flowers, and tops of plants, and they are canded with more gross liquor.
9. Conserves, are made by stamping the matter in a stone mortar, and mixing the
sugar therewith in a double proportion in things more humid, and treble if more
dry, with a little distilled water, thus are prepared flowers for the most
part, seldom herbs, less often roots, and fruits almost never, and are then
to be filtrated. 10. Decoctions, are made of all things that may communicate
their virtue unto liquors, as mineralls, vegetables, and animals, or living
creatures; but Apozems chiefly of vegetables, sc. roots, barks, herbs,
flowers, berries, fruits, and woods, with spring water, whay, hydromel, or
wine, from a four fold proportion of the liquor to twelve, with a due
preparation, decoction, and clarification with the white of an egg. 11.
Lambatives and ^ohochs, are made of pectoralls, sc. powders, conserves,
mucilages, syrups, decoctions, honey, pulps, etc. mixed to the consistence of
honey: note the proportion of powder is half an ounce to 2 of syrup. 12.
Electuaries, sc. the common or opiats are made of fine powders, with warm
clarified honey, being set to ferment in some warm place, after the mixture of
the dissolved solubles; but mixtures are made of powders, electuaries,
conserves, extracts, and dissected confections, with some convenient liquor, or
so much syrup as may suffice. 13. Elixyrs, are spirituous liquors of excellent
faculties, impregnated by infusion, and agree for the most part with liquid
tinctures. 14. Emplaisters and cerots, are made of fat things, as oiles,
rosins, grease, marrow, wax, and gums, and sometimes powders, to the wax melted
are last added: the proportion of oil, fat or honey is three ounces, to one of
dry things, of wax 1 pound, of rosins 8 ounces; thus are Cerotes made, yet
softer: hereto belong Dropaces, made of pitch, a little oil, and other
materials, as pepper, pellitory, rosemary, euphorbium, castor, bitumen,
brimstone, salts etc. 15. Emulsions, are made of the inward parts of fruits,
and milkie seeds, as almonds, the 4 greater cold seeds, seeds of purslain,
lettuce, pine apple kernells, etc. with spring or distilled water, the
decoction of barley, liquorice, raisins or jujubes being pounded, and strained,
and then sweetened, avoiding things acid. 16. Errhines, are made of extracts,
liniments or powders. 17. Epithemes, are made of distilled waters, juices,
decoctions, emulsions, etc. alone or mixed with powders, species, electuaries
etc. and some wine vinegar, or spirits for penetration, and so applied with a
sponge or linen cloth, etc. the proportion is half a pound, of liquors, of
powders from 1 dram to half an ounce, of wine or spirits 1 ounce. 18. Extracts,
are drawn out of mineralls, vegetables and animalls by preparing them for
infusion and then pouring the menstruum thereon to a convenient height, (sc.
the spirit of wine etc.) after which set it in a warm place, and then extract
it according to art. 19. Faecula's, are made of roots and sometimes of leaves
by pounding them in a mortar, and pouring on water till like a pulpe, which is
then to be pressed, and set to settle. 20. Flowers, are made by chymicall
separation by sublimation. 21. Gargarismes and dentisrices, are made for the
most part of waters, juices or convenient decoctions, to which way be added of
syrups, or honey 2, 3, or 4 ounces, to 1 pound of water, with a little vinegar
etc. 22. Gellies, are made of succulent fruits, of horns and tender bones, by
decoction and filtration, edulcoration and coagulation, to which also may be
added powders and extracts etc. 23. Infusions, are made of minerals and
animals, but chiefly of vegetables, and such as are purging, with their
corrigents, together with some distilled or spring water, whay, muscadell,
mede, or wine etc. to cover the matter, 1, 2, or 3. fingers, which after
steeping is to be pressed. 24. Juleps, are made of some potulent liquor, as
distilled or spring water corrected by a toste, or some decoction, as of hearts
horn, liquorice, or barley etc. in which juyces and spirits may be dissolved,
and of syrrups 1, or 2, ounces may be added to a pint of liquor. Hereunto
belong morets, made of spices and other confortatives, with sugar or syrrups.
25. Stones, are made by digestion, extraction and coagulation. 26. Liquors, are
made by deliquium, etc. 27. Magisteries, are made of animals, vegetables, and
minerals prepared by solution in some convenient or acid liquor, precipitation,
ablution in common water, and gentle exiccation. 28. Masticatories, are usually
made of mastick, raisins, bastard pellitory, cubebs, sage leaves, agarick etc.
made into powder, balls, or troches with wax, figgs, turpentine, or honey etc.
and so are to be chewed. 29. Morsells and rolls, may be made of all kinds of
remedies, as powders, seeds, conserves, oiles, extracts, with sugar dissolved
over the fire, putting them in by degrees and stirring them, after which it is
to be poured forth upon some plain thing and cut into tablets. In those that
are purging manna may be put in stead of honey, things condited are to be first
cut in pieces: distilled oiles are last to be dropped in, or used outwardly, so
musk and amber being dissolved in rose water. Rolls also are thus made, but
the powders must be finer and in a less quantity, and if there are acid juices
they must be made only by mixture. 30. Oiles, as first the destilled, are made
of animals, vegetables and minerals. 2. Those by expression, of seeds, and
certain oleous kernells. 3. By decoction, the simples being cut and boiled in
oil mixed with water, wine, or some convenient liquor, until the aqueous
humidity be exhaled, or by maceration in oil, as that of olives, or the
omphacine if the simples are more dry. 31. Pills, may be made of any dry thing
incorporated by some viscid and glutinous liquor, as syrrups, mucilages,
inspissate or thickened juices, extracts etc. or they may be made only of
juices and inspissate extractions. 32. Potions, are made of syrrups,
electuaries, extracts, manna, powders etc. with decoctions, infusions, and
chiefly distilled waters, usually only by mixture. 33. Pomanders, are made of
sweet powders, to which oiles may be added, which may be incorporated with wax,
storax, Indian balsame, the mucilage of tragacanth, with a little turpentine
when need, and a little rose water, and so made up into small balls. 34.
Preparations, are made by powdering the more hard matter, sprinkling thereon
some cordial water, sc. rose water for the most part, and afterward drying it
in the shadow. Those things that are more solid are to be calcined. 35. Powders
and species, are made by triture or levigation, and the less if of a volatile
substance, and apart if of a diverse hardness. 36. Fomentatorie little baggs,
may be made of any in^ided or contused vegetables, sowed up in small bags,
and are then to be applied warm either dry or moist. 37. Salts, are made by
incineration, maceration, transcolation, and evaporation or crystallization.
38. Wash-balls, are made of soap especially that of Venice, with which sweet
things finely powdered are to be mixed with some fragrant water, as of roses,
etc. 39. Spirits, if more volatile, are made by a more gentle fire, as by BM.
vel cinerum. The more fixed, by a retort and stronger fire, and are made of
animals, minerals, and vegetables, and the more volatile of leaves, flowers,
fruits, seeds and spices: but the more fixed out of woods, barks etc. The first
differ not from distilled waters, but that they are less phlegmatic, and
separated by rectification after contusion, and fermentation. 40. Juices, are
drawn seldom out of animals, but chiefly out of vegetables; yet not all, as
those that are oleous, and more dry: and are made by contusion, expression,
clarification, filtration or digestion, and the less succulent by maceration,
or elixation first. 41. Sinapismes, are made of mustard seed, cresses, nettles,
sowbread, bryony, squills, garlic, euphorbium, cantharides etc. with the pulp
of figgs, leaven, honey, oxymel, soap, etc. And Vesicatories, of cantharides
prepared, sc the heads and wings being cut off, 30 being powdered, and of sharp
leaven 1 ounce, with sharp vinegar if need. 42. Suppositories, are used for
diverse indications, but chiefly the dejectory, of which, 1. the more gentle are
made of lard, an open fig, candle, wax, meat boiled in water, stalks and
roots; as of beets, cabbage, blites, mercury etc. 2. The mean with a certain
acrimonie, are made of honey boiled thick, soap, and boiled tupentine, to which
sometimes is added mousedung, salt or sugar. 3. The morestrong and purging, are
made of agarick, aloes, hier^ picra, hellebore, scammonie etc. in the powder of
which the suppositorie may be rolled. Here the proportion of honey is 1 ounce,
of powder more gently purging 1 dram, if more strongly half a scruple, half a
dram or 1 dram. They are also at last to be anointed with oil or butter.
Pessaries and nascals are made in the form of a finger, of hysteric remedies,
which are to be put into a long linen bag, or made up with picked wool or
cotton, or incorporated with honey, laudanum, galbanum, wax, juices etc. they
are in figure like suppositories, but thicker and longer. Roots also may be
used in stead thereof, as of madder, cyperus, lillies etc. 43. Syrups, are made
of some medicamentous liquor, decoction, infusion, juice, distilled water or
vinegar, which being clarifyed, sugar or honey (for preservation and sapour) are
to be added, then boiled and clarifyed: it is to be inspissated to the
consistence of more liquid honey. The proportion of liquor to sugar or honey is
almost double or treble. Hereunto belong physical honies, and syrupized Robs.
44. Tinctures, of which the more liquid are nothing else than extractions,
without an abstracted menstruum: the more solid are powders without combustion,
remaining out of the liquid tinctures, the menstruum being abstracted; and are
made after the manner of extracts. 45. Trochiskes, are made of all kinds of
remedies, which being powdered are made up in some convenient viscous liquor,
as in some mucilages with tragacanth, juices, syrups, etc. Hereunto belong
sumale candles made of odoriferous powders, with tragacanth, storax etc. as
also troches for the same, not differing in the way of making. 46. Inunctory
balsames, liniments and unguents, hardly differ in their preparation, but
consistence, which in the first is more liquid, like honey: in the second a
little harder, and scarce fluid: the third more hard, and less fluid: and are
made of oil, butter, fats, marrow, rosins, mucilages, juices, etc. as also of
powders and things that may be melted. To 1. ounce of oil is used of fats
almost 1, or 3 drames in liniments. 1. dram or a half in balsams. 1 dram and a
half or half an ounce in ointments, with 1. dram of powder etc. Also balsames
are without wax, liniments have a little, or none, as 1. dram to 1 ounce of
oil; but unguents have more, and sometimes gummes, and are made by mixture or
liquefaction.

10. The Dosologie or quantities thereof. I. As Ingredients. So 1. the doses of
Herbs, as used (...) are proportioned by handfulls, in clysters and decoctions,
1, or 2. for one time: so if dry, in external and great remedies, but in
others, as powders for the head and stomach etc. from one dram to hafe an
ounce, or an ounce. 2. Flowers, if dry are measured by weight and measure, if
fresh they are proportioned by measure only: the dry in antidotes and more
noble compositions, from a scruple to two drams; as in cordial, capital and
stomachick powders, and unguents; but in syrrups, apoz emes, and other
decoctions from half a pugill to 2, 3, or more, as also in bathes and
clysters; not being efficacious therein, unless in a great quantity: when
fresh they are more effectual to refrigerate, humect, or loosen; and are
therefore used only in syrrups, and apozemes, and other decoctions of the like
nature, and that from half a pugill, to more: and are not weighed except for
conserves. 3. Fruits, if great, whole and discrete, are prescribed by number,
and not weight, except some part thereof only be to be used, and in exact
compositions. And in some the diversification is to be made according to the
scope and use, as prunes, tamarinds etc. for if used to refrigerate or alter
choler a little number will suffice, as two or three couple; but ten or
twenty, if to purge: so of figgs etc. in inward remedies; for in bathes if to
cleanse and relaxare they may be put in, in a greater quantity, sc. 50 couple;
and loosening, detergent and emollient fruits from 10 couple, to 20. The
refrigerating and lenient, in injections against the inflammation of the
intestines to 10. couple, as prunes, sebestens and tamarinds: so also the
sweeter fruits in clysters easing pain, lenient, loosening, detersive, and
drawing down worms: so also the astringent in clysters for fluxes, but in a
less quantity in altering decoctions, least they should cause obstructions.
The detergent in loosening remedies from 20 couple to forty, and in the
altering to 5, or 6 couple; but in pectorall decoctions, or syrrups in a mean
quantity, or to 10. couple, as figgs, jujubes etc. also the pulpe thereof is
prescribed by measure, as the pulp of raisins to two ounces in solutive
electuaries; in lohochs in a mean, and in hepatick corroborating or malactick
cataplasmes from a quarter of a pound to a pound; so all astringent fruits: the
lesser fruits as currants etc. in a greater or lesser weight, according to the
scope, nature, strength, and jorme of the remedies: and the indiscrete fruits
are prescribed by weight, not number. 4. Seeds, are always proportioned by
weight. The hot and pleasant to 1 or 2 drams, as aniseed etc. in peptick
powders: the less acceptible to half or 1 dram, and the more sharp in a
lesser quantity: the temperate from 1 dram to an ounce in inward remedies; and
in baths, fomentations, and clysters, from 1 ounce to more. The Diuretic,
according to the scope and acrimonie: if to provoke urine, from 1 dram to 3, or
4. and with purging remedies from a scruple to a dram. And in aperient remedies
in a mean quantity. In arteriacks from one scruple to a dram, as also in
Bechicks. Those that expel wind, in clysters, remedies easing pain and the
colic, from two drams to 6: in antidotes from one dram to three: the hottest
seeds, used powdered in inward remedies from one scruple to one dram, and in
the external from 2 drams to an ounce; but in decoctions to be taken inwardly,
from one dram to three, and in external remedies from 3 scruples to an ounce
and half. The greater cold seeds, in diuretics from two drams to an ounce. In
pectoralls from half a dram to three. In loosening remedies from a scruple to a
dram. In clysters from half an ounce to an ounce. In bathes from two ounces to
6: but the lesser cold seeds, in inward remedies, as powders, from a scruple to
two drams. In the outward, from half a dram to half an ounce. Narcotick seeds,
from half a dram to two or three, as in remedies for the colic: but in the
external, from a dram to half an ounce. Cerealls, that are whole are to be
measured by pugills or small handfulls; more in baths: in clysters one or two
pugills. In the decoctions of syrrups, injections and gargarismes from half a
pugill to a whole one: but when they are powdered, by weight; as in
cataplasmes, from one pound to two: and to inspissate the juice of herbs, as
much as may reduce it into the consistence of honey; as in bechick and arteriack
remedies from one dram to three. Pulses, are measured as cereals, but are
weighed when powdered. 5. Roots, in syrups and apozems, from one ounce to
three, if for more doses; if for one, from 3 drams to an ounce, more or less,
according to their nature and strength and the scope: in baths they are
proportioned by pounds or handfulls. In clysters from 2 ounces to 3. and more
for fomentations, irrigations etc. 6. Woods, if sweet, more noble, and
precious, from half a dram to a dram, for the most part, in inward or outward
remedies, as suunders etc. but the more gross and ignoble, of which are made
decoctions, as guajacum etc. from an ounce to a pound. 7. Barks, the more rare
and excellent, from a scruple to half an ounce, as cinnamon etc. The more base,
from one ounce to more; except ungrateful to the taste, as guajacum etc. 8.
Juices, according to the scope and form of remedies. 9. So Rosms, the liquid
taken alone, from a scruple to 3 drams to cleanse the reins; if to loosen the
belly, from 2 drams to half an ounce; in plasters and unguents, from half an
ounce to more, according to the scope; but the more dry, as pitch etc. in
outward remedies, as plasters and unguents, from half an ounce to an ounce or
more. 10. Living creatures, if used whole, are proportioned by number, except
small, their parts by number and weight: the more liquid, by weight: so those
that are burned, or prepared, and that from one dram to three, as rasped hearts
horn, etc. but those that are more sharp, foetid, or sweet, if used in^ wardly
from two grains to a dram, as musk, amber etc. but more, if used outwardly.
The Intestines, from one dram, to two, if taken alone or with wine, but in
opiats and powders for more doses to one or two ounces. The lungs and liver, if
unpleasant, stinking and dried, from half a scruple to a dram, or two if mixed
with sweet things. Excrements, if more sharp from half a dram to two drams,
and outwardly from half an ounce to two ounces: and if more gentle to a pound,
as that of the cow etc. Galls, by weight, more or less, according to their
acrimonie and consistence: those of four footed beasts to one dram, of birds to
two, of fishes to three. Horns, being burned or rasped from one dram to four,
but the more precious, as the Unicorns, from 6 grains to a dram. Shells, of
fishes burnt from one dram to three, and in outward remedies from half an
ounce to two ounces. Pearls in cordials, etc. from one scruple to two drams.
11. Mettalls, by weight, according to their strength and acrimonie, and the
strongest from a dram to an ounce, the weaker in a greater quantity; but those
that may be eliquated, and are emplastick, as litharge etc. from an ounce to a
pound, or more: and the sharp, as verdigrease etc. from half a dram to two
drams; if washed in a greater quantity: those that have but little acrimonie,
us lead, tuttie etc. and those which dry without biting, from a dram to an
ounce. Mineralls, that are very sharp, as brimstone, alome, etc. are to be
used only in strong remedies: the caustic as vitrioll etc. from half a scruple
to a scruple used alone, or a dram used with more gentle remedies. Precious
stones, as the sapphire etc. from half a scruple to a dram: the stronger and
acrid, as the lapis cyaneus, according to the scope and manner of preparation,
sc. in cordialls, from 7 grains to half a scruple, in purging remedies, from
a dram to two drams and a half; and in a greater quantity, if in greater
compositions: and those that are burned in a less quantity, than those which
are not, or not washed, but those stones that are without acrimonie, as the
lapis Judaicus, etc. from half a dram to two drams. So Earths also. More
particularly. 1. In Decoctions, the proportion is of leaves 5 handfulls, of
flowers 4 pugills, of roots 3 or 5 ounces, of seeds 4 or 6 drams, of water 2 or
3 pints, boiled to one half or a third part, with transcolation, edulcoration,
and clarification, to each dose of which, one ounce of syrup may be added, and
sometimes catharticks with correctors So also in insusions. 2. In Clysters, in
a double proportion to what is taken by the mouth, sc. of simple purgers, as
coloquintida etc to two or three drams, of the compounded, as of hiera p^cra
etc. to an ounce or an ounce and half etc. according to the strength of the
patient and vehemence of the disease: of oiles 3 ounces, of sats, honey, and
sugar etc. half an ounce or an ounce, of the yelks of eggs 2 or 3, of common
salt a dram and half, more or less according to the intended p^oritation of
the expulsive faculty. 3. In Gargarismes, a triple weight of liquor to that of
physical juices and syrups, sc. 6 ounces to two hereof, and of dry medicines 2
or 3 drams to half a pound of a decoction. 4. In Errhines, of the leaves of
cephalic purgers being incided and contused, 4 handfulls to 4 ounces of white
wine etc. in soft ^^^hines, to two ounces of the juice aforesaid an ounce and a
half of wine, and of honey as much as may serve to make it into the form of an
opiat being boiled, of sharp or purging powders 1 scruple: in the solid, to a
sufficient quantity of turpentine and wax 2 drams of powders. 5. In Epithemes,
to 1 pound of liquors a dram and half, or two drams of the species, or 1 ounce
of wine, and a few grains of saffron, as in cordial epithemes; but in the
hepatick and splenetick, half an ounce of vinegar to one of the waters. 6. In
Fomentations, to each 1 or 2 handfulls of herbs one pint of liquor. 7. In
Embrocations, for the most part 1 pint of liquors to 2 handfulls of herbs,
which are then to be boiled to a medietie. 8. In Insessions, of herbs from 5
handfulls to 8 or 10. of roots from 2 ounces to 4: of seeds from 6 drams to 6
ounces: and of water as much as may serve thereunto, which are to be put into a
bag and boiled to a third part. 9. In Baths, of liquids as much as may rise
to the mouth of the stomach, of herbs from five handfulls to fifteen, more or
less, according to the nature of the disease and strength of the patient, of
flowers from one pugill to 12, of roots from three ounces to five pound, of
seeds to an ounce, of pulses from 6 ounces to two pound, of mineralls from
three ounces to three pound etc. which are to be boiled to a third part. 10. In
Lotions, of herbs from 4 handfulls to 10. with a convenient quantity of
liquids. 12. In Tragaea's, of sugar one ounce to every dram of species,
especially if bitter and less pleasant. 13. In Aromaticall electuaries, of
honey or sugar a threefold or sixfold quantity to that of the species. 14. In
Cathartick or purging electuaries, of the species one part to three of honey or
sugar being well mixed with their correctives and the dirigents. So also in
Opiats, or narcotick and stupefactive antidotes, which are to be compounded
with great care. 15. In Conserves, for the most part, to one part of the herbs
shred, or flowers, 3 of powdered sugar. 16. In Conditures, the proportion of
sugar is according to the nature and temper of the matter. 17. In Lohochs, the
proportion of the recipient matter is fourefold to the ingredient powders, so
that to 4 ounces thereof, there is one of the powder usually. 18. In Liniments,
to one ounce of oil, 2 drams of butter, fats and creams. 19. In Unguents, to
one ounce of oiles one dram of species, and two of wax. 20. In Plasters, to
one ounce of dry things 3 of oil, and to 3 ounces hereof, one pound of wax, of
rosin 8 ounces, that they may be more tenacious. 21. In Cataplasmes, to each
handful of the leaves or other things, of oil or fats an ounce, or an ounce
and half. 22. In Cerots, to one ounce of oil, a dram, or a dram and half of
the species, of hard wax half an ounce, with a little rosin. 23. In
Sinapismes, to two parts of contused mustard seed, one of figgs: in those that
are more weak, the contrary. 24. In Tablets, Troches, and Morsells, 4 ounces
of sugar to 2 drams of the species; in tablets that are purging, to one pound
of sugar 8 drams of species, or 12 thereof. 25. In Collyries, a little of the
white of an egg, to a convenient quantity of depurate or purified juice. 26.
In Suppositories, to one dram of the species and salt, one ounce of honey. 27.
In Juleps, of dulcorants or sweetening things, from an ounce to an ounce and
half; of clarified juyces orliquors, if more strong, as the acid, to half an
ounce, else an ounce; of confections from one scruple to two, and less if more
precious, as bezar stone, to four or six grains, of Unicorns horn half a
scruple, and of pearls one scruple for one dose. 28. In Physical wines, to
one pint of wine cathartick three or four ounces of sugar, and of cinnamon two
drams. 29. In Emulsions, of dulcorants or sweetening things for one dose, an
ounce, or an ounce and half, of fruits an ounce and half or an ounce or two,
so of seeds, and of rose water, of manus Christi one dram, of liquors s.q. 30.
In Amygdalates or Almond milk, of blanched almonds two ounces, of warm water
half a pint, of sugar one ounce or two. 31. In Ptisans, of cleansed barley two
ounces, of sugar one or two ounces, of water s. q. or twenty parts. 32. In
Hydromel or Metheglin, to one part of honey eight or twelve of water, of cinnamon
two drams or half an ounce, and it is then to be boiled to the consumption of a
4th part. 33. In Diet drinks, to a pint and half of water, one ounce of
ingredients, which are then to be boiled to a third part for sweating, and for
ordinary drinking to two ounces of ingredients twelve pints of water, of sugar
half a pound, of cinnamon three drams or half an ounce, boiled to the
consumption of a fourth part. 34. In Hydrosaccharates, of spring water depurate
or purified by boiling, twelve parts to one of white sugar; and of cinnamon, or
sanders in fevers, from three drams to half an ounce. 35. In Broths analeptick
or restaurative, to each pint of white wine, of cordial juyces or convenient
liquors three ounces, of sugar two, of cinnamon, and of the confection of
alkermes one dram: in restaurative distillations, to three or four pints of
the liquor, of cordial waters eight or twelve ounces, of conserves and
conditures three or six, of the confection of alkermes, etc. three drammes or
half an ounce. 36. In Boles, of conserves three drams or half an ounce, of
powders one scruple, of confections a scruple or half a dram. 37. In
Pandaleons, of fruits two drams, of seeds an ounce, of powders three drams, of
sugar s. q. of conserves three drams or half an ounce. 38. Of the Basis for
Pills, according to the strength thereof, with convenient syrups. 39. In
Dropaces, to an ounce or an ounce and half of pitch half an ounce or six
drams of oil, or so much of hot powders. 40. In Vesicatories, to two ounces of
old leven, as much of cantharides, which are then to be kneaded together with
aqua vitae or vinegar. 41. In Frontals, to three or four pugills of flowers
half an ounce of seeds; if in a humid form, half an ounce of oiles to a
sufficient quantity of unguentum populeon. 42. In Oxyrrhodines, to four or six
ounces of oiles, two or three of vinegar, and four of water, being shaken
together. 43. In Cuoupha's, of roots one ounce, of dry leaves three handfulls,
of flowers two or three pugills, of spices three drams or half an ounce, of
gums one or two drams, of musk half a scruple or a scruple. 24. In Moister
Collyries, of herbs appropriated to the eyes, six or eight handfulls, of seeds
an ounce and half or two ounces, of herbs for the head two handfulls, of
spices half an ounce or six drams, of galls two ounces, of urine half a pint
or a quart, of honey half a pound or a pint, of wine two pintes. 45. In
Apophlegmatismes, the same quantity as in gargarismes. 46. In Suffumigations,
of gums four or six drams, of powders three drams, of amber, musk and civet,
as every one pleases, so in pomanders. 47. In Stomach plasters, of mastick
two ounces, of powders half an ounce, of sweet gums 2 drams, of turpentine s.q.
48. In Pessaries, of juyces 2 ounces, or 3, of honey an ounce and half, of
powders half an cunce. 49. In Injections for the Ears, of powders half a
scruple or a scruple, of fats 2 drams, of honey half an ounce, etc. For the
Bladder, of syrups one ounce, of fine powders one or two drams.

II. As Compounds, etc. and so, 1. Altering remedies, if temperate, they are
given from 2 drams to 2 ounces: if in the first degree, from a scruple to an
ounce: if in the second, from half a scruple to half an ounce: if in the
third, from 5 grains to 2 drams: if in the fourth degree, from 2 grains and a
half, to a dram. 2. Purging remedies, in the first degree, if in the first
mansion, from 2 ounces to 8, as syrups of roses and violets solutive: in the
second, from 2 ounces and a half to 5. as the honey of roses and violets
solutive: in the third, from two ounces to four, as the juice of roses and
violets, and syrup of peach flowers: in the second degree, if in the first
mansion, from half an ounce to two ounces, as tamarindes and cassia in pulps:
in the second, from half an ounce to an ounce and half, as the seed of
bastard saffron, in infusion: in the third, from three drams to seven; as
dodder of time: in the third degree, if in the first mansion, from one dram, to
half an ounce, as mirobalans, or five drams, as polypody: in the second, from
two scruples to two drams, as rhubarb, agarick, seen, and bryonie of Mexico and
Peru: in the third, from half a scruple, to one dram, as aloes, hermodactiles,
turbith, hedge hys^ope and jalap: in the fourth degree, if in the first
mansion, from ten grains to half a dram or two scruples, as mezereon, coccus
Cnidius, asarabacca, and coloquintida: in the second, from five grains to
fifteen, as elaterium, and the bark of black hellebore: in the third, from
three grains to ten, as euphorbium, esula, and scammonie. 3. Apozems and
distilled waters, from two ounces and a half to five. 4. Boles, to one ounce.
5. Clysters, to those that are middle aged, about a pint; to children, two or
three ounces or more, etc. 6. Confitures, in the quantity of a wallnut: so
Conserves. 7. Electuaries, that are alterative and strengthening, from one
scruple to a dram and half: the lenient from one dram to 4: the purging to an
ounce or thereabouts. 8. Elixyrs, from half a scruple, to a scruple and half.
9. Emulsions, are to be taken often, as need requires. 10. Extracts, if harder
and alterative, from one scruple to a dram and half; if cathartick or purging,
from one scruple to a dram. 11. Liquors, as of salts and the like; being
dissolved, from 5 drops to a scruple. 12. Magisteries, if corroborating and
strengthening, from half a dram, to a dram: the purging according to their
efficacy. 13. Morsells, from one ounce to 2 or more. 14. Oiles distilled, from
2 grains to 15.15. Pills, if laxative, from half a dram, to two drams; if
purging, from 2 scruples to 4.16. Preparations, from a scruple to a dram. 17.
Powders and species aromaticall or purging, from a scruple and half, to 4
scruples. 18. Salts of vegetables, from a scruple to a dram. 19. Sapes and
Syrups, from one ounce to 3.20. Spirits, if mineral, from 3 grains to half a
scruple, or to 2 and more if weaker; if of vegetables, to a spoonefull, when
needful. 21. Troches, to 4 scruples. Here note, that these quantities are
proportioned for such as are strong and middle aged, and for others, they are
to be moderated according to the ingredients, and constitution of the patient:
as also that the more pleasant may be taken in a greater quantity, and oftener;
but the unpleasant, in a lesser, and at once.

11. The Chresiologie or use of them. Thus Temperate remedies, are used where
there is no manifest distemper of the first qualities, as heat and cold, etc.
as also in fevers of phlegm, and to preserve the body in good temper, strength,
and vigor, and is to be done by such things that are appropriate thereunto.
The Rest, as 1, The Hot, if so in the first degree, are used, to reduce the
body to natural heat, ease pains, take away weariness, and to help fevers,
as also to cause good digestion, and breed good blood: if in the second, to
help moist stomachs, remove obstructions, and open the pores: if in the third,
to cut tough humors, provoke sweatings, and to resist poison: if in the fourth,
to cause inflammations, and raise blisters. 2. The Cold, if cold in the first
degree, they are used to qualify the heat of food, and assuage that of the
intestines and bowels: if in the second and third, to assuage the heat of
choler, help the inflammations of hot swellings, and to cause sleep: if in
the fourth, to mitigate pain, by stupefying and dulling the senses. 3. The
Moist, if so in the first degree, to lenifie and lubrifie, to help the cough,
and roughness of the threat: if in the second, to mitigate the sharpness of
humors, and loosen the belly, and other parts. 4. The Dry, if so in the first
degree, to drink up moisture, and stop fluxes, and help the slipperinesse of
the parts: if in the second, it strengthens the parts made feeble by too much
moisture, and disposes them to action.

Remedies endued with the second qualities: As 1. The Mollifying, are used in
scirrhus's and hard tumors, and swellings. 2. The Hardening, are used to
repress the heat of the humors in swellings, and to hinder the flux of the
thinner blood, and defluctions thereof. 3. The Loosening, are used in
convulsions, caused by cold and si^city. 4. The Rarefying, to open and dilate
the pores, that the vapors of the blood may be expelled, and to mitigate
pain. 5. The Densant, to strengthen the skin, to resist external injuries, as
also to prohibit too much sweat, or the dissolution of the spirits. 6. The
Opening, to help the quantity and pravity of the blood, and open the he
morrhoids. 7. The Attenuating, to open obstructions, purge the breast of
phlegm, move the courses, and cleanse the passages of the bowels. 8. The
Drawing, to unload the bowels of vicious humors, help the critical
evacuation in a^scesses, draw out poison, and help chilled parts. 9. The
Discutient, in diseases of repletion, to dispell the serous humidity, and evil
vapors by sweat, or insensible transpiration, to draw out hydropick water,
help the gout and sciatica, and to assuage phlegmons and other tumors. 10 The
Repelling, in hot tumors, pains of the head, etc. for hereby in fevers, are
the vapors diverted from the head, they also hinder the increasing of
phlegmons. 11. The Burning, to help dried, tabid parts and almost extinct, by
causing attraction of aliment; they also serve to extirpate hair, hard rumors,
warts, and to help hard and callous swellings, and the polypus, etc. they also
help cold griefs, gouts, old pains of the head, and other cold and moist
affections of the head, as also fistula's and malignant ulcers, together with
dangerous fluxes of humors to the superficies, and draw out the same. 12. The
Cleansing, to take away the filth, matter, and excrements of ulcers. 13. The
Glewing, to help the rage of the blood, suppurate, and to stop fluxions.

Remedies endued with the third qualities, as first those Causing matter, are
used to ripen phlegmons. 2. Those Provoking urine, to help dropsies, etc. 3.
Those Moving the courses, to help diseases caused by the retention of the
menses: to ease the body, dropsy and epilepsie, etc. 4. Those Causing milk,
to prevent diseases by retention thereof, etc. 5. Those Generating sperme, for
the preservation of the species, rather then voluptuousness. 6. Those Easing
pain, to prevent the dangerousnesse of symptoms. 7. Those Causing flesh, to
fit hollow ulcers, for glutinating and cicatrizing remedies. 8. Those Glewing
wounds, to help di^joyned continuity. 9. Those Cicatrizing ulcers, to perfect
the cure of wounds. 10. Those Refisting poison, to preserve the vital faculty.
11. The Beautifying, for known purposes. 12. The Occult, in occult diseases.

The Appropriate, as the cephalicke or those respecting the head, and parts
thereof, the pectorall, cordial, stomachick, splenetick, nephritick, cystick,
hysteric, arthritick, and cathartick or purging, are various according to the
intention or scope, and variety of the grief and part. The Compounded
remedies, as first Syrups and Juleps, are used to prepare the humors of the
body for purgation, open the passages, remove obstructions, cut tough humors,
deterge, or cleanse, digest and dissipate matter contained in the habit of the
body, oppugn distempers by their qualities, and gently to purge. 2. So
Decoctions or apozems and Infusions. 3. Clysters, are used to purge, temper
humors, ease pain, heal ulcers, and cause sleep, etc. 4. Gargarismes, in
diseases of the head, mouth, and jaws, sc. to draw phlegm from the head,
hinder the swellings of the mouth, and discuss them, or to cleanse and
consolidate wounds. 5. Errhines, in old diseases of the head, especially in the
falling sickness, dimnesse of the eyes, stoppings of the nostrills, and ulcers
thereof, want of the smell, drawing of the face awry, and Kings evil, etc. 6.
Epithems, in fevers, hectic, squalid, burning, and pestilentiall,
inflammations of the bowels, and heat of the whole body, also in the pantings
of the heart and passions thereof, in the erysipelas or St Anthonies fire, and
weakness of the body, etc. 7. Fomentations, to rarify the skin, and help
perspiration; to attenuate blood and vicious humors in inflammations, to
concoct crude humors, mollify, and digest by vapor, as also to assuage and
ease pain. 8. Embrocations, in hot diseases, chiefly of the head, to cause
sleep, and in fevers with raging. 9. Insessions, in stead of baths, and to
help the decay of strength. 10. Baths, if laconick or dry, to heat the humors
in the body, melt, and evacuate the same, to loosen the skin, and extenuate the
corpulent: if of sweet water moderately hot, it is useful for children and old
people, to heat, moisten, ease wearisomenesse, mitigate pain, help fullness,
soften hard parts, discuss flatulencies, and cause sleep: if luke warm, to
moisten and cool, to help drying fevers and hecticks, as also sunburnings: and
if too hot, it heateth and moisteneth not so much: if of milk, to help
leanness, also weakness, and pining: if of whay, to help the itch, and heat
of the skin, and breakings out in children: if of wine, to strengthen
debilitated parts: if of oil, to help cold agues, and pains of the sinews
thence arising, as also to help convu^sions caused by punctures or wounds, and
to strengthen natural heat, resolve hurtful matter, and help pains of the
joints, etc. if natural, to dry, heat, and bind, etc. 11. Lotions, to
cleanse the sweatings and filth of the head, and open the pores of the skin. If
for the feet, to draw the humors downwards from the upper parts, help
wearisomenesse, and cause sleep. 12. Oiles, to help pains, roughness, and
many other maladies, as also to make unguents, cerots, and plasters. 13.
Powders and aromaticall species, to strengthen the heart, and restore nature,
etc. 14. Tragaea's, to strengthen the stomach, dissipate flatulencies, hinder
vapors, and to help the maladies of other intralls, and parts. 15.
Electuaries, if aromaticall, to comfort the principal parts chiefly: and the
other to purge. 16. Opiats, in great pains, colic griefs, and other
distempers requiring ease. 17. Conserves, are used for pleasure, and to
strengthen. 18. Conditures, for pleasure, and help the stomach enfeebled by
distempers. 19. Lohoch's, to help the roughness of the throat, inflammation of
the lungs, ulcers, difficulty of breathing, coughs. caused by the flowing of
humors and distillation thereof, and help those that expectorate tough matter
ready to suffocate. 20. Extracts, are used when there is nauseousnesse by
reason of the taking of medicines in a great quantity, these operating in a
small dose. 21. Liniments, to lenifie rough parts, ease pain, heat, rarifie,
refrigerate, dry, moisten, discuss, cleanse, mollify, or ripen. 22. Unguents,
to alter, mollify, digest, cleanse, etc. 23. Plasters, to repel the flux of
humors caused by inflammations, ease pain, strengthen the members, soften,
discuss, concoct, ripen, draw forth things infixed, suppurate, purge, open,
glue, and cicatrize. 24. Cataplasmes, to ease pain, concoct humors, and
digest chiefly. 25. Cerots, to heat, moisten, loosen, concoct, bind, etc. 26.
Dropaces, in extenuations of the body, to moisten, warm, attract the blood,
repair the loss of flesh, to help vomiting, crudities, collicks, and in stead
of cataplasmes in old griefs. 27. Sinapismes, to draw from the center to the
superficies in old affections, as in the inveterate headache, megrim, falling
sickness, vertigo and madness, also in distillations, and long griefs of the
stomach, and sciatica, gout, resolutions, refrigerations, as also in acute
diseases, sc. the lethargy, and catalepsie, etc. 28. Tablets and Morsells, to
purge, alter, and strengthen. 29. Troches, to preserve remedies: and if used
downward, to help diseases below the navell: The other, to alter, purge,
open, and strengthen. 30. Pills, to purge the head and habit of the body when
cold. 31. Collyries, in diverse diseases and affections of the eyes, as ulcers,
wounds, fistula's, and suffusions, etc. 32. Apophlegmatismes, in all old
affections of the head, dimnesse of the eyes, deafness, resolutions of the
tongue, and wheals in the head or face. 33. Errhines, in old griefs of the
head, especially the falling sickness, dimnesse of the sight, obstructions of
the nostrills, want of smelling, drawings awry of the face, and kings evil.
34. Confections, to please the pallat, and to strengthen the body. 35.
Suppositories, to open the belly, and prepare the body before bloodletting, in
stead of glisters, as also in burning fevers, when vapors arise unto the
head, in sleepie diseases of the head, when clysters work not at a convenient
time, also for revulsion, to kill worms, open the haemorrhoides, and heal
ulcers of the straight gut. 36. Little baggs, to heat, cool, strengthen etc.
37. Pessaries, if emollient or softening in the inflammations of the womb,
exulcerations, or aversions, and windiness: if opening, to draw out the
terms, and open the compressed womb: if astringent, for the contrary
purposes. 38. Perfumes, to comfort the spirits, strengthen and preserve, and
Suffumigations, to cause a good smell, to help distillations from the head upon
the inferior parts, to help heaviness, obstructions, cold diseases of the
brain, and drive away the infection of the plague, and are used to the
nostrills, also in asthma's, and stoppages of the breast by cold and thick
humors, in suppurations, coughs, and stitches of the sides, in the syncope, in
the recoveries from sickness, as also in cold distempers of the liver and
womb. 39. Physical wines, in cold distempers of the body, chronicall diseases,
as the asthma, obstructions, palsies, and crudities of the stomach: if
altering, to discuss and consume the relics of diseases, strengthen, provoke
urine, and help long diseases. 40. Emulsions, to lenifie, cool and moisten, to
help the intralls, fevers, and cause sleep. 41. So Amygdalates. 42. Ptisans,
in fevers, to cool, cleanse, nourish, moisten, and to help the diseases of the
breast, and hecticks. 43. Hydromel, in cold phlegmatic diseases; as the palsy,
to strengthen natural heat, resist putrefaction, provoke urine, and cleanse:
if vinous, it concocteth crude humors, expectorates, strengthens the
stomach, concocteth crudities, and helps the asthma: if physical, it helps
inveterate cold griefs. 43. Diet drinks, in long diseases, to attenuate,
resolve, consume, rarefie, and prepare the humors for purgation: if
evacuating, in diseases deeply rooted, to dissipate and discuss, as in the
dropsy, and French pox, etc. 44. Hydrosaccharates, to moisten, cool, and
cleanse, in fevers, hot diseases of the liver, stomach and reins. 45. Broths
restorative, to nourish, and repair the solid substance. 46. Boles, if
purging, they are used in distempers in the lower region, and near parts; if
roborating, to strengthen the stomach and parts affected. 47. Pandaleons, as
lohochs. 48. Pills, if purging, in diseases in the habit of the body, and third
region, especially in the pituitous, and obstructions; if usual, in bodies
cacochymick, to strengthen the stomach; the altering, to help hoarsenesse, etc.
49. Frontals, chiefly to cool, in fevers, and watchings, to repel vapors,
as also to ease pains of the head, and phrensies, etc. 50. So Oxyrrhodines,
and to repel thin fumes in burning fevers. 51. Cucupha's, in cold and moist
diseases of the brain, catarrhes, fluxions, and to recreate the animal
spirits. 52. Collyries liquid, to help the heat of the eyes, repel, and
discuss, dry and cleanse. 53. Stomach plasters, to strengthen the stomach,
cause concoction, stop vomiting, and help the cold distempers thereof. 54.
Injections, to help inflammations, pains, ulcers, to cleanse and cicatrize,
etc.

12. The Cairologie, or season and manner of using them. So those that are
temperate, or of the first qualities, are to (...) be used when the body is in
good temper, or exceeding and defective therein.

Remedies of the second qualities, as 1. the Attenuating, are not to be used,
before the stomach and intralls are cleansed of their evil humors; lest they
cause obstructions, or fevers, etc. 2. The Discussing, in the dec^ination of
diseases, and with the repelling, in the increase or state of phlegmons. 3. The
Repelling, in the beginning and increase of hot tumors, when the humors are
flowing, and in the state with discutients: also they are dangerous in great
pains, and where there is much matter, except first evacuated. 4. The Burning,
after the body has been well purged, the parts being first fortified, and they
mixed with correcters. 5. The Extersive, the body being neither plethorick, nor
cacochymick, nor symptoms troublesome.

Remedies of the third qualities, as first the Suppuring, in the state of
phlegmons. 2. Those Provoking urine, the urinarie passages being first opened.
3. Those Moving the courses, after purgation, if the body be full of bad
humors. 4. So those Causing milk, and sperme. 5. Anodynes, when symptoms are
most violent, with things respecting the cause. 6. Those Causing flesh, after
the distemper, pain and symptoms are removed, and vary according to the
scope. 7. The Glewing, after abstersion and incarnatives. 8. The Cicatrizing,
when the ulcer is almost full of flesh, observing the nature of the part
affected. 9. Those Resisting poison, according to the nature thereof, using
vomits, purges, and sweating remedies. 10. Cosmeticks, after preparation of the
body. Remedies Appropriate to certain parts of the body, as to the head, etc.
after general and particular evacuation or purging, sc. the corroborating,
observing the times and symptoms of the disease, and nature of the parts: the
purging three or four hours before meat: the lenient, an hour, or half an
hour before; but cephalic pills may be taken after.

Compounded remedies, as 1. Syrupes and Juleps, are to be used in the morning,
being warmed, and in the evening, if to cause sleep. 2. So Decoctions or
Apozems, and infusions, the stomach being empty. 3. Glysters, two or three
hours before meat, and are to be retained about half an hour. 4.
Gargarismes, in the morning, and evening before meat. 5. Errhines, after
purgation or bloudletting, the stomach being empty, and the mouth first filled
with water. 6. So Epithemes, in the morning or evening, in the state often. 7.
Fomentations, before cataplasmes or unguents, after evacuations of the body,
and in severs before their accessions, the body not being full of humors and
excrements. 8. Embrocations, are to be used often, and renewed. 9. Infessions,
two or three hours before meat, the body being first purged, and excrements
evacuated, being warm, in which the abode is to be about an hour. 10. Baths,
if laconick or dry, in the winter, and beginning of spring, or when the air is
temperate: if of sweet water, in the spring, summer, and end thereof, the body
being first evacuated and cleansed, and excrements purged forth, in the morning
or evening, after digestion, in which the abode may be for two or three hours,
if a fat, cold, and moist body. 11. Lotions, if for the head, in the morning
before meat, warm, the excrements being evacuated, after which the head is
presently to be dried with towells: if for the feet, in the morning or evening
before meat, or sleep, after which the feet are to be wrapped up in a moist
towell. 12. Powders and aromaticall species, in the morning, being fasting, and
that in some convenient wine, broth, syrup, or other liquour. 13. Tragaea's,
in the morning, the stomach being empty, and in the evening, two or three
hours before supper, and after meats if to repress vapors, with a tossed
soaked in wine. 14 Aromaticall electuaries, when needful, in the morning and
evening, three or four hours after supper. 15. Purging electuaries, in the
morning, the stomach being empty. 16. Opiates, in the evening going to bed, in
wine or some other convenient liquor. 17. Conserves, often, but chiefly in the
morning or evening, in the quantity of a wallnut alone, or with other
corroborating spices with syrups. 18. Conditures, before or after meat. 19.
Lohochs, at any time, before and after meat, but chiefly at morning and
evening, and are to be taken with a liquorice stick, and held in the mouth
until they dissolve, and so are to be swallowed. 20. Extracts, in the morning,
the stomach being empty, and that alone, in pills, or some liquid thing, or
else mixed with other remedies. 21. Liniments, two or three hours before meat,
being warm. 22. Unguents, before meat. 23. Plasters, before meat. 24.
Cataplasmes, if heating and discutient, and to be applied to the
hypochondriums, the body being first evacuated. 25. Cerots, before meat, the
stomach being empty, and then also, if pectorall, and stomachicall. 26.
Dropaces, the body being freed from excrements. 27. Sinapismes, are then also
to be used. 28. Tablets, rolls, and morsels, before meat, two or three hours,
or four if purging. 29. Troches, are often to be used and held in the mouth.
30. Pills, if capital, three or four hours after a light supper, or at
midnight, or after the first sleep: if lesser, one or two hours before meat;
and the mean in the morning. 31. Dry Collyries, at morning and evening. 32.
Apophlegmatismes, in the morning, the body being freed from excrements. 33. Dry
errhines, the whole body being evacuated by bloudletting or purges. 34.
Comfeits, at any time before or after meat. 35. Suppositories, one or two
hours before meat, being first anointed with butter. 36. Little baggs,
according to the nature of the disease. 37. Pessaries, in the evening and at
bedtime, and are not to be drawn out till six or seven hours after. 38.
Physical wines, in the morning, or two hours before dinner; in the winter,
for ten or 20 days space. 39. Emulsions, in the morning and evening, and at
bed time if to provoke sleep. 40. Almond milk, at any time, but chiefly
before sleep. 41. So Ptisans. 42. Metheglin, for ordinary drinking. 43. Diet
drinks, in the morning. 44 Hydrosaccharates, as ptisans. 45. Restoratory
broths, at any time, or three or four times in a day. 46. Boles, in the
mornings, as other purgers. 47. Pandaleons, as lohochs. 48. Frontalls, at bed
time. 49. Oxyrrhodines, when there are violent symptoms, and are often to be
renewed. 50. Cucupha's or quilts, are to be worn some convenient time
together, but chiefly at nights. 51. Moist Collyries, are to be used warm,
for a quarter or half an hours space together. 52. Suffumigations, at any
time. 53. So Perfumes and Pomanders. Note, hence appea^eth the way and form of
prescripts, the form of remedies, and time of use etc. being considered.

II. As alimentous. Thus of the faculties of medicinales, now follow those of
aliments; which are such vegetables, that nourish and increase the bodily
substance, by restoring that which is deperdite, the body being in a perpetual
decay, and therefore wanting refection by meat and drink: and this, if it do
not greatly affect the body by any other quality, is properly and simply called
aliment, and is in some measure like unto the substance of the body, into which
it is to be converted; but if it change the body by any exuperant quality, it
is not simply aliment, but medicamentous: such are those things which with
sweetness have adjoined an acid, acerb, bitter, or sharp quality: and from
hence arises the difference of aliments: of which some are.

1. Euchymick, or of good juice, sweet in taste, pleasant to the palate, and
not of any unpleasant smell: as also fat things, and some which are insipid, as
bread of the best wheat etc.

2. Cacochymick, or of evil juice, which besides sweetness, have some other
quality mixed therewith, as sharpness, bitterness, saltness, acerbity, and
too much acidity: also all fetid things, of an unpleasant smell, and corrupted;
as the oleraceous, (especially the wild,) except lettuce and succorie, also
cucumbers, corrupt corn, things growing in cenose and dirty places, as also
thick, austere, and acid, beer made of bad grain, etc. and some of these
engender 1. A cold, pituitous and crude juice, as the hasty fruits and cold
herbs. 2. But others, a hot and bilious, as all things that have acrimony, so
garlic, onions, leekes, wake^ Robin, cresses, mustard etc. 3. And some a me
lancholi^k, as pulses, especially lentils, and cab bage.

3. Of gross nourishment, as those things which have a strong and hard
substance, as bread baked under ashes, and whatsoever is made of meal without
leaven, chestnuts, acornes, frogstooles, thick, sweet, and black wine, and ale,
also whatsoever is viscid and glutinous, and are to be shunned by all that live
at ease, and use no exercise before meat; but those are the best for diet, that
are in a mean between incrassating and attenuating.

4. Of thin juice, as things thin and friable, especially if joined with
acrimonie; as garlic, onions, leekes, hyssop, organie, savorie, bread of
wheat well fermented, and twice baked, bitter almonds, peaches, and thin white
wines: These also open the passages, cleanse away what is viscous, incide and
extenuate what is gross; but are to be shunned by those, who are of a
chollerick temperature; the long use of them causing bilious and serous
excrements; yet are agreeable to those whose body and veins are full of a
crude, pituitous and melancholic juice. Here note, an attenuating diet
differs from a slender one, the last prefixing a mode in the quantity, and
the other being so called by reason of the tenuity of the alimentary juice.

5. Eupeptick, as things easily resoluble, concocted or corrupted; as most
fruits.

6. Dyspeptick, as all things of a solid substance and thick juice. An
Experiment of all which may be made by decoction in water. For the liquor, if
sweet, shows the thing to be of good juice; if thick, of gross juice; if
well boiled, of much nourishment: if thin, of little: if slowly boiled, not
easily altered in the stomach, and so the contrary. Also some are 1 flatulent,
of cold unconcocted humidity. 2. Without wind, of easy elixation. 3. Easily
descending, acrid, salt, insipid, or excrementitious. 4. Slowly, as things dry
and binding.

Thus Reader desiring thy health I rest,

Thine, T. L.

A catalogue of the names of Authors, as they are cited in the following
discourse, with the explication thereof, and number of their cuts.
ACac. Acacia. A Cost. A Costa. Actuar. Actuarius. Aeg. Aegineta. Aelian.
Aelianus. Aemil. Mac. Aemilius Macer. Aet. Aetius. Agric. Agricola. Agrip.
Agrippa. Ald. Aldinus. Aldrovand. Aldrovandus. Almeyd. Almeyda. Alpin. Prosper
Alpinus. 46. Amat. Lus. Amatus Lusitanus. Anguil. Anguillara. Ant. Musa.
Antonius Musa. Apollin. Apollinaris. 141. Apollod. Apollodorus. Apul. Apuleius.
Aquap. Aquapendens. Arab. Arabum. Arist. Aristoteles. Augen. Augenius. Aug.
Augustani. Avic. Avicenna. Auth. Pandect. Author Pandectarum. BApt. Port.
Baptista Porta. Bapt. Sard. Baptista Sardus. Barth. Ang. Bartholomaeus Anglus.
Bauh. Bauhinus. 3547. Begu. Beguinus. Bellon. Bellonius. Benz. Benzo. Bern.
Paludan. Bernardus Paludanus. Bles. Hortus Blesensis. Blochwit. Blochwitius.
Bokel. Bokelius. Bont. Bontius. Bor. Borellus. Bras. Brasavola. Bruns.
Brunfelsius. 238. CAEsalp. Caesalpinus. Came. Camerarius. 1003. Campeg.
Campegius. Cass. Bass. Cassianus Bassus. Cato. Cells. Celsus. Chalm. Chalmeteus.
Cieca. Clowes. Clus. Clusius. 1135. ( exot. 194.) Col. Coals. Columel.
Columella. Column. Columna. 205. Cord. Cordus. 272. Cornar. Cornarius. Cortus.
Cortusus. Crat. Crato. Cratev. Cratevas. Cresc. Crescentius. Croll. Crollius.
Culp. Culpepper. Cuzen. Cuzenus. DAl. Dalechampius. Dam. a Goes. Damianus a
Goes. De Laet. Diosc. Dioscorides. Dod. Dodonaeus. 1305. Dond. De Dondis.
Dorst. Dorstenius. Droet. Droetus. Dur. Durandus. Durant. Durantes. 879. ERast.
Erastus. Ern. Ernestus. Eyster. Hortus Eystettensis. 1083. FAb. Faber.
Fall-Fallopius. Fern. Fernelius. Ficin. Ficinus. Florent. Florentinus. For.
Forestus. Fracast. Fracastorius. Freitag. Freitagius. Fuch. Fuchsius. 516. Fum.
Fumanellus. GAl. Galenus. Gall. Gallorum. Garc. Garcias. Gaza. Gebelk.
Gebelkoveverus. Ger. Gerard. Ger. Berg. Gerardus Bergensis. Germ. Germanorum.
Gesn. Gesnerus. Goclen. Goclenius. Gron. Hortus Groningensis. Grul. Grulingius.
Guainer. Guainerius. HAf. Hortus Hafniensis. Heart. Hartmannus. Heurn. Heurnius.
Hieron, Hieronymus herbarius. Hipp. Hippocrates. Hisp. Hispanorum. Hoier.
Hoierus. Holler. Hollerius. Horn. Hornius. Horst. Horstius. Hort. san. Hortus
sanitatis. Hubn. Hubnerus. Hugo Soler. Hugo Solerius. JArric. Iarricus. Ind.
Indorum. Jo. Joel. Jo. Spiringus. John's. Johnson. 2730. Jordan. Jordanus. Jonb.
Jonbertus. Isaac. Isid. Isidorus. Ital. Italorum. Jul. Alex. Julius
Alexandrinus. Junck. Junckers. KEgl. Keglerus. Kentman. Kentmannus. Kunr.
Kunradus. LAcun. Lacuna. Lemn. Lemnius. Linschot. Linschottus. Lips. Lipsius.
Lob. Lobelius. 2116. Lonic. Lonicerus. 833. Lugd. Lugdunensis. 1587. Lugd.
Hort. Lugdunenfis hortus. Bat. MAc. Macasius. Maff. Maffaeus. Manard. Manardus.
Matthew. Matthiolus. 957. Mes. Mesue. Mind. Mindererus. Miz. Mizaldus. Monard.
Monardes. Monardus. Montag. Montagnana. Mont. Montanus. Morescot. Morescottus.
Myl. Mylius. Myreps. Myrepsus. NEand. Neander. Nicand. Nicander. Nic. Nicol.
Nicolaus. Nicolus. Noll. Nollius. OFfic. Officinarum. Orib. Oribasius. Ovied.
Oviedus. PAllad. Palladins. Palmar. Palmarius. Parac. Paracelsus. Parey. Par.
Hortus Parisiensis. Park. Parkinson. 2786. Pat. Hortus Patavinus. Paul. Paulus.
Pem. Pemel. Pen. Pena. Penot. Penotus. Pers. Persarum. Phyt. Brit. Phytologia
Britannica. Pisan. Pisanellus. Platear. Platearius. Plat. Platerus. Plaut.
Plautus. Plin. Plinius. Plut. Plutarchus. QUerc. Quercetanus. RAb. D. Chimchi.
Rau. Rauwolfius. 42. Recch. Recchus. Ren. Renealmus. 42. Renod. Renodaeus.
Rhas. Rhasis. Ric. Ricius. Riol. Riolanus. Riv. Riverius. Rondel. Rondeletius.
Rud. Rudius. Ruell. Ruellius. 350. Ruland. Rulandus. Rums. Rumsey. SAla.
Angelus Sala. Savon. Savonarola. Scalig. Scaliger. Schenck. Schenckius.
Scholtz. Scholtzius. Schrod. Schroderus. Schwenckf. Schwenck felt. Senn.
Sennertus. Serap. Serapio. Seren. Sam. Q. Serenus Samonicus. S. Seth. Simeon
Sethi. Smith. Solenand. Solenander. Stock. Stockerus. Sylv. Sylvins. Sylvat.
Sylvaticus. TAb. Tabernaemontanus. 2087. Tentzel. Tentzelius. Terent.
Terentius. Thal. Thalius. Theoph. Theophrastus. Thevet. Thevetus. Tradesc.
Tradescant. Trag. Tragus. 567. Tral. Trallianus. Tulp. Tulpius. Turc. Turcarum.
Turn. Turner. VAl. de Tar. Valescus de Taranta. Vall. Valleriola. Varig.
Varignana. Var. Varro. Vesling. Veslingius. V. Vid. Vidus Vidius. Vigon.
Vigonius. Vill. Villanovanus. Virgil. Virgilius. Virgin. Virginiae. Virtruv.
Vitruvius. Vlstad. Vlstadius. Vntz. Untzerus. WArs. Hortus Warsaviensis. Weck.
Weckerus. Weinrich. Weinrichius. Wirsung. Wirsungus. Worm. Wormius.
A table of such abbreviations as are used in this Work.
P. Place. T. Time. N. Name. K. Kinds, or Species. T. Temperature. V. Virtue.
H. Hurts. ap. applied. c. cause, causes or caused. d. drunk. fl. flowers, or
floured. h. help, helps or helped. m. mix or mixed. pp. prepared. p. aeq.
equal parts. q. s. or s. q. a sufficient quantity. gr. a grain. ob. half a
scruple. scr. a scruple. drach. a dram. unc. an ounce. acetab. two ounces and
an half. lib. a pound. sem. half. an. a like quantity. m. an handful. a
pugill. a little handful. no. in number. fere. almost. 1. in the first degree.
2. in the 2d degree. 3. in the 3d degree. 4. in the 4th degree. initio. in the
beginning. medio in the middle. fine. in the end.
A
Adders Tongue, Ophioglossum.
Place. It grows in moist Meadows. Time. It is found in April and May.
Name. It Is called (...), Lingua Serpentis, Lancea Christi, Eneaphyll: lingua
vulneraria.
ADDers Tongue. Gerard, John's: Kinds. As the common, and misshapen. Temperature.
Is dry 3. Virtues. The leaves stamped and boiled in oil Olive, until the
herbs be parched, then strained, yield an excellent balsame for green wounds:
Like that of S. Jo: wort. Park: Temp. It Is temperate between hot and cold, dry
2. Virtues. The juice drank with Horse-taile water distilled, helps all
Wounds, Vomiting, flux of blood, and Whites. The powder helps Ruptures:
decoct in red Wine, it helps watering eyes. Col: It cures Fevers, and all
heat in the body. The juice taken in the distilled water of Oken budds, stopps
the Courses. With Hoggs grease, it helps S. Anthonies fire, also the leaves
mixed with Swines grease, and gently boiled, strained, and applied, help,
burnings, hot tumors, apostumes, and spreading sores, and also repress
inflammations in wounds: being infused in Oil Olive, with clear turpentine and
insolated, it cures the bitings of Serpents by signature, (as some affirm)
See the Isagoge.

Adonis flower, Flos Adonis.
P. It grows in the west part of England amongst the Corn. T. Fl. In May,
June, July, and later. N. (...), Eranthemum. Flos Adonidis.
Adonis flower. Ger. T. That with red flowers according to the taste, seems to
be something hot, but not much. V. The seed is thought to be good against the
stone, the seed stamped, and the powder given in Wine, Ale, or Beer, to drink,
does with great effect help the Colic: which also is affirmed by Parkinson,
who says it has been certainly tried by experience, and the first is
consented to by Bauh. Tabern. it is hot and dry 2, and is used in sudatory
baths, against cold humors.

Agrimony. Agrimonia.
P. It grows in barren places, by high ways, etc. T. It floureth in June and
later: and seedeth in Summer. N. (...). Eupatoria, Lappa inversa Philanthropos.
Agrimony. Ger: T. is hot and moderately binds, it is temperate in dryness.
Gal. Of subtle parts, cutting and scouring: it opens the Liver, and
strengthens it. V. The leaves decoct, h. naughty livers, and pissing of
blood. the seed d. in wine, h. the bloody-flix, and biting of Serpents, the
leaves stamped with old swines grease, ap. close ulcers that be hardly healed.
boiled in wine and d. it h. hepatick fluxes in old people. The water Ag. Ger.
J. K. as the common, and common Durch Ag: T. the leaves and root are hot and
dry 2 scour, open, and attenuate. and d. h. scabbs, jaundice, wounds, and
tertians. Park: K. as the bastard, hemp like, and broad leafed hempe-like Ag:
of America. V. the sweet is the best, which being decoct and d. h. the Colic
and cough. ap. with swines grease, it is magneticall, and draws out things
fixed in the flesh, and h. luxations; the juice dropped into the ears h.
impostumes: so the distilled water, and hempelike Agrimony, d. it h. dropsies
and all impostumes c. by cold. boiled with Fumitory in whey and d. it h. the
itch. scr. 1. taken kills worms. Matthew. the herb or seed d. in wine h. the
dysenterie: and unc. 6. d. in white wine with sugar h. the strangury.

Ague-tree, Sassafras.*
P. In the west Indies near the sea in temperate places. T. It is green and
flourishes all the year. N. It is called by the Indians Pavame, and Winanke.
Ague-tree. Ger. T. the wood and branches are hot and dry 2. of somewhat
subtle parts: the rind is hotter, sc. 3. V. the best of the tree is the root,
and that the best, which has the rind fast cleaving to it of a tawny color,
and sweet smell. The distilled water thereof smells and tastes as the
Cinnamon, and produces the same effects; the decoction of the wood in water,
boiled to the color of Claret wine d. for certain days h. the dropsy,
opens the Liver, and cures quotidian and tertian agues, and long fevers: the
root comfort the liver and feeble stomach, (...) appetite, consumes wind,
stops vomiting, and persumeth the breath, it provokes urine, and c.
fruitfulness. Park. The decoction of the branches is inwardly given in all
cold diseases, and obstructions of the liver and spleen, as also in cold
rheumes and defluctions of the head, on the teeth, eyes, or lungs, warming and
drying up the moisture: and strengthening the parts. It h. coughs, and other
cold diseases in the upper parts, it also dries up the moisture of the womb,
which in most is the cause of barrenness, its generally used in all diseases
c. of cold, raw, thin, and corrupt humors: it h. the French disease; the leaves
ap. h. wounds.

Alder tree. Alnus.*
P. Grows in low and moist places. T. The black fl. in spring. berries in
Aut. the fruit of the 2d is ripe in Sept. N. (...). the common, and Amedamus.
The other is called Frangula, and Avornus.
Alder-tree black. Ger: T. its inner bark is purging and drying. V. the
infusion thereof purges phlegm and choler by stool and vomit; decoct in
vinegar it h. the toothache and scabs, etc. the dry is less violent, the
leaves c. milk in beasts. The common and rough leaved Al: T. the leaves and
bark, are cold, dry, and astringent. V. the leaves h. hot swellings, ulcers,
and all inward inflammations, as of the almonds etc. the bark serves for the
Diers. Park, the leaves put under the feet refresh travelers; the other's bark
boiled with agrimony, wormwood, dodder, hopps, fennel, smallage, and endive
roots d. h. Cachexy, the outmost bark h. lasks.

Alexander. Hipposelinum.
P. Grows almost every where: the 2d in Candy T. The seed is ripe An. 2. in
Aug. the 2d fl. in June. N. (...). Equapium, apium Sylv. Smyrnium. petrosel.
Mac.
Alexander. Ger: T. the seeds and root are hot and dry 3. as of the garden
parsley, cleansing and attennuating. V. and, eaten h. the stomach; the seeds
bring down the flowers, expel the secundine, break wind, provoke urine, and
h. the strangury: so the root decoct with wine. That of Candy. T. Is hot and
dry 3. V. the leaves dissolve wens, dry ulcers, and green wounds, the seed is
opening and diuretic, and h. the lungs; the root h. the asthma and coughs.
Park. the seed taken in wine h. the bitings of Serpents.

Alkanet. Anchusa.
P. Montpellier. Narborne. Kent. Cornwall. T. Fl: in the summer months, the
roots are bloody in harvest. N. (...). Fucus herba. Onocleia. Buglossa Hisp.
Orchanet.
Alkanet. Ger: J. K. as the red, yellow, and small Alk. T. the roots are cold
and dry. Gal. binding, bitter and cleansing choler, the leaves are weaker. V.
Diosc. a cerot of the root with oil h. old ulcers, with parched barley meal it
h. the lepry, tetters and ring-wormes: as a pessarie it extracts the dead
birth: the decoction with hydromel, d. h. the yellow jaundice, diseases of the
kidneys, the spleen, and agues. the leaves d. in wine h. laskes. the root
boiled with wine and sweet butter taken, h. bruises by falling. d. with hot
beer it expells the measles and pox. unc. 2. of the root with oil olive a
pint, earthworms pp. no. 20 boiled and ap. h. deep punctures. the root is used
by women to paint the face. Park. K. the tall and low. V. kill worms, d. with
hyssop and cresses. the leaves and root d. in wine h. the mother. Bauh: the
root boiled with oil and wax, h. burnings: ap: with barley meal it h. the
erysipelas. The other, called Alcibiadion, being taken, h. the bitings of
venomous beasts. Plin: the leaves ap. with honey and meal h. luxations.

All-heale. Panax.
P. The 1. grows in Syria, Boeotia, etc. the Clownes-Allheale, in moist
places. T. The 1 Fl. from May to the end of September: the 2. in Aug. and seedeth
in September. N. (...). The Clownes Allh: is called Stachys palust. and aquat:
and tertiola.
All-heale. Ger: K. as that of Hercules, and the great Allh. T. the bark of
the root is hot and dry: Gal: yet less then the juice, so 3. V. the seed
powdered and d. in wormwood wine h. poison, and the bitings of venomous
beasts. the leaf or root stamped with honey, till like an unguent, ap: cures
ulcers and wounds, and covers naked bones. The Clownes Allheale. T. is hot 2
dry 1. V. the leaves stamped with axungia, h. green wounds, ap. as a pultise:
so also with oil and turpentine: taking inwardly Saracens confound with honey
and sugar, boiled in Claret wine. Park: K. as the American with shining leaves,
the crusted berried, and costus-like all-heale V. the gum of that of Herc.
purges phlegm from remote parts. ap. and d. it h. cold diseases so the last.

All-seed, Atriplex sylvestris.
P. Near path ways, ditches and dung-hils. T. Fl: and seedeth in June, to the
end of Aug. N. (...). Polyspermon Cassani Bassi.
All-seed, or Arrach wild. T. Gal. is moist 2 cold 1 see orach. Col. K. as the
great common wild narrow leafed, and wild Arrach, with so much seed that it is
called All seed. V. The common wild Arraches, are near as cold as the garden
sorts, but more drying, serving chiefly for inflammations, being applied
outwardly thereunto; applied they cool apostumes, and h. S. Anthonies fire,
and such like maladies: so Park. applied they dissolve tumors, with vinegar and
nitre ease pain of the Gout, and cure scabbed nails.

Almond tree. Amygdalus.
P. Hot regions, any where if planted. T. Fl. with the Peach: the fruit is ripe
in Aug. N. (...). Nuces graecae Caton: the fruit amygdalum.
Almonds. Ger: T. the sweet, dried, are moderately hot; the bitter are hot and
dry 2 and fat. V. the sweet are nourishing, gross when fresh, and bind the
belly. The milk h. the lask, the bloody flixe, and plurisie, opening,
concocting, and cleansing, they h. the chest, and lungs, and raise up rotten
humors, taken before meat they stop the belly, with barley water, h. fevers.
the oil of the sweet Almonds h. all aches, and plurisies; d. after phlebotomy:
and stone of the kidneys, it lubrifies the ureters, opens the belly, h.
colic, and women's throws, smoothes the face, and cleanses the skin. Bitter
Almonds attennuate, and open the liver, and spleen, h. pain of the side, open
the body, provoke urine, bring down the menses, h. strangury, with a looch
cleanse the lungs: and with starch stay haemoptysis. 5 or 6 taken fasting keep
from drunkenness, they mundify the skin and ulcers: with honey h. the bitings
of mad dogs: and ap: with vinegar h. headache, cough, and shortness of wind*
the oil d. is diuretic: so ap. Diosc. the gum heals and binds. h.
haemoptysis, pains of the stone, sharpness of urine, decoct with licorish,
and tetters dissolved in vinegar. Park. V. the oil with powder of sugar candy,
h: dry coughs, and women after travel: the powder of the cakes smoothes the
skin: the bitter, with amylum and mints h. haemoptysis.

Aloes. Aloe.
P. India, Arabia, Egypt, Asia, Spain, and nigh the Sea. T. It is always
green. Fl: in the summer months. N. (...). Amphibion. Sempervivum. Sedum.
Aloes. Ger: J. K. as the common, and prickly. T. the juice is hot 2 dry 3.
very bitter: emplasticke, and something binding, ap. V. it purges the belly,
comfort the stomach, it purges more if not washed: if so, it more
strengthens the stomach, and purges choler out of the next passages: it
preserves from putrefaction, kills worms, h. stinking breath, and opens
the piles; taken in a small q. it c. monthly courses, and opens obstructions,
drach. 1. taken. It helps wounds, cleanses ulcers, as in the fundament, etc.
its put into medicines which stanch bleeding; and h. the eyes, troubled with
roughness and itching. with vinegar and oil of roses ap. it h. the headache,
and with wine, the falling of the hair. with wine and honey it h. swellings and
ulcers of the mouth: with honey, the spots coming of stripes: the juice, aloe
succotrina, purges phlegmatic, cold, and choleric humors, in plethorick
bodies. drach: 2. taken in a stewed prune, expel superfluous humors, h. the
jaundise, and all fluxes of blood: so ap. Lignum aloes. T. is moderately hot
and dry, of somewhat subtle parts: taken, it h. moist stomachs and weak
livers; the dysenterie, and plurisies, and is cordial; chewed, it perfumes the
breath; if burnt, the room. Park. V. the leaves of the herb h. scalding, the
juice ap. with oil of wormwood to the navill kills worms. The American. T.
is bitter and sharp, the juice h. wounds and old sores, with wormwood the
wounds of Serpents: the fume taken h. the French disease.

Anemonie. Anemone.
P. They grow not wild in England, or rarely. T. Fl: in Jan: to the end of
April N. (...). Herba venti. Ranunculus sylvarum. Leimonia Th.
Anemonie. Ger: J: K. as the purple, double scarlet, great double of Bythinia,
and single, chestnut, broad leaved, double yellow, storcks-bill, Matthiolus's
white, three leafed, and poppy wind flower. T. are all sharp and binding. V.
the juice snuffed up into the nose, mightily purges the head. the root chewed,
is an apophlegmatisme. In collyries, it eases inflamed eyes. the juice
cleanses corrosive ulcers. the leaves and stalks boiled and eaten, cause
milk: provoke terms, and ease the leprosy, in bathes. The other Anemonies of
John's. K. as the broad leaved skarlet, the skarlet with the large flower, broad
leafed of Constable. small leaved with the sanguine flower, small leaved skarlet,
light purple small leaved, whitish small leaved, striped flesh-coloured, small
leaved double crimson, and double dark purple Anemonie. T. are hot and biting,
the juice h. scarres of the eyes. Trallian. the flowers beaten in oil ap.
cause hair to grow: and agree with the 1. The wild. Ger: J. K. as the yellow,
white, double white wood, and double purplish wood Anemonie. T. V. agree with
the garden Anemonies. Col. the root chewed, purges water and phlegm very
forcibly, therefore h. the Lethargy, by spitting. Park. the leaves are used in
the ointment martiatum and h. cold distempers.

Anet. Anethum.
P. Gardens, and other places. T. Fl: and seedeth in Aug: N. (...). Anetum,
Dill: and So called by all.
Anet Ger. Gal. T. is hot fine 2di dry (...) the decoction of the dried tops,
(...) causes milk, h. windiness, (...) rine, increases sperme, and stays
the hicket: so smelled to or ap. with wormwood wine. Gal. the seed burnt and
ap. to moist ulcers, heals them, as in the secret parts: the oil in which it
is boiled, is digesting, and anodyne: causes sleep, concocteth humors, and
provokes lust. the fume of dill boiled in wine, h. the suffocation of the
mother. Park. T. it is hot 3 dry 2. green: dry, 3 and digesting. V. boiled and
d. it h. pains and swellings, stops the flux, and vomiting, h. windiness of
the mother, and much d. h. venery.

Angelica. Angelica.
P. In gardens sc. the 1. the rest in fields, etc. T. Fl: in July and Aug. the
roots perish after the seed. N. (...). radix Spiritus S: the last archangelica.
Angelica Ger: J: K. as the garden, wild, and great wild Ang: T. especially
that of the garden, is hot and dry 3, opening, attennuating, digesting, and
hydrotick. V. the root of the garden Angelica h. poison, plague and all
infections by cotrupt air, chewed in the mouth, and that by urine and sweat.
it h. pestilent fevers, drach. 1 of the powder d. with thin wine, the distilled
water of card. b. or of tormentil, vinegar, or treacle: it opens the liver
and spleen, draws down the terms, and expels the secundine. the root d.
in wine h. the cold shivering of agues. the root green h. the asthma, by
expectoration. it h. surfeting, loathing of meat, c. concoction, comfort the
heart, and cures the bitings of venomous beasts: so the wild, but less
effectually. Park. K. as the mountain, and great water Ang. V. the distilled
water h. all pains of cold and wind, 3 spoonefulls taken at once, and with the
powder of the root h. the pleurisy and diseases of the breast, colic,
strangury, tumors, and stoppages, the juice ap. h. the scotoma, deafness,
toothache, ulcers, and sciatica. Pem. the distilled water d. h. the mother, and
ap. h. the gout.

Aniseed. Anisum.
P. Candy, Syria: the East Countries and Gardens. T. Its to be sown in May: the
seed is ripe in Aug. N. (...). Matahalna, yerva dulce Hisp.
Aniseed. Ger: J. K. as the common, and starry headed An. T. Gal. the seed is
hot and dry 3, as others 2, or dry 1 hot 2. V. the seed h. wind and
belchings, and gripings of the belly: gently provokes urine, causes milk,
and lust, h. laskes and the whites, chewed it sweetens the breath, h. short
wind, and dropsy; quenches thirst, and h. the hicket; dried and taken with
honey, it cleanses the breast from phlegm; with bitter Almonds it h. old coughs,
it prevents falling sickness, and with honey, vinegar and hyssope gently
boiled, h. Squinancy being gargled. Park: V. the seeds h. consumptions, decoct
with figgs and licorish. 3 or 4 dropps of the oil d. in wine, h. giddiness;
ap. it draws things out of the eyes, and h. bitings, sc: the seed, with oil of
roses ap: it h. the ears; the quintessence h: convulsions.

Appletree. Malus.
P. Orchards, and fertile ground: the rest in horsedung. T. It bloom's in
April, and May: the fr: is ripe in July, and September. N. (...), Malum the
fruit, and pomus the tree.
Apples. Ger: K. as the pome-water, Bakers ditch apple, the Queening, the
summer and winter Peare-maine. T. are all cold and moist superfluously; the
sweet are not so cold and moist, but more nutritive and descend more slowly:
the sour are colder and moister, of less nourishment, and eaten before meat,
mollify the body; the austere unripe are cold, c. gross blood, wind, and the
colic, the middle tasted retain the faculties of the other. V. the roasted,
are better then the raw: apples h. a hot stomach; the austere strengthen it
enfeebled by heat: and ap: h. all inflammations. the juice of the sweet and
middle tasted temper melancholy; the ointment of the pulpe, with swines grease
and rose water, beautifieth the face, and h. rough skins: the pulpe of the
roasted, n: 4 or 5. especially of the pomewater apples m: in a quart of fair
water; till like lambs-wooll, and d. last at night, h. the strangury, and
gonorrhaea's, etc. the leaves cool and bind, and h. inflammations in the
beginning: apples cut in pieces, and distilled with camphire and butter-milke,
h. the marks of the small pocks, ap: in their state: taking also milk with
saffron, or mithridate d. Mad apples. Ger: mala insana. T. are cold fere 4
and hurtful; yet those of Toledo eat them with scraped cheese pickled, to
procure lust. The apples of love. Ger: are very cold, and moist. V. they are
olygotrophicke and cacochymicke, yet in hot countries are eaten, boiled with
pepper, salt, and oil. The Ethiopian apples. T. are as those of Love. V. they
are eaten as sauce, as the former. The thorny apples and those of Peru. T. are
cold 4 and narcoticke as Mandrake. V: the juice boiled with axungia to a salve,
h. all inflammations and burnings: and the leaves with oil olive boiled till
crisped and strained, then with wax, rosin, and a little turpentine boiled to a
salve, h: old ulcers and sores of the secrets, and new wounds. Park: V. the
sour h. thirst, the sharp cut phlegm, and h. the appetite, the rotten h:
inflammations. Adams apple. T. as lemmons, yet milder: dissect and ap. with
powder of brimstone, heated under cinders, it h. the itch and scabbs. The
Indian. T. is binding, and h. laskes. The tart Indian h. the appetite, and
chollerick agues: and ap. the web in the eye. Thornie apples. V: the seed h.
the stone and urine. Adams apple, Serap: fructus musae. T. heateth and
moistneth fine primi. V. the fr: is of little nourishment, h: a hot breast, the
lungs and bladder, provokes urine, and c venery, too much eaten it hurts the
stomach and stopps the liver.

Apricock-tree. Malus Armen.
P. Gardens, against walls. T. Fl: in April: the fruit is ripe in July. N.
(...). Praecocia, the lesser. Chrysomelon.
Apricocks. Ger: K: as the greater, and lesser. T. are cold and moist 2 yet not
so moist as Peaches. V. they are more wholesome to the stomach then Peaches,
oligotrophick, and full of excrements: they putrify taken after meat: and
before it, cause other meats to descend as Peaches; the kernel is sweet; the
leaves not yet used. Park. V. apricocks have no use in Physic. Matthew: the oil
of the kernells h: inflamed piles, tumors, hoarsness, and pains of the ears
unc: 5. d. with unc: 1. of muscadell, h. the stone and colic.

Arch-angell: Lamium.
P. By hedges, walls, ways, borders of fields. T. Fl: all summer, chiefly the
beginning of May. N. (...), Vrtica iners, and mortua, Archangelica.
Arch-angell, Ger: J: K. as the white, yellow, red, Hungary, hedge, and Hungary
with the variegated flower, T. they are hotter and drier then nettles, nigh to
hore-hound. V. stamped with vinegar and ap: as a pultis, they h^ wens, hard
swellings, the Kings evil, inflamed kernels under the ears, and ^awes, neck,
arme-holes, and slankes: so bathed being decoct, the white flowers conserved
and taken, stay the whites; the distilled water c. a good color, mirth, and
refreshes the vital spirits. Park: also the Spanish: V: as the rest h.
obstructed and hard spleenes d. and ap: it h. the gout, and draws out
splinters, and stopps bleeding ap: to the neck.

Aromaticall reed, Acorus.
P. The 1 in gardens, planted: the 2d in Arabia. T They put forth their leaves
in spring. N. (...). Calamus Aromaticus, to which Acorus is a substitute.
Aromaticall reed. Ger: K. as the true acorus, and true aromaticall reed of the
ancients. T. Diosc. the roots are hot Gal. Plin: hot and dry and of subtle
parts. V. the decoction of the root of calamus d. provokes urine, h. pain in
the side, liver, spleen, and breast; convulsions, gripings, and burstings, and
h. strangury, provokes the courses d. or the fume taken; the juice with honey h.
dim eyes, the hardness of the spleen, and all infirmities of the blood: the
root boiled in wine, stamped and ap. to the secret parts h. all swellings, and
hardness thereof. scr: 2. ss: of the root d. in unc. 4. of muskadel, h.
bruises by falls, the root is alexipharmick, and in lohocks h. the chest
oppressed with cold humors. John's: the root preserved h. the stomach, and
prevents contagion by the air. Diosc. the best acorus is well compact, white
within and full. The true calamus Dios. d. is diureticall, and h. those that
are hydropick, nephritick, troubled with the strangury, or bruised, it moves
the courses d. or ap. the fume taken by the mouth with dried turpentine h. the
cough; its used also in perfumes. Park: Acorus taken with wormwood wine h. cold
stomachs: and ap. h. tumors.

Arrow-head. Sagittaria.
P. In the ditches, as near Oxford. etc. T. Fl: in May and June. N. (...).
Magopistana. Lingua serpentis.
Arrow-head. Ger: K. as the great, small, and narrow-leaved. T. are cold and
dry. V. like plantaine in faculty and temper. Lugd. cold and moist; but they
are rather cold and dry, and astringent, like plantain: so the seed given in
wine h. fluxes, spitting of blood, the fretting in the gutts, distillations,
bloody urine, and consumptions, the seed d. h. the dropsy, and falling
sickness; the powder of the leaves kills worms, and ap. h. sores inflamed.

Arsmart. Persicaria.
P. Moist plashes, almost every where. T. Fl. from June to Aug. N. (...).
Hydropiper, the 2d plumbago, the 4th noli me tangere.
Arsmart. Ger. J. K. as the common, dead or spotted, small creeping, and codded
Ar. T. Gal. it is hot and dry, yet not so hot as pepper; the dead is cold and
something dry. V. the leaves and seed wast all cold swellings. it dissolves
the congealed blood of bruises; bruised and ap. to a fellon for an hour it h.
the pain; and laid under the saddle refreshes the tired horse. The dead Ar.
ap. h. inflammations and green wounds, boiled with oil olive, wax, and
turpentine. The 4th, Lob. is venomous. Trag. a vomitorie; yet doubtful. Park.
V. the mild h. putrid ulcers ap. and kills worms. The root ap. h. the
toothache, the juice dropped into the ears kills worms therein, and fleas.
Col. the water ap. with aqua vitae h. goutes and aches.

Artichocke. Cinara.
P. A fat ground, set with ashes. T. It Is planted in November. the slips in
April. N. (...). Scolymus Diosc. Cactos Theoph.
Artichocke. Ger: K. as the great red, great white, and wild Art. T. is
cacochymick, and of choleric juice. V. the nails and middle pulpe with pepper
and salt, boiled with fat flesh, c. lust: so the ribbs, and are windy. It
stays the gonorroeha: the budds steeped in wine, and eaten, provoke urine and
lust. the root h. the smell of the armeholes, decoct in wine and d. the pith
being taken out: for it expells stinking urine. The Jerusalem Art: T. are
windy. V. and become meat (yet of evil juice) boiled and stewed with sack and
butter, with a little ginger, or baked in pies, with marrow, dates, ginger,
raisins of the sun, sack, etc: they cure torments of the belly. And as
Artichocks are thought to be hot and dry 2 the infusion of the budds provokes
urine.

Asarabacca. Asarum.
P. In shadowie places, and Gardens. T. It Is always green, Fl: in the spring.
N. (...). Nardus rustica, Perpensa.
Asarabacca. Ger: K: as the common, and Italian. T. the leaves are hot and
dry, purging, with astriction: the roots are more hot and dry, of subtle
parts: they procure urine, and the menses, and are stronger then the roots of
Acorus. V. the leaves by vomit, bring out phlegm and choler, and move the
belly more forcibly then the roots; the roots h. stopping of the liver, gall,
and spleen, wens hard swellings and long agues, and in a greater q. operate as
the leaves. drach. 1. of the root poudered d. in ale or wine if gross, c.
vomit: if fine it is diuretic. or drach: 3. or 4, if infused in whay or honied
water: or 9 leaves stamped: it also h. the sciatica, dropsy, and quartan
agues: given as a vomit. Pem: d. it h. the green-sicknesse, and asthma: ap. it
h. wounds, cold headaches, and dries up milk; it is not to be given to weak
bodies, or women with child. Park: K. as the Virginian, and bastard. V: this
attennuats and cleanses.

Ash-tree, Fraxinus.
P. Moist, as about meadows, the 2d on mountains. T. Leaves and keys in Ap:
and May. the 2d Fl: in May, berries in Sep. N. (...), Ornus, orneoglossum. sc:
the wild: the seed lingua avis.
Ash-tree. Ger: T. the leaves and bark are dry and moderately hot, the seed
hot and dry 2 V: the leaves d. and ap: h. bitings of vipers: and stop the
belly; so the bark, boiled in water and vinegar, they stay vomiting ap: to the
stomach; boiled in wine and d. they open the liver and spleen, and corroborate
them; 3 leaves d. in wine every morning make lean, the keys provoke urine,
increase sperm, and cause lust, poudered with nutmeggs and d. the shavings of
the wood d. are deadly: lee made of the ashes of the bark h. the scurse and
rough skin. The wild ash, V. the leaves boiled in wine, h. pain in the side,
stoppings of the liver, dropsy, and tympany. Park, the oil of the wood m.
with water of violet fl. h. pimples.

Aspen-tree, or Poplar, Populus.
P. Meadows, ditches, and by water sides. T. The buds in March and beginning
of Apr: then to be gathered. N. The 1 (...), farfarus, the 2d (...), the 3d
(...), Lybica Plinii.
Aspen-tree or poplar, Ger: J: K. as the white, black, aspen, Indian, and
lesser leaved white Poplar. T. Gal. the white cleanses, and is of a waterie
warm, and thin earthy substance. V. Diosc. drach: 1. of the bark d. h. the
sciatica and strangury: the leaves d. c. women to be barren, the juice dropped
into the ears h. their pain. the rosin of the black poplar budds, is hot and
dry, of thin parts, attenuating, mollifying, and anodyne: so the leaves, yet
more weak, and with the young buds h. pains of the gout ap. with May butter
as an ointment. the ointment of the budds h. all inflammations, bruises, and
falls. Park: V. the water dropping from the black poplar h. warts and pushes,
the seed d. h. the falling sickness.

Asphodill, Asphodelus.
P. In France, Italy, Spain naturally, and in gardens here. T. Fl: in May and
June, beginning below. N. (...). Albucum. that of the water, is called
Pseudoasphod.
Asphodill, Ger: J: K. as the white, branched, red, yellow, and dwarf Asph: T.
are hot and dry fere 3. V. Diosc. Aet: the roots eaten provoke urine, and the
terms, especially being stamped, and strained with wine and d. drach: 1. d. in
wine h. pains in the sides, ruptures, convulsions, and old coughs: the roots
boiled in dreggs of wine h. phagedens, all inflammations of the duggs or secret
parts, and ease the fellon ap: as a pultis, the juice of the root boiled in old
sweet wine, with a little myrrh and saffron makes an excellent collyrie for the
eyes. Gal: the ashes of the roots m. with ducks grease, h. the alopecia, and
c. hair. drach: 1. taken in wine, h. burstings; in broth, the biting of
venomous beasts, and c. vomiting. The juice of the root h. the white morphew
ap: after rubification. Onion asphodill. T. Gal. operates as Aron, and has an
abstersive quality, the root does attenuate and open. V. the young springs h.
the yellow jaundise. Gal: the ashes of the bulbe h. the scalld head. Bauh: the
root and fl: of the first, ap. with wine h. the bitings of serpents. the joyce
of the root put into the opposite ear h. the toothache. Oil being heated at
the fire in the excavated root thereof, h. burnings and kibes, and pain of the
ears.

Avens, Caryophyllata.
P. High mountains, thick woods, shadowy places. T. Fl. in May, till Aug: the
seed is ripe in July. N. (...) Sylvat. Sanamunda, Herba benedicta, Nardus
rustica.
Avens. Ger: J: K. as the common, mountain, fine leaved, red fl: mountain,
and dwa (...) T. the root and leaves are manifestly d^y, something hot and
scouring. V. decoct in wine and d they h. crude stomachs, the colic, bitings
of venomous beasts, stitches and pains of the sides, stoppings of the liver,
and scour the intralls, and with wine h. the wind, the leaves and roots d. h.
clotted blood, the roots in Autumn dried kill moths, are odoriserous, and
operate as Cinquefoile. Park: the root thereof d. h inward wounds, fluxes, and
ruptures. The infusion of the root d. in the morning prevents the plague, or
any poison. Matthew: the mountain Avens operate as the first, and more speedily.
Schrod: it is hot and dry 2, a little astringent, discutient, cephalic, and
cardiack.

B
Balme-Aple. Balsamina.
P. Hot Regions, Gardens, Italy. T. It Is to be sown in April in horse-dung. N.
(...). Pomum Hierosol: Viticella, Caranza.
BAlsame-apple. Ger: T. the apples and leaves are much drying, moderately
cooling, or hot 1, and dry 2. V. the leaves h. green wounds, bruised and ap.
d. with wine they h. the colic, burstings, and convulsions. The leaves of the
male, poudered and d. in wine h. those that are deeply wounded, and the
colic: the oil of the fruit h. green wounds, cramps, and shrunk sins ap:
and pains of childbirth, the hemorrhoides, and all other pains of the
fundament. The leaves d. in wine, h. ruptures. The female is near the first in
temperature, the oil of the fruit h. inflamed wounds, and consolidateth, it h.
ulcers of the duggs, and privities with a pessarie. The apple ap: h. wounded
and pricked sinews, scalding, and scarres ap: and d. and barrenness bathed and
ap. Park: The oil h. scarres proceeding of wounds, pains of the stinging of
bees, and consumes moisture.

Balsam-tree, Balsamum.*
P. In Egypt, and the Indies. T. It Is green all the year. N. (...). The liquor
opobalsamum, the fr. carpobalsamum. the wood xylobalsamum.
Balsam-tree. Ger. T. balsam is hot and dry 2 with astriction. V. natural
balsam taken fasting in the morning with rose water or wine, the q. of 5 or 6
drops h. rhose that are asthmatick, it h. pains of the bladder and stomach,
and comfort the same, it h. stinking breath, and the shaking fits of the
quotidian ague, also it cures consumptions, and cleanses the womb being used
as a pessarie; the stomach being annoinred therewith, it h. digestion,
preventeth obstruction and windiness; it h. hardness of the spleen, and
pains of the reins and belly c. of cold, and all aches ap. with a linen
cloth, also it dissolveth oedematous tumors, and strengthens the members, it
comfort the brain, h. palsies, convulsions, and all griefs of the sinews
ap. and speedily cures green wounds. Balsam-tree of Hispaniola, yields a
^uyce which being boiled in water to the thickness of honey, h. wounds and
ulcers, stops bleeding, and is more effectual then the true balsam; the water
which issues out of the branches being cut off, is vulnetary, and h. all cold
diseases being drunk some few days together. The balsametree of Clusius,
called Molle by the Indians. T. is astringent, hot and compounded of diverse
faculties. V. the berries sod in water make a most wholesome drink, vinegar, and
honey. The leaves boiled and the decoction d. h. all cold diseases; the white
gum being dissolved in milk. ap. h. the web of the eyes, and clears the
sight, the decoction of the bark used as a bath, h. the pain, and swellings
of the legs. This tree is of such estimation among the Indians, that they
worship it as a God, according to their savage rites, and ceremonies. Park: V.
the liquor of the first h. all poisons, and infections, all agues arising from
obstructions, and all diseases of cold and wind, and the cough. The Indian is
as the first.

Barbery-bush. Berberis.
P. Deserts, Woods, borders of fields. T. It has leaves in April. Fl: and Fr:
in Sept: N. (...). Crespinus. oxyacantha. uva crespina.
Barbery bush. Ger: T. the leaves and berries are cold and dry 2. Gal: of thin
parts, and cutting. V. the leaves season meat as sorrel. The decoction h.
choleric agues, heat of the blood and liver: so the berries and h. hot laskes,
bloody flix, and bleeding. The green leaves made into a sauce as sorrel, h.
hot stomachs, burning agues, and appetite lost: the conserve of the fruit more
effectually. The roots steeped certain days in strong lie of the ashes of
ashtree, color the hair yellow. John's: the bark of the roots h. the jaundise.
Park: the juice stopps women's courses, taken with Southernwood water and sugar
it kills worms, it h. haemoptysis, fastneth the teeth, stopps rheumes, and
gleweth wounds: the inner bark d. h. the jaundise.

Barley. Hordeum.
P. Loose and dry ground almost every where. T. It is to be sown in March,
it is ripe in Aug: N. (...). these barleyes are called distichon and
polystichon.
Barley. Ger: K. as the common, and bear Barley. T. is cold and dry 1,
abstersive and drying more then bean meal. V. Diose. it cleanses, provokes
urine, c. windiness, and hurts the stomach: the meal boiled in hydromel
with figgs h. inflammations: with pitch, rofin, and pigeons dung, it softneth
and ripeneth hard swellings: with melilot and poppy seeds it h. pain in the
sides: ap. with line-seed, senugreek, and rue, it h. wind in the gutts: with
tar, wax, oil, and the urine of a boy, it does digest, soften, and ripen hard
swellings in the throat, as the Kings evil: boiled with wine, myrtles, the
bark of the pome-granate, wild pears, and the leaves of brambles, it h. the
laske: the ale or beer made of it, boiled to a salve, and ap: h. pains of the
sinews and joints: or for old and new sores, take strong ale lib. 2. one ox
gall, boil them gently with stirring, add vinegar lib. 1. olibanum unc: 1.
fl. of camomill and melilot an. unc: 1. rue finely poudered unc: sem: a little
honey, and a small q. of the powder of cominseed, boil them to an unguent and
ap: it h. old and new sores: also the meal boiled in water, with garden
nightshade, the leaves of garden poppy, the powder of senugreeke, lineseed,
and a little hoggs grease. h. all hot swellings, and the dropsy. The naked
Barley. Ger: V. boiled in water h. burning choler, also in vehement fevers,
add the seeds of white poppy and lettuce to cause sleep, and for shortness of
breath, add figgs, raisins of the sun, licorise, and anniseed, boiled with
whay, the leaves of sorrel, marigolds, and scabious, it h. the thirst, and
inflamed livers d. 1 and last in the day. Wall-barley, and burnt, stamped, and
ap. c. hair to grow. French barley. Pem: h. severs of choler, diseases of the
breast, sharpness of the throat, and c. milk: outwardly it mollifieth. Park:
Way barley makes hair grow: the caustic is hot 4. Barth: Ang: the ptisan of
barley quenches thirst, and h. the feverish heat of the body, also it
nourishes, and comfort the same. Fuch: Diose: the best is white, and the
ptysan thereof h. the roughness of the throat. Came: Matthew. it h. the plurisie,
tabes, and marasmus, and those that are hectic, especially with the seeds of
gourds, cucumbers, etc.

Barren-wort. Epimedium.
P. In moist meadows: and shadowy places. T. Fl: in April and May, and unto
the middle of Aug. N. (...). Epimetrum. Epipetron.
Barren-wort. Ger: Gal: T. is moderately cold, with a watery moisture, as yet
not used in physic. Park: it keeps women's breasts from growing over great,
being made into a cataplasme with oil and applied. Plin: Diosc: Gal: the root
makes women barren: taken inwardly, as also the leaves poudered, and taken in
wine for some time, so Bauhinus.

Basil. Ocymum.
P. Gardens. The wild in gravelly watery ground. T. Fl: in June and July, by
little and little. N. (...). Basilicum. The wild Acin^s.
Basil. Ger: John's: K. as the great, citron, bush, and Indian. T. Gal: is hot
2 with superfluous moisture. ap: it does digest, distribute and concoct. V.
Diosc: if much eaten it dulleth the sight, mollifieth the belly, breeds
wind, provokes urine, dries up milk, and is dyspeptick. The juice with fine
meal of parched barley, oil of roses, and vinegar, h. inflammations, and the
stingings of venomous beasts. The juice d. in sack h. the headache: and ap,
cleanses the eyes, and dries them. The seed d. h. melancholy, short
windednesse, and strangury, and is a sternutatory. The smell h. the heart, and
head. The wild. K. as the stone, Fish, Austrian field, and wild Basil of the
Alps. T. the seed of these wild Basils is hot and dry. V. ap: with wine the
herb h. pain of the eyes, the juice mundifieth them, and h. catarrhes
instilled. The stone Bas. stops the laske and courses: ap: it h.
inflammations, these have moderate heat and astriction, and cure the contrary
diseases. The cow-basil is not used in physic. Ephemerum or quick fading Fl:
boiled in wine h. the toothach, gargled. Pem. Basil, d. provokes the terms,
expells the birth, and poison, h. swounings and c. venery. ap: it h. the
lethargy, iaundise and dropsy: put into the ears with goose grease it h. the
pain in young children. with honey ap: it h. spotts in the face, the dose is
from 1 ser. to 43 gr. Park: the seed kills worms, lessens the spleen, and with
ox gall h. scarres. The broad leafed wild as the rest h. cramps, hoe swellings
and lasks. Bauh: Trag: the first h. the phlegm of the lungs being hot,
resolving and incisive.

Batchelours buttons. Lychnis hortensis.
P. Gardens for ornament. T. Fl: in June and July. N. Batrachion: rapum D.
Anthonii the double.
Batchelours buttons. Ger: J: K. as the red, white, and degenerate with green
flowers. T. V. are not yet discovered. Double batchelours buttons. K. as the
double crowfoot, double white, double wild. T. doc bite as the other crow feet
do. V. the root applied does exulcerate and attract the humors: yet Dod. they
are not so hot and dry as crow-foot.

Bawme. Melissa.
P. Gardens, Mountains, woods. T. Fl: June, July, and Aug: So the Assyrian. N.
(...). Melites. Aprastrum. Citrago. Melissophillum.
Bawine. Ger: J: K. as the common, Turkey, bastard with white, and with purple
Fl: the smiths bawme, smooth Molucca, and thorny. T. is hot and dry 2. Gal:
like hore-hound. V. d. in wine it h. the bitings of venomous beasts,
melancholy, and comfort the heart: the common d. h. the mother: the juice
glutinateth wounds: so the herb with aqua vitae, the hives of Bees rubbed with
it draw others: it h. the infirmities of the heart, cold and moist stomachs, c.
concoction, and opens the brain. d. in wine and ap: it h. the bitings of mad
dogs, and d. it h. the toothache, the orthopnoea, and eyes: the leaves with
salt h. the Kings evil, hard swellings, and the gout. Smiths bawme h. green
wounds, and ruptures, and stays the whites. Pem. d. it expells poison, and
the plague: it hurts hot and dry bodies, the dose poudered is scrup: 1 or 2.
Park: K. as the unpleasant, and Assyrian, great, and prickly. V. kills
worms, and h. the jaundise. Sim: Seth: taken before sleep it c. pleasant
dreams. Plin: d. in wine it h. the tormina. Schrod: its hot 2, dry 1.

Bay Tree. Laurus.
P. Gardens. Hot regions. In France, Spain, etc. T. It Is green Winter and
Summer. Fl: in spring. N. (...). Laurea. Laudea veterum: the wild, Tinus.
Bay Tree. Ger: Gal: T. the berries and leaves are hot and very dry, yet the
berries most: the bark is more bitter and astringent. V. the berries with honey
h. ptysicks and consumptions of the lungs, asthma's, all rheumes about the
chest: and d. in wine h. the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts, cure
poison, and cleanse the morphew: the juice h. pains of the ears, and deafness,
dropped in with old wine and oil of roses: with ointments, it h. weariness,
heateth and discusseth, and inwardly, quickneth: the berries also h. cramps,
and convulsions, the diseases of the stomach, liver, spleen, and bladder, warm
a cold stomach, concoct raw humors, h. appetite, open the liver and spleen: and
bring down urine, the menses, and secundine: the oil h. scabbs, bruises,
spotts, and congealed blood, and discusseth. The leaves bathed h. the mother,
and bladder: and ap: h. the stinging of Bees: with barley meal parched and
bread, they h. all inflammations, and d. h. pain of the stomach, and c. vomit.
The berries stamped with scammonie, saffron, vinegar, and oil of roses m. to a
liniment, and ap: h. the megrim. 2 leaves eat first h. drunkenness: the bark
of the root d. in wine h. urine, breaks the stone and drives it forth, opens
stoppings of the inward parts, and kills the Foetus: it h. the dropsy,
jaundise, and flowers stopped. The wild K. as the common, and Portingale. T. V.
are not discovered. Cherry bay. T. V. the fruit is good to be eaten, etc. not
discovered. Orange-bay. T. V. the fruit is usually ^aten, the rind being taken
off, and is of easy concoction. Green, it h. fluxes, ripe it looseneth the
belly. The decoction of the leaves h. swollen legs, and the obstructed spleen;
the fruit is cold and h. fevers; it is called Guayava, and grows in the West
Ind. Park: a decoction of the berries with cumminseed, hyssop, origanum,
euphorbium, and honey h. rheumes. The oil h. all griefs of cold, and wind ap:
bruises, scabbs, and pains of the ears. That of Alexandria h. urine, and the
terms. Strawberry bay. John's: T. the fruit is like that of the Strawberry tree.

Beade-tree. Zizipha.*
P. In Italy, Spain, and Germany. T. Fl: in Italy and Spain, in June, the
fruit is ripe in September. N. (...). Zizyphus. Sycomorus Ital: Bellon.
Beade-tree. Ger: K. as the common, and that of Cappadocia. T. Avic: the
flowers of the first are hot 3 and dry fine primi: the second is cold and dry.
V. the flowers of the first open the obstructions of the brain. The distilled
water kills nitts and lice: m. with white wine ap: it preserves the hair from
falling: the fruit is troublesome to the stomach, dangerous and deadly. The
decoction of the bark with fumitory and mirobolans h. agues c. by phlegm. The
juice of the uppermost leaves with honey h. poison. Rhas: the tree is hot and
dry, and operates as aforesaid. Matthew: H. the leaves and wood are deadly unto
beasts: the poison thereof is h. by the same remedies that Oleander is. That of
Cappadocia, works as the first, but the decoction thereof h. the heat of
urine, and diabetes the running of the reins, and exulcerations of the privy
parts: a looch made of it, or the syrup h. haemoptysis, or spitting of blood,
c. by distillations of sharp and salt humors. Manard: Beads of the roots of
S. Elen: T. V. the powder h. griefs of the stomach, stone, and ischury: the
smell does corroborate, and strengthen. Park: V. the water of the Beade tree
given to dogs in their meat, presently kills them. The beads of S. Hellen,
radix Sanctae Helenae. T. are dry initio 2di, and hot fine. V. the powder
sprinkled on the body, binds the skin, and strengthens the members. Bauh:
they are hot fine 2di, and dry 1 or a little more.

Bean. Faba.
P. Gardens and fields commonly. T. Fl: in April and May: is ripe in July and
Aug. N. (...). The black its called Faba veterum and graec.
Bean. Ger: K. as the great garden, and wild. T. before ripe it is cold and
moist, when dry, binding, and windy, of light substance, cleansing and flowly
descending. V. if parched they loose their windiness, and are of hard
digestion, and gross juice, when green they are excrementitious: boiled with
vinegar and salt taken, they h. bloody flix with laskes, and vomiring: they
raise phlegm out of the chese and lungs, and ap: h. the gout boiled with water
and m. with swines grease. The meal with oxymel ap: h. the fiery heat of
bruises, and wounds: and pultised h. the privities and papps inflamed, and
dries up milk: tempered with the meal of fenugreeke and honey it h. black
spotts c. by beating, and wastes kernells under the ears: with rose leaves,
frankincense, and the white of an egg, it h. watering eyes, the pin and web,
and hard swellings: tempered with wine, the suffusions, and stripes of the
eyes: the bean chewed without the skinn, and ap: to the sore head h. rheumes:
boiled in wine it h. the inflammation of the testicles: the skins ap: hinder
hair: with barley meal parched, and old oil ap: they h. the Kings evil: and
decoct, die wool. beans ap: without the skins stop the blood: The black bean
is not used. Kidney bean Ger: J: K. as the white, black, red, pale yellow,
Italian with a small white fruit, and small red fr: narrow leafed, of Brasile,
party colored, and purging of America. T. Diosc: do more loose the belly then
peason, are less windy, and of good nourishment: hot and moist. -- V. eaten
before ripe they are not windy, loose the belly, and provoke urine, when ripe
they are unwholesome. Park: the distilled water of bean husks h. the stone and
urine: fried beans eaten with garlic h. coughs: the ashes of the husks with
hoggs grease h. old pains and gout: the lesser bean operates as the 1. The
Molucca bean h. the brain.

Bears-breech. Branca ursina.
P. Moist and stony places: and gardens. T. Fl: in summer: the seed is ripe in
Autumn. N. (...). The smooth, melamphyllos.
Bears-breech: Ger: J: K. as the garden, and prickly. T. the garden
Bears-breech is between hot and cold, somewhat moist, mollifying and digesting:
and h. in clysters, the root Gal: is more drying. V. Diosc: the roots h.
burnings ap: and luxations: and d. provoke urine, stop the belly, h. burstings,
crampes, and consumption of the lungs, the ptysick, spitting of blood, bruises,
and strains, as the greater comfrey: a plaster of the root h: aches, and the
numnesse of the hands and feet. Park: the root outwardly ap: h. the gout. Ger:
it helps in clysters against sundry maladies. Crescent: T. it is hot and moist
1. the leaves applied with axungia help cold apostumes, and with oil, the
deseases of the Spleen.

Beares-eares Auricula ursi.
P. In Gardens when planted there. T. Fl. in April and May. N. Lunaria
arthritica, paralytica Alpina. Sanicula.
Bears-eares. Ger. K. as the yellow, purple red, scarlet, blush colored,
bright red, and stamell, T. are dry and very astringent. V. it heals all
inward and outward wounds of the breast and enterocele d. often: it is of the
virtue of sanicle. The root of Damasonium taken poudered drach: 1 or 2 h. those
that have devoured the sea hare, taken too much opium, or have been bitten by a
toad. d. with Daucus seeds, it h. the tormina, and bloody flix, the convulsion,
and affects of the womb: the herb stays the flux, moves the courses: and ap:
as a pultis asswageth oedematous tumors. John's: Park: Bears ears, h. the
palsy and trembling of the joints, prevent pains in the head, and giddiness.
The leaves of Cortusa are a little hot. Came: the oil thereof is excellent for
wounds. Matthew: Bears ears refrigerate, dry, glutinate, and restrain. Bauh:
Gesn: being chewed they h. the toothache.

Beech-tree. Fagus.
P. Plain, open, and forests. T. Fl: in April and May: the fruit is ripe in
Sept. N. (...). It is called Oxya and Scissima.
Beech-tree. Ger: T. the leaves do cool, the kernel of the nut is somewhat
moist. V. the leaves ap: h. hot swellings, blisters, and excoriations, and
chewed h. chapped lips, and pain of the gums. The kernells h. pain of the
kidneys coming of the stone, earen, and bring forth the gravel. Crescent. The
water in the hollownesse of Beeches h. scurfe, tetters in man and beast: and
scabbs ap. Park: the juice of the young leaves, is cooling and binding, the
water that comes out of the tree bored h. tetters, and sore mouths. Matthew: the
ashes ap: h. the stone, and the reins, the leaves corroborate.

Beete. Beta.
P. Moist and fertile, Gardens: the white nigh the sea. T. It Is to be sown in
the spring, and is ever green. N. (...). The white is called Sicula and Sicla.
Beete. Ger: J: K. as the white, red, and red Roman. T. the white is temperate
in hear and moisture: the other are dry, and all abstersive: the white cold,
moist, and nitrous, so clensing, and an errhine. V. boiled and eaten it loses
the belly, and is of little nourishment: the juice put in the nostrills purges
phlegm out of the head. The great Beet with vinegar oil and salt, is a good
sallad. The To: beet boiled and eaten with oil, vinegar, and pepper, is a good
salled also. Pem: the juice provokes urine, opens the liver and spleen, h.
venime, vertigo's, and headache: the red stopps flu^es, and ap: h. bleans in
the skin, kibes, cankers and scurse. Park: K. the prickly stalked, and candy,
as the rest h. inflammations.

Bell-flower. Campanula.
P. The 2 first in Gardens: the rest in sandy places. T. Fl: From May to Aug.
N. Rapunculus and Rapuntium.
Bell-floure. Ger. K. as the Peach-leafed steeple milky, round leafed, yellow,
little white, and little purple. T. these especially the 4. last are cold and
dry. V. and of the nature of Rampions whereof they are kinds. Park. the roots
of the wild bell-flours. K. as of the wild field, and time leased. V. with
vinegar oil and pepper h. the stomach eaten, and cause appetite, and milk in
Nurses sc. the greater roots, and beaten with the meal of Lupines h. spots, so
the water. They may also be used in gargles for the mouth.

Bettony. Betonica.
P. Shadowy woods, borders of pastures etc. T. Fl. in June and July: the second
in Aug. N. (...). Vetonica. cestron: that of the water, Clymenon.
Betony. Ger. T. is hot and dry 2. Gal. cutting. V. it h. deseases of the head
of a cold cause, and the falling sickness, it cleanses the lungs and chest. h.
obstructions of the Liver, Milt, and Gall, and the yellow Jaundise. It c. a
good appetite, h sower belchings, and the strangury, pain in the Kidneys and
the Bladder, it breaks and expels the stone, it h. ruptures, cramps, and
convusions, the bitings of mad dogs and serpents and poison, d. and ap. it h
the sciatica. A conserve of the flowrs h. the headache, drach. 1. of the root
d: in honyed water causes to vomit gross humors. The powder of the leaves d.
in wine h. the spitting, and pissing of blood, and all inward wounds. the
powder with meat loosneth the belly gently, and h. the epilepsie with madness
and headache, and all pains of the head, it kills worms. h. agues, cleanses
the mother. and cures bruisings. Water Bettony. T. is hot and dry. V. the
leaves scour, and cleanse, and mundify ulcers, that are foul, especially the
juice boiled with honey: the juice ap. h. red faces and deformity. Pem: the 1.
h. the dropsy m. with honey, the cough and thin rheum: and wind colic d. Ap.
it draws out splinters, and h. biles. The juice instilled help the pain of
the ears, Park. with axungia it h. plague sores, d. with pennyroyall and mede
it h. agues.

Bezar-tree. Moringa.*
P. It grows in Malabar. T. The time is not observed. N. The Arabians and
Turks call it Morian, the Persians Tame.
Bezar tree Park. T. the seeds are sharp, the roots alexipharmick, and as
effectual as unicornes horn, bezarstone, or any treacle, V. the natives use it
against all kinds of poisons, and bitings of venomous creatures, even of that
most venomous serpent called by the Portugalls Culebras de Capillo, d. and ap:
it also h. the wind colic, and leprosy, it being used many have been cured
thereof: it is mixed also with those medicines that purge melancholy: All which
is also affirmed by Bauhinus.

Binde-weed. Volubilis.
P. Almost every where: the blew in Syria. T. Fl: from may to Aug. N. (...). Of
the Prickly Sarsa parilla: that of the Sea, Soldana.
Binde-weed. Ger: J: K. as the great smooth, small, lavender leafed,
silver-leased, and black. T. are hot and dry. V. the juice of the black, much
opens the belly: the stamped leaves ap: dissolve and wast hard swellings: the
rest are not used in physic. Blew bind-week. K. as the common, round leaved,
and small. T. is hot and dry 1. Serap: 3. V. it purges thick phlegmatic, and
melancholicke humors, expels worms, and troubles the belly. Rough
bindweed. K. as of Peru, the common, that of Portugal, and Germany. T. the
roots are hot and dry of subtle parts, and decoct c. sweat. V. the roots h.
old pains of the head and joints, and cold diseases, and such as are cured by
sweating if there be no ague joined. the leaves d. h. poison. Sea bind-weed.
Soldanella. K. as the common mountain, and small mountain. T. is hot and dry
2. the 2d bitter and astringent. V. it mightily purges waterish humors,
opens the liver, and h the dropsy d. in fat broth: the powder in weak
bodies, must be mixed with aniseed, cinnamon, ginger, and sugar. The leaves of
the mountain bind-weed ap: to the navill draw out hydropick water, so in other
parts: and h. wounds: the whole herb troubles the stomach. Purging bindweed,
Scammonium. K. as the Syrian, that of Valentia, and the French. T. it is the
strongest purger that is, moderately hot and dry. V. it purges choler, water,
and phlegm, and hurts the stomach, and fretteth the intrailes, it opens the
veins, hurts the heart, if much taken c. swounings, vomiting, bloody flix,
and tenesmus: except boiled in a quince, with the mucilage of psyllium, pulpe
of prunes and mastick: or m. drac: 2 of aloes with scr. 1. thereof: or give the
quince in which it was roasted: the dose is from gr: 5 to 12. Park: Great
binde-weed K. as the blew with a triparted leaf, and red. V. the first purges
phlegm, and melancholy, and kills flat worms. The small: purge and
dissolve. K. as the mallow leafed, purple, and Arabian.

Birch-tree. Betula.
P. Woods, fenny grounds, in most places. T. The catkins 1, the^ the leaves in
April and later. N. (...). Betulla. Semos. Semuda Theoph:
Birch-tree. Ger: T.V. is not yet used. Park: the juice of the leaves while
they are young, or the distilled water of them, or that which comes out of the
tree being bored with an auger, d. for some time together, breaks the stone
in the kidneys or bladder, and is also good to wash sore mouths, a lie made of
the ashes of birch-tree bark, is effectual for the same. Col: the leaves are
cooling, the bark and catkins hot: the inner bark h. the womb.

Birds-eyne. Paralysis.
P. Moist and squalid grounds. T. Fl: from April to Aug. N. Sanicula
angustifolia: and paralytic a alpina.
Birds-eyne. Ger: K. as the red, and white. T. V. as of other primroses. So T.
they are dry and astringent, and a little hot, cephalic, and neurotick, and
h. the palsy, the roots decoct h. the stone an oinment of the leaves and hoggs
grease h. wounds, wrinkles, spots, and sunburning. the juice of the root
purges the brain and helps the megrim, the leaves d. h. the breast.

Birds-foot, Ornithopodium.
P. In diverse parts of England, as Hamstead and black heath etc. T. Fl. from
June to the middle of September. N. (...) Diosc. quorundam, (...). pes avis, the
knotted, herniaria.
Birds-foot Ger. J. K. as the great and small. T. V. are not used in meat or
medicine: yet c. milk in beasts. Park: T. they are a little drying and
binding. V. they are good to be used in traumatick potions, and h. wounds ap.
Lugd. the lesser breaks the stone in the kidneys, and drives it forth the
decoction being taken, and h. ruptures d. and applied to the part: all which is
affirmed by Bauhinus, of the tuberous birds-foot of Delechampius, called
herniaria.

Birds-nest, Nidus avis.
P. The north parts of England. T. Fl. in June and August and then seedeth. N.
(...). Coagulum terrae Plin. orobanche Gesn.
Birds-neest. Ger. T. V. is not used in Physic, Bauh. the taste of the root
and whole plant is bitter; and very ungrateful to the palate, and as yet its
not discoursed of, as to any known virtues.

Birth-wort, Aristolochia Saracenica.
P. Fat and campion soiles. T. Fl. in May, June and July. N. (...). terrae
malum. pistolochia.
Birth-wort, Ger. J. K. as the long, round, climing, Saracens, small, and
Virginian snakeroot. T. are hot and dry 3 and cleansing. V. drach: 1. of the
long birthw. d. with wine and ap: h. against serpents. d. with myrrh and pepper
it expells what is in the matrice, the flowers and dead child, so also as a
pessarie: so the round as the 1. it also h. stuffings of the lungs, the hicket,
shiverings of agues, hardness of the milt, burstings, cramps, convulsions, and
pain of the sides, d. in water it plucketh out thorns, and splinters: and in
plasters and pultises, scales or bones, it h. corruption, mundifieth ulcers,
and fills them with flesh ap: with ireos and honey. The branched birthw. Gal:
is more sweet and weaker d. in water it h. bruises. The round does beautify,
cleanse, and fasten the teeth rubbed with the powder. The root of the Virginean
Pistolochia is aromatic, and h. the bitings of Adders or Vipers, chewed ap:
and swallowed. John's. it also h. the plague, small pox, measles, and such like
malign and contagious diseases. Pem: the round root purges phlegm and choler,
attenuateth, h. the intestines, the falling sickness: kills worms, and
dries scabbs. ap: with honey it h. ulcers of the mouth, and adding aloes, lime,
and chalk, it h. the polypus: note its not to be given to women with child.
Park. K. as the running, bushy, and ever green bushy rooted. V. the 1. h. the
falling down of the mother as a pessary. Col: it h. windiness: it h. the
nerves with syrup of vinegar: the water h. ulcers.

Bishops-weed. Ammi.
P. The first grows by hedge sides. T. Fl: in June and July, the seed is ripe
in the end of Aug. N. (...). Ameos. cuminum Aethiopicum, and regium.
Bishops-weed. Ger: J: K. as the common, Candy, and small Bish. T. the seed is
hot and dry fine tertii. V. it h. gripings of the belly in making of urine,
and the bitings of Serpents taken in wine, and brings down the flowers: ap:
with honey it h. spotts c. by stripes: so also the seed of Sison, being hot and
dry 3, of thin parts and diuretic. The seed of Ameos d. in wine h. against all
poison, pestilent fevers, or the plague, and is used in the correcting of
Cantharides: pounded, honey being added to the herb, it scatters congealed
blood, and h. marks caused by stripes, being applied as a plaster. Park: d.
and ap: it abateth an high color, and makes it pale, and the fume thereof
taken with rosin and raisins; cleanses the mother. The Egyptian or Arabian
seed is said to provoke venery. Gal: Diosc: Ammi T. is hot and dry 3, of thin
parts a little bitter and sharp: therefore digesting, and opening, etc.

Bitter-sweet. Amara dulcis.
P. Moist, nigh ditches, rivers, hedges etc. T. Fl. in July, the berries are
ripe in Aug. N. (...). Strychnodendron. Solanum lignosum.
Bitter-sweet. Ger. T. the leaves and fruit are hot and dry, clensing and
wasting. V. the decoction of the leaves opens the liver and gall d. and h. the
yellow jaundise. The juice h. fallings from high places, and bruises,
dissolveth clotted blood and heals. Trag. the wood sliced and boiled with
wine gently purges by urine and siege, those that have the dropsy or
jaundise. Diosc. so also that with white flowers drach. 1. of the fruit d. with
unc. 3. of white wine for 40. days h. the spleen, and dyspnoea: and cleanses
woomen brought to bed. Park. V. a drink made of the wood h. putrid seavers and
agues: the berries ap. h. fellons. Col. it helps ruptures and wounds. the
leaves ap. with bacon h. fellons.

Bladder-nut. Nux vesicaria.
P. Kent and many other places. T. Fl. in May: the nuts are ripe in Aug. and
September. N. Pistacium Germanicum. Staphylodendron Plin.
Bladder-nut. Ger. T. is superfluously moist. V. It troubles the stomach, and
is somewhat binding, so not to be eaten: it is not used in physic, yet some use
it to provoke venery Park. and others, to cure the stone. Col. but it has
diverse evil qualities, whereby it is loathsome and overturneth the stomachs of
those that eat it. Bauh: some affirm that being planted in gardens, it
drives away venomous beasts.

Blew-bottle. Cyanus.
P. The 1. grows in gardens, the rest in cornfields. T. Fl: from May to
harvest. N. (...). the common, Flos frumenti, and Baptisecula.
Blew-bottle. Ger: J: K. as the great, common, double, double purple, broad
leafed creeping, small creeping, purple, violet, and variable. T. the common is
something cold. V. it h. inflammations of the eyes: the rest are not
sufficiently known as to their faculties. Park: V. the powder of the dried
leaves of the great blew-bottle d. h. inward bruises, and broken veins taken
in plantaine, great comfrey, or horse-taile water, and resists poison, and
infection, and fevers taken in wine: the juice h. wounds ap. So the lesser.

Blite. Blitum.
P. Gardens and fields, and wast places. T. Fl: all summer long: seed in Aug:
and Sept* N. (...). Of the black, Sanguinaria, and Blitum nigrum.
Blite. Ger. J. K. as the great white, great red, small white, and small red.
T. is cold and moist 20, of little nourishment. V. it loses the belly, yet
not vehemently, not being nitrous or sharp. Park: it is more hurtful to the
stomach, head and eyes, then other herbs, being insipid and provoking castings.
Col: it causes fluxes and gripings of the belly being much eaten: yet the red
is used to stop fluxes of blood in man or woman. The white blite with much
seed, which by some is called allseed, is a very acceptable bait unto fishes.
Note all blites hurt the eyes. Lonic: the red ap: h. inflammations, and corns.
Bauh: Plin: d. in wine, it h. against Scorpions. Matthew: the black refrigerates,
humects, and is emollient.

Bloud-wort. Lapathum sativum sanguineum.
P. In gardens, and diverse other places. T. Fl: in June and July, the seed is
ripe in Aug. N. (...). Lapathum nigrum, rubrum, Sanguis draconis herba.
Bloud-wort. Ger: T. is cold and dry. Park. it is an excellent herb to be
eaten, the seed is much commended for any flux in man or woman, being inwardly
taken: so likewise is the root, being of a stiptick quality. Col: it comfort
the liver. The seed decoct in wine or water h. wambling pains of the stomach,
the root boiled in vinegar h. scurfe.

Borage. Borrago.
P. Gardens, and there it increases very much. T. Fl: in summer, till Autumn
be far spent. N. (...) Corrago. Porrago*
Borage. Ger: K. as the garden, white floured, and never-dying. T. it is
evidently moist not so hot, but in a mean betwixt hot and cold. V. the flowers
in sallads exhilerate and comfort the heart. The leaves boiled in pottage
loosen the belly: and in honied water h. hoarsnesse and rough throats. The
leaves and fl: in wine, h. melancholy. A syrup of the fl: exhile^ateth, purges
melancholy, and h. the frenzy; so a conserve of the fl: a syrup of the juice
with the powder of the bone of the stags heart, h. swouning, the cardiack
passion, melancholy, and epilepsie. The root is not used in medicine: the
leaves eaten raw c. good blood in them that have been lately sick. Pem: it h.
fevers, cooling and opening. Park: the seed c. milk. Aemil: Macer, it h. the
memory: and cleanses the lungs.

Box-thorne. Lycium.*
P. In Cappadocia, and Lycia, etc. T. Fl: in Feb: and March. The fr: is ripe in
September. N. (...). Pyxacantha. Buxea spina.
Box-thorne. Ger: J: K. as the common, and Spanish Box: T. Gal: the juice is
drying, and compounded of diverse kinds of substances, one of thin parts
digesting and hot, another earthy and cold, so binding: it is moderately hot,
and therefore used for several purposes. V. Diosc: the juice clears the
sight, it h. the festered sores of the eyes, the itch, and inveterate
distillations of humors: it h. runnings of the ears, ulcers in the gums, and
almonds of the throat, as also against the gallings of the lips and fundament.
Park: K. as the Italian, the yellow grain of A vignon, the 1 and 2d of Candy,
the supposed Indian, and Lycium like Egyptian tree. V. the juice stopps all
fluxes.

Box-tree. Buxus.
P. Barren ground: and gardens: etc. T. Fl: in Feb: and March: the seed is ripe
in September. N. (...). The lesser is called Chamaebuxus.
Box-tree. Ger: T. the leaves are hot, dry, astringent, and of a loathsome
smell. V. it is not used in medicine; yet some Empericks use the wood against
apoplexies etc. The bastard dwarf box, chamaebuxus fl: coluteae. T. the leaves
are bitter and hot. V. it is not used in physic, nor the faculties yet known.
Park: V. some use the wood of the first in stead of guajacum, against fluxes
and the French pox. Fernel. the leaves purge, unc: 1. decoct in whay, or drach:
1. of the powder d. in broth. Given to horses they h. the botts: with
pennyroyall they h. the bitings of dogs.

Bramble or blackberrie bush. Rubus sylvestris.
P. In hedges: the 2d in gardens planted. T. Fl: in May and June: the fruit is
ripe in August and September. N. (...). Sentis, Vepres, Batus, Cynosbatus: the
fr: Mora bati.
Bramble-bush. Ger: J: K. as the common, the raspis, stone black-berry, and
knot-berry bush. T. the young budds of the bramble bush, the fl: and leaves,
and unripe fruit, are very dry and astringent. V. chewed they h. inflammations
of the mouth, and almonds of the throat, and stay all fluxes, so decoct with
honey: they h. the eyes hanging out, knots in the fundament, and ap. stay the
haemorrhoides. The indurate juice of the stalks, leaves, and unripe fruit is
more effectual. The ripe fruit is sweet, temperate, and wholesome: it has
astriction, so helps the stomach dried unripe: too many eaten c. headache: the
root is binding, and of thin substance, and wastes the stone in the kidneys.
The berries and flowers provoke urine, and decoct in wine h. the stone, the
leaves boiled in water, with honey, alum, and white wine ap. h. sores in the
mouth and privities, and fasten loose teeth. The Raspis is thought to be like
the bramble in temperature and virtues, but not so much binding or drying.
Diosc: it operates as the bramble. The fruit h. weak stomachs. Park: the
berries of the first h. against poison: the juice with mulberies h. the stomach
and heart burning with hypocistis and honey. The leaves poudered h. ulcers.

Bread of India. Jucca.
P. All the tract of India. T. It Is green all the year. N. Hiucca, Hiurca,
Manihot: the bread thereof Cazavi.
Indian bread. Ger: T. it is hot and dry 1, the poisonous juice being pressed
forth, it is dry in the middle of the 2d. Park: bread made of the root, the
juice being pressed out, and the root poudered, then with water made into
cakes, is of good nourishment, yet exasperating the throat, except eaten with
liquors to mollify it: the juice ^aw is poysonsome, but half boiled away,
wholesome. Terent: it is aromaticall and h. ulcers.

Brook-lime. Anagallis aquatica.
P. River sides, and watery ditches. T. Fl: and seed in June, July, and Aug. N.
(...). Becabunga, Berula, Cepaea.
Brook-lime. Ger: J: K. as the common, great long leaved, round leaved, the 4th
of Lobel, and that of the garden. T. it is hot and dry, yet not so much as
watercresses. V. eaten in sallads it h. the scurvy, used as watercresses, and
scurvy-grasse: yet weaker. Boiled and ap. it h. swollen legs, and the dropsy.
The leaves boiled, strained, and stamped with the powder of fenugreek, line
seed, the root of marsh-mallowes and hoggs grease, unto the form of a
cataplasme, ap: h. any swelling in the legs or arms, and preserve wounds from
apostumation. The leaves stamped, strained and d. in wine h. the strangury, and
griefs of the bladder: and eaten with the tendrels of asparagus, oil,
vinegar, and pepper, h. the strangury and stone. Park: K. the long chick-weed
leafed. V. as the rest. They break the stone, provoke women's courses, and
expel the dead birth: and fried with butter and vinegar and ap. warm h. S.
Anthonies fire, also it h. scabbs in horses.

Broom. Genista.
P. Dry, sc: the 1 and 2d: the rest in hot regions. T. Fl: in April and May:
Seedeth in Aug. the Rape, in June. N. (...). Spartum, Broom-rape is called
Rapum genistae.
Broom. Ger: J: K. as the common, rape, long floured, great floured, and
branched, the Spanish, English dwarf, and dwarf of Hungary. T. the twiggs,
flowers, and seeds are hot and dry 2, of thin parts, clensing and opening,
especially the seed, which is drier and not so moist. V. the twiggs and topps
decoct, cleanse and open the liver, milt, and kidneys, purge watery humors with
water; and with wine h. the dropsy: so the seed. A lie made of the ashes of
the stalks and branches dried and burnt, with white or Rheinish wine, h. the
green sickness, and dropsy, and expels watery humors with the urine. All
its parts trouble, cut, attenuate, and violently purge by vomit and stool
phlegm and raw humors out of the joints: sc. of Spartum: it breaks and
expels the stone: the young budds pickled and eaten c. appetite, open the
liver and spleen: stamped with axungia and ap: h. the gout: and with honey of
roses, or an egg h. the Kings evil. Broome-rape boiled in wine, h. pains of
the kidneys and bladder, the stone, and provokes urine: the juice h. green
wounds, and cleanses old ulcers. The distilled water of the fl: d. h. surfeits,
and the black jaundise, the leaves dried and poudered with the seed, d. 1 and
last. Sliced and infused in oil olive, it h. spotts, freckles, and pushes. The
fl: or seeds of Spanish-broom d. with meade q. drach: 1. c. strongly to vomit:
and taken alone, loosen the belly, and purge watery humors. Base-broome. K. as
the green weed, woody, winged, globe, hares-foot, and small with hares-foot
fl: T. V. as the first are hot and dry 2, and bitter, yet not so well known.
Spanish base broom K. as that without leaves, and the white leafed lesser. T.
V. the seeds and juice draw mightily. drach: 1. of the seeds and fl: d. with
meade c. vomiting: the seed purges: bruised and steeped in water and d. it h.
the sciatica, and squinancy d. in the morning: in a clyster with sea water it
purges. Park: K. as the white, Spanish green, and white. V. are referred to
the rest. The thorny-broom is hot and dry, opens the liver and spleen, and h.
the jaundise, and urine stopped.

Bryony. Bryonia.
P. Almost every where: on banks, and under hedges. T. Fl: in May, June, July,
and August. N. (...). Vitis alba, and Vitalba. Viticella. The black, Sigillum
Maria.
Bryony Ger: K. as the white. T. is in all parts hot and dry 3, much clensing,
purging choler, phlegm, and water. V. the first springs boiled and eaten, purge
by siege and urine. the root d. in meade in the spring, or decoct and d.
purges as before, and troubles the stomach, h. dropsies, falling sickness,
and vertigo. The root as a pessarie extracts the dead child, so as a bath
boiled and ap: it takes away wrinkles and freckles, sunburnings, spots, and
scarres, with meal of vetches, or boiled in oil, it h. whitlowes: stamped
with wine and ap: it breaks biles, and draws out bones. The fruit ap: h.
scabbs and lepry. An electuary of the roots with honey or sugar h. short winds,
old coughs, pains in the sides, burstings, and dissolveth clotted blood. The
root stamped with salt and ap: h. filthy ulcers, and scabbed legs: so the
fruit. It Is root, and that of wake-Robin stamped with brimstone ap. h. the
morphew and freckles made in a nodulus ap: with vinegar. Black bryonie T. the
root is hot and dry 3, the fruit is weaker: both scour and waste. V. the
roots d. purge water, and d. in wine h: the dropsy. The fruit h. sun-burning
ap: and spots of bruises: so the root ap: as a plaster it h. deformities of
the skin, breaks impostumes, draws out splinters, and eases ache ap: and
dissolveth clotted blood. Bryony of Mexico and Peru, mechoacan. T. the root is
of a mean, between hot and cold, yet dry. V. it purges phlegm and water,
drach: 1 or 2. d. with an appropriate water, h. all diseases of phlegm and cold
humors, old headaches, coughs, the dyspnoea, colic, pain of the kidneys and
joints, reins, and belly. Park: the faecula of bryonie taken to the q. of 2 or
3 grains in wine or broth, purges phlegm out of the chest. Mechoacan h. the
dropsy and jaundise, expels wind, and h. old agues. The jalap is more
strong. Col: the wa^^r drawn out of the root of bryony d. h. the fits of the
mother, cleanses the womb, and h. the courses.

Buck-horne. Coronopus.
P. Barren plains, and sandy ground. T. Fl: when the plantaines do: May, Jun.
Jul. N. (...). Herba stella, Sanguinalis, and Harenaria.
Buck-horne. Ger: J: K. as the harts-horne, and swines cresses. T. is like the
common plantaine, binding, cooling, and drying. V. the leaves boiled and d. 1
and last h. sore eyes, watery, and blasted, etc. the leaves and roots stamped
with bay salt, tied to the wrest h. fitts of the ague. Sea Buck-horne. K. as
the common, small sea, small buck-horne plaintaine, and mouse tail. T.
coronopus is cold and dry much like plantaine. Mouse-taile is cold and
something drying with astriction. V. their faculties in working are referred
unto the plantaines and harts-horne. Park: K. the upright, T. as the 1. V.
buck-horned. in wine h. bitings of the viper, the stone and laske, and all
fluxes and rheumes. The root h. the colic: Col: and warts.

Buck-thorne. Rhamnus.
P. The borders of fields, and untilled places. T. Fl: in May: the berries are
ripe in Autumn. N. (...). Spina infectoria. Burgispina. Spina cervi Cordi.
Buck-thorne. Ger: J: K. as the common, middle, and dwarf. T. the berries are
bitter and binding, hot and dry 2. V. they purge thick phlegm and choler,
drach: 1. or drach: 1. and sem: being taken: or the berries, from 15 to 20,
decoct in fat broth with salt. The juice of the ripe berries boiled with a
little alum, colors a deep green: and steeped when unripe color yellow.
Ram-thorne rhamnus. K. as the white fl: and purple, and sallow. T. is dry 2,
cold 1, and digesting. V. the leaves ap: h. S. Anthonies fire. The 3d decoct
and ap: h. the palsy and gout. Park: K. as the sea R. with willow leaves, red
fl: Bavarian, myrtle leaved, and black berried. V. h. inflammations.

Buck-wheat. Tragopyrum.
P. Any ground, and it enricheth the soil. T. It Is sown in April and May, and
is ripe in August. N. Fegopyrum, Erysimum Theoph: Irio Plin.
Buck-wheat. Ger. T. it nourishes less than wheat, rye, barley, or oats; yet
more than mill or panick. V. bread made of it is meal is eupeptick, of quick
descent, and oligotrophick. Park: yet not cacochymick, and is withal a little
flatulent: it mightily impinguats foul: it provokes urine, increases milk,
looseneth the belly. Taken in wine it h. melancholy, and instilled, clears the
eyes.

Bucks-beane. Trifolium paludosum.
P. Fenny and boggy places. T. Fl: and flourishes from June to September. N.
(...). Menianthes Theophrasti.
Bucks-beane. Ger: T. Diosc: the seed d. with meade, h. the cough, and pain in
the chest, weak livers and haemoptysis. Gal: it cleanses and cutteth tough
humors, yet with astriction. Park: it purges and cleanses the liver. Col: it
serves for many griefs of the breast. Lugd: the seed is bitter and subacerbe,
and also is astringent, and contracting, so h. excreation: so Dod: etc.

Bugle. Bugula.
P. Woods and Copses, shadowie, and moist places. T. Fl: in April and May. N.
(...) Renealmi, Consolida media, Solidago minor, Laurentina.
Bugle. Ger: K. as the middle consound, and white. T. is of a mean between heat
and drienesse. V. d. it h. inward burstings, rents, and bruises, dissolveth
congealed blood, h. wounds inward and outward d. and ap: it h. the weak liver,
opening and strengthening it. The decoction of Bugle d. works the foresaid
effects, opens the liver and gall, h. the jaundise and long fevers, rotten
ulcers, and sores of the mouth and gummes, and is excellent in curing wounds
and scratches, and sores of the secrets, or the herb bruised ap: Park: K. as
the blush colored, and sweet Portingall, as the rest. V. h. those that are
liver-grown, fractures and dislocations d. and ap: and made into an ointment
with scabious, sanicle, and axungia h: all hurts.

Buglosse. Buglossum.
P. The 1 in gardens, the 2d by watery ditches, the 3d in dry places. T. Fl:
from May to Autumn. N. (...). Lang de beef is called Lingua bubula: the wild
Echioides.
Buglosse. Ger: J. K. as the garden, lang de beef, and small wild. T. the
leaves operate as borage, and make soluble. V. the root ap: with oil h. green
wounds, and with barley meal h. S. Anthonies fire. The juice with aqua vitae
rubbed on the body c. sweat in agues. The leaves, fl: and roots are used in
stead of borage, which exhilerate, comfort, and strengthen the heart. The other
buglosses. K. as the wall, vipers, rough, and red fl: vipers bugl. T. are cold
and dry. V. the root, leaves, and seed d. in wine h. the bitings of serpents,
etc. plenty of milk in women's breasts. The herb chewed, and the juice
swallowed down h. poison, and venomous bitings: so also applied. Park: K. as
the small garden, great wild, Lancashire, and small creeping. V. the roots are
clammy, and binding, and in a lohoc h. coughs, and condensate rheum. The wild
sorts are somewhat hotter and drier: near to the vipers bugl: the roots of wall
buglosse h: wounds, inflammations, rheumes, and fluxes. Stone bugloss is sharp,
hot and bitter: it c. birth. The vipers, K. as the hoarie, white, and black,
exhilerate, and h. the back. The Sea Marsh bugl. h. fluxes and heat. Vigon: the
1 maturateth felons. Serap: it purges choler.

Bulleis-tree. Prunus sylvestris.
P. In loose ground: the wild in most hedges. T. Fl. about March: the berries
are ripe in Sept: N. (...). Prunellus, Spinus Virgil:
Bulleise. Ger: or wild plums. T. stay and bind the belly, so all unripe
plums, being then sharp and sour. V. the juice of sloes stops the belly,
laskes and bloody flix, menses, and all issues of blood, and may be used in
stead of acatia, being as effectual. Park: the fruit is cold, dry, and
binding, h. pains of the intestines by scouring: so the distilled water of the
fl: the leaves h. sore throats, and stop rheum of the eyes: so also the water
of the green berries, and ap: h. headaches, of heat. Col: the bark d. h.
pissing of bed.

Burre-dock. Bardana.
P. The 1 grows every where: by ditches and high ways. T. the season is in
July and August. N. (...). Prosopis, Personata.
Burre-dock. Ger. K. as the great, and lesser, T. the leaves of clot-burre are
moderately dry and wasting, the root is something hot. The seed of the lesser
burre Gal: is hot, dry, and digesting. V. the roots taken with the kernells of
Pine apples, h. the spitting of blood, and corrupt matter: and stamped with
salt and ap: h. the biting of a mad dog. The juice of the leaves d. with honey
provokes urine, h. pains of the bladder, and d. with old wine, the bitings of
serpents: the herb with salt ap: after scarrification, draws out the poison
of vipers: so the root, and h. the Kings evil. The stalk of the clot-burre
when young, boiled, the rind being pilled off, with fat meat, c. venery, h.
ulcers of the lungs, and haemoptysis with the kernel of the Pine apple. The
juice of the root d. with ale, h. a windy or cold stomach. The leaf ap: to
the gout with treacle of Androm: and the whites of eggs p. aeq. helps it,
and eases the pain. Diosc: the decoction of the root of the great burre, with
the seed ap. h. the toothach, burnings, and kibed heels. d. in wine it h. the
strangury, and pain in the hip. The fruit ap: h. hard swellings: the root
stamped and strained with malmesey h. the running of the reins, whites, and
strengthens the back with the yelkes of eggs, powder of acornes and nutmeggs
m. and d. first and last. Park: the leaves ap: h. the shrinking of sinews or
arteries. the seed d. in wine 40 days, h. the sciatica. The roots prepared h.
consumptions: the roots with wine ap: h. hard spleenes. The burres decoct, make
hair yellow. Col: the leaves ap: h. the mother.

Burnet. Pimpinella.
P. Gardens, barren places: dry sandy ground. T. Fl: from June to September,
and then the seed is ripe. N. (...). Sanguisorba, Sanguinaria, Bipinella,
Sorbastrella.
Burnet. Ger: K. as the garden, and wild. T. is drying, binding, and does
meanly cool, the lesser has a temperate scent. V. this h. wounds, stops
bleeding, d. and ap. it stays the laske, and bloody flixe, and menses. The
lesser is eaten in sallads, and does exhilerate. The decoction d. h. all
fluxes, so the powder of the herb or seed d. with wine or chalybeat water: the
leaves are vulnerary, and d. in wine macerated h. the trembling of the heart.
Park: it h. pestilentiall agues. K. as the great and American. The thorny is
dry and binding, d. it stays lasks, and fluxes. Pem: it is hot and dry 2. the
distilled water h. the skin.

Burre-reed. Sparganium.
P. Moist meadows, fennes, and ditches. T. They knot in August. N. (...).
Platanaria. Carex Dod. Butomus Theoph.
Burre-reed. Ger: K. as the branched, and great water b: T. are cold and dry.
V. the knops boiled in wine, h. the bitings of venomous beasts, d. and
fomented: so Park: K. as the unbranched, and great branched of Virginia.
Schwenck. the branched or ramous, has a drying faculty. Trag: the seed h: the
bitings of venomous beasts: as the root. So Lugd: Ruell: Plin: Diosc: Dod: its
cold, but not much.

Butchers-broome. Ruscus.
P. Rough and barren grounds, and heaths. T. It Is sprouts are gathered in
spring: the berries in Aug: N. (...). Centromyrrhine. S^opa regia.
Butchers-broome. Ger: T. the root is hot, meanly dry, and of a thin essence.
V. the roots d. decoct in wine, break the stone, and expel it, and h. the
strangury: Diosc: so the leaves and berries, and provoke terms, h. the
headache, and yellow jaundise. The roots gently raise up tough and gross
phlegm, sticking in the lungs and chest, and concoct the same. Park: the roots
and leaves are hot 2, dry 1, the young shoots are more bitter then asparagus,
yet eaten like it, open obstructions, and provoke urine. The roots d. and ap:
h. broken bones, and luxations ap: as a pultis. Col: the juice of the leaves
taken with sugar, h. the spitting of blood, and cleanses the womb: and h. the
stink of the mouth. The powder of the roots with anniseed and fennel seed d.
h. wind.

Butter-burre. Petasites.
P. In moist grounds almost every where. T. Fl: in April: the leaves continue
till winter. N. (...). Iphium Theoph: Persolata Plin: as it is thought.
Butter-burre. Ger: T. is hot and dry 2, of thin parts. V. the roots stamped
with ale and d. h. pestilent and burning fevers, cool and abate their heat,
poudered and d. in wine h. the plague, c. sweat, and drive from the heart all
venom and ill heat: it kills worms, and h. the suffocation of the mother:
ap. it h. all filthy ulcers: d. it provokes urine, and the terms. Park: the
root taken with zedoary and angelica h. the suffocation of the mother: decoct
in wine h. shortwindednesse. The powder h. blemishes in the skin. Col: the
oil of the root ap: h. shaking fevers: and coldness of the joints: it h.
farcian in horses d. and ap.

Butter-wort. Pinguicula.
P. It grows in Yorkshire, etc. T. Fl: from May to August. N. Sanicula
Eboracensis, Diapensia, Consolida quinquefolia.
Butter-wort. Ger. is hot and dry 3. V. the inhabitants of Yorkshire anoint
the duggs of their kine with the juice thereof, being bitten of venomous
creatures, or chapped: and say it rotts sheep feeding on it. Park: it h.
ruptures in children, and heals green wounds: used as an ointment it helps
the hands chapt by the wind. The people in Wales make a syrup thereof, as of
roses, with which they use to purge themselves, and their children, and put
into broth it purges phlegm effectually. The herb made into an ointment with
butter h. obstructions of the liver.

C.
Cabbage. Brassica capitata.
P. Gardens: a fat and well manured soil. T. It is sown in spring, or Sept:
removed in Ap: N. (...). Caulis capitulatus, Sambusium Cresc.
CAbbage. Ger: K. as the white, red, and open Cabbage. T. as Coleworts, are
drying and binding sc. the substance: the juice is nitrous and clensing, and
the 1 loses the belly, and is of little nourishment. Park: V. they are to be
eaten with fat meat. Eaten they dry up milk in nurses breasts, as some think:
Matthew: but they rather increase milk: the seed grossly bruised, and boiled in
flesh broth h. the colic d. and eases all pains and gripings, and stone in
the kidneys. A lohoc of the pulpe of the boiled stalks, with honey and almond
milk, h. the consumption and lungs.

Cacao-tree. Cacao. *
P. In the West Indies, in hot and shadowie places. T. As soon as it is touched
by the sun it withers. N. Cacavate, the confection thereof, Chocolate.
Cacao-tree. Col: K. as the common, and broader, T. the kernells of the fruit,
are of different parts: first they are very cold and dry, so should be
restringent and obstructive; yet they so far participate of heat and
moisture, that if they be well ground and mixed, their restringency and
obstructivenesse will be corrected. V. the confection of chocaletto, being
taken alone, or relented in milk, c. venery, procreation, and conception, and
facilitates delivery, preserves health, and impinguates, it h. digestion,
consumption, and cough of the lungs, the plague of the gutts, and other fluxes,
the green sickness, jaundise, and all manner of inflammations, and
oppilations, it h. the morphew, cleanses the teeth, and sweetneth the breath,
provokes urine, cures the stone and strangury, expells poisons, and preserves
from all infectious diseases. Bauh. Benz. the Indians use it with pepper for
drink, but it is better for hoggs then men.

Calamint. Calamintha.
P. Mountains in the shadowy and gravelly parts. T. It brings forth fl: and
seed from June to Autumn. N. (...). Calamintum montanum. Calamintum.
Calamint. Ger: J: K. as the common, the more excellent, and field. T. the
Mountain calamint is hot, biting, and of a thin substance, dry 3. Gal: it
digesteth or wastes thin humors, and cutteth the thick. V. d. with meade it
manifestly heateth, provokes sweat, consumes superfluous humors, and h. the
shiverings of agues, so the sallet oil in which it is boiled, chafed on the
body: decoct and d. it provokes urine, menses, and expels the dead child,
so ap: it h. those that are bruised, also cramps, convulsions, orthopnoea's,
and the choleric passion. It h. the yellow jaundise, opens the liver and
gall, and cleanses. d. and ap: it h. the bitings of serpents, and spotts, and
cleanses the skin: it kills worms d. with salt and honey, and those of the
ears dropped into them: the juice as an errhine stopps bleeding, the root used
in cute with myrtle seed gargarized h. the squinancie. Ap. it h. the sciatica:
eaten it h. the leprosy, drinking whay after it: of it is made diacalaminthe,
which does wast crudities and c. menses. Park: K. as the greatest, and small.
V. ap: as a pessarie it provokes the courses, and the birth. ap: it h. the
spleen: the decoction with sugar h. old coughs. Col: it preserves meat.

Calathian violet. Pnemonanthe.
P. Meadows, untilled places. T. Fl: in Aug: and September: N. Viola autumnalis.
Campanula Autumnalis.
Calathian violet. Ger: T. is hot in faculty, somewhat like gentian, but far
weaker, V. it h. pestilent diseases, and the bitings and stingings of venomous
beasts. Park: it serves in stead of the greater gentians. It resists
putrefaction, and h. against faintings and swounings. The roots taken with
mirrhe, rue, and pepper, h. the bitings of mad dogs etc. in wine they h. those
that are liver-grown, and dejected appetites, and steeped in wine h. those that
are wearied by travel, and lame in their joints, and have stitches in their
sides: taken in the distilled water of the herb it h. all agues: as a pessary,
it draws forth the dead child: the juice h. wounds and tumors.

Caltrop. Tribulus.
P. In myrie lakes and ditches. T. Fl: in June, July, and August. N. (...).
Tribulus marinus. Saligot.
Caltrops. Ger: J: K. as the water, small water, and small froggs lettuce. T.
is cold and moist, the land Caltrops, are more earthy. V. the herb used as a
pultis h. all inflammations, boiled with honey and water, it h. cankers of the
mouth, sore gumms, and the almonds of the throat. The bread of the kernells,
binds the belly. The fruit d. green in wine h. the stone, and resists
poison, so ap: the leaves d. h. all inflammations of the mouth, and ulcers,
corruption of the jaws, and Kings evil* the powder of the nutts d. h. the
pissing of blood, gravel, and binds the belly. The lesser agree with the
first. Land Caltrops. T. are cold, earthy, and binding. V. the fruit d. wastes
the stone being of thin parts. d. and ap: it h. the bitings of vipers. d. in
wine it h. poison. The decoction kills fleas sprinkled. Park: it h.
inflammations, impostumes, and flux of humors, tumors, and pains. Gargled it
h. sore mouths: the juice h. rheumes of the eyes Instilled.

Calves-snout. Antirrhinum.
P. The 1 grows in gardens, the rest among corn* T. Fl: in May, until July:
the seed is soon ripe after. N. (...). Orontium, Canis cerebrum, Os Leonis, Leo
herba.
Calves-snout. Ger: J: K. as the purple, white, yellow, small, and small
creeping. T. they are hot and dry, and of subtle parts. V. the herb is of the
faculty of Star-wort, but less effectual. Apul: the distilled water, or
decoction of the herb and root in water, ap: h. watering eyes of a hot cause.
Park: V. the wild snapdragons are little used. Matthew: the leaves, flowers, and
seed, h. the rising of the mother, m. with rose water and honey. The herb
applied to the forehead, h. the pin and web in the eye. Croll: it helps
against phantasmes. Lonic: ap. with oil of lillies it is cosmeticall.

Camels-hay. Schoenanthum.
P. Eastern countries: Arabia, Syria, etc. T. Their time answers other reeds
and flaggs. N. (...). Juncus odoratus rotundus, Vnguentarius.
Camells-hay. Ger. K. as the common and bastard. T. is indifferently hot, and a
little astrictive. V. it provokes urine, terms, and h. wind in the stomach.
It c. headache being hot and of thin parts. Diosc: it dissolves, digests, and
opens the veins. The flowers d. h. the pissing of blood, pains of the gutts,
stomach, lungs, liver, and reins, fulness of the stomach, dropsies,
convulsions, or shrinking of sinews drach: 1. d. with pepper for certain days.
Boiled in wine, it h. inflammations of the matrice, the fume being taken, and
bathed. Park: the decoction of the fl: h. haemoptysis, poison, and
inflammations of the body, d. and ap: the powder h. creeping sores. Turn: it
loses the vessels and ripeneth.

Cammocke. Aresta bovis.
P. Fertile pastures, and borders of fields. T. Fl: in July and Aug: and are
full grown in Autumn. N. (...). Anonis, Acute ^a, Remora aratri, Furze.
Cammocke. Ger: K. as the common purple without prickles, and yellow. T. the
root is hot 3, attenuating and cutting. V. the ba^ke of the root d. with wine
provokes urine, breaks the stone, and expels it. Boiled in water and
vinegar gargarised hot, it h. the toothache: boiled with oxymel it h. the
falling sickness. Matthew: the powder often taken h. ruptures, the tender
spriggs pickled, are a pleasant sallade. Park: K. as the greater yellow gentle
and variable. V. the powder of the bark of the root d. in wine, or the
decoction h. the haemorrhoids, and opens the liver and spleen, so the
conserve. The powder ap: h. hard tumors.

Cammomill. Chamaemelum.
P. Gardens, and many other places. T. Fl. most part of all the summer. N.
(...). Anthemis, Leucanthemis, Cham^milla.
Cammomill. Ger: K. as the common, sweet naked, double fl: and Roman. T. Gal:
is hot and dry 1, of thin parts, digesting and rarifying: it h. weariness and
pain, and mollifieth: V. it h. the colic and stone in clysters, and
provokes urine The oil h. all aches, bruisings, shrinking of sinews,
hardness, and cold swellings: decoct in wine and d. it h. cold stomachs, sour
belchings, wind, and provokes the terms. It h. cold agues. Decoct in white
wine and d. it expels the dead child, and secundine, and cleanses those
parts. The herb boiled in posset ale d. h. the wind of the chest, expels
phlegm, and h. agues in children: in baths it c. sweat, and opens the pores: it
h. gnawings of the belly, pains of the sides, and mollifieth hard swellings: so
the oil of the flowers: it is anodyne, and h. wearisomenesse. The wild. T. is
hot and dry as the 1. and h. the mother. Park: the fl: decoct and d. c. sweat,
and h. cold aches: the syrup h. the jaundise, and dropsy. Turn: the strongest
is the purple fl: the yellow and white fl: h. the stone. Trag: the distilled
water of the fl: h. obstructions, and ap: h. the head. Pem: ap. it h. the
colic, and wastes humors: the oil h. cramps.

Campion. Lychnis.
P. In the borders of plowed fields, and ditches. T. Fl: from May, until
Autumn. N. (...). The feathered are called, Flos cucult. Armoraria pratensis.
Campion. Ger: J: K. as the red wild, English sea, wild hairy, hoary wild,
small hairy, overworne, spatling, and white wild. T. they are referred unto
the garden Campions. V. drach: 2. of the seed poudered and d. purge choler,
and h. those that are stung by venomous beasts. The other wild campions. K. as
the red, white, and degenerate batchelors buttons with green fl: broad leafed
wild, and creeping mountain camp. T. V. are not yet discovered. Park: K. as
the ordinary rose, and nonsuch. T. the seed is hot and dry 2, the seed of the 1
d. h. poison: the leaves ap: h. ulcers. The wild. K. as the white with
streaked husks, corn, cockle, and narrow leafed. V. stop fluxes, operate as
the 1. and h. the stone.

Capers. Cappares.*
P. In Italy, Spain, and hot regions. T. Fl: until Autumn, the knops are our
sauce. N. (...). Caparis, Inturis Gazae.
Capers. Ger: K. as the sharp, and round leafed. T. Capers, or the flowers not
fully grown, are hot, and of thin parts, eaten green they are oligotrophicke,
and a medicine, rather than a meat. V. they cause appetite, and h. a moist
stomach, clensing away the phlegm, that cleaves to it: they open the liver and
milt, and h. those that have a quartane ague, and ill spleens. The bark of the
root, heateth, cleanses, purges, cutteth, and digesteth. It h. hard spleenes
taken, or ap: boiled with oximel, it expels gross humors by urine, and
siege, so h. the spleen and sciatica: it provokes the terms, and draws
phlegm out of the head. Diosc: the bark cleanses old sores, and scoureth the
crusts about the edges: being chewed it h. the toothache. Stamped with
vinegar, it scoureth tetters and ringwormes, hard swellings, and Kings evil.
The bark d. h. hardness of the spleen, the palsy, and ruptures, and is
diuretic. Beane-capers. T. V. are not of any known use. Park: the bark of the
root with oxymel, h. the palsy, and weakness of the nerves, and draws out
humors that are the cause of ruptures, convulsions, and cramps. The roots
boiled in oil. h. pains of the ears: the oil h. the spleen. The Arabian
sort is almost exulcerating. Rauwolf. Bean capers kill worms.

Carrawaies. Carum.
P. Germany, fruitful fields and meadows. T. It fl: and seedeth from May to
September. N. (...). Carnabadion Sethi. Careum.
Carrawaies. Ger: T. Gal: the seed is hot and dry 3, and is moderately binding.
V. it consumes wind, h. the stomach, c. concoction, and provokes urine: the
root may be eaten as the carrot. The seeds confected h. digestion, provoke
urine, dissolve wind and operate as annise seed. Park: the seed h. all cold
griefs of the stomach, and head, the bowels and mother, and h. the wind in
them: and sharpneth the sight. The powder ap. with a pultis h. spotts in the
skin: fried with the herb ap. in a bag, it h. the wind colic. Heart. the
oil d. in wine, from 3 dropps to 7 with a like q. of that of amber hastens the
birth.

Carnations. Caryophyllus.
P. Gardens, set in pots, in warm places. T. Fl: most part of the summer. N.
(...) Theoph: Scalig. Herba tunica, Ocellus Damascenus, and Barbar.
Carnations. Ger: J: K. as the great double, double, white, blew, and single.
T. the flowers with the leaves and roots, for the most part are temperate in
heat and dryness. V. the conserve of the fl: of the clove-gilliflower is very
cordial and exhilerating, it h. hot pestilentiall fevers, and expels the
poison, and fury of the disease. The wild. K. as the single purple pinkes,
single red, white jagged, large white jagged, purple jagged, white wild
jagged, wild purple jagged, Clusius's mountain, and dwarf, leafelesse, white
mountain, Deptford, Maiden, small mountain broad leafed, white mountain,
wild sea, broad leafed wild, and white campion pinke. T. are of the temper of
Carnations. V. they are not used in physic. Fuch: The root preventeth the
plague, it is juice h. the stone, and falling sickness. Park: K. as the great
old, Cambersine, Gredeline, Primelo, Bradshawes dainty Lady, Oxford, granpere,
tawny, and Tuggies gillifl. double and matted Pinke. T. V. as the rest.

Carrot. Pastinaca.
P. In a loose well manured soil. T. They are to be sown in Ap: and fl: the
next year. N. (...). Daucus, the wild.
Carrots. Ger: J: K. as the yellow, and red. T. the root of the yellow is
temperately hot, and something moist, of little nourishment, and that not very
good, it is not so windy as the turnep, nor passes so soon through the belly.
The red is of like faculty: the seed of both is hot and dry. V. the seed
breaks and consumes windiness, and provokes urine, as that of the wild
carrot. The root is usually boiled with fat flesh and eaten. The wild carrot,
or bee's-nest. T. the seed and root is hot and dry 2, and opening. V. the root
boiled and eaten, or boiled in wine, and the decoction d. provokes urine,
expells the birth, and c. venery. The seed d. provokes the terms, and urine:
h. the wind, dropsy, colic, and stone, d. in wine. It h. the mother, and
conception, and bitings of venomous beasts. Candy carrots. T. the seed is hot
and dry 3. V. the seed d. h. the strangury, and dysurie, gravel, and stone,
and provokes urine: it h. gripings of the belly, wind, colic, and old
coughs. d. in wine it expels poison: the root d. in wine stopps lasks, and
h. poison. Stinking carrots. K. as the stinking, small leafed stinking, and
deadly: Thapsia. T. V. the root c. gripings, cramps, and convulsions. The
wild. Park: K. as the mountain of Hungary, mountain fine leafed, the true of
Candy, low mountain parsely, and coriander leafed etc. V. the root h. coughs.

Catch-fly. Muscipula.
P. In the west parts of England among the corn. T. Fl: most part of the
Summer. N. (...) Thal: Viscaria Dod: Silene Theophrasti.
Catch-fly. Ger: J: K. as the lime-wort, common, and narrow leafed. T. V. They
are referred to the wild pinkes, and gilliflowers in nature and virtue. Park:
K. as the French, Clusius's of Candy, great Candy of Alpinus, lesser Spanish,
and the red German Catchfly. T. V. are not discovered, but may be referred to
those of the other wild campions, to which most like.

Catmint. Mentha cattaria.
P. Borders of fields, moist and watery places, T. Fl: in July and Aug: the
seed is ripe in Sep. N. Mentha felina, Herba catti, Nepeta Eystet.
Cat-mint. Ger: J: K. as the common or nep, great, and small. T. it is hot and
dry, and has the faculty of the cala-mints. V. it h. cold pains of the head,
stomach, and matrice, diseases of phlegm, raw humors, and wind, burstings, and
bruises, the juice d. with wine or meade. It Is bath brings down the terms, and
makes fruitful: and operates as the ordinary mints. Park: strange neppe is
to be referred to the rest. V. cat-mint h. cramps and cold aches, dissolveth
cold and wind: it h. coughs, and shortness of breath: ap: it h. the piles,
decoct it h. scabbs. Col: d. it h. vertigoes.

Cats-taile. Typha.
P. Pooles, ditches, and marshie grounds. T. Fl: in July and August. N. (...).
Cestrum Morionis, Juncus asper Dod.
Cats-taile. Ger: T. is cold and dry. V. the down stamped with swines grease
h. burns and scalds: so Turn: the down beaten with the leaves of betony, the
roots of gladiole, and leaves of hyppoglosson into powder, and m: with the
yelkes of eggs hard sodden, and so eaten, h. the enterocele in children, taken
fasting for 40 days, with ligature. The down ap: h. kibed heels. Park: K. as
the greater and lesser. T. cleanse and dry: and ap: stop blood.

Cedar-tree. Cedrus.*
P. In Syria, as upon mount Libanus. T. It Is always green. N. (...). Cedria
the rosin, it is also called Cedrina.
Cedar-tree. Ger: as the great of Libanus. T. is hot and dry, with an excellent
tenuity of parts. The rosin is of a clammy substance. V. the gum of cedar is
good to be put into collyries for the eyes: ap: it h. the haw and stripes.
Cedar infused in vinegar, and put into the ears kills the worms therein,
and with the decoction of hysope h. the noise thereof: infused in vinegar and
ap. it h. the toothache, put into the hollow of the teeth it breaks them,
and eases their pain, used as a gargarisme, it h. angina's, and the
inflammation of the tonsills: it kills nitts etc. ap. with salt, it h. the
biting of cerastes. d. with sweet wine, it h. the poison of the sea hare, and
h. lepers: as a suppositorie it kills worms, and used as a pessarie, it
draws forth the birth. The prickly cedar, Oxycedrus. K. as the crimson, rough
Lycian, 1, and 2. V. Gal: is hot and dry fere 3, the substance is sweet, and
used in perfumes, with the leaves. V. the berries of the low cedar may be
eaten, yet if taken too plentifully, they c. headache, and gnawing in the
stomach, the berries of the crimson one are not so hot and dry as the rest,
the other are biting, hotter and drier than those of juniper, and eaten c.
headache: yet they h. the strangury, and provoke urine. Park: the rosin is hot
4, and preserves dead bodies from putrefaction, and d. h. the ulcers of the
lungs. The prickly Cedar. K. as the Cyprus like. V. the berries with honey h.
the cough, and the mother d. in wine, stopps fluxes, h. cramps, and is little
inferior to the first.

Celandine. Chelidonium.
P. In untilled places, among brambles in the shade. T. Fl: from April, to a
good part of Summer. N. (...). Hirundinaria, Scrophularia, Ficaria.
Celandine. Ger: J: K. as the great, and great with more cut leaves. T. the
great is manifestly hot, and dry 3, and clensing. V. the juice of the herb
does sharpen the sight, especially if boiled with honey. The root h. the yellow
jaundise without agues, opening the liver and gall. The root chewed h. the
toothache, boiled with anise-feed in white wine, it opens the stoppings of
the liver, and h. the jaundise. Cut in pieces and given to hawks it cures
their worms. Clus: the juice of the great Celandine dropped into small green
wounds, presently cures them. Small Celandine. T. is hot and dry, more biting
than the greater, nigh to the crow-foot. V. it blistereth the skin, and draws
off corrupt nails: the juice of the roots m. with honey ap. As an errhine, it
purges the head of filthy humors. The root and grains h. the piles, the juice
with wine bathed. Park: the greater h. the dropsy, itch^, and sores in the
legs d. and the plague. ap: it h. creeping sores: with oil of Cammomill, the
pains, of the belly. ap: it h. spotts: the lesser h. the Kings evil and wennes.

Centorie. Centaurium.
P. A fat soil, and sunny banks, pastures and fields. T. Fl: in summer, the
roots are to be gathered in Autumn. N. (...). The lesser is called Fell terrae,
Multi-radix.
Centorie. Ger: J: K. as the common great, and whole leafed. T. is hot and dry
3, of a mixed taste. V. drach: 2. of the root taken h. burstings, spitting of
blood, cramps, shrinking of sinews, dyspnoea's, and gripings of the belly. The
herb mightily gleweth wounds. Diosc: The root, in the fore mentioned cases, if
no fever, is to be given with wine; else with water. Gal: the juice of the
leaves operates as the root, and is used in stead of Lycium. Small centorie. K.
as the common, and yellow. T. is hot and dry 2, and bitter: the yellow is hot
and dry 3. V. decoct in water and d. it opens the liver, gall, and spleen: it
h. the yellow jaundise, and long agues: it kills worms, cleanses, scoureth,
and attenuateth; it purges choler and thick humors, and h. the Sciatica.
Stamped green and ap: it h. wounds and old ulcers. The juice in collyries h.
the eyes, and m. with honey cleanses them. d. it h. the infirmities of the
sinews. drach: 1. of the powder of the leaves of the yellow centorie d. once in
3 days with auniseed, or carraway seeds in wine, h. the dropsy, and green
sickness. The juice of the red floured is bitter, purges choler, and h. the
liver. Park: K. as the Pyrenean great, great of Portugal, and great yellow. V.
d. it h. the dropsy, sc. the root, and pleurisies, coughs and strangury: and
eyes ap: the lesser d. h. the green sickness, and colic; provokes the
courses and birth.

Charlocke. Rapistrum.
P. Follow fields, ditch banks, and among corn. T. Fl: from March, till
summer. N. (...). Lampsana Matthew: Chadlock.
Charlocke. Ger: J: K. as the wild, chadlock, and water chadl. T. the seed of
these wild turnips, and water chadlock, are hot and dry as mustard seed. Gal:
these being eaten c. evil blood. Diosc: they warm the stomach, and nourish
somewhat. Park: K as the white wild, one grained, and Spanish one grained. V.
not used. Gal: the seed is abstersive, and somewhat digesting.

Chaste-tree. Agnus castus.
P. It grows naturally in Italy, and hot regions. T. It puts forth leaves
in May, fl: in Aug. N. (...). Salix marina. Vitex.
Chaste-tree. Ger: J: K. as the common, and that with cut leaves. T. the leaves
and fruit are hot and dry 3, of thin parts, and wasting wind. V. it c.
chastity, by exiccation of the sperme, used any way. The seed d. h. windiness
of the stomach, opens the liver and spleen. drach: 1. d. in wine h. dropsies:
the leaves stamped with butter ap: dissolve the swellings of the genitors. The
decoction of the herb and seed h. the pain and inflammation of the matrice
used as a bath. The seed d. with penniroyall brings down the menses, so also
in a pessarie, or sum. In a pultis it h. the headache, frenzy, and
lethargy with oil and vinegar, being bathed. The sum thereof chaseth away
serpents, and ap: h. their bitings. The seed ap: with water h. the rifts of the
fundament; with the leaves, it h. luxations, and wounds. Park: the seed d. h.
the bitings of venomous beasts, causes milk in women's breasts, and provokes
urine. Made into a pultise with vine leaves and oil, ap: it h. agues and
weariness: the seed with barley meal mollifieth, and with honey h. sore
mouths.

Cherry-tree. Cerasus.
P. Gardens, old broken walls, shadowie places, and fields. T. Bloomes in
April: the winter ch: Fl: in Aug: and has fruit. N. (...). That of the winter
is called Solanum halicacabum.
Cherry-tree. Ger: K. as the common English, Spanish, late ripe, cluster,
double fl. bearing fruit, double fl. barren, birds, red grape, common black,
and dwarf chapter T. those that are somewhat sour are the best, the wild little
sweet ones the worst: they soon putrify, and are of evil juice, and c.
worms, agues, and fevers: they are all cold and moist. V. the Spanish
cherries are like to these in faculty, yet putrify not so soon. The Flanders
or Kentish, when ripe are better, yet watery, cold and moist, and quench
thirst, h. hot stomachs, and agues, loosen the body, and nourish nothing at
all. The late ripe, or morell ^h: are dry, being dried, and binding; they h.
the stomach, and stop the belly. All are cold and moist, and eaten before meat,
loosen the belly, hurt rheumatick bodies, and cold stomachs. The black
strengthen the stomach, are better than the red; and dried, stop the laske. The
distilled water of cherries h. hot stomachs, and the falling sickness d. with
wine. The gum of the cherry-tree d. in wine and water, h. the stone,
lubrifying the passages, and h. the sharpness of humors: also it h. old
coughs, the sight, and appetite, and causes a good color. Winter cherries. K.
as the red and black. T. the 1. is cold, dry, and of subtle parts, the leaves
are of the temperature of garden nightshade. V. the fruit bruised, and infused
in white wine 2 or three hours, then boiled and strained, and d. with sugar
and cinnamon, h. the stopping of the urine, stone, and gravel, dysury, and
sharpness of water, etc. and h. the yellow jaundise. If old, d. a greater q.
Cherry bay. T. V. the fruit is good to be eaten, the rest not used. Recch: the
bark of the sweet cherry tree of India, d. h. the dysentery, the powder h. the
inflammations of the eyes, the fr: is hot, dry, and a little binding. Park: K.
as the creeping dwarf, new sound land, strange long cluster, that of Austria,
mountain dwarse, and Indian. V. the sweet are more lubrick: the tart h. heat:
the water of the black ch: h. the stone: the oil of the kernells d. in meade,
h. faintings, colic, and worms: the leaves of the winter ch: h. stingings.

Chervill. Cerefolium.
P. The 1 in gardens moist and dunged: the last in Spain. T. Fl: in May, the
seed is ripe in July. N. (...). Chaerephyllum, Enthusicum Theoph. as it is
thought.
Chervill. Ger: J: K. as the common, hedge, great, and small sweet. T. is
moderately hot and dry, but not so much as parseley, and is pleasant to the
stomach. V. decoct in wine and d. it provokes urine, so also ap: hot to the
share: it is windy and causes lust: the leaves of the sweet ch: are pleasant
in sallads. Gal: the root is hot 2, of thin parts. Diosc: d. in wine it h. the
bitings of the phalangia, and provokes the menses, and secundine: boiled and
d. it h. the ptysick, and consumption of the lungs. The seed eaten in sallads
with oil, vinegar, and pepper h. cold and feeble stomachs: so the roots, and
exhilerate, and c. lust. Tooth-pick chervill. Gingidium. K. as the broad and
Spanish. T. Gal: it is wholesome for the stomach, bitter and binding, moderately
hot, and dry fine 2di. V. it provokes urine decoct with wine and d. it
scoureth the bladder, and expels the stone. The quills serve for toothpicks:
as for the wild chervill, see Shepheardsneedle. Park: V. garden chervill
dissolveth congealed blood, and h. bruises d. and ap: it expells the stone, and
h. the pleurisy and pricking in the sides. The wild dissolves tumors in any
part. ap: it h. scarres. Strange Chervill. K. as the common, and broad leased
of Syria Gingidiu^. T. are in a mean between heat and cold* bitter, clensing
and drying a moist stomach: and d. in wine, provoke urine.

Chestnut-tree. Castanea.
P. The 1 grows in shadowi^ places, the 2d in the East countries. T. They
bloom in April: the nutts are ripe in Autumn. N. (...). Lopima, the fruit
Heracleotica nux, glandes Sardianae.
Chestnut-tree. Ger: J: K. as the common and horse chapter T. common chest-nutts
are very dry, and binding, in a mean between heat and cold, and windy. V. they
are of good nourishment, yet dyspepticke, stop the belly etc. thick blood eaten
raw: roasted they more easily descend, and are less windy, yet astringent.
Made into bread they h. laskes, and the bloody flixe. Their meal made into an
electuarie with honey h. the cough, and spitting of blood. The bark of the tree
boiled in wine and d. stopps laskes, bloody flixe, and also all other issues of
blood. Water-chestnut, see in Caltrops: Earth-chestnutts, in Earth-nut. Park:
K. as the chestnut of Peru, and the dwarf. V. the white skin of the common, d.
h. any flux: the last purges choler: that of Peru, tastes like the almond:
the Indian is a little astringent.

Chick-weed. Alsine.
P. Shadowie, among bushes, old walls, and cornefields. T. They are green in
winter: fl: and seed in spring. N. (...). Hippia, Hippago Plin. the wild,
Morsus Gallinae, Hen-bit.
Chick-weed. Ger: J: K. as the great, middle, fine, sea, right, stone,
speed-well, fountain, river, marsh, water, berry-bearing, and creeping water
ch: T. it is cold moist and waterish, cooling without astriction. V. the leaves
boiled soft in water, adding hoggs grease, the powder of fenugreeke, and
line-seed, and a few roots of marsh mallows stamped to the sorme of a pultis,
h. swellings, suppurating hot apostumes, and dissolving them: it h. shrunk
members, wounds in the sinews, and defends virulent ulcers from inflammation:
or it comfort, digesteth, defends, and strongly suppurateth. The leaves
boiled in vinegar and salt, bathed, h. manginesse of the hands and legs. The
lesser ch: refreshes birds in cages. The bastard chick-weed. K. as the
Germander, horned, ivy, and great. T. are thought to be cold and moist, and
like the first in virtue and operation. Park: K. as the greatest, great
spreading, and smaller. V. the leaves ap: with vinegar h. stingings with
serpents, and d. with meade h. pains of the back: ap. h. headache and wenns:
and all heat d. and ap: The mountain. K. as the ivy and rocky. V. as the 1.
so the sea chick: which does attenuate and purge.

China. China radix offic.*
P. In China, Malabar, Cranganor, etc. T. It Is thought to be green all the
year: the root will keep many years. N. The Chinois call it Lampatan. The
Arabians and Persians Chophchina.
China. John's: K. as the true, and bastard. T. is thought to be moderately hot
and dry. V. Garcias, it cures the French disease, yet most judge it less
effectual than Guajacum, or Sarsaparilla: it is diaphoreticke, attenuates,
dries, and resists putrefaction, it strengthens the liver, h. dropsies,
malign ulcers, scabbs, lepry, and consumptions. The decoction of the root,
also h. the palsy, gout, sciatica, schirrous, and oedematous tumors, and the
Kings evil, the inveterate headache, weakness of the stomach, stone, and
exulceration of the bladder. Park: it h. agues quotidian, intermittent,
pestilentiall and hectic: it dries up rheumes, h. the jaundise and ruptures,
all diseases of the joints, nodes, and ulcers of the privities, and c. lust, it
is to be sliced and boiled: the dose of the decoction is unc: sem: or unc: 1.

Cicely. Myrrhis.
P. In gardens, and the fields of Germany. T. Fl: in May: the seed is ripe in
July. N. (...). Smyrrhiza, Smirnium, Conilaus.
Cicely. Ger. T. is temperate in heat, and moderate in dryness. V. the leaves
are pleasant in sallads. Park: K. as the greater and lesser sweet Cicely. T. is
hot 2, with tenuity of parts. V. the leaves, seed, and roots, give a good
relish to other herbs: the root eaten with oil, butter and vinegar, warmeth a
cold and windy stomach, and h. consumptions: d. it h. poisons, and the
courses: the juice h. ulcers: Vntz. it h. the plague, so Joub: Fum: Durand:
Poter: Moresc.

Ciches. Cicer.*
P. They are sown in the fields. T. They are sown in April, being 1 steeped
in water. N. (...). Erebinthus. The black are called Arietina.
Cich. Ger: as that of the garden. T. Gal: is windy like the bean, yet of
stronger nourishment, provoking lust, and generating sperme. V. it scoureth,
the decoction wastes the stone. Diosc: the Ram ciches provoke urine, the
decoction thereof being made with rosemary, and given to those that are
hydropicall, or have the yellow jaundise. H. they hurt the bladder, and
exulcerated kidneys. Wild ciches. K. as the common, and broad leased. T. Gal:
is hotter and drier than the first, more biting, and bitter. V. Theoph: they
operate as the first. Park: the decoction thereof, looseneth the belly,
provokes the terms, and c. milk. Against the dropsy and jaundise, take of
cicers unc: 1. of French barley unc: 2. and a small handful of marsh mallow
roots, wash, cut, and boil them in the broth of a chicken: of which take
fasting in the morning unc: 4. and fast two hours after: so the white, and h.
barrenness in those that are too hot. The wild K. as the three leafed V. are
stronger then the first, and cut, open, and digest.

Cinque-soile. Pentaphyllon.
P. Low and moist meadows, upon banks, etc. T. Fl: from the beginning of May,
to Aug. N. (...). Quinque-folium. Five finger grass, Cincke-field.
Cinke-foile. Ger. J. K. as the common, great upright, purple, marsh, stone,
silverweed, wall, hoarie, small hoary creeping, wood with white fl: small white
floured wood, small golden floured, and straw-berry Cinke-foile. T. the roots
especially of the first, are dry 3. without apparent heat or sharpness. V.
the decoction of the roots d. h. all sluxes. The juice of the young roots d. h.
diseases of the liver, lungs, all poison: and d. with meade or wine and pepper:
it h. tertian and quartan agues and fevers, and the falling sickness d. 30
days together. The leaves with appropriate herbs h. ruptures and burstings,
their juice d. h. the jaundise, and comfort the sromack and liver: the
decoction of the root held in the mouth h. the toothache, stays
putrefaction, and ulcers of the mouth, h. inflammation of the almonds of the
throat, and stays laskes. The root boiled in vinegar h. shingles, fretting
sores, and cankerous ulcers. The leaves boiled in water with lignum vitae, h.
the falling sickness, with sweating. The extraction of the roots h. bloody
flixe. Park: K. as the great yellow, and white, codded, and low with wild
tansie leaves. V. the wild creeping upright and white are the best, and
operate as Tormentill: it cools d. and ap: it h. the quinsy, coughs, all
nodes, and pains.

Cinnamon-tree. Canella. *
P. In Zealand, and Malabar. etc. T. It is green all the year. N. (...).
Cinnamomum, Cassia.
Cinnamon-tree. Ger: T. Diosc: it is warming, and of thin parts, dry and
astringent, it is diuretic, oxydorkicke, and persumeth the breath. V. the
decoction brings down the menses, h. bitings of venimons beasts, the
inflammations of the intestines and reins. The distilled water comfort the
weak and cold stomach, h. pain of the intestines c. by cold: it h. the color
of the face; used in meats, they become more wholesome for all bodies: the
chymicall oil h. pains of the breast, comfort the stomach, breaks wind,
h. digestion, and m. with honey h. spotts in the face. Garcias, the distilled
water of the fl: operates as the bark. The oil of the berries, h. coldness
of the sinews, pains of the joints, stomach, and breast: the cassia lignea in
a greater q. serves in stead of Cinnamon, John's. Park: T. Cinnamon is hot and
dry 2, aromaticall, and very cordial. V. the distilled water h. the
wind-collick, the stopping of the urine and the courses, it sweetneth the
breath, and resists poison, and stopps laskes. Col: the distilled water
hastneth the birth, stops vomiting, h. the sainting of the spirits, and
trembling of the heart: it strengthens the retentive faculty of the parts: and
h. cold and moist bodies. Cassia lignea, opens, dissolves, and dries.

Citrulls. Citrullus.
P. In hot regions, as in Syria, etc. T. The seeds are to be sown as those of
Cucumbers. N. (...). Anguria. Citrulus.
Citrulls. Ger: K. as the common, and small. T. the pulpe is of little and cold
nourishment, the seeds are of like faculty with those of Cucumbers. V. it
engenders a waterish blood, h. the heat of the inward parts, and tempereth the
sharpness of choler: being raw and held in the mouth, it h. roughness of the
tongue in agues, and quenches thirst. Wild citrull, Colocynthis. T.
Coloquintida is bitter in all its parts, hot and dry fine 2di. so it purges,
cleanses, opens, and operates as most bitter things do, but chiefly by the
stool. V. it violently purges phlegm and choler, therefore it is carefully
to be used, being mixed with mastick or gum tragacanth, that it fret not the
intestines, or with gum arabic and bdellium, its good to be used in the
scotoma, vertigo, megrim, continual headache, apoplexy, epilepsie, stuffing
of the lungs, gripings of the intralls, and other dangerous diseases. Common
oil wherein it is boiled h. singing in the ears, and deafness ap: also it
kills worms, and loses the belly, the navill being annoinred therewith.
Mes: decoct in vinegar, and the teeth being washed therewith it h. the too
thache: the seed with myrrh and aloes preserves dead bodies. scr: 1. of the
pulpe taken, mightily opens the belly, and purges gross phlegm and choler:
so also the infusion, and h. the diseases aforesaid, and colic, looseness of
the sinews, luxations, and all diseases of cold. So also used in clysters:
boiled in oil and ap: with wool, it h. pain of the hemorrhoides. The
decoction used as a somentation, provokes the terms. Park: K. as the Turkey.
V. the seed h. the heat, and sharpness of urine, and macilent bodies grown
feeble by chronicall diseases: all its parts are used for the same diseases
that gourds are. Coloquintida h. the jaundise and putrid fevers: ap: it kills
the foetus, and cleanses the skin: the oil of sweet almonds stops its working.

Clarie. Horminum.
P. In moist Gardens: the wild, in barren places. T. They Fl. in June, July,
and August. N. (...). Gallitricum. Sclarea. Geminalis. Centrum galli.
Clarie. Ger. J. K. as the common, small, Fuchsius his wild, and Jupiters
Distaffe; T. is hot and dry 3. V. the seed powdered, and m. with honey, taken,
clears the sight. Its mucilage ap. draws out what is fixed in the body, and
scatters swellings, especially in the joints. The seed powdered and d. with
wine c. lust. The leaves taken h. the weakness of the back caused by too much
flowing of the whites: but more effectually, fried with eggs like a tansie.
Wild Clarie, K. as the common, with purple leaves, broad leafed wild, white
floured wild, and red fl. wild. T. in temperature and faculties are referred to
the garden Claries. Aeginet. it is hot, moderately dry, and clensing. The feed
d. with wine c. lust, with honey cleanses the eyes, so also put whole into the
eyes, and h. waterish humors, redness, inflammations, etc. And eases pain.
The leaves in pottage scatter congealed blood, warm the stomach, and help
dimnesse of the eyes. Park. K. as the garden, low Germane, Italian wild, spike
floured, sage leafed, and plain Ethiopian. V. This d. h. coughs, the
plurisie, and sciatica. The yellow h. ulcers, the powder of the first, h.
barennesse, and c. sneezing.

Claver. Medica.
P. The first in Italy, the rest in France, Spain, and fields. T. Its sown in
April: Fl. in June and July, the fruit is ripe in Aug. N. (...), Trifolium
cochleatum.
Claver. Ger. J. K. as the medick fodder, prickly snaile, and medicke f. of the
sea. T. it is cold. V. applied green, it h. inflammations and infirmities which
need cooling. Park. K. as of Burgundy, woody, Lugd. his creeping round prickly
heart of Arabia, and moon cl. V. The oil of the seed h. tremblings of the
heart, and stone, sc. of that of Burgundy: the rest are not used. The horned,
as the meadow trefoile.

Cliver. Aparine.
P. Near the borders of fields, by hedges etc. T. Fl. in June and July: the
seed is ripe in Aug. N. (...). Phylanthropos. Asperugo. Philaterion.
Clivers. Ger. K. as the common, and great goose-grasse. T. Gal. it is
moderately hot and dry, and somewhat of thin parts. V. The juice pressed out of
the seeds, stalks, and leaves, h. the bitings of the Phalangia and Vipers d.
with Wine. The herb stamped with swines grease wastes the kernells of the
throat. The leaves ap. stay blood issuing out of wounds, and sod in pottage
with oatemeale c. lanknesse. Park. V. the juice dropped into the ears h. the
pain of them. Matthew. The juice and powder h. old uleers. Trag. The distilled
water d. twice a day h. the jaundise; so the decoction, and h. lasks.

Cloud-berrie. Vaccinia nubis.
P. In the tops of Mountains and heathy places. T. Fl. in May, the fruit is
ripe in July. N. Chamaemorus Cambro-Britanica: the second Norwegica.
Cloud-berry. Ger. T. the fruit is cold, dry, and very astringent. V. The fruit
quenches thirst, cools the stomach, and h. inflammations, being eaten as
worts are, or the de coction drunk. Park. The Norway Knot-berry, li. the
scurvy, and other crude, putrid and melancholy diseases wherewith those
northerly people are afflicted. Bauh. Hoier. the people of Norway make an
electuary, thus, they boil the berries to an indifferent consistence, without
adding any liquor threreunto, the berries being full of juice, which they keep
in convenient vessels for the uses aforesaid.

Clove-tree. Caryophyllus. *
P. In the Malucca Islands, Zeilan etc. T. The Cloves are gathered from the 15.
of Sept. to Feb. N. (...). Clavus. Garyophyllum.
Clove-tree. Ger. T. Cloves are hot and dry 3. V. they strengthen the stomach,
liver, and heart, help digestion, and provoke urine. Garc. The liquor
distilled from them when green, is a most excellent cordial. C. Acosta, Cloves
stop the belly: the oil or water dropped into the eyes sharpens the sight, and
cleanses away the web. drach. 4. of the powder of Cloves taken in milk h. to
generation. The Indians use the oil or butter thereof as a balsam for wounds,
and hurts. The powder serves also for perfumes. Clove-berry tree, Amomum
quorundam. T has a fruit not much differing from the amomum of Diosc. having a
heating, astrictive, and drying saculty. V. and is thought to be effectual for
the same purposes. Park. The oil of Cloves chymically drawn is much used for
the toothach, and to stop hollow aching teeth, and serves to put into perfumes.
The powder ap. to the forehead h. the headache coming of cold. Being eaten
they sweeten the breath. Garc. Cloves taken with Nutmegs, Mace, long Pepper and
black, procure sweating to those that have the French disease. Bauh. Aegin. T.
Cloves are aromaticall, sharp, a little bitter ho^ and dry about the 3d degree.
Aet. 2. Avic. 3. V. They stop vomiting and help all cold diseases of the head.

Cockle. Pseudomelanthium.
P. In corn fields, very frequently. T. Fl. in the summer months. N.
Nigellastrum. Lolium Fuch. Githago Trag.
Cockle. Ger. T. the seed is hot and dry fine 2di. V. the seed made into a
Pessarie, and put up with honey, c. the terms to flow. The seeds parched and
powdered d. help the yellow jaundise. Park. d. and ap. it stops bleedings,
the herb decoct expels the stone. drach. 2. of the seed d. in wine purge
choler. It h. stingings of venomous beasts and the plague. It cleanses and
heals old sores, ulcers, and itch, and dries the moisture.

Cockes-head. Onobrycbis.
P. The two first only, grow in England. T. Fl. in July, the seed is ripe soon
after. N. (...). Glaux Gesneri. Red Fitchling, and medick fitch.
Cockes-head Ger. K. as the common, purple, blew, pale colored, and mountain.
T. they rarifie, attenuate, and wast. V. the green leaves ap. h. hard
swellings, or waxen kernells, ap. in manner of a salve, and wast them. Dried
and d. in wine it h. the strangury. ap. with oil it c. sweat: Which also
Diosc. affirms. Park. K. as the spiked with purple fl. and the least. V.
given to cattle, they cause much milk, and are a singular food for them.
Bauh. it stops the belly, draws forth urine and the Menses. The dry leaves
d. in wine, strangle: and ap. discuss swellings being green.

Coffee. Cophy. *
P. It grows in Turkey. T. The time is not observed. N. As for the variety of
names Authors have as yet writ little.
Coffee. T. is of an exsiccant quality. V. It dries up the crudities of the
stomach, comfort the brain: it h. consumptions, lethargies, rickets and
swounings of women, it fortifyeth the sight with its steeme, and prevents
dropsies, gouts, and the scurvie, together with the spleen, and hypocondriacall
winds: all which it does without any distemper. Hereof may be made an
clectuary, thus. Take of butter and sallet oil p. aeq. m. and melt them with
thrice so much honey, and powder of Turkish Coffee q. s. Rums. the q. of a
nutmeg taken, opens the body, and h. the stone and gout.

Colewort. Brassica.
P. Gardens, a fat soil; the wild, in new ditches. T. They are sown in spring:
The Collyflower in horsedung. N. (...). Caulis. Crambe. Raphanus Theoph.
Coleworts. Ger. J. K. as the garden, curled garden, red, white, and red
Cabbage, open Cabbage, Cole-florie, swollen, Savoy, curled Savoy, parsley,
English sea, and wild Coleworts. T. are all drying and binding with a nitrous
quality, therefore the juice and broth does mightily cleanse, the whole
substance is drying. The juice and first broth looseneth d. The rest is of
melancholic juice. The white Cabbage is best next unto the Coleflorey. V.
Colewort eaten h. dim eyes, and the palsy; and with vinegar it h. the spleen.
Eaten raw it preserves from drunkenness. The leaves stamped with barley meal
and salt, ap. help all inflammations, and break carbuncles. The juice taken
with floure-de-lys and nitre loosens the body: d. with wine it h. the bitings
of venomous beasts. Ap. with the powder of senugreek it h. gouts and old
ulcers. As an errhine it purges the head, as a pessarie with barley meal it
brings down the flowers. The juice with wine dropped into the ears h.
deafness. The seed kills worms and h. freckles and sunburning. The broth
bathed h. the sinews and joints and cankers in the eyes. Rape-cole. Caulorapum.
K. as the round. T. V. is meat not medicine. Park. K. as the fine-cur, and
thorny. V. made into an electuarie, h. pursinesse and almost all diseases.
Turn. The summer Cole is the sharper: taken after meat it h. the evil of
surfeiting. The juice h. the voice. It Is hot and dry 1.

Coltsfoot. Bechium.
P. It grows near springs, and in moist places. T. Fl. in March and April:
and the flowers quickly fade. N. (...). Farfara. Vngula caballina. Populago.
Farrugium. Tussilago.
Coltsfoot. Ger. J. K. as the common and mountain. T. the leaves green are
something cold, and drying, and h. ulcers and inflammations; dried, are hot and
dry, and somewhat biting. V. A decoction of the green leaves and roots, or a
syrrup of them h. coughs of a thin rheum. The green leaves stamped with honey
h. all inflammations. The fume of the dried leaves taken through a sunnel h.
shortness of breath; and the impostumes of the breast; so also taken as
tobacco. Park. The distilled water with Elder fl. and Nightshade d. the q. of
unc. 2. h. agues, and applied h. all heat, burnings, and pushes. The wool of
the root boiled with Niter makes tinder. The root of the hoary and American d.
h. coughs and lenifies ap. The mountain Coltsfoot is useless.

Columbine. Aquilegia.
P. Gardens, being planted there. T. They fl. in May, June, and July. N.
Aquileia. Aquilina. Leo herba Dod. Pothos Theoph.
Columbine. Ger. J. K. as the blew, red, double, variegated, with the inverted
red fl. inverted with the white fl. rose, and degenerate Col. T. they are
thought to be temperate between heat and moisture. V. Trag. drach. 1. of the
seed with scr. sem. of Saffron d. in Wine opens the liver, and h. the yellow
ja^ndise with sweating. The leaves boiled in milk h. sore throats and the
uvula fallen. The flowers open the liver. Clus. the powder of the seed d. in
wine does facilitate women's labor. Park. K. as the single and white Spanish.
V. the root eaten h. the stone: d. it h. swounings. The tufted, h. ulcers and
plague: and swounings with amber greise.

Consound. Solidago Saracenica.
P. In Gardens, and by wood sides. T. It flowreth in July, the seed is ripe in
Aug. N. Consolida aurea Tab. Consolida Saracen. Herbafortis.
Consound. Ger. K. as the Saracens. T. is dry 3. with manifest heat. V. d. and
ap. it is not inferior to any traumatick herb. It h. the wounds of the lungs.
The leaves boiled in water and d. stay the wasting of the liver, and h. the
oppilation of the same, also it cures the yellow jaundise, and chronicall
agues, and fevers. The decoction of the leaves made in water, h. the soreness
of the throat, being used as a gargarisme; it increases also the virtue of
lotions appropriate for privy maimes, sore mouths: and m. therewith. Park. K.
as the Germane small codded. V. as the rest, help the dropsy and all inward
ulcers, wounds and bruises. The distilled water h. all pain in the body and
all wounds. Trag. the water h. the fretting of the genitors, and ulcers of the
mouth.

Corall-worts, Dentaria.
P. On shadowie and dark hills. T. Fl. in April and May, the seed is ripe in
Aug. N. Dentillaria. Viola dentaria. Coralloides.
Corall-worts. Ger. J. K. as the ^oothed violet, coral toothed, seven leased,
and first and second five leased. T^is vulnerary. V. Matthew. the decoction of
the r^ot h. the enterocele, and inward wounds, especially those that have
entered into the carity of the breast. Park. K. as the bulbed, Cinquesoile and
Tresoile, Setfoile, and bulbed narrow leafed, with the least. V. the root is
drying, binding, and strenthning; it expells urine and gravel, h. pains of
the sides and bowels and inward wounds, drach 1. of the powder of the root d.
in red wine for a certain time: and d. with horsetaile water h. ruptures and
cold fluxes: and ap. the decoction h. green wounds.

Coriander. Coriandrum.
P. In fertile fields and Gardens. T. They fl. in June and July, and seed in
Aug. N. (...). Corianon. Coriannum. Coliandrum.
Coriander. Ger. K. as the common and bastard. T. the green and stinking leaves
are cold, dry, and very hurtful to the body. The seed dry, is warm and
useful. V. comfits of the seed prepared taken after meat, close the mouth of
the stomach, stay vomiting, and h. digestion. The seed dried in an oven and d.
with wine, kills worms and stops all fluxes. The seeds are prepared by
drying, then steep them 24. hours in Wine and Vinegar, and dry them again for
use. The green leaves boiled with the crumbs of bread or barley meal h. all hot
swellings and inflammations: and with bean meal dissolve the Kings evil,
wens and hard lumpes. The juice of the leaves m. with ceruse, litharge of
silver, Vinegar and oil of roses h. S. Anthonies fire, and all inflammations.
drach. 4. of the juice of the green leaves taken poison the body. The seed
prepared with sugar taken first and last helps the gout, c. digestion, shuts
the stomach, represseth fumes, h. noise in the ears, dries up rheumes, and h.
the quinsey. Park. the dried seeds d. in wine help urine, and cause coiture,
and increase blood and sperme. The Indian Coriander like seed, decoct h. agues,
husked and boiled like Rice, taking it and abstaining from other food: it is
called Mungo. Bauh. Gal. Coriander has contrary faculties, having much of a
bitter essence which consists of thin and terrene parts, with an aqueous
tepid humidity and a little astriction. Mac. The antidote is swallowwort.

Corn. Far.
P. It grows in fat and fertile moist grounds. T. It Is sown in Sept. or
October: and is ripe in July. N. (...) the first. Zea. Spelta. Zea Diecccos
Matthew.
Corn. Ger. K. as the spelt corn, zea, or spelta. T. Diosc. It nourishes
more then barley. Gal. It Is in a mean between wheat and barley, and may be
referred to them. V. The meal boiled in water with the powder of Saunders, and
a little oil of Roses and Lillies, unto the form of a pultis, and applied
hot, h. swelling of the legs, gotten by cold and long standing. Starch-corne,
Triticum amylcum. T. Is somewhat like to Wheat or Barley. V. it serves to feed
Cattle, and to make starch of. S. Peter's corn, Briza monococcos: with the
Haver grass, Festuca Italica. T. are somewhat sharp and digesting. V. the
juice of the last m. with barley meal dried, and when used, moystned with rose
water, and ap. plaisterwise, h. the Aegilops, or fistula in the corner of the
eye: it mollifieth and disperseth nodes, and aswageth the swellings of the
joints. Burnt Corn, ustilago. K. as of Barley, Oats, and Rye. T. V. are not
used in physic. They cause bread to look black, and to be of an evil taste.
Lonic. the bran of spelt is used in clysters, it is a little drying, decoct in
wine and vinegar it h. the eyes. So Trag. Bauh. the bread thereof is black and
unpleasant.

Cornell-tree. Cornus.
P. In Gardens: the second in hedges, almost every where. T. Fl. in April: the
berries are ripe in August. N. (...). the female is called virga sanguinea.
Cornell tree. Ger. T. the fruit of the male Cornell-tree is very harsh in
taste, it cools, dries and binds, and may be eaten. V. it h. laskes and
bloody flix, and hurts cold stomachs. The leaves and crops are choking and
drying, and heal green wounds in hard bodies: so Trag. The female Cornell
tree. T. the berries are of unlike parts, some hot, bitter and clensing; many
cold, dry, harsh, and binding, yet not used in physic. V. Matthew. the berries
boiled and pressed yield an oil for lamps. Park. the conserve of the fruit of
the male h. all fluxes, the liquor coming out of the stalks heated h. tetters.
Came. Diosc. the berries h. the whites.

Costive tree. Curo.*
P. In China. Japan. Malaca. etc. T. The time is not observed. N. The first is
caled Coru arbor, the second Pavate.
Costive tree. Park. K. as the first and second. T. the bark of the root only
is in use, which contains a clammy milk, somewhat bitter, drying and cooling:
V. the natives use the milk hereof against all fluxes of what cause soever
arising. The second is not so strong, but of excellent use in inflammations,
and eruptions of chollerick matter in the skin, and S. Anthonies fire: the
root is of chiefest use, yet sometimes the wood is used being steeped in the
decoction of rice, which presently grows sour, with which they wash the
inflamed parts: d. it h. hot Livers and Fevers, with the leaves of Tamarinds
it stops defluxions.

Costus. Costus.*
P. In the Indies, and other places. T. The time is not observed. N. (...).
Costus Indicus: and Offic. the latter.
Costus. J. K. as the Indian or sweet smelling, and the bitter. T. is hot and
attenuating. V. It is used in oil to anoint the body against the cold fits of
agues, and the sciatica, and to draw any thing unto the peripherie of the body.
Also it provokes urine and the terms: h. strains, cramps, and pains in the
sides, and by its bitterness kills worms, it h. the bitings of Vipers,
pains of the chest, windiness of the stomach taken in wormwood wine, and is
used to be put into antidotes. Park. Taken with sweet wine it c. venery. ap.
with honey and water, it h. the blemishes of the skin, and face. Pem. it is hot
and dry 3. The best is whitish and bitter: the dose is scr. 1 or scr. 1. sem.

Cotton-plant. Xylum.*
P. In India. Arabia. Egypt etc. T. The seed is sown in the spring: it is ripe
in harvest. N. (...). Gossipium. Lanugo. Bombax and Cotum.
Cotton-plant. Ger. T. Serap. The seed is hot, and moist, the wool is hot and
dry. V. the seed h. coughs and shortwindednesse, c. lust and sperme: the oil
h. freckles, spots, and blemishes of the skin. The ashes of the wool burned
stop the bleeding of wounds: and are used in restrictive remedies, and exceed
Bole armoniacke. The wool serves for many known uses. Park. K. as the fine,
bush, thorny Indian, and long leafed Cotton-tree of Java. V. the kernells of
the seed are used against gnawings of the stomach: and h. agues. Recch. That of
Mexico d. resists poison, the stalk is cold, dry and binding.

Cowslip. Primula veris.
P. Moist medows, and borders of fields. T. Fl. from April to June. N.
Arthritica. Herba paralysis. Dodecatheon.
Cowslips. Ger. J. K. as the field, field Oxlips, double paigles, two in a
hose, field Primrose, double white, green, and Mr Heskethe's Primrose. T.
Cowslips and Primroses are dry and a little hot. V. Cowslips h. pains of the
joints, gout, and palsy: the decoction of the roots d. h. the stone. The juice
of the leaves h. luxations and burstings. drach. 1. sem. of the powder of the
dried roots of the field primrose d. in Ale c. vomit forcibly of waterish
humors, choler and phlegm. A conserve of the fl. of Cowslips h. the palsies,
convulsions, cramps, and all diseases of the sinews. Cowslips greatly stop the
belly, and h. lasks and the bloody flix decoct and d. warm. An unguent made
with the juice of Cowslips and oil of lineseed h. all scaldings, or burnings,
with fire or otherwise. Park. V. The juice or water of the flowers of Cowslips
cleanses the skin from spots, and h. wrinkles. The decoction of the roots h.
pains in the back, and wounds. Dorst. d. it h. the appetite, and heat.

Cow wheat. Crataeogonum.
P. The first grows among Corn, the rest not here. T. They fl. in June and
July: the wild to Sept. N. (...). Triticum Vaccinum: the wild Milium Sylvaticum
Tabern.
Cow-wheat. Ger. J. K. as the white, purple, blew, and yellow. T. the seed is
hot and dry, and full of fumes. V. taken in meats and drinks it troubles the
brain, and causes drunkenness and headache. Wild Cow-wheat. K. as the
common, and Eyebright. T. the seeds cause giddiness. V. The powder of the seed
d. c. Venery. Park. K. as the party colored, and black. V. it troubles the
head as Darnell, the seed is sharp and is used as Millet is. Lugd. it being d.
thrice a day, 4. days before, c. conception.

Cox-combe. Crista galli.
P. Dry meadows, and Pastures. T. Fl. most part of the Summer. N.
Alectorolophos. Pedicularia. Fistularia.
Cox-comb or yellow Rattle. Ger. T. V. its not yet used in physic. Park. V.
the herb boiled with some honey and beans d. h. coughs, and dropped into the
eyes h. dimnesse thereof. The whole seed being put into the eyes does draw
forth any filme or dimnesse T. Some think it to be cold and drying.

Crab-tree. Malus Sylvestris.
P. In hedges, almost every where. T. The time answers the trees of the
Garden. N. (...). Chamaemalus. Wilding tree.
Crab-tree. Ger. T. Crabs are cold and moist. V. the juice of Crabs h.
burnings, scaldings and all inflammations, if presently applied it hinders
blistering. The juice is astringent and abstersive, mixed with the yeest of
beer ap. it helps S. Anthonies fire, and all inflammations, scabbed legs,
burnings and scaldings. Park. Crabs stop the belly, and provoke urine. The
juice h. against the heat and fainting of the stomach d. and h. casting taken
alone, or in a posset. Col. the inner bark boiled with allom dies yellow.

Cranes-bill. Geranium.
P. Deserts, untilled grounds, and mud walls. T. Fl. in May, and the greatest
part of summer. N. (...). Gruinalis. Rostrum Gruinum, Gruis, aut Ciconiae.
Cranes-bill. Ger. J. K. as the Doves-foot. T. is cold and somewhat dry, with
some astriction and glutinating. V. it h. green wounds and inflammations. Half
a spoonful of the herb or root powdered taken first and last in red wine for
the space of 21. days h. ruptures, especially specially with the powder of red
snailes without shells, and h. wounds decoct in wine and d. Herb Robert. T. is
somewhat cold, scouring and somewhat binding. V. it h. ulcers of the duggs and
privities, and stops blood. Knotted Cransbill. T. the root is somewhat hot.
V. drach. 1. d. in wine three times a day h. ptysicks, and the windiness of
the matrix, and corroborates. Musked Cransbill. T. is cold dry and astringent.
V. it operates as Dovesfoot: it h. green wounds and hot swellings. Crowfoot
Cranes-bill. K. as the common, small, duskie and long rooted. T. are referred
to the former. V. they are not in use; Fuch. yet the blew flowred heals
wounds. Candy Cransbill. K. as the common, and bastard. T. are referred to the
Doves-foot. V. it is excellent for wounds. Wild Crans-bills. K. as the spotted,
bloody, unsavorie field, and violet. T. V. are not used, but may be referred to
the other of their kind. The other Crans-bills K. as Pennies bulbous, knotty
and silver leased mountain. T. V. are not discovered. Park. K. as the red and
purple, T. are drying, binding and a little hot. V. they h. inward and outward
wounds: and drank h. bleeding, vomiting, fluxes and the stone. The Mallow
leafed and rocky. V. as the rest. The unfavorieh. the mother. The doves cr. h.
the chollick.

Cresse. Nasturtium.
P. Gardens: the Winter Cr. by pathway sides. T. The 1. fl. in June and July:
so the water Cr. the rest in May. N. (...). Winter Cresse, Barbarea.
Cresses. Ger. K. as the garden, Spanish, and stone. T. The herb of garden
Cresses, is sharp and biting, very hot and dry: the seed fere 4. V. it h. the
scurvy, the seed stamped with honey h. hardness of the milt, with Vinegar and
barley meal parched it h. the sciatica, hard swellings and inflammations. With
brine it h. tetters, ripens fellons and raises up tough humors of the chest
with things appropriate. Diosc. It hurts the stomach and troubles the belly.
It expells worms and flowers, kills the foetus in the womb, and c. lust. d.
it h. bruises, and c. sweat. Indian Cresses. T. V. are not discovered, but may
be referred to the rest. Sciatica Cresses. T. are hot 4. and like the garden
cr. V. the roots ap. with swines grease h. the sciatica laid to 4. hours,
bathing the place after with warm water, and anointing it with oil. Bank
cresses. K. as the common and Italian. T. the seed is like that of the garden,
fiery and attennuating. the seed h. rheums, taken as alohoch it h. coughs the
yellow jaundise, and sciatica with honey. d. it h. poison: ap. with water and
honey it h. cankerous apostumes behind the ears, and inflammations of the paps
and testicles. drach. 1. of the seed of the Italian bank cresses d. in a
decoction of grass roots cleanses the reins and expells the stone.
Dock-Cresses. T. are hot and somewhat abstersive. V. it h. ulcerated breasts,
yet is cacochymick. Water Cresses. K. as the common and Italian. T. are hot and
dry. V. d. in wine or milk, it h. the Scurvy: eaten three times a day for the
space of 30 days, it provokes Urine, h. the stone and green sickness, and
expells terms. Winter Cresses. T. are hot and dry 2. V. the seed h. the
strangury. The juice with wax oil and Turpentine as an unguent mundifieth
ulcers: Boiled with Scurvy-grasse it h. the Scurvy. Park, The garden cr. h.
Lethargies sc. the seed. The wild as the rest. Turkey Cresses. T. are hot. V.
and ev acuate phlegm. Recch. K. as the Cresse of Peru. T. is hot and dry fere
4. and sharp. V. it h. cold stomachs, and the cough. ap. it h. hot tumors with
cold remedies.

Crosse-wort. Cruciata.
P. In moist and fertile medows. T. Fl. all the Summer long. N. (...) Diosc.
Trag. Crucialis. Cruciata herniaria. Thalii.
Crosse-wort. Ger. T. is dry and binding. V. it heals and closes wounds
inward or outward: the decoction being drank, it h. those that are bursten, d.
and ap. as a pultis. Park. it stops the bleeding of wounds. Came. it h. to
expectorate phlegm out of the chest, and h. the obstructions thereof, and of
the meseraicke veins; and decoct in wine h. the appetite: ap. it h. moist
sores, clensing and healing them. So Croll. Lob. it is bitter and abstersive.
Trag. The distilled water h. poison and the plague: so the powder. Came. It Is
effectual for all purposes for which the greater Gentian is.

Crow-foot. Ranunculus.
P. Pastures, medows, almost every where. T. Fl. in May: so the Candy; and
single, and double of Asia. N. (...). it is called Pes galli, and Coronopus by
some.
Crow-foot. Ger. J. K. as the common, right, of the followed field, white
mountain, that of Illyria, round rooted, golden-haired, frog, grassie, winter,
Portugal, globe, rough white floured mountain, and rough purple fl. double,
double wild, and double white. T. are biting as the other Crowfeet. V. the
chiefest virtue is in the root, which stamped with salt h. plague sores ap. to
the thigh, attracting the malignity of the disease. Stamped with Vinegar ap. it
takes black scars out of the skin. Asian Crowfoot. K. as the double red, double
Afian scarlet, double buttoned scarlet Asian, of Tripolie, branched red, and
white fl. and with yellow striped flowers. T. V. they are referred to the other
Crowfeet, whereof they are thought to be kinds. Marsh Crowfoot. K. as the great
and lesser, common and jagged. T. as the rest, it is biting exulcerating hot
and dry 4. V. The leaves or roots of all the the Crowfeet stamped and ap. c.
blisters and remove excrescencies. ap. to the Plague sore it extracts it is
venom, and draws it to any part. Stamped with salt and ap. to the finger it
h. the toothache. It Is used by beggars to deforme their legs. That of Illyria
taken contracteth the sinews. The other Crowfeet, K. as the broad leafed,
candy, plantain leafed, mountain with the lesser flower and bigger, rue
leafed, columbine and small rough leafed. T. V. are to be referred to the
former. Water Crowfoot. T. V. is hot, and like to the common Crowfoot. Park. K.
The marsh, as the French round leafed, true Sardinian, water, Ivy leafed, and
with Alecost leaves. V. as the rest. The wood. K. as the single white and
yellow, etc. ap. h. hard tumors. The field V. as the rest. So also the
Mountain: the roots ap. to the wrist h. fevers.

Crown-imperiall. Corona imperialis.
P. Gardens when Planted: naturally in Persia. T. Fl. in April and March: the
seed is ripe in June. N. Lilium Byzantinum, and Persicum.
Crown-imperiall. Ger. K. as the common, and double. T. V. are not yet
discovered. Park. the whole plant and every part thereof, as well roots as
leaves and flowers do smell somewhat strong as it were the savor of a Fox:
which yet is not unwholesome, but rather may persuade that it may be useful.

Cuckow-flower. Cardamine.
P. Almost every where, except the Alpish. T. Fl. in April and May. N. Flos
cuculi. The double is called Sisymbrium alterum Diosc.
Cuckow-flowers. Ger. J. K. as the common, Ladies smocks, double flowred, three
leafed, mountain, impatient, and dwarf daifie leafed Lady-smocks of the Alps.
T. are hot and dry 2. V. they are referred unto the water cresses. Park. V. the
small operates as the rest: and is thought by some to be a good substitute when
watercresses are wanting, and h. the scurvy. Those of the mountain. K. as the
three leafed and small. T. are sharp, and reduced to the first. Bauh. That
which is called Odontis, is commended against poison.

Cucumber. Cucumis.
P. In gardens, in horsedung. T. They are to be set in April. N. (...). The
wild is called Asininus cucumis, and Anguinus.
Cucumbers. Ger. K. as the common, adders, and Spanish. T. are all cold and
moist 2, of little and bad nourishment, and quickly putrify. The seed is not
so cold, clensing and opening. V. the seed opens the liver and bladder, and
helps the chest and lungs inflamed. ap. it smootheth the skin, and makes it
fair. The Cucumber eaten h. hot stomachs. The seed strained with milk or
sweet wine and d. loses the belly and h. exulcerations of the bladder. The
fruit sliced and boiled with mutton and oatemeale and eaten thrice a day for
three weeks h. sauce phlegm, copper faces, and fiery noses, with pimples and
rubies: washing the face with the following liquor. Take a pint of strong white
wine vinegar, of Orrice roots powdered drach. 3. Brimstone finely powdered unc.
sem. Camphire drach. 2. stamped with 2. blanched Almonds, 4. Oak apples cut,
and the juice of 4. Limmons, shake them together and set them in the sun 10.
days, use it daily without wiping the face. It also cures all deformities of
the skin. Wild cucumbers. T. the leaves, roots and rinds, are bitter, hot and
clensing. The juice is hot 2 of thin parts. V. the juice, elaterium purges
choler, phlegm and water by stool and vomit, the dose is from 5 gr. to 10. of
the dried juice, scr. sem. it h. the dropsy and shortness of wind: so the
juice of the root, as an errhine it h. red eyes, with milk. Park. It h. cold
diseases d. and ap.

Cudweed. Gnaphalium.
P. Mountains, hills, and barren places. T. Fl. from June to September. N.
(...). Centunculus. Tomentitia. Cottonaria. Herba impia. Camaexylon.
Cud-weed, Ger. J. K. as the English, common, sea, white and purple mountain,
bright red mountain, rock, live for ever, small, wicked, lions, small lions,
long leafed, and small broad leafed. T. are astringent and drying. V. boiled in
strong lee, it cleanses the hair from nits and lice, in ward-robes it keeps
from moths. Boiled in wine and d. it kills the worms, and h. the bitings of
Venomous beasts. Dried and the fume taken by a funnell as tobacco it h. coughs
of the lungs, pain of the head, and cleanses the inward parts. Golden Cudweed,
Elyochryson. T. Gal. Cutteth and attenuateth. V. Diosc. The tops d. in wine h.
the dysury, stingings of serpents, sciatica, and d. in sweet wine dissolve
congealed blood. Laid among cloths it prevents moths. Park. K. as the greater
Germane, and small leaning. V. as the rest h. all fluxes drank in red wine,
and bruises: the leaves ap. h. the tenesmus and ulcers. The herb impious d. in
wine and milk h. the mumps. So that of the mountain.

Cullions. Testiculus Odoratus.
P. In dry pastures or heaths. T. Fl. from August to September. N. Orchis.
Triorchis. Tetrorchis.
Cullions, Ger. The sweet. K. as the common, triple, Frizland, and liege lady
traces. T. are of the nature of dogstones. V. the sappy roots of Lady-traces
eaten or boiled with milk and d. cause venery, strengthen the body, h.
consumptions and hectic fevers. Park. K. as the greater and lesser, yellow
with smooth eaves, and small creeping. V. the roots of these Orchides are
effectual above all other to c. venery. Recch. Lady-traces of Mexico. T. the
root is sweet and a little bitter. V. it c. venery, and discusseth hot tumors
d. and ap. And h. the heat of the blood. Bauh. the root of the first boiled
with wine and honey h. putrid ulcers of the mouth. So Dod.

Cumfrey. Consolida major.
P. Watery ditches, and fruitful meadows. T. They Fl. in June and July. N.
(...). Solidago. Symphytum. Pecton. Alum. Osteocollon.
Cumfrey. Ger. J. K. as the purple flowred, with the knobbed root, and borrage
flowred. T. the root is cold and clammy, and infipid. V. the roots stamped and
the juiced. with wine, h. spitting of blood, and inward wounds and burstings;
so applied. The roots boiled and d. cleanse the breast from phlegm, and h. the
lungs with sugar. The slime of the root d. with a posset h. wrenchings of the
back, and gonorrhoea's. Four of the roots stamped with knot-grasse and the
leaves of Clar^y, of each an handful strained, adding a quart of muskadell,
the yelks of three eggs, and powder of three nutmegs d. first and last h. the
gonorrhoea and all pains and consumptions of the back. The syrrup stops blood,
h. the heat of agues, sharpness of humors, ulcers of the lungs, and cough,
also ulcers of the kidneys, flux of the matrix, inward hurts, and ruptures: is
thus made; take unc. 2. of the roots of great comf. unc. 1. of Lycorise, 2
handful of Folefoot roots and all, unc. 1. sem. of Pineapple kernels, 20
jujubes, unc. 2. of Mallow seed, unc. 1. of the heads of poppy: boil all in a
s. q. of water to a pint, to the liquor strained add unc. 6. of white sugar,
as much of honey: boil it to a syrrup. The root stamped and ap. h.
inflammations of the sundament, and flowing of hemorrhoides. Park. unc. 2. of
the juice d. h. the lethargy, ap. it represseth the growing of the duggs, h.
gangreens, and pains of the joints. Pem. The distilled water h. outward sores.
It hurts those that are bound in the body.

Cumin. Cuminum.
P. It grows in putrified and hot soiles. T. It Is to be sown in the midst of
spring. N. (...). Cyminum. Carnabadium Cassi Bassi, Bauhini.
Cumin. Ger. T. Gal. The seed of the garden Cumin is hot and dry 3, and
binding. Diosc. V. the seed h. windiness of the stomach, belly, guts, and
matrix, it helps frettings of the belly d. used in clysters or applied with
wine and barley meal as a pultis, pultis, so also boiled with wine, it h.
blastings, swellings of the genitors, and consumes windy swellings in the
joints. Taken in broth it h. cold lungs and such as are oppressed with raw
humors, it stops bleeding at the nose with vinegar being smelt unto. Made
into a sacculus with bay salt, heated and ap. warm being sprinkled with wine
vinegar, it h. stitches, and the plurisie. Wild Cumm. K. as the common, codded,
and horned. T. V. are to be referred to the first, yet not used in physic.
Park. It h. the colic boiled in wine and d. and h. those that are bitten with
serpents: the seed taken in broth h. short windednesse, and old coughs, the
seed bruised, fried with a hard egg, and ap. to the nap of the neck h. the old
headache, and stops rheum. The powder ap. warm to the eyes with wax h. the
rheum and redness of the eyes. ap. it c. palenesse. The wild drank in wine
sc. the seed h. wind: and ap. cleanses.

Currants. Ribes.
P. Gardens: naturally in Savoy and Switzerland. T. Fl. in Spring: the fruit is
ripe at Midsummer. N. Ceanothus levis Gesn. Grossularia ultramarina.
Currants. John's. K. as the red, and white. T. the berries are cold and dry fine
2di, with some astriction and tenuity of parts. V. they h. heat of fevers,
choler, and hot blood, resist putrefaction, quench thirst, h. the appetite,
stop vomiting and dysentery of a hot cause, so the juice boiled, called Rob de
Ribes. Park. V. they h. the sainting of the stomach. The black are used in
sauces: so also the leaves by many, the scent and taste being very pleasant.
Gesn. The white, and red h. coughs. Lob. The Arabian are in taste and virtues
like barberries. Schwenck. The leaves of the black are hot: ap. to the nostrils
they h. the epilepsie and mother, and d. cause menses and h. the tormina.

Cypresse-tree. Cupressus.
P. Hot countries, as Candy, Lycia, and gardens. T. The tame yields fruit in
Jan. May and Sept. N. (...). The fruits are called Galbuli. the tree
Cyparissus.
Cypresse-tree. Ger. K. as the garden, and wild. T. the fruits and leaves are
dry 3 and astringent. V. Diosc. the nuts stamped and d. in wine stop all fluxes
of blood, glue ulcers in hard bodies, and suck up hidden moisture. The leaves
and nuts h. ruptures, and the polypus, also carbuncles and phag^dens with
parched barley meal. The leaves boiled in meade h. the strangury. The smoke of
the leaves drives away gnats. The shavings of the wood preserve from moths, so
the rosin also laid among garments. Park. the powder of the leaves with a
little myrrh and wine h. sluxes that sall on the bladder: without mirrhe,
those of other parts. The decoction h. coughs, and short windednesse. The chips
d. cause menses, the leaves h. spots.

D
Daffodill. Narcissus.
P. In gardens and meadows, almost every where. T. Fl. from February till May.
N. (...). Of rush Daffodill, Junquilias. Bulbus vomitorius Diosc.
DAffodils. Ger. J. K. as the purple circled, etc. T. the roots are hot and dry
2. V. Gal. The roots glue the sinews and tendons, cleanse and attract. Stamped
with honey and ap. they h. burnings, wrenches of the ancles, aches and pains of
the joints. With honey and nettle seed they h. sunburnings and morphew. With
axungia and leaven of rye bread it ripeneth impostumes. Stamped with meal of
darnell and honey it draws thorns out of the body. The root stamped, strained
and d. h. the cough, colic and ptisicke. The root eaten or d. c. vomit, and
being mingled with vinegar and nettle seed h. spots in the face. Bastard
Daffodils. T. are referred to the kinds of Narcissus. V. the decoction of the
roots of the yellow purges, phlegm and water with anise seed and ginger. The
distilled water h. palsies rubbed in by the fire.

Daisy. Bellis.
P. Meadows, borders of fields, almost every where. T. Fl: in May and June. N.
Herba Margarita. The blew, Globularia.
Daisies. Ger: K. as the great. T. the great daisie is moist fine 2di, cold
initio. V. the leaves h. all burning ulcers, and apostumes, inflamed and
running eyes ap. Made into a salve, with wax, oil, and turpentine, it h.
inflamed wounds, especially in the joints: the juice, decoction, or distilled
water, h. any inward burstings. The herb is used in vulnerary potions: ap. as
a pultis with Mallows and butter boiled it h. pains of the gout. In clysters
it h. heat in agues, and torment of the gutts. The little daisies. T. are moist
fine 2di, cold initio. V. they h. all pains, especially in the joints, and
gout from a hot and dry humor, stamped with fresh butter ap. and operate more
effectually with mallows. The leaves boiled in pottage loosen the belly, and in
clysters h. the burning of fevers, and inflammations of the intestines: the
juice of the leaves and roots as an errhine purges slimie humors and h. the
megrim. The leaves stamped and ap. h. swellings and bruises. The juice
instilled h. dim and watering eyes. The decoction of the field daisie d. in
water, h. agues, and inward heat. Park. they are all vulnerary and decoct with
wallwort and agrimony h. palsies. The small is more binding.

Dandeleon. Dens leonis.
P. In meadows near ditches, and by high ways. T. They flower at most times
in the year. N. (...). Taraxacon. V^inaria. Rostrum perci^um. Caput mandchi.
Dandeleon. Ger. J. K. as the common, and knotty rooted. T. is like succory or
wild endive: it is cold; but dries more, opening, and clen^ing being bitter.
V. It operates as succory. Boiled, it strengthens the weak stomach, and eaten
raw stops the belly and h. the dysentery, with lentills. The juice drank h.
gonorrhoeas boiled in vinegar, and the difficulty of making water, and h. the
jaundise. Park. It h. ulcers of the ureters. The water h. severs and sores, and
c. rest.

Dane-wort. Ebulus.
P. Untilled ground, borders of fields, and by high ways. T. The fl. are
perfect in summer, the berries in Aut. N. (...). Humilis Sambucus. Chamaeacte.
Dane-wort. Ger. T. is hot and dry 3. and wasting, especially the leaves; the
root is purging. V. the roots boiled in wine and d. h. the dropsy. The leaves
applied wast hard swellings. Diosc. The roots soften and open the matrix, and
h. pain of the belly used in a bath. The juice makes hair black. The tender
leaf h. hot inflammations ap. with barley meal, burnings, scaldings, and
bitings of mad dogs, and with bulls tallow h. the gout. drach. 1. of the seed
d. is a most excellent hydragogon, and h. dropsies. scr. 1. of the seed bruised
and taken with syrrup of roses and a little sack h. the dropsy and gout
mightily purging watery humors taken once a week. Pem. It h. the Sciatica,
agues, stopping of the spleen, stone of the kidneys, S. Anthonies fire and
scurvy, and kills worms. the leaves boiled in water and d. h. dry coughs and
quinsies. Dane-wort berries and seeds powdered and d. in wine fasting operate
as the root. In the decoction of ground pine and a little Cinnamon they h. the
gout, sciatica and French pox. It operates as the Elder, but more forcibly. For
the hip-gout take Dane-wort seed, turbith, hermodactyles, seen, tartar, an.
drach. 1. of cinnamon drach. 2. make all into fine powder: the dose is scr. 4.
in liquor convenient. The juice as an errhine, purges the brain, the juice of
the berries with honey put in^o the ears h. their pain: an ointment of the
leaves with May butter h. all aches, cramps, and cold affections of the sinews,
comfort, strengthen^th, warmeth, and opens all the outward parts ill
affected. It is to be given with anise seed, car^ away seed, cinnamon, mace,
etc. it hurts the head, hot stomach and liver. Park. ap. to the throat it h.
the Kings evil: as a pessary it draws down the menses: it h. lamenesse by
cold: the spleen and colic. Paracels. the decoction c. sweat: decoct in wine
and ap. it h. phlegmons of the genitors.

Darnell. Lolium.
P. In fields among Wheat and Barley, in moist soi^es. T. They flourish with
the Corn: the seed is ripe in Aug. N. (...). Zizania. Era Plin. Thyarus. the
red, Phoenix.
Darnell. Ger. K. as the white, and red. T. Is hot 3. dry 2. the red dries
without sharpness. V. The seed boiled with pigeons dung, oil olive, and
powder of line-seed to the form of a plaster, wastes wens and excrescencies of
the body. The bread in which it is eaten hot, c. drunkenness. d. with red wine
it stays fluxes. Diosc. The meal stays phagedens, gangrens and putrifyed
ulcers: boiled with raddish roots, salt, brimstone, and vinegar it h. spreading
scabs, tetters, and leprous scars. The seed d. in white or Rhenish wine,
provokes the menses. A sum made thereof with parched barley meal, myrrh,
saffron, and frankincense made in form of a pultis and applied to the belly h.
conception, and facilitateth the birth. Red Darnell d. in red wine stops
lasks, fluxes, and pissing of blood. Note, Darnell hurts the eyes, and makes
them dim. Park. K. as that with oaten tops, small prickly, and double kind with
a double top. V. the meal ap. as a pultis draws out splinters. The smoke c.
coughing. Col. The seed of the red applied stopeth the courses. The decoction
of the first with water and honey ap. h. the sciatica. Being made into a pultis
with swines grease, it draws out splinters, thorns and broken bones, that
are in any part. The root boiled in wine and d. after it has stood certain
days kills the worms.

Date-tree. Palma.*
P. In Africa and Egypt: the best in Syria. T. It Is always green. Fl. in
spring: the fruit is ripe in Sept. N. (...). Palmula. The fruit is called
Dactylus. the wild Chamaeriphes.
Date-tree. Ger. T. all manner of Dates are dyspeptick and c. headache: the best
are sost and sweet with moisture, they c. clammy and gross blood, they easily
stop the liver and spleen. Those which grow in colder regions, when they cannot
come to perfect ripeness, if eaten plentifully they c. wind, gross humors,
and often times the leprosy. Diose. The dryer sort of dates h. haemoptysis,
bad stomachs, and bloody flix. The best called caryotae h. rouglnesse of the
throat and lungs: confections hereof c. lust, h. consumptions, and strengthen
the liver and spleen made into broths; the dry stop the belly, vomiting, and
wambling of the stomach in women with child eaten, or ap. as a plaster. The
ashes of the stones are emplastick, h. pushes of the eyes, staphylomata, and
falling away of the hair of the eye lids, ap. with spikenard. With wine it
keeps down excrescencies in wounds: the boughs and leaves do evidently bind,
especially the case of the flowers. The leaves and branches h. green wounds,
and eaten refresh and cool hot inflammations, and are astringent. The wild
Date-tree K. as the little, and that bearing cones. T. it is cold and moist
with a little astriction. V. taken as a meat it engenders wind and raw
humors, sc. the brain, therefore it is to be eaten with pepper and salt. The
drunken date tree, Faufel: T. is cold and dry 2. V the fruit of areca before
ripe eaten is stupefactive, therefore it is used in great pain and aches, the
juice of the fruit strengthens the gummes, fastens the teeth, comforts the
stomach, stopps vomiting and looseness of the belly, and purges out congealed
blood. Park: K. as the low, and thorny palmito. V. unripe dates stop laskes,
and h. the falling of the sundament taken in red wine: the last serve to make
broomes of. Pem: dates are hot and dry fere 2, when ripe hot and moist 2, as
others. Jo: The decoction thereof h. hot agues, they hurt those that have the
colic.

Dittander. Piperitis.
P. In gardens, and many other places. T. Fl: in June and July: the seed is
ripe in Aug. N. (...). The 2d, Flammula: the 3d. Lepidum Glasti-folium.
Dittander. Ger: K. as the common, and annual T. the leaves, but especially
the roots, are very hot, burning and bitter. V. it causes blisters, and by its
hot quality it mendeth the skin in the face, taking away scabbs, scarres, and
manginesse, if any thing remain after the healings of ulcers, etc. Park. the
French is hot, and ^ery, sharp as the rest, and works the same effects: it h.
goutes, and any pain in the joints, or other inveterate griefs, the leaves
bruised and m. with old axungia ap. as Sciatica cresses, and h. discoloring of
the skin, and burnings with iron: the juyced. in ale c. speedy delivery in
travail: the leaves held in the hand ease the toothache, it is used for sauce
for cold stomachs. Lugd: Gal: it is hot 4, less dry, and h. the joints. Trag:
ap: it h. the spleen.

Dittany. Dictamnum.
P. Gardens, being planted there. T. Fl: in summer: the seed is ripe in
September, of the wild, in Aug. N. (...), and Diptamnus albus: the other
Creticus, and Pseudodictamnus.
Dittany. Ger: K. as of Candy, and the bastard. T. are hot and dry. V. d. used
in a pessary, or fume, it expels the dead child, and s^cundine. The juice d.
with wine h. the stinging of Serpents: eaten by deer it helps their wounds, and
expells arrows: it h. wounds made by invenomed weapons, and draws out
splinters. The bastard Dirtany is of the nature of the first, but not so
effectual. Bastard Dittany. T. the root is hot and dry 2, wasting,
attenuating, and opening. V. it expells the birth, menses, and secundine, h.
cold diseases of the matrix, ill stomachs, and short wind, stingings, and
bitings of venomous beasts, poisons, and pestilent diseases. Drach: 1. of the
seed d. h. the strangury, and breaks and expels the stone: so the leaves
and juice, and ap: draw out splinters: the root taken with rubarb it kills
and expels worms. It Is eaten by deer as the former. Pem. It h. dropsies and
swollen spleens: The powder taken with honey h. the cough. The decoction h. the
jaundise. drach. 1. with 5. grains of saffron d. in wine expels the dead
child. The juice with the powder h. the uvula fallen. The juice with woman's
milk h. pains of the ears. As an errhine it purges the brain, and h. the
falling sickness with castor and the juice of rue. Note it is not to be given
to women with child, or to hot and dry bodies. Park. The white d. h. the
tormina. Vntz. The white h. the stone d. in wine, so Plat. and Matthew. Pem.
Ditany is hot and dry 3. and biting, especially being green. Weck. It operates
as pennyroyall, but more strongly.

Divels-bit. Morsus Diaboli.
P. Dry meadows and woods, and about ways sides. T. Fl. in Aug. and is then
known from scabious. N. Succisa Fuch. Nigina Plinii. Geum antiquorum quorundam.
Divels-bit. Ger. T. is something bitter, hot and dry fine 2di. V. it h. old
swellings of the almonds and upper parts of the throat. It cleanses slimie
phlegm sticking in the jaws and h. swellings there, gargarized with honey of
Roses. It operateth as Scabious: h. stinging of venomous beasts, poisons, and
pestilent diseases, so Fuch. Morescot. Weinrich. Erast. Gebelk. Tabern. and
wastes plague sores ap. The decoction d. h. pains of the matrix, and
expels wind. Park. K. as the common, and red Hungarian Scabious. V. it is
bitter and more effectual than scabious, d. or ap. It h. fevers, bruises, and
dissolveth clotted blood, d. and ap. it ki^ls worms and h. the scurfe and itch.

Docke. Lapathum.
P. In meadows, and by river sides. T. Fl. in June and July. N. (...). Rumex.
Oxylapathum. Hippolapathum. Lapathion.
Docks. Ger. J. K. as the sharp pointed, small sharp, and roundish leafed
wild. T. are of a mixture betwixt cold and heat, dry almost 3. especially the
seed which is very astringent. V. the powder of any docks d. in wine stops
lasks and the bloody flix, and eases pains of the stomach. The roots boiled
till soft and stamped with axungia ap. h. the itch, soabs, and manginesse.
Water dock. K. as the great and small. T. are cold and dry. Park. K. as the
English mercury, and strong scented sea dock. V. the seeds of most of them are
drying and binding, and h. all lasks and fluxes, subversion of the stomach
through choler, and haemoptysis. The sorrel are more cold than the rest, the
bloud-wort, more drying. The roots open, cool, and cleanse, and h. the
jaundise, English Mercury. T. the root is dry clensing and softning.

Dodder. Cuscuta.
P. It grows upon sundry kinds of herbs. T. It flourishes chiefly in July
and August. N. (...). Cassitas Plin. Cassutha.
Dodder. Ger: T. is of the temper of the herb on which it grows: it is dry 2,
and hot, it cleanses with a certain astriction, especially that which grows
upon the bramble, it h. the infirmities of the liver and spleen. V. Dodder
opens the liver and spleen, purges phlegm, choler, and superfluous humors out
of the veins: it provokes urine, opens the kidneys, and h. jaundise: it h.
lingering agues, bastard and long tertians, and quartans, properly in children;
it also strengthens the stomach. Epithymum, or dodder of time, is hotter and
drier than Epilinum, or dodder of flax, sc: 3. it h. all infirmities of the
Milt, obstructions and hard swellings, old head ache, Epilepsie, madness c. of
melancholy, and the spleen; it also h. the French disease, contagious ulcers,
and scabby evil. It purges melancholy and phlegm: that which grows upon
savorie and scabious is more weak. Dodder which grows upon flax, boiled in
wine or water and d. opens the liver, gall, milt, bladder, kidneys and
veins, and purges choler by siege and urine: that which grows on brambles
h. old agues, and jaundise. Epiurtica provokes urine, and opens obstructions,
etc. Park: Dodder sympathizeth with the herb on which it grows, and is more
effectual than the herb it self. Pem: that of time h. the cramp, and
quartane agues with lapis lazuli. Dodder distilled and the water d. h. the
liver and lungs, expells the stone, and terms, and ap: h. the eyes. Croll: The
decoction thereof h. the tartar of the stomach. Senn. It h. diseases arising of
phlegm and choler. De Dond: the juice with the acerose syrup h. fevers.
Heurn. It Is corrected with aniseed, and d. with wormwood.

Doggs-bane. Apocynum.
P. Italy, Syria, and those Eastern countries. T. They bud in May, fl: in
September. N. (...). Cynomoron. Cynocrambe.
Doggs-bane. Ger: J. K. as the climing, and broad leafed. T. they are of the
poisonous nature of Thora, which kills whatsoever creature eats it, except
preserved by the use of Anthora. V. the leaves mixed with bread and given to
dogs, presently take away the use of their limbs, and procure sudden death.
Park: K. as the greater and lesser American. T. it is not meanly hot. V. ap.
it disperseth tumors, and is not inwardly to be used. Aeg. It Is hot without
dryness.

Doggs-stones. Cynosorchis.
P. In moist and fertile meadows. T. Fl: from April to September. N. (...).
Testiculus canis, and Caninus.
Doggs-stones. Ger: J. K. As the great, white, spotted, marsh, and lesser
Austrian. T. are hot and moist, the greater is windy and causes lust. The
second is more hot and dry, and h. venery, so Serapias stones, and are more
dry. V. Diosc. The greater eaten c. generation of males, and d. in goats milk
c. lust. So the rest which are juycie, which is every other year by course.
Park. K. as the great purple, greater pale purple fl. and smaller, with the
greater, lesser, and Hungarian soldiers Cullious. V. the firm roots cause
lust.

Doggs-tooth. Dens Caninus.
P. In green and moist grounds, and gardens. T. Fl. in April, or the midst of
March. N. Dentali. Satyrium Erythronium quorundam.
Dogs-tooth. Ger. K. as the common and white. T. are very hot and
excrementitious. V. the powder thereof taken in pottage kills worms: drank
with wine it h. the colic, So Clus. it strengthens and nourishes the body,
and d. with water h. the epilepsie. Park the root is thought to be more
venereous than the fatyrions. Came. Matthew. Some use the roots for all purposes
for which the hermodactile serves, which is neither assented to or condemned
by the forementioned authors, having had no experience thereof.

Dragons. Dracunculus.
P. In gardens, and marsh places. T. The berries are ripe in Autumn. N. (...).
Dracontia. Serpentaria. Colubrina. Bisaria.
Dragons. Ger. J. K. as the great, small, water, and spike dr. T. is more
biting and bitter than Aron, hot, and of thin parts with some astriction. V.
the root does scour the entr^lles, and attenuate. It h. malignant ulcers, and
the black and white morphew, tempered with vinegar. The leaves cure ulcers and
wounds: the fruit is more strong and h. the polypus: the juice cleanses spots
in the eyes. Gal. The root twice or thrice sodden expels cla^^r^ie humors, out
of the chest and lungs. Diosc. The root of the lesser dragon evacuateth humors
out of the chest. The juice of that of the garden dropped into the eyes h.
scoroina's: the distilled water h. pestilentiall fevers or poison d. with
treacle or mithridate. The smell of the flowers is hurtful to women newly
conceived with child. Bauh. It does incide, digest, and open. Matthew. It h. cold
stomachs, c. appetite, dissipateth flatulencies, roborates the members,
provokes urine and the terms, and is an apoflegmatisme.

Dragon tree. Draco arbor.*
P. In the Island Madera, and Insula Portus S. T. It flourishes all the year.
N. (...) the gum, and Sanguis draconis.
Dragon tree. John's. T. the Sanguis draconis, which is thought to proceed from
this tree, is astringent It stops the courses, fluxes, dysenteries,
haemoptysis, and fasteneth loose teeth. smiths use it to varnish over their
works, to give them a sanguine color, and keep them from rust. Park. it stops
the gonorrhoea, h. the strangury, watering of the eyes and burnings. Col. It Is
thought to be cold 2 and dry 3, it fastens loose teeth: so the bark and fruit.

Dropwort. Filipendula.
P. Rocks, rough places, pastures, near rivers. T. Fl. from May to the end of
June. N. (...). Oenanthe. Philipendula Myreps.
Dropwort. Ger. J. K. as the common, mountain, narrow leafed, hemlock and
water dr. T. are hot and dry 3. opening and clensing with a little astriction.
V. the root of the common Filipendula boiled in wine and d. h. all pains of
the bladder, provokes urine, and expels the stone; so the root of Oenanthe.
The powder of the first often used in meat preserves from the falling
sickness. Park. the root d. expells the secundine, and h. the jaundise. The
powder made into an electuary with honey h. wind and all cold affections of the
lungs. The mountain. V. as the red rattle. Oenanthe h. the head, womb and
bladder. The water dr. h. the strangury.

Ducks-meate. Lens palustris.
P. In ponds, lakes, ditches, and standing waters. T. It Is in its freshest
beauty in the beginning of the year. N. (...). Lenticula aquatica.
Ducks-meat. Ger. T. Gal. Is cold and moist 2. V. Diosc. It h. all
inflammations, S. Anthonies fire, and hot agues ap. alone, or with parched
barley meal, also it knitteth ruptures in children. Mingled with fine wheaten
flower and ap. it h. hot swellings, as phlegmons, the erypelas and pains of
the joints, as also the fundament fallen in young children. Park. K. as the
common and cross leafed. V. Matthew. The distilled water h. all inward
inflammations, and pestilent fevers, the redness of the eyes, the swellings of
the privities and breasts. The herb ap. h. the headache c. by heat, and repells.

Dyers-weed. Luteola.
D. In most and barren places, almost every where. T. Fl: in June and July. N.
(...). Herba lutea. Luteum Vitruvii. Pseudo-Struthium-Matth.
Dyers weed. Ger. T. is hot and dry. V. John's. The root as also the whole herb
heats and dryes 3. It cuts, attenuates, resolves, opens and digests. It h.
punctures and the bitings of venomous creatures d. and ap. and preventeth
infection of the plague. Park. K. as the small of Candy, and the great fertile
and sterile. T. Matthew. it is hot and dry 3. V. being bruised and ap. it h.
wounds. Also it serves to dye yellow, and green, those cloths that have been
first dyed blew with woad. Bauh. The root is sharp and provokes urine and sweat.

E
Earth-nut. Glans terrae.
P. Pastures, cornefields, almost every where. T. Fl. in June, and July: the
seed is ripe soon after. N. (...). Nucula terrestris. Bulbocastanum.
EArth-nut. Ger. J. K. as the small, and great. T. the roots are moderately hot
and dry, also binding: the seed is hotter and dryer. V. the seed and root
provoke urine. The roots eaten h. spitting of blood: and boiled, buttered, and
eaten comfort the stomach, and yield nourishment good for the bladder and
kidneys. Pease earthnuts. T. are dyspeptick, and moderately hot, dry and
binding; so the root, and stop all fluxes, and nourish like the parsnep. Park.
Earth Chestnuts nourish as the Chestnut. Indian Chestnuts strengthen the stomach
tosted; and eaten too much c. headache.

Eglantine. Cynorrhodon.
P. In the borders of fields and woods, etc. T. Fl. and flourishes with the
other rose tree. N. (...). Rosa sylvestris and Canina. Sentis.
Eglantine. Ger. J. K. as the sweet bryer, and double egl. with the bryer and
pimpinel^ rose. T. these wild roses are referred to the manured rose, but are
not used in physic where the other may be had. V. Plin. The root h. bitings of
a mad dog. The spungie bryer balls stamped with honey and ashes, h. the
alopecia, or the falling of the hair. Fuch. being powdered and taken they h.
the stone and strangury: they strengthen the kidneys. The fruit when ripe is
used for meat. Park. K. as the damask, the vermilion of Austria, and single
dwarf without thorns. V. The conserve of hepps gently binds the belly, stops
defluxions from the head upon the stomach, and dries up the moisture thereof,
and h. digestion. The powder of the dried pulp h. the whites d. The powder of
the balls h. the colic, and of the worms thereof d. kills worms.

Egyptian thorn. Acacia.*
P. In Egypt, and Palestina: the second in Cappadocia. T. Fl. in May: the fruit
is ripe in the end of August. N. (...). Aegyptia spina, and Christi.
Egyptian thorn. Ger. J. K. as the common and thorhy trefoile. T. Gal. The
juice of acacia is cold and earthy, with a certain watery essence, and thin
hot parts: it is dry 3, cold 1, if washed 2, loosing its biting quality. V. The
juice of acacia stops the lask, terms and gonorrhoea d. with red wine: it h.
blasting and inflammation of the eyes, and makes the skin smooth. It h.
serpigo's, heat of the mouth, and makes the hair black. Diosc. It h. S.
Anthonies fire, the shingles, pterygia and whitelowes. The gum does bind and
somewhat cool: it is emplastick, so dulleth the remedies with which it is
mixed. Ap. with the white and yelk of an egg, it preventeth blisters in
burnings, or scaldings. The juice of the other also binds, but is not so
effectual nor good in ophthalmick remedies. Park. K. as the west Indian and
true acacia of Diosc. V. the juice h. kibes and chilblaines, fasteneth loose
teeth, h. the flu^ of humors to the joints, binds, cools, and strengthens d.
and ap. h. vomiting, the gum fastens colors.

Elder-tree. Sambucus.
P. In gardens, mountains, almost every where. T. Fl. in April and May: the
fruit is ripe in Sept. N. (...). The fr. Grana acts. Jews ears, Fungi
Sambucini.
Elder-tree. Ger. J. K. as the common, that with white flowers, the jagged, and
hearts Elder. T. It Is drying, glutinating and moderately digesting: the bark,
leaves, first buds, flowers, and fruits dry, heat and purge; yet with trouble
to the stomach. V. It operateth as the Danewort. The leaves and tender crops
taken in broth, purge slimy phlegm and choler; the middle bark more strongly.
The dried seeds h. the dropsy. Drach. 1. taken in the morning for some space
causes leanness. The leaves boiled till soft with oil of sweet Almonds, or
of lineseed, ap. hot to the piles and reiterated, do presently give ease. The
green leaves stamped and ap. with bulls tallow h. hot tumors and the pain of
the gout. The juice of the inner bark d. with whay h. the dropsy: so the
flowers being fried with eggs. Dried they attenuate, and being steeped in
vinegar and it d. h. the stomach, and used with meat c. appetite. The seed is
gentler than the other parts; yet drach. 1. steeped in vinegar and taken with
aniseeds h. the dropsy. The Jews ear is binding and drying. The infusion
thereof h. inflammations of the mouth, and almonds of the throat, and uvula
gargarized. The tender leaves of the tree with parched barley meal h. hot
swellings, scaldings, bitings of a mad dog, and glue ulcers. The pith dried is
good to put into issues to keep them open. See Blochwit. Water Elder. K. as the
common, and rose. T. V. are not discovered. Park. As the first. Pem. The
flowers c. sweat: their water opens the liver, spleen and reins, and h.
tertian agues, and melancholy unc. 3. taken fasting. The Jews ears with
columbine leaves boiled in ale h. sore throats: and steeped in plantaine water
ap. h. inflamed eyes. The water clears the skin, and h. the pain of the
sides. The oil h. pains of the joints. Park. K. as the red berryed. V. the
decoction of the berries colors hairs black. The juice of the leaves is an
apophlegmatisme: and with honey h. the pain of the ears. The flowers in
clysters h. the wind and colic.

Elecampane. Helenium.
P. In fruitful meadows, and shadowie places. T. Fl. in June, and July: the
roots are gathered in Autumn. N. (...). Inula. Enula Campana. Scabwort.
Elecampane. Ger. T. is hot and dry 3. when green, it is full of superfluous
moisture. V. It h. short breath, old coughs and orthopnoea's given in a lohoc.
The root preserved taken after supper h. digestion, and keeps the belly
soluble. The juice boiled kills worms, and chewed fasteneth the teeth. The
root h. poison, bitings of serpents, ruptures, cramps, and convulsions. An
ointment of the decoction or powder with honey h. old ulcers. It h. the
sciatica. The decoction d. provokes urine, h. burstings and luxations. The
root taken with honey cleanses the breast, ripeneth tough phlegm, c.
expectoration, h. coughs and shortness of breath, comfort the stomach, and
h. digestion: so the roots condited. Boiled soft and mixed with fresh butter
and powder of ginger ap. it h. the itch, scabs and manginesse. Pem. the canded
roots h. the wind of the stomach and stitches in the sides caused by the
spleen, wheesing in the lungs, mother, plague, and putrifyed fevers. d. in ale
it clears the sight. Note it must not be given to hot and dry bodies. The
dose of the root powdered is from 20. grains to 30. The decoction ap. h. sores
and cankers. Park. The roots condited h. melancholy. The decoction of the root
kills all worms whatsoever. The distilled water clears the skin. Fuch.
Plin. Eaten fasting it fastens the teeth.

Elme-tree. Vlmus.
P. Almost every where. T. The seed falls in April. N. (...). The seed is
called Samarra.
Elme-tree. Ger. J. K. as the common, narrow leafed witch-hasell, or the
broadest leafed, and smooth leafed elm. T. The leaves and bark are moderately
hot and clensing with clamminesse. V. the leaves h. green wounds, and the bark
ap. The leaves stamped with vinegar take away scurfe. Vnc. 1. of the thicker
bark d. in wine or water purges phlegm. The decoction of the leaves, bark or
root h. broken bones bathed. The liquor in the blisters ap. h. pimples, spots,
freckles and beautifyeth the face. It heals green wounds, and cures ruptures
newly made, being laid on with spleen wort, using a trusse. Park. K. as the
lesser. V. it operates as the rest, the leaves d. in malmsie with pepper h. old
coughs. The decoction of the bark or root h. shrunk sinews: the scum c.
hair. The bark applied with brine h. the gout.

Endive. Endivia.
P. Gardens: the wild in barren grounds. T. It Is sown in spring; it seedeth in
harvest. N. (...). Intybus. Scariola. Seriola Lob. Park.
Endive. Ger. J. K. as the garden succory, and endive, with the thornie. T. are
cold and dry 2: somewhat binding, something bitter, clensing and opening.
Garden endive is colder, and not so dry or clensing. V. the herbs green cool
hot livers, h. the stopping of the gall, yellow jaundise, lack of sleep,
stopping of urine, and hot burning fevers, so the syrrup: the distilled water
is used in potions cooling and purging: and with that of plantain and roses
injected with a syringe h. excoriations in the passages of the urine. The herb
eaten in sallads, especially the white, comfort the weak, and cools the
hot stomach. The leaves of succory bruised and ap. h. inflamed eyes. Pem. The
distilled water h. sharpness of urine; so the seed, and h. the syncope: it
hurts the palsy and cold stomachs. The dose is drach. 1. Ap. it h. the gout,
fretting ulcers, and hot tumors. Wild succory. K. as the common, yellow, and
wild endive. T. agree with the garden sorts. V. the leaves boiled in broth h.
weak and hot stomachs, and operate as the first. Gum succorie, chondrilla. K.
as the blew, that of Robinus, yellow, Spanish, rushy, sea, swines, male swines,
and wart succory. T. are like the common, but dryer. V. the roots with honey and
nitre made into trochisks cleanse the morphew, sunburnings and spots in the
face. The gum smootheth the hairs of the eyebrows, and is used in stead of
mastick. Powdered with myrhre and made into a pessarie it brings down the
terms. The leaves of wart succorie powdered and d. to the quantity of a
spoonful take away warts and such excrescencies. Park. K. as the small garden
endive, and succory with red fl. etc. V. the last boiled and d. purges forth
phlegm, and choler. The distilled water h. cachexies. ap. it h. inflammations.
Gum succory h. laskes. The bulbed h. the Kings evil.

Eyebright. Eufragia.
P. In dry meadows, grassie ways and pastures. T. Fl. in Aug: till Sept. and
must then be gathered. N. (...). Ophthalmica. Ocularia. Eufrasia. Luminella.
Eyebright. T. is more hot than dry. V. taken alone, or with other things, it
preserves and restores the sight, the powder being taken with fennel seed,
mace and sugar. Stamped and ap. to the eyes, or the juice with white wine
dropped in, or the distilled water clears the sight. Three parts of the
powder with one of mace m. h. all hurts of the eyes, and comfort the memory,
half a spoonefull being taken every morning in whitewine. Pem. To clear the
sight, take rose water and celandine an. unc. 1. of tutty powdered drach. 1. m.
and wash the eyes. Park. K. as the great red woody, greater purple broad
leafed, and yellow, with the lesser. V. being infused in wine or beer it h.
the eyes effectually. Bauh. It h. the inflammation of the eyes, and grief
thereof e. by crude humors. Trag. decoct in wine it h. the jaundise.

F
Fellwort. Gentiana.
P. In shadowie woods and mountains. T. Fl. in August: the seed is ripe in
Sept. N. (...). Basilica Serap. Ciminalis. centauria radix. Aloe Gall.
FEllwort. Ger. J. K. as the great, great purple, blew flowred, cross wort,
and spotted of Dr Penny. T. the root is hot and clensing, bitter, attenuating,
purging and opening. V. it h. cramps and convulsions, ruptures, bad livers and
stomachs, and h. against poison and broken windednesse. Drach. 1. of the root
powdered with a little pepper and herb of grace h. against the stingings of
venomous beasts, bitings of mad dogs or any poison* The decoction d. h.
stoppings of the liver, crudity of the stomach, and digestion: it scatters
congealed blood, and h. all cold diseases of the inward parts. Park. or
outward. English felwort, or hollow. T. V. is not discovered, but may be
referred to the first. Bastard Fellwort. K. as the spring large floured, Alpish
of the spring time, and the bastard. T. are in taste and form like the greater
gentians. V. they operate as the rest, but less effectually. Park. Hollow root
ap. cleanses, purges, and dries. Park. K. as the smaller vernall, autumn,
and centory like leafed. V. the roots d. in wine h. lamenesse. The water h.
agues, kills worms, and c. courses: the juice h. ulcers and heat of the eyes.

Fennel. Foeniculum.
P. Gardens, and hot countries. T. Fl. in June and July: the seed is ripe in
Aug. N. (...). Marathrum. The giant, (...).
Fennel. Ger. K. as the common, and sweet. T. the seed is hot and dry 3. V.
the powder of the seed d. for certain days fasting preserves the sight. The
green leaves eaten, or seed d. in a ptisan c. milk in women's breasts, so the
roots; and h. the dropsy, boiled in wine and d. The seed d. h. the pain of the
stomach, desire to vomit, and breaks wind. The herb, seed and root, h. the
lungs, liver and kidneys, opening and corroborating. The seed and herb of the
sweet fennel operate as the aniseseed. Pem. The herb is not so hot as the
seed. It provokes urine, h. the stone and hicket, swelling of the spleen,
jaundise, gout, cramps, and shortness of breath: it causes a good color and
attenuateth fat bodies. Note, ithurts hot bodies. Hoggs fennel. K. as the
common sulphurwort, dwarf, and great, peucedanum. T. these, especially the
yellow sap of the root, is hot 2. dry initio 3ii. V. the juice of the root
taken alone or with bitter almonds, and rue h. shortwindednesse, pains of the
belly, wind of the stomach, wastes the spleen, and purges phlegm and
choler: it expels urine, the birth and secundine, and h. pains of the
kidneys and bladder. Mixed with oil of roses or vinegar, ap. it h. the palsy,
cramp, sciatica and cold diseases. It helpet^ ruptures and exomphalos. The
decoction of the root operates as the juice, but not so effectually. The powder
of it cleanses and heals old sores and ulcers, and extracts things fixed in
the flesh: mixed with oil of roses it causes sweat, being anointed:
therefore it h. the French pox. The congealed liquor with oil of roses ap. h.
the lethargy, frenzy, dizinesse, falling sickness, palsy, cramps, and all
infirmities of the sinews with vinegar and oil. Smelt to it reviveth those
that are strangled with the mother. Taken in a rear egg ith. coughs,
dyspnoe^'s, and gripings c. by gross humors. It wastes the spleen, cutting,
digesting, and attenuating: it opens the matrix and facilitates the birth. Held
in the mouth it h. the mother. Fennel giant. K. as the common, small, and
Aesculapius his alheale. T. these with their gums are hot 3, and dry 2. V. the
pith Gal. is astringent and h. the haemoptysis, and flix. As an errhine it
stops bleeding, d. in wine h. bitings of vipers, and roasted with pepper and
salt eaten c. lust. The seed is hot and attenuating, and h. agues mixed with
oil and the body anointed therewith. Drach. 1. of the juice of ferula bearing
sagapenum purges gross phlegm and choler, h. old and cold diseases, as the
epilepsie, apoplexy, etc. cramps, palsies, and shrunk sinews, short breath,
long cough, and pain of the side and breast. Sagapenum steeped in vinegar ap.
wastes and mollifyeth all hard swellings. The juice of ferula g^lbanifera,
galbanum d. in wine with myrrh h. all poison. The q. of a bean taken in wine
h. women's travel. The perfume h. risings of the mother, and falling sickness.
It mollifieth, attracteth splinters, wastes cold humors, and operates as
Sagapenum. Park. The seed of the common boiled in wine and d. h. the bitings of
serpents and poison. The juice clears the eyes: so the distilled water. The
juice dropped into the ears kills the worms thereof. The wild is stronger,
and h. the stone. The decoction of the seed of the round-headed colors the
hair yellow. Hoggs fennel. K. as the Italian. V. as the rest, the juice in
wine ap. h. pain of the ears and toothache. Scorching fennel. K. as the
true, Spanish, and carrot leafed. V. scr. 2. of the bark of the root, or scr.
sem. of the juice d. with meade strongly purges choler upwards and downwards.
It h. asthm^'s. Ap. it digesteth and draws, and h. blemishes of the skin, and
pains of the joints.

Fenugreek. Foenum graecum.
P. Gardens: it is sown in fields beyond the sea. T. It may be sown until
April. N. (...). Carphos Plin. Si liqua Columel. Silicula Varronis.
Fenugreek. Ger. J. K. as the common, and wild. T. it does manifestly heat, it
is hot 2. dry 1. The meal mollifyeth and wastes, V. the juice of the herb
boiled and taken with honey purges all corrupt humors in the intestines and
eases pain, being slimy and warm, It cleanses and raises humors out of the
chest with a little honey, with more in old diseases without a fever, boiling it
with fatdates, and using it long before meat. It h. inflammations that are
less hot, by wasting them: the meal boiled with mead ap. h. all
inflammations, and kneaded with niter and vinegar, h. hard spleens. The bath of
it h. impostumes, ulcers, or stoppings of the matrix: the juice of the
decoction cleanses the hair, h. dandriffe and achores; as a pessarie with
goose grease it opens the mother. The green herb stamped with vinegar h.
feeble parts without skin and ulcerated. The decoction h. ulcers in the low
gut, and bloody flix. The oil scoureth hairs, and the scars of the privities.
The seed decoct in wine and d. with vinegar expells all evil humors. Boiled in
wine with dates and honey unto a syrrup, it cleanses, and h. pains of the
breast. The meal boiled in mead dissolveth all hard swellings; so also m. with
the roots of marsh mallows and line-seed. The decoction used as a bath with
wine h. griefs in the lower parts of women, or the fume taken. The decoction of
the seed h. scurfe. Pem. Its mucilage ap. h. pains of the eyes. Park. The
seeds buried till they sprout and eaten, c. to grow sat. Aeg. It is hot and
loosens the belly taken before meat. Week. The oil with that of myrtles ap.
h. the cicatrices of the genitors.

Fenny-stones, Orchis palmata.
P. In fenny grounds and moist shadowie woods. T. They flower and flourish
about May and June. N. The 1. is Cynosorchis Dracuntias Lob. The three last,
Palma Christi.
Fenny-stones. Ger. J. K. as the marsh dragon, marsh handed, handed marsh,
creeping and greatest handed satyrion. T. V. are of little use in physic, and
are referred to the handed satyrions whereof they are kinds. Dal. The marsh
orchis is more strong in procuring lust, than any of the dogs stones. Park. K.
as the female handed, small with red fl. sweet, smelling like cloves,
frogg-like, gelded, spotted marsh, great mountain handed, and spotted white. V.
the roots boiled in red wine and d. stop fluxes, the powder being taken. The
marsh as Serapias stones.

Fern. Filix.
P. In dry and barren ground: in shadowie places. T. Fl. in summer: the seed is
ripe at midsummer. N. (...). Pteris. Of the female Thelypteris and
Nymphaeopteris.
Fern. Ger. K. as the male and female. T. are hot, bitter, dry and something
binding. V. unc. sem. of the root of the male fern kills long flat worms d.
in mede, and more effectually with scr. 2. of scammony first eating garlic. It
also expels the child in the womb and h. the spleen. Stamped with axungia
it h. the prickings of the reed. The female operates as the male. Diosc. It c.
barrenness, and abortion. The powder ap. h. ulcers and gallings. The root of
the 1. sodden in wine opens the spleen: in water h. lasks in children, the fume
of the decoction taken. Water fern. T. the root is less hot and dry than they
of the former ones. V. the heart of the root d. h wounds and bruises, and
dissolveth clotted blood, so the tender sprigs: and are good to be put into
unguents appropriate to wounds and punctures. Wallferne, or Polypodie. K as of
the wall, of the oak and Indian. T. does dry without biting V. Diosc. it
purges choler and phlegm. Actuar. And melancholy, boiled in broth with beets
or mallows. Mes: It dries and attenuateth, h. aches in the joints, taken in a
decoction for some space: with phlebotomy, cathartick and hydroticke remedies.
It h. luxations. unc: 1. boiled with honey, water, and pepper d. purges phlegm
and choler, or unc: 3. in water and wine. Oak fern, K. as the true, white,
and tree-f. T. is sweet, biting, and bitter, V. it is a psilothron ap. The
black operates as maidenhaire. The small fernes, K. as the male fountain, male
and female dwarf stone-ferne. T. V. are referred to the black o^e-ferne. Park:
K. as the great, strange, and diverse leafed mules fern. V. h. the spleen. The
berrie bearing of America, sea, and naked stone-ferne. V. are referred to the
former. Polypody h. all ill affects of the lungs, sc. the water with sugarcandy.

Feverfew. Febrifuga.
P. In hedges, and about rubbish. T. Fl: for the most part all the summer. N.
(...). Matricaria, Amarella. Tagetes.
Feverfew. Ger: J: K. as the common, double, and mountain. T. is hot 3, dry 2.
it cleanses, purges, opens, and operates as other bitter things. V. it h.
the diseases of the matrix, provokes the terms, and expells the dead child, d.
ap. or used in a bath. Diosc: it h. S. Anthonies fire, the leaves and fl. being
applied, and all hot swellings. The powder d. with oxymel, syrup of vinegar or
wine evacuates phlegm and melancholy, h. pursinesse, and stuffings of the
lungs, as also the stone: drach: 2. of the powder taken with honey, or sweet
wine purge phlegm, and melancholy, so h. those that are vertiginous,
melancholicke and penfive. The herb h. the suffocation of the mother,
hardness, and stopping of the same being boiled in wine and ap: so the
decoction sat over: d. and ap. with bay salt to the wrists, with powder of
glass it h. the ague Park: The double la. those that have taken opium, so the
rest, and also all pains in the head c. by cold: d. it h. agues: the distilled
water h. freckles, and colic ap.

Fig Tree. Ficus.
P. Spain, Italy, gardens, under a hot wall. T. They bear ripe fruit in the
spring, August and September. N. (...). The unripe fruit is called Grossus and
Olynthus.
Fig Tree. Ger: J: K. as the common, and dwarf. T. The dry figgs nourish
better than the green, which are somewhat warm and moist. The dry and ripe are
hot almost 3, sharp and biting: the leaves are somewhat sharp, opening, but
not so strong as the juice. V. dry figgs are not of very good juice, they h.
the throat and lungs, the cough, and short windednesse. Decoct with hysope and
d. they expectorate phlegm. Stamped with salt, rue, and nut kernells, they h.
poison, and prevent infection: stamped with wheat meal, powder of fenugreeke,
lineseed, and the roots of marsh mallows, ap. warm, they ripen impostumes, and
phlegmons, and all hot tumors behind the ears: and the roots of lillies added
h. bubo's, boiled in wormwood wine with barley meal: ap. to the belly, they
h. dropsies. Dry figgs soften and wast both inwardly and outwardly: the leaves
wast the Kings evil and all tumors, ap. with the roots of marsh mallows. The
milk h. rough skins, sores, spotts and deformity ap. with barley meal, and
h. warts ap. with fat things: it also h. the toothache ap. and opens the
hemorrhoids: with fenugreek and vinegar they h. goutes: the milk ap. h. wounds
of venomous beasts: green figgs h. the stone, the dry h. all diseases of the
chest, pain of the bladder, and childbirth: the juice of the leaves dissolveth
milk clotted in the stomach, and ap. with the yelke of an egg, c. the menses.
The prickly Indian fig tree. T. V. eaten colors the blood red: the juice h.
old ulcers: Cochenele is given in malign diseases, as in pestilent diseases,
etc. The arched Indian figtree. T.V. The fruit is usually eaten, and of good
nourishment. Pem: Figgs h. the falling sickness, quinsie, and infirmities of
the womb: they also expel venomous matter to the skin: toasted they
facilitate the birth: ap. with leaven and salt, they break plague sores, and
with copporas h. running ulcers: with salt ap: they h. kibes: and tosted, pain
of the teeth. They are best for phlegmatic persons. Col: 2 or 3 eaten in the
morning steeped in aquavitae h. pursinesse. Park: The Indian figgs, loosen the
belly, refresh the spirits, h. coughs, and hot urine, and c. lust: The juice of
the leaves h. burnings: common figgs boiled with hysop and lycorice, h. the
chest.

Figge-wort. Scrophularia.
P. In shadowie woods, and moist meadows. T. They flower in June and July. N.
(...). Millemorbia, Castrangula, Ficaria, Ferraria.
Figge-wott. Ger. J. K. as the great, Indian, and yellow floured. T. Col: it is
thought to be hot and dry fine 3 tii. V. It h. the Kings evil, piles, and
hemorrhoides, the root boiled with butter ap. It h. wenns, and hard knotts, d.
and ap. it dissolveth clotted blood: the roots boiled with oil and wax, h. all
scabbs and lepry: so the distilled water d. and ap. and h. the virulency of
corroding ulcers, spots, freckles, scurf and deformity of the skin. Park. K. as
the great without knobbed roots, great leafed of Candy, strange and elder like.
V. The roots with butter set 15 days in a moist place, then boiled and
strained, make an excellent ointment for scabbs, etc. so Bauh: Matthew: Solenand:
and Dod: drach: 1. of the root d. killes worms.

Filbeard-tree. Avellana.
P. In orchards, gardens, and hedges. T. The catkins fall off in March: the
fruit is ripe in August. N. Corylus. Nux Prenestina and Heracleotica.
Filbeard-tree. Ger: J: K. as the common, that of Constantinople, with the wild
hedge-nut. T. Dod: The filbeard nuts green are drier than wallnuts, when dry
they are colder. Ger: the catkins are cold, dry and binding, and h. the flux.
V: Col: the skins that cover the nut kernells taken in wine to the q. of drach:
1. stay women's courses, especially those of the red filbeard: so drach: 2. of
the shells d. in red wine; and stop laskes, with the milk of the kernells and
catkins: an electuary of the parched kernells h. old coughs, and d. with pepper
h. catarrh^^: a decoction of the inner rind made in small ale, d. first and
last 9 days h. the strangury: too many eaten cause headache, except eaten
with raisins. Park: being parched they are less hurtful to the stomach, being
less oilie, and windy.

Firre-tree. Abies.
P. High mountains in Italy, France, etc. T. The time of the Firre-tree agrees
with the Pine. N. (...). Its rosin is called Lachryma abietis and Terebinthina
Veneta.
Firre-tree. Ger: J: K. as the male, and female. T. The bark, fruit, and gum
are of the nature of the pitch-tree and his gumms. V. its rosin sc: the
turpentine, loses the belly, expels choler, cleanses the kidneys,
expels urine, and the stone: taken with sugar, and the powder of nutmeggs,
it h. the strangury, gonorrhoea, and the whites. It heals green wounds, being
washed in plantaine and rose water, with the yelke of an egg, the powder of
olibanum and mastick, with saffron. Park: T. the clear turpentine is hot and
dry 2, and very clensing. V. It is excellent in salves for green wounds,
clensing and sodering them together. Recch: The Fur of Mexico: T. is hot and
dry 3: the rosin is hot 4, discussing and corroborating.

Flag. Gladiolus.
P. In meadows and watery places. T. Fl: from May to July. N. (...). Ensis. The
corn Flag, Segetalis. Victorialis rotundus.
Flag. Ger: J: K. as the French corne-flag, Italian, and water sword fl: T. the
root of corn flag does draw, wast, consume and dry, and is of a subtle
digesting quality. V. The root stamped with the powder of frankincense ap:
draws out splinters, stamped with the meal of darnell and meade ap: it h.
hard swelings. Some affirm that the upper root causes lust, and the lower
barrenness: the upper root d. in water h. the enterocele in children: stamped
with hoggs grease and wheaten meal, they h. the scrophula: the seed d. in
goats or asses milk h. pains of the colic. Ordinary flagge. T. the roots
are hot and dry 2. V. It binds, strengthens, and condenses: it h. fluxes, and
stops the courses. Park: The distilled water of the yellow water-flag, h.
watering eyes, being dropped thereinto and ap. h. blemishes in the body: it h.
inflammations and cancers, and foul ulcers in the privities. Lonic: T. It Is of
the same faculty with acorus. Lugd. Ap. it draws out the menses: the upper
root c. venery. Dorst: The water h. burning fevers: the root d. h. coughs and
poison.

Flax. Linum.
P. In fruitful and moist soiles: the wild, in gravelly places. T. Fl: in June
and July: the seed ripens in the mean time. N. (...). Linum sativum: the wild.
Sylvestre.
Flax. Ger. K. as the garden. T. The seed is hot 1, in a mean between moist
and dry: as others, of superfluous moisture, and windy though parched. V. It
hurts the stomach, is of hard digestion, of little nourishment, provokes
urine, loosens the belly, and if parched stops it. Diosc: Line-seed operates
as fenugreeke, wastes and mollifieth hot swellings, d. and ap. Boiled with
honey, oil, and water it h. spots and blemishes, and foul skins with
saltpeter and figgs; with honey and water cresses, it brings off ill favored
nails: with honey it expectorates phlegm, and h. coughs. Baked with pepper and
honey, it causes lust: the oil mollifieth hard swellings, ap. extends shrunk
sinews, and eases pain. d. it h. pain in the side and collicke: with aniseed
and line-seed boiled in water ap. it h. the angina. Line-seed boiled in vinegar
ap. h. the dysentery, and pains of the belly: stamped with the roots of wild
cucumbers, it draws out things fixed in the body: the bath h. inflammations
of the matrix: poudered with fenugreeke, and boiled with mallows, violet
leaves, smallage, and chickweed, until the herbs be soft, then stamped with
axungia to the form of a pultis ap: h. all pain, softneth cold tumors,
suppurateth apostumes, and prevents ranklings applied warm evening and
morning. Wild flax. K. as the wild white, thin leafed wild, broad leafed
dwarf, millmountaine, the third broad leaved, and yellow floured. T. V. are
referred to the garden flax, and are seldom used in physic or surgerie.
Toad-flaxe. K. as the great, sweet purple, variable, of Valentia, white,
purple, creeping yellow, soure-leaved creeping, golden starfashioned, golden,
bushie, sparrowes, sparrowtongue, and bastard toad-flaxe. T. They are of the
temper of the wild snap-dragons whereof they are kinds. V. the decoction h.
the jaundise and deformity of the skin, being bathed therewith: d. it opens
the liver, spleen, and h. the jaundise, and the dysurie, and opens the
passages. Col: Park. Lineseed taken with raisins, opens the liver: with water,
myrrh, olibanu^ and wine it h. wateringeyes: the oil with rose water h.
burnings. The wild resolves and lenifieth. Common toad flax. V. h. the dropsy
and stone, and d. loses the belly, h. the jaundise, expells poison, the
menses, and dead child: ap. it h. red eyes, the juice h. ulcers, and spots of
the skin. Park: K. As the broad leased blew, and narrow leased with yellow fl:
V. the wild in most things is like that of the garden, and in many things more
effectual, by reason of its bitterness: the decoction with the fl. resolves
tumors, lenifyes inflammations, stiff arteries, and swellings in the groin.
The last is used to loosen the body. Toad-flax. K. as the greater of Hungary,
base white mountain, Spanish, upright, and bastard. V. as the rest. Schenck:
page 738. The distilled water of the fl: of flax, taken with sugar, expels
the pox: so Holler: Mac: the oil is emetick.

Flea-bane. Conyza.
P. In Spain, Italy, France, Germany, England, etc. T. Fl: in July and August.
N. (...). The blew fl: is called Amellus montanus Columnae. Dentelaringes.
Flea-bane. Ger. J. K. as the great, small, middle, dwarf, great
jagged-leaved, watersnipt, Austrian, hoary, hairy of the Alps, and blew
flowred. T. is hot and dry 3. V. The leaves and flowers h. the strangury,
jaundise, and griping of the belly: taken with vinegar they h. the epilepsie:
the fume of the decoction h. pains of the mother: the herb burned drives
away flies, gnats, fleas, and venomous things. Park: K. As the great mountain
of Germany, and sweet purple. V. The leaves h. the hurts of all venomous
creatures, small swellings and wounds: the decoction d. c. the terms, opens
the liver, and h. laskes: the last h. the toothache, so that of the sea.
Reech. K. As that of Mexico. T. is hot and dry 3, and sharp.

Fleawort. Psyllium.
P. Gardens: the first in fields near the sea. T. Fl: in June and July. N.
(...). Pulicaria. Herba Pulicaris.
Fleawort. Ger. K. as the common, and never dying. T. Gal: Serap: the seed is
cold 2, temperate in moisture and dryness. V. The decoction of the seed d.
purges choler, cools hot diseases, and quenches thirst. Stamped, boiled in
water, and ap. with vinegar and oil of roses, it h. all swellings in the
joints, S. Anthonies fire, and violent impostumes. Strewed in chambers, it
expels fleas. Pem: its mucilage, with rose, and barley water, the syrrup of
violets and roses, h. hoarsnesse, pleurisies, and purges choler. With
marmemelade of quinces, poppy seeds, and sugar candy it h. catarrhes: the seed
torrified, and taken with plantaine water h. fluxes and coughs: ap. it h. the
sciatica, and with populeon the piles, and tenesmus. It h. rough hair: so
Coals. Park: ap. with oil of roses and vinegar, it h. sore nipples. Jo. The
antidote is Andromachus's treacle, and vomiting with juniper water.

Flix-weed. Sophia Chirurgorum.
P. By high ways, in obscure places almost every where. T. It floureth and
seedeth from June to October. N. Pseudonasturtium Sylvestre, Sophia Paracelsi.
Thalictrum.
Flixweed. Ger. T. it dries without any sharpness or heat. V. The seed d.
with wine or smithes water stops laskes, and all issues of blood. The herb
bruised and put into unguents heals ulcers, old sores, and wounds. Col: The
herb d. consolidateth bones, and kills worms: so the water, and syrup.
Park: It Is no less effectual than plantaine or comfrey, for the purposes
aforesaid.

Floure-gentle. Amaranthus.
P. Gardens, the floramore in a bed of horse-dung. T. Fl: in Aug: and flourish
till the frosty weather. N. (...). The golden is called Cona aurea. Chrysocome.
Stoechas citrina.
Floure-gentle. Ger. K. As the purple, scarlet, floramore, branched, and
velvet. T. are binding, cold and dry. V. they stop all kinds of bleeding, and
laskes. Park. K. as the greater, and lesser purple, variable, carnation,
golden, and candy. T. the three first are hot and dry: but the other sorts are
accounted cold and dry; V. they all h. rheumatick bodies: the first cause
urine, and ap. comfort cold parts, and preyent moths. These are called
helychrysum and aurelia. Golden flower-gentle. Ger. J. K. as the common, broad
leased, round headed, and wild. T. V. d. kill worms, and nits applied.

Flower-deluce. Iris.
P. In gardens, moist meadows, by brinks of rivers. T. The dwarf fl. in
April: the greater in May: the bulbous in June. N. (...). Radix marica. Of the
water flag. Pseudoacorus.
Flower-deluce. Ger. K. as the common, and water flag. T^the green roots of Fl.
deluce are hot fere 4. dried, hot and dry 3, and burning the mouth. The root of
the bastard Fl. deluce is cold and dry 3. and astringent. V. the root of the
common Fl. deluce stamped with a little rose water ap. h. bruises. The juice
purges choler and watery humors. d. in whay it h. the dropsy. The roots dry
attenuate thick humors: and in a lohoch h. shortness of breath, and old coughs
etc. They h. evil spleens, cramps, convulsions, bitings of serpents, and
gonorhoea's d. with vinegar: and with wine provoke the courses. The decoction
mollifyeth the matrix and opens it. Boiled and ap. it mollifies the Kings
evil and hard swellings. John's. The roots of ordinary flaggs are hot and dry
2. they excel acorus, bind, strengthen and condense, and h. fluxes and the
courses. Flourede-luce of Florence. K. as the common, white, great of Dalmatia,
and small, twice flowring, violet, Austrian, and Germane. T. the roots are hot
and dry fine 2di. V. the juice mightily purges choler and water: and d. in
whay h. dropsies, evil spleens, cramps, convulsions, bitings of serpents,
gonorrhoea's d. with vinegar: and with wine provoke the courses. Variable
Flowredeluces. K. as the common, Turkey, sea, wild Bizantine, narrow-leased,
grass, narrow leafed many flowred, white dwarf, red flowred dwrafe, yellow
dwarf, and variegated dwarf. T. are referred to the other. V. the oil of the
flowers and roots an. q. v. made as oil of roses: strengthens the sinews
and joints, and h. cramps of repletion and peripneumonia's. The fl. of French
Fl. deluce distilled with diatrion santalon, and cinnamon: and the water d. h.
dropsies. Bulbed Flower deluce. K. as the broad leased onion, changeable, many
branched changeable, yellow, ash-colored and whitish. T. are referred to the
kinds of asphodills. V. unc. 6. of the herb, with goats suet, as much oil of
alcanna, lib. 1. stamped mixed and ap. h. the gout. The decoction of the root
with meal of lupines h. freckles and the morphew in the face. Velvet Fl.
deluce. T. V. is not discovered. Park. The root of the greater with the fl. is
sternutatorie and emetick. Spanish nut. K. as the common and small. Ger. T. V.
is eaten in fallads to c. lust. Park. The bulbous. K. as the great of Clus. and
blew English. T. V. are useless.

Flower of Constantinople. Lychnis Chalced.
P. Almost in all gardens. T. It flourishes in June and July. N. (...) Theoph.
Schwenck. Flos Constantinop. Hierosol. Creticus Aldrovandi.
Flower of Constantinople. Ger. T. V. it serves for ornament, and is not used:
so Park. Bauh. Its faculty is not found out, it having no physical use; but
the root which in taste is a little sharp, is thought to be hot 1. Park. K. as
the single and double nonesuch T. V. as the first are not used. Lob. It
scoureth wool, like sopewort. Schwenckf. It Is of no savor, and neglected as
to use.

Fluellin. Veronica.
P. In corn fields, especially amongst Barley. T. Fl. in August and September.
N. (...) the 1. The male, Betonica Pauli.
Fluellin. Ger. J. K. as the female, and sharp pointed. T. Col. is bitter, cold
and dry. V. it is astringent. It h. the dysentery and hot swellings, spreading
cankers and corrosive ulcers d. and ap. it h. inflammations of the eyes boiled
and applied as a pultis. The leaves sodd in the broth of a hen stay
dysenteries. Paul. The female Fluellin opens the obstructions of the liver,
and spleen, expels urine and the stone, and cleanses the kidneys and the
bladder. Drach. 1. of the powder of the herb with so much treacle h. pestilent
severs. Male Fluellin. K. as the common, little, smallest, shrubby, tree,
upright, and leaning. T. are in a mean between heat and dryness. V. the
decoction d. h. all fresh and old wounds, cleanses the blood, h. the kidneys,
scurvie, spreading tetters, fretting sores, small pox and measels. The water
distilled with wine till red h. old coughs, ulcers, inflammations and dryness
of the lungs. Park. K. as the greater spiked fl. and germander like. V. the
male h. infectious diseases d. in wine, pains of the head, jaundise, stone,
and fluxes of blood. The female h. fluxes and cankers d. and ap. The juice h.
the polypus. Bor. The water h. the dropsy.

Fooles-stones. Orchis morio.
P. In pastures, and fields seldom manured. T. Fl. in May and June: the stones
are to be gathered in Sept. N. The last is called Orchis Anthropophora.
Oreades.
Fooles-stones. Ger. J. K. as the male, female, and lesser spotted. T. are hot
and moist. V. these are thought to have the virtues of dog-stones, whereunto
they are referred. Park. K. as the male Neopolitan. V. this with the rest
operates as dog-stones.

Fox-gloves. Digitalis.
P. In barren sandy grounds, almost every where. T. They flower and flourish in
June and July. N. (...). Alisma and Damasonium Caesalp. Viola calathiana Plin.
Fox-gloves. Ger. J. K. as the purple, red, white, yellow, and dusky T. Col.
Are bitter, hot, dry, and clensing. V. boiled in water and d. they cut thick
phlegm and naughty humors, opening the liver, spleen and inward parts: and d.
with meade cleanse the breast and ripen clammy phlegm: they may be used in stead
of gentian. Park. The leaves ap. h. green wounds: the juice cleanses and dries
old sores, and h. the Kings evil, or the herb ap. Two handfulls of the herb
taken with unc. 4. of polypody of the oak bruised, and d. in ale effectually
h. the epilepsie.

Fox-stones. Testiculus Vulpinus.
P. In moist meadows, woods and fertile pastures. T. Fl. from May, to the end
of Aug. N. Orchis Serapias. The birds, Ornithophora.
Fox-stones. Ger. J. K. as the butterfly satyrion, gnat, humble be, waspe,
be, fly, yellow, small yellow, birds, spotted birds, soldiers, soldiers
cullions, spider, small gnat, and narrow leased satyrion. T. V. are referred
unto the dog-stones, yet they are not of any great use in physic, Park. K. as
the greater gnat, and purple birds flowered. V. These with the rest are not so
effectual for venery; but serve to discuss swellings, and cleanse foul ulcers
and fistula's, and h. inflammations of the mouth, phagedens, and lasks.

Fox-taile grass. Alopecuros.
P. In moist furrows of fertile fields. T. Toward the latter end of summer.
N. The first is called, Gramen Phalaroides. The rest Alopecuroides.
Fox-taile-grasse, Ger. J. K. as the great, small, great bastard, and small
bastard. T. V. are not yet discovered, or the nature or virtues of the
Foxetaile: so Turn. Park. It is not used in medicine, but serves only to be
worn as a toy in the hat.

Frankincense tree. Arbor Thurifera.*
P. It grows in Arabia. T. It is gathered in the dog days. N. (...). Thus,
sc. the rosin; and Olibanum.
Frankincense-tree. Ger. T. Gal. Thus is hot 2. dry 1. with some small
astriction: the white is manifestly astringent, so the rind, and dries
exceedingly, being of more gross parts than Frankincense, and not so sharp, so
h. the spitting of blood, swellings in the mouth, colic, flux, arising from
the stomach, and bloody flixes. The fume is dry 3. it does also cleanse and fill
up the ulcers of the eyes, like unto myrrh. Diosc. says if it be drank by one
in health it puts him into a frenzy, yet few consent hereunto. Avic. it
strengthens the wit and understanding, but taken often it c. headache, and if
too much be taken with wine it kills. Park. it h. the gonorrhoea, and
melancholy. It h. the cough and thin rheumes: and the Pleurisy, taken with the
conserve of roses. The sum h. the piles, tenesmus, and cough. With mirrhe and
the white of an egg ap. it h. pains of the head: and in salves it incarnates.

Friars cowle. Arisarum.
P. In Italy, and Tuscany. T. They flower with the Dragons. N. (...). Aris
Plinti. Aron parvum Cornarii.
Friars cowle. Ger. J. K. as the broad, and narrow leafed. T. it agrees with
wake-Robin, yet is more biting. V. It is not much used in Physic; but it is
reported that it stays phagedens, and that being put into collyries, it h.
fistula's. Diosc. Being put into the secret part of any creature, it rotteth
the same: so Came. Park. It Is milder than arum. It h. hollow ulcers, clensing
and healing them. Bauh. It h. burnings. Amat. The Germans use it against the
plague; yet it is not acknowledged by Clus.

Fritillarie. Fritillaria.
P. It grows in gardens and meadows. T. It flowreth in March and April. N.
Lilium variegatum. Flos meleagris Dod.
Fritillarie. Ger. J. K. as the lesser dark yellow, and early white, with the
checquered, and changeable checquered daffodill. T. V. serve only to adorn
and beautify the garden, and are not yet used in medicine. Bauh. The smell of
the black Fritillarie is unpleasant and stinking, and near unto that of
stinking Gladdon. The white is not yet written of, as to any physical use: so
Clusius, and Bauhinus.

Frog-bit. Morsus Ranae.
P. It floateth in ditches and standing waters. T. It flowreth and flourishes
most part of the year. N. (...). Nymphaea parva, and alba minima Park.
Frog-bit. Ger. T. V. It Is thought to be a kind of pond-weed (or rather of
water Lilly) and to have the same faculties that belong unto it. Park. As the
lesser sorts of water lillies, it cools; yet less than the greater sorts.
Schwenckf. It has the taste of ducks meat and the same virtues.

Fumitorie. Fumaria.
P. In corn fields, vineyards and manured places. T. It flourishes from May
to the end of summer. N. (...). Fumus Terrae Offic. Capnos Plin-Calchocrum.
Fumitorie. Ger. J. K. as the common, white broad leafed, fine leafed, and
yellow. T. is cold and something dry, opening and clensing by urine. V. it h.
those that have filth growing on the skin, or have the French disease. It opens
the liver and spleen, purifieth the blood and h. quartane agues, either the
syrrup, decoction, or distilled water thereof taken. Boiled in whay it h. in
the end of the spring, and in summer time those that are scabbed. It provokes
urine opens the liver, strengthens the stomach and looseneth the belly.
Diosc. The juice with Gum Arabic h. the eyes troubled with hairs they being
first plucked up. The decoction d. expels by urine and siege all hot and
hurtful humors, and digesteth the salt and pituitous. Bulbous Fumitorie. K. as
the great purple, great white, Bunnikens, and small Bunnikens holwort. T.
hallow root is hot 2 and dry 3, binding, clensing, and somewhat wasting. V. it
h. long swellings of the almonds in the throat and haemorroides m. with
unguentum populeum. drach. 1. d. purges forth phlegm. Park. K. as the
climbing, round rooted, with with green fl. and green fl. hollow root, with the
Indian, and knobbed Indian fum. V. Trag. The juice d. with the powder of the
root of esula c. vomit, the hollow rooted h. the plague. Pem. The 1. is hot 1,
and dry 2, as appears by its bitterness.

Furze-bush. Genista spinosa.
P. In pastures and fields, in most places. T. Fl from May to October. T.
(...). Scorpius Spinosus Theoph.
Furze-bush. Ger. J. K. as the great, small, small round codded, needle, dwarf
and scorpion. T. is hot and dry. V. the seed h. the stone, and laske. Park. The
two first open the obstructions of the liver and spleen. The flowers thereof in
a decoction h. the jaundise, as also provokes urine, and cleanses the kidneys
of gravel. The others no doubt are participant of the same qualities.

G
Galingale. Cyperus.
P. In fenny grounds naturally, and gardens. T. They flower in August. N.
(...). Juncus quadratus and angulosus. Aspalathum.
GAlingale. Ger. J. K. as the English common, and round. T. the roots are hot
and dry 2. V. d. it expells gravel and h. the dropsy. Boiled in wine and d.
it provokes urine and menses, and expells the stone. It also h. stingings and
bitings of scrpents. Fernel. The root used in baths h. coldness and stopping
of the matrix, and provokes terms. It causes blood and digestion, and
exhilerates: causes a good color, and sweet breath. The powder dries up all
moist ulcers even in the mouth and privities, stays the humors, and heals
them though malign and virulent. Spanish Galingale or Italian Trasi. T. the
roots are windy. V. the milk pressed out of the roots d. h. the breast and
lungs and mundifyeth them, it h. coughs and c. venery, the roots must be beaten
and macerated in broth, then pressed: the same milk or cream d. h. hor and
sharp urine, adding seed of pompions, gourds, and cucumbers. The true
galingale. K. as the greater and the less. T. are hot and dry 3. and the
lesser the hotter. V. they h. all cold diseases as colic and flatulencies,
and pains of the stomach c. by cold. The smell comforts the too cold brain.
The substance chewed sweetens the breath, and h. the beating of the heart. They
h. flatulency of the womb, c. venery, and heat the too cold reins. Park. K. as
the lesser Assyrian round rooted sweet, and rush nut. V. as the rest, the roots
boiled with bay berries and d. h. the dropsy, so ap. with the urine of a boy.
Alpin. The decoction of the roots is used by the Egyptians to warm the stomach.

Gall-tree. Gallae arbor.*
P. In Italy, Spain, and most of the hot regions. T. The gall appears when
the sun enters Cancer, and that in one night. N. (...). Quercus. Robur.
Plaecida Gazae.
Gall-tree. Ger. J. K. as the first and second, greater, and lesser gall-tree.
T. Gal. The gall called omphacitis, is dry 3, cold 2. and a very harsh
medicine. V. it fasteneth together slack parts, it repelleth rheumes and
fluxes, and dries up the same, especially those of the gums, throat and mouth.
The other gall is less drying and binding: being boiled and ap. as a plaster,
it h. the inflammations of the fundament, and falling down thereof. It Is
boiled in water if there be need of little astriction or binding, or otherwise
in austere wine if more need require. d. in wine, or the powder strewed upon
meats, it h. the dysentery, and the coeliack passion. They are used in dying,
and making of ink. If burnt they stanch blood, and are of thin parts, and
drying: they must be laid upon burning coals till white, and then quenched in
vinegar and wine. Also they are good in laskes, d. in wine, or water, and ap.
and serve in all cases where there is need of drying and binding. Oak apples
are much of the same nature, yet of lesser force. Park: The fume of the
decoction h. the falling down of the mother, and inflammations. Dorst: Aeg:
Galls are dry 3, cold 2. and when unripe repel, contract, and strengthen.

Garlic. Allium.
P. It is planted in gardens, sc. the small cloves. T. It is set in November: and
December: or Feb: and March. N. (...). Theriaca rustica. Vlpicum Columellae.
Garlic. Ger: T. is sharp, hot and dry 4, and exulcerateth the skin by raising
blisters. V. Being eaten it extremely heateth the body, attenuateth thick and
clammy humors, digesteth and consumes them. It also opens obstructions, h.
cold poisons, and the bitings of venomous beasts. It yeildeth no nourishment,
and ingendreth sharp and naughty blood, therefore hurts those that are of a
hot complexion; but it becomes of good juice boiled till it loose its
sharpness. It h. roughness of the throat, and old coughs: it provokes urine,
consumes wind, and h. the dropsy of a cold cause. It kills and expels
worms, sodden in milk and taken by young children. It h. cold stomachs, and
preserves from contagious air. The fume of the decoction taken brings down
the flowers and secundine etc. It h. the morphew, ring worms, scabbed heads in
children, dandraf and scurfe mixed with honey and ap. With figleaves and cummin
ap. it h. the bitings of the shrew mouse. The wild Garlic. K. as the crow, and
bears gar. T. are referred to those of the garden. V. the wild is stronger
than the garden garlic. The leaves of Ramsons stamped are good sauce to eat
with fish, and with butter in April and May; being eaten by laboring men. The
distilled water d. expels the stone and urine. The mountain Garlic K. as
the great, Clusius his great, the lesser leek leafed, the vipers, and broad
leafed. T. are in a mean between leeks and garlic. V. Scorodoprassum
attenuates and h. expectoration. The last operates as garlic. Park. K. as the
Turkey, great Turkey with narrow, and bulbed leaves. V. Garlic dicusseth the
inconveniences c. by mineral vapoures. It h. the jaundise, cramps, piles and
cold diseases.

Gaul tree. Myrtus Brabantica.
P. In fenny countries, and many other places. T. Fl: in May and June: the seed
is ripe in Aug. N. (...). Eleagnus Cordi. Rhus sylv. Plinit.
Gaule-tree. Ger: T. the leaves are hot and dry, the seed 3. V. the fruit is
troublesome to the brain; being put into beer whilst it is boiling it makes
it heady. The shrub with the fruit laid among clothes, keeps them from moths
and worms. Park. It Is bitter and harsh, drying and discussing, and is very
effectual to kill the worms in the belly and stomach.

Germander. Chamaedrys.
P. In rocky rough grounds, almost every where. T. Fl. and flourish from June
to August. N. (...). Trixago. Quercula minor. Trissago. Teucrium.
Germander. Ger. K. as the great broad leafed, small, and wild. T. that of the
garden is hot and dry fere 30. of thin parts and cutting. The wild also is hot
and dry, opening and cleansing the liver and spleen. V. boiled in water and d.
it delivers the body from all obstructions, and cutteth clammy humors: it h.
coughs, and shortness of breath, the strangury and dropsy. The leaves stamped
with honey, and strained, and a drop at a time put into the eyes, h. the web,
and any dimnesse thereof. It mightily provokes the terms d. in wine, the
privities being fomented with the same. Tree-Germander. K. as that with broad
leaves, the Hungarian, great Austrian, dwarf rock, Spanish, and rough headed.
T. V. are referred to the garden ger: yet they are weaker and less used. Water
germander. T. is hot and dry, bitter, harsh, and sharp. V. It cleanses the
intrals and old ulcers m. with honey. It provokes urine and menses, purges
rotten matter out of the chest, h. old coughs, pain in the sides of cold, and
inward ruptures. Decoct in wine and d. it h. bitings of serpents, and poison.
Stamped and ap. with vinegar and water it h. the gout. Scordium laid among raw
flesh preserves it a long time from corruption d. with wine, it opens the
stoppings of the liver, milt, kidneys, bladder and matrix, provokes urine, h.
the strangury, and exhilerateth. drach: 2. of the powder taken in meade, stop
the bloody flixe, and comfort the stomach. Hereof is made diascordium, serving
for the purposes aforesaid, as also against the pocks, measles, purples, or any
pestilent sickness, before it has universally possessed the whole body. Park:
K. as the jagged leafed, thorny of Candy, mountain, rock, greater and smaller
bastard: V. d. it h. poison, all diseases of the brain, gout, and kills
worms. That of the mountain stops fluxes. Tree germ: is hot 2, dry 3, of thin
parts. Recch: The sweet of Mexico. T. is hot 4, and dry. V. and h. the spleen.

Gessemine. Jasminum.
P. It Is fostered in gardens. T. Fl: in July and August. N. (...). Jeseminum.
Gesseminum.
Gessemine. Ger. K. as the white, great white, yellow, and blew. T. The herb,
especially the flowers are hot initio 2di. V. the oil made of the flowers,
wastes away raw humors, and h. cold rheumes, but in those of a hot
constitution it causes headache, and the smell causes the nose to bleed. It
is useful after baths to supple and warm the body. The leaves boiled in wine
until soft, and ap. as a pultis h. cold swellings, wens and excrescencies.
Park: K. as the single Spanish, and sweet yellow Indian. V. The leaves cleanse
the skin, and h. tetters: the oil h. stitches. Turn: It h. moistness, and
salt phlegm, and old men of a cold complexion: it h. aches c. by cold humors.
ap. it h. cold superfluities and spots: so the Arabian.

Gilloflowers. Leucoium.
P. They grow in moist gardens. T. Fl: from spring to the end of summer. N.
(...). Viola alba. Wall flower, Viola lutea.
Gilloflowers. Ger: J: K. as the violet colored, double stock, and thorny. T.
V. they agree with the wall-flowers though inferior and not used in physic;
yet some use them to c. lust. Camerar, a conserve of the fl. of stock
gilloflowers given with the distilled water thereof h. the apoplexy and
palsy. The sea stock gilloflowers. K. as the white, purple, broad leafed,
yellow and small yellow. T. V. are not used in physic. Wall-flowers. K. as the
common, double and wild. T. the whole shrub is of a clensing faculty, and of
thin parts. V. the yellow is most used in physic. The juice mixed with some
unctuous thing to the form of a liniment h. rifts of the fundament. The herb
boiled with white wine, honey, and a little allom h. hot ulcers and cankers of
the mouth. The leaves stamped with a little bay salt ap. to the wrists h. the
shaking fits of agues. A decoction of the flowers with the leaves mollisieth
schirrous tumors. The oil h. the palsy and gout. Also a strong decoction of
the flowers d. moves the courses, and expells the dead child. Sea
Gillo-flower, or Thrift. T. V. Is not used in physic. Park. Wall-flowers. V.
the conserve of the fl. h. the apoplexy and palsy. The oil h. strains.
Schwenckf. The fl. of the bulbous leucoium, d. in wine h. stitches in the side.

Ginger. Zingiber.*
P. In Spain, Barbary, and the Canarie Islands. T. Fl. in heat of summer, and
loses the leaves in winter. N. (...). Zinziber. Gingiber.
Ginger. Ger. T. is hot and dry 3. V. Diosc. It Is exceeding good in conditures.
It heals, digesteth, and loses the belly, corroborateth the stomach, and h.
scotoma's, and answers the effects of pepper. Being canded it is hot and
moist, and c. venery: and being dried it is hot and dry as aforesaid. Park: K.
As the brasill with a black root, and the oriental. V. it h. digestion, and
dissolveth wind, and being dry it binds the belly. Col: Being ground on a
whetstone and m. with salt in white wine, and the eyes anointed therewith
after residence, it h. the web: it h. all cold griefs: as also the cough and
toothache. Parac. The distilled oil h. ulcers.

Gladdon stinking. Spatula faetida.
P. Gardens, woods, and shadowy places. T. Fl: in August: the seed is ripe in
September. N. (...). Xyris. Spurgewort.
Gladdon stinking. Ger. T. is hot and dry 3. V. The roots, as of the other
Irides, are hot and extenuating: h. the cough, digest and consume gross
humors, purge choler, and tough phlegm, c. sleep, and h. gripings in the
belly. The root hereof h. the Kings evil, and buboes. d. in wine it provokes
the terms: so used in a bath. As a pessary it hasteneth the birth: in
plasters it covers bare bones with flesh boiled soft and ap. The roots ap.
h. hard tumors, and the Kings evil: with honey it draws our broken bones. The
meal h. rifts of the fundament, and opens the haemorrhoides, the juice as an
errhine causes sneezing, and attracteth filthy excrements. It h. all evil
affections of the breast and lungs, taken in sweet wine with spikenard; or in
whay with a little mastick. The root of gladdon h. wounds, and fractures of the
head, and attracteth splinters. The seed mightily provokes urine. d. in wine
it h. convulsions, ruptures, the sciatica, strangury, and flux of the belly,
removing the cause. Park: It h. the poison of Serpents. The juice of the leaves
and roots h. the itch, so Trag. And blemishes of the skin. Boiled with vinegar
and ap. it h. the tumors of the spleen, and stops the gonorrhoea. Dorsten: The
juice ap. h. the lepry.

Glasse-wort. Kali.
P. In salt marshes almost every where. T. It flowreth, and flourishes in the
summer. N. Kali. Salicornia. and Salsicornia. The ashes Soda. The salt Sal
Alkali.
Glasse-wort. Ger. J. K. as the common, snaile, and small. T. Is hot and dry:
so the ashes, yet more hot and dry sc. 40, and caustic. V. A little quantity
of the herb taken inwardly, mightily provokes urine, and expels the dead
child: it purges forth watery humors, and h. the dropsy: a greater q. is
deadly. The sum hereof drives away serpents. The ashes are mixed with those
medicines that h. scabbs, and filth of the skin. Serap: It consumes
excrescencies in ulcers. Axungia vitri, the flower of crystal or sendever,
does wonderfully dry: and h. scabbs, and manginesse, the foul parts being
bathed with the water in which it is boiled. Park: K. as the great, small white
and joynted. T. All cleanse without manifest heat. V. The juice opens the liver
and spleen, and h. the hardness thereof. The soap hereof ap. to the feet, h.
those that are speechless. The powder of the rest. K. As the prickly,
Columna's, Neapolitan, Egyptian, and Arabian. V. Alpin: Purges choler.

Goats-beard. Tragopogon.
P. The 1 in gardens, the other in fertile pastures. T. They fl: and flourish
from May to September. N. (...). Barba hirci. Coma.
Goats-beard. Ger. K. as the purple, and yellow. T. Are temperate between heat
and moisture. V. The roots boiled in wine and d. h. pains and pricking stitches
of the sides. Boiled in water till tender, buttered and eaten they h. the
appetite, warm the stomach, h. consumptions, and strengthen those that have
been sick of chronicall diseases. Park: The distilled water of the 1. and blew,
h. old sores and wounds ap. The root is more bitter and binding, than that of
the yellow. The other K. as the summer, and the greater with jagged leaves. V.
Trag. The distilled water h. impostumes, plurisies, griefs of the stomach and
liver: and h. the stone.

Goats-rue. Galega.
P. In Italy, and gardens planted. T. Fl: in July and August. N. Ruta capraria.
Herba Gallic a Fracastorii.
Goats-rue. Ger. T. it is in a mean between hot and cold. V. It h. poison d.
and kills worms: so ap. fried with lineseed oil and ap. to the navill. A
spoonefull d. in the morning with milk h. the epilepsie. Boiled in vinegar and
d. with treacle, it prevents the plague: eaten in sallads with oil, vinegar,
and pepper, it preventeth venomous infirmities, and c. sweat. Ap. it h. the
bitings or stingings of venomous beasts. unc: sem: of the juice d. h. cramps,
convulsions, and the diseases aforesaid. The seeds feed foul exceedingly. The
leaves boiled and ap. h. the stinging of waspes and bees. Park: The juice taken
with treacle, the powder of the roots of tormentill with carduus b. water, and
bole Arm: prevents infection: it is cordial: ap. it h. the colic, and
gangrenes.

Goats-stones. Tragorchis.
P. In fat clay ground. T. They flower in May and June. N. (...). Testiculus
hircinus.
Goats-stones. Ger: J: K. as the greatest, the male, female, and small
goats-stones of Holland. T. V. They are referred to the Fools stones; yet they
are seldom or never used in Physic. Park: K. as the ordinary, and lesser
truer. V. Lugd: Dod: The roots of these with the rest, are better than the
other orchies, for the purposes aforesaid.

Goats-thorne. Tragacantha.*
P. In Candy, Arcadia, Achaia, etc. T. It flowreth and flourishes in the
summer. N. (...). Spina hirci. The last, Poterion.
Goats-thorne. Ger: J: K. as the common, small, and the burnet g. T: The plant
is dry without biting, it conglutinateth the sinews, especially the roots being
boiled in wine and d. The gum dragagant, is emplastick, some what dry, and
allayeth the sharpness of humors. V. The gum in a lohoch h. the cough,
roughness of the throat, hoarsenesse, and all sharp and thin rheumes, and
distillations: being laid under the tongue, it h. the roughness thereof. d.
with cute or the decoction of licorice it h. the heat of urine: it is also used
in medicines for the eyes. The gum steeped in rose water until it be soft, m.
with other things, serves to make the usual artificial beads. Diosc: The
best gum is that which is diaphanous, thin, smooth, unmixt, and sweet of smell
and taste. Park: The gum dissolved in sweet wine and d. h. the gnawings of the
bowels, and frettings of the urine, especially with burnt harts-horne. m. with
milk, it h. spots in the eyes, and itching and scabbs of the eye lidds. It
stops the flux used in clysters; so the thorny Burnet.

Goldilocks. Adiantum aureum.
P. In moist places, in rotten trees and crannies. T. They flourish especially
in the summer time. N. Muscus capillaris. Polytrichum aureum.
Goldilocks. Ger. T. are temperate in heat and cold. Park: Yet they dry,
rarifie, and digest. V. Golden maiden-haire h. to expectorate tough phlegm from
the chest and lungs, like the rest, being boiled and d. It also provokes
urine, and h. to expel the stone: it is profitable for those that are
splenetick, and epileptick. The lie thereof bathed, h. the hair etc. as the
rest.

Gold of pleasure. Myagrum.
P. In sundry places of England. T. Fl: in May and June: the seed is ripe in
September. N. (...). Pseudomyagrum Matthew. Sesamum Tragi.
Gold of pleasure. Ger. T. is hot and dry 3. V. Diosc. The oilie fatness of
the seed polisheth the skin, and makes it smooth. Ruell: The juice h. ulcers
of the mouth. Park: K. as the wild, round podded like, and the greater one
grained. T. Gal. The seed is emplasticke. V. The oil is hot and c. thirst d.
It serves in Germany for poor men's tables, and rich men's lamps, and with the
lie of ashes to make soap. The wild is like the first.

Golden-rod. Virga aurea.
P. In Woods frequently. T. They flower and flourish in the end of Aug. N. It Is
thought to be Leucographis Plinii.
Golden-rod. Ger. K. as the common, and Arnold's T. is hot and dry 2 and
cleanses with a certain astriction. V. it provokes urine, wastes the stone
(so Fum.) in the kidneys and expells them: and purges raw humors out of the
ureters. It Is vulnerary and operates as Saracens consound. The distilled water
d. for some days together works the same effect. It excells for stopping of
blood in sanguinolent ulcers and wounds. Park. K. as that with dented leaves.
V. Golden rod decoct and d. h. inward bruises, so ap. it stops bleedings,
fluxes, and the courses, and h. ruptures, and fastens the teeth, also it is used
in lotions for ulcers in the mouth, or privities.

Gondell of Italy. Cymbalaria Italica.
P. In gardens and other shadowie places: on thatch etc. T. Fl. in the
beginning of summer. N. Vmbilicus Veneris offic. Lonic. Linaria head, fol.
Columnae.
Gondeli of Italy. John's. T. is cold and moist, repelling, scouring, and
wasting. Park. V. it is thought to be a fit substitute for umbilicus Veneris,
and has some astriction. Matthew. It stops the whites being eaten often in
sallads, after the manner of the Italians. A conserve of the leaves, or a
syrrup of the juice may serve instead thereof: also it cures wounds, and stops
blood the juice being ap. and also ripens apostumes.

Goose berry bush. Grossularia.
P. In gardens and diverse places. T. The leaves appear in April: the fruit
is ripe in June and July. N. (...) Theoph. Vva crispa. Spina. Spinella.
Goose-berry bush. Ger. T. the berries before they be ripe, are cold and dry
fine 2di. and also binding. V. the fruit is used in stead of sauce, and in
broths in stead of varjuice, in hot burning agues. They c. raw and cold blood,
nourish little, stay the belly and stop bleeding, and menses; except taken into
a cold stomach, then they clog and trouble the same by some manner of flux. The
ripe berries as they are sweeter, so less binding and something hot, of more
nourishment and not so crude. The juice of green goose-berries h. all
inflammations, the erysipelas or S. Anthonies fire: so Fuche They c. appetite,
and h. hot stomachs and livers, The young leaves eaten raw in a sallad, provoke
urine and expel the stone. Park. K. as the great red, and prickly. Dod. The
berries used any way are of dry, cold, and crude nutriment. Col. Too much eaten
they c. crudity and worms.

Goose-foot. Pes anserinus.
P. In fat moist places, on dung-hills, by high ways. T. It flourishes with
the Crach, of which it is a kind. N. Chenopodium. Atriplex Sylvestris
latifolia.
Goose-foot, Ger: J. K. as the first and second. T. is cold, and moist, and
that no less than Orach, but more cold. V. it is reported, that it kills
swine eating of it: it is not used in physic, so Lob. nor sallad. Park. It Is
held to be deadly taken inwardly. Lugd. Fuch. It Is cold 2. Dod. fere 3. ap. it
operates as garden nightshade.

Gourds. Cucurbita.
P. In the gardens of these cold Regions: as Cucumbers. T. Fl. in June and
July; the fruit is ripe in August. N. (...). Colocynthis.
Gourds. Ger. K. as the snake's, and bottle gourds T. The pulp is cold and
moist 2. V. The juice being dropped into the ears with oil of roses, h. the
pain thereof c. by heat. The pulp ap. as a pultis h. all hot swellings, the
headache, and inflammations of the eyes. The same author affirms that a long
Gourd being laid in the cradle by the young infant whilst it is a sleep and
sick of an ague, it shall be quickly cured. The pulp is eaten sod, but being of
a waterish and thin juice, it is oligotrophick or of small nourishment, and the
same cold and moist, and therefore looseneth the belly: if baked or fried it
becomes less laxative. The seed provokes urine and h. the sharpness thereof.
The wild Gourd. K. as the bottle, and Mushrom. T. is hot and dry 2. V. it is
extreme bitter so it opens and scours as the wild mellons, so also does the
wine contained all night in this Gourd, and mightily evacuateth chollerick and
phlegmatic humors. Park. K. as the long, simnell, Indian ovall, and pear
sashion'd. V. they h. choler, and inflammations of the liver and stomach. The
distilled water of the unripe h. thirst in agnes: and ap. h. all inflammations
and lust: the ashes h. all uleers. the seed h. heat and the stone. The
chestnut Gourd c. venery eaten. The sour Aeth^opian h. heat and fluxes. Ser.
2. of the bitter so. of the pulpe purge choler and tough humors.

Goute-wort. Herba Gerardi.
P. It grows of it self in gardens. T. Fl. from May to Aug. N. Podagraria
Germanica. Pycnomos Brunfelsii.
Goute-wort. Ger. T. Is anodyne. V. The herb with the roots stamped and ap. h.
members that are troubled with the gout, aswageth the pain and h. the
swellings and inflammations thereof. It cures also the haemorrhoids, the
fundament being bathed with the decoction of the leaves and roots, and the
tender sodden herbs ap. very hot. Park. Upon good experience it is found good to
h. the cold gout and sciatica: joint aches, and other cold griefs. Lob. It Is
ap. for the same diseases, that Dane wort is.

Grains of Paradise. Cardamomum.*
P. Grains grow in Ginny, and Cardamoms in the East Indies. T. The seed being
sown springs in May: the fruit is ripe in September. N. (...). Grana Paradisi.
Grains of Paradise. Ger. K. as the greater, and lesser. T. Avic. Are hot and
dry 3. with astriction. V. the grains chewed in the mouth draw forth aqueous
and pituitous humors of the head, and stomach: they also comfort and warm the
feeble breast, h. the ague, and rid the shaking fitts being drank with sack,
Park. They break the stone, provoke urine, and resist poison. The perfume
kills the foetus. They h. the epilepsie, and cough, expel the wind and
worms, they h. pains in the bowels, ease bruises, h. weak sinews and the
sciatica: with vinegar they h. scabs, and are used in antidotes. Pem. H. they
hurt hot and dry bodies: the dose of the powder is scr. 1. or 2.

Grass. Gramen.
P. The common almost every where: the small in dry places. T. All the year,
seed in June and July. N. (...) Theoph. Herba.
Grass. Ger. J. K. as that of the meadow, and small meadow gr. T. The roots
and seeds open obstructions, and provoke urine, and are more used than the
herb. V. The decoction of the herb with the roots of parsley d. h. the
dropsy and provokes urine. The roots Gal. consolidate wounds. The juice of
grass mixed with honey and the powder of southernwood d. kills worms: or the
juice ap. to the belly, with ox gall. Fernel. Grass opens the liver, and
reins, and h. their inflammations. Hay sodden till tender in water and ap.
hot, h. beasts that be chap-fallen. Dwarfe-grasse. K. as the red and white,
small hard, and rush grass. T. V. are thought to agree with that of the
meadow, but are not yet used in physic. Corne-grasse. K. as the common and
bent. T. V. are thought to agree with the first, but are not used in physic.
Millet-grasse. K. as the common, and great water gr. T. V. as the rest. Darnell
grass. K. as the common, with the wild reed, and lesser reed grass. T. V. are
not discovered. The feather top, fern, and greater wood gr. T. V. are not
known. Great foxtaile grass. K. as the great, small, great and small bastard.
T. V. are not used. Great Cats-taile grass. T. V. is not discovered. Cypress
grass, and rushy water. T. V. are useless. Water grass. K. as the common and
spiked, T. V. are referred to the dogs grass. Flote-grasse. K. as the common,
and spiked. T. V. are not discovered. Kneed grass. K. as the common, and water
gr. T. V. are not known. Panike. K. as the bearded, small and single eared. T.
V. are not discovered. Hedgehog grass, with the hairy and round headed s. T.
V. Caesalp. The head of the silver grass ap. h. green wounds and stops
bleeding. Hairy wood grass, with the Cyprus. T. V. are as unknown as the
former. The other grasses, K. as the sea spike, salt marsh, sea rush, marsh
rush, great, and small Cypress grass, water, and spike-cypresse, and wood
rushy grass. T. V. are not discovered. Dogsgrasse. K. as the common, and
knotty Dogs-gr. T. The roots agree with those of the common grass, opening the
liver and reins without manifest heat, but more effectually. V. Couch-grasse
helps green wounds. The decoction h. the reins and bladder, and expels
urine and gravel. Gal. The root stamped and ap. speedily h. wounds. The
decoction h. the tormina and dysury. The knots d. h. the strangury. Sea
dogs-grasse, and sea couch grass. T. V. operate as the Dogs-grasse: so the
upright Dogs-grasse, and Lady-lace. Dew grass, cocks-foot common, and with
creeping roots. T. are astringent and drying, in taste like the Dogs-grasse. V.
Apul. A plaster made hereof with hogs grease and the leaven of household bread
h. the bitings of mad dogs. The ear being ap. diverteth the defluxions or
flowing of humors. Manna-grasse or rice-grasse. V. In pultises it discusseth
the hard tnmors or swellings in women's breasts. Cocks-foot doggs-grasse
operates as the other doggs-grasses. The other Cyperus grasses. K. as the great
narrow leafed, bastard, long bastard, round bastard, and millet cyperus. T. In
taste seem to be cold and astringent. V. as yet they are not used in physic.
Mountain haver, and capon-taile grass. T. V. are not discovered.
Cotton-grasse. T. V. d. sodden in wine h. the tormina of childing women. Water
gladiol. T. V. is not used. Park. K. as the corn grasses, sc. the close eared,
rush leafed white wheat grass etc. the darnell, field oaten, wood and
Mountain oaten, millet, quakers, Fox-taile, bastard-fox tail, cats-taile,
cyperus, kneed, reed, smooth wood, hairywood, prickly headed, and rush grasses,
are not of any known use in physic. Pem. Couch-grasse h. the haemoptysis or
spitting of blood. Meadow grass. V. the seed thereof ap. discusseth flatulent
swellings, and obdurate tumors in the body. The panick grass hurts sheep.
The curled panick grass is said to operate as quich-grasse. Crested and spiked
grass come near the temper of the other field grasses. The variable spiked
causes milk in beasts. The Canary grass. T. is drying and repressing. V. it
stops the fluxibility of humors. The seed makes bread of little nourishment.
The juice h. diseases of the bladder, and is the substiture for millet in
somentations and plasters. The bastard does not much differ from the true. The
knobbed couch-grasse. V. is better than the common. It h. inflammations: the
seed h. laskes, and vomitings. The root is cold and dry with a little
mordacity, and tenuity of parts: the seed is colder and dryer and somewhat
harsh. The herb is cold 1, moderate in moisture, and in dryness. The
distilled water d. kills worms. Cocks-foot grass. V. bruised and ap. it
stays bleeding: the spike being put into the nose causes it. Egyptian
cocks-foot grass. V. ap. h. wounds. The root and seeds d. provoke urine,
expel the pox etc. h. fevers and cause sweat. Haver grass. V. it dries
without sharpness. V. it h. the aegilops. The seeds d. inebriate. The ashes of
the stalks h. the gout. Decoct and ap. it h. nodes and joint swellings. The
herb boiled in wine with dried roses h. a stinking breath: in water with the
root of wild oats, honey, and aloes h. the polypus. The cyperus grasses, with
the rush-like grasses, of the marshes, waters etc. and the marsh reed grasses.
T. V. are not of any known use. Common cotton grass. V. Cord. decoct in wine
and taken warm h. the griping pains of the belly. Their woolly heads serve
for the stuffing of beds. The water grasses. V. serve only for the food of
beasts. The roots of the sea quich grass operate as the ordinary sort. All the
sorts of unsavory Cyperus. T. are defective in heat and dryness. V. and not
used for any purpose in physic: so also water gladioll. The fresh water
excrescencies, or water weeds. Plin. Bound to the body, and kept moist h. the
bruises, ruptures, and contusions thereof. Silkegrasse. Smith. V. The
Virginians use the roots thereof being bruised and ap. to cure wounds. Lob. The
root of grass is sweet and subacerbe, of a mean, slender, and somewhat
inciding substance, which without heat opens the intralls, expells
impurities, and detergeth. Apul. The root conglutinateth ulcers.

Gromell. Lithospermum.
P. The two first grow in untilled places: the rest on sands. T. Fl. from the
12. day of June until Autumn. N. (...). Gorgonium. Aegonychon. Leontion.
Diosporon.
Gromell. Ger. J. K. as the great, and small, purple flowred, and bastard. T.
the seed is hot and dry 2. V. The seed concused and d. in white wine, breaks
the stone and expels urine. Park. K. as the greater creeping, small wild,
small with tufted tops, small corn and Germane grom. T. the two first are hot
and dry 2. V. these are most used: the rest are less effectual. They h. the
strangury. The seeds boiled in barley water with the four greater cold seeds,
and d. in the morning h. the stone. Matthew. drach. 1. sem. of the greater and
lesser. drach. sem. of spleen wort. drach. 2. of white amber powdered and d.
for diverse days together in the juice of plantaine purslain and lettuce h.
the gonorrhoea. drach. 2. of the seed d. h. the delivery of women.

Ground Pine. Chamaepitys.
P. They grow in Kent very plentifully: and in gardens. T. They flower in June,
and often in Aug. N. (...). Ibiga. Ajuga. Iva arthritica and Moschata.
Ground Pine. Ger. J. K. as the male, and small, French, bastard, and Austrian.
T. are hot 2 dry 3. V. The leaves tunned up in ale, infused in wine, or sodden
in honey and d. for 8. or 1. days h. the jaundise, sciatica, stoppings of the
liver, and difficulty of making water; it opens the spleen and expells the
menses. Stamped green with honey it h. wounds and malignant ulcers, dissolveth
the hardness of women's breasts, and h. poison and bitings of venomous beasts.
The decoction d. dissolveth congealed blood, and with vinegar expels the
dead child: it cleanses the intralls, h. the infirmities of the liver and
kidneys and yellow jaundise. d. in wine it provokes the menses and urine:
boiled in meade and d. it h. the sciatica in 40. days. It is an antidote
against Wolfes-bane. The powder taken in pills with a fig mollifyeth the belly,
wastes the tumors of the paps, h wounds and putrified ulcers ap. with honey;
sc. the 1. the other two operate not so effectually. The Austrian is thought to
be much better. Many flowred Ground Pine and stinking, Anthyllis l. with the
sea pimpernell. T. are in a mean between hot and cold. V. half an ounce of
the dried leaves d. h. hot urine, and the strangury, and purges the reins.
Taken with oxymel it h. the falling sicknessed, first and last. Park. The first
cleanse impure blood, and open the belly, and h. all diseases of the mother. d.
and ap. it h. all diseases of the joints: and cold griefs of the brain, so
the pills thereof: and h. the dropsy. The stinking d. and ap. stops desluxions.

Ground-sell. Senecio.
P. It grows almost every where. T. Fl: almost every month in the year. N.
(...). Erigerum. Herbutum.
Ground-sell. Ger. J. K. as the common, and 1, and 2d. Cotton gr: T. It has
mixed faculties, it cools, and withal digesteth. V. The leaves boiled in wine
or water and d. h. the pain of the stomach of choler. The leaves and fl:
stamped with hoggs grease, h. the burning heat of the privities and fundament:
a little saffron or salt being added, it h. struma's or the kings evil. The
leaves stamped, strained into milk and d. h. the red gums, and frets in
children. Diosc. with the fine powder of frankincense, it h. wounds in the
sinews: so the down m. with vinegar. Boiled in ale with a little honey and
vinegar it c. vomit, especially a few roots of assarabacca being added. Park.
K. as Miconus's Spanish, and the stinking. T. Trag. It Is cold and moist. V.
Plin: d. in wine, it h. the jaundise and epilepsie, and pain of the bladder and
stone drach: 1. d. in oxymel, also it h. the sciatica, and colic. Eaten with
vinegar in a fallet, it h. the sadness of the heart, and defects of the live^^
it provokes the courses: ap. it h. hot swellings, and pains of women's breasts:
so the distilled water, and h. defluxions to the eyes.

H
Hares-cares. Bupleurum.*
P. Among Oken woods in stony grounds. T. Fl. and bring forth seed in July and
Aug. N. (...). Auricula leporis.
HAres ears. Ger. K. as the narrow and broad leafed. T. are temperate in heat
and dryness. V. It serves in meats for sallads: it is vulnerary also. The
leaves stamped with salt and wine ap. consume and drive away the Kings evil,
and are used against the stone in the bladder. Park. Plin. The seed or root
powdered and decoct in wine and d. so the leaves also h. the bitings and
stingings of venomous beasts: applied it provokes urine and the courses. It h.
wounds inward or outward, cancers and old sores, of evil disposition, and bad
curation. Bauh. The yellow tufted is somewhat sharp, and a little bitter, and
an apophlegmatisme. Dod. The seed is hot and dry 2.

Hares-foot. Lagopus.
P. The first grows in gardens, the small among corn etc. T. They flower and
flourish in June, July and Aug. N. (...). The first is called Lagopodium.
Cytisus Trag. The other Pes leporis.
Hares-foot. Ger. J. K. as the great, great large headed and narrow leased
little. T. the small haresfoot does bind and dry. V. It stops the lask d.
with red wine, and with water by those that are severish. The temper and
faculty of the rest are referred to the other trefoiles whereof they are kinds,
Park. K. as the bright red, and common. T. all the parts thereof, as also of
the rest, but specially the spiked heads do dry and bind. V. Lob. The first
especially d. in wine h. fluxes, and ap. to the share h. the inflammations
thereof. Matthew. also it h. belchings of choler and pain of the belly, the
seeds being d. in red wine. It h. hot urine, haemoptysis and gonorrhoea's, and
cures ruptures.

Harts-ease. Viola tricolor.
P. In gardens, and fields, in many places. T. Fl. all summer, till autumn. N.
(...). Herba trinitatis, and Clavellata. Viola flamme a.
Harts-ease. Ger. K. as the common, upright, wild, and stony. T. is obseurely
cold, evidently moist, slimy like the Mallow, it moisteneth and suppleth, yet
not so much as the Mallow. V. It h. agues, convulsions, and the falling
sickness. It h. inflammations of the lungs and chest, lcabs, itchings and
ulcers. The distilled water of the herbs or flowers d. for 10. days unc. 8.
in the morning, and so at night h. the French pox. Park. K. as the greater,
lesser and double flowred. T: they are hotter and dryer than Violets. Lugd:
those of Egypt use it for the cpilepsie.

Hart's-tongue. Phyllitis.
P. By the way sides, in shadowie, moist stony valleys. T. It is green all the
year long; yet less in winter. N. (...). Radiolus Apuleil, Lingua Cervina.
Foliosa.
Hart's-tongue. Ger. J. K. as the common and finger, moone-ferne, small, and
handed moonferne, Hemionitis. T. It is of a binding and drying faculty. V. The
common hart's-tongue h. fluxes; and d. in wine, the bitings of Serpents, so
Turn. It opens the liver and spleen, and h. all griefs proceeding of
oppilations. Park. It h. the heat of the liver and stomach, it stops the laske,
and bloody flixe. The distilled water thereof h. the passions of the heart, and
stays the hicket, also it h. the falling of the palate, and stops the
bleeding of the gums, the mouth being gargled therewith. Lugd: Gal: It Is
acerbe, therefore it h. the diarrhoea, etc. Col: It h. spitting of blood, and
other fluxes. The posset drink thereof with whitewine h. the stone. It h. the
jaundise, and Kings evil etc.

Hart-wort. Seseli Aethiopicum.
P. In gardens planted: the last in stony places. T. They flower and flourish
in September. N. (...). Sile: those of Candy are called, Tordy lia.
Hart-wort. Ger. J. K. as the small of Candy, and the great: the mountain, and
that of Marseilles. T. It is concocting and diureticall. V. It h. the
strangury, provokes urine, and expels the secundine and dead child. It h.
coughs, and shortness of breath, the suffocation of the mother, and falling
sickness. The seed d. with wine, concocteth raw humors, and h. torments of the
belly and agues. The juice of the leaves given to beasts, causes speedy
delivery of their young. Hart-wort of Aethiopia. T. V. Is thought to agree with
that of Marseilles. Park: K. as the true of Diosc. the meadow of Mompelier,
English green Saxisr. Milky marsh, mountain hemlock-like, and that of Pelopon.
V. the English h. the colic, and the frets of Children. The best is the
Ethiopian.

Hasell-tree. Avellana Sylvestris:
P. In woods, and moist untilled places. T. The catkins fall away in March: the
nuts are ripe in August. N. (...). Corylus. Nux Pontica, Tenuis, Heracleotica.
Hasell-tree. Ger. K. as the filberd, wild hedge, and filberd of Constant. T.
The nutts newly gathered are superfluously moist, and windy; so the dry also:
dyspeptick, of an earthy and terrene essence, and hard substance flowly passing
through the belly; so clogge the stomach, and cause headache much eaten. V.
The kernells made into milk like almonds, mightily bind the belly, h. laskes,
and bloody flix, and cool agues, and burning fevers. The catkins are cold and
dry, and stop laskes. John's. The kernells of nutts rather cause than cure the
laske. Park: The milk drawn from the nutts with meade h. old coughs: parched
and d. with pepper they h. rheum. drach: 2. of the husks and shells d. in red
wine, stop laskes and the courses.

Hawke-weed. Hieracium.
P. In untilled places, the borders of fields, etc. T. Fl: all summer long. N.
(...). Accipitrina. Lampuca. Porcellia Gazae.
Hawke-weed. Ger. J. K. as the great, small hares, black, succorie, endive,
long rooted, sharp, crooked 1 and 2d, broad leafed mountain, and the lesser
broad leafed mountain. T. Are cold, dry, and somewhat binding. V. They are in
operation like sowthistle: the juice of the yellow dropped into the eyes h. the
sight. It h. a hot stomach, and inflammations ap. the herb and root being
stamped and ap. h. those that are stung with scorpions: which the lesser
perform as well as the greater. The other hawke-weeds. K. as the 1, 5, 6, 7,
of Clusius, the small of Candy, and Dandelion. T. V. are not known. Park: K. as
the rough and bulbed dandeleon like. T. V. as the rest. The juice d. in wine h.
crudities in the stomach, dysury and poison: d. with vinegar it h. the dropsy:
decoct with honey it h. phlegm, and the cough with hysope. With wild succory it
h. the colic, reins, and bladder: the water h. freckles: the rough h.
plurisies: so the 1 of Clusius, and h. the colic. The rest K. as the long
rooted etc. as the first.

Hawthorne-tree. Oxyacantha.
P. In woods and hedges, almost every where. T. Fl: in May: the fruit is ripe
in September. N. (...) Gal. Amyrberis Serapionis.
Hawthorne. Ger. K. as the common, and that of Cumberland. T. The fruit is very
astringent. V. The hawes stop the laske and menses, and all other fluxes of
blood. The stones beaten to powder and d. h. the stone. Park: The powder of the
stones d. in wine h. the dropsy. the distilled water of the fl: steeped 3
days in wine, and d. h. the plurisie, and inward tormenting pains, and stops
laskes: it is cooling and drawing: and ap. attracteth things fixed in the
flesh. Schwenck. The kernells powdered and d. break the stone: the root ap. is
magneticall.

Herb Christopher. Aconitum bacciferum.
P. In the North parts of England. T. Fl: in May and June: the fr: is ripe
before Autumn. N. Herba Christophoriana. Napellus Racemosus Lugd.
Herb Christopher. Ger. T. It Is of the nature of the Aconites. V. It Is thought
to be of a venomous and deadly quality, so useless. Park: K. As the common,
and that of America. V. By the taste they seem not pernicious. Clus. acetab: 1.
taken h. the aquose diseases of women.

Herb Frankincense. Libanotis.*
P. In the deserts and mountains of Germany. T. Fl: in July and August. N.
(...). Cervina alba, and Cervicaria.
Herb Frankincense. Ger. K. as the great, small, black, and rose-mary. T.
These herbs with their seeds and roots, are hot and dry 2, and digest,
dissolve, and mundify. V. The leaves pounded stop the flux of the piles, and
supple the swellings, and inflammations of the fundament: swellings of the
throat, and ripen botches hardly brought to suppuration. The juice of the
leaves and roots m. with honey ap. quickneth the sight. The seed m. with honey
cleanses rotten ulcers, and consumes cold and hard swellings. The leaves and
roots boiled till soft, and m. with darnell meal and vinegar ap, h. the gout.
Taken in wine and pepper it h. the jaundise, c. sweat, and with oil ap: h.
ruptures. It h. the white spots of the skin, and rists in the hands or feet.
Park: K. as the white. V. It increases milk in nurses breasts, the root being
taken in wine. Also it eases the pains of the stomach and belly, and the
bitings of venomous beasts. It provokes urine, and the terms: it h. cramps:
the juice ap. to the forehead h. the eyes, and stopps rheum.

Herb Terrible. Alypum Monspeliensium.*
P. In mountains and gravelly ground in France. T. Fl: in February and March.
N. (...). Alypum montis ceti. Herba terribilis Narbon.
Herb terrible. Ger: With gut-wort, Tarton-raire Gallo-provinciae. T. John's.
Are catharticke like the Tithymal's, the latter comes near to the quality of
Mezereon, and therefore is carefully to be used, being apt to cause the
dysentery, and immoderate fluxes. Park: Diosc: It purgeth-melancholy taken in
the q. of epitbymum, with a little salt and vinegar. Plin: The dose is from
drach: 2. to 6. Gutwort purges choler, phlegm, and water, and that with
violence.

Herb True love. Herba Paris.
P. In woods frequently in England. T. Fl: in April: the berry is ripe in May.
N. The 2d Herba Paris triphyllos: Solanum Tetraphyl: Lob.
Herb True love. Ger. T. is exceeding cold, so h. the force of poison. V. The
berries given by the space of 20 days h. against poison, or halse a spoonefull
d. in the morning fasting, and also h. those that are without understanding.
Camerar. The leaves ap. h. green wounds, and the powder of the roots d. h.
gripings, and pains of the colic. Hereof is made an antidote, as follows:
take of the domestic and field angelica, of swallow-wort, garden valerian,
polipody of the oak, of the roots of marsh mallows and nettles, an: drach: 4.
of the bark of the mezereon tree drach. 2. grains of herb true love no 24.
and leaves of the same no 36. the roots being macerated in vinegar and dried,
make all into a powder for use. Park: K. as that of Canada with a round root.
V. The berries are thought to be hypnoticke d. at night. The leaves cleanse and
heal old ulcers, discuss tumors, and allay inflammations, and tumors of the
privities: the juice h. the eyes, and felons.

Herb Two pence. Nummularia.
P. It grows near unto ditches and water. T. Fl: from May, till summer be
well spent. N. Centummorbia. Serpentaria. Hirundinaria quorundam Bauh.
Herb Twopence. Ger: J: K. as the common, and purple fl: money-wort. T. Is
dry, moderately cold and binding. V. The flowers and leaves stamped and ap. h.
ulcers and wounds: more effectually if boiled in oil olive, with some rosin,
wax, and turpentine. The juice d. in wine h. the bloody flixe, and all other
issues of blood, laskes, vomiting of blood, and whites in women. Boiled with
wine and honey it h. wounds of the inward parts, and ulcers of the lungs, and is
a most excellent traumatick herb. The herb boiled in wine, with a little honey
or mead, h. the cough in children, called the chine-cough. Recch: K. as the
Indian money fl: T. The root is glutinous, a little bitter, yet cold. V. d. it
h. severs, fluxes, and urine stopped. Park: K. as the small. T. V. as the rest,
with chalybeat water h. ulcers.

Heath. Erica.
P. Dry, hungry, and barren mountains, etc. T. Fl: all the summer, to the end
of September. N. (...). Tetralix veterum. Sisera Varronis. That of Jerico is
called Rosa Maria.
Heath. Ger: J. K. as the common, rough leaved, the great with white flowers,
great with purple flowers, crossed, steeple, small leafed, chalice, bearing
berries, small leafed with berries, Dodonaeus his dwarf, that with three
branches at a joint, Lobel's strange, creeping Dutch, and small Austrian heath.
T. Gal. Does consume by vapors, and digest: the flowers and leaves, are to be
used. V. The tender tops and flowers ap: h. the stingings and bitings of
venomous beasts. The bark and leaves may be used for Tamariske. Heath of
Jerico. T. V. Is not as yet found out. Park: K. as the great with purplish
green fl: brush, small upright without branches, white, and black berried. T.
Are somewhat drying, and a little bitter, except the last. V. The fl: decoct h.
pains in the body, stone, sight and gout. The white berries h. agues and
thirst.

Hellebor. Helleborus.
P. On mountains, where Gentian grows. T. Fl: in May and June: the black,
sooner. N. (...). Veratrum album. Sanguis Herculeus.
Hellebor. Ger. K. as the white, and timely white. T. the root is hot and dry
3. V. the root of the white c. vomit and expels superfluous humors, h. the
epilepsie, phrensies, sciatica, dropsies, poison, and all cold diseases of hard
curation, and is to be used only in hard and strong bodies. The root cut small
and put into ^istula's does mundisie them, and remove callous matter hindering
curation, that so it may be healed by sarcotick remedies sc. the black. The
powder c. sneezing and purges slimie humors. The root d. in the weight of two
pence h. agues. It kills mice and rats made up with honey and wheat flower.
Plin. It h. the lousy evil. The wild Hellebore. K. as the white, and narrow
leafed wild. T. are thought to be hot and dry. V. Their faculties are referred
to the first, whereof they are kinds. The decoction d. opens the liver, and h.
the imperfections thereof. The black hellebore of Diosc. T. V. is referred to
the black which is of greater force. Black hellebore. K. as the true, wild,
great oxe-heele, and setterwort. T. is hot and dry 3. and hotter than the
white. V. It purges phlegm, choler, and melancholy: it helps those that
are furious, pensive, leprous, melanchollick, epileptick, or are sick of a
quartan ague. The dose is s^r. 3. it is given with wine of raisins or oxymel,
with aromaticall seeds, and is made stronger by adding gr. 1. or 2. of
scammonie. The first of these kinds is best, then the second. The rest are of
less efficacy. The roots h. the morphew, spots, tetters, ^ing-wormes,
leprofie, and scabs. The roots sodden in pottage with flesh open, and h. the
dropsy. The root of the bastard hellebore, or beares-foot d. in wine operates
as the true black hellebore and kills worms, powdered and drach. 1. d. in
wine. Boiled in water with rue and agrimonie it h. the jaundise, and purges
forth yellow superfluities. The leaves of bastard hellebore dried, and the
powder taken in a fig or raisin, or strewed upon bread spread with honey and
eaten, kills worms. Heart. The essence of black hellebor h. the gout. Park:
K. as the fennel leafed bastard, that of Matthew: and sanicle-like black Hell. V.
It h. the liver, old pains of the head, consumptions, aches, and pains of the
teeth: and deasnesse and ulcers ap. it is corrected by quinces, sc. the white.
The black put into the ears of beasts h. their poisonous diseases.

Helmet-flower. Napellus.
P. In gardens, the wild almost every where. T. Fl. from May to September. N.
(...). Toxicum. Napellus verus.
Helmet-flower. Ger. J. K. as the blew violet ooloured, purple of Newburg,
large floured, and that with a nodding head. T. are all hot and dry 4, and most
venomous V. they are deadly both to man and beast: being eaten, the (...) and
tongue presently swell, the eyes hang out, the thighs are stiff and wits
depart. The autidote is the fly that feeds on the leaves, or take of torra
lemnia unc. 2. bay berries and mith idate an. unc. 2. of the flies that feed on
the herb 24. of honey and oil q. s. m. The juice of it poysoneth arrows.
Park. The wholesome Helmet fl. Anthora is an antidote, kills worms, h. the
colic, and plague, and is cordial. Hugo S^ler. The quantity of a bean of
the root is a hydragogon.

Hemlock. Cicuta.
P. About walls, in shadowie places, and fat soiles. T. They flourish and seed
in September. N. (...). The last of Ger. is thought to be Phellandrion Plinii.
Hemlock. Ger. J. K. as the common, broad leafed stinking, and giant. T. Gal.
is cold 4. V. It is not to be used inwardly or outwardly. Ap. it causes the
parts to pine away. The wild and water hemlocks. K. as the thin leafed wild,
and wild water common hemlock. T. V. They are like the common hemlock and not
used in physic. Lonic. The dried juice is used in collyries to ^ase pain. Ap.
it h. phagedens and S. Anthonies fire, as also all inflammations, and h.
venery. Park. K. as the foolish. V. ap. it represseth the swellings in women's
breasts, and repells milk, the roasted root ap. h. the gout. Trag. The antidote
is vinegar d.

Hemp. Cannabis.
P. In fat, dunged, plain, and moist soiles deeply dug: the wild in barren
hills. T. Sown in March and April. The first is ripe in August: the second in
July. N. (...). Water hemp is called Eupatorium Cannabinum.
Hemp. Ger. J. K. as the male, and female. T. the seed is dyspeptick, and of
ill juice, hurtful to the stomach and head. V. It consumes wind, and if much
eaten it dries up the sperm. The juice of the herb dropped into the ears h.
their pain proceeding of obstruction. The pulp of the seed pressed into liquor
and d. h. the yellow jaundise without an ague, opening the gall, and concocting
choler through the whole body. Matthew. The seed given to hens causes them to
lay eggs more plentifully. Wild hemp. K. as the common, bastard, and small
bastard. T. V. are referred to the manured hemp; yet not used in physic where
the other may be had. Water hemp. K. as the common, and common Dutch. T. The
leaves and roots are bitter, hot, and dry 2. scouring, opening and attenuating.
They expel gross humors by urine, and purify the blood. V. The decoction of
them (especially the last) d. h. scabbed and filthy skins, and opens the liver,
spleen and gall, and h. the jaundise. The herb boiled in wine or water h.
tertian fevers. The leaves ap. and the decoction d. h. all wounds both inward
and outward. The second h. poison. Gesn. A pugill of the fibers of the root
boiled in wine and d. purges and c. vomit. It works like white hellebore, but
more gently and safely. Park. T. The manured is thought to be cold and dry: so
Trag. and Lonic. others count it hot and dry, as Gal. Matthew. Ruel. Fuch. and
Lugd. V. The emulsion of the feed h. lasks, and the colic. The juice d. kills
worms, and ap. h. the gout and burnings. Lob. The wild h. nodes.

Henbane. Hyoscyamus.
P. The black almost every where: the white in gardens. T. They spring in May,
st. in Aug. the seed is ripe in October. N. (...). Apollinaris. Faba suilla,
and Jovis. The last, Nicotiana. Petum.
Henbane. Ger. J. K. as the black, and white, lesser white, white of Candy, and
that with a reddish flower. T. are cold 4. V. They cause sleep, and are
anodyne, h. sharp and hot distillations, stop bleeding: and ap. h: all
inflammations. The leaves stamped with the ointment of populeon and ap. h. the
pain of the gout, swellings of the privities, and the tumors of women's
breasts. To bathe the feet in the decoction c. sleep; so given in clysters, or
the flowers smelled to. The leaves, seed and juice d. c. troublesome sleep and
deadly. The seed of white henbane taken in the weight of 10 gr. with meade h.
coughs, defluxions of humors to the eyes or breast, and all issues of blood.
The root boiled in vinegar and held hot in the mouth h. the toothach. The fume
taken c. worms to come out of the teeth. Yellow henbane or English Tobacco. T.
is cold and moist, Lobel. but rather hot, biting and gummie. V. it is used by
some instead of tobacco: it c. spitting, stupifieth the senses, and c.
giddiness; but to little profit. The herb h. all impostumes, tumors,
inveterate ulcers, botches, burnings, green wounds, and all hurts in the head,
made into an oinment, thus, take of the green leaves thereof lib. 3. sem. and
stamp them very small in a stone mortar, of oil olive q. s. boil them upon a
gentle fire, continually stirring it 'till the herbs seem black, and will not
bubble any more: then strain the green oil from the faeces, and put it to the
fire again, adding thereto, of wax lib. sem. of rosin unc. 4. of good
turpentine unc. 2. melt them together and keep it in pots for the use
aforesaid. Croll. The decoction of the root of Henbane in vinegar with arsmart
h. the toothach being used warm. Park. K. as that of Egypt V. The black and
yellow are more dangerous than the white, which is cold 3. and h. all pains of
a hot cause ap. The antidote is Garlic. English tobacco d. purges slegme,
kills worms, h. the stone: and ap, kills lice.

Holly-tree. Agrifolium.
P. Almost every where: in woods and hedges. T. It Is green both winter and
summer, the berries are ripe in September. N. (...) Theoph. Aquifolium Gazae.
Paliurus secundus Diosc. Lacunae.
Holly-tree. Ger. T. the berries are hot and dry, of thin parts and waste away
wind. V. They h. the colic. 10. or 12. taken inwardly purge away thick and
phlegmatic humors. The birdlime made of the bark gleweth up the intrailes,
and is lethall. Holly powdered and d. h. all fluxes of the belly, as
dysenteries etc. Birdlime is thus made: take off the bark and put it in a ditch
in boggy ground, covering it with boughs of trees, and there let it remain
till it be putrifyed, which will be done in 12, days, then beat it in mo^ters
to the thickness of lime, after which wash it very often, and putting to it a
little oil of nuts, keep it in earthen vessels for use. Sea Holly. K. as the
common, and Levant, Eryngium. T. The roots of both of them are moderately hot,
and a little dry with a thinness of substance. V. The roots boiled in wine and
d. h. the collik, break the stone, expel gravel, and h. all infirmities of
the kidneys, provoking urine and opening the passages being d. 15. days
together; so the roots eaten, and h. those that are liver sick, and bitten with
venomous beasts; they h. cramps, convulsions, and the epilepsie, and provoke
the terms. The roots condited h. those that are withered with old age, and
want natural moisture, and c. venery. Drach. 1. d. with carrot seeds h. very
many infirmities. The juice d. pressed forth with wine h. the gonorrhoea. The
bastard Sea-holly. K. as the blew, common, dwarf, mountain, and small smooth.
T. Are hot. V. They are not used in meat or medicine. Park. K. as the smooth
leased and prickly. V. Matthew. The decoction of the root, or bark thereof
fomented on the places that have been put out of joint, mollifyeth and
discusseth the tumors, and consolidateth broken bones. Sea-holly K. as the
upland, and small bastard sea holly of Spain, with the French thistle of Lobel
and Pena, and trefoile thistle, Eryngium trifolium. T. The first is of the
temper of the sea-holly, and used in stead thereof, being not much inferior.
V. The decoction of the root in wine, d. opens the liver and spleen, h. the
jaundice, dropsy, and pains in the loins, and French disease. The roots ap.
h. the Kings evil: so d. and ap. h. the bitings of serpents: with axungia it is
magneticall and sarcotick. The juice of the leaves dropped into the ears h.
impostumes. The distilled water h. melancholy, quotidian and quartan agues, and
wry necks. The rest are weaker. Vntz. The seed of the 1. h. the stone: so Lon:
Moresc. Fernel. Col: a handful of the berries of common holly boiled in a pint
of ale to the one half, which being strained and a little butter put thereto,
is a good remedy for the stone and stoppage of urine, 5, or 6, spoonfulls
thereof being taken at once. The powder of the leaves dried in an oven, and the
pricks taken off, being d. in ale is commended against the stitches and
pricking pains of the side. The juice that droppeth out of the wood when laid
on the fire, being dropped into the ears h. deasnesse. The birdlime thereof
being applied with the yelk of an egg draws out thorns and splinters etc.
The tender shoots of the Sea holly eaten, are aphrodisiastick, or c. lust.

Holly-rose. Cistus.
P. The hotter provinces of Europe, and gardens. T. They fl. from May to
September. N. (...). Rosa sylvatica and canina. The excrescence or juice,
Hypocistis.
Holly-rose. Ger. J. K. as the male, the male with his excrescence, toothed
thin leased, the female, Cistus with leaves like sea purslain, lavender leased,
thin leased, low with broad leaves, and narrrow, low of Austria, low with
leaves like wild time, Lobel's strange, Dr Penny his cistus, that lasting one
year, long leafed yearly, spotted annual, and marjoram leafed. T. It dries
fere 2. and is of temperate heat: the leaves and first buds being beaten, dry,
bind and glutinate ulcers, and green wounds. V. The flowers are of most force.
d. in wine they h. the bloody flix, weak stomachs, sluxes and the overflowing
of moist humors. ap. as a pultis they h. putrified ulcers and phagedens; and
also h. burnings, scaldings, and old ulcers. Hypocistis is more binding, h. all
infirmities coming of fluxes, as the whites, laskes, bloody flix, and
strengthens parts debilitated with superfluous moisture. It Is excellent to be
mixed with somentations, for the stomach, and liver: it is put into treacle to
comfort weak bodies. Dwarf cistus. K. as the English yellow or white, the
yellow dwarf of Germany, and white, that of Savoy, narrow leafed, time-leafed,
and Frisian dwarf cistus. T. V. are referred to the kinds of cistus, for they
heal wounds, stop blood, and all issues thereof, as the bloody flix, and
hamoptysis, and boiled in wine h. ulcers in the mouth, and secret parts ap. for
it joyneth and strengthens. Cistus Ledon. K. as the first bringing Ladanum,
the second gum, leafed like poplar, the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th Cistus ledon of
Clusius, the 8th with his excrescence, the 9th, leafed like myrtle, the
Polonian, leafed like r^semary, that of Matthiolus's description, the mountain,
and rosemary leafed Cistus ledon. T. Gal. Ladanum is hot fine primi, having a
little astriction: it is of thin parts and therefore softneth, also it digesteth
and concocteth. V. Ladanum h. the infirmities of the mother, and keeps hairs
from falling, wasting away putrifyed humors. Diosc. It does bind, heal,
souple, and open. m. with wine, myrrh, and oil of myrtles ap. it keeps
hairs from falling; or laid on mixed with wine: also it makes the scarres of
wounds well colored. m. with meade or oil of roses it h. the pains of the
cares being dropped in. A fume thereof draws forth the after birth, and h.
the hardness of the matrix: it is good to be mixed with mollifying and anodyne
plasters. d. with wine it stops the laske and provokes urine. It Is very
good also put into pomanders etc. Note, the best is sweet, somewhat green, fat,
easily waxes soft, is full of gum, not easily broken, and without sand. Park.
K. As the sweet, and mountain. V. as the rest, the juice of the dwarse d. and
ap. h. poison: the distilled water is cosmeticke. The narrow and broad leafed
male. V. as the first: so the female K. as the annual etc. Gum cistus. K. as
that of Lob. etc. V. h. coughs, and is stopping.

Hone-wort. Selinum Sii foliis.
P. It grows in clay ground among corn. T. It begins to flower in July: the
seed is ripe in August. N. Sium terrestre Goodteri. Selinum segetale Park.
Corn Parsley.
Hone-wort. Ger. T. V. It h. the Hone, being aswelling so called: take one
handful of the green leaves, and stamp them, put to them about half a pint of
beer, strain it and drink it, and so continue to drink the like quantity every
morning fasting, till the swelling do abate, which will be in a week or two.
Park. T. the seed is like parsley in form and as hot in taste. V. It Is near of
the same property, with Parsley.

Hony-wort. Cerinthe.
P. They grow not wild in England. T. Fl. from May to August: and perish at
winter. N. (...) Theoph. Maru herba Dod. Cerinthe Plinii.
Hony-wort. Ger. J. K. as the great, small, and rough. T. are cold. V. and not
experimented. Park. K. as the greater yellow and red, greater yellow or purple,
and lesser yellow or white. T. are all of a temperate quality between cold and
hot; but rather inclining to cold, and somewhat astringent. V. It stops
bleeding at the mouth or nose, immoderate fluxes of women, and fluxes of the
belly, the herb being boiled and d. The juice of the herb with a little
saffron dissolved therein, h. bleared and watering eyes, and is used in soul
ulcers after they are cleansed, to h. to incarnate them, especially such as are
in the tender parts of the body: some do use it in steed of borage and buglosse
as a remedy. Plin. Virg. Bees are much delighted with the flowers; being very
sweet.

Hops. Lupulus.
P. In fat and fruitful ground, the wild among thorns. T. The flowers are
gathered in Aug. and Sept. N. (...). Lupus salictarius, and reptitius. Vitis
Septent. Lob.
Hops. Ger. T. the flowers are hot and dry 2. They stuff the head and hurt it
with their strong smell; so likewise the leaves, which also open and cleanse. V.
The buds in spring are used to be eaten in sallads; and are of small
nourishment; yet are good for the intralls, procuring urine, and keeping the
body soluble. The leaves, tender stalks, and flowers open the liver and
spleen, cleanse the blood, and h. long agues. Boiled and d. in whay, they h.
scabs and filth of the skin. The juice is stronger, purges phlegm and choler,
and dropped into the ears h. the corruption thereof. The flowers season beer,
and too many are ill for the head. The decoction of the flowers makes bread
light. The decoction of hops d. opens the liver, spleen and kidneys, and
purges the blood by urine; so the juice, and purges the belly of choler.
Thus appears the wholsomenesse of beer above ale. Park. the tops and roots
h. the French disease, and breakings out in the body, terters, ring-wormes, and
spreading sores; the ague, itch, and morphew. The decoction of the flowers and
tops, d. expells poison. drach. sem. of the seed d. in powder kills worms
and brings down the courses. The flowers and heads used in baths h. the
swellings of the mother and strangury. The juice dropped into the ears h.
sores and the stench thereof. The syrrup h. the jaundise and headache c. by
heat of the intralls, and agues. The decoction h. alopecia's. The wild are
best. Fernel. It Is hot 1, dry 2, and operates as Fumitory. Riol. The syrrup h.
the diseases of melancholy Freitag. and choler.

Hore-hound. Marrubium.
P. In untilled places, near old walls, paths etc. T. Fl. in July and Aug. in
the second year. N. (...). Prasium. The wild is called Stachys.
Hore-hound. Ger. K. as the white, snow white, Spanish, and Candy. T. Gal. is
hot 2. dry 3. and bitter. V. common horehound boiled in water and d. opens
the liver and spleen, cleanses the breast and lungs, h. old coughs, pains of
the side, spitting of blood, ptysicks, and ulcerations of the lungs. Boiled in
wine and d. it provokes the terms, expels the secundine and dead child,
and h. hard labor. A syrrup made of the green leaves and sugar h. old coughs
and wheezings of the lungs, and h. their consumption, also it h. against poison
and the bitings of serpents: the leaves ap. with honey cleanse filthy ulcers, and
stop the pearl in the eyes; so the juice hardened in the sun m. with wine and
honey: dropped into the eyes it clears them. Drawn into the nostrils it
cleanses the yellowness of the eyes, and stops the watering of them. Wild
horehound. K. as the common, wild, stinking, thorny, Portugal, Germander, and
hyssop leafed Ironwort. T. are biting and bitter, hot 3. The stinking Stachys
Fuchsii and Sideritides are hot and dry 1. John's. V. The decoction of the
leaves d. draws down the menses and secundine. It keeps wounds from
inflammation and speedily heals them; also it stops fluxes and defluxions,
being dry and moderately binding, sc. the stinking hore-hound. It h. the
bitings of mad dogs. Water hore-hound. T. Is cold and very astringent, yet
little used. Black or stinking hore-hound. K. as the common, and long leafed.
T. is hot and dry, of a sharp and cleansing faculty. V. being stamped with salt
and ap. it cures the biting of a mad dog. The leaves roasted in hot embers
waste hard knots in or about the fundament: it also cleanses foul filthy
ulcers. Borel. Cent. 4. Obs. 14. The tops of white hore-hound infused in white
wine all night and d. for 3. days, provoke the menses, h. cachexies, ill
colors, the stomach, and c. appetite. Park. K. as the black French. V. Matthew.
They h. bad livers, the itch and jaundise, and kill worms. Marsh hoar. V. Is
traumatick and d. h. agues.

Horne-beam tree. Carpinus.
P. In North-hampton shire, and Kent. T. It springs in April: the seed is ripe
in Sept. N. (...) Theoph. Ostrya Theoph. Zugia. (...).
Horn-beame tree. Ger. T. V. Is not of any physical use: so Came. Matthew. but
serves only for the use of husbandry. Park. It serves for mills and other
smaller works, etc. being hard, strong, and durable: so Trag. etc.

Horse-foot. Cacalia.
P. In the Austrian and Syrian Alps, etc. T. Fl. about the same time that
coltsfoot does. N. (...) Diosc. cacanum Gal.
Horse-foot. John's. K. as the hoarie, and smooth leafed. T. The root moderately
dries without biting, it is of a gross and emplastick substance. V. Being
steeped in wine and taken it h. the cough, and roughness of the artery or
hoarsenesse, like gum dragagant, being chewed and the juice swallowed: it
operates as liquorice. Park. Diosc. The peare-like grains beaten and m. with a
cerote, make the skin smooth: Plin. And stay the falling of the hair: so Col.

Horse-taile. Equisetum.
P. The finest leafed grows in wet grounds etc. T. They flower from April to
the end of summer. N. (...). Cauda equina, and Salix. Asprella Ephedra.
Horse-taile. Ger: K. as the great, naked, corn, water, wood, female, and
Italian rushy. T. Gal. is bitter, yet binding and mightily dries without
biting. V. Diosc. Stamped and ap. it does perfectly cure wounds, even of the
sinews cut in sunder. It cures wounds of the bladder and bowels, and h.
ruptures and burstings: the herb d. with water or wine, h. the bleeding at the
nose, and other fluxes of blood, it stops the courses and bloody flix etc.
so the juice, and more effectually. The herb with the roots boiled in wine, h.
ulcers of the kidneys and bladder, the cough and difficulty of breathing. Park.
K. as the barren, finest leafed, stinking, greater meadow, and mountain
horsetaile of Candy. V. The smoother is better than the rough, and the leafed
than the bare: decoct in wine and d. it h. the strangury and stone. The
distilled water d. two or three times in a day h. the pains of the entralls,
and h. the cough c. by distillation. The juice ap. h. inflammations and
eruptions in the skin. Lugd. It does inspissate the body. Schw. The naked h.
the scurvy.

Horse-tongue. Hippoglossum.
P. On the Alps of Liguria, and on the Mountains of Austria. T. Fl. in May: the
fruit is ripe in Autumn. N. (...). Bonifacia. Vvularia. Bislingua.
Horse-tongue. Ger. K. as the male, female, and Italian. T. is hot 2. dry 1. V.
the roots of double tongue, or horse-tongue boiled in wine and d. h. the
stangury, provoke urine, h. hard travel of women, and expel the secundine
etc. So also drach. 6. of the powder of the root d. in wine, and bring down the
terms. Plin. unc. sem. of the powder of the root d. in wine c. speedy
delivery. Bapt. Sard. It h. diseases of the mother, a little spoonful of the
powder of the herb, fruit, or root being taken, andd. in flesh broth for
certain days h. ruptures. Park. T. it is thought to be hot and dry 2. It h.
sores of the mouth, and dries filthy ulcers ap.

Hounds tongue. Cynoglossum.
P. In untild grounds, by high ways, almost every where. T. They flower in
June and July. N. (...). Lingua canis. Limonium Aetii.
Hounds-tongue. Ger. J. K. as the common, first and second Candy, and small
green leafed. T. the herb, but especially the root, is cold and dry. V. The
roots roasted in the embers and ap. h. haemorroides, and wild fire. The juice
boiled with honey of roses and turpentine to the form of an unguent h. wounds
and deep ulcers. Diosc. The leaves boiled in wine and d. mollify the belly: and
stamped with old swines grease h. falling away of the hairs c. by hot humors:
also they h. scaldings and bitings of mad dogs. Vigon. The juice with syrrup of
roses and oxymel of squils h. the French pox. Hieron. Brunfels. It mundifyeth
ulcers. Park, K. as the greater mountain, party colored fl. and blew. V. The
root h. rheumes.

House-leeke. Sedum.
P. On walls, and tops of houses, and about rubbish. T. Fl: in June or August,
the smaller in June or July. N. (...). Herba Jovis. Semperflorium Apul.
Aithales.
House-leeke. Ger: K. as the great, tree, and great narrow leaved. T. The great
house-leeks are cold 3, and a little dry. V. They h. S. Anthonies fire,
shingles, creeping ulcers, and inflammations c. by rheumes and fluxes: they h.
inflamed eyes ap. as also burnings, and scaldings: ap: with barley meal dried
it h. pains of the gout. It h. hot laskes d. with wine, and kills worms. The
juice with a pessary stopps fluxes in women c. by heat. The leaves held in the
mouth quench the thirst in burning fevers. The juice m. with barley meal and
vinegar h. S. Anthonies fire, all hot burning and fretting ulcers, scaldings,
burnings, hot inflammations, and the gout of a hot cause. The juice with
garden nightshade, and the budds of poplar boiled in hoggs grease, makes a
most excellent populeon. The juice h. corns ap. the skin of the herb being
emplastred every day and night. The decoction or juice d. h. the bloody flixe,
and cools the inflammation of the eyes being dropped in, and the herb
bruised ap. The lesser house-leekes. K. as the common, white floured, small
summer, small large floured, small prick-madam, scorpion, Port-land; and small
rock sengreene. T. are all cooling like the greater, and serve for the same
use. Prick-madam is used in sallads, and h heart-burnings. The other small
sengreenes or house-leekes. K. As the small water, 1. small of the Alps, and
4th: white of the Alps, and long leaved rock s. T. V. The 3. first are cold,
and operate as the other of the smaller sort. The two last are rather hot, and
attenuating, but none of them are commonly known, or used in physic. Sea h.
See in Aloes. Water house-leeke. T. Is cold. V. It stopps blood coming from the
kidneys, keeps green wounds from inflammation, and h. S. Anthonies fire and
hot swellings ap: and operates as the first. Recch: K. That of Mistica. T. Is
sharp. V. It h. all pains. The juice c. vomit. Croll: The juice of the lesser
house-leeke h. the scurvy and stomacace. Park: K. as the great English sea, and
woolly. V. h. all inflammations, the juice d. in a posset h. agues: ap. it h.
the headache, and stingings. The small stone-crop, etc. as the first. Wall
pepper, exulcerates. The mountainous, as the 1. so the Water housleeke of Egypt.

Hyacinth. Hyacinthus.
P. In gardens, being planted: some near rivers. T. The 3 first fl: in the
midst of Jan: and the rest in spring. N. (...). Vacinium, Lilium purpureum. D.
G.
Hyacinth. Ger: J: K. as the starry, sc. the common, white floured, two leaved,
lilly leaved, that of Constantinople, Summers, greater starry summer and lesser,
and that of Peru. T. V. are unknown. Clus. The lilly leafed eaten by cattle c.
their heads to swell and then kill them, being of a malign and poysonsom
quality. Autumn Jacinth K. as the small and great. T. V. are not written of.
English Jacinth. K. as the hare-bells, white, blew oriental, and many flowred
1. and second, reddish purple, and white oriental, winter, oriental with
leaves on the stalk, double flowred oriental, the greater dusky flowred
Spanish, and lesser, with the tuberous rooted Indian Jacinth. T. do lightly
cleanse and bind. The seeds are dry 3. the roots 1, and cold 2. V. the root
boiled in wine, and d. stops the belly, provokes urine, and h. the venomous
biting of the field spider; so the seed, and more effectually stops the
laske, and bloody flix. d. in wine it h. the falling sickness. Diosc. The
roots stamped and ap. with white wine, hinder the growth of hairs. The seed d.
with southernwood in wine h. the jaundise. Fair haired jacinth. K. as the
common, and white, that of Constantinople, fair curled haired branched, blew,
and great grape-flower. T. V. Vhe fair haired operates as the English. Musked
Grape flower K. as the yellow, and ashcoloured. T. V. They may be referred to
the Jacinths, whereof they are kinds; but as yet are not of any known use. The
two feigned plants, K. as the false bumbast Jacinth, and flower of Tigris T. V.
are not yet discovered, or are rather adulterine and supposititious. The woolly
bulbus. T. V. is of no use. Park: K. as the Barbary, early blew starry, Turkey,
and ash-colored. T. V. The roots and leaves are cold and dry. Weck: The seed
d. in wine h. the Kings evil. Col: The tuberous root d. h. the jaundise.

Hyssope. Hyssopus.
P. In gardens, the hedge hyssope in moist places. T. Fl: from June to the end
of August. N. (...). Hyssopum. Hedge Hyssope, Gratiola.
Hyssope. Ger. J. K. as that with blew flowers, and reddish, white flowred,
thin leafed, and dwarf narrow leafed. T. is hot and dry, Park: 30. V. A
decoction made with figgs, and gargled in the mouth and throat, ripeneth and
breaks the tumors, and impostumes of the mouth and throat, and h. the
difficulty of swallowing c. by cold rheumes: the same made with figs, water,
honey, and rue, and d. h. the inflammation of the lungs, old coughs, shortness
of breath, and the obstructions of the breast. The syrup or juice taken with
the syrup of vinegar, purges by stool clammy phlegm, and drives forth
worms if eaten with figgs. The distilled water d. operates as the rest, but
not so speedily. Hedge hyssope. K. As the common, broad leaved, and grass
Poley. T. Are hot and dry, and the 1. only is used in medicine V. scrup: 1.
taken mightily purges waterish, gross, and slimie humors, and chollerick: so
eaten in a sallad, or the decoction d. Boiled in wine and d. it h. all fevers
and dropsies, and such like diseases proceeding of cold and watery causes. The
extraction given with the powder of cinnamon, and a little of the juice of
calamint h. tertian and quotidian fevers. Park: Common hyssop in ptysan's,
expectorates phlegm: ap. with sugar it h. green wounds: and with honey, salt,
and cummin-seed, it h. the bitings of adders: decoct with oil and ap: it h.
the itching of the head: the oil h. numnesse: it h. wind and agues. K. As the
tufted, etc. The hedge his. kills worms, h. ulcers, prevents putrefaction, and
opens obstructions.

I.
Jacke by the hedge. Alliaria.
P. It grows by garden hedges, by walls, etc. T. Fl: chiefly in June and
July: it is used as sauce in April. N. Rima Maria. Pes asininus. Alliastrum
Gesn.
JAcke by the hedge. Ger. T. is hot and dry fine 2 di, much less than garlic.
V. The leaves stamped, serve for sauce with salt fish. The leaves also are
boiled in clysters against the pain of the colic and stone, they easing
pain, and wasting the wind. Bor: Cent: 1. Obs; 22. Also, it is effectual
against the plague. Park: It warmeth the stomach, and c. digestion: the juice
thereof boiled with honey is thought to be as good as Erysimum hedge mustard,
for the cough, to expectorate phlegm. d. and ap. it h. the mother: the leaves
h. ulcers of the legs. Mac. It h. gangreens, and the sphacelus. Trag. It h.
the sciatica or hip-gout in clysters, as an errhine it h. the lethargy.

S. James's-wort. Jacobaea.
P. Every where in untilled places somewhat moist. T. Fl: In July and August,
and are then carried away. N. (...) Diosc. quorundam. Herba S. Jacobi, and
Flos. Cineraria. Argentea.
S. James his wort. Ger: J. K. as the common, narrow leafed, broad leafed, and
sea ragwort. T. Is hot and dry 2, bitter and clensing. V. It h. green wounds,
and filthy tetters, it cleanses and heals them, the juice being tempered with
honey and may butter, and boiled to a salve. Boiled in hoggs grease to an
ointment it h. old aches and pains in the arms, hipps, and legs. The
decoction gargarized, wastes and heals inflammations and swellings of the
throat: the leaves stamped small, and boiled with some hoggs grease unto the
consumption of the juice, adding some mastick and olibanum, then strained, and
ap. h. the sciatica. Prosper Alpin: The Egyptians use its decoction against
the stone, and to help old obstructions, especially those of the womb, also
coldness, strangulation, barrenness, and inflation thereof, and brings down
the courses: the bath of the leaves and flowers, h. those that are troubled
with the mother. Park: K. as the Hungarian, round leafed hoary, lesser sea, and
broad leafed sea rag-wort. V. It stops catarrhes, and rheumes falling on the
eyes, nose, or lungs. The juice h. fistula's. Col: It h. the squinancy, and
Kings evil, and the staggers in horses. Bauh: It operates as Groundsell. It h.
wounds, inflammations, and fistula's.

Jewes-thorne. Paliurus.*
P. It grows in Lybia, etc. T. It budds in the spring, and continues not
green. N. Rhamnus tertius Diosc: Christ's thorn, where with he was crowned.
Jewes-thorne. Ger. T. the leaves and root do evidently bind and cut. V. The
seed h. the stone, and removes tough and slimie humors out of the chest and
lungs. Diosc. The decoction of the leaves and roots stops the belly, provokes
urine, and h. the poison and bitings of serpents. The root stamped and ap.
consumes the phymata, and oedemata. The seed is a remedy for the cough. Park:
T. V. It Is like the Bucks-thorne. Aet: The fruit h. the excretion of the breast
and lungs. Gal: The leaves h. fluxes, the fruit incideth; so Bauhinus,
Platerus, etc.

Indian hop-like purger. Carlo sancto.*
P. It grows in Mexico. T. The time is not observed. N. It has not any
Synonymous names.
Indian purger. Park: T. is hot and dry initio 2 di. V. The bark of the root
being a little chewed, is an apophlegmatisme, by which catarrhes and
distillations are voided, and pains of the head much eased, in some also it c.
vomit, and brings out choler and phlegm, a purgation being first taken. The
bark being chewed h. loose gummes, putrid teeth, and makes the breath sweet.
The powder taken in white wine, or the decoction with maiden hair and a little
cinnamon, h. the obstruction of the mother, and consumes wind with ung.
dialth: ap. also it h. the passion of the heart, the French disease, epilepsie,
and ruptures, and h. digestion: pomecitron bark being added to the decoction.

Indian leaf. Folium Indum.*
P. In Arabia and Cambaya. T. It Is supposed to be green all the year. N.
Tamalapatra. Folium Indicum. Malabathrum.
Indian leaf. Ger: T. Is hot and dry 2 agreeing with nardus, or as others
report with mace. V. it is diureticke, warmeth and comfort the stomach, and
h. digestion. It h. the web in the eyes, inflammations, etc. Being laid among
clothes, it keeps them from mothes and vermin, and gives unto them a sweet
smell. Park: It c. a sweet breath, resists poisons, and is therefore put into
antidotes, that are cordial or stomachicall.

Jobs tears. Lachrymae Job.
P. In Italy, and the countries adjoining. T. It Is to be sown early in the
spring. N. Lachrymae Jobi. Diospyros.
Jobs tears. Ger. T. V. It Is not for the use of Physic: so Park: in his
Paradise; yet in his Theater of Plants, he yields it to be of some use. Pen:
Lob: It Is commended by some, either in powder, or the decoction thereof,
against the stone, or gravel in the kidneys and bladder: but beyond sea, they
chiefly use the seeds, which being perforated, they string them, and so use
them for prayer beads. Croll. It Is an excellent lithontriptick: so Col.

S. John's Wort. Hypericum.
P. In pastures very plentifully. T. They flower and flourish in July and Aug.
N. (...). Perforata. Fugadaemonum. Sol terrest. Paracelsi.
S. John's Wort. Ger. J. K. as the common, rue, Lobel's woolly, woolly of
Clusius, and small creeping. T. Gal: It Is hot and dry, and of thin parts. V.
Boiled with the flowers and seed, d. it provokes urine, h. the stone, and
stopps laskes. The leaves stamped and ap: h. burnings, scaldings, and all
wounds and ulcers. The leaves, flowers, and feeds stamped, and put in a glass
with oil olive, and set in the Sun, then strained, and new added, till the
oil become of the color of blood, make an excellent remedy for green and
deep wounds that are through the body, for pricked sinews or wounds made with a
venomed weapon: or take white wine 2 pints, oil olive lib. 4. oil of
turpentine lib. 2. the leaves, flowers, and seeds of S. John's wort. an. M. 2.
gently bruised, put all into a great double glass, and set it in the sun 8
or 10 days, then boil them in the glass per B. M. after strain the liquor,
putting in new herbs etc. so have you a remedy equal to the natural balsame.
Diosc. The seed d. 40 days together h. the sciatica, and all aches in the
hipps. Taken in wine, it h. tertian and quartan agues. Square S. John's grass,
Ascyron, or square S. John's Wort. T. Is hot and dry. V. It has the same
faculty that S. John's Wort has. Diosc: the seed d. in unc: 4. sem: of meade
does strongly purge choleric excrements. S. John's bread, Ceratonia, Carabe. T.
Is dry and astringent; so the fruit. V. The fruit of the Carob tree eaten
green, looseneth the belly; being dry it stops it, and provokes urine. It
is good for the stomach, and nourishes well. Bastard S. John's Wort. K. As that
of Matthew: and the French, Coris. T. seem to be hot 2. Diosc. The seed d.
provokes urine, and the courses, h. the sciatica, and d. in wine h. the
opisthotonos, and cold fitts of agues, and against the phalangium. The oil ap:
h. convulsions. Park: K. as the Indian with white flowers. V. The common
opens and dissolveth, and d. h. the haemoptysis or spitting of blood.

Ironwort. Sideritis.
P. In corn fields, meadows, and mountains. T. Fl: in June and July: the seed
is ripe soon after. N. (...). Militaris. Stratiotes.
Iron-wort. John's. K. as the common, narrow-leaved, creeping branched, not
branched creeping, and smooth broad leaved. T. Are dry with little or no heat,
and astringent. V. They h. green wounds stamped and ap. or put into unguents
and plasters. They prevent inflammations, stop fluxes, h. the bitings of a mad
dog; as the germander and hyssope leaved. Clus: The 1 and 2d are used in Styria
in fomentations to bathe the head in aches thereof, as also they h. against
weariness of the limbs. The decoction h. inflammations, and ulcerations of the
legs. Park: K. as the Jews, small Jews, Germans, small of mount-pelier,
mountain, small Germ: and al^hoofe leafed, with the clownes woundwort. V. They
h. rheumes and ruptures.

Judas-tree. Arbor Judae.
P. In Spain, and Italy, in the hedges there. T. Fl: in spring, the fruit is
ripe in summer. N. Siliqua Sylvestris Clus: and Fatua. Fabago.
Judas-tree. Ger. T. V. is unknown, so Park: yet those of Virginia account the
flowers to be an excellent sallad ingredient. Dod. It Is not as yet experimented.

Jujube-tree. Zizypha.*
P. In Italy, Africa, Egypt, Arabia, and Syria. T. Fl: in April, and then are
the seeds to be sown. N. (...). Jujuba. Jujube Arab. Ziziphus Dod.
Jujube-tree. Ger. T. jujubes are temperate in heat and moisture. V. The fruit
of the jujube-tree eaten, is dyspepticke and oligotrophicke: taken in syrupes,
etc. it h. the roughness of the throat, the breast and lungs: it h. the cough,
reins, and bladder. The great jujube tree, Oenoplia non spinosa. T. The fruit
is cold and dry. V. The unripe fruit strengthens the stomach, and stopps
laskes, the juice being taken, or injected by clysters. The infusion of the
dried fruit h. relaxations, and exulceration of the gutts, and all pestilent
fevers, resisting putrefaction, and strengthening the heart. The juice purges
choler out of the stomach and reins. The infusion h. putrid fevers. Park:
The first purge choler, cleanse the blood, and h. agues, and vomitings. Pem:
The syrrup h. the shortness of breath.

Juniper-tree. Juniperus.
P. In very many places of England, as the South, etc. T. Fl: in May, the fruit
is ripe in September. N. (...). The berries are called Grana Juniperi. the gum,
Vernix.
Juniper-tree. Ger: K. as the common, and great, with the small of the Alps. T.
Is hot and dry 3, the berries are hot, but not so dry: the gum is hot and dry
1. V. The fruit does cleanse the liver and kidneys, and extenuates gross
humors, it is used in alexipharmic ke remedies. Largely taken it c. gnawings in
the stomach, and heateth the head, it provokes urine, so Vntz: Gebelc: Mont:
Neand: Tabern: d. it h. the infirmities of the chest, coughs, windiness,
gripings and poisons, cramps, ruptures, and the mother. The decoction of the
berries h. old coughs, and the chin-coughs, poisons, and pestilent severs: in
Bohemia, the infusion is used for a common drink. The smoke of the leaves and
wood drives away serpents, and all infection of the air: The juice of the
leaves d. and ap: with wine h. the bitings of the viper: the ashes of the
burned bark ap: with water, h. the scurse and filth of the skin: the powder
of the wood taken inwardly is deadly, as some affirm; yet is it contradicted
by others: the fume of the gum stopps phlegmatic distillations of the head, and
rheum, and raw humors in the intralls. It kills worms, stopps the menses,
haemorrhoides, and haemoptysis, it does exiccate hollow ulcers, and is
sarcotick. ap. m. with oil of roses, it h. chapps in the hands or seet. m.
with oil of line-seed, it makes vernix, which serves to beautify pictures,
and iron. Park: K. as the great Sclavonian. V. The fruit h. the bitings of
vipers, the strangury, and dropsy, so the lie d. Matthew: and h. the mother: the
berries h. all diseases by cold d. in wine: so the oil: the salt h. the
scurvy. Grul. The oil of the berries d. from 5 to 10 dropps is diuretic.

Ivy. Hedera.
P. About walls and trees: untilled and dark places. T. It flourishes in
Autumn, the berries in winter. N. (...). Ground Ivy is called Corona terrae.
Chamaecissus.
Ivy. Ger. K. as the climbing or berried, and barren or creeping. T. Gal: It
has contrary faculties, sc: an earthy, binding, and cold substance, and a
substance somewhat biring; and when green, a warm watery substance also. V.
The green leaves of Ivy boiled in wine h. old ulcers, and virulent; as also
burnings, and scaldings: boiled in vinegar ir h. bad spleenes: the fl: and
fruit more effectually, and h. burnings. The juice used as an errhine purges
the head, stopps the running of the ears and heals their ulcers; as also
those of the nostrills: if too sharp, add oil of roses, or sallad oil. The
gum of the old stock kills lice, and is a psilothron, being hot and burning.
Diosc. 5 of the berries stamped and made hot in a pomegranat rind with oil of
roses, and dropped into the contrary ear, h. the toothache. The berries make
the hair black. The leaves are good to be applied to issues, attracting the
humors: and preventing inflammations, being green. The berries d. are
diureticke, and lithontriptick. The leaves steeped in water 24 hours, h. sore,
smarting, and waterish eyes if bathed with the infusion. ground Ivy. K. as the
common, and rock alehoofe. T. Is hot and dry, bitter, scouring, and opening
the obstructions of the intralls. V. put into the ears it h. the ringing, and
deafness of the same. Matthew: The juice m. with verdigrease h. fistula's and
hollow ulcers. Diosc: drach: sem: of the leaves d. in unc: 4. sem: of fair
water for 40 or 50 days h. the sciatica: and in 6 or 7 days, the yellow
jaundise. Gal. attributes all the virtues to the flowers. Ground Ivy stamped
with celandine and daisies an. and strained, adding a little sugar and rose
water dropped into the eyes h. all inflammations, spotts, web, itch, smarting,
and any grief what ever: it h. though almost blind. The herbs m. with a little
ale and honey, strained, and injected into the eyes with a syringe h. the web in
the eyes of beasts. It also h. the griefs aforesaid tunned up in ale, and h.
rheumes. The decoction stopps the terms. Boiled in mutton broth it h. weak
and aching backs. Put into ointments, it h. burnings and scaldings. Park: K. The
Virginian ivy. T. V. Is only for rarity. Hieron: unc: 2. of the decoction of
the 1. h. the swellings in the bodies of women. Park. K. as that of Lob: and
yellow berried. Diosc: A pugill of the fl. d. in red wine twice a day stopps
laskes. Plin: The berries h. the jaundise, and kill worms. sc: the white
berries thereof. Came. The juice h. old pains of the head. Matthew. a cap made of
the fresh leaves h. the sore heads of infants. The lesser is less effectual.
Ground Ivy is vulnerary. The oil of the leaves h. the pains of the intralls.

K.
Kings-speare. Asphodelus Luteus.
P. In moist and marish places. T. Fl: in May and June, the leaves are green in
winter. N. Hastula Regia, Femina Dionysii Ded.
KIngs-speare. Ger. J. K. as the common, Lancashire, and true Lancashire. T. V.
is not used in meat, or medicine: so Dod. Fum: The roots d. provoke urine.
Bauh: The English of Lobel, is used by virgins to color their hair yellow,
sc. the lie of the flowers.

Knap-weed. Jacea.
P. The 2 first grow in fertile pastures, the rest in gardens. T. Fl: in June
and July: the last in August. N. Materfillon. The filver Knap. w. Aphyllanthes
Dod.
Knap-weed. Ger. J. K. as the black, great, yellow, mountain, white floured,
knobbed, and rough headed. T. are of the nature of scabious, whereof they are
kinds; yet they are not so proper for the use of physic. V. They h. swellings
of the uvula, as devils bit; but not so effectually Silver-knapweed. K. As the
great, little, narrow leafed, and thorny. T. V. Are not used for meat or
medicine, yet the Stoebe of Diosc: is useful. T. The seed and leaves are
astringent. V. The decoction injected h. dysenteries, and purulent ears. The
leaves ap. as a pultis h. bruises of the eyes and blackness, and stop the
flowing of blood. Park: That of the sea is not used, sc: the Spanish. The
common is astringent and drying: it h. fluxes and distillations: it h. ruptures
d. and ap. fistula's and running sores, and wounds. The rest, as those with
divided leaves, etc. operate as scabious.

Knot-grasse. Polygonum.
P. In barren and stony ground, almost every where. T. They are in flower and
seed all the summer long. N. (...). Seminalis. Sanguinaria. Centumnodia.
Corrigiola.
Knot-grasse. Ger. T. Gal: is cold 2, and binding. V. The juice h. the
haemoptysis, and all issues of blood; as the pissing and vomiting of blood,
etc. It h. the gonorrhoea and weakness of the back, being fried with eggs like
a tansie and eaten. So also the decoction d. or the powder taken in a rear
egg. The herb boiled in wine and honey, h. ulcers and inflammations in the
secret parts of both sexes; adding a little allom: and the parts bathed
therewith. Diosc: It provokes urine, and h. the stillicidium, when the urine
is hot and sharp. It is with good success given to swine, when they will not
eat their meat. The other knotgrasses. K. As the mountain, that of Valentia,
the small round leafed, parsly-piert, with the chick-weed breake-stone, and
small water saxifrage. T. Are cold 2, dry 3, astringent, and incrassating. The
three last are hot 2, and of subtle parts, but parsly-piert is less hot than
the other two. V. The leaves hereof, with mouse ear an. unc: 1. dried, bay
herries, turmerick, cloves, the seeds of the great burre, the seeds in the
berries of heppes, or brier-tree, fenugreeke, an. unc: 1. the stone in the
(...) gall drach: sem: powdered and d. in warm white wine: drach: sem: or
scrup: 2. break the stone: so the two last. Park. K. as the greatest. V. as the
other, h. fluxes, and all pains c. by heat and inflammations, agues, and
defluxions. The berry bearing etc. as the first.

L.
Lacca-tree. Lacca.*
P. In Zealand, Malavar, and other parts of the East Indies. T. Lacca is
generated after much rain. N Loc. Lacca Sumetri the best: the other Lacca
Comberti.
LAcca-tree. Ger: Lacca is hot 2. V. It comfort the heart and liver, opens
obstructions, expels urine, and h. the dropsy. The artificial Lacca made
of the scrapings of brafill and saffron, is used of painters, and not in
physic. Park: The first dissolveth the hardness of the liver, h. the yellow
jaundise, and dropsy, by expelling watery humors: and also h. to break the
stone. Worm, It Is hot 1, dry 3. It purges thick phlegm, choler, and
melancholy, c. a good color, kills worms, and h. severs, De Dond: It
extenuates,

Ladies bedstraw. Gallium.
P. The first grows upon sunnie banks, the second in marshes etc. T. They
flower most of the summer months. N. (...): the rest, Species lappaginis.
Ladies bed-straw. Ger. K. as the yellow, that with white flowers, with red
flowers, and the great bastard. T. these, especially that with yellow flowers,
is dry and binding. V. The flowers of the yellow. Diosc. Are used in ointments
against burnings, stop blood, and are put in the cere-cloth of Roses. With oil
olive set in the sun till white and ap. it h. wearied travelers. The root d.
in wine c. lust: so the flowers smelled to. The herb is used for rennet to make
cheese with, and h. to break the stone. The white are not used in physic or
surgerie. Lonic. Applied in baths it h. the itch in children. Park. d. it stops
the blood and h. inward wounds. Clus. The white flowred h. the joints, cold,
and pains. Fuch. It Is somewhat sharp and drying. Col. The herb, and flowers
being bruised, and put into the nostrills stays their bleeding, and it does
as much to wounds, applied thereunto, and h. burnings. The white flowred ap.
comfort and strengthen the sinews, arteries and joints.

Ladies Mantle. Alchimilla.
P. In pastures and copses, or low woods. T. It fl. in May and June,
flourishes all the year. N. Stellaria. Sanicula major. Pes Leonis. Drosion
Gordi.
Ladies mantle. Ger. T. It Is like little Sanicle, yet more drying and binding.
V. It Is applied to wounds as small sanicle is, and operates after the same
manner. It stops bleeding and the courses. It keeps down maidens paps; and
when they are too great or flaggy, it makes them lesser or harder. Park. It
stops bleeding, vomiting, and fluxes, and h. bruises, ruptures, and the whites.
The distilled water d. 20 days together h. sterility in women c. by humidity:
so Schenck. and Matthew. so bathed. It h. humid wounds and consolidates. Trag.
ap. it h. wounds, pains and inflammations. Myl. It Is in a mean between hot and
cold.

Ladies slipper. Calceolus Marianus.
P. On the mountains of Germany, Hungary, etc. T. It flowreth about the midst
of June. N. Calceolus Mariae, and Sacerdotis.
Ladies-slipper. Ger. J. K. as the first and second. T. V. It Is not as yet writ
of, or used in physic. Park. also is silent herein: so Dod. etc.

Larch tree. Larix.*
P. Upon the Alps of Italy, in Moravia etc. T. The cones are to be gathered
before winter, the rosin in summer. N. (...). The agarick Agaricum. The rosin
Laricea resina.
Larch tree. Ger. T. The leaves, bark, fruit, and kernells, are of the temper
of the pine, but not so strong, the rosin is moister than other rosins, without
sharpness, and vulnerary, and operates as the turpentine rosin. Agarick is hot
1, dry 2. it cutteth, cleanses, opens and purges. V. It h. the jaundise, and
cold shakings, which are caused by thick and cold humors. d. and ap. it h.
those that are bit of venomous beasts that hurt with their cold poison. It
provokes urine and brings down the menses: it makes the body well colored,
expels worms, h. agues, especially quotidians and wandering fevers, and
others that are chronicall, which it does by purging away gross, cold, and
phlegmatic humors. The dose in substance is drach. 1. or drach. 1. sem. in
infusion or decoction from drach. 2. to 5. but it purges slowly, and does
somewhat trouble the stomach, therefore it is mixed with ginger, wild carrot or
Lovage seed or sal gem. or it may be given with oxymell. Agarick being taken
with the syrrup of vinegar, h. pains and swimmings of the head, or the
epilepsie. It h. the asthma, cough of the lungs, ptysick, consumption, and
haemoptysis: it comfort the weak stomach, c. good digestion, and kills
worms. Park. The coals of the wood are of most force to melt the iron oar.
The Venice turpentine cleanses the reins and bladder, expels urine and the
stone, and with white amber it h. the gonorrhoea. In an electuarie it h. phlegm
and consumptions.

Lark-spur. Consolida regalis.
P. In gardens sown: the last in corn fields. T. Fl. all summer long. N. Flos
regius. Bucinum. Delphinium. Calcaris Flos.
Lark-spur. Ger. J. K. as the garden, white or red, double, great double and
wild. T. are temperate and warm of nature. V. some affirm that the seed d. h.
the stingings of scorpions. Park. They are not used in physic. Croll. Three or
more of the flowers eaten h. the stitch of the side. Brunfels. The flowers h.
the redness of the eyes, heat of the body, coughs, strangury and sciatica etc.

Laserwort. Laserpitium.*
P. The best grows upon the mountains of Cyrene. T. It flowereth in
Montpelier about midsummer. N. (...). The gum is called Laser. That of Syria
Asa foetida.
Laserwort. Ger. T. The herb, especially the root, is hot and dry 3. Laser
exceeds much the heat of the leaves and stalks. V. The root stamped with
oil scatters clotted blood, h. spots c. by bruises, dissolveth the Kings
evil, and all hard swellings ap. as a plaster, and with the oil of ireos and
wax it h. the sciatica. Being held in the mouth and chewed it h. the toothach,
drawing the humors from the brain. The gum, especially the Laser of Cyrene
dissolved in water and d. h. hoarsenesse, and taken with a rear egg h. the
cough, and with broth the old plurisie: it cures the jaundise and dropsy,
taken with dried figgs. Scr. 1. with a little pepper and myrrh h. the
shrinking of the sinews, and members out of joint. Taken with honey and vinegar
it h. the epilepsie. It Is good against the flux of the belly c. by debility of
the stomach, taken with raisins of the sun. It drives away the shiverings of
agues, d. with wine, pepper and white frankincense. The electuary hereof h.
quartan fevers. d. and ap. it h. all venomous bitings, and shots, it brings
to maturation all pestilentiall impostumes and carbuncles, ap. with rue, salt
peter, and honey; and h. corns being first scarified. ap. with copperas and
verdigrease it h. excrescencies, the polypus, and manginesse. ap. with vinegar,
pepper and wine it h. scurfe and the falling of the hair. Asa foetida is good
for all the purposes aforesaid, yet not so good as the Lacer of Cyrene: it is
good also to be smelled to, and to be applied to the navells of women troubled
with the rising of the mother. Park. K. as the French, and that of Alpinus. V.
That of Diosc. boiled with vinegar in the rind of a pomegranate h. against
poison. Gargled it h. the quinsey, and draws out horse-leeches with vinegar.
d. in lie it h. cramps, and c. the courses with myrrh and pepper.

Lavender. Lavendula.
P. In gardens in these cold countries. T. They flower and flourish in June and
July. N. (...). Nardus Italica. Pseudonardus. Lavandula.
Lavender Ger. K. as the common, white flowred, and spike. T. Is hot and dry 3.
of thin substance consisting of many airie and spiritual parts, so h. cold
diseases of the head that are sine materia. V. The distilled water smelt unto,
or the temples and forehead bathed therewith h. those that have the eatalepsy,
a light migram, the epilepsie, and syncope in a body that is not plethorick or
feverish. The flowers picked from the knops, m. with cinnamon, nutmegs, and
cloves, powdered and d. in the distilled water thereof, h. panting and passions
of the heart, the vertigo, swimming of the brain, and members subject to the
palsy. A conserve of the flowers also h. the diseases aforesaid, the quantity
of a bean being taken first in a morning. Bathing with the distilled water of
the flowers h. those that are paralytick; so also the oil of the flowers, and
oil olive, made as oil of roses being anointed. French lavender or stic
kadove. K. as the common, jagged, toothed, and naked. Staechas. T. has a
little cold earthy substance, so binding: it also opens obstructions,
extenuateth, scoureth, and strengthens the intrals, and whole body. V. Diosc.
The decoction h. the difeases of the chest, and is used in antidotes. The
flowers h. pains of the head, and diseases thereof c. by cold, as the
apoplexy and epilepsie etc. The decoction of the heads and fl. d. opens the
liver, lungs, milt, mother, bladder, and all the inward parts, driving forth
corrupt humors, and procuring urine. Sea lavender. K. as the common, rock, that
with the indented lease, and hollow leased. T. The seed is very astringent. V.
The seed powdered and d. in wine h. the colic, strangury, and dysentery, the
overmuch flowing of women's terms, and all other fluxes of blood. Lavender
cotton. T. The seed is bitter, hot and dry 3. V. Plin. The herb d. in wine h.
the poison of all venomous beasts. Given green or dry it kills worms; so the
seed, and expels them, and operates as effectually as worm seed. Park. V.
Oil of spike h. cold and benumbed parts: and serves for persumes. The dried
flowers comfort and dry the moisture of a cold brain. Stickadove expells
melancholy, cleanses and strengt heneth the liver and inward parts. Lavender
cotton, is used in remedies for cold disease. Col. Lavender water d. h. lost
speech. The smell h. the sight: it h. gripings c. by cold.

Laurel. Laureola.
P. In mountains, rough, shadowie, and woody places. T. Fl. in winter: the
fruit is ripe in May and June: it is always green. N. (...). Chamaedaphne.
Peplion.
Laufell. Ger. K. as the Spurge Laurel. T. It agrees with the Germane spurge
olive, throughout the whole substance, being biting and extreme hot. V. Diosc.
the dry or green leaves purge phlegm. It provokes vomit and brings down the
menses, being chewed it draws water out of the head. It causes sneezing.
Also 15. gr. of the seed d. are a purgation. Lugd. The leaves taken h. the
dropsy, but evert the stomach, and inflame the intralls, except macerated in
vinegar with a quince etc. Jo. the antidote is milk with butter and bole arm.
Park. The berries are given to h. the colic: so the oil ap. It h. the piles
and urine stopped.

Lead-wort. Plumbago Plinii.
P. In gardens whon planted there. T. Fl. in July and Aug. N. Molybdaena.
Dentillaria Rondeletii.
Lead-wort. Ger. T. is caustic. V. It helps the toothache, and that (as some
say) if it be held in the hand only. Park. It h. the sciatica, or pain in the
joints; or any other inveterate grief, the leaves being bruised and ap. with
axungia, as Sciatica Cresses. The same also h. marks, scabs, and deformity of
the skin. The juice d. in ale c. speedy delivery in travail.

Leekes. Porrum.
P. In a mean earth, fat, well dunged and dug. T. It may be sown in March
or April: remooved in September. N (...). Porrus Palladii. The 1. Capitatum.
The 2d Sectivum.
Leeke. Ger. J. K. as the headed, cut or unset. T. Is hot and dry, and does
attenuate as the onion. V. boiled it is less hurtful and loses it is
sharpness, yet is cacochymick; but better taken with cold herbs. Boiled and
eaten with ptisana, it concocteth and expectorateth raw humors lying in the
breast: in a lohoch it cleanses the lungs. The juice d. with honey h. bitings of
venomous beasts; so also the leaves stamped and ap. The same juice with
vinegar, frankincense and milk, or oil of roses dropped into the ears h.
their pain and noise, drach. 2. of the seed with the like weight of myrtle
berries d. stop the haemoptysis of long continuance: the same ingredients put
into wine, keep it from scouring, and if sour amend the same. It cutteth tough
humors. Lobel. The following lohoch h. phlegmatic squinancies and other cold
catarrhes that suffocate: take blanched almonds unc. 3. 4 figgs, soft bdellium
unc. sem. juice of lyquorice unc. 2. of sugar candy dissolved in a s. q. of the
juice of leekes and boiled in B. to a syrrup, as much as may serve to make the
rest into the form of an eclegma. H. It heateth the body, c. ill blood, and
terrible dreams, dulleth the sight, is noisome to the stomach, breeds wind,
and offends hot and chollerick bodies. Wild leekes. K. as the common, French
and cives. T. Cives are hot and dry like the leck. The vine leek is more hot
than the rest. V. Cives attenuate, open, and are diuretic, and c. hot and
gross vapors etc. as the leek. The vine leek or Ampeloprason provokes urine
and the flowers, and h. bitings of venomous beasts. Cives are called
Schoenoprason. Park. Leeks eaten h. hoarsnesse; and baked in hot embers the
surfeit of mushromes. The green blades boiled and applied warm h. the piles.
Fum. The juice d. with parsley extracts the foetus. Park. Theat. Leeks are much
about the same property, that onions are, yet not altogether so effectual.

Lentils. Lens.
P. In gardens, and fields sown. T. They flower and wax ripe in July and Aug.
N. (...). Lenticula.
Lentils. Ger. K. as the great and little. T. Gal. They are in a mean between
hot and cold; yet dry 2. Their skin is astringent: the substance of an earthy
juice, somewhat harsh. V. The first decoction d. with salt and pickle does
loosen the belly. The second binds and h. laskes, especially if boiled with
red beets, myrtles, the pills of pomegranats, dried roses, medlars, service
berries, unripe pears, quinces, plantain leaves, galls, or the berries of
sumach. The meal of lentils mixed with honey does mundifie ulcers, and rotten
sores: it c. flesh, and is good to put to digestives, for green wounds. The
skins being taken off they are more nourishing and less binding. They are of
thick and bad juice, stop the belly, cause melancholy, and if much eaten c.
the leprosy. They li. the dropsy. H. They hurt the sight stop the menses, c.
sad dreams, hurt the head, sinews and lungs. 30. of them shelled and swallowed
h. the overcasting of the stomach. Boiled with parched barley meal and ap.
they h. the gout, with honey fill sores, break aschares, cleanse ulcers: and
boiled in wine wast wens, and hard swellings of the throat. with a quince,
melilot and oil of roses, they h. the inflammation of the eyes and fundament,
which if great they must be boiled with the rind of a pomegranate, dry rose
leaves and honey. If sea water be added they h. eating sores that are mortifyed,
also pushes, shingles, S. Anthonies fire, and kibes ap. and also women's breasts
in which the milk is curdled. Sea Lentill. John's. K. as the narrow and cut.
leased. T. V. May be eaten as Sampire. It Is thought to be diureticall. Park.
They hurt dry constitutions and those that have the courses stopped. The
decoction with rose leaves and quinces h. ulcers,

Leopards-bane. Doronicum.
P. In gardens: and wild on high mountains. T. They flower in June, and July.
N. (...). Myophonon. Thora.
Leopards-bane. Ger. J. K. as the small, and great: with the cray-fish, winged,
narrow leased, large flowred and the greatest woolfesbane. T. are cold. V. They
are mixed with compound medicines that h. pains of the eyes: and being green
h. their inflammation. It kills all fouresooted beasts in the compass of one
day; yet the root h. stingings of scorpions. Gesn. drach. 2. of the powder
being taken h. the vertigo and epilepsie, or mixed with gentian, the powder of
misle-toe, and astrantia. Schwenck. The root is sweet and temperate. Senn. The
antidote is milk and mithridate etc. Park. K. as the fained of Matthew. V.
Theoph. Plin. It Is good against scorpions taken in warmed wine, resisting the
poison.

Lettuce. Lactuca.
P. In manured, fat, moist, and dunged ground. T. It Is to be sown at the first
spring, and that very thin. N. (...) Pythagoreorum. Chas Arab.
Lettuce. Ger. K. as the garden, curled, cabbage, small curled, Savoy, and
Lumbard lettuce. T. Is moderately cold and moist. V. It cools the heat of
the stomach, h. the heart burning, and choler, quenches thirst, and c. sleep,
and milk in dry bodies, tempering the heat and dryness, and hinders in cold
bodies. It makes a pleasant sallad being eaten raw with vinegar, oil and a
little salt: if boiled it is of easier digestion, and more nourishment. Taken
before meat it whetteth the appetite; taken after, it preventeth drunkenness,
staying the vapors. Gal. It neither binds nor loses the belly; yet the
contrary is sound true by experience. Being ap. outwardly it h. all
inflammations, burnings and scaldings ap. with salt before the blisters
appear. The juice too much used quenches the natural sperme, but procures
sleep. Wild lettuce. K. as the greatest smelling of opium, and the wild with
the divided lease. T. are cold fine 3tii. V. Diosc. Some mix the juice thereof
with opium. The juice d. in oxycrate q. ob. 2. or scr. 1. purges watrie
humors, and cleanses the ulcer in the eye, argemon, and h. the darkness of
sight. Stamped and ap. with women's milk it h. burns and scalds: it is hypnotick
and anodyne, moves the courses, and h. the stingings of scorpions, and the
bitings of spiders. The seed d. like the garden lettuce h. venery. Lambs
lettuce or corn sallad. T. Is cold and something moist like the common, and in
stead thereof, in winter and the first spring it servely for a sallad herb
used as the rest. Park. The juice ap. with oil of roses to the fore head, h.
the pains of the head: ap. to the testicles it h. the colts-evill, and with
camphire it restrains lust. H. but it is hurtful to those that are
asthmaticall. Mac. It tempereth adust humors. Pem. The first is cold, and moist
1 or 2. ap. it h. lust. Park. K. as the sharp pointed garden lettuce. Gal.
Serap. It yeildeth good nourishment. The juice with oil of roses, ap. c. sleep
and h. the headache c. of heat, as also the colts-evill, and heat of urine.
The wild. K. as the purple fl. T. V. as the rest.

Lilly. Lilium.
P. In gardens planted: naturally in Italy, Persia etc. T. Fl. from May to
July. N. (...). Rosa Junonis.
Lillies. Ger. The white lillies, K. as the common, and that of Constantinople.
T. is hot, and partly of a subtle substance. The root is dry 1, and hot 2. V.
The root of the garden lilly stamped with honey conglutinateth the sinews cut
in sunder, and consumes achores, and the scurfinesse of the beard and face.
Stamped with vinegar, the leaves of henbane, or the meal of barley, it h. the
tumors of the privities. It c. hair in burned and scalded places m. with oil
or grease and ap. Roasted in the embers, and stamped with some leaven of rye
bread and hogs grease, it breaks pestilentiall botches, and ripeneth buboes
coming of venery. The flowers steeped in oil olive, and shifted two or three
times during summer, and set in the sun h. the sinues and hardness of the
matrix. Jul. Alex. The distilled water thereof d. c. speedy deliverance, and
expels the secundine. The leaves boiled in red wine and ap. h. old wounds,
and ulcers. The root stamped, strained with wine and d. for two or three days
together, expels the pestilence. The juice m. with barley meal, and baked
in ^akes and eaten for a month h. the dropsy. Florent. The root being
curiously opened, and any color that is not caustic being put in causes the
flower to be of the same color. Red lillies. K. as the common, gold red, fiery
red, bulbe hearing, that with bulbs growing along the stalks, and small red.
T. Gal. The flower is partly of thin, partly of an earthy essence. The roots
and leaves dry and cleanse, and moderately digest and wast. V. The leaves of the
herb ap. h. the stingings of serpents. The same boiled and mixed with vinegar
h. burnings, green wounds, and ulcers. The roots roasted in the embers, and
stamped with oil of roses h. burnings and hardness of the matrix. Stamped
with honey it cures the wounded sinews and members out of joint, and h. the
morphew, wrinkles and deformities of the face. Stamped with vinegar, the leaves
of henbane, and wheat meal, it h. hot swellings of the secret parts. The roots
boiled in wine ap. h. corns. d. with mead they purge out unprofitable blood.
Mountain lillies. K. as the great and small. T. V. are not yet used in physic.
The other Lillies. K. as the red of Constantinople, the Byzantine purplish
sanguine colored, the light red and vermilion Byzantine many flowred. T. V.
are of as little use as the former. The narrow leafed reflex lillies. K. as the
red, the yellow mountain with the spotted flowers and unspotted. T. V. are
thought to agree with the other lillies. The Persian lilly. T. V. serves for
ornament to the garden; but is as yet of no known physical use. Lilly in the
valley. K. as the common, and red, T. are hot and dry. ^. The flowers distilled
with wine, and d. the quantity of a spoonful, restore speech unto those that
have a dumb palsy, h. the apoplexy and gout; and comfort the heart:
strengthen the memory and h. inflammations of the eyes, being dropped
thereinto. The flowers being put into a glass, and set in a hill of ants close
stopped for one months space, there shall be a liquor that appeaseth the pain
of the gout being applied. Water lilly. K. as the white, yellow, small white,
and dwarf. T. The roots and seed dry and bite. V. That with yellow fl.
stops the laske, bloody flix and gonorrhoea. That with white flowers is of
greater force, and stops the whites d. in red wine: they cleanse the morphew,
h. the alopecia, steeped in tar; and the morphew in water, sc. the white for
the first, and the black root for the other. Theoph. Stamped and ap. they stop
bleeding. The flowers of the white h. the infirmities of the head, c. by heat.
The root of the yellow h. hot diseases of the kidneys and bladder, and the
gonorrhoea. The root and seed of the great water Lilly d. h. venery; or the
powder taken in broth, drying the sperme. The conserve of the flowers operates
as the former, and h. burning fevers. The oil of the flowers refrigerateth,
causes sleep, and preventeth venereous dreams: the temples of the head,
palms of the hands, the feet and breast being anointed for the one; and the
genitors for the other. The green leaves of the great water Lilly ap. to the
back h. the gonorrhoea being renewed thrice a day. The yellow Lilly with the
day Lilly. T. Is referred to the Asphodills. V. Diosc. A pessary of the root
with honey brings forth water and blood. S tamp^d with the leaves and ap. it h.
hot swellings, inflammations and burnings. Park. K. as the water lilly of
Egypt, etc. T. V. the leaves and flowers are cold and moist.

Limon-tree. Malus Limonia.*
P. In the sea coasts of Italy and Spain etc. T. It Is always green, and
bearing fruit. N. (...). Limas and Limera Hisp. The first notes the fruit, the
second the tree.
Limon tree. Ger. T. The pap is sour, cold and dry with thinness of parts. V.
The distilled water of the whole fruit, drawn out by a glass still h. tetters
and blemishes of the skin, and makes the face fair and smooth. d. it
provokes urine, dissolveth and expels the stone. Vnc. 2. of the juice mixed
with the spirit of wine or aqua vitae d. in the fit of an ague h. the shaking,
and h. the ague at thrice using, the patient being covered warm to cause
sweat; so unc. 1. sem. of the distilled water taken. The seed kills worms,
the syrrup h. burning fevers and infectious diseases: so Vntz. For. Val. de
Tar. Joub. Aug. Tab. Pisan. Ficin. It comfort the heart, cools the inward
parts, cutteth, and attenuateth. Park. The rind and juice come near unto the
property of the Citron; but it is weaker to resist poison, venom or infection:
yet the juice being sharper cools more. The juice of unripe Limmons d. with
malmesy expels the stone and kills worms. A piece of gold being steeped
24. hours in the juice thereof, and it d. in wine with the powder of Angelica
roots h. those that are infected with the plague. The distilled water kills
lice: the juice used at sea preventeth the scurvy, and h. thirst. Riol. The
syrrup h. putrefactions and distempers of the blood. Col. The juice taken every
morning with white wine and sugar strengthens the heart, stomach and head: it
h. melancholy. The rind h. the stench of the mouth. The juice h. stains in
linen.

Line-tree. Tilia.
P. In gardens and woods. T. Fl. in May: the fruit is ripe in Aug. N. (...).
Philyra. Teia Hisp. Linden-tree.
Line-tree. Ger. K. as the male, and female. T. The bark and leaves are of a
temperate heat, somewhat dry and astringent. V. The leaves boiled in smiths
water, with allome and a little honey h. sores in childrens mouths. The leaves
boiled till tender, and stamped very small with hogs grease, the powder of
fenugreek and lineseed h. hot swellings and c. maturation of impostumes ap.
very hot. The flowers h. pains of the head of a cold cause, dizzinesse
apoplexy, epilepsie, and not only the flowers but the distilled water also.
Theoph. The leaves are sweet, and are fodder for cattle; but the fruit can be
eaten of none. Park. The coals make gunpowder, being quenched in vinegar they
dissolve clotted blood. The juice of the bark steeped and ap. h. burnings. The
distilled water of the bark h. against fretting humors that c. the bloody
flux. The coals h. the haemoptysis.

Lions-leafe. Leontopetalon.*
P. Among corn in Italy, Candy etc. T. It flowreth in winter as affirms Pet.
Bellon. N. (...). Pes Leoninus. Brumaria.
Lions-leafe. Ger. Gal. It Is hot and dry 3. and digesting. V. Diosc. The root
taken in wine h. the bitings of serpents, and eases the pain. It Is used in
clisters for them that are troubled with the sciatica: so Trag. Plin. Bauh.
Park. The root ap. h. the sciatica, also it cleanses and heals old filthy
ulcers. Rauwolf. The inhabitants of Aleppo use the powder of the old and
greater roots thereof to take spots out of their garments by rubbing them
therewith.

Liquorice. Glycyrrhiza.
P. In Germany, France, Spain, and in gardens when planted. T. Fl. in July: the
seed is ripe in September. N. (...). Dulcis radix. Liquiritia, Herba Scythica.
Liquorice. Ger. K. as the hedghog, and common. T. The root is sweet,
temperate, hot* somewhat binding and moist: the bark is somewhat bitter and
hot. V. The root h. the hoarsnesse and roughness of the throat, and breast;
opens the lungs, ripeneth the cough, and expectorateth phlegm; so the Rob, or
juice, and the ginger bread made of the juice, with ginger and other spices:
and h. all infirmities of the lungs and breast. The juice h. the heat of the
stomach, and mouth. d. with wine and raisins it h. the infirmities of the liver
and chest, sores of the bladder and diseases of the kidneys. Being melted under
the tongue it quenches thirst, h. the stomach and green wounds applied; so the
decoction of the roots being fresh. The powder of the dried root ap. h. the web
in the eye, and ulcers of the mouth. It h. hoarsnesse, difficulty of breathing,
inflammations of the lungs, the pleurifie, spitting of blood, consumption, and
rottenness of the lungs, and all infirmities of the chest: it h.
inflammations, tempereth the sharpness of humors, concocteth them and c. easy
spitting. The decoction h. the kidneys and bladder exulcerated, the strangury
and all infirmities proceeding of sharp, salt, and biting humors. Theoph. With
this and mares milk cheese the Scythians were reported to be able to live 11.
or 12 days. With honey it h. ulcers. Sala. The essence h. the diseases of all
the cavities of the body, c. by sharp and salt humors. In a lohoch with rose
water and gum-tragacanth it expectorateth phlegm, and h. thin distillations.
The English is less astringent. Col. Liquorice boiled in fair water, with some
Maidenhaire and figgs, makes a good ^rinke for those that have a dry cough, to
digest phlegm, and to expectorate it: it h. the ptysick, consumption, and all
griefs of the breast and lungs. It Is also used against colds in cattle.

Liver-wort. Hepatica.
P. In shadowie and moist places, on rocks etc. T. It brings forth its stars
and leaves in June. N. (...). Lichen. The nouble Herba trinitatis. and
Trifolium nobile.
Liver-wort. Ger. K. as the ground, small with starry and round heads, and
stone Live. T. Stone liverwort is cold, dry, and somewhat binding. V. It h.
inflammations of the liver, hot and sharp agues and tertians of choler.
Diosc. ap. it stops bleeding, h. inflammations, tetters, and ringwormes. It h.
the yellow jaundise, and inflammations of the tongue. Noble Liver-wort. K. as
the common, red, and that with double flowers. T. are cold and dry with
astriction V. They h. the weakness of the liver c. by heat, cooling and
strengthening it. Bapt. Sard. A spoonful of the powder of the root d. certain
days together with wine or broth h. the enterocele. White Liver-wort. K. as
the common and double flowred grass of Parnassus. T. Is dry and of subtle
parts. V. The decoction of the leaves d. does dry and strengthen the moist
stomach, stops the belly, and h. desire to vomit. Boiled in wine or water
and d. especially the seed provokes urine, and breaks and expels the
stone. Brunfels. It h. all hot impostumes. Park. The first h. the gonorrhoea
and whites, the rest are for pleasure.

Loose-strife. Lysimachia.
P. In moist meadows, and by water sides. T. Fl. in June and July, often
until Aug. N. (...). Salicaria. Coroneola.
Loose-strife. Ger. J. K. as the yellow, small yellow, yellow with branched
flowers, tree primrose, spiked, codded, rose-bay, narrow leafed, blew, hooded,
wild, and small purple willow herb. T. The yellow (which is most useful,) is
cold, dry and very astringent. V. Diosc. The juice d. h. the bloody flix, it h.
green wounds and stops blood; so also as an errhine: so Fuch. The smoke of
the burned herb drives away serpents and kills gnats. Plin. It dies the
hair yellow: d. it h. the dysentery. Made into a salve it cools and heals
wounds. As a pessary it stops the terms. The others have not been
experimented. Park. K. as the round headed yellow. V. as the first, the juice
h. sore mouths, and the secret parts. The small purple fl. V. as the first; so
the codded, and is hot and dry 2. The distilled water of the spiked h. hurts of
the eyes, scars and the quinsey.

Lovage. Levisticum.
P. In gardens, where it grows very much. T. Fl. in July and August: and then
seedeth. N. Ligusticum. Siler m^ntanum.
Lovage. Ger. The common. T. Is hot and dry 3. V. The roots h. all inward
diseases, and expel ventosities, especially of the stomach: the seed warmeth
it and h. digestion. Ant. Musa. The Gennes did formerly use it in their meats,
as we do pepper now. The distilled water clears the sight, and takes away
all spots, lentills, freckles, and redness of the face, if they be often
washed therewith. Bastard Lovage, with the horse fennel. T. This plant with
his seed is hot and dry 3. V. The seeds of Siler d. with wormwood wine c. the
menses, h. suffocation of the matrix and cause it to return to its natural
place. The root stamped with honey and ap. h. old sores and covers bare bones
with flesh. It Is diuretic, and h. pains of the intralls of crudity. It h.
concoction, consumes wind, and h. the swelling of the stomach: the root is
not so effectual, as not being so hot and dry. Senn. It c. sweat, h. the womb,
and c. the terms. Crescent. It Is hot and dry 2. diuretic, extenuating and
opening, and h. the griefs of the stomach. Park. K. as the Germane. V. The
first d. h. agues. The last h. the quinsey, and eyes. Penot. The salt h. the
stone.

Lung-wort. Pulmonaria.
P. Upon old trees, rocks and shadowie places. T. It flourishes especially in
the summer time. N. Lichen. The golden Corchorus Dalechampii.
Lung-wort. Ger. J. K. as the tree, and sea, with the round leafed oister weed,
sea thongs, sea wracks, jagged, grass, sea girdle, sea ragged staff, and
hairy riverweed. T. Lung-wort is cold and dry. V. The powder d. with water h.
inflammations and ulcers of the lungs, bloody and green wounds, ulcers in the
privities, and stops the reds, and all fluxes of choler upwards or
downwards. Fried with eggs as a tansie and eaten, it strengthens the
weakness of the back. The powder with salt given to cattle h. their cough, and
broken-windednesse. French Lung-w. K. As the broad-leafed, and narrow leafed,
with the golden mouse-eare. T. are temperate, and a little astringent. V. The
decoction or the distilled water of the first d. and ap: mundifies, and h.
green wounds: it h. inflammations and hot distempers of the heart, stomach and
liver. The juice dropped into the ears h. them, if troubled with a pricking
pain or noise. Trag: The water operates as that of succory. Pen: The 2d h.
whitelowes, and diseases of the lungs. Came: The 3d. (if the Costa of
Camerarius) h. the pthisis, given in conserve, syrup, or powder, or used in
broths. The other Lung-wort, or cow-slipps of Jerusalem. K. as the spotted, and
buglosse Cowslipps. T. Is of the temperature of great comfrey, yet the root is
more drying and binding. V. The leaves are used among pot-herbes. The roots are
thought to h. the infirmities of the lungs, and ulcers thereof, and to be of
the like force with the great Comfrey. Park: Cowslips of Jer. boiled and d. h.
the haemoptysis. Came: The 1. is binding, abstersive, and glutinating.

Lupine. Lupinus.
P. In a sandy and bad soil, hardly in tilled places. T. They are planted in
April, and have fruit 2, or 3 times. N. (...). Aurum comicum Plauti.
Lupine. Ger. J. K. as the garden, yellow, blew, and the great blew. T. They
are bitter, and of an earthy substance, not easily digested. V. Being boiled
and seasoned with salt, they are eaten with pickle: before they be steeped in
water, and have their bitterness, they cleanse, wast, and kill worms, taken
with honey, water and vinegar, or ap. also ap. it h. the morphew, sore heads,
small pox, wild scabbes, gangreens, and venomous ulcers, by clensing,
consuming and drying without biting. Taken with rue and pepper, it scoureth the
liver and spleen, it moves the courses, and expells the dead child ap. with
myrrh and honey. The meal wastes without biting, h. spotts c. by dry beating,
chaeradas and phymata boiled in water and vinegar, or oxymel; and operates as
the decoction: Boiled in rain water till they yield a cream they cleanse, and
beautify the face. The root boiled with water and d. is diureticke. Lupines
made sweet, m. with vinegar and d. h. the loathsomenesse of the stomach, and c.
appetite. Boiled in the strong lie which barbers use, with wormwood, centorie,
and bay salt, they stop gangreenes, and h. atrophicke members, and stay the
ambulative nature of phagedens ap. hot with stuphes of cloth. The decoction
with the root of black chameleon thistle ap. cures the scabs that are in
sheep. Croll: The decoction thereof expells the pox, etc. Dorst. Aeg. Lupine is
hot, dry, abstersive, dissipating, and drying without biting. Taken with fennel
seed, it h. pains and wind of the intestines, the decoction thereof with
solatrum in wine h. the shortness of breath, and heat; and mollifyeth the
belly. ap. it h. marisca's. Park. K. as the great white. V. as the rest. The
juice mixed with the gall of a goat, the juice of limmons and a little alumen
saccharinum, h. nodes and impostumes. The burning of the husks drives away
gnats. The wild are stronger for all purposes, and more eflectuall.

M
Madder. Rubia.
P. In gardens, and clifts of rocks: the second in moist meadows. T. Fl. from
May to September: the roots are gathered in Autumn. N. (...). Erythrodanum.
Rubia tinctorum. (...) Nicandri.
MAdder. Ger. J. K. as the red, wild, sea, small Candy, and dwarse. T. The
root is cold, dry, somewhat binding, and withal having diverse thin parts, and
a little sweetness, with a subsequent harsh taste; yet is it doubted of by some
whether it bind or open. V. The decoction of the root h. burstings, bruises and
wounds, stops bleeding and h. inflammations. It is used in vulnerary potions
and h. wounds of the chest and intralls. Jo. Spiring. The decoction given with
triphera magna stops the reds, haemorroides and bloody flix; so it apeareth to
be astringent: it is also by some used in compositions against untimely birth.
Diosc. thought it diuretic and that it would expel the menses and secundine,
and cause bloody urine; but this rather arises from the color of it. Thus it
is evident that it does not vehemently either bind or open. Plin. The stalks
and leaves are used against serpents, the root boiled in meade, and d. opens
the liver, spleen and kidneys, and h. the jaundise, and provokes urine. It h.
the lothsomenesse of the Kings evil, and ulcers of the mouth, there being
added to the decoction a little allome, and honey of roses. The Synanchica
Dalechampii dries without biting, and h. the squinancy d. and ap. Lonic. T.
It Is hot 2, dry 3. V. with vinegar it h. the itch. Ern. The distilled oil h.
the epilepsie, apoplexy, and loss of speech, 1, or 2, drops being put upon
the tongue: d. it h. the swelling of the spleen and quartan agues. Park. K. as
the smooth leafed. V. It h. the sciatica. The seed taken with vinegar and honey
h. hard spleenes. The small K. as the spiked headed, and purple flowred. T. V.
are weaker.

Madwort. Alyssum.
P. It Is often sown in gardens: the seed comes from Italy. T. Fl: and
flourishes in May, the seed is ripe in August. N. (...). Lunaria aspera Gesn:
Lutea vel Graeca.
Madwort. Ger. K. as that of Gal: and Diosc: T. Gal: It Is meanly dry,
digesting, and scouring. V. Taken, it h. those that are bitten of a mad dog,
it h. the morphew, and sunburning. etc. Park. K. as that of Columna. V. that of
Diosc. d. stops the hicket if there be no ague, so also smelled to. They
also h. wounds inward and outward, digest clotted blood, and h. cancers and
filthy ulcers.

Mallow. Malva.
P. In gardens almost all: the wild in untild places. T. Fl. in July and Aug.
the second year. N. (...). That of the garden is called Rosa ultra marina. The
marsh Althaea Bismalva.
Mallow. Ger. The hollihocke. K. as the single garden, jagged strange, double
purple and double scarlet tree with double flowers. T. is moderately hot and
moist, but not so much as the wild: it has a clammy substance, especially the
seed and root. V. The decoction of the flowers, especially those of the red,
boiled in red wine stops, the courses. The roots, leaves and seeds operate as
the wild, which are more commonly used. Wild Mallows. K. as the field dwarse,
French curled, vervaine, and Spanish. T. are moderately hot and moist, of slimy
and glutmating juice, better than those of the garden, moderately nourishing,
causing gross blood, and loosening the belly. V. The leaves h. the stinging of
scorpions bees, wasps etc. Diosc. being anointed with oil and the leaves
stamped, they hurt not at all. The decoction with their roots d. h. against
poison, it being vomited up again. The leaves boiled soft and ap. mollify
tumors, and hard swellings of the mother hathed, and the fume being taken. The
decoction in clisters h. roughness and fretting of the guts, bladder, and
fundament. The roots of the Vervaine Mal. h. the bloody flix, and inward
burstings, being d. with wine and water. Note, the French Mal. is the
wholsomest to be eaten. Marsh Mal. K. as the common, water, tree, shrubby, and
hemp leafed. T. is moderately hot, but dryer than the rest: the roots and seeds
are more dry, and of thinner parts, digesting and mollifying. V. The leaves
digest, h. pains and concoct. Mixed with fomentations and pultises, ap. they
h. pains of the sides, of the stone and bladder, and in a bath h. all pains;
so the decoction of the leaves d. and expels the stone; as also the roots,
and seeds. The decoction of the roots h. the bloody flix, by mitigating the
frettings thereof, and more effectually there being added the roots of bistort,
tormentill, the flowers and rinds of pomegranats etc. The mucilage of the roots
is mixed with anodyne remedies. Boiled in wine, and the decoction d. it h. the
stone, bloody flix, sciatica, cramps, and convulsions. The roots, with the
leaves of the common Mallows, and of violets boiled in water till soft, then
adding a little fennugreek, and lineseed in powder, the root of black bryony,
and barows grease, and made to the form of a pultis, ap. warm mollify hard
swellings, and apostumes in the joints, and sores of the mother: it consumes
all cold tumors, blastings, and windiness: it h. rifts of the sundament;
comfort, and defends green wounds from accidents, digesteth them, and c.
maturation in old ulcers. The powder of the seeds d. stops the laske, bloody
flixe, and all other issues of blood. Yellow mallow. T. agrees with the
tree-mallow. V. Avic: It h. green wounds, and conglutinateth the same. The
seed d. in wine h. the stone. Bern: Paludan: The Turks drink the seeds to
cause sleep and rest. Venice mallow, with the thorny, and Egyptian codded. T.
The leaves are clammy, so it is thought to come near unto the common mallow. V.
It mollifieth, but is not used in physic. Park: They are all viscous, h.
pains of the stone, ap: mollify, and are anodyne. Recch: K. The sharp mallow
of Mexico. V. The root is bitter. drach: 2. d. are a gentle purge. Park: So the
Jews mallow. The other h. diseases c. of heat.

Mandrake. Mandragora.
P. In hot regions, woods, mountains, and gardens. T. They spring in March: Fl:
in April: the fruit is ripe in August. N. (...). Circaea. Anthropomorphos.
Morion. Terrae malum.
Mandrake. Ger. K. as the male and female. T. is cold 3, the root 4. V. Diosc:
the root is phlegmatic, the apples are milder, and may be eaten with pepper,
and hot spices. Gal: The apples are cold and moist, the bark of the root cold
and dry: the juice is good in all cooling ointments. The dried juice of the
root taken in a small q. purges phlegm and melancholy. In collyries it h.
pains of the eyes. In a pessarie it draws forth the dead child and
secundine: the green leaves stamped with axungia and barley meal h. all hot
swellings and inflammations, and ap: consume hot ulcers and apostumes. A
suppositorie made of the juice and put up into the fundament c. sleep: infused
in wine d. it c. sleep and h. pains: the apples smelled to c. sleep, or the
juice taken in a small q. Aeginet: Serap: Avic: The seed and fruit d. cleanse
the matrix or mother. Senn: The antidote is wormwood, rue, scordium,
castorium, and wine. Mac: also mustard, organie, etc. Jo. and vinegar smelled
to. Park: The leaves h. knotts in the flesh, and the roots h. S. Anthonies
fire, etc. and boiled with ivory mollify the same.

Maple-tree. Acer.
P. The 1 in gardens planted: the 2d in low woods and hedges. T. Fl: about the
end of March, the fruit is ripe in September. N. (...). Sphendamnus. The common
Opulus.
Maple-tree. Ger. K. as the great and lesser. T. Plin: The pounded root ap: h.
pains of the liver. Seren: Sammon: d. with wine it h. pains of the side, so
Dod: Theoph. The wood serves for the chiefest utensills. Park: K. as the three
leased. T. V. as the rest. Gal: drach: 1. of the root powdered and d. in water,
h. the liver, but none other of the Greek writers make any mention thereof, as
useful in any disease. See Cornar.

Marigolds. Calendula.
P. The double flowred are set in gardens. T. Fl: from April to winter, and
then if warm. N. (...). Caltha. Chrysanthemum.
Marigolds. Ger: K. as the greatest double, greater double, smaller double,
double globe, straw colored double, single, fruitful, Jack an Apes a
horseback, and mountain wild. T. The flowers are hot fere 2 do, especially
when dry, it is cardiacke, alexipharmicke and antifebriticke any way taken. V.
d. with wine it brings down the terms, and the sum expels the
secundine. The leaves of the herb are hotter, and biting, also moist, so
mollify the belly used as pot-herbes. Fuch: The juice gargled h. the
toothache. The fl: and leaves distilled, and the water dropped into red and
watery eyes h. the inflammation and eases the pain. The conserve of the fl.
and sugar taken fasting in the morning h. trembling of the heart, and prevents
the plague, etc. by the corrupt air. The yellow leaves of the flowers are used
by the Dutch to put into broths, and physical potions for diverse purposes.
Germane marigold. K. as the golden with the broad leaf, and lesser. T. Being
green it is hot and dry 2. dry, 3. V. John's: The women living about the Alps
use the root against the suffocation of the mother, the stopping of the
courses, and greene-sicknesse, etc. Corne-marigold. K. as the common, that of
Valentia, small mountain, the other Alpine and Candy. T. are thought to be in
a mean between heat and moisture. V. Diosc: The stalks and leaves may be
eaten as other herbs. The flowers m. with wax, oil, rosin, and frankincense
made up as a seare-cloth, wast cold and hard swellings. The herb d. after
coming out of the bath, h. those that are discolored by the yellow jaundise.
French marigold. K. As the great double, single, and small. T. V. are venomous.
Marsh marigold. K. As the great, small, and double flowred. T. V. are not
written of. Park: Double marsh marig. T. V. The root is sharp near crowfoot.
Mac: The flowers color the hair yellow. Vntz. The juice h. the pestilence. So
Morescot: Goclen: Agric: Erast: Mind: Palmar: Came: and Matthew: It Is heating,
opening, digesting, and provokes to expulsion. unc. 1. of the juice, with
drach: 1. of the powder of earth-wormes d. h. the jaundise.

Marjerome. Majorana.
P. They grow wild in Spain, Italy etc. here in Gardens. T. They are sown in
May, bring forth ears in August. N. (...). Amaracus. Marum. Sampsycum.
Marjerome. Ger. K. as the great sweet, pot, and gentle. T. are hot and dry 2:
as others, 3. V. The sweet h. cold diseases of the brain taken. Put into the
nostrills it c. sneezing, purges phlegm; chewed it h. the toothache: d.
provokes urine, expels waterish humors, and resists poison: the decoction
d. h. the dropsy, dysury, sighing, and pains of the belly. The leaves dried
m. with honey, taken dissolve clotted blood, and ap: h: spotts c. by bruises.
The leaves are good to be put into things that are odoriferous, and their
powder into cerots, etc. and h. cold swellings, and luxations. The oil h. the
shrinking of the sinews, cramps, convulsions, and all aches c. by cold. Wild
Marjerome. K. As the bastard, white, of Candy, and the English, Origanum, or
organy. T. All cut, attenuate, dry, and heat 30: and that of Candy is the
strongest. V. d. in wine it h. the wounds by venomous beasts. d. with wine and
raisins of the sun, it h. those that have d. opium etc. The decoction provokes
urine, and the courses, and h. dropsies: in a lohoch it h. old coughs, and
stuffings of the lungs: used in baths it h. scabs, itch, and scurvinesse, and
the ill color c. by the yellow jaundise: Drach: 1. taken with meade, purges
filthy humors. The juice m. with milk put into the ears h. the pain thereof:
m. with the oil of ireos and used as an errhine it draws down water and
phlegm. The herb strewed on the ground drives away serpents. The decoction
loses the belly, and purges choler: d. with vinegar it h. the infirmities
of the spleen, and in wine all mortal poisons, therefore it is put into
treacles etc. d. it h. nauseating stomachs, and watery, as also swounings of
the heart. Goats marjerome, Tragoriganum. K. As the common, that of Clusius,
and the Candy. T. are hot and dry 3. Gal: and binding. V. It h. wamblings of
the stomach, and belchings, and stopps vomiting: They also operate as the other
organies. Weck: The dry leaves ap: with honey h. bruises: and in a pessarie draw
down the menses, and h. the inflammations of the eyes with barley meal. Park:
The common opens the liver, and h. the breast etc. troubled with cold: ap. with
flower it h. inflammations. Organy h. the hicket.

Marvel of Peru. Mirabile Peruvianum.
P. It grows naturally in Peru: in gardens planted. T. It Is sown in the midst
of April. Fl: in September. N. Hachal Indi. Solanum odorif: Jasminum
Mexicanum. Admirabile Peruvianum Clusii.
Marvel of Peru. Ger. K. as with yellow fl: and with white. T. V. Cortus:
drach: 2. of the root taken inwardly purge waterish humors. Recch: K. as that
of Mexico. T. Is sharp, hot, and dry with astriction, and of crasse parts. V.
Therefore it h. the diarrhoea, strengthens the stomach, discusseth and h. cold
griefs.

Masterwort. Imperatoria.
P. In dark woods, and deserts. T. Fl: from May, to August. N. Astrantia.
Ostrutium. Magistrantia Came.
Masterwort. Ger. T. The herb, especially the root, is hot and dry 3. V. d.
with wine it h. against all poison, pestilence, and corrupt air. The roots and
leaves stamped and ap. h. pestilentiall botches, and such like swellings. The
root d. in wine h. rigorous cold fitts of agues, the dropsy, and c. sweat,
also it corroborateth the stomach, h. digestion, restores appetite, and
dissolveth all ventosities. It h. bruises, and dissolveth congealed blood: the
root stamped with the leaves and ap. h. the bitings of all venomous beasts:
also it attenuateth, digesteth, provokes sweat and urine, concocteth cold
humors, and h. the colic and stone. drach: 1. of the powder d. diverse days
together h. the dropsy, convulsions, cramps, and epilepsie. d. in wine before
the fitts, it h. quartan agues, and pestilent diseases. So Vntz. Kunr. Crat:
Kentman: Kegl: Tabern: etc. Boiled in sharp wine and gargled very hot, it h.
the toothache: chewed it is an apophlegmatisme, it h. apoplexies, drowsiness,
and other like infirmities. As for black Masterwort. See Hellebor. Begu. The
salt of masterwort, taken from the quantity of 4. gr. to 8. in the Rob of elder
h. all intermitting fevers. Fum. The herb is sharp and somewhat bitter. Park.
K. as the mountain mast. T. The root is of very subtle parts, and h. all cold
diseases. d. in wine it h. cold rheumes, and short-windednesse. It h. in women's
diseases, and cold poisons. Trag. The root c. lust. Penot. The salt h. the
dropsy, asthma, ptifick, and ulcers.

Mastick. Marum.
P. It Is sown in gardens, and to be kept from cold. T. Fl. about August, and
later in cold summers. N. (...). Helenium odorum Theophr. Clinopodium Diosc:
Dod.
Masticke. Ger. J. K. as the common, Assyrian, and creeping. T. are hot and dry
3. V. Diosc. The herb d. and the decoction h. against the bitings of venomous
beasts, cramps, convulsions, burstings and strangury. The decoction, boiled in
wine till the third part be consumed, and d. stops the laske in those that
have an ague, and in others in water. Lugd. ap. it h. the nomae, and is used in
hot ointments. Ren. It operates as organie: especially Terpsinoe. Park. K. as
that of Candy. T. It Is more temperate in heat than marjoram. V. it h. against
poison, and is odoriferous.

Mastieke-tree. Lentiscus.*
P. It grows in Syria, Candy, and Italy etc. T. Fl. in spring, the berries
are ripe in Autumn, the rosin is gathered with the grape. N. (...). The rosin
is called Mastiche.
Masticke-tree. Ger. T. The leaves, bark and gum are of a temperate heat, dry
2, and somewhat astringent. V. The leaves and bark stop the laske, bloody
flix, haemoptysis or spitting of blood, and bloody urine, and all other fluxes
of blood: it also h. the falling sickness, falling down of the mother, and
exiture of the fundament. The gum mastick has the same virtue being relented
in wine and d. Chewed in the mouth it h. the stomach, stops vomiting,
increases appetite, comfort the brain, stops the defluxion of rheumes and
watery humors, and c. a sweet breath. The same infused in rose water, fastneth
loose teeth, and comforts the jaws. Being spread upon leather or velvet and
ap. plaisterwise to the temples, it stops the rheum from falling to the teeth,
and h. their pains: being put into digestives and healing unguents, it h.
ulcers and wounds. It draws phlegm out of the head. It Is used in waters that
cleanse the face. The decoction fills hollow ulcers with flesh, ap. it
knitteth broken bones, stays eating ulcers, and provokes urine. Park. K. as
the Indian. V. The oil of the berries of the first h. the itch, and leprosy.
The powder of mastick with amber and turpentine h. the gonorrhoea and whites:
and with the conserve of red roses it h. rheumes: so the oil, and h. the
colic.

Mat-weed. Spartum herba.*
P. In Spain and the Low Countries. T. It bears its heads in summer. N. (...)
Theoph. Spartum Latinorum. Juncus Hisp. and Ibericus.
Mat-weed. Ger. J. K. as Plinies, the headed, English, small English, and
heath, with the feather grass. T. are useless in physic, and hurtful to
cattle. They serve to make mats with, and frailes, etc. The feather grass
serves for a feather, and is worn by sundry ladies and gentle women. Park. K.
as the Spanish rush, softer Spanish rush, and small French Mat-w. T.V. are as
useless as the first. The soft serve to stuff beds with. Bauh. The rest serve
to make shoes with, as also ropes etc.

Maudlin. Ageratum.
P. Every where almost in, gardens. T. They bring forth their tufts of yellow
fl. in summer. N. (...). Eupatorium Mes. Costus hortorum min.
Maudlin. Ger. J. K. as the common, that with uncut leaves, and white flowred,
with costmarie. T. are hot and dry 2. V. They are very effectual, (especially
Maudlin) d. and ap. to provoke urine; so the fume, and mollifyeth the obdurate
matrix. The leaves of Maudlin and Adderstongue stamped and boiled in oil olive
adding a little wax, rosin, and turpentine, make an excellent incarnative salve
for a deep ulcer or wound. Costmarie steeped in ale is very good for the
diseases aforesaid; a conserve of the leaves with sugar warmeth and dries the
brain and opens its obstructions: it stops all catarrhes, rheumes, and
distillations taken in the q. os a bean. The leaves boiled in wine and d. h.
the tormina, and bloody flix. It h. those that are troubled with the green
sickness or dropsy in the beginning, and h. a weak and cold liver. The seed
kills worms and expels them, as worme-seed does. Park. K. as the small,
purple sweet, and fennel leased. V. It h. inflammations, it purges choler
and phlegm. It h. putrefaction and obstructions, day agues and the cachexy.

Maiden hair. Adiantum.
P. Upon walls, in stony, shadowy and moist places. T. They are green winter and
summer, without flowers. N. (...). Polytrichum. Callitrichum. Crinita. Capillus
Veneris: and terrae. Cincinnalis.
Maiden-haire. Ger. K. as the true, Assyrian, and rue. T. the true does dry,
attenuate, and wast; and is in a mean between heat and coldness. Mes It Is of
unlike parts, some watery, earthy, and binding, others hot and thin: so when
green it loses the belly, else binds it, and h. fluxes. V. d. it breaks
the stone and expels it. It raises up slimie humors out of the chest and
lungs, by spitting, in a lohoch. It wastes the Kings evil, and other hard
swellings, and c. hair to grow. Wall rue, Ruta muraria, sive salvia vitae is
not much unlike to black maiden hair: it h. the cough, short windednesse, and
stitches or pains in the sides: boiled it concocteth raw humors sticking in
the lungs, h. pain of the kidneys and bladder, gently provokes urine and
expels the stone. It h. ruptures in children, the powder being taken for 40
days: so Matthew. English, or common maiden-haire, Trichomanes mas. T. V. Gal.
has all the faculties belonging to black maiden hair. V. decoct in wine and
d. it helps those that are shortwinded, and the cough, it ripeneth tough
phlegm, and avoideth it by spitting. The lie wherein it has been sodden, or
infused in, is good to wash the head, causing the scurfe and scales to fall
off, and hair to grow in bare places. Brunfels. Vigon. It h. the spleen: the
juice with southernwood, and cresses etc. h. the alopecia. Riol. The syrrup of
it h. diseases of obstruction. Park. K. as the foreign. V. It h. the diseases
of the spleen, and causes a good color. Col. It h. diseases that breed by the
obstruction of the liver or spleen. They h. the bitings of venomous creatures.
The leaves of wall rue m. with a little salt peter, and the urine of a young
child, take away the shriveled wrinklings of women's bellies after their
deliverance, if washed therewith.

May-weed. Cotula.
P. In corn fields, near unto pathwaies etc. T. Fl. in July and August. N.
(...). Parthenium Fuch. and Virginea.
May-weed. Ger. K. as the common, and yellow, with the wild mountain Cammomil.
T. are thought to be hot and dry, and like after a sort to Cammomil, yet not at
all agreeing with man's nature. V. It h. the mother, and c. blisters. Hort. San.
The leaves stamped and ap. h. the hardness of apostumes. d. it c. vomiting.
Avic. The smell h. cold windiness of the head. Col. It Is often used with good
success, for the same purposes that Cammomil is, especially the ordinary
sort, and are both put into clisters. Park. K. As that with a strong, and no
scent. V. It Is used to dissolve wind and tumors, and ease pains and aches in
the joints etc. especially the stinking sort, which is the best.

Mede-sweet. Vlmaria.
P. It grows in the brinkes of ditches and meadows. T. Fl. in June, July,
and August. N. Barba capri, and hirci. Regina prati. Medesusium Cordi.
Mede-sweet. Ger. T. is cold and dry with astriction. V. The root boiled or
powdered and d. h. the bloody flix, and all fluxes of blood: The flowers boiled
in wine and d. h. the fits of a quartan ague, and exhilerate; so the smell, and
delights the senses. The distilled water of the flowers dropped into the eyes
h. the burning and itching thereof, and clears the sight. Park. K. as the
common, and greater. V. They are likely to be of the faculty of Burnet: yet
Trag. they are more hot and dry: it h. the colic, ap. it h. phagedens, and
sore mouths. Came. The seed d. c. the headache.

Medlar-tree. Mespilus.
P. In orchards and hedges, and are better if grafted. T. The fruit is ripe in
the end of October. N. (...). Sicanion.
Medlar tree. Ger. J. K. as the manured, the other garden, the Neapolitan and
dwarf. T. The medlars are cold, dry and astringent; so the leaves: the dwarf
medlar is dry, sharp and astringent. V. They stop the belly, especially when
green. The fruit of the three grained Medlar, is more wholesome for the
stomach. Being preserved with sugar or honey, it is grateful to the taste. They
are good for women with child, strengthening the stomach and stopping the
lothsomnesse thereof. The stones of medlars powdered and d. break the stone,
expel gravel and provoke urine. Senn. They are most fit for bilious stomachs.
Park. they operate as services, but more effectually. The decoction h.
defluxions in the mouth, the courses and piles, and ap. h. the stomach and
wounds.

Melilote. Melilotus.
P. In pastures, and among corn. T. Fl. in July and August. N. (...).
Trifolium odoratum, equinum, ursinum. Corona Regia.
Melilote. Ger. K. as the Assyrian, Italian, Kings, and Germane claver. T. Gal.
is hot and dry 1. and astringent, wasting and ripening, and is also
diaphoretick. V. Boiled in sweet wine until it be soft, adding the yelk of a
roasted egg, the meal of fenugreek and lineseed, the roots of marsh mallows
and hogs grease stamped together, and used as a pultis, it does assuage and
soften all manner of swellings, especially about the matrix, fundament and
genitors. With the juice hereof, oil, wax, rosin, and turpentine is made a
melilote plaster, which is healing and drawing. The herb boiled in wine and
d. provokes urine, breaks the stone and asswageth pains of the kidneys,
bladder, and belly, ripeneth phlegm, and c. it to be easily evacuated. The
juice dropped into the eyes, clears the sight, consumes, disolveth and h.
the web, pearl and spots in the eyes. Melilote with water h. the melicerides,
and the running ulcers of the head ap. with chalk, wine, and galls. It h.
pains of the cares the juice being dropped in m. with wine: and headache ap.
with vinegar and oil of roses. Pem. ap. it h. wens, also inflammations and
pains in the side. Park. The flowers with Cammomil in clysters expel wind.
ap. it h. the apoplexy. The Egyptian h. the mother. The Indian as the first.
The Italian is the best.

Melon. Melo.
P. It grows in hot regions. T. It Is sown in April: the fr. is ripe in
August. N. (...). Melopepon. Musk Millon.
Melon. Ger. K. as the musk, sugar, pearefashioned, and Spanish. T. The meat
of the musk melon is very cold and moist. V. It Is harder of digestion than the
cucumbers: if it remain long in the stomach it putrifyeth and c. pestilent
fevers. The Spaniards and Italians eat them to refresh the rage of lust. The
seed is of like operation with that of cucumbers. Bor. Cent. 4. Obs. 70. The
continual use hereof h. the consumption.

Mercury. Mercurialis.
P. In untilled places, by hedges, in the shadow. T. Fl. in June and July. N.
(...), the second. Pes anserinus. Tota bona. Bonus Henricus.
Mercury. Ger. The English. T. is moderately hor and dry, clensing and
scouring. V. The leaves boiled with other pot-herbes and eaten loosen the body.
Bruised and ap. they scour green wounds and old ulcers, mundifie and heal
them. French Mercury. K. as the male and female. T. Is hot and dry 2. Gal.
Clensing and digesting. V. It Is used in clisters to scour the guts. Taken, it
purges out phlegm, and choler. Diosc. The decoction purges forth watery
humors. The leaves stamped with butter and ap. to the fundament provoke to the
stool: the bruised herb ap. as a pessarie cleanses the mother and h.
conception. Acost. The juice m. with that of hollihocks, and purslaine and
anointed or bathed on the hands, defends them from burning. Wild Mercury. K.
as the dogs, and male childrens, with the female. T. are thought to agree with
the other. John's. V. It Is reported by the Ancients, that the male phyllon c.
generation of boys, and the female of girls. At Salamantica they use their
decoction against the bitings of mad dogs. The Moors at Granado use them in
women's diseases. Dorst. The common is hot and dry 1. Aver. It consists of
contrary substances, etc. stiptick, sharp, and aqueous: being fresh it gently
purges, and is therefore used in the beginning of severs, before digestion.
The leaves ap. h. the strangury, and warts. The seed d. with wormwood h. the
Kings evil. Heurn. The Mercurialate honey purges melancholy. Park. K. as the
wild, called Quick in hand. V. The common Mercury purges choler and water. d.
with myrrh or pepper, it h. the strangury and diseases of the reins, and
bladder: So Hipp. As an errhine it h. catarrhes. Matthew. The seed d. h. the
jaundise. The last is emeticke.

Mezereon-tree. Chamelaea Germanica.
P. In moist and shadowie woods in the East countries. T. Fl. in spring: the
fruit is ripe in Aug. N. (...). It Is thought to be Cneoron Theoph.
Mezereon-tree. Ger. T. is in all parts extreme hot: the fruit, leaves and
rind, are very sharp and biting, inflaming the throat. V. The leaves
vehemently purge phlegm, choler, and waterishhumors: it is very dangerous to
be taken inwardly, inflaming like the sea Tithymale. It may be used in stead of
the spurge olive, and prepared like it. One or 2. berries of it being eaten c.
abstinence from drinking by reason of the heat. Senn. The leaves macerated in
vinegar, or the juice of quinces, are given in powder from gr. 5. to 10. with
mastick and spike. Mac. The antidote is organie. Jo. Terra Le^nia, and milk
with butter. Park. It Is to be given to strong bodies, and not without
correctives.

Milke-wort. Polygala.
P. In woods, and fertile pastures. T. Fl. from May, to August. N. (...). Flos
ambarvalis Dod: and Crucis Gesneri.
Milke-wort. Ger. K. as the creeping, blow, red, white, and purple. T. Gal.
they may serve in stead of Glaux. John's. V. a handful hereof steeped all night
in wine, and d. in the morning, will effectually purge choler. Black milk-wort,
Glaux. T. is dry 2. V. The seed is like that of the lentils, but not so
astringent, it stops fluxes, dries the moisture of the stomach, and engenders
milk. Schwenckf. The sky colored ap. h. inflammations, and lenifieth tumors.
That of Matthew. is astringent. Park. K. as the greater and lesser. T. V. as the
rest. That of the sea. K. as the small and Venetian of Alpinus. T. V. is
galactogenetick. Bauh. The first is hot and moist.

Millet. Milium.
P. In light and loose mould, and moist. T. It Is to be sown in April and May.
N. (...). Paspale Hipp. Meline Varronis.
Millet. Ger. T. Gal. is cold 1. dry 3. and of thin substance. The meal m.
with tarr h. the bitings of all venomous beasts ap. Of this is made Ambrose his
syrup against agues which is diaphoreticke, and quenches thirst, and is thus
made: take unhusked mill q. s. boil it until it be broken, then take unc. 5.
of the decoction, to which add unc. 2. of the best white wine, give it hot to
the patient well covered. Millet parched and put into a linen bag ap. h. the
tormina, or any pain c. by cold. Turkey millet Sorghum. T. is like to panick.
V. The bread thereof is oligotrophick. Weck The common stops the belly, and
provokes urine. Park. Matthew. The stalks of the Indian millet h. kernells under
the ears, being burnt and taken.

Milt-wast. Asplenium.
P. On old stone walls, and rocks: the rough on heaths. T. It continues green
all the year. N. (...). Scolopendria. Ceterach. Mula herba. Lonchitis.
Milt-wast. Ger. J. K. as the common, rough, great rough, and the bastard. T.
Are in a mean and of thin parts. V. Diosc. The leaves boiled in wine and d.
for 40 days, h. the spleen, strangury, yellow jaundise, and stone, h. the
hicket, and hinder conception. Bor. Cent. 2. Obs. 53. a ptisan hereof h. the
dropsy. Lonic. T. It Is hot 1, and dry 2. V. decoct in wine it h. the Kings
evil, and the quartan ague. It purges melancholy and dissolveth clotted
blood. The distilled water thereof comforts the heart. Aeg. it lessens the
reins. Col. it is hot and dry 1. Park. K. as the small. V. the rough h. wounds,
and inflammations. Matthew. drach. 1. of the dust of the leaves m. with drach.
sem. of amber powdered and taken with the juice of purslain h. the gonorrhoea.
d. it h. melancholy and the French disease.

Mints. Mentha.
P. In gardens, almost every where. T. They flower and flourish in summer. N.
(...). Yerva buena Hisp.
Mints, Ger. J. K. as the red garden, curled, spear, heart, and balsam mint.
T. Is hot and dry 3. somewhat bitter and harsh, and is inferior to calamint:
it exhilerates the mind, and provokes appetite. V. It Is very wholesome for the
stomach, and staieth the hicket, vomiting, and the chollerick passion, taken
with the juice of a sour pomegranate. Gal. With water and vinegar it h. the
vomiting of blood. Plin. In broth it stays the flowers and whites, sc. the
first. ap. to the temples it h. the headache. It h. watering eyes, breakings
out of the head, and infirmities of the fundament. With meade it h. the ears.
Taken inwardly it defends from serpents. ap. with salt it h: the bitings of mad
dogs. It keeps milk from curdling d. and hinders generation, by
condensating the sperme. Diosc. ap. it hinders conception. Garden Mint d.
does calefie the stomach, expel superfluous humors, and c. digestion. Water
Mint, or horsemint. K. as the common, water calamint, horse, party colored,
small, mountain and turnep rooted horsemint. T. is hot and dry, as that of the
garden, and is of a stronger smell and operation. V. ap. it h. the stinging of
waspes etc. The smell exhilerates, yet it is not used in physic where the
other is to be had. Park. It Is used in baths, with baulme etc. to strengthen
the sinews. Bor. Cent. 1. Obs. 29. Horsemint ap. to the womb h. sterility.
Riol. The syrrup of mints h. diseases of phlegm. Park. K. as the white etc. V.
The wild h. windiness, and ap. h. the Kings evil.

Mirobalan-tree. Myrobalanus.*
P. In the East Indies: wild, in Goa etc. T. The time is the same with that of
other fruits there. N. The first are called Arare: The black Rezenvale: The
third Gotini. The fourth Amuale. The fifth Aretea.
Mirobalan-tree. Ger. K. as the yellow, Indicae, Bellericae, Emblicae, and
Chebulae. T. Are astringent and sharp like service berries; so cold and dry. V.
The Indians use them rather to bind than purge; or if so, it is only the
decoction with sugar, especially the Chebulae. The yellow and Bellericae taken
before meat stop the laske, and h. the weak stomach. The yellow and black, or
Indicae and Chebulae purge lightly, unc. 2. or 3. being taken, and draw
superfluous humors from the head. The yellow purge choler: Chebulae, phlegm;
Indicae, melancholy, and corroborate the intestines: roasted in the embers they
dry more than they purge. The best Chebulae are somewhat long like a limmon,
with a hard rind, and black pith: and the Bellericae, which are round, lesser
and tenderer. Lebel. The Emblicae meanly cool, some dry 1. They purge rotten
phlegm out of the stomach, comfort the brain, sinews, heart and liver, c.
appetite, stay vomit, cool choler, h. the understanding, quench thirst, and h.
the heat of the intrals: the greatest and heaviest are the best. They purge
best being soked in water, boiled soft, and preserved in honey. The distilled
water h. the French disease, etc. The Bellericae are mild, cold 1. dry 2. and
corroborate. The rest come near the Emblicae in operation. De Dond. They
strengthen the body. Park. The Bellericks, Emblicks, and Citrines h. the piles,
fluxes and ulcers.

Misseltoe. Viscum.
P. The first grows upon oaks: the other not here. T. It is always green,
the berries are ripe in Autumn. N. (...) Renealmi. Ixia. Viscus. Hale Arabum.
Misseltoe. Ger. K. as the common, Indian, and that of Peru. T. the leaves and
berries are hot and dry, and of subtle parts: the birdlime is hot and biting,
and waterish with some quarthly quality. Gal its acrimony overcomes its
bitterness. V. ap. it draws from the deepest parts of the body, dispersing
and digesting the humors. It ripeneth swellings in the groin, and scirrhous
swellings behind the cares etc. m. with rosin and a little wax with
srankincense, it mollifyeth old ulcers and malicious impostumes. Boiled with
unslaked lime it h. hard spleens. With orpiment it removes ill favored nails,
and more effectually unslaked lime and wine lees being added. The berries
strained into oil and d. h. stitches. Ren. It Is hot and dry 3. It purges
viscid humors, h. spasms, and is hydrotick and antepileptick. Jo. The antidote
is wormwood wine. Park. It h. the palsy d. Trag. it h. the ears.

Mock-privet. Phillyrea.
P. In Syria, France, and other places. T. Fl. in May and June, the fruit is
ripe in Sept. N. (...). Cyprus. Alcanna Arabum.
Mock-privet. Ger. J. K. as the narrow leafed, broader leased, the second
toothed of Clus. and the first. T. The leaves are binding. V. Chewed in the
mouth they h. the ulcers thereof, as also inflammations and heat. The decoction
h. burnings and scaldings. Stamped and steeped in the juice of mullein and ap.
they make the hair red. Bellon. So the skin also, and is therefore used among
the Turks. The fl. moistened in vinegar and ap. h. the headache. The oil
hereof is sweet, and does heat and supple the sinews. Park. K. as the
prickely. V. The leaves operate as those of the wild olive: and d. provoke
urine, and the courses.

Moluccas-tree. Panava.*
P. In orchards, in the Islands of the Moluccas. T. As of other trees. N. Lignum
Molucense. By the Indians Panava.
Moluccas-tree. Park. Lignum Molucen e. T. The wood is alexipharmicke. V. 10.
gr. of the powder of the wood taken in broth or water are a remedy against
virulent serpents, even the Viper Regulus, and the Aspis etc. Scr 1. of the
wood filed with the sea dogs skin taken h. those that are wounded with poisoned
arrows: so ap. Being taken in the morning fasting it evacuateth all melancholy
humors, and h. quotidian and quartan agues, iliack and colic passions, of
wind or humors, the dropsy, stone, dysury, choleric passion, schirrous and
scrophulous griefs in the joints. It kills worms of all sorts, and h. the
appetite. If it work too strongly it is h. by taking half a small cupfull of
the decoction of rice. It works without troubling the stomach, or hindering
business, it h. also old griefs of the head as the megrim, epilepsie, and
apoplexy: those of the belly, and womb, as also the shortness of breath, noise
in the ears and gout. It may be given in all seasons to all ages, and
differing dispositions without danger. Those that are chollerick may take it in
the syrrup of vinegar, or conserve of roses. The seed hereof is used to catch
birds being cast to them with rice, which being devoured does inebriate them
for a time: and if taken too greedily kills them, if they be not h. by cold
water put on their heads. Bauh. It Is to be taken early in the morning after
which there must be abstinence from meat and drink, until it has purged
sufficiently, then take broth etc.

Moly. Moly.
P. In gardens when planted there. T. It springs in Feb. and has fl. fruit and
seed in Aug. N. (...). Molyza. Mile Galeni.
Moly. Ger. J. K. as that of Diosc. the serpent's, and Homer's, the Indian,
withering, broad leafed with yellow fl. and dwarf white fl. T. are very hot,
coming near to garlic. Diosc. They mightily bring down the terms, one of
them being stamped with oil of Flowerde-luce and used as a pessary. The other
molyes. K. as the first narcisse-leafed, 2d, and 3d, the first broad leafed
mountain, second, third, fourth and fifth mountain Moly of Clusius. T. V. are
not as yet made use of. Park. K. as the bulbed of Hungary, purplish of Naples,
the three cornered, the Spanish of Diosc. late pine apple, and sweet smelling
of Mompelier. V. Are not so good as garlic, yet hotter than onions or leeks.

Mony-flower. Bulbonach.
P. It grows in woods and gardens. T. Fl: in April, the next year after
sown. N. Lunaria. Viola lunaris and latifolia Dod.
Mony-flower. Ger. K. as the white, and long codded, white satin flower. T.
The seed is hot and dry, of a sharp taste, like treacle mustard. The roots are
not so biting, and may be eaten in sallads. V. The leaves stamped with sanicle,
adding oil and wax, make a singular unguent for green wounds. The seeds h. the
falling sickness. Lugd. Lob. The seed is abstersive, moderately hot, and
provokes urine.

Moone-wort. Lunaria minor.
P. In dry barren mountains, and heaths. T. It is to be found in May and
April. T. Lunaria petraea. Taura Gesn: Ruta lunaria Tab: Small Lunarie.
Moone-wort. Ger: J: K. as the small, and small branched. T. Is cold and dry.
V. It h. green wounds, and stays the bloody flix. Park: The blew is
vulnerary, and h. the dropsy. Croll: It h. all cancers of the breasts.
Schwenchf. That of Clus: is cold, dry, and astringent. d. it h. fractures and
dysenteries, and the whites: ap. it h. the enterocele in children. Park: The 1
is more cold and dry than adders tongue, and more availeable for all wounds. d.
in red wine it h. the courses and whites, vomitings, and bleeding: as also all
fractures, dislocations, and ruptures: but it is chiefly used with balsamic
herbs.

Moss. etc. Muscus. etc.
P. On trees, on the ground every where. T. The first continue all the year:
the rest flourish in the summer. N. (...). Vsnea. Phacos. Sphagnum.
Moss. Ger: J: K. as tree moss. T. Moss is somewhat cold and binding, more
or less according to the bark of the tree on which it grows, receiving the
property thereof: so that which grows on the oak, does cool and very much
bind. That which grows on the rosin trees, is binding, digesting, and
softning. Serap: The wine in which moss has been steeped certain days, d. c.
sleep, strengthens the stomach, and stopps vomiting, and the flux. Diosc:
The decoction used as a bath, stops the whites: it is m. with oiles to thicken
them. It Is useful in perfumes, and compositions, against lassitude. The best
is that of the Cedar tree, the next of the poplar, in which kind the white and
sweet is the chiefest, which in Italy is that of the larch-tree. Ground-mosse.
K. as the common, beasome, goldilocks, flowring branched, chalice, fern,
horned, toothed greater, and little, woolfes claw, heath cypress, small heath,
and that which grows upon a man's skull. T. The mosses of the earth are dry,
and astringent, without any heat or cold: Woolfs claw, or club moss, is
temperate in heat and cold V. The Arabian physicians use moss in their
cardiack medicines. It corroborates the stomach, and stops vomit and laskes.
Boiled in wine and d. it stops the haemoptysis, the terms and bloody flix,
and h. bloody urine. The powder of moss stops bleeding in green wounds, and
cures the same. Woolfes claw is diuretic, Trag. and lithontriptick. Stamped
boiled in wine and ap. it h. the arthritick pain. Floting wine is restored to
its former goodness, by this hung in the vessel. The powder of chalice moss
d. for certain days, h. the chin-cough: so also Skull moss, and is a
singular remedy against the epilepsie. Sea moss or coralline. K. as the white,
English, the smallest, mountain, sennell, sea, and bulbous sea fennel,
branched, and broad leafed sea moss, with Clusius his sea fur. T. Coralline.
Gal. is of an earthy and waterish essence, so binds and cools: it has also
a certain saltness whereby it mightily dries. V. Diosc. It h. the gout which
has need of cooling. Drach. 1. taken kills worms. The best is that which
cleaves to the coral, and is of a reddish color. Coral. K. as the red,
black, white, bastard whitish, yellow, and reddish bastard. T. It Is binding,
and meanly cold, it cleanses spots in the eyes, h. the issues of blood, and is
diuretic. V. d. in wine or water it h. the spleen, and those that are
epileptick: it dries and stops all fluxes. Being burned it becomes more
dry. d. it h. the tormina, and pains of the stone. d. in wine it c. sleep if
without an ague; else it is to be taken in water, the water moistning and that
cooling the body; so the heat is restrained, and the vapors repressed that
hinder sleep. Sponge. K. as the white, funnell fashioned, and the branched.
Park. K. as the Venetian sea hollow, and coral like. V. They serve for
fomentations or bathings: put into wounds they keep them open. The ashes mixed
with vinegar clear the eyes when blood shotten: the stones in them serve
against the stone. The Venetian spungy plant decoctin mead cleanses the face.
Boiled in vinegar and taken, it h. those that have eaten dangerous mushroomes.
The powder d. in wine purges like Cremor tartari, and cutteth viscous humors.
Tree mosses. K. as the common, fennel like, hollow headed, knotted, and
horned. V. d. they h. the dropsy, and steeped in oil of roses and ap. h. the
head ach c. of heat: also distillations and hot rheumes. Land moss. V. d. it
h. the stone, sc: the beasome and club moss: boiled and ap: it h.
inflammations and pains c. of heat. Mountain coralline, and the rocky
corall-like. T. V. are useless. Sea moss. K. as the soft, that of Naples,
that dying red, southernwood-like, the long close of Venice, the silver like
and golden sea feather. V. that of Naples h. watering red eyes, the powder
being put into them with fennel water: it also stops vomiting d. with
vinegar, and corroborateth the stomach, the decoction thereof in wine being
injected with a syringe into the bladder h. ulcers thereof. That of Venice h.
all ulcers d. and ap. as also the stone. Sea wrack. K. as the common, great sea
girdles with many labels, sea thongs, oystergreen, sea curled endive, sea oak,
and sea garland. T. Diosc. Gal. They cool and dry, and h. the gout and
inflammations. The red fucus h. against the venom of serpents. The first
serves as litter for horses. Sea thongs h. the longings of women with child,
and are used to kill worms. The winged and great sea girdle, with the sea
garland, are eaten in sallads. The first is good manure for barren ground.
Coralline. K. as the reddish and scaly. V. is thought to be useful against the
stone, fluxes, cramps, the epilepsie, and melancholy. The shrub Corallines. K.
as the heath-like woody, white, and red crusted, Sclavonian sea feather, the
red sea fan, and those of Italy. V. The Sclavonian h. the bitings of venomous
beasts, heales wounds and kills worms. The other sea plants. K. as the
cypress, base wild rocket, stony sea horse-taile, stony lavender cotton, the
sea willow and sea navell. V. Lobel. The last is thought to be diuretic and
digestive, stopping fluxes, and easing pains of the gout etc. Coral. V. d. it
h. the pain of the stone. It h. melancholy, and the syncope. It facilitates
the birth, it fasteneth loose teeth, and h. sores of the mouth, and hollow
ulcers. Burnt and the ashes ap. in collyries it h. the watering, heat and
redness of the eyes. It h. ptisicks, running sores, and cleanses impostumes.
Amber. T. is moderately hot and dry. V. The fume h. moist distillations of the
head to the eyes, etc. and h. the epilepsie, and strangulation of the mother,
and provokes the courses. unc. sem. of the powder taken in the morning in a
rear egg h. abortion. It stops fluxes. d. in wine it is diureticall. The
powder taken in the conserve of roses h. the cough, consumption, and gout, the
oil d. the q. of three drops in muskadine h. the stone etc. ap. it h. all
cephalicall diseases: so amber grise, it is hot and dry 2.

Motherwort. Cardiaca.
P. In stony, barren, and rough places. T. It flourishes, flowreth and seedeth
from June to September. N. (...). Marrubium mas Brunf. Licopsis Anguil.
Motherwort. Ger. T. is hot and dry 2. clensing and binding. V. It h. the
infirmities of the heart: also convulsions, cramps, and palsies: so Caesalp. It
opens the obstructions of the in tralls, and kills all kinds of worms in the
belly. The powder d. in wine provokes urine, and the courses, and h. in
travel with child: also it is traumatick. It is used also for the cough, and
murren in Cattle etc. Myl. yet the smell thereof does not show it to be
cardiack. Park. It h. the risings of the mother. And cleanses the chest of cold
phlegm: also it warmes and dryes cold humors.

Mouse-eare. Pilosella.
P. On sandy banks, in open untilled places. T. Fl. in May, June and July: and
are green all the winter. N. (...). Auricula Muris. Myosotis.
Mouse-eare. Ger. K. as the great, and creeping. T. are hot and dry, and
astringent with a certain hot tenuity. V. The decoction d. h. all wounds
inward and outward, hernies, or ruptures. The powder ap. dries and h. wounds:
so Feruel. The juice c. steel that is often quenched in it to be so hard that
it will cut iron or stone, without waxing dull. Used as a gargarisme it h. the
looseness of the uvula. d. it h. the fluxes of the womb. Avic. As a
sternutatory it cleanses the brain, and h. the epilepsie, dysentery, and
enterocele; it gleweth wounds, stays the swelling of the spleen, and bloody
excrements thereby. The syrup of its juice h. coughs, the consumption and
ptisick. Fuch. The juice h. the shiverings of agues: Came. Matthew. The milky
juice thereof is bitter, extenuating and abstersive: the herb glutinates,
cooles and dryes. It h. vomiting and the haemoptysis. Park. K. as the Assyrian,
blew etc. V. d. they h. the jaundise, tormina and dropsy.

Mug-wort. Artemisia.
P. The first grows in the borders of fields etc. T. It flowreth in July and
August. N. (...). Parthenion. Matter herbarum. Zona Divi Johannis.
Mugwort. Ger. K. as the common, and that of the sea. T. It is hot and dry 2,
and somewhat astringent. Plin. It properly cures women's diseases. Dios. It
brings down the birth and after birth; it h. the mother, and pain of the
matrix used in a bath, and as a pessary with myrrh; so also the tender tops
being boiled and d. and ap. as a pultis provoke the terms. The herb pounded
with oil of sweet almonds and ap. to the stomach h. all griefs of the same. It
also cures the shakings of the joints inclining to the palsy, and h.
convulsions. Parac. The salt thereof h. the itch. Mac. The herb tempereth
phlegm. Scholtz. Cons. 236. The root used in meat h. the gout. Barth. Ang. The
decoction h. the headache. Park. K. as the small, fruitful and fine mountain.
V. ap. h. nodes, and d. h. against opium.

Mulberry-tree. Morus.
P. In hot regions, as in Italy etc. T. Fl. in May: the berries are ripe in
August. N. (...). Morus Celsa.
Mulberry-tree. Ger. K. as the common, and white. T. the fruits before ripe
are cold and dry fere 3. and do mightily bind. V. Being dried they h. lasks
and the bloody flix, bleeding and the reds: They h. all inflammations and hot
swellings, in the mouth etc. The ripe berries also are cold and full of juice,
somewhat drying and binding; therefore good against the hot swellings of the
mouth, and those parts; so also the diamoron. The berries taken before meat
open the belly, quench thirst and c. appetite. They nourish little being taken
in the second place, or after meat. The bark of the root is bitter, hot and
dry, and of a scouring faculty, the decoction opens the liver and spleen,
purges the belly and drives forth worms: steeped in vinegar it h. the
toothache; so the decoction of the leaves and bark, and juice of the root: it
also h. the phyma, and purges the body. Gal. The first buds have a middle
faculty, both to bind and scour. Park. So the Virginian. Croll. The juice of
the fruit in gargarismes h. the quinsie. Senn. They are not fit for stomachs
replete with vicious humors. Park. The syrrup h. the uvula, the juice of the
leaves h. against the phalangium, and aconite: and with vinegar h. burnings and
bleeding: and depilates with urine.

Mullein. Verbascum.
P. In the borders of fields and untilled places. T. Fl. from July to
September. N. (...). Tapsus barbatus. Candela regia. Lanaria.
Mullein. Ger. K. as the common and white flowred. T. is dry, digesting and
clensing. V. The leaves boiled in water and ap. h. hard swellings, and
inflammations of the eyes, and pains thereof. The root boiled in red wine and
d. stops laskes and the bloody flix. Boiled in water and d. they h. ruptures
and old coughs. The lease ap. with treacle h. the piles and haemorrhoides; so
also the ointment made of the leaves with axungia: the leaves worn under the
feet provoke the terms. The leaf ap. with the fume of frankincense and
mastick, h. the piles and diseases of the lower parts, being used twice every
day; so also the flowers set in oil in warm dung till consumed. Plin. The
leaves preserve from putrefaction. Base Mullein. K. as the white, black,
candle-wicke, and small candle-wick. T. are dry without any manifest heat, yet
hotter and dryer than the first. V. the black with his fl. boiled in wine and
d. h. the diseases of the breast and lungs and spitting of corrupt matter. The
leaves boiled in water, stamped and ap. as apultis, h. oedemata and ulcers, and
inflammations of the eyes. The flowers put into lie make the hair yellow. The
leaves in cold ointments h. scaldings and burnings. Moth mullein. K. as
Plinie's, the purple, green, that with the greenish purple colored flower,
white flowred, that with the great flower, and the yellow. T. V. John's. The
decoction of the first opens the bowels and meseraick veins. The plan: causes
flies to resort to it. That of Ethiopia is dry without any manifest heat. V. It
h. the plurisie or rotten matter in the breast, asperity of the throat and
sciatica, the decoction being d. The root being decoct with honey h. the
diseases of the breast, and lungs; so also the roots condited with sugar. The
leaves of the common mullein are by the husbandmen of Kent given to their
cattle, against the cough. Woody Mullein. K. as the French, and lesser French
sage, with the Syrian sage leafed mullein. T. are dry and operate as sage. V.
Diosc. The leaves stamped and ap. as a pultis h. burnings and scaldings. Bor.
Cent. 1. Obs. 27. The leaves of mullein bruised and ap. h the stingings of
serpents. Park. K. as the black and jagged. V. d. It h. the cramp with sage,
marjerome and cammomile fl. ap. The distilled water of the flowers h. hot
gouts, the powder h. the colic.

Mustard. Sinapi.
P. It grows wild in most places. T. It may be sown in the spring: it is ripe
in July. N. (...). Aristoph. Thlaspi Plinii. Saurion.
Mustard. Ger J. K. as the garden, field, white, and small wild. T. Gal. The
seed is hot and dry 40. it does attenuate and attract. V. the seed pounded with
vinegar is a good sauce with gross meats, peptick, corroborating the stomach,
and provoking appetite. It h. those that are short winded and stuffed in the
breast with tough phlegm from the brain. Chewed in the mouth it h. the
toothach. A gargarisme made with the seed, honey and vinegar h. the swellings of
the uvula, and almonds of the throat. d. with water and honey it provokes the
terms and urine. The seed used as an errhine is ptarmick and h. women sick of
the mother. Ap. with figgs, it h. the epilepsie, and lethargy, also the
sciatica, and all pains of a cold cause. It is mixed with drawing plasters,
and consumes nodes. It h. those that have lost their hair, and takes away
spots c. by bruises. The seed of the white mustard is used in antidotes, as in
the Electuary de ovo etc. Treacle mustard. K. as the common, mithridate,
knaves, Bowyers, Grecians, clownes, buckler, and small buckler. T. The seeds
are hot and dry fine tertii. V. The seed eaten purges choler, provokes the
terms and breaks the inward apostumes. In clysters it h. the sciatica, and
operates as the other mustard feed. H. too much taken it c. a hypercatharsis,
and is hurtful to women great with child. Candy mustard. K. as the common, and
small white flowred. T. The seed is hot and dry fine 2di. Treacle mustard. K.
as the round leafed, Hungary, churles, peasants of Narbone, yellow, white,
Clusius his small, and small rock. T. Is hot and dry fine 2di. sc. the seed. V.
the seeds are sharp and biting, break inward impostumes, bring down the
flowers, kill the foetus, and h. the sciatica. They purge choler upward and
downward unc. 2. sem. being taken. They are m. in counterpoysons, as treacle,
mithridate etc. Woody mustard. K. as the hoary, small, thorny, bushy, and Ivy.
T. V. They may be referred to the kinds of thlaspies. Toures mustard. K. as
the common, great, gold of pleasure, and treacle wormseed. T. are hot and dry
3. V. Diosc. The oilie fatness of the seed of the third levigates the skin.
Ruel. The juice h ulcers of the mouth. The seed of the last stamped and d.
kills and expels worms. Park. The common is antepileptick. Pem. It h. the
malignity of mushromes, and venime, agues, palsy, epilepsie, and c. lust and
concoction: ap. it h. cold tumors. Park. The distilled water is cosmeticall.
The Arabian h. phlegm. The rest, as treacle Mustard.

Myrtle-tree. Myrtus.
P. It grows naturally in Italy in fertile places. T. Fl. with the rose, the
fruit is ripe in Autumn. N. (...): The berries, Myrtilli offic.
Myrtle-tree. Ger. J. K. as the common, great Spanish, strange, white berried,
little and wild Spanish. T. it consists of contrary substances, having a
certain subtle heat with a predominant earthinesse; so dries much. The
leaves, fruit, buds and juice do bind both d. and ap. V. they stop the
haemoptysis, and all other issues of blood. The bath hereof h. the reds, and
whites. The fomentation stops the haemorrhoides: they h. laskes, and the bloody
flix. ap. with barley meal, they quench the fiery heat of the eyes. ap. they
h. all inflammations in the beginning, and pains by strokes or strains. They
are wholesome for watery stomachs. The fruit and leaves dried provoke urine.
The decoction bathed h. luxations, ruptures, and the outward parts exulcerated:
it h. tetters, scoureth dandriffe, and the sores of the head, it makes the
hairs black, and hinders their falling. d. fasting it prevents drunkenness,
and h. the poison of any venomous beast; so the dried juice of the leaves.
Lonic. T. the berries are cold and earthy. V. the syrrup thereof h. old coughs,
the exulceration of the lungs and strengthens the stomach. Lugd. d. in wine it
h. the biting of the scorpion: the decoction of the leaves h. purulent ears
being instilled. The leaves stamped and ap. with water h. parts that are
troubled with fluxions. The powder of the dried leaves sprinkled on the body,
restrains sweat, and h. the falling down of the matrix, and diseases of the
fundament. The oil that is made of the berries by expression is drying and
astringent. Mac. The berries color the hair black. Riol. The oil anointed h.
diseases of the rarity of the skin, as immoderate sweating, with the powder of
dried roses. Weck. Wild Myrtle h. the strangury, head ach, and Kings evil.
Col. The fr. h. the trembling of the heart, and stinging of serpents. d. it h.
a stinking breath; and ulcers, with wine. Aquapend. The oil is anodyne, and h.
luxations. Park. K. as the greatest open laurel, strange broad leased close,
and double fl. V. ap. it h. S. Anthonies fire and d. prevents the danger of
mushroomes. The excrescence is strongest and operates as Acacia.

N
Navell-wort. Vmbilicus Veneris.
P. The first grows on stone walls: the 2d, 3d, and 4th on the Alps. T. They
flourish in winter, and fl. in the beginning of Spring. N. (...). Acetabulum.
Herba coxendicum.
NAvell-wort. Ger. J. K. as the small, first and second, and the Italian
bastard, with the wall, jagged, and water pennywort. T. is moist, and somewhat
cold and binding. V. It cools and repelleth, scoureth and consumes. Water
penny-wort is hot and ulcerating, like crowfoot. The bastard Italian partakes
with the true in cold and moisture. V. The juice of wall penny wort h. all
inflammations, and hot tumors, as the erysipelas or S. Anthonies fire: it h.
kibed heels, being bathed therewith, and the leaves ap. The leaves and root
eaten break the stone, provoke urine, and h. the dropsy. The water penny-wort
is dangerous and noisome unto sheep and other cattle that feed thereon. That
of the sea. K. as the common, and one summers navell-wort. T. is diuretic, not
much hot, but exceeding dry. V. It provokes urine and digesteth the sliminesse
in the joints. Diosc. drach. 2. d. in wine expel much urine out of their
bodies that have the dropsy, and ap. h. the gout. Park. K. as the spotted and
small red flowred. T. V. are cold and moist like house-leek. That of the wall
h. hot stomachs and livers. The distilled water h. sore kidneys, pains of the
bowels, piles, gout, sciatica and Kings evil. The least are strongest: that of
Matthew. is hot, dry 2, and clensing.

Navew. Bunias.
P. In a loose, and yellow mould and fruitful. T. They are sown, fl. and seed
with the turnep. N. (...). Napus sylvestris, and agrestis, the wild.
Navew. Ger. K. as the gentle and wild. T. It Is of the temperature and nature
of the turnep; yet it is a little dryer, not so soon concocted, nor digested:
neither is it so flatulent. V. John's. The seeds taken in drink or broth, h.
against poison, and are used in antidotes. Lonic. T. it is hot 2 and moist 1.
Caesalp. It Is better than the turnep, sweeter, sooner digested, better agreeing
with the stomach and more nutrient: so Diphilus. Park. The wild is hotter and
dryer (especially the seed) than the tame. It provokes urine and the courses,
h. crudities of the stomach, and tormina: the seed h. against infection.

Nettle etc. Vrtica etc.
P. In untilled places, near hedges etc. T. It flourishes in summer: the seed
is ripe in July. N. (...). Nettle-tree is called Lotus Arbor.
Nettle. Ger. K. as the Roman, common stinging, and small. T. is dry, and a
little hot, and of subtle parts. V. being eaten boiled with perewinckles it
looseneth the body and cleanses it, it provokes urine and expels the stone:
so Vntz. Wirsung. Fernel. Plin. Apollin. Being boiled with barley cream it
brings tough humors out of the chest. The juice used as an errhine stops
the bleeding at the nose, and h. the inflammation of the uvula. The seed of
nettle c. lust, d. with cute, it being windy. It concocteth and draws raw
humors out of the chest, it h. the orthopnoea, pleurisy and inflammation of
the lungs and chin cough, taken in a lohoch. It h. against hemlock, mushromes,
and quicksilver. Apollod. It Is an antidote for henbane, serpents and
scorpions. Plin. The oil of it h. the stinging that the nettle made. Being
grossly powdered and d. in wine it is a singular remedy against the stone, it
expels gravel and urine. The leaves or seeds of any nettle work the like
effect, but not so speedily as the Roman nettle. Nettle-tree. T. Is drying, and
of thin parts V. The decoction of the wood beaten small, d. or used
clyster-wise, h. the bloody flix, whites, and reds; it stops the laske, makes
the hair yellow, and preserves it from falling. Park: The fruit does cool
and bind the body. Brunfels: Serap: The oil of the 1 is laxative, eaten with
the yelkes of eggs it c. venery, and purges phlegm. Aemil: Mac: The roots h.
the joints. Parac: The juice with salt h. running ulcers of the feet. De Dond:
It h. the hurt of quicksilver, so Plin: Came: The seed and leaves are
digesting. Grul: The root h. the toothache. Park: K. as the greater, middle,
and lesser wild nettle. T. Are hot and dry 2. V. An electuary of the juice
with honey h. the plurisie. It h. the diseases of the mother, and kills worms:
it h. wind, and c. venery; the water h. the skin, gout, and gangreens.

Nightshade. Solanum.
P. Near high ways, the borders of fields, etc. T. Fl: in summer, sometimes
till Autumn. N. (...). Solatrum. Morella. Vva lupina Cucubalus.
Nightshade. Ger. K. as the garden, and sleepie. T. Is cold 2, and binding.
Diosc: It h. S. Anthonies fire, the shingles, pain of the head, heart burning,
or heat of the stomach, and other distempers c. by sharp and biting humors:
yet it is to be used with caution, least the humors be repelled to the inward
parts. The juice of the green leaves of garden nightshade m. with barley meal
ap: h. S. Anthonies fire, and all hot inflammations; so also with oil of
roses, ceruse, and litharge of gold ap. The leaves are good to be put into the
ointment of poplar buds. John's. drach. 1. of the bark of the root of sleepie
nightshade taken is somniferous; yet milder than opium: the fruit is
diuretic. Deadly nightshade. T. Is cold 4. V. It c. sleep, troubles the
mind, and c. madness. Many of the berries taken bring present death: it is to
be used as petty morell: the antidote is meade. The leaves ap. with vinegar c.
sleep, and h. the headache of a hot cause. Inchanters nightshade. T. V.
Doubtless it has the virtue of garden nightshade, and may be its substitute.
Tree nightshade. T. V. It is not yet used, yet by some referred to the Ginny
pepper. Park: Tree night-sh. is held to be cooling. Recch: Nightshade of
Mexico. T. Is cold and dry. V. ap. it h. S. Anthonies fire: and h. heat and
fluxes. The root of the pale is bitter, discutient, and diuretic. Park: The 1
ap: h. frenzies, stopps the courses, and h. the gout. The Virginian is
cathartick.

Nutmeg-tree. Nux Moschata.*
P. In the Indies, in Banda, Molucca, etc. T. The fruit is gathered in
September. N. (...). Nux Muscata, and Myristica: and Aromatites.
Nutmeg. Ger. K. as the male and female, or round nutmeg. T. Is hot and dry 2,
and somewhat astringent. V. Chewed in the mouth it causes a sweet breath. It
h. freckles in the face, quickneth the sight, strengthens the belly, and
feeble liver. It h. swellings in the spleen, stopps laskes, breaks wind,
and h. all cold diseases. Bruised and boiled in aqua vitae to the consumption
of the moisture, adding honey of roses, boiling the nutmegs gently, and
straining them to the form of a syrup, they h. all pains c. of wind and
cold, taking 3 spoonefulls fasting for several days together: the same
bruised and boiled in strong white wine to the fourth part, with the roots of
mother-wort strained, and d. with sugar, h. all gripings in the belly c. by
windiness. The best are the heaviest, fattest, and the fullest of liquor,
which is known by pricking them. Sala, the 1 distilled oil h. cardiack
passions, and the colic: it is hystericall and cephalic, abstersive and
diuretic. The 2d h. fluxes, the tormina and wind c. by cold. Paracels: The
distilled oil h. ulcers. Ern: It operates as that of cloves. Park: They h.
colds of the head: it c. lust and fat: so the mace.

Nut-trees. Nuces variae.*
P. In India, Arabia, and other places. T. Fl: in May, the fruit is ripe in
September. N. (...). The 1 Pistacia. The 2d Nux Indica. The 3d Vomica.
Nuts. Ger. K. as the fisticke nut. T. The kernells are hot and moist, and may
be eaten as those of the Pine-apples, they are not so easily concocted, but
much more easily than common nutts, the juice is good, but somewhat thick,
they are polytrophicke, and analepticke. V. They are good for those that have
the phthisicke. They concoct, ripen, and cleanse forth raw humors that cleave
unto the chest. They open the stoppings of the liver, h. the infirmities of the
kidneys, expel gravel, ease pain, and h. ulcers. The kernells condited and
eaten, c. lust, open the lungs, h. the shortness of breath, and taken in wine
are an excellent prophylactick remedy. The Indian nut, Cocus. T. Is in a mean
between hot and cold. V. The branches being cut in the evening send forth
water, which is pleasant to drink, from which is drawn a strong a qua vitae,
helping against all manner of sicknesses. The milk in the kernells cools and
refreshes the spirits. The kernel serves for meat, out of which is pressed an
oil good for meat and medicine, wherewith the Indians anoint their feeble
limbs, it helping lassitude, pains, and other infirmities. Of the branches
they make their houses, of the trunk their ships; of the hemp on the outside
their cables: and of the finer stuff, sails for their ships. Likewise of the
shell they make cupps to drink in. The vomiting and purging nutts. T. Are
poisonous, cold 4, and narcotick, or causing deadly sleep. V. The vomiting nut
is not to be given inwardly, but in other compositions. The powder given with
flesh unto fowls, does presently stupisy them, if not kill them. Park.
Horse-chesnut. V. Stopps all manner of fluxes and spitting of blood, being
eaten roasted. In Turkey they are given to horses in their provender to h. the
cough, and brokenwindednesse. Borell: Cent: 1. Obs: 50. An unguent made of the
oil of nuts, with the yelks of eggs p. aeq: m. h. burnings ap. twice a day.
Recch: The pulpe of the nut cocus, h. against poison: and being infused in
water in cups made of the shells thereof and d. it h. the colic, palsy,
epilepsie, and other diseases of the nerves; yet by some it is thought little
effectual. Park: V. Fistick nuts h. against the stingings, and bitings of
serpents, and other venomous creatures. The discolored small Indian nut
Faufel. V. h. in all hot diseases, it h. the toothache, and fasteneth loose
teeth. The Indians use it to stupifie. Gare: The distilled water h. all hot
fluxes of the belly. The white nuts curcus, habacoulcoul Serap: c. sperme and
the colic. Bezoar nut Lobus echinatus. T. V. causes vomiting. Ginny nuts. T.
V. serve to make bread with. The liquor of the leaves serves for drink.

O.
Oak. Quercus.
P. It grows in a dry and barren ground. T. It casts the leaves about the end
of Autumn. N. (...). Jovis arbor. Robur. The fruit, Glans. The cup, Capula.
Oak. Ger. K. as the common, and dwarf. T. The leaves, bark, acorne cupps,
and acornes, bind and dry 3, and are also somewhat cold. V. The thin skin
under the bark, and that which is next to the acorne poudered, h. the whites,
reds, spitting of blood, and laskes. The acornes eaten are hardly concocted,
and of gross, raw, and cold nourishment, they provoke urine, and h. poison,
and are less binding than the leaves, or bark. The apples h. all fluxes of
blood and laskes, boiled in red wine; they also h. excessive moisture, and
swellings of the jaws, and almonds of the throat. The decoction thereof stopps
women's diseases, and the fume taken c. the mother to return to its place: the
same steeped in strong white wine vinegar, with the powder of brim-stone, and
root of ireos m. and set in the sun 30 days, makes the hair black, wastes
proud flesh, and h. sunburning, and all deformities of the face, being washed
therewith. Matthew. The oak apples before they have a hole in them, contain a
fly, a spider, or a worm: if a fly, then war ensues; if a creeping worm,
scarcity of victuals; if a running spider, it prognosticateth great sickness,
or mortality. The oak of Jerusalem, Botrys, and that of Capadocia, Ambrosia.
T. Are hot and dry 2, and of subtle parts. V. The decoction h. the stoppings
of the breast, and asthma, cutting and wasting gross humors; so the conserve
of the leaves. It gives a pleasant taste to flesh, that is sodden with it, and
is eaten with the broth. Dried and laid among garments, it c. them to smell
sweet, and preserves them from vermin. The scarlet oak, Ilex coccigera, the
grain is called Kermes, and Coccus baphicus, the maggot within is named
Cutchonele. T. This grain is astringent and somewhat bitter, and dry without
sharpness. V. Gal: It h. great wounds, and sinews that be cut ap: with oxymel.
It stopps the menses, and is cordial, and purges melancholy. The confection
hereof, h. the trembling of the heart, and swounings, and exhilerates, the
lapis cyaneus being left out: the berries of the cochenele must be taken by
themselves, which alone are sufficient to die the juyces, and to impart unto
them their virtue. The great scarlet oak, Ilex major glandifera. T. The leaves
cool and repel, as those of the mast trees. V. Stamped and ap. they h. soft
swellings, and strengthen weak members. The bark of the root boiled in water
until it be dissolved, and ap. all night, makes the hair black, being first
scoured with cimolia. Clus: The acorne is esteemed of, and usually eaten. The
great Holme Oak K. As that with greater and lesser acornes, Cerr^s. T. V. are
useless. The Cork oak. K. as with broad and narrow leaves. Suber. T. The
bark does manifestly dry and bind. V. The powder taken in water stops
blood. Paul: The corkes which are taken out of wine vessels being burnt
mightily dry, and are m. with compositions against the bloody flixe. The cork
also is of known use, and serves to put into the shoes for warmenesse. Park:
The ever green oak is less binding, it strengthens weak members. The young
tops and leaves thereof are used in gargles for the mouth and throat. Croll:
The liquor of the apples that grow on oak leaves ap. h. the rupture. Park: K.
As the sweet, male and female bitter. V. Acornes h. the virulency of
cantharides. Hip. The fume of the leaves h. the mother. Gal: ap. it h. wounds:
the water h. all heat and fluxes. The Laurel is binding. The leaves of Botrys
ap. h. the mother.

Oats. Avena.
P. Almost every where: in cold moist ground. T. They are sown in spring: and
mowen in Autumn. N. (...). Vena Italica. Chartall Arab.
Oats. Ger. K. as the common, and naked. T. Gal: Are dry, and somewhat cold.
V. Common oats put into a linen bag, with a little bay salt, made hot in a
frying pan, and ap. very hot, h. the stitch in the side, or colic in the
belly. Such parts as are troubled with the serpigo, being first anointed with
that unction usually ap. against the French disease, and held over the fume of
the decoction of oats, with sweating, will in 5 or 6 times using hereof be
perfectly cured. Wild oats. K. As the common and small. T. are drying. V.
Being boiled in water with the roots to a third part, then strained, adding
honey, and the powder of aloes, and so boiled again to the thickness of thin
honey, and ap. with a linen cloth; they h. the ozaena, and the filthy ulcers of
the nose. John's. Being boiled in wine, with dried roseleaves, they h. a
stinking breath. The bearded wild oats T. V. Are useless. Senn: Oats are
hot, of mean nourishment, and stop the belly. Trag: They are hot as meat, and
cold and dry as medicine. Park. The meal h. fluxes: with sugar it h. the
cough; ap. with vinegar it h. spotts, and the itch with the oil of bays.

Oily pulse. Sesamum.*
P. It grows in Egypt, and India. T. It must be sown against the Ides of
October. N. (...). Sisamum. Sesama. Sempsem Egypt. Alpini.
Oily pulse. Ger. T. Is hot and dry 1, Gal: The seed is fat, nauseous, and of
slow digestion, of thick juice, not easily passing through the veins. It c.
thirst, and is emplastick, and softning; so also the oil and decoction. V.
Diosc. it c. a stinking breath. It wastes the grossness of the sinews, h.
bruises of the ears, inflammations, scaldings, pains of the joints, and the
bitings of Cerastes. Mixed with oil of roses, it h. the headache c. by heat;
so the herb boiled in wine, but especially it h. the heat and pain of the
eyes. The oil is good against the sounding and ringing of the ears. Schrod.
The oil is moderately hot, mollifying, and maturating: it h. the cough, and
asperity of the lungs in pleurisies, also it impinguates, and c. sperme. ap: it
h. hard tumors, and creeping ulcers. Dorst: It Is hot 1, dry 2. The oil h.
warts: ap. with oil of roses it h. the headache c. by heat. Park: Alpin: The
Egyptians use it against the scirrhus of the liver: the decoction with honey c.
the courses, and h. dandriffe. The oil h. the deformity of the skin.

Olive Tree. Olea.
P. In Italy, France, Spain, and other places. T. Fl: in June, the fr: is
gathered in November or December. N. (...) the wild, Oleaster, Cotinus.
Olive Tree. Ger. K. as the manured and wild. T. The ripe olives are hot and
moist, and of little nourishment, the unripe are dry and binding. Those that
are preserved in pickle, called colymbades, dry up the superfluous moisture of
the stomach. The branches, leaves, and tender budds, cool, dry and bind,
especially of the wild olive. V. The pickled olives c. appetite, yet are of
little nourishment. The branches, leaves, and budds, especially of the wild,
h. the eyes, S. Anthonies fire, the shingles, and epinyctides, so For.
night-wheales, carbuncles, and eating ulcers: ap. with honey, they h. escharres,
cleanse filthy ulcers, and quench the heat of hot swellings, h. kernels in the
flank, heal wounds in the head, and being chewed, cure ulcers in the mouth;
so the decoction, and juice, which also stopps all bleedings, and the whites.
The juice is to be pressed out with wine, and dried into cakes. The oil which
issues out of the wood whilst it is burning h. tetters, scurses, and scabbs
ap. that which is pressed out of the unripe olives is cold and binding. The old
oil is hotter and of greater force to digest, or wast away, and that which is
made of unripe olives is partly binding, partly digesting. The oil of ripe
olives mollifieth, asswageth pain, dissolveth tumors, h. stiffness of the
joints, and cramps, especially being mixed with hypericon, cammomill, dill,
lillies, roses etc. Oil omphacine, or of unripe olives does stop, and repress
tumors in the beginning and cool the heat of burning ulcers and
exulcerations. Bor. Cent. 2. Obs. 14. The oil of olives eaten in the morning
with a tossed loses the belly. Park. Pickled olives burnt, beaten, and ap. h.
ulcers, and fasten loose teeth. The oil h. exulcerating poisons. The dregs h.
the scab with lupines: with honey etc. it h. the teeth; so the gum, and is
ophthalmick, antipsorick, and expells the foetus. The fl. of the wild persume.

One blade. Vnifolium.*
P. It grows in Lancashire, and near Bathe. T. Fl: in May, the fruit is ripe
in September. N. (...). Monophyllon. Cotyledon Sylvestris Trag.
One blade. Ger. T. It is vulnerary. V. The leaves are of the same force in
wounds with Pyrola, especially in wounds among the nerves and sinews: also it
resists poison, and the pestilence: drach. 1. of the root being given in
vinegar m. with wine or water, and the sick going to bed, and sweating ^n it,
so Park* Lugd. T. It Is hot and dry. The leaves prevent inflammations in wounds.

Onion. Cepa.
P. In a fat ground, well dug and dunged. T. It Is sown in March and April,
or September. N. (...). Caepa. Caepe.
Onion. Ger. J. K. as the white, longish Spanish, and scallions. T. All onions
are sharp, and move tears by the smell. Gal: They are hot and dry 4, yet not
so hot as garlic, the juice is of a thin, watery, and airie substance, the
rest is of thick parts. V. Onions do bite, attenuate, and cause dryness:
being boiled they loose their sharpness, especially if the water be changed;
yet they attenuate, break wind, and provoke urine, and are more soluble boiled
(...)


