Old SAYINGS and PREDICTIONS Verified and fulfilled, Touching the young King of
SCOTLAND and his gued Subjects
Jockey. I Jockey turn the stone of all your plots,
For none turns faster then the turn coat Scots.

Presbyter. We for our ends did make thee King be sure,
Not to ^le us, we will not that endure.

King. You deep dissemblers I know what you do,
And for revenges sake, I will dissemble too.


THE SCOTS HOLDING THEIR YOUNG KINGS NOSE TO YE GRINSTONE
Come to the Grinstone Charles it is now to late
To Recolect it is presbiterian fate
You Couinant pretenders must Ibee:
The subject of youer Tradgie Comedy:


THis Emblem needs no learned Exposition,
The World knows well enough the sad condition
Of regal Power, and Prerogative
Dead, and dethroned in England, now alive
In Scotland, where they seem to love the Lad,
If he will be more obsequious then his Dad.
And Act according to Kirk Principles,
More subtle then were Delphick Oracles.
For let him lie, dissemble, kill and slay,
He Is a good Prince that will the Kirk obey.
This blind obedience teach the Popes of Rome,
And Popes of Lambeth we have had at home:
Whose doctrine made our English royal State
As odious as the Italian Potentate.
But now the Scots all falsehoods do engrosse,
And will defend them with St. Andrews Cross.
They will protest against all violence,
Against sacred Kings, yet blast their innocence.
Abhor that Civil Power that dares take
The life of Kings away, yet way will make
For justice stroke both by their Tongue and Pen,
And then accuse our State for Murdering men.
Did not the Kirk-men Presbyrerian Scots
Thus Crown and Scepter with the righteous spots
Of blood and tyranny besmeare, and stir our State
To do Heroic Justice, and t'expiate
With blood the blood of many thousands spilt
By one whom they more infamous with guilt
Of horrid murder made, then all those ten
Vile persecuting Emperors and monstrous men?
But Law and Justice at the last being done
On the hated Father, now they love the Son,
And now have Crowned their Convert Proselyte,
Whom they adore, if he adore the right,
And dictates of the Scottish Hierarchy,
With which the Crown and Scepter must comply,
And be subordinate unto, for Kirk must rule,
This is a Tenet of the Romish School.
Then stoop gued King, it was thy Fathers Fate
To be so indulgent to that grand Prelate,
Whose old impostures now have gul'd, and can
Transform a Scottish Levite from a man
Into a Monster Sphinx, whose knotty sense
In his dark riddles nones intelligence
Could extricate; so Kirk-mens subtle styles
Wrapped in religious Covenants beguiles
The Laick Jockies, who at their command
Will daret invade and spoil their Neighbors Land.
Turn Jockie turn (for gold will turn thy heart
And make thee to renounce in Christ a part)
The Grindstone to make sharp thy Levites Laws
Or else t'abate the edge of regal Cause,
And privilege. And Jockie for thy pains
Great treasures, pleasures, offices, and gaynes
Shall be thy large Reward when England's won,
Till then hang on the hopes which thou have spunne.
Lo here the Chicken of the Eagle lies
Like to be made a Scottish Sacrifice.
But, wants he King-craft to create a Plot
To undermine the Sicophanting Scot?
No; he will a Presbyterian Brother be,
And vow to ratify their Hierarchy,
Nay more, he will not disdain in show to be
Subject to their proud Kirk's Supremacy:
The Sins of's Fathers house he will bewail,
Mourn and lament under a Scottish Veil.
But this religious mock we all shall see,
Will soon the downfall of their Fabel be.
Rouse up true English Hearts and let them see
The sad effects of Mask't Hypocrisy,
Curb their proud hearts that they in time may know
That God is working of their overthrow.
Yet why should valiant Soldiers fight and toil
To get the nothing of a barren soil?
And for a speedy issue to these wars
Heaven send them store of fearful fatal jarres.
As in a Glass, that they (though late) may see
What it is attends the STEWARD's Family.
COurteous Reader, Although this Emblme does chiesly represent the Rigid
Presbytery of Scotland, yet it is too apparent, they have many Friends both of
the Clergy and Gentry in England, that are not behind hand in assisting them,
in their present actings, and for so much as concerns our present occasion, I
shall briefly cite Mr. Lilie's words expressed in his Astrologicall predictions
this present year, 1651. wherein he ingeniously confesses, he has no malice,
either to Presbyterian or Malignant, except they disturb our quiet, and molest
our present Government and Council of State; but in the second page of his
book, he describs the Parliament of England's perfectionall figure, for the
11. year of their sitting, from which he concludes the Genuine sense of that
quadrant aspect, runns thus, or does signify in effect thus, that our present
state shall be still, a great part of this year dangerously molested and
pestered by a refractorie people of their own, called a Scotified Clergy, a
generation of men from whom both the Spirit of Truth, and the meek Spirit of
obedience, due by the Laws of God unto their Superiors is departed: certainly
these men do our Parliament more mischief, and whole Nation more prejudice,
then an Army of Foreign Forces would do, let God reward them according to
their iniquity; from the second figure, he concludes, that the present power or
Counsel of State shall stand firm, and shall not be dissolved, by any earthly
power, worldly force or treachery, during this annual resolution. Observe
this also, viz. That forty years were the English under the government of two
Scottish Kings, even just as many years as the Children of Israel did wander
in the Wilderness before they came unto rest, God has now delivered us from
that servitude, and we are very near entering into the Land of Canaan, viz.
liberty, if we repine not at Gods mercies, nor rebel against his authority,
we shall assuredly enjoy it.

2 The grand cause of the Scots being at variance and enmity with us, is our
change of government, and why may not England change again a third and a
fourth time, if they see good, and ask Scotland no leave, it being a right in
all Nations to alter their government, for the public benefit; Scotland may
take notice, how long they were in former times without a King, and how little
power they afforded him, certainly it was their ancient custom, to hold his
Nose to it, with the Bridle both of Kirk and State, so that this is no new or
strange Emblem of them; the difference betwixt them is this, that we having
cast off their King, it is their design to settle him upon us again, by
force, they proclaimed him King of Great Britain, etc. But we have more
reason to break the line of succession, made up of tyranny, cruelty and
oppression: The Norman bastard the Father of them all, had no other title to
the Crown but his long sword, by which he became Conqueror against the Laws
and liberties of England, and after him proceeded his Sons, and their
Successors obtained the Crown, one from another, by power and policy, till
the time of Henry the seventh, who laid claim to it by the same title also, of
Conquest, after he had slain Richard the third, save that he descended from a
Bastard of John of Ga^nt, and from this King, did our late Tyrant King CHARLES
derive his title, he being descended from a Daughter of that Henry married into
Scotland, by virtue whereof his Father K. James, by the unhappy policy of some
Courtiers, did obtain the Crown, who was then attended with a heavy curse,
and terrible plague, into England, if it were no more but the weak and unjust
title of the usurping pretenders, the English Nation have sufficient cause to
cast off this accursed Monarchy, but which is more, through all their reign
has been exercised, a constant course of tyranny, for not one of them since
William the Conqueror, but did exceedingly abuse, and enslave the people, as
the Chronicle makes mention: So that it was nobly done of our Parliament to lay
hold on a season of liberty, after the Nation had groaned under slaverie, for
five or six hundred years. Suppose the title of this young King had been good
and right, has not the Fathers treason cut off the Son? has he not from the
beginning been in actual war against the Parliament? has he not had his
Fathers Counselors, and principles? and has he not been bred up under
popery and prelacie, and has had hand in the blood of the three Nations,
making use of all Parties, to serve his own malicious ends and interest, and
are not Englands eyes yet open, to see what will be the sad condion, and woeful
effects of it? If they should be so base spirited, as to suffer this young
pretender to take rooting again, to bring them back into slaverie, and
Monarchcall bondage, a yoke too heavy for Englands shoulders to bear.

I will conclude with an old Prophecy of a Jesuit in Hen. VII. time, of all
the Kings and Queens that should succeed in England; thus, Mars, Puer, Alecto,
Virgo, Vulpes, Leo, Nallus. The English of it is this, Mars the God of war,
Hen. 8. Puer, a Boy, Edward the 6. Alect^, a Fury, Queen Mary, Virgo, a maiden
Queen Elizabeth, Vulper, a Fox King James, Leo a Lion King Charles, Nullus,
None.

By J. L. Philalethes.

London, Printed 1651.


