THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS OF Maj. Genesis Laughorne, and Col. Rice Powel,
IN The name of themselves, and the Army in South Wales, concerning the KINGS
Majesty, his Highness the Prince of Wales, and their further proceedings
touching their Design and Engagement; with their Desires and Resolution
touching the same.

ALSO, Sir MARMADUKE LANGDALES Propositions in the North of England concerning
the Kings Majesty, and the Government of this Kingdom, And the manner of the
blocking up the Town of Barwick, and the playing of 30 Pieces of Ordinance
against it. May.15. 1648

LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

The Copy of a letter from the North; containing a Relation of the condition of
those parts; with some particulars from Barwick, as Col. Brodelin made
Governor of Berwick, Sir William Selby the Lord Generals brother, taken
prisoner, and the Commissioners Jnstructions taken, etc.
SIR,
THe works about this Town go one a pace, and with all, prepare for defense,
the Inhabitantr out of their affections to the Common good, as well as for
their own Security have undertaken to make a work called the s^eiffeld work,
and to encourage others, the Major and Aldermen went them selves first to
begin it, so that when the workers finished, the Town will be as it were
double Walld; likewise the Soldiers make up other works, and all paid for
their pains, the Surprise of Barwick, and Castill makes them the more diligent
for by this they perceive which way things are likely to tend.

The English ^s we here that surprised Barwick do also use diligence to
Fortify that Town, and they have made Colonel Brodlin the Govenour, who is
to Command the forces there, and give I^structions for the fortifying and
victualling thereof, they have taken Sir William Selby the Lord Generals
Brother prisoner, also they have taken the Commissioners with their
Instructions, and other packets sent by the Post from England, also they have
secured the Mayor with the Commissioner and other which they took; also they
brought in some provisions with them; but to prevent other provisions and
supplies going unto them, there is a Ship gone from Newcastle, called the
Adventure, to block up the River Tweede, to prevent the bringing of any relief
that way; but some Foot all come into them from Scotland side, but they have
broken down the Bridge, so that none could pass over into England that way:
there is much talk of Prince Charles his coming into Scotland, and that he
has already granted Commission to diverse also, it is reported that Barwick was
surprised by a Commission from the Prince, the Scots make preparations that all
may be in a readiness against the return of their Commission, and if their
answer be not satisfactory, as they call it, they threaten to do something, it
is hoped when the time comes, there will not dare to venture upon any design,
for the Ministers still hold out Here is great alterations in this Town,
Malignants are very high, and insult over the Parliaments friends with great
tyranny. The Inhabitants fear they shall want bread to eat. Here is little
trading, except to Soldiers upon Tickets. The Parli^ment of Sco^land, and the
Assembly of Divines a^e upon a new Treaty. These Malignants here abou^s stop
the report of the Parliament of Englands Votes, to continue the Government of
the Kingdom, by the King, and Parliament, and would not have the new^s spread
in Scotland. etc.

We have every day fresh Alarms, God grant it prove not a worse deluge then
the former, none have cause to gape for a War, but the desperate banckrupt, and
the hungry Soldiers; me thinks men of Estates should now value peace. And
Religion will at this time be ill settled in blood.

Our Governer Sir Arthur Hazlerig, sent supplies to the Governor of the Holy
Jsland, fearing that it might be attempted as well as Barwicke, And they came
very seasonably, for not long after they were landed; letters came to the
Governor, from Sir Marmaduke Langdale, to persuade with him, about the
surrender thereof. His Letter was (as I am informed) to this effect (viz)

That he had received Commission from Prince Charles for the reducing of those
parts to the obedience of the King. And that if he would keep that Jsland for
his Majesty, he did assure him, that it would be taken by his Majesty for a
very accep^able service, And promised him (upon his honor) that he should have
all his Arrears paid to him.

The Governor being Encouraged by those suplies sent from hence, stands upon
his guard, and would return him no Answer of compliance. Here are two Ships
taken near these coasts by the Irish, w^o d^e much mischeife at Sea.

Levitenont Colonel Henry Lilburne is placed Govenerr of Tinmouth Castle, from
which he is little absent. We have good hopes of the Countries standing firm
to us, especially if strength come to support them. God grant these dismal
clouds well blown over.

Newcastle, the 8, of May. 1648.
from this Town of Newcastle, there was sent this last weke, into the Town of
Barwick, a Frigor which carried 34. pieces of Ordinance, upon her coming into
the Harbor, discharged 2 broad sides against the Town, which made them within
think all was not like to be well with them; our Governo likewise on Monday
the first instant, mounted a considerable number of musketeirs on horseback,
and sent them to secure workworth Castle, a strong hold that belongs to the
Earl of Northumberland, situate near the sea, upon the mouth of the River
coquet, which runs through the middle of Northumberland.

The Popish and Malignant party, flock a pace forth of these two Counties of
Northumberland, and Durham, to Barwick, no doubt Royal Presbyters; where those
that held the Town are very active, sending forth summons to the parts remote,
and adjacent wheat a Rendevous upon Hedgely Moor, 4. or 5. rules from Alwick,
to be there listed for the service of the King: Col. Gray of Warke his tenants
to join with them.

The high Sheriff of Northumberland, and many Justices of Peace, are enforced
to fly to Newcastle for the safety of their persons, leaving their houses and
goods exposed to the danger of the enemy. At the meeting last week of the
several Northern Counties, at Richmond, it is agreed that some of Col.
Lambertss troops of Horse stay in Yorkshire, and the rest (about 1000) to be
drawn to Nortumberland and Cumberland.

This Town being at a general meeting desired to declare whether they would
stand for the Parliament, and give their assistance for defense of the Town,
answered that which signified nothing, or the contrary: Eght hundred Foot are
coming from Yorkshire to this Town; these Counties will not stir unless they
see a potent Army come for their defense, if then they begin to feel already
its to be active any way; the Fortifications of this place and Tinmouth goes on
apace. Lieutenant Coll. Lilbourne is to be Deputy Governor of Tinmouth.

Newcastle, May. 7.
The Copy of a Letter from Brecknockshire in Wales etc. Col. Horton keeps his
Randezvouz in this Country, where he has scatered and routed all that were
gathered together for the assistance of powell who were fortyfying of some
strong holds in this Country, he also opposes the Welsh party daily, and
keeping them from flying to the Mountains through his vigillancy: It is said
that Maj. General Laughorne, and Col. Powell have made several Propositions
and inhabitants of Southwales, to this effect viz.

That they are resolved to use there uttermost endeavors for the settling of
his Majesty in his Royal Palace at Westminster.

To restore Charles Prince of Wales, and the rest of the Royal Progeny, to all
there just rights and prerogatives belonging unto them.

That they will hazard both life and fortunes for the electihg and stablishing
the Book of common prayer, and settling of Church Government, as it was before
this Parliament began.

Cardiff 11. April, 1647.
Worthy Sir.
Since my last, we have received further intelligenc^ from Barwick, that the
Town is now blocked up by Sea, and that they now, and then receive many Great
shot, insomuch, that diverse houses are battered; but Sir. Mar. Langdale, has
sent Propositions to Capt in Batten Governer of the Holy Island, which are to
this effect. viz.

1 That he would be pleased to surrender for else maintain the said Garrison for
the Kings Maj. 2 that upon performance of the same, he will engage for his
Arreares together with the soldiers also. 3 that he will assure him of his
Maj. said favor, and will recommend him unto his Majesty. 4 That he would be
pleased to consider of the imprisonment of his Majesty, and the violation of
the laws of the Kingdom etc. These with some other circumstances, were
presented to the Governor; but he utter^y denied to assent thereunto.

Newcastle May, 10. 1648. Sir, I am yours to serve you I Holding.

Imprimatur

G. M.


