The Liberty of the Imprisoned ROYALIST.
BEat on proud Billows, Boreas blow,
Swell curled waves high as Jove's roof,
Your incivility shall know
That innocence is Tempest proof.
Though surely Nereus roar my thoughts are calm,
Then strike affliction, for thy wounds are Balm.
That which the world miscalls a Iayle,
A private closset is to me,
Whilst a good conscience is my bail,
And Innocence my Liberty.
Locks, Bars, Walls, Leanness, though together met,
Make me no prisoner, but an Anchorite.
I whilst I wished to be retired,
Into this private room was turned,
As if their wisdom had conspired,
A Salamander should be burned;
And like a Sophie who would drowned a fish,
I am condemnd to suffer what I wish.
The Cynick huggs his poverty,
The Pelican his willdernesse,
And it is the Indians pride to be,
Naked on frozen Caucasus.
Contentment cannot smart, Stoics we see,
Make torments easy by their Apathie.
These Manacles upon my arm,
I as my Sweet-hearts favor wear;
And then to keep my anckles warm,
I have some iron shack's there:
These walls are but my Garrison, this Cell
Which men call jaile does prove my Cittadell.
So he that stroke at Jasons life,
Thinking h'ad made his purpose sure,
By a malicious freindly kn^fe,
Did only wound him to a cure.
Malice I see wants will for what is meant
Mischief, oftimes proves favor in the event.
Here sin for want of food does sterve,
Where temp^ing objects are not seen:
And those strong Walls do only serve
To keep vice out not let sin in.
Malice of late's grown charitable sure,
I Am not committed, but am kept secure.
I Am in this Cabinet locked up,
As some high prized Margarit,
And like some great Magull or Pope,
Am cloystered up from public sight.
Retir'dnesse is a point of Majesty-
And thus proud Sultan I Am as great as thee.
When once my Prince affliction has,
Prosperity does Treason seem,
And then to smooth so rough a path
I can learn patience too from him.
Now not to suffer shows no loyal heart,
When Kings want ease Subjects must learn to smart,
What though I cannot see my King,
Either in's person or his coin;
Yet contemplation is a thing,
Which renders what I have not mine:
My prince from me what Adamant can part,
Whom I do wear engraven on my heart.
My soul is free as Ambient Air,
Although my baser parts be mu'd,
Whilst loyal thoughts do still rejoice,
To company my solittude.
And though Rebellion may my body bind,
My King can only captivate my mind.
Have you not seen the Nightingale
When turned a Pilgrim in her Cage,
And hear her tell her wonted tale,
In that her Hermitage
Even her chirping melody does prove,
That all her bars are trees, her cage a grove.
I am the bird whom they combine,
Thus to deprive of liberty,
Who though they do my corpse confine,
Yet maugre hate my soul is free.
And though I Am mu'd, yet I can chirp and sing,
Disgrace to Rebels, Glory to my King.
Vive le Roy.
FINIS.
Upon his MAJESTY'S Coming to HOLMBY.
HOld our brave Charles, and thou shall win the field,
Thou can not loose thy self, unless thou yield,
On such conditions, as will force thy hand,
To give away thy Scepter, Crown, and Land,
And what is worse to hazard by thy fall,
To loose a greater Crown, more worth then all.
Thy poor distressed Cavaliers rejoiced
To hear thy royal resol^tion voiced,
And are content yet far more poor to be,
Then now they are, so it reflect from thee,
Thou art our Sovereign still in spite of hate,
Our zeal is to thy person not thy state.
We are not so ambitious to desire,
Our drooping fortune to be mounted higher,
And thou so great a Monarch (to our grief)
Must sue unto thy subjects for releife,
And when they sit and long debate about it,
Must either stay, or go away without it.
No sacred Prince, thy friends esteem thee more
In thy distresses then they did before,
And though their wings be clipped their wishes fly
To heaven by millions for a fresh supply,
That as thy cause was thus betrayed by men,
It may by Ange^s be restored again.
A PANEGYRIC, Faithfully representing The proceedings of the PARLIAMENT at
Westminster, since their first Sessions to this present: Wherein their
wonderful Acts are truly declared; And what is further by them to be expected.
MOst gracious, Omnipotent,
And everlasting Parliament,
Whose power and Majesty
Is greater then all Kings by odds;
Yea to account you less then Gods,
Must needs be blasphemy.
Moses and Aaron never did do
More wonders then are wrought by you
For Englands Israel:
But through the Red Sea we have past,
If you to Canaan bring's at last,
Is It not a miracle?
In six years space you have done more
Then all our Parliaments before:
You have quite done the work:
The Cavaliers, the King, the Pope,
You have o'rethrowne, and next we hope
You will confound the Turk.
The heads of Strafford, and of Laud,
You did cut off because by fraud
They would have made you slaves:
But sure you are ten times more just,
Who Carew and the Hotham's trust,
For they are arrant knaves.
By you we have deliverance,
From the desig^s of Spain and France,
Ormond, Montrosse, and Danes:
Y^u aided by our Brethren Scots,
Defeated have malignants plots,
And brought their swords to Canes.
What wholesome Laws have you ordained,
Whereby out Properties, maintained
Against those would us undo
Yea both our fortunes and our lives,
And what is dearer even our wives,
Are wholly kept by you.
O what a flourishing Church and State
Have we enjoyed ere since you sat?
What a glorious King God save him,
Have you now made his Majesty,
Had he the grace but to comply
And do as you would have him?
When Hell was not enough to fright
And m^ke the r^yall party right,
You wisely did invent
That dreadful Tophet, Goldsmiths-hall,
And Committees worse then Devil and all
For their full punishment.
Your Directory how to pray
By the Spirit shows the perfect way;
In zeal you have abolisht
That Dagon of the Common Prayer;
And next we see you will take care
That Churches be demolisht.
What multitudes in every Trade
Of painful preachers you have made,
Learned by revelation:
Oxford and Cambridge make poor Preachers,
Each Shop affords better Teachers;
Oh blessed Reformation?
Your godly wisdoms have found out
The true Religion without doubt:
For sure among so many,
(We have five hundred at the least,
Is not the Gospel well encreast*)
One must be pure, if any.
Could you have done more piously,
Then sell Church Lands the King to buy,
And stop the City plaints?
Paying the Sects Church-Militant,
That the new Gospel help to plant,
God knows they are poor Saints.
Because The Apostles Creed is lame,
The Assembly do a better frame,
Which saves us all with ease:
Provided still we have the grace
To believe the two houses in the first place:
Let our works be what they please.
It Is strange your power and holiness
Cannot the Irish Devil dispossess
His kind is very stout.
That though you do so often pray,
And every Month keep Fasting-day,
You cannot get him out
Who will not pay with all his heart
Excise? the fifth and twentieth part,
Assessments, Taxes, Rates,
It Is easy what both Houses leavy,
Our duties to our King are heavy,
But all we have's the States,
For all your sufferings and your pains,
What in the end shall be your gains,
You never did regard;
Some twenty thousand pounds a man,
An Office too alas who can
Think that a fit reward?
Wherefore as soon as you're dissolved,
To show our thanks we are resolved,
The King himself engages,
Another Parliament to call,
Which your deserts consider shall,
And surely pay your wages.
FINIS.

