LOVE in Distress: OR, THE Lucky Discovery.

A NOVEL.

Written by The Honorable Lady ***

LONDON: Printed by W. Onley, for H. Newman in the Poultry, S. Briscoe in
Covent Garden, and H. Nelme in Cornhill. 1697.

Advertisement.
THere is now Published, Mr. Dennis 's Miscellany Poems, with several select
Translations from Horace, Juvenal, Mr. Boileau' s Epistles, Satyrs, etc. and
Aesop 's Fables in Burlesque Verse: To which is added, the Passion of Byblis;
with some Critical Remarks on Mr. Oldham; with other Letters and Poems.

To my Dear FLAVIA.
MADAM,
THAT Time I stole from my more Airy Diversions, I dedicated to this little
Piece^, and tho my first design was not to have published it, nor ever desired
any Eyes to encounter it, but yours, and my own; yet for that Presumption I lay
it at your Feet, and beg your Protection, with a Charitable Endeavor to Peruse
it with a partial Eye, and excuse the first Sallies of so unworthy a Pen; yet
were I capable of producing the most deserving Volume in the Universe, I should
be Ambitious of no Nobler a Patroness: For it is not the sound of a great many
Titles that I covet, which, oftentimes like a hectoring Bully, makes a great
Noise, with little or no Courage; not that I despise true Nobility, nor admire
it farther then the Intrinsic Value.

I have nothing to plead for the Meanness of the Present, nor any Reasons for
the many Objections you or any other may make, if you please to Criticize; only
you have here the first Draught of sometimes a Pleasant, sometimes a
Hypocondriack Brain, without ever rectifying; yet my dear (Flavia) accept of
this humble Offering from a Friend, and afford it the Reading; some leisure
Hour after the soft Message of your Lover's Sighs has been whispered to your
Ears, and experimentally taught you, Love is not that Trifle to be ridiculed at
pleasure, but rather the most serious Business of our Lives; nor imagine it too
foolish a Subject to entertain you, but reflect on the Sallies of your own
Heart, and after mature Examination, if you find that youthful Bosom incapable
of a tender Impression, I will readily submit to the most rigid Principle of
the morosest Stoic; but pardon my Opinion, if I believe it impossible, and
dare confidently affirm, so much Vivacity, Wit, Fire, and Beauty cannot be
incapable of an honorable Sentiment: This is a sort of Natural Philosophy, at
least a Woman's Philosophy, the only Theme they can Write of; and all these
different Passions are agitated by Love, Scorn, Jealousy, Anger and
Resentment, which if not displayed in their true Colors, consider the Author,
and force a Complaisance.

I would avoid all things in the common Rode of Flattery, therefore I shun a
Character I could be very copious on, and only tell you, If this Trifle has but
the Influence to effect a Smile from you, or the good Luck to disperse some
melancholy Cloud that would eclipse the Luster of your Glorious Mind, I shall
have the utmost of my Hopes, and esteem my self rewarded even to the height of
my Lavish Wish.

I could say a great deal in Commendation of Love, what Effects it has had over
the profoundest Philosophers, the most Judicious and Learned, even those who
have most contemned that Passion, have been delivered up to the most sensible
Touch of it; bring authentic Authors to prove as much; produce the wonderful
Effects of it in these Days; but that is not my part, I justify nothing, but
leave it to your Mercy; and if you do afford it your favorable Protection, I
shall be proud I had the Occasion to show my Choice in a Person of such
singular Virtues, such nice and refined Sentiments, such inestimable Merits,
and One whom ten thousand Advantages, besides that of Friendship, induces me
ever to Subscribe my self,

Your Devoted Friend, and Humble Servant, CORINNA.

To CORINNA, on her Novel entitled, Love in Distress: or, The Lucky Discovery.
I Begged Apollo, that he would inspire,
For once, my Breast with such Poetic fire,
That I your Praise might to the World recite,
And show how much I value what you write:
But the ill-natured God did Aid refuse,
Envious at Merit in a Female-Muse.
Spite of the Churl, boldly I Will pay a Mite,
Though I expose myself by what I write.
Your Lines are strong, so easy flows your Wit
Your Verse so smooth, your Sense is so polite,
That you are sure the Muses Favorite.
To what a wondrous pitch in time you will grow,
Who can such Judgment on a Trifle show!
Trifles indeed to what your Mind possess;
Proceed Corinna, and never fear Success.
PHILANDER.

To my much-loved Sister, Mrs. S. R. alias, my Sister the Lady P. on her Novel
entitled, Love in Distress: or, The Lucky Discovery.
THus dare a Brother venture to commend
Your first Attempt, and say it is nicely penned.
Assist me then, ye Muses, that I lose
Not one aspiring Thought which I could choose.
That I, inspired by you, may add to Fame,
And celebrate my dear Corinna's Name.
Well, could I give her Merit just Desert,
Could I express the Dictates of my Heart,
But it is impossible, not all your Aid
Can speak my Raptures of that Charming Maid.
And, oh! I blush, that to my own Disgrace
I want Assistance for a Sister's Praise;
Yet I Will not wonder, it is her lavish Store
Has bankrupt mine, and rendered me so poor.
Fain would I from a Character so true,
So natural, and well displayed by you,
Give injured innocent Canace her Due.
Deplore the desperate Octavio's Fate,
Applaud that Turn of Fortune you relate,
With so much Passion, Eloquence, and Wit,
That whoever reads must feel what you have writ,
Let not one Character escape true Praise,
And crown each lucky Thought with golden Bays:
But, oh! in vain I Have only the Desire;
For your bright Flame puts out my weaker Fire.
J. R.

To CORINNA, on her Novel entitled, Love in Distress: or, The Lucky Discovery.
THe painted Grapes that drew the feathered Train,
Provoked their hunger, but provoked in vain:
Advancing near, they soon perceived the Cheat,
And left, unsatisfied, the Fairy Treat.
Your lively Fancy does at once invite,
And feast our ravished Souls with true delight.
Strange Art! that over our Sense such power can gain,
To make us feel those Passions which you feign!
Their Adoration basely they misplace,
Who are enamored only on a Face;
But conquered, and of Liberty bereft,
Your Captives have at least this Comfort left,
That honorably vanquished, we submit
To double Charms of Beauty and of Wit:
By these delightful Spells our Hearts are seized,
Fond of our Chains, and with our Ruin pleased.
But when you dye, (as pity it is you must)
Instead of mouldring into common Dust,
As a Reward for your ingenious Pen,
The Muses have decreed, Corinna then
Shall mount to them, and make their number Ten.
STREPHON.

LOVE in Distress: OR, THE LUCKY DISCOVERY.
LIsbon, the principal City of Portugal, famous for its curious Traffic, and
no less to be admired for the producing of Worthy and Brace Heroes; amongst the
rest, a Noble Youth (whose Extraction was derived from the most Illustrious
Sebastian, the Nephew of John the Third, King of Spain and Portugal, who was
unfortunately slain in the Field of Alcazar in Afric) and whose Royal
Virtues, and Heroic Actions, might worthily contain as many Volumes as our
Atlas: But rather than derogate in the least from his acquired, and renowned
Fame, I will omit all Circumstances of his Valor, and only recount the Amorous
part of his Life, with Impartiality.

His Parents enjoyed all the Blessings of Peace, Honor, Wealth and
Tranquillity; all the Comforts that the World, or Nature can bestow upon Mortals
in this lower Sphere; yet nothing added more to their secret Satisfaction and
Felicity, than the springing Virtues, and Beauty of Melantius, which was the
Name of this most Excellent Person. It was now he was attained to the Twenty
third Year of his Age, and with that to all the Perfections, that a Soul stamped
with the Image of a Deity, could be capable of: It was therefore no wonder if
his Parents were thoroughly sensible of his Deserts, and knew how to set a
considerable value on so inestimable a Jewel; they feared that his Generous and
Ambitious Humor, would prompt him forward to be acting something worthy of
himself: And indeed he had often solicited them to permit him to assist the
Christians, against the increasing Power of the Insulting Turk. He pleaded the
Justice of the Cause, the Shame of an Unprofitable Life; and, in short, he told
them, his Soul glowed within him, to be attempting that which he had often
envyed in other Brave Men; he urged that the Plenty of the World ought not to
indulge a Man in Idleness; he had recourse to the Emblem of the Bees, and their
abhorrence of the slothful Drone: He omitted no Argument that might prevail; he
feared no Danger, nor apprehended Fate, but begged he might have leave to try
his Fortune where Glory was to be gotten, and not like a Dunghil-weed rot at
the Spot he grew.

They heard, (and often blessed the Auspitious Hour that gave him Birth) but
never could be brought to condescend, that he should launch for Fortune in the
uncertain World: They told him, It was not the Just and Brave, that always reap
the Benefit of their own Merits, for fickle Fortune is a Jilt, and often
favors Fools and Knaves; yet found no Argument strong enough to diminish in
the least, the aspiring Spirit of this Gallant Youth. At last they thought a
Married Life the Infallible Remedy to secure the only Pledge of all their
former Joys: He then found himself pressed to Marry, his Relations having
proposed to him a Match out of one of the Noblest Families in Portugal; her
Name Aspatia, only Child to the Duke Antonio de Almeyda, a Lady whose
Perfections, balanced with her Quality and Fortune, had made numerous Captives
of less amorous Souls than our Melantius.

It was a short Voyage down the famous River Tajo, that conducted him to the
Scene of bliss, first under pretense of a complemental Visit; the Duke received
him with an extraordinary and hearty Welcome, which he returned, by a grateful
acknowledgment of his Favor.

The Duke to divert his Noble Guest, entertained him with a sight of his
magnificent Palace, where he took great delight in viewing the unparalled
Statues, and Paintings, and the curious Cielings, done by the most famous
Masters of the Age. After he had satisfied his Curiosity, as well as he could
in so short a time, the Duke led him into his Garden, which for the fine
Situation, and lovely Prospect, the Orange, Lemon, and Citron-Trees,
continually in Blossom, Fruit of all sorts, and variety of all Flowers,
pleasant shady Wildernesses, refreshing and artificial Fountains; and, in
short, all that Nature or Art could render curious, made this exquisit Spot of
Ground be justly termed the Paradise of Portugal.

Their wandering Steps led them into a retired Walk, where Melantius was
surprised with the sight of a Beauty; and although the Jessamin-Hedges, which
were very thick on each side, had eclipsed some part of her Charms; yet he had
discovered so many Perfections, that he was resolved to approach this unguarded
Fair; who, if Heaven had informed, with a Soul agreeable to her Body, he had no
farther thought, then an entire resignation of himself: With these
Contemplations he entered the Arbor, not observed by the Duke, who was just
turned to gather a Flower, which gave him opportunity to gaze, as one void of
sense, upon this Lovely Fair. 'Twas at that Instant our young Enamourato's
Thoughts were elevated beyond the Power of expression.

The Weather in those Climates is violent hot, especially that part of the Day,
when the Sun is in the Center of the Zodiac; which so suffocates the
Inhabitants, that they are willing to close with all advantages, that can
render a Refreshment to their drooping Vitals: The same Motive induced this
Charming Fair to receive the benefit of a soft still Wind, that whispered
Content through all the lazy Air. She had a Slave, whom she was most secure in;
but at this time she had dismissed her, that she might with greater freedom
enjoy the liberty of sweet Contemplation: Love had been no stranger to her
Heart, a Heart perhaps too apt to take the Impression; and what Person of the
same Sex, that has ever experimented the least Power of that Triumphant Tyrant,
but must acknowledge, that although to feed their fancy, and divert their
melancholy hours; they may admit of a Confident, to treat with all advantage on
the Object of their thoughts; yet there are some Transports of Satisfaction,
that cannot be contained under any limit, but breaks out into Raptures; which
when vanished, dejected and surprised they even blame themselves for being an
Eyewitness.

This place was all Retirement, secret and secure; none durst approach except
the Duke, at some appointed hours, wherein she never failed to entertain her
self with all the privacy and freedom her Heart could wish: At this time her
Soul, wrapped in sublimer Meditations, had took its flight above all thought, and
left the Body wholly bereft of sense or motion; a profound Sleep sealed her
Eyes, and she appeared as divinely charming to the ravished Melantius, as the
virtuous and excellent Lucretia did, exposed a Victim to her audacious Roman
Lover: A sacred Silence seemed to reign there, which secured her from all fears
of Interruption, as in a Cave forsaken by wild Beasts-in a Desert.

The ingenious contrivance of this Arbor rendered such satisfaction to the
sight, that it unresistably allured the Beholders to a solitary retreat; it
consisted of four delicate little square Beds of green Turf, on the farthest of
which, lay this Amazing Beauty; her Head declining to the right side, supported
by a Hand, that seemed to be formed of polished Alablaster, her Hair hanging
carelessly moved at the discretion of a gentle Wind, the color fair, compared
to Cynthya's Silver Tresses; she had on a pair of embroidered Bodice, her Bosom
half open, with a large white Damask-Scarf wrought with Gold, which falling off
her Shoulders, had circled in her Knees, and likewise hid the other Arm, her
Breast whiter than Snow, but of a warmer Constitution, wrought wonderful
effects in a young tender Heart resolved to love: The discovery of all these
Charms, the powerful clearness of her delicate Complexion, was capable to make
him surrender upon the first Assault.

You must imagine the unavoidable rustling that he made, soon expiated the
drowsy God, who gently slipped his Chain, and gave his Captive leave to open her
bright Eyes; then with a Face more serene and lovely than Aurora, she confirmed
the languishing Expectation of her Amorous Lover; though the sudden confusion
that seized every Faculty, at the approach of a Man, and a Stranger, dispersed
a pleasing Blush throughout her Cheeks, and gave a ravishing luster to her
sparkling Eyes, which were blue, and full of Life. With what new fire this
kindled him is unaccountable; for never was Lover at the height of his Wish,
struck with a more acute Passion, than he was sensible of the first Minute;
Fear, Pleasure, and a resenting Pity filled his Mind, to see her so severely
astonished, that sometimes her Face with Shame was glowing red, then straight
with Anger it grew pale.

Forgive me, Madam, (said he, with an Air full of concern) by unadvised steps,
(though I must own 'twas not without design) I have incroached upon your
Privileges; charmed with ten thousand Beauties, insensibly I did resort to
this Retirement. Sir, (replied Aspatia, who had a little recovered her self) I
pray, no more; call not more Blushes to my Cheeks; but if you will restore my
Peace, retire, and leave me to my innocent Retreat. Melantius, who could not
brook this Command, with eager Transport threw himself at her Feet, then
blessed his happy Genius which had been his Guide, and conveyed him to the
Shrine of Chaste Diana, where he would offer up his pure Devotion.

While thus he spoke, she surveyed him round, viewed and reviewed his Noble
Mien, observed his Speech, his Air, his Person, in all which discovered Worlds
of Pleasure. He was of a middle stature, well shaped, the features of his Face
were regular, black-ey'd, and languishing; his Hair was of a bright Ash color,
which was very long, and lay in folding Curles all over his Shoulders.

With strange amazement, and transported thoughts, they did for a great while
stand and gaze on one another. Then, then the little envious God of Love did
clap his Wings, and rejoiced at the approaching Fate of these unhappy Lovers;
but soon this pleasing Ecstasy was diverted by Aspatia, whose Modesty recalled
her surprised Spirits; then casting down her Eyes which were filled with Shame,
she blamed her most imprudent Curiosity, when she beheld Melantius Prostrate at
her Feet, with Eyes that spoke too open and intelligibly the Circumstances of
his Heart; yet forced a Smile to say, Indeed you are too obsequious, too lavish
of your Praise; and give me leave to impute these Favors, to that common face
of Gallantry, that generally attends your Sex, rather than to your solid
Judgment.

By this time the Duke had recovered the Arbor; where he was surprised to find
Melantius in a close Conversation with his Daughter, who appeared in great
confusion; the Duke blamed his own Imprudence, in leading him that way, and as
he entered the Arbor, excused himself, by telling her the agreeable
Entertainment of that young Lord's Conversation, had wholly taken up his
Consideration; therefore to compence for having interrupted her accustomed
Retreat, (which he attributed altogether to himself) they would leave her to
her freedom; and seeing Laura the Slave of fair Aspatia appear, the Duke
thought fit to retire.

This sudden motion was something perplexing to Melantius, who could not depart
without a great Regret, which he signified by his Looks, which were all
Remorse. Immediately Aspatia withdrew to her Apartment, where, as soon as she
entered, she threw her self carelessly on a Couch, and there sat very dull and
pensive; Laura imagining it no other, but some little concern for the disorder
she was surprised with in the Garden; approached her with a pleasing Look:
Come, Madam, (said she) banish this trifling Sorrow, here is that will make you
soon assume your usual Gaiety; a Letter from the Count Octavio, Madam. From
Octavio! (said she, starting in a little disorder) Give it me. But what means
my foreboding Heart? Can any thing from that brave Man displease me? And yet I
feel an unusual Shivering over all my Limbs, as some dire Omen of a future
Misfortune! She took the Letter with her trembling Hands, and having opened it,
she Read as follows.

OCTAVIO to ASPATIA.
YOU see (dear Madam) how much I am yours, when even the Commands of my Prince,
cannot detain me in Italy; nor the Threats of a Father induce me to Marry a
Lady, whose Beauty has no Superior but fair Aspatia 's. I am the same constant
Man, as when I left you, and only live to Adore you. What will my Fate produce?
Cannot all my Sufferings, and the Sincerity wherewith I serve you, render me
the most passionate of Lovers? Nor is it possible to reconcile the Duke, your
Father, to a Stranger? Yet this is less my Care, then how I stand in the
favorable Sentiments of the only Person I live by. I am now at Porto with all
the Privacy imaginable, till I know with what Encouragement I may come to
Lisbon. I shall wait with much impatience, to see the Characters of that fair
Hand, from whom depends, the Life, Fortune, and Felicity of,

Madam, Your Unchangeable Octavio.


During the perusal of this Letter, the Commotions of her Mind was visible in
her Face; and having concluded it, she fetched a deep sigh, and returned to her
pensive posture. After some time lifting up her troubled Eyes, she cried, Ah!
Laura, did I Love Octavio? Laura smiled at the oddness of the Question, and
made no Answer; whilst she continued; Was I not obliged in honor to make some
return to him I owe my Life to? Nay more, the Life of him that gave me mine.
But say I did advance too fast, too tenderly, forgive my Indiscretion, it was
no more than Gratitude did prompt me to: But why these scruplous Thoughts? Am I
not the same Aspatia, young, f^ee, and disengaged? No, no, but he is still the
Brave the Generous Octavio; and must not, cannot, will not be imposed upon.

Tormented with a thousand different Thoughts, she past the residue of the Day
till Bedtime. Laura wondering much from whence this should proceed, (though it
required no penetrating Eye to discry a deep impression of the Lovely Stranger
stamped upon her Bosom) had used the most prevalent of her Arguments, to
dissuade her from that melancholy Humor: But alas! 'twas all in vain; she
retired to her Bed, where her Pillow was the only Confident to the Agitati^^
she suffered that Night; which was spent with much more satisfactory
Reflections by Melantius, who encountered no other Ideas but those of Love and
Ecstasy; he was transported with the many Charms he found in the beautiful
Aspatia. He fancied her his own, not dreaming of any Obstacle that could oppose
it; he considered the Equality of their Birth and Fortune, the Convenience of
the Match; and indulged himself with all the transporting and delightful
Raptures that proceed from thought.

The next day was that great Solemnity, wherewith Alphonso Henery entertained
his new Queen Beatrice, Daughter to Alphonso the Tenth, King of Castile; by
whom that Noble Dowry, the Kingdom of Algaroes, was added to the Crown of
Portugal. All the Nobility was there present to pay their Devoirs to the Queen.
In particular, the illustrious Families of Almeyda, and that of the Marquess de
Leganes, who was Father to our Cavalier Melantius. The Celebration of these
Nuptials, would be too tedious to recite; let it suffice, never was any thing
more glorious, where Melantius made the most considerable Figure of the Beaux
Esprits, and Aspatia of the Belles.

The general approbation they received, did not a little contribute to augment
the favorable Sentiments they had entertained for one another. And at the
Tournament, when Aspatia beheld her young Hero enter the Lift, (with an Aspect
that foretold the Miracles he performed) it was easy to read her Wishes in her
Eyes, which were constantly fixed upon him, and seemed to move in the same
Sphere with the Vicissitudes of his Fortune. But oh! how her Heart danced when
he came of Conqueror; the Air refounded with 10 Poeans to the Victor, and
ecchoing Triumphs filled the breath of Fame; but his proudest Trophy was the
Congratulation he received from the fair Aspatia; and without doubt, he was
Gallant enough to attribute his good Fortune to the influence of her Eyes.

After some short Preliminaries, these Diversions broke up, to entertain the
Ladies with a splendid Ball; and it was there Melantius determined to make an
Offering of his panting Heart to the Deity he Worshipped: His kind Stars soon
blessed him with a lucky Opportunity; for Aspatia being somewhat overheated
with Dancing, was in motion with her Fan, which by chance she let fall.
Melantius was the fortunate Person that took it up, and delivering it with a
profound Bow, in a soft dying Tone; he said, Ah! Madam, could you as easily
restore my Heart, which I just now resigned an Offering at your Feet. She
smiled at the pretty Gallantry, and replied, I never retain any thing I cannot
pretend a Property in; and would have declined a farther Discourse: But he
continued, That is as your Cruelty or Justice will determine: This I can
affirm, it is no longer mine; and if your Severity will not think it worth your
Charitable Protection, you shall behold it the most wretched Victim in the
World. He waited for no answer, but taking hold of one corner of her
Handkerchief, which he dexterously conveyed into his own Hands: It Is but
reasonable, Madam, (said he) to afford me some small Relick, to guard that
Breach, which otherwise you expose to the greatest danger imaginable. Although
this did something displease her, it was impossible to retrieve it, without a
public view; therefore not offering at a recovery, she suffered him to carry
it off, though not without a great Resentment, which appeared in her angry Brow.
Melantius, who was sensible of his fault, engaged with the rest of the Company,
and appeared no more that Night before Aspatia, but as a Criminal; only she had
the secret satisfaction of often seeing the Handkerchief displayed to his Lips,
and there most religiously saluted. The Departure of the King and Queen, put a
period to that Days Entertainment; and all the Company retired well disposed to
sleep; nor did a thought molest Aspatia, who enjoyed a sweet Recruit for the
last Night's Tribulation.

Phoebus had already mounted the Olympic Palace, and made a considerable
Progress in his Day's Circuit, when our lovely Fair awaked, and called Laura to
inquire how the Day had past: After she received satisfaction to some such
frivolous Questions, Laura presents her with a Billet-doux, which she had just
received from a Page of Melantius, who still waited for an Answer: She took it
with a panick fear, in hope and doubt, to find what it contained; but who can
tell her private Transport, when she read what follows.

MELANTIUS to ASPATIA.
IF an Offender may have leave to plead for Mercy, have pity on a true
Penitent. My Crime may be too Enormous to expect a Pardon; but I am sure my
Contrition is of as large a size. You have already sufficiently punished me,
and that cruel Frown at parting stabbed deep into my Heart; nor could Poison,
Daggers, or a thousand Deaths be half so terrible. Let it suffice, I only live
to receive my Sentence from those dear Lips that can give Life even in the
pronouncing of my Death. My Life and Happiness are absolutely in your power;
and if to Love with the most sensible Tenderness imaginable, can offend; to
Die, would be but the least part of my Duty: But if a Restoration of my petty
Theft can any way contribute to a Pardon, permit me this Afternoon to lay at
your Feet both That and your Adoring Slave,

Melantius.


This passionate Declaration was so far from displeasing, that it filled her
with a Torrent of Joy, to find a Man so entirely at her Dispose, whom Fate had
already destined her to Love; to deny his Visit, was to rack her own
Inclination, and to permit it too easily, would make the Conquest too cheap;
however, this Contest did not long last, the irresistible God bore sway, and
she returned this Answer.

ASPATIA to MELANTIUS.
I Am Confirmed, that in all points Melantius is the most Gallant of Men; and
where he offends, he makes but too sufficient Reparation: I can forgive without
these Insinuations you use to bribe a Pardon; but shall expect with the Return
of my Handkerchief, you desist a Suit too inglorious for a Hero.

Aspatia.


Having dispatched the Page, she began to reflect how barbarously she used
Octavio in the mean time; but who can resist the powerful influence of that
little Tyrant, who models us after his own Chimera's? well may he be
represented blind, not only for the inequality of Persons that he wounds, but
whoever is possessed of the same Malady, runs violently on, pursues the Object
of their Affections, adheres to nothing but Almighty Love, and cannot see an
Error.

Well, she is resolved to let Octavio stay a little for an Answer, being in
some perplexity what to write to him; she banished all troublesome Thoughts,
and wholly dedicated that Day to Melantius, who came dressed with all the
Gaiety of a young Bridegroom; entered the Room, with ten thousand Graces, and
passionately flings himself at her Feet; and having stole her Hand, he gently
raised it to his trembling Lips, and stamped the Image of his Soul upon it.
Aspatia, who simpathized too feelingly with this Ecstasy, was the first that by
good fortune recovered her self; and being obliged to take some notice, My
Lord, (said she) this is far from concurring with the Capitulations I proposed.
Oh! name them not; (said he) forbid the Sun to shine, stop the bright
Charioteer of Heaven in his full Career, root up the Earth from its Center, but
never, never bid me cease to Love; all these are more possible to be done, then
not to Love the Adorable Aspatia.

She already felt a Commiseration too sensible to withstand, but her unlucky
Sex obliges her to act that hard Part, to appease the dearest of her Wishes:
she wore the Mask, and most severely reprimanded him, conjured him not to
pursue so extravagant a Rallery; or if it were sincere, to avoid so fruitless
an Amor: In short, she played the Tyrant, and insulted over a Heart, whose
utmost Faculty was to serve her; but Melantius could not yield to Despair, at
every little repulse, and resolved not to quit the Siege: He left her not that
Evening, till he had brought her to a more gentle Humor; after that, not a Day
passed wherein he failed to sigh and plead. This tender Application engaged her
to show him indifferent Favors, till at last Time and Assiduity prevailed, and
sighing, dying, she confessed she Loved. It was then his Joy was without
bounds, exalted above a common Transport, he was impatient for a Consummation,
and every Minute of delay was insupportable; he informed the Marquess de
Leganes, that now he was ready to make a Resignation of himself to the fair
Aspatia, and only waited his Proposals to the Duke her Father. The Marquess was
extremely well pleased at his Son's resolution to Marry, commended his Choice,
applauded his Prudence, and without farther demurs, he orders his Coach to be
ready, and away to the Duke de Almydas, whom he had the fortune to find at
home: Before they parted, occasion presented to promote the Unity of their
Families: The Duke returned the Marquess all the Civility in the World; and
though he did not absolutely determine, he desired time to consider, which was
more out of Ceremony, than any doubt or scruple; he knew the convenience of the
Alliance, and after pretensions of mature Consideration, two or three Visits
brought it to a conclusion.

Next there was a most glorious Preparation for their Nuptials; in the mean
time Melantius had free egress and regress to the Author of his Bliss, where
the blessed Hours were spent in gazing, wishing, and a thousand Toys that
Lovers affect to please themselves, till the happier Minutes may be improved.

Who would not conclude him now the happiest of all Men, just ready to launch
into a Sea of Pleasure, within reach of the wished for Haven, and not able to
touch the Shore. Fate so ordered it that the Marchioness de Leganes was taken
violently ill, and in three or four days died: This put a stop to a farther
proceeding, in the Hymenean Ceremonies, till a long Obsequies was celebrated to
the Dead.

It Is impossible to tell how much Melantius suffered at this time, not only for
the loss of so dear a Parent, but at the delay of so many Joys; which without
doubt would have been a kind Ingredient, and have helped down the bitter Pill of
Affliction, with less regret; there is no Life, no support for him, whilst
absent from Aspatia: But the Circumstance of his Affairs forbidding his stay,
the better to bear this parting, he begs her Picture, which she grants, but at
the same time entreats for his: This was his constant Companion in all
Adventures, never from his Bosom, slept and conversed with him, mitigated his
Misfortunes and increased his Joys; and so strong was his Imagination, that he
fancied it bore part in all his Change of Fortune.

The time was now come, that the Marchioness was conveyed to Porto, there to be
Interred, in a Tomb belonging to their Ancestors. Whilst these Rites were
performing, Melantius, to give vent to the excess of Sorrow that oppressed him,
walked out one Evening on the Banks of Duero, whose pleasant Streams runs by the
Walls of Porto; and moving on with a soft easy pace, silently entertaining
himself with Contemplation of his future Fate, was roused from the Abyss of
Thought he was lost in, by a Sigh that seemed to pierce the Air; this made him
curious to discover what Person it was that gave such evident tokens of
Distress: He had not gone far before he discovered a Cavalier, who lay upon the
Grass, with his Face toward the River; he appeared to be very tall, and his
Hair black; he had a Letter in his Hand, which having read, he flung his Arm
down with a little force, and cried, Where must we seek for Virtue? Is there
such a thing in being? Or, is it but a Notion? It Is evident it is not to be
found within this Globe of Earth, if it can fail in Cruel Fair Aspatia. These
words were very much surprising to Melantius, who heard one sighing, and as he
hoped for another Aspatia, he was a true Lover, and did not want for a thousand
perplexing Fears and Doubts, at the Name of his Mistress, yet were they not so
violent as to disturb his attention to the Cavalier who thus went on: All
things in Nature look so hush and calm, and not a breath of wind disturbs the
gentle Air, throughout the Horizon is all serene, nor do these dewy Sheets one
wrinkle wear; and yet the Perturbations of my Breast, are able to affect the
World around me: Have I not sent, implored, and wished in vain? And am I now
grown so Contemptible not to deserve an Answer? Oh! Where are all those pitying
Looks and Glances, that used to wound Octavio with delight? Was my Hopes
exalted to that height, to make my Fall mo^e desperate, and upbraid me with too
great Presumption? These Characters! These dear Characters! can Witness I was
not once indifferent to her. Support me, feeble Limbs, once more to Lisbon, and
I Will discharge you ever from a future Service.

The naming of Lisbon, gave a fresh Alarm to Melantius, and had like to have
delivered him up to as much Desparation as the other: He was fixing direful
Thoughts, when he perceived the Cavalier to rise and come forward, which
obliged him to retire some distance, till he saw the way he would take, being
resolved to track him, and if possible, to find out the Mystery of his Trouble;
with that design he suffered him to advance to the utmost limit of his sight;
who returned the same way that Melantius came, with his Arms folded, and his
Eyes fixed upon the Earth. In this posture he had not gone far, before he
discerned something on the ground which cast a resplendant light, that showed
it to be of considerable value; and having taken it up, it appeared an
Ebbony-Case inlayed with Gold, and set round with Diamonds; the outside Glories
were inferior to what he found within, and it requires a more Polite Pen to
display the Wonder, Ecstasy and Jealousy, that possessed his mind, to find the
lively Protraicture of Aspatia painted there. Great Gods! (said he) Where will
my various Fortune end? Am I beholden to ye for this Present, or is it lost by
my more happy Rival? Perhaps Aspatia may be near this place, and by some lucky
Accident have dropped it: But Oh! that hope is vanished 're it is conceived;
Octavio dare not think she who could suffer him to Languish these two Months,
without the least of a relenting Pity, could be induced to set a foot near
Porto, whilst it contained her much contemned Admirer: Yet, whatever Chance has
sent thee, thou art welcome. Aspatia may be Cruel to the highest degree, but
you are innocent, and no Ingrate; you smile, and please me with a thousand
Graces; and should I lay you near my panting Heart, you would no way resist,
but yield, and there receive warmth from my raging fire: Nay, should I ravish
here ten thousand Kisses, they were all my own, without the least repulse: Why
then, dear Flatterer, we will never part, but cheat my childish Hope with these
Delusions.

He was seated under a Tree, pleasing himself with abundance of such wild
Discourses. When Melantius missed his Picture, he returned with all the Concern
in the World, to the place where he discovered the Cavalier; and having
searched diligently, and not finding it, his fears suggests to him a thousand
Doubts: Sometimes he fancies that he had dropped it as he came, and probably it is
found by some poor Peasant; who, tempted with the Treasure, would conceal it,
from all possible means of regaining: Then he imagines it in the hands of the
Cavalier, whom by this time he had lost sight of, and knows not where to find:
This made him redouble his Pace, and with all the speed he could, endeavor to
recover the Town before he was Housed; yet not so expeditiously as to hinder
him from a slight search as he passed. Being thus employed, and his thoughts
wholly fixed on his Loss, he was startled at the unexpected sight of the
Cavalier, who still lay under the Tree, adoring the lovely Picture of Aspatia.
Melantius filled with Joy to have found it, yet Jealousy and Spleen to see it
there, went up to him; and with a hasty Voice demanded the Piece. But the
Cavalier drowned in his thoughts, answers to some former Ejaculations of his
own; The Gods shall never retrieve thee. This rude reply, (as Melantius
apprehended it to be) so enraged him, that without any more words he had
recourse to his Sword; bidding the Cavalier (if he dared) rise, and defend it;
who being recovered from his waking Dream by this fierce Attack, though not
knowing the reason, yet seeing there was no time for Parley, he Drew in his own
Defense; at first only parrying to avoid the Passes that were made at him, but
finding his Enemy too resolute to be played with, he was forced to endeavor
his Dispatch, to secure his own Life.

This rencounter was maintained with equal Fortune for some time, by these
Combitants, till Melantius feeling himself bleed in the right Arm, renewed his
force; Shame and Anger made him desperate; so that by a thrust under the left
Pap, he had the advantage to see the Cavalier fall; but Melantius (who was in
all points truly Noble and Generous, ran to his Assistance, deplored his Fate,
begged his Pardon, and blamed him for being so refractory. The Cavalier had
neither Sense, nor Strength to listen to his many relenting, though ineffectual
Expressions, yet perceiving him willing to serve him, with broken Sentences and
Signs, he desired to be carried to a little Cott within a stones throw, which
stood alone and obscure at the foot of a Hill. Melantius having discry'd the
place, was in distress how to convey him thither; when he beheld an old Man
driving up the Hill a few poor Goats; he called to him, and desired his help,
he was very ready to assist, and withal told him, what his humble Roof could
afford, was at their Command; but he feared it had nothing to recommend it but
Retirement, being three Miles off the City, poorly furnished, and ill provided.
Melantius thankt him for his feasonable Relief, and returned to the place where
he had left the Cavalier just expiring. When the old Man drew near to discern
the Face of this Unfortunate, he burst into a shower of Tears; and cried, Ah!
poor Don Pedro; What Cruel Hand has destroyed the best of Men? Now may these
Shades be cursed, whose dear delightful Retreat has betrayed thee, like a
Siren, to thy utter ruin: Did I this Morning leave thee fresh and well, to
bring thee home a dead and helpless Corpse? Oh! had I never known thy Virtues,
I had never missed thee.

His grief spoke a sensible sorrow, but considering a speedy help was required,
Melantius interrupted him to bear the Cavalier to the House, where they laid
him on a Bed, and covered up his Wound close from the Air; Melantius likewise
bound up his own Arm, and the old Man called a Lad, whom they sent to the Town
to bring a Surgeon with all speed and privacy; in the mean time careful not
to disturb the wounded Cavalier, who had little other sign of Life than a
troubled breathing; they retire to the Door of the Hutt, where Melantius
enquired of the old Man what he knew concerning him, he was nothing scrupulous
to declare his acquaintance of him, and thus began.

Sir, (said he) I have lived upon this spot these fourscore years, never in
plenty, nor never did I want; by Trade a Fisherman, my Family once large, which
I maintained by my daily Labor, till the Supreme Powers were pleased to reduce
it to the poor Lad you have seen, who is my Grandchild; he is now about
fifteen years of Age, him have I brought up to the same Slavery, being in no
Capacity to do better for him; we live alone, and eat what we earn with sweet
content. One-Evening, as we were fishing, two Leagues from this place, was the
first time we saw this Don Pedro, sitting at the foot of a Rock melancholy, and
sighing to the Winds; but he took no notice of us that time, nor several times
after, when we have found him in the same place, sometimes reading, sometimes
complaining at his hard Fate; one Day he seemed diverted with our Sport, and
des^red to Board us; we put to Shore and took him in, and he continued with us
till toward Night, enquiring of my Life, my Family, my Abode, in all which he
was particularly pleased at my unambitious Mind, and free Content; he told me I
was Rich and Happy because I coveted no more. For that Night we parted, and
having liberally rewarded us, he returned from whence he came, but bid us not
fail to meet him the next Day, having promised to visit our homely Habitation:
We fetched him punctually at the appointed place, and brought him to this
Rustic Shore, where he was so taken with the Retirement, and innocent Life,
being a Nursery to his Grief, that he could not part from us; but this mean
Room (he now lies in) was his Lodging, being the best we have. Six Weeks has he
been here, in which time his Diversion was to Walk alone, early and late,
sometimes he would Fish with us, he fared as we did; all I could learn relating
to himself, or Country, is, that his Name is Pedro, a Spaniard Born; he was
very inquisitive after Letters, and sent the Boy every Night to Porto to
enquire.

By this time the Chyrurgeon was come, whom Melantius bribed to Secrecy; having
prob'd the Wound of the Cavalier, they were greatly encouraged to find it not
mortal; but his excessive bleeding had already reduced him so low, he could not
speak, but fainted several times in their Arms. Melantius (though he did not want
for Jealousy that this was his Rival) yet considered his Misfortune with much
trouble, he stayed till he was Dressed, and after applying something to his own
Arm, and leaving a Charge to the old Man to be careful of him, he returned with
the Chyrurgeon to Porto, promising to be with them early the next Morning.
After a short Devoir paid to the Marquess de Leganez, he retired to his Bed,
to Contemplate on the Days Adventure, and although his Malady required rest, his
distracted thoughts could not permit of any respite, but flew more swift than
the fleeting Minutes; he was impatient for the Day, that he might again visit
the wounded Cavalier, who (he hoped) would be in a Condition to relate some
part of his Life, at least tell him, why he would not part with the Picture but
by Compulsion.

Scarce had the pale-faced Empress of the Night, drawn her Sable Curtains, but
Melantius was up, and arrived at the poor Mansion; just as bright Sol had tip'd
the top of Olympius with his golden Beams, having before taken care all
Necessaries should be brought; the Cavalier, whom he found something revived by
a little Sleep he had gotten, and both able to look up and speak. Melantius
enquired of his Health, withal signifying some Joy for this small Amendment,
but an undissembled Concern for his Misfortune. The Cavalier was amazed at this
great Civility, from a Person he imagined had used him the most unreasonable of
all Men. Sir, (said he, in a weak faint voice) how much I receive from you now,
can only be repayed by a bare acknowledgment, and I must attribute this Favor
altogether to your Generosity, being as much at a loss for any Merit of mine to
deserve it, as I am at our late Quarrel. Melantius as much puzzel'd at these
Expressions, was apt to believe a Fevor had seized his Head, but considering
'em spoke with an Air that showed a great Moderation, and peculiar Grace, he
was obliged to answer in this manner. Nothing could have provoked my Sword
against a Person of your Worth, but the refusing to restore this Picture, which
is my only present Felicity. The Cavalier assured him he did not hear it
demanded. But, Sir, (said he) dare you so far trust my Fidelity, to inform me
whose it is, and how it became yours? Melantius very willingly replied; It is a
Lady's, whose Fame is not confined to the scanty limits of one Kingdom, but
universally admired: She is the Daughter to the Duke de Almeyda; and were it
not for the Jilting Tricks of Fortune, I should now style her my Wife; her own
Hand recommended it to me, when the Death of the Marchioness de Leganes (from
whom I received my being) put a stop to our Marriage, which should have been
Consummated within a Week.

The Cavalier, whose Attention was interrupted with a Torrent of Sighs, at this
last Accent of Melantius, resigned his Life, or at least it appeared so, when
all the industry that was used could not recall his Spirits; but just when they
discovered some glimering Hopes, his Soul shrank back as in the Abhorrance of
the World; but the assistance of the Surgeon, who was now come, was so
effectual, that no longer could the impulse of his anxious Trouble repel his
Art, but in spite of himself, was his Life thrust back, to die ten thousand
Deaths: With the first breath he recovered, he exclaimed against the Cruel
Fair, and blames Heaven for making her the brightest of her Sex, without
dispersing their Divinest Attributes upon her. Oh! Why! (said he) Why was she
created so Divinely Glorious? (That Gods themselves would have been proud to
have layn at her Feet, adoring Captives) and not be blessed with unblemished
and unshaken Virtue? Is the^e no Bolt of Heaven that st^^kes with Fate, but
must it light on miserable Octavio? Ah! false Ingrate, now triumph in thy
Injures, and with thy insulting scorn crush thy loathed Victim lower than the
Grave.

Every word he spoke, was like Darts to Melantius, and almost pierced him
through; nor was his staggering Thoughts longer in dispute, if this was his
Rival: Alas! he was too terribly convinced; yet being nearly concerned to have
a more ample satisfaction, which he could not learn from this confused
Discourse; he had so much command of himself, as to endeavor to moderate the
excess of his Passion, and recall his Peace: But few things are of sufficient
power to persuade a despairing Man into Reason; he looks upon himself as the
lowest and vilest Insect; miserable, despised, and ruined; nay, lost in a Mist
of wild Horrors. In this rage he continues to curse the malice of his Stars,
sometimes pouring out Execrations on himself, for being too unworthy to possess
so Divine Treasures. Then again charging her with being False, Cruel, Inhumane
and Unjust. Now (said he) if this Soul dare remain in this desolate Body, who
can be more wretched? But I will never fall so low, and abject: Nor can I bear,
(even though her Charms are by her falsehood almost lost;) that another should
ravish them from me. But will the Gods permit such things to prosper? On whom
we Mortals do rely for Justice. No endeavor they could use, could bring him
into a calmer Humor, or engage him to suffer his Wound to be dressed; he still
opposed it, and tore the Plasters off as they were applied. Melantius
alleged, That probably there might be a mistake. Are you sure (said he) this
is the same Aspatia? If you knew this Hand, (he replied) which I believe you
are no Stranger to, your Doubts are evidently resolved. With that he delivered
him a Letter, in which there was such tender Expressions, that could proceed
from nothing but Love: As he read, every Letter grated his Soul, to find such
considerable Favors lavished on another. Oh! Poor Melantius; (said he, fighing
to himself) thou have but blown up the Embers, in the absence of this Cavalier;
for it is impossible such substantial Love, could vanish with a flash; even when
he was within reach of enjoying all that his Soul could wish for. But why
should I complain? Is it not for me, she forgoes all these Engagements? If it
is a Frailty, it is to make me happy? But how am I sure she does not yet retain
some Inclination, for the once loved Octavio? Who by one melting glance, may
perhaps kindle afresh her expiring Flame. How may I believe that a Heart which
could once play false, should constant prove to me? What Charms has poor
Melantius to secure it? Only Excess of Love. Notwithstanding these uneasy
Thoughts, he resolves to see her suddenly; and if her Plea convinced him of her
Innocence, she should from him receive an everlasting faithful Love. Yet this
ungenerous Proceeding with Octavio, shocked his tenderest Sentiments; and were
he not already the most amorous of Men, he had declined a Beauty that could be
guilty of such pitiful Conduct: He was thoroughly convinced how much the
Cavalier might have hoped for; yet considering himself the happy Man, he
reflects on it with Partiality. After much entreaty they prevailed with him to
be dressed, and finding him inclinable to repose, (which was but a feigned
show, that he might have the melancholy liberty of his own Thoughts) they left
him.

Melantius returning to Porto, in his way met the Boy with a Letter directed to
Don Pedro, and knowing the Hand to be Aspatia's, who could blame his Curiosity,
in this juncture of Affairs for opening it? She had been in a Sea of Troubles
and Fears in his Absence, considering what would be the event of Octavio's
Passion, should she not answer his Letter: She knew he could not long be a
Stranger to her Amors with Melantius, and therefore she thought cunningly to
palliate the Story to him her self; with this design she had framed, (with all
the Subtilty and Craft that could be invented) a way to break to him the
dreadful Secret; and in order to that, had thus writ.

ASPATIA to OCTAVIO.
THink me not Ungrateful, when I send the Generous Octavio, the best of Wishes.
Oh! how unaccountable are the Circumstances of our Lives and Passions? Let it
suffice, it is you, and only you, can make my future Days happy, or miserable: I
have Wonders to tell you, and beg that speedily you come to Lisbon. Laura shall
meet you, at the usual Rendezvous, and conduct you to the lost and confused

Aspatia.


This indeed new modeled his Resolutions; and instead of seeing her, his design
is now wholly to abandon her, having discovered (as he thinks) a sufficient
Demonstration of her Falseness; Rage and Resentment, filled his Soul: Am I at
last (said he) abused and forlorn? No, false One, you may triumph, but never
shall insult over the wronged Melantius; for from this Minute, I will shun thy
false deluding Cha^ms.

Thus fully determined, he goes home; no rest could he take, various were his
thoughts, and as various his Resolutions; yet all determined in that point, of
never seeing more the Fair Deceiver. How to dispose of himself he was not long
at a stand, when he reflected that all Italy was in Arms, and that the Dispute
betwixt the Pittis, and that Complete Hero and Champion for his Country,
Lorenzo de Medici, the Tuscan-War that was then afoot, the Republic of Venice
that was likewise engaged, would give him a glorious Diversion, from his
perplexing Crosses, especially too since the Turks gave them new Fears, by
menacing the remainder of those Islands, which they held in the Archipelago.

Thus positively resolved, he writes a Letter to the Marquis de Leganes; in
which he desired him not to be concerned, at his sudden Departure; since he had
made a Vow to perform some Religious Duties, not only relating to himself, but
for the good of his dead Mother's Soul; withal telling him the reason why he
did not take his leave, as his Duty required, was fear of being opposed in that
which nothing ought to avert; and in his absence, which he hoped would not be
long, his Prayers should constantly be offered up for his Prosperity: Likewise,
that he should go nigh to steer his first Course to our Lady of Loretto. This
being prepared, he called a Servant whom he could trust, and having related to
him his design, ordered him with speed and privacy to hire a Feleuqua at the
nighest Port. Whilst his Man (whose Name was Montal) was thus employed:
Melantius writes to Aspatia this Letter, and in it incloses hers, which he had
intercepted going to Octavio.

MELANTIUS to ASPATIA.
YOU must pardon me (Madam) if I dare not encounter those dangerous Eyes once
more to take my last Farewell; believe me, it is with great Regret I quit this
Kingdom, and had Aspatia been true, not Empires heaped on Empires, could have
tempted me to leave her. At the same time I must applaud your Generosity to the
unhappy happy Octavio, who by a dire Mistake of Fortune, has suffered under my
Hand, yet not so cruelly as by your Eyes: It Is time to abate the Tyranny you
have used, and restore a Heart he once has been possessed of. If I have wronged
him in intercepting this Billet, y ur Mercy which I am sure will not be
wanting, can calm the raging Feavor in his Blood. Yet to make a Reparation for
my Fault, but more to gratify your dearest Wish, by my Absence you shall fear
no Obstacle to molest your Tranquillity; and wherever I am, spite of myself,
I am the lost confused Aspatia's

Melantius.


Soon after Montal returned with the News of a Merchant-Vessel that only waited
the next fair Wind to hoist Sail for the Streights, which they hourly expected.
Melantius got all things in readiness, having contrived just as he Embarked, to
send his two Letters forward. About the hour of Twelve, a Mariner came to give
Montal warning, that the more speed they made the better. The Night shrouded
with her gloomy Vall, and a fresh Breeze of Wind represented to Melantius (as
he made to the Port) not the calmest Reflections; yet with a Noble Bravery that
always attended him, he Embarked; where we will leave him on his Voyage, and
relate what was done in the mean time at Home.

Early the next Morning the Marquess de Leganes had his Letter, which extremely
startled him, but being a Pious Man, and considering the consequence of the
Business, he the easier dispensed with his Absence; and what made him the more
credulous, was his Engagement with Aspatia, which he judged to be too dear a
Tie, to quit upon a Whimsy: Thus with moderation did the Marquess bear the
Absence of his Son, but for what poor unfortunate Aspatia suffered, (who knew
too well the cr^^^ cause) I dare not undertake here to display. Only the weight
of her Misfortunes was of power to sink a World. A Death-like Cold seized her
Heart, her every Faculty lost their use at the News of his Flight. In this
manner she continued for a long time, till her swelling Passion forced a vent;
then how often did she blame her unhappy Conduct, raging and almost frantic,
she delivered herself up to the extremity of an immoderate Sorrow: No Name was
too hideous for such black Ingratitude, as she termed it, nor no Wish too hard
or severe; at the same time forgetting her unkind usage to Octavio. There was
not one Argument Laura omitted to restore her Peace, but to no purpose, her
Reason was lost; she beheld her self fallen from the height of Bliss to the
most abject Misfortune, and in her wild thoughts she saw the Man she loved, and
hourly languished for, in another Country, pleasant, and diverting himself in
Company with all the Ladies of Beauty, Wit, and Fortune, whilst she was
flighted and abandoned by him, deserted, and foraken: How this racked the
utmost faculty of her Soul? Oh! Melantius; Oh! Cruel Melantius, did she cry,
How miserable? How wretched miserable have you made me? If I have been unjust,
Heaven knows it is not to thee; then blame thy self, thy dear engaging Self,
that has betrayed Aspatia to those base Characters of False, Unjust, and
Vngenerous.

This Passion continued so violent, that she found it impossible to appear
before the Duke that Day, without exposing her Sentiments, having lost her
Masterpiece of Dissimulation and Cunning, which by some is attributed as
incident to the Sex, too sensible was her Affliction to bear disguise, and
therefore to conceal it from the Duke, whom she knew would search too nicely
into the dreadful Cause, she sent Laura to acquaint him she was indisposed,
immediately retiring to her Bed, in expectation of a Visit, knowing him to be
the most indulgent of Fathers: Not long after he came reading of a Letter he
had just received, and having enquired and advised about her Health, This
Letter comes (said he) from the Marquess de Leganes, wherein he acquaints me of
a short Voyage his Son has taken to the Chapel of Loretto; but, I believe
(continued he with a Smile) your Intelligence has been more speedy. At this
second Confirmation and killing ungrateful News, she could hardly support her
self, and as he pressed on to know if she had been before informed, she felt the
greatest difficulty and pain to force but those words, I was.

The Duke having some guess at the nature of her Malady, left her to gain some
Repose, or rather to the freedom of her own Thoughts. No sooner had he quitted
the Room but she called Laura to her, and with an easy Look, as if she had
mastered some difficulty, spoke to her in this manner:

Since I have confided in thee as to all the Circumstances of my Life, so must
you now assist me in this last and most Desperate: I Love, and you are no
Stranger to the Extremity of my Passion, my Life, my Honor, my Fame, are but
false Idols to that Potent God: Tell me then, Can I live and not possess
Melantius? That dear Melantius, whose Soul once moved with the same tender
melting touch as mine. Oh! it is impossible; he thinks me False, Perfidious, or
he had never left me: Shall I then live with this black Infamy, and not right
my self? No, I will seek him to the utmost Verge of Earth, and there proclaim
my Innocence; then if his Heart should prove imp^netrable, and obdurate, my
Death shall convince him of the direful Truth; and my wronged Ghost shall be
ever before his Eyes, raving for Justice and Revenge, perplex his future Peace.

Laura gave her self no trouble to diswade her from this Exploit, believing it
no other then a Chimera she would never put in execution; But she found her
self mistaken, it was what had taken deep root and fixed in her Resolution, she
persisted in it daily, and then she failed not to lay before her the danger and
hazard, but chiefly the false Constructions would be made of such an
extravagant Action. Aspatia was deaf to all Advice, and only made answer, She
would not be diverted from her Design, though she was forced to adventure alone.
When Laura found her so fully determined, she assured her, nothing could have
that face of difficulty, or terror, to make her decline her in the most
desperate Attempt; but hoping her care in reminding her of what might prove to
her Disadvantage, should not offend, she positively consents to obey her
Commands.

Thus satisfied with Laura's Compliance, the next Consultation was to get Men's
Clothes, the easier to disguise their Flight, and most commodious for their
adventurous Travels. This Task was left to Laura, as likewise to hire a Vessel
to Transport 'em to any Port in Italy, who performed very punctually all her
Commands, and pretending a Visit to some Relations for two or three Days, by
Aspatia's Connivance, she went directly to Setuval, a famous Haven about 20
Miles from Lisbon, where she secured a small Feleuqua for their purpose, and
also placed Horses in the Rode for their more speedy conveyance thither. The
Wind sat fair every Hour she was there, which obliged her to make a quick
return to Lisbone, to inform Aspatia, and assist her Flight.

Night being the time for performing of such Projects, they waited wish great
impatience and panick fears till it came, in the mean time providing good store
of Gold and Jewels, the most portable and necessary Luggage, and being thus
Knight-Errantly Equipped, they sallied out, and at two Miles Stage took Horse,
and rid full speed to Setuval; they arrived there about four a Clock, was
Embarked with the Courage of Heroins, and a fair way under Sail e're they were
missed at home. But yet too soon was the fatal News spread throughout all
Portugal, for the Duke not seeing nor hearing from his Daughter the next Day,
concluding her not well, went (as was his usual Custom) to her Apartment to
visit her, but not finding her there, he was much surprised, and seeing a Note
lie on the Table he took it up, which to his greater Wonder, he found
subscribed to himself; wherein she acquainted him she had left the Kingdom, but
had no way left to excuse her Flight, but that Almighty Love was the powerful
Cause, whose Passions and Effects were ever unaccountable, and begged him, if
he could, retain a thought of his own former Joys, he would be so Charitable to
recollect them in her defense, and believe she left so good a Father, with the
greatest violence imaginable; concluding with her Petition to indulge himself,
and bear her Absence with moderation, and a charitable Opinion of her, giving
him some hopes of a speedy return, which should compensate for all her
imprudence: But alas! This was of little force or efficacy; for the immoderate
Grief, Anguish, and Shame which possessed the Duke, (not only for the loss of a
Child he had built his chief felicity on, but at the Dishonor of his Family,
which could never be retrieved) was not with ease to be allayed: He considered
her the Bloom of all Portugal, celebrated for her Beauty, and universally
admired; but when he came to reflect what a Blot she had given all these
Advantages, he could hardly support the Trouble. There was no Port throughout
the Kingdom he failed to send to, with Orders to search all Transport-Ships;
all diligence imaginable was used, but to no purpose; our Amazons were fled
beyond recall, their Habits taking off all Suspicion.

Being thus destitute of Comfort, he found himself not Philosopher sufficient,
to bear with tranquillity, so great a Misfortune, especially in a place where he
had all Eyes upon him, he therefore retired to a curious, though solitary Seat he
had some twelve Miles from the Port of Ville-neue, where he passed his Days
recluse from the World, with great Devotion and Acts of Charity, only now and
then a select Friend, in particular the Marquess de Leganes, who was herein
greatly interested, a fit Companion to lament with him the unfortunate Conduct
of both their Children: But what the more confounded the Marquess was, he
lately had an account his Son was long since arrived at Leghorn, and after
visiting some of those Holy Places he had promised, he had put himself in the
Gens d'Arms of the Florentines, under Lorenzo de Medici; where he did those
Wonders, I shall have no occasion to speak of here.

But to return to Aspatia, whose Voyage for the best part was pleasant and
prosperous, they apprehended themselves past all danger, being within ten
Leagues or less of Leghorn, when a boisterous Storm arose, and so violent a
Tempest, that it terrified the most daring Mariner; the Seas ran Mountains
high, and the Heavens clattered out Peals of Thunder; and notwithstanding they
were so nigh the Shore, they were again drove out to Sea; and finding the Storm
grow louder and more dreadful, they cut their Mainmast by the Board, and
strove to lay their Vessel at Hull, whilst all Hands were at work to furl their
Sails, she sprang two Leaks, and it was with much ado, by the incredible labor
and industry of the Seamen, who were continually plying the Pump, she was kept
above Water.

This was a sad discouragement to our Amazones, (whom, though I cannot affirm,
wished themselves on their own Native Soil) yet none can blame them for being
dismayed, when even the Tritons and Dolphins were amazed. This Tempest lasted
full six Hours, all which time it seemed to threaten them with immediate
Destruction, at length it began to clear up to Windward, the Wind abated, and
in little time they made Land, though distant from the designed Shore. They
wrought lustily for their Deliverance, and recovered a rocky and dangerous
Haven, belonging to the State of Naples, called, Fuzzuelo. The Feleuqua had
done its last Duty, in bringing them safe to Land, her Rudder being spent, and
she so much disabled, she was incapable of further Service, and lay a dismal
Memorandum of their past Danger with her Keel upward upon the Sands.

With Joy they Landed, though feeble and faint, with little Nourishment, and hard
Work, they in the Storm being forced to fling over Board most of their
Provisions to lighten the Vessel. This was a place which obliged every one to
shift for themselves; being none acquainted with the Country. There were few
other Passengers than Aspatia, who now went by the Name of Don Lelio, and Laura
by that of Carlo.

Wildness, Wants, Barrenness, and innumerable Calamities were seated here,
which dreadful appearance encouraged the Weather-beaten and distressed Saylors,
with Resolution to scale those desperate and stupendous Mountains, in pursuit
of Food and Life; but this Achievement had too many Difficulties and Terrors
to be attempted by Don Lelio, who was driven to that extremity, to beg when
they had allayed their own Hunger, some one would be so Charitable to return
with Relief, and assist them up that desperate Precipice, yet before they
departed, to prevent any Outrage which might be offered, he distributed Gold
largely amongst them, and assured them he had but a small parcel left for the
supplying his own Necessities, the Quantity, and Freeness wherewith it was
given, easily confirmed them in this belief, and there was not one but promised
an Expeditious Return with the first Provisions they found. Thus did this
Extravagant Passion reduce the Tender, Beautiful, and much to be pitty'd Don
Lelio to all the Distress of Hunger and Cold; nay, exposed to a Multitude of
other Dangers; yet nothing made so cruel an Impression as the Absence of
Melantius. Her Heart was not so obdurate, as to bear such sensible afflictions
without Tears, which were shed in abundance by them both, to see themselves
left on a naked Rock, destitute of all comfort, and likely to become a Prey to
some furious wild Beast: Thus laden with fears and grief, they imparted their
sad Thoughts one to the other, as they moved along the Shore, and engaged in
this lamentable Conversation, weeping their Fate, without design, or
consideration, they had stragled about a Mile from the place where they first
Landed, there they found an easy ascent up the Mountains, 'twas a Path that
was levelled as much as those impregnable Rocks would permit, and appeared to
be frequented; they were in great dispute, Whether they should make any Sally
alone, not only for fear of the Dangers they might encourter; but for fear of
missing those who had promised to bring them succor, at last they resolved to
take a view of the Countries on the other side, and then to return to their
appointed place, they fortified one another with Counsel, Courage and Comfort,
and attained to the utmost height of the Clift, before they could think of
descending, and to their great satisfaction, they found on that side an easy
descent; they were likewise delighted with the pleasant Prospect of a lovely
Champion Country stocked with curious Rivers, and fine Woods; this Prospect for
some time took up their Consideration, and they had not yet determined what to
do, when they heard the agreeable sound of soft Music in a Wood, at the Foot
of that Rock; they were now in hopes they were not far from Inhabitants, and
believed it the best prudence to seek for shelter there, rather than trust to
poor famished Wretches, who perhaps were as far from Comfort as ever; they made
no longer delay, but with speed descended, entered the pleasant Wood, and made
up, as nigh as they could guess, to the harmonious found that they heard on the
Rock; they had not gone far before they came under the Shade of a Noble Poplar,
which spread his Branches over so large a Circumference, that it required
admiration, as a curious piece of Nature; but what was more surprising to them,
was to read on this Tree carved in great Characters on the Bark, Cruel Unkind
Octavio. This Name had dreadful effects on Don Lelio, which made Carlo take
pains to draw him from that place, least it should have proved prejudicial to
them both; yet before he would consent to depart, he wrote underneath it with
the point of his Sword, Cruel Unkind Melantius. By this time the Music
desisted, which put them to some trouble to find the way, but following a small
Track they had discovered, e're they were aware, they were entertained with the
same Instrument again; and a Voice that was sweet, and so nigh that it
surprised them.

The Words that were Sung, were these.

I.
MVst I Love, and must I Languish,
And never hope to ease my Pain?
Can I bear the bitter Anguish
Of a slighted cold Disdain?
Is the Darts then of no power
For to wound this Dear Ingrate?
Must I suffer every Hour,
And be pitied when too late?
II.
Cruel God now change thy Fashion,
Since we must thy Will obey;
Give us both an equal Passion,
Or both Flames do thou allay:
Say Great Deity, Must never
My soft Wishes have redress?
Oh! How vain is all endeavor?
Love can only Love express.
They listened with great Attention, having at the same time the advantage of
seeing the lovely Person, who deliverd 'em in French, which both of them
understood perfectly well; it being generally used by the Quality of most
Nations: The Words were delivered with an Air all Passionate yet Serene; which
Don Lelio had the satisfaction of observing without being discovered himself.
The Youth appeared about the Age of Sixteen, Beautiful as Narcissus, Fair as
the God of Love, his Eyes of the nicest black, had a gloss that out shined the
Glories of the Day, and all his Features surprisingly perfect: He was dressed
after the French Mode, gallant in all things: His Hair which was curiously
fair, was tied up in a Scarlet Ribbon: He was seated under a Myrtle Tree, and
had a Lute under his Arm which afforded them this delightful Harmony. Appearing
in this posture, he exceeded all the Fictions that Poets attribute to Adonis.

The Woods, the Groves, the pleasant murmuring noise of little Rivulets, and
this amorous Song, gave Don Lelio a sweet Idea of Elyzium; and it was no small
comfort to him, that his Fortune had cast him on a Shore where there were
Lovers; he could not believe them a barbarous People, that were capable of so
refined a Sentiment. The Verses were so composed, they gave no intelligence,
Whether a Man or Woman was complained of, and the Habit being all that appeared
Masculine in this Charming Youth, who had so much Goodness, Innocence and
Sweetness in his Looks, that they apprehended no danger to encounter him: When
the Song ended, they made up to the place where he was, who appeared in a great
disorder at their approach, but they being willing to put an end to a Fright
(that had spread an agreeable Blush throughout his Face) readily told their
Distress, declaring they were Shipwrackt Persons, thrown by Fortune on that
Coast, though distant from thence some Miles; the rest of their Company making
their way over the dreadful Mountains, they only were left without hopes
(unable to follow such desperate Attempts) till their wandering Steps had led
them to that place, which had an Eye of Humanity in it. They humbly entreated
him to inform them where they might hope for some Relief. Don Ariosto (so was
this young Cavalier called) viewing the effeminate Delicacy of Don Lelio and
his Comrade, had pretty well dissipated the Fears that had assaulted him, and
being of a compassionate tender Disposition, was impatient to assist them;
therefore with a quick return, he requires them to follow him, and to his
utmost endeavor he would contribute to serve them, though he feared, the place
could not produce any Accommodation worthy of such Persons; being acquainted
with nothing but a poor Cabin at the entrance of that Wood. They gladly
accepted the Favor, and full of grateful Acknowledgments, redoubled their
Paces to this happy Retreat, which they found miserable poor to appearance, but
'twas no small Surprise to them when they entered, to see all things, though far
from fine, curiously neat. The Inhabitants were, an Old Man, and an Old Woman,
with one only Daughter, they received him with all the Joy in the World, and he
appeared to have no small Authority there: Having first refreshed the
Strangers, with wholesome Cordials, he led them into a Room, where there was a
little Field Bed, and all things else necessary for a Cavalier, not to be
expected in so mean a Mansion. He told them it had been his Abode a
considerable time, finding more Content there, then in greater Splendor. He
presented them Clothes to shift themselves, retiring that they might have
liberty, whilst he ordered a plentiful Supper; at which he had a Relation of
all their Misfortunes at Sea. This Entertainment was comfortable and
delightful, but broke up soon, that the weary Travelers might take Repose
after their hard Sufferings. How terrible was the Complement expected here from
Don Lelio? For it was but reasonable he should Invite Don Ariosto to partake a
Lodging in his own Bed, whilst the others opposing it, seemed a gentle
Courtisie, taking up with Cloe's Chamber, who for a shift was forced to lie at
the Feet of her Old Parents.

Our Adventurers spent some part of the Night in discoursing of their
Deliverance, as also of the Youth, Beauty, and particular way of living of the
Lovely Ariosto: And notwithstanding some Sleep they had got, Don Lelio found
himself the next Morning in a violent Fever, unable to sustain so hard a
Fatigue, which whilst his Body was in Agitation he was insensible of. This News
was a great Affliction to Don Ariosto, who used all Endeavors to restore his
Health, he watched by him Night and Day, and administered several things to him,
having some knowledge in Physic, which Art he had for some time studied; but
finding his Medicines and his Care ineffectual, he was infinitely concerned.

Don Lelio continued desperately ill, even to the threatening of his Life; yet
during all this Sickness, not one had the least Suspicion of his Sex; till one
Day Carlo and he, whose constant Entertainment it was to condole their sad
Destiny, had been seriously engaged in Discourse, when upon some occasion Carlo
quitted the Room, without warning, and that so softly, he was not missed.
Immediately enters Don Ariosto, and approached the Bed, but finding all silent,
and the sick Cavalier's Head turned on the other side, concluding him asleep,
was just retiring, but was stopped by his Voice, who believing he was still
speaking to his faithful Carlo, thus went on: Ah! Laura, how imprudent will
your poor Mistress be rendered, for leaving an indulgent Father, and all the
Glories of this World, to bear this Hardship, and to pursue an unworthy false
Ingrate, quit a Palace worthy of a King, to die here in a lonely Cott? But
more, my dearest Laura, how terrible must Aspatia's Memory be to thee, when
thou do reflect, that by her wild Conduct thou were lost, left on a Foreign
Shore destitute of Friends; whilst thy weak Sex not dole to contend with the
lean Jaws of Famine, Cold and miserably Poor, perhaps some broken Crumbs for a
Regalio, a Bed of Straw to rest on, thy Sleep disturbed with Fears, thy Days
with Horror, till by this lingering Wretchedness you perish. Can thou forgive
me then? Oh never! never!

This pitiful Complaint, not only filled Don Ariosto with Wonder, but with the
most sensible Compassion imaginable, when Don Lelio who had desisted a while
from speaking, and hearing no reply, turned his languishing Eyes, which were
drowned in Tears to seek Carlo; but how full of confusion were those Eyes to
see Don Ariosto at the Bedside? Fixed and immovable he lay, and seemed lost in
concern for what he had uttered: For sometime Don Ariosto took pleasure to gaze
on her pretty Disorder, whilst the other was tormented with a Multitude of
Fears and Doubts; till Pity could no longer view such cruel Sufferings, he
stepped up to her Bed, and with a Voice full of Amazement: Madam, (said he) for
so I now may call you, since Chance has made me your accidental Confident; I
here stand ready to confirm with the most sacred Vow, an everlasting Secrecy;
for it would be more then barbarous in me, to insult where all Circumstances
ought to oblige me to the tenderest Compassion; and therefore not to keep you
longer in suspense, and to secure you from all Fears or Jealousies of me, know
your Fortune has not played the most Jilting Game in casting you on this
despicable Shore; for this Habit (pointing to himself) conceals the same Sex.
How incredible soever this appeared to Don Lelio at first, his sudden. Recovery
from his present Confusion, and the new Life it seemed to inspire him with,
showed how willing he was to believe it; whilst Don Ariosto thus continued: By
what I have heard, Love has had a powerful Influence over you, which doubly
engages me to serve you, for I blush not to own, I now suffer under the
Extremity of that Passion. A great deal more he spoke to this purpose, giving
convincing Proofs of what he said. Don Lelio conceived no Bounds to his Joy at
this Confession; yet not being able to speak till a multitude of intruding
Sighs had made way, it was visibly seen how timerously he entertained this
happy Discovery; at last with a faint Voice, between Hope and Distrust he thus
broke silence: With what Phrase may I term you? Pardon my Dispute, for I was
ever difident of my own good Fortune, being almost inured to an unkind Destiny,
but it would be no other than a Poor, and Vngenerous part in me, to Conceal any
thing from a Person that so frankly has dispersed my Fears, by a kind and free
Declaration. I have no scruple now to confess to you ingeniously, not only my
Sex, but even all the Chances of my Life, when my Condition will permit, and
you are at leisure to hear.

As these words were delivering, Carlo entered the Room, in no small Surprise
(as may be imagined) which was much more augmented to hear Don Lelio, call (in
a free and unconcerned manner) by the Name of Laura, taking Don Ariosto by the
Hand, and thus speaking: My poor Laura, how much am I bound to Heaven, that in
mittigation of my deplorable Disasters, has raised me here the best of Friends,
and one whose Sufferings strangely sympathize with mine. Fear not to embrace
with the tenderest Affection this our Generous Protector, for the Charming
Ariosto is a Woman.

Wonder and Amazement crowded thick upon Carlo, to find so strange a Revolution
in so short a space; but being confirmed by the Mouth of Don Ariosto all that
had passed, she was overjoyed: with unspeakable satisfaction did these
metamorphos'd Fair Ones unite; and having spent some time in discoursing of
small Occurrences of their Life's, they declined the principal Events to a more
favorable opportunity, that the recital might not be troublesome or tedious to
Don Lelio. For that night they parted infinitely pleased, and with such mutual
Engagements of Friendship and Fidelity, that none could be greater or more
substantial.

From this moment Don Lelio recovered, so much does the Satisfaction of the
Mind contribute to the Health of the Body, in a short time he became perfectly
well: But during his Sickness, which lasted Eight Months, you shall have an
account of Melantius, whom we left in the Florentines Army.

To tell, with advantage, the wonderful and glorious Exploits of that young
Hero, would be too mighty a Subject to join with this Trifle; nor ought a less
florid Pen than that of Homer, or Virgil, undertake so heroic a Task;
therefore let it suffice, that after having performed beyond the Credulity of
Man, it was his chance, during a Truce, to be sent with other Commanders, to
recruit their Troops with Neapolitans, having Permission from the State. They
arrived at Naples about the time of Don Lelio's recovery, and had marched through
the remotest parts of that Republic, in quest of Men, which they imagined
might hide themselves in those Mountains, to avoid a Service attended with too
many Hazards. They were now within a league of that sacred Wood which harbored
the lovely unfortunate Don Lelio. This place Melantius had already found out,
where he often sought to calm and sweeten the Frenzy of his Mind, which was
almost fester'd by Despair.

One day he had retired hither, to seek a Sanctuary in the midst of Solitude;
when striving to shake off his oppressing Fetters, he was convinced there was
no evading the Sentence of the Deity, and therefore resigned himself up as
Love's cruel Martyr, and not without a harsh Contest betwixt Love and Honor.
This Debate held him till he arrived, all hopeless, at the foot of the Poplar
(we spoke of) whose beauty and exceeding largeness took up his consideration
some small time; but when he espied those two Sentences on the Bark, writ in
different Characters, who can describe his Confusion! oppressed with a heavy
weight of Fears, Doubts, and Jealousy, he was hardly able to support his
sinking Fate. The Blood came thrilling from his panting Heart, his Sinews
shrunk, and so strange a Lethargy came all over his fainting Senses, that he
seemed fixed to the center, at length, with hard struggling to resist this
powerful Charm, he regained his Spirits, but so faint and weak, he was forced
to retire, and leave the pursuit of this Mystery till the morrow. But instead
of rest that night, his dark melancholy Thoughts were filled with Illusions and
Fancies, as perplexing as those he came from.

The next morning, which was one of the serenest and pleasantest imaginable, he
was up with the first summons of the chirping Lark, and with greedy and
thoughtful steps traversed the enameled Fields, till he entered the Wood, where
he began a curious search, examining every Tree, if possible, to make a farther
discovery. He met with several little Sentences, but no more intelligible than
the other; being come under the shady embracing greens of that proud Poplar,
where he, the day before he was seized with that anxious Trouble, had some
Reflections on the hard measure of his Tyrannick Chains, but overcame them with
a Resolution to continue his search.

He had not advanced far, but there presented to his Eyes two young beautiful
Cavaliers, Arm in Arm, walking a deliberate pace; and one at some distance
behind them. These were the reciprocal and charming Don Lelio, Don Ariosto, and
Carlo, who had chose this lovely Morn to ease the Secrets and Burden of their
Souls. They seated themselves on the Bank of a pleasant and purling Stream, so
close to the place where Melantius had concealed himself, that with ease he
overheard all they said.

The first that broke silence was Don Ariosto, who, after some deliberation,
thus began:

The History of Canace.
THE Story which I shall tell you will be brief, having no Adventure to
entertain your Ears, but the unaccountable Passion of a foolish and credulous
Woman.

My Birth, without ostentation, is as considerable as any Family this day in
Italy, being Daughter of the Marquess de Castiglione Della Stivere, who married
one of the Illustrious House of Caraffa in Naples; their Hearts were firmly
united, and for some few years enjoyed the calmest Sererity that a tender
Passion, attended with Greatness and Plenty, could create: But Love, nor all
this Tranquillity, could not defend them from the Tyrannick Power of Death; for,
my Mother, after being delivered of me her fatal Offspring, at the end of
thirteen months resigned her Charms to the cold Tomb, leaving the Marquess my
Father the most deplorable of Men; which he gave evident demonstration of to
the World, not being able to survive the dear Partner of his softer hours full
three months.

My Parents being dead, I was committed to the charge of the Viscount Bozzolos,
the noble and reciprocal Friend of my deceased Father, who in particular had
left me his Ward, where I was brought up by the Viscountess (his Lady) with all
the care imaginable, till maturer years made me capable of the best Education,
which was liberally bestowed upon me. But ill Fortune still attended me, and
bereft me a second time of an affectionate Mother: 'Twas a Loss difficultly to
be supported by the disconsolate Viscount; yet Time wearing out the Excess of
his Sorrow, he began to be comforted in the blooming Virtues of one only Son,
and me, now his adopted Daughter, in whom every little Advantage of Wit and
Beauty was his Glory. I was now the absolute Mistress of his House, and so
equally did he share his Favors between Octavio (so was his Son called) and
me, that the nicest Eye could not judge which stood fairest in his Affections.
Yet an unkind turn of Fortune rendered us two the ungrateful Instruments of his
Affliction; for, our Infant Natures, which had made us Companions in our
harmless Pleasures, united us in a strong Band of Friendship, which daily
improving, as we ripened in years, at length produced a mighty flame: Not that
this could have done us any prejudice of itself, being (as we understood after)
what the Viscount ever wished: but not knowing how it would be accepted of,
(and a timorous bashfulness that generally attends young Lovers) made us
industrious to conceal a Passion which consequently proved my Ruin.

Joined to Octavio's Virtue, Wit, and Beauty, he had all the Power and Art of
fine Persuasion; noble, facetious, and generous, but juster to his Friendship
than his Love; one who could never fail to make his Passion prosper; with such
Insinuation would he move, none could resist his Whispers and Address. In
short, he made a Conquest of Canace, turned me to what he wished; he won my
Soul with honorable Vows, and for my Love returned me double Interest. Thus,
for some years, we enjoyed a calm Content of secret, innocent, and virtuous
Friendship. Wrapped in these chaste Delights, we never once had Dreams of greater
Bliss, had not the revolution of Affairs convinced us, that a Lover's Hopes has
no Confinement.

Octavio, to be rendered more polite, being already Master of his Studies, was
by his Father sent to read the World and Men.

This Separation was a fatal blow, to two united with an ardent Passion; but,
being limited to just three years, we strove to bear it with a handsome courage,
not parting without mutual Protestations of Love, Fidelity, of Truth and all.
Here Passion swelled so big she could not speak, and filled her Auditors with
feeling pity. But a few Sighs being past, and having dried her lovely Eyes, she
renewed her Discourse, where 'twas broke off, and all that lavish Wishes could
suggest, to Hearts then flaming with a pure Desire.

His Travels being accompanied with a noble Youth, the Confidant and Friend of
all his Pleasures, (by Name Alcidas, of the great Family of Pittis, those
mighty Competitors to the House of Medicis, whose Enmity has been so long
contracted, that the colateral Branches of that House still bear the unjust
Resentment of that Quarrel;) some minutes stole away without Regret; my Faith I
plighted, and he swore to be for ever mine. But, oh! forgive my interrupting
Sighs, Who can relate the fickle Chance of Fortune, without grief, which more
is to be blamed than any breach of my Octavio's Promise?

A constant correspondence passed between us; and that we might with freedom
write our Thoughts, our Letters were directed to one had been my Servant, who
being now disposed of in the World, lived still with grateful Sentiments to
serve me.

Having thus passed two Year, and better, my cruel Fate drew on apace,

Alcidas's business called him home in haste, when having made all ready for
his Journey, Octavio recommended to his care, Letters to his Father, and to me.
He was no Stranger to our constant Vows; Octavio had imparted all that passed,
and left him as the trustiest of his Friends, with Justice to applaud his Love
and Virtue. But see the strange reverse of Fortune, Alcidas came full fraught
from poor Octavio, with Love, fresh Vows, and a thousand fond Addresses; which
he defers to a kind opportunity, dispatching first his business to the State.
He now became a constant Visiter, entertaining us with Stories of Octavio; the
great delight I took in hearing of him, made me never fail to be in company; yet
no secure occasion did present, to make me happy with that dear Epistle. My
^^rm attention, when he did display the Courage, Wit, and Beauty of my Lover,
engaged my Heart, my Ears, my Eyes upon him; but, oh! how often have I been
surpised to find his Color come and go, his Speech to faulter, with all the
symptoms of a troubled Mind. This passed without my knowing what it meant,
being resolved not to take notice of it; but yet, alas! too soon I knew the
Cause. Alcidas being frequent in his visits, came on a day the Viscount was
abroad; I entertained him with an easy Freedom, but the ungenerous Passion
raging in his Breast, made him remiss in all the Gallantries he did observe, he
looked wild, turned pale, and answered, Mal a Propos, to all I spoke, seeming
involved in anxious Cares and Trouble.

I knew not what to think, but feared the worst, and was just going to ask him
his Disease, when I percerv'd him rise, and come toward me trembling, he held
a Letter in his Hand, his Eyes half drowned in Tears, he had not power to
speak, till a large shower was sprinkled at my Feet, then in the posture of an
humble Supplicant, he thus began:

Madam, you see here prostrate at your feet one whom the Fates have done their
worst to plague. The envious Gods throw heavy Curses on me, and rend my Soul
with Horror and with Death. I from my youth have been Octavio' s Friend, his
secret, constant, honest, bosom Friend, loved where he loved, contemned where
he despised, affected all Diversions he approved, loathed Place and Person that
he did not like: So equally, so firm, so true we loved, as we were made to
pleasure one another. What shall I say? The Heavens have done their worst to
make a Wretch of base undone Alcidas; this Friend, that dared to trust me with
his Life, made me the Confidant to your Amors, and recommended to my faithful
charge Ten thousand tender Vows, and passionate Addresses, withal this Letter,
(putting in my Hand the Billet which he held, but still went on) which I
discharge, as I am bound by Honor. But, oh! when making to this happy Soil,
why was I not blasted on the way, drowned in the turbulent, rude, boisterous
Floods, or shook by some rough Thunderbolt to Atoms? Then Friends might say,
So fell just good Alcidas. But I must live to lose my Fame and Value, and dye a
Blot and Scandal to my Name. Cursed be those Stars that did conduct me to those
Charms which made a Captive of my Friend Octavio; my Optics are the same, my
Heart is his, and where he loves, I cannot but adore. Then pardon, Madam, that
you here behold your Slave reduced to love, without a Limit.

Here having stopped, I knew not what to say: I must confess, I felt a great
Compassion, his modest Speech could not incurr my Anger; his sense of Wrongs
and Faults committed pleased me; and I commiserating his ill chance, was going
to return, when he proceeded:

Judge, Madam, the sad Conflict of my Heart, betwixt my Love and those most
sacred Ties of Friendship. Must I then wrong my Friend? By all that is good, I
will not play him false. And at these words he started up in haste, his Words
and Gesture seeming much resolved, when suddenly his Air was wholly changed,
and falling faintly at my Feet again; But, oh! (said he) my Heart is not my
own; who can resist those Charms I now behold? And saying so, his Spirit sunk
within him, and left him breathless by me on the Floor.

This Accident indeed disturbed me much, I called for the Assistance of my
Maid, and with our Industry and Care recovered him. Then I began to plead
against his Passion, to represent my Contract to Octavio; still taking care to
clinch upon his Honor, and blow those noble Sparks I still felt warm with
Generosity, which I affirmed would render him more Praise, more Joy, than the
fruition of my dull Embraces: He heard with all the torment of Despair; yet
being biased by his generous Genius, he did resolve to quit the Siege, and
never, never more to see my Face; but parting, told me, when I heard his Death,
which suddenly would invade my Ears, I should remember, none ever loved so
well, nor none ever suffered more.

In short, he seemed fixed in his Resolution, which filled me with a World of
Satisfaction, hoping that Absence might effect his Cure, without that cruel
Remedy of Death. I retired with a Mind transported with the Thoughts of my
Octavio, read his dear Letter over twenty times, kissed and caressed his
Characters and Seal, and thought my self secure from this Alcidas.

But see the frailty of a Lover's Promise: It Is true, he made no more his
common Visits, endeavoring with true care to avoid my presence; but the cross
Destinies, that owed us Spite, led his dull pensive Steps into a Church where
I was offering up my Hours Devotions: He came up to the Altar where I kneeled,
and placed himself a little distance from me, but knew me not, by reason of my
Veil: Nor had I yet observed a Man so near me; for being wrapped in a Seraphick
Joy, my Thoughts had no relation to the World; when flinging up my Veil, to
breath some Air, I heard the Voice of one in great surprise cry out, Good God,
defend me; with that I turned, and to my troubled view appeared Alcidas, pale
as Death, unable to support his sinking Limbs, his Eyes all languishing with
Love and Pain, spoke with more moving Rhetoric than a Tongue; yet, Pity being
all I could afford, I left him in that most deplorable estate, whilst he,
without the power to move my stay, made faint Petitions with his trembling
Hands; but I, deaf and insensible as the Winds, fled, and with eager paces got
me home, where I began to exclaim against this Chance, with angry resentment of
Alcidas. How much he loved, I was too well convinced, and doubted the Event of
such a Passion: I plainly saw how Willingly he strove, with Violence and Art,
to quench his Flame, but yet the gnawing Tortures of his Breast insensibly
excites him to relief: Two or three Interviews he got of me, fanned his soft
Fire into a furious Blaze, which he no longer able to support, abandoned
Friendship, Honor, Truth, and Virtue, and gave himself entirely up to Love.

The first Advance he put in execution, was, to propose our Marriage to the
Viscount, which several times was done without my Knowledge. The aged Seniors
met in consultation, and struck the Bargain as themselves thought fit.
Alcidas's Family was rich and noble, himself admired for a gallant Youth,
loved, valued, and approved of by the World; which pleased the Viscount, that I
there should match, to Honor, and to Wealth, as I was born.

Things being thus decreed, 'twas requisite next to consult my Mind in this
Affair, of which I had not entertained the least Suspicion; till on a day,
pensive, and sad as Death, I chose the Garden for a safe retreat, to nurse that
melancholy vapor which oppressed me. After I had spent some time in troubled
Thoughts, under the shady Branches of the Trees, my Maid drew near, and gave to
me a Letter; the Character I had never seen before, which seized me with a
strange unusual Distrust; but when I opened it, and found Alcidas's Name, Gods!
how it struck me with a killing Fear! my feeble Limbs could hardly do their
Office, to bear me to a little private Arbor, where I sat down to read the
fatal Billet; the Contents thereof were these:

ALCIDAS to CANACE.
LOVE, the predominant Passion of the Mind, I find, can bear with no
Competitor; how much I have strove to overcome its Power, witness thou great
Controuler of our Reason: but the resistless Charms of Heaven-born Beauty has
quite cashiered that idle Notion Honor, which serves but to betray our
freeborn Wishes to the Capricio of another's Appetite; a mere fantastic empty
Vanity of our own making, and governed by our Wills, not Inclinations. Octavio
loves, but much more does Alcidas: Desire does rage in every vital part; nor
can my Soul subsist without your Pity: I can no longer suffer endless pains,
Nature will prompt us Remedies to seek, and Reason teach us how to ease a
Torment. Wonder not, Madam, that I have engaged the Viscount's Pleasure, to
secure you mine; all that can move an Avaricious Mind, shall lavishly be
offered at your Feet; only resolve to make me truly happy, since my unbounded
Passion will aspire to gratify the tenderest of my Thoughts, and prosecute
with vigor my Design, being positively destined ever Yours,

ALCIDAS.


I found by this, his Hopes were much exalted; the Viscount's Promise strangely
did amaze me, for yet he had not told me his Intentions, nor did I dream I was
so near a Ruin; what should be done, I could no way determine, but sat
confounded at this cruel blow. When I perceived the Viscount pass me by, a
thousand Resolutions filled my Mind, which suddenly were lost without
Conclusion: Sometimes I thought to charge him with Injustice, blame his too
free disposal of my Heart, and positively refuse the Match. When milder
Thoughts took place, I soon found this too rash; Honor and Virtue bound me
still to Duty, since he had proved in all respects a Father: to tell him how
Octavio and I loved, could no way get admittance from my Tongue; and Reason did
suggest, that had he liked that Love, he would have first proposed it.

Debates and Tumults rising in my Breast, I knew no Method how I should allay
them. Oppressed without the comfort of Relief, various Opinions ended in this
last, of taxing him with an unkind proceeding: With that I quit the Arbor
where I sat, and met the Viscount, who was now returned. My Thoughts swelled
high to vent a Flood of Grief, but a respectful Awe confined my Tongue, and I
had no more power left than just to ask him of his Health: However, long I was
not in suspense; the Viscount fondly told me his Design, bid me prepare to make
a happy Bride, and bless the World with an Illustrious Offspring. He told me, I
must wed the brave Alcidas, with all the Advantages that Fate could give, or I
could wish for. What I returned I cannot now retain; my Thoughts were so
disturbed, I quite forgot my Answer, but sure I am I very much opposed it,
which he implied to Virgin-Modesty, bidding me depart, and wisely make my
Choice.

I left him almost ready to expire, got to my Chamber, where I wrote at large
each circumstance and tittle to Octavio, bid him make haste to save a constant
Maid, since Life or Death depended on his stay; but not a Letter ever reached
his Hands, Alcidas intercepted all that passed, still pushing on with violence
and care the consummation of a wretched Bliss.

Hard shift I made to get two months Reprieve, in hopes to have an Answer from
Octavio, but seeing none, I found there was a Cheat; Rage and Resentment so
possessed my Mind, I gave myself up wholly to Despair, and did at the last
extremity resolve to sacrifice myself when at the Altar. Things were now almost
brought to a conclusion, the Wedding Day prefixed, a Pomp prepared, where I was
to surrender by compulsion a Hand, where I could not resign a Heart: but what
prevented my unhappy fall, kills my sad Soul with the remembrance: Octavio, by
some base officious Hand, had false Intelligence of this Amor, wherein they
represented it my Choice, with all the aggravations could incense a man abused,
as he believed he was: The Viscount's Letters told him of our Marriage, without
the circumstance of my aversion, and never receiving any one from me, confirmed
him easily, beyond dispute, that I was turned a fickle mean Ingrate.

What he designed I never yet could learn, but he with speed came posting home
to Madrid, a place where we for many years resided, entered the City privately
at night, and got admittance in the Family; 'twas late, and we were all retired
to Rest, which made him give Command not to disturb us; but no Repose could
ease my weary Eyes, that almost were consumed with Tears and Grief. I spent
that night in Tortures beyond Wracks, dreading each moment which drew on the
day when I was to be married to Alcidas.

This News Octavio learnt in his Discourse with an old Servant, that had let
him in, which raised him to the height of Desparation. Some hours he traced
the Room in great disorder, having difmiss'd the Servant to his Bed, with
charge to keep it secret he was there; whilst bandying in his Thoughts Ten
thousand Projects, ill Chance, and not Premeditation, forced an Act, which
Love, and only Love, must justify.

Just as the Day peeped through its thick Veil, and cast imperfect Shadows on the
Earth, Alcidas, whose transported Thoughts never rested, impatient of delay,
came underneath my Window, and with a gentle Summons raised his voice to these
Expressions, which as my Maid took down, I well remember:

The SONG.
ASTREA, wake, disperse thy Fears;
Look up, behold, the Day appears:
Whilst I impatiently do wait,
The promised bliss, to crown my Fate.
Phoebus, lash on each fiery Steed,
Let Phaeton supply thy speed;
My Heart does burn as well as bleed.
Rise and outshine the splendid Light;
Let every killing Grace invite,
And raise my Soul to such desire,
That Thought no farther can aspire:
Then every dying Sigh shall breath
The Ecstasy I do receive,
And those Delights I mean to give.
Clear up those gloomy drooping Eyes,
And see the glorious Sun arise,
With brighter Splendour to survey
The Triumphs of this happy day:
Away with all disdainful Pride,
All coy Reserv'dness lay aside;
Prepare to be a joyful Bride.
Octavio did with pain attend the end, and being well convinced this was
Alcidas, rushed out upon him in a Storm of Rage, and with a Dagger smiting in
his Breast, cried out, This as a grateful Present from Canace, delivered by the
Hands of wronged Octavio.

Alcidas struggled with a weak defense, and strove to gain some time to draw
his Sword, but 'twas too late, the Wound he had received laid him on the
Ground, deprived of Life.

I from my Chamber plainly heard what passed, which rendered me half dead with
Fear and Horror; too well I knew Octavio's voice to be deceived, and could not
guess what Fate had brought him thither; a thousand dreadful Thoughts did
multiply, and filled my Bosom with a throbbing Terror: hurried by distracted
Fears, I flung a Nightgown carelessly upon me, and ran with open Arms to find
Octavio, but found him in a manner overwhelmed with Sorrow. The lovely Mourner,
fixed as in a Trance, stood weeping over the Body of Alcidas, when I with
trembling Transport seized upon him, spoke all the tenderness that Love could
dictate, but he contemning all my Sighs and Tears, forced himself violently
from my Arms, made no Reply to any thing I said, but threw me from him with a
scorned Disdain, and left my Heart just bursting with this usage, whilst he
with nimble flight stole from the City, got to his Servant left without the
Gates, mounted his Horse, and rode for Life and Refuge, abandoned by all
Comfort to his Fortune.

Mad as a frantic Bacchanal I raved, and hardly could be hindered from
pursuing him. My Maid had used all Arguments with Reason that might persuade a
sense not wholly banished; but finding I was refractory to Advice, and hearing
the trampling noise of Feet draw near, made no Apology, but pulled me in, and
gently shut the Door.

This Quarrel reached no Ears but only ours, except the Servant, who had let
him in, who finding him uneasy in his Mind, had modestly withdrawn to wait his
Order, and accidentally being fallen asleep, not wakened till the Fray was
almost over: Scarce had my Maid chained up the outward Gate, but he approached
us with disordered Care, making a strict Enquiry for Octavio; Oh! how I sunk
beneath my load of Fears, left this loved cruel Man should now be ruined;
Ungrateful as he was, I still adored him: 'Twas then, even though his Perjuries
were fresh, I did forget the Outrage done my Heart, to think of Means for his
Security: Stifling the Anguish of my sinking Soul, I made a cunning search into
this Servant, and learnt from him the time Octavio came, and that he was alone,
disguised and dull, that none had seen him enter but himself, whom Business
accidentally had kept up. This gave, through all my Fears, some little Hope,
that probably there might be no Distrust, if I could bribe this man to Secrefie.

With subtle Instruments I prob'd his Breast, and found it at the bottom truly
honest, his Interest and Advantage was Octavio's, whom he loved and served for
many Years, admired in Infancy his budding Virtues, and at those early days
sought his Affection; yet I not failed, from time to time, to seal his vowed
Fidelity with powerful Gold. Having thus passed a sacred solemn Promise, next,
to avoid Suspicion in the House, we stole with silent Caution all to Bed, to me
the most detested place in Nature (because designed for Rest and Fase); yet
forced my Heart even far beyond my Will, since all this Care concerned
Octavio's Good.

Till nine of the Clock the next morning, I suffered all the racking Pains of
Love, Fear, and Jealousy, and by this time Report was spread throughout the
City, that Alcidas was slain, his Hat and Gloves, that dropped in the
Rencounter, being found drenched in a dreadful gore of Blood, but for the Body,
it could not be heard of, though careful strict enquiry was made. The Viscount
startled at the fatal news, came trembling with surprise and grief, to tell me;
at sight of whom, before he spoke a word, Reflection dashed my tortured breast,
and not being able to support its weight, I sunk from the Chair I sat, into a
Swoon. He guessed, by this, that I had been informed, and weeping, bore a part
in my Affliction, pitying my Loss, and poor Alcidas's Fortune. Industry was
used to bring my Life, but all their Application was in vain, till above half
the day was spent, then I began to breath the Air of wild Distraction. Madrid
was now the Seat of Wonder, Rage, and Sorrow; the Murder of so great a man was
generally lamented: a search was now began throughout the City, both for the
Assassinates and wretched Corpse, no House, or Vault, or Well escaped a ransack,
which gave me all the agony of Fear, for the unfortunate distressed Octavio;
yet all this diligence made no discovery, no Author found that had done such a
deed, nor could Alcidas's Body ever be heard of, which Riddle I could never
understand. Our Family did suffer cruel Censures; my strange Aversion, and the
fatal Place, the Time, nay, every Circumstance looked odd, and gave too fair
Pretenses for Suspicion, but nothing could be proved; so that the Death of this
Unfortunate received no other expiation than a public Sorrow.

Contrary to my Hopes, it is true, I lived, but lived the most dejected She on
Earth; mourned that this Tragedy was not my own, rather than be the Fate of all
adored me: I saw the passionate Alcidas fall, and feared the utter loss of
brave Octavio; his parting Blow kept still a fresh Idea of all the Cruelty that
there was acted. I doubted his extremity of Mind would prompt him rashly to
destroy himself; or, if he lived, he lived no longer mine. How wretched, how
unhappy was my Life! my Fears augmented by perpetual Silence; no Tidings of
Octavio could be heard, no Letter nor no Message did come near us, which much
perplexed the melancholy Viscount; but I, that knew too much, and dreaded to
know more, died daily with the expectation of the worst. Sometimes I thought I
was obliged to speak, that necessary Methods might be taken; but, oh! the
Bloody Fact had so much Horror, that my Soul shrunk at the remembrance, to tell
the Viscount 'twas impossible, and likewise barbarous to disturb his Peace;
besides, I knew not how he would resent my management, in keeping it so long.
Thus restless, thus oppressed, I sunk beneath the Burden of a Secret, which
Time had made too dangerous to reveal. The small Relief of Hope had almost left
me: Silent and sad, I bore a tedious Pain, and only waited Death to give me
Ease, when there arrived a Letter from Octavio; the Viscount, unto whom it was
directed, read it with all the smiling Air of Pleasure, but my prophetic Fear
allowed no Transport; an unaccountable foretelling Sadness did overcome my Joy,
to hear he lived; I dreaded to enquire, yet knew not why; but, oh! too soon the
Viscount did expose that Letter, which produced my final Ruin.

Octavio was now at Portugal, from whence he excused his long silence and stay,
since 'twas not to be imagined he could return to Madrid, without endangering
the loss of Life and Fortune, for Reasons which he guessed the Viscount knew;
but he, good Man, did only apprehend these words as they related to the next
that followed, which told him of a noble Match proposed, between himself and a
most glorious Maid, framed by peculiar Providence with care, and made a
charming Abstract of Perfection; Aspatia, happy Aspatia, was her Name, Daughter
to the most Renowned Duke de Almeyda, born to command and conquer all that saw
her: Crowds of adoring Slaves lay at her Feet, and gloried in their blessed
Captivity, the Universe did never produce before a clearer Virtue, Wit, or solid
Judgment; nor Nature form so lovely or exact a Beauty; For, oh! (said she, in
Sighs and floods of Tears) I have heard her perfect and impartial Character.

At this Don Lelio blushed, and almost died with swift reflections on his
vanquished Honor, and the kind lavish Praises of his Rival. The sad concealed
Melantius, at this part, was ready with his Passion to expire, but chaced with
violence his Spleen away, to give attention to the mournful Sequel; whilst Don
Ariosto, who had too much Grief to mind an alteration in Don Lelio, proceeded
in this manner:

'Twas here my Fugitive discovered Charms; nor Sorrow, Wit, nor Reason coul
withstand; such Charms, that when his Soul was all over dark and dismal Horror
calmed and dispersed the melancholy Cloud, disarmed the torturing Fury in his
Breast, and placed a Troop of smiling Cupids there; 'twas not without
encouragement he wrote to learn what he might hope for from his Father, on what
Demands he might expect to gain a Beauty of that bounteous Wit and Dower,
giving his Raptures latitude to speak the most he thought his Mistress could
deserve.

This when I read, no Tongue can tell my smart, my throbbing Breast did heave,
my Eyes distorted, no doubtful Wretch that stood their latest Doom, was half so
shocked at a condemning Sentence, speechless and cold I fell upon the ground,
and only shortbreath'd Sighs declared I lived; but soon again I did recover
strength, to fall a Supplicant at the Viscount's Feet, to whom I wept, and told
the movingst Tale, that his sad Pressures, like to Niobe's, seemed to have
turned his reverend Frame to Stone. I wept, and told him even from our budding
Loves, each circumstance of what I have now related, declared the Murder, and
displayed my Wrongs, begging him to compassionate my Cause, since I was still
compelled to die or love him.

Grief stopped his Tongue from making a Reply, but with his Head he bid me quit
the Room, to give him liberty to vent his Trouble. I left him languishing to
that degree, that Fate sat daring Reason in his Face, which pierced my very
Soul; as I departed, the look he gave me seemed a last Farewell; and 'twas with
great compulsion I retired, to leave him to the rigid Sourge of Fortune, which,
I perceived, did handle him severely.

After some wretched hours of close retirement, he forced a settled Mind, and
sent for me; his Countenance appeared without a Cloud, and every Action had an
easy Air: Smiling, he rose, and took me by the Hand, and placed me on a Seat
just by him, discoursed me with the greatest Moderation, that I could hardly
credit what I saw. Maturely he discussed upon each point, and brought it
subtilely to a kind result; told me, that since hard Fate had played its Game,
our Care must be to help and crown all future managements with good Success;
bid me not mourn what I could not redress, but learn of him to bear the Lash of
Fortune.

I could not judge if this was Artifice, or whether he had overcome his
Passion, yet parted from him much more satisfied, for he had promised to
restore Octavio, if I would leave the Conduct to his Will. With humble
resignation I consented, wholly to be disposed by his Command; for, I confess
that my unparalled Love fell to the height of abject Supplication.

Within two days I went from Madrid, to pass the tedious minutes more sedate,
in a still rural Villa of the Viscount's, that thirty miles stood distant from
the City; there, there how many wretched hours flew, in the reflection of my
dubious Destiny; no Shade, no Grove, but conscious of my Grief, my Tears
supplied each Rivulet and Spring, and every melancholy Grotto spoke Despair, to
the perpetual Volleys of my Sighs.

'Twas thus I spent the best part of a Year, whilst the kind Viscount acted
things at home beyond the expectation of a Friend, and cunningly in my behalf
he did proceed: he writ Octavio word, That his Fears need not any way oppose
his coming home, for none could guess him guilty of that Crime; besides, the
great Affair which he proposed could never be decided at that distance;
therefore 'twas requisite he should return, to settle all in Peace for his
advantage: giving some hints, that I was then retired, lest that should be a
Motive for his staying.

It was these generous Letters once more induced Octavio to see Madrid; the
Interview between him and the Viscount, I heard, was very passionate and
moving, which being mitigated in few days, he introduced the mournful Tragic
Tale, which was the fatal Cause of all our Evil: Octavio charged the weighty
Sin on me, whose Falseness had betrayed him to that Mischief, and then the good
old Man did weep, to vindicate my much wronged Faith and Honor, owning the Act
(as really 'twas) his own, to force me on a Match I loathed and hated. At this
Octavio sensibly was touched, and bore a friendly part in my Misfortune, but
Love was banished, all that Stock he swore could never be exhausted, now was
spent, and I was then reduced to sordid Pity: Nothing could move a kind Consent
to see me, his Heart was absolutely now another's; for though upon the Fall of
poor Alcidas he fled, to seek a noble Death, entirely despising Thoughts of
Life, resistless Beauty, that o'erweighs the World, and balances bright Virtue
with a Bubble, with her engaging Charms seized on his wandering Soul, and laid
her strict Commands on him to live; he could not view a Mistress so abused, nor
stand the Test of my severe Reproaches; nor would he wed the Woman for whose
sake his Hands had been imbrew'd in that dear Blood; or rather 'twas his
newborn Flame prevailed, to make him quit the Seat of his Confusion, and seek a
Sanctuary of Repose on the soft Bosom of his chosen Bride.

Within six Weeks he went from Madrid, to prosecute his last-establish'd Love;
nor were there any Offers could reclaim him: Which News the Viscount would have
hid from me, but oh! I had too true Intelligence, Reason kept Argus Watch, though
Love was blind; nor could my hundred Eyes be all deluded, too obvious was this
last ungrateful part for me to be deceived, or Heaven to pardon. I scorned
myself, that I could not contemn the Man that had so slighted and abused me;
but, oh! impossible, I loved to that degree, not all my Wrongs had influence to
reclaim; still I adored, still languish'd to retain the most perfidious Wretch
that ever breathed; in vain I sighed, in vain deplored the loss of all my
Hopes, the false Octavio, in whom I yet discerned Ten thousand (...)

Thus you have heard the Fate of poor Canace, the most unhappy Maid that ever
loved; hitherto all my Life has been one Plague, and what I am to suffer will
be great, since now the utmost prospect of my Hope is Bankrupt to that last and
wretched point of learning how to bear with Resignation.

Don Lelio, who had given strict attention to the relation of this mournful
Tale, looked on the lovely Innocent, who wept, and weeping pierced the Souls of
those that heard her, like April showrs in Tears she mourned, which like the
Heavenly Dew dropped from her Eyes and veiled the luster of those beauteous
Orbs, and, like an Evening Zephirus, her Sighs whispering their murmuring
Accents through the Air, wrought the Inanimates unto compassion. Thus Sorrow in
its Splendour did appear, all moving, all transporting, all engaging, melting
the tender Hearts of the Spectators, who gazing on the melancholy Maid,
suffered the charming Object so to please, they never thought to interrupt her
Grief, till they beheld her fall into a Swoon.

Melantius, all over Pity and Concern, was rushing from his Covert to her
succor, when he perceived Don Lelio clasp her close, laying her Head upon his
panting Bosom, and chaffing gently with his Hands her Temples, this application
summoned back her life, which by degrees assumed the glorious form, dispersing
through her dying Face a Bloom that warmed the very Heavens with Desire, and
gave such Satisfaction to Don Lelio, that catching her with Rapture in his
Arms, he cried, Cease, cease, my dearest Friend, to be perplexed, Octavio may
and shall be still thy own, if Time and your Disease will now permit. Wonders!
it is Wonders that I have to tell you.

At this Melantius did again retire, who otherwise was going to appear, and
make an offering of himself to serve them. The fainting Maid, recovered by this
Speech, rubbed off the Chagreen of all her Woe, and earnestly composed herself
to hear; the which Don Lelio having well observed, most readily proceeded in
this manner:

The History of Aspatia.
LET not an empty Name incurr your Rage, nor be you too too partial in
Resentment, then I Will confess myself to be Aspatia, that very same Aspatia you
distrust, yet Honor with so high a Character, she whom blind Fortune took
delight to jilt, and make the Pastime of her fickle Humor; she who has met
with too severe a Curse; yet conscious of no weighty Sin but Love, your Rival
once, for evermore your Friend, if you will generously embrace the Offer; for
know, it was my unexperienced years gave me that Title, and not Inclination,
Gratitude may sometimes be mistook for Passion; no more was mine no farther my
Concern: But I Will not dare to justify Octavio; he who insensibly abandons
Charms the greatest Monarch would be proud to boast of, can no way make
addition to a Crime, of which the World most justly will accuse him: Yet since
'twas you that first engaged his Heart, and taught it how to love, and to
resent, Pity a Mad-man's Frenzy, it is no more, and let me plead for him who is
my Ruin.

At this she paused, and gave Ariosto time to view her with Amazement, and
Disorder, Fear, Hope; and Jealousy at once attacked, and battered her with
fierce Artillery; she looked upon her sometimes as a Foe, sometimes a Friend,
and knows not which to think her, but prudently her Judgment did suspend, till
she had heard the sequel of the Story.

Never till now Melantius was so lost, to see Aspatia by him in that habit,
within the compass of his Arms, there in a Country desolate, remote, far from
her noble Father and Relations, weeping to craggy Rocks and senseless Trees, far
from that Princely Splendour once she used to grace the Courts and Palaces of
Lisbon, where glorious Captives waited at her Feet, proud to be chose to do
some little Service, and where he had imagined her in all the Gaiety of Youth
and Pleasure, triumphing over a Crowd of bleeding Hearts, stabbing by Frowns,
transporting by her Smiles, beyond the Wishes of fantastic Woman: What could
this mean? by what strange Miracle found he Aspatia, on the Verge of Naples?
That sprightly Beauty that enslaved the World, tracing a solitary Grove in
Sorrow, wasting the Treasure of her Youth in Exile; oh! how amazed, how Thunder
struck was he, to see that unexpected killing Object, the Mistress of his Soul
before his Eyes, with all those Charms that made him first her Captive! her
whom he unadvisedly abandoned, whose very Memory he once contrived to banish,
too late alas! he found he was deceived, found that the Gods had Interest in
her Cause, and took peculiar care to make it prosper; 'twas hardly he gave
credit to his Eyes, but really did believe he saw a Vision, wishing perpetual
Sleep to charm his Senses, still to retain that dear deluding Phantasm; but
when he recollected from that Thought, and found each Faculty was sound and
perfect, his Wonder and Confusion did increase, to know what God, what Fate had
brought her thither: All angry Resentments left his Breast, inspired by Wishes
and Love's softer Fire, the little God sat playing in her Eyes and showed him
all the Pleasure, not the Pain, of dazzling Rapture and more fond Desire,
inviting him by all those little Arts that first betrayed his easy tranquil
Mind to the subjection of his wanton Snares, to curse his Rigor, yet adore his
Power: Once more he triumphs over his bleeding Heart, shot thick his Arrows,
and secured his Throne, tickled him with the Feathers of his Dart, till
unperceived he fell upon the Steel, and smiling at his Wound, sucked in the
Poison.

Don Lelio's Dress did render him more fair, exposing Beauties that were made
to conquer; Charms that had been concealed lay open now, Limbs the most regular
and most surprising. Lost in a mighty Ecstasy, he gazed, dying and languishing
for the possession; not one past Injury did grate his Soul, or discompose its
ravished Entertainment; Resentment fled beyond the very Clouds, and buried all
his Wrongs in dark Oblivion. The Nymph, all chaste and innocent, did look
youthful, engaging, beautiful and tempting, and to his Eyes appeared without a
blemish: None but his wretched self he did accuse and tax with too much Folly
and Credulity, who rashly had forsook, for the first Fault, the most deserving
Creature in the World: If she had Sense, he knew she must resent it, and
therefore was distracted with his Fears, how to retrieve the Interest he had
lost: With Looks unguarded, and unbounded Thoughts, he gave away the remnant of
his Soul, each wandering Faculty, caught by surprise, was made a second and
substantial Conquest, prompt by Distrust and violent Desire, his breaking Heart
no longer could resist, but was just falling at her Feet for Mercy, when the
distressed fair One thus broke silence, and Curiosity stopped his proceeding:

That I am Daughter to the Duke Antonio de Almeyda, I blush to own, having the
least deserved that worthy Lot, and most abused my Interest in that Name: My
Mother, who derived from no inconsiderable Branch of the Piacenze's Dukes, had
all Advantages that could complete a Beauty; for, besides the rare Perfections
of her Person, she had Wit, Fortitude, Judgment, and Virtue, which begot her
the Applause, Admiration, and Esteem of all that knew her: she was universally
adored, and industriously sought for by all the neighboring Princes in Italy;
nor did a Stranger pass throughout the Country, that made it not his chiefest
care to see the fine Charlott, so was she called.

Amongst the rest, it was the Duke d' Almeyda's chance (who was just then come
to that Title by the Death of his Father) to travel through Parma, where she
then resided; he resolved not to quit the City till he had a sight of this
lovely celebrated Beauty, which was no hard matter for a Man of his Quality. He
saw, and was convinced, gave up his Freedom at the fatal View, and ever after
owned himself her Slave.

Their Amor was romantic and entertaining, but too tedious to recite here,
therefore passing over all Preliminaries, we arrive at their Nuptials, which
was very noble and magnificent, with splendid Masks, Balls and Tournaments,
wherein all the youthful Nobility assembled, and performed diversity of
Gallantries: Three years after Marriage the Duke stayed in that Country, by the
Intercession of his Wife, who found no small. Regret to leave her Native Soil;
but at length, urged by necessity of some weighty Affairs, wherein the Duke had
been a very considerable Loser, they were forced on their Journey at a very
inconvenient time for my Mother, who was then eight months gone with Child of
me, Heaven had already blessed them with a Son, whose graceful Aspect promised
early Virtues: Not much above one year they had enjoyed him, when they set
forward toward Portugal; they met with a pleasant Land-Journey, and embarked
with as fair a Prospect, but that overruling Power that finds it expedient
sometimes to dash our sweetest Cups with Gall, presented them a too too bitter
Draught, which when compelled by Fate, there is no Man can resist.

They were within some few hours sail of shore, when the Heavens overcast, and
a dreadful Storm arose, which proved only a direful Omen of their Misfortunes,
for in less than half an hour it cleared again to pleasant calmness and
serenity; when from the Topmast-head they 'spied a Ship that gave them chase,
with all the sail that she could make they crowded down upon them; they were in
some consternation and surprise, but the Duke, whose noble Soul could never
admit of Fear, took all the most convenient methods for defense that the short
time would give him leave. Now, by the nigh approach, to their Perplexity, they
discerned her to be a famous Pyrate, who for many years had scoured those Seas;
no way they had to escape, for their Adversary having the Wind, soon boarded
them. The Duke at this time performed Wonders, but having few Assistants
besides his own Attendants, and not being well provided for what so little was
expected, after a stout defense, which startled much the Pirates, by desperate
Multitudes he was repulsed: They being now the Masters of the Ship, grew
insolent, and rifled all their Treasure, clapping the Sailors under Hatches,
and making all their Prize. My Mother, who had endured all the violence of
Fears and Terror, at this last Scene of immediate Death or Slavery, fell with
the direful Imagination into a Swoon. The Duke being luckily by, received her
in his Arms, and although his Reflections did present him with too clear a
Prospect of their Woe, he used all the Indulgence and tender Applications that
could recover her, and encourage her to bear Fa^e with a Patience worthy of
herself. It was a considerable time before he was convinced she lived, and the
fatal demonstration served but to involve him in a greater Doubt; for the warm
Persuasions he had whispered, summoned back some fleeting Hopes, and untimely
disclosed her Eyes, to be a Spectator of young Frederick (their only Child) and
his Nurse, just forced on board the Pyrate. This Sight renews her former Grief,
and sunk her with the weight of Desperation: Nor was the Duke, with all his
Fortitude, now in condition to address a Comfort, he saw his Wife expiring at
his Feet, his Child a Captive to insulting Villains, and he the sinking Prop
that should relieve them; Love, Pity, Charity divides his Breast, and equally
demands his kind Assistance, but all the Means was taken from his Hands, and he
had nothing left but his bare Wishes, which was reduced to wish himself, and
his dear Wife, next Prey, that they might suffer all together.

Whilst he stood in this Extremity of Care, a violent and unexpected Hurricane
arose, and separated the Ships, which lay grapled together, the fury of the
Tempest drove them so fast, that in short time they lost sight of each other:
The Seamen, who were very industrious at their Plunder, were most of them in
the Longboat, conveying off their Booty, and but two at this time left on
board the Duke, abject Rascals, who finding their Necessity, meanly were
imploring for their Lives, but the Duke, who was wholly taken up with his
Sorrow, had but just reason enough left to release his own Seamen, to whose
Mercy he left them, and from whose hand they received their Deaths, whilst he
employed himself in the recovery of my Mother: Grief, and the cruel Sufferings
she underwent had taken full possession of her Heart, and it was with great
difficulty they kept her Soul and Body together, till they made a Port in
Algarves, called Tavila, where she had not been two days, but she was delivered
of me, sometime before the usual season, and delivered up her Life at the same
minute: My Father was the most afflicted Man in the World, and had it not been
in consideration of me, which obliged him to preserve his Life, in care to
mine, he hardly had survived my Mother. He stayed not long after the
Funeral-Rites, but took me, with my Nurse, to a House he has near Ville-Neuove,
where he lived a disengaged and retired Life, till I attained the Years of
Fourteen, at which time he thought it convenient to introduce me into the
World, that I might be the better capable of acting for my self: We then
removed to Lisbon, where we lived with all the Grandeur that could render an
advantage to my blooming Years, I had the Privilege of visiting the Court, and
some public Places, which, in a short time, got me not a few Admirers. The
Duke was willing to see me well disposed of, and encouraged those of the most
Illustrious Families, and of the greatest Characters, for me to make my Choice;
but I being only taken with the Gallantry and Address, lived with a cold
Indifference to the Sex, and could not be prevailed upon to Marry.

It was at this time, that my small Beauty gained some little Fame at Lisbon,
when Octavio appeared at Court, and was generally reported, a Noble Cavalier,
but one whose nice Virtues were eclipsed by a profound Melancholy, there
lacked not those who imputed it to Love, and applied it to several of our
Beauties, yet knew no more then from their bare Opinion; he had the good luck
to be particularly received amongst the Ladies; and I confess my self, that
often I have viewed him with some Pleasure: He had something in his Aspect that
attracted all Eyes, and something in his Disposition so engaging, that there
was no beholding him with bare Indifference; yet mine was Admiration, and not
Love, which afterward I was too dear convinced of: Several small Services I
had received, which past with me but as his common Humor, till a more evident
Address too fatally informed me; Madrigals, Songs, and Billet-doux, he sent; by
Night with Sighs and Serenades he entertained me; by these and a thousand other
ways, he often declared the Message of his Heart, which found more free access
into my Breast, then all the Gallantry I knew before; yet I had Conduct to
conceal my Thoughts, and gave him not the least Encouragement, but rather
seemed vexed at his ill placed Passion; some Months passed on with this
Amusement, without much Love, or much Consideration, till daily Services
inhaunced the Store of mighty Favors, that I began to fear the Payment;
hitherto he had no access into our House, and found it difficult to gain my
Presence, till a most famed remarkable Exploit, gave him a fair, and plausible
Pretension:

One Day at a famous Match of Hunting, where most of the Nobility (then
residing at Lisbon) participated of the Diversion, Ladies as well as Men, were
in the Field to see the Pastime, and partake of the Chase, I being mounted on a
fierce Arrabian Courser, followed the Game with earnest satisfaction; my
Inclination to those Country Sports, and the Rural Life I had been used to,
gave me opportunity to make my self a complete Horse-woman: I was now hot in
pursuance of the Chase, and gave full Reins to my Horse, without consideration,
when a Servant followed me to deliver a Tablet I had dropped, which I turning
back to receive, just as I was at the brink of a rapid River, and not checking
my speed, the Horse not being used to boggle at any opposition, took the Water,
and before I could recover, plunged into the Stream, where with the violence of
the Flood, and struggling of the Beast, I lost my Saddle, and was left floating.

All that saw this Accident, were in great Consternation how to deliver me from
the danger, yet was cautious of themselves, but the Duke my Father, urged by
his Paternal Love and Care, desperately pursued me into the River, where
instead of preserving me, he met with the same Misfortune, and we had like to
have sunk together, had not the Brave Octavio, (who was then on the top of a
Bridge built over the Stream) seeing our Distress, quited his Horse, and like
Persius, or some Guardian Deity leapt in to save us: The Event answered his
Design, for after some little struggling, he recovered us both, and swam with us
out in each Hand in Triumph.

This God-like Action begot Admiration in all the Spectators, but for our
parts, that had not yet sense to know our Safety, or Deliverer, stupid, and
half dead, we were conveyed to a Grange within view, where the best means was
used to recover us: And here Octavio's Gallantry was more observable, in
refusing to shift his Clothes till he was confirmed we lived.

From these generous Actions, (after the Recovery of a dangerous Sickness it
gave us both) Octavio became the Darling Friend of the Duke, and their Intimacy
grew so remarkable, that it was a great Chance to find them separate; a long
while Octavio was so brave to stifle all his Hopes, with feigned Indifference,
being loath to urge the mighty Obligation, till Love, resistless Love overcame
his Will, and added greater hopes to gratify his Passion, no longer could he
bare the hard Restraint, but willing to improve his fleeting Hours, began a
more solemn Court then ever yet he had pretended to. From my Youth, and
Unexperience, and the particular Esteem I had ever found for Octavio, I was
inclinable to believe I Loved, he being the first Man that could ever warm me
into a Liking, and considering the Duke was just upon the Design of Marrying
me, Gratitude, and some small Inclination, made me not violent to oppose a
Flame, I thought I could better dispense with than any; but the Duke, since the
Misfortune of his Wife and Son, having fixed his future Bliss, and utmost Hopes
in me, and lived Unmarried to make me Great and Fortunate, could not bare the
Thoughts of my Separation to another Kingdom; and I really believe there was
nothing but Octavio's being a Stranger, disappointed his Wishes; he declined it
with all the Complisance in the World, conferring daily Favors on him, and
generous Offers to compensate, if possible, for the Lives he had received at
his Hands, without so dear an Acknowledgment, not forgetting prviate Commands
to me, not to allow or encourage his Address: but I, from the Duke's Affection
to him, not expecting this Repulse, had rashly advanced too far, and though it
was not difficult for my Heart to recant, yet Duty obliged me to refer my self
to my Father, and Honor to excuse my self under the same pretext to him.

Affairs were in this manner between us, when Octavio was summoned Home to
Madrid, which he evaded a long time, nor would not depart till I had promised
him, if he could gain the Duke's Consent, he should not fail of mine; we had
private Enterviews by the Assistance of my Maid, where through his
Intercession, I assented to a Correspondence during his Absence, for the
grateful Sentiments I had entertained of him fince his rescuing us from Death,
made it difsicult for me to deny him any reasonable Request.

With these Assurances, though not without great Regret, he set forward his
Journey; I was not under the easiest Circumstances when we parted, but Time,
and a more dear, yet cruel Remedy, soon disengaged those Cares.

Melantius, Son to the Marquess de Leganes, just returned from his Studies, (a
young Cavalier, Charming as a God, Beautiful to a Wonder, Wise as Apollo; Just,
Heroic, Affable and Courteous, Gallant and Engaging; a Face, a Shape, and Wit
formed for Love and Success:) (Heavens! I Rave) became my Lover. Then, and not
till then, my panting Heart, learnt to distinguish a real Passion, from that of
an imaginary Engagement. Gods! With what new Fire was my Breast enflamed, and
how exquisite was the dear sense of all my Joys and Doubts; and how different
from the feeble warmth I felt before? But to Behold him was too great a Bliss:
To hear him Speak, or Touch him, was a Heaven of boundless Pleasures, and
thrilling Satisfaction, and to imagine more, was not to live.

Scarce had she ended this last Accent with a Sigh, but Melantius (charmed to
an unexpressible degree, flung himself at her Feet, (forgeting all past
Jealousies and Fears) thoroughly convinced of his Mistake, with eager Kisses he
devoured her Hand, sighed on her Knees, and panting on her Breast, as soon as
ever his Passion would give leave, with a transported Joy, he burst into these
words: Be false! Be vain! if possible you can; still, still I am born to Love
and to Adore you.

Aspatia thus luckily and strangely surprised, could hardly give a credit to
her Senses, and it appeared incredible to all, a too substantial Blessing to be
real, Dumb with Amazement, silently they gazed, and gave themselves entirely up
to Wonder: But Aspatia, whose more particular Interest had involved her in a
thousand doubtful Apprehensions, had much ado to recover from the Agitation,
either excess of Joy or Fear had drove her to. As soon as she was convinced by
the tender Embraces of her Lover, that it was no Illusion, she fain would have
assumed a Neglect and Resentment equivolent to the Injuries she had received,
but Inclination, and Reflection that he had took her at too critical an
advantage to impose an Affectation, she dispensed with Form, and raising him
from the Ground, with Eyes all Love and languishing, she said, Rise to my Arms,
thou dear, thou cruel Man, and once again receive thy own Aspatia. Melantius
sprung at the Invitation to the Bosom of the Fair, which was panting him a
Welcome, where in equal Raptures, they were a long time Clasped, till Aspatia's
Curiosity (to know by what prodigious Chance, they had so wonderfully met)
roused her. Melantius, after a Complement to Don Ariosto (whom he saluted by
the Name of Canace, giving her to understand he had overheard her Story, and
wishing her as quick a turn of Fortune) and some kind notice of Carlo (whom he
discovered was the trusty Laura) gave them a punctual and diverting Narrative
of his Life, from his quitting Portugal, to that happy Minute.

By this time a Reconciliation and Intimacy was sealed on all hands, and their
Stomachs giving them a Summons, they adjourned to the Cabin, referring the
Conclusion of Aspatia's Story to the Afternoon; which when she had finished,
and Melantius was confirmed his Mistress had been Constant, transported at the
News, he pressed returning Home, that they at once might satisfy their Parents,
and complete their own Felicity: Aspatia, weary of that way of living, required
no persuasions to a thing she already was impatient to put in execution. Don
Ariosto, who had determined never to leave Aspatia, was doubly now induced to
accompany them to a place, where probably she might retrieve her Lover^; only
desiring the Liberty to continue the Habit she was then in, till some fair
occasion presented for her to change it.

Thus being agreed, Melantius took leave for that Night, that he might
discharge himself from his Command in the Army, and early the next Morning
returned with Montal, whom he ordered with Speed to provide for their
Departure; where we will leave them on that Design, and return to Octavio, whom
we left almost Expiring.

Grief, Disappointments, and the Anguish of Octavio's Wound, had reduced him to
a violent Feavor, which daily increasing to the hazard of his Life, it was
thought expedient, to send for a Priest to perform the last good Office: Adrian
a Franciscan Friar in the Neighborhood, a pious and judicious Man, heard his
Confession; after which Introduction, he became a constant Visiter; something
in Octavio's Person won his Soul, and he resolved with care and diligence to
serve him; his Distress and ill Accommodation moved him with Compassion. This
Kindness was observed by poor Octavio, who as far as his Ability, made a
grateful Return. The good Humor and Sanctity of Father Adrian, had begot so
great an Esteem in Octavio, that at Intervals he made him his Confident; and
now finding himself grow worse, he trusted him to acquaint the Viscount
Bozzolos, where, and under what Circumstance he was, which a long time he had
been a Stranger to. Upon the first notice the good old Viscount, fearing the
Desolation of his Family, and inevitable Ruin of all his Joys, made no stay
for reply, but without consideration of the Fatigue, got all things ready, and
the next Day set Sail for Portugal; the Ship put into the Port of Velle-Neue
for Water, and the Viscount impatient to see Octavio, tho 'twas with more
trouble to a Man of his Age, yet for more dispatch, resolved to perform the
reft of his Journey on that less dangerous Element: He took but the respite of
the Night, and the next Morning mounted Horse for Porto, with Alacrity and
Speed, he set forward, being attended for twelve Miles together with a cool
Breeze that rendered the blushing Cheeks of Aurora very refreshing: About this
time he arrived in a pleasant Vale, (where the Duke de Almeyda, and the
Marquess de Leganes were a Hunting) the Viscount's Horse starting at the
approach (...) Peace, and took care, as much as possible, to conceal my concern
from her; but when I found my self oppressed, took Horse, and under pretense of
taking the Air, privately indulged my Sorrow.

In one of these melancholy Humors, as I was moving along the Shore, by the
vast Billows that came rolling in upon me, and the mountainous height of the
swelling Surges; I raised my Eyes that were fixed on the Ground, to contemplate
that Emblem of the impetuous Storm in my Breast, when I perceived a Vessel
struggling with the Wind, endeavoring with all her Skill to plow her Passage to
the Island of Sicily, whilst the swelling Seas repulsed her Course, and the
rapid Waves forced her back as fast: This Contest of the angry Floods, and the
Sailers Task to oppose 'em, took up my Thoughts, till I saw the raging Tempest
rush the shattered Vessel on the Sands before me, where Waves after Waves dashed
on her Sides with their resistless force, starting the Planks, and leaving
Breaches that unsatiably received the Torrents that poured in, till Drunk with
the Deluge, she tumbled down, and sunk with her Freight and most of her Men;
Despair or Hopes made some attempt to stem the Tempest, others to catch at
Planks, but all in vain, none could float to Shore, but unable to sustain the
Conquering Main, sunk in the Gulf to the Stygian Lake; except a few, whose
luckier Thoughts had prompted them to secure the Longboat, and with great
difficulty saved their Lives.

I made up to the place where they Landed, being curious to know their
Circumstance, and found they were all Sailers; but one who was their Captain,
and a Boy about a Year old, very Beautiful and richly Clad; I was strangely
taken with the Child, who infinitely resembled mine, and inquired his Birth and
Country; but they very readily told me, That therein they could not satisfy
me, for they knew not themselves, confessing they were Pirates, and that in
their Course toward Portugal, had met with a considerable Prize, and again
lost it in the late Wrack; their Child they imagined to be by its Splendor a
Nobleman's aboard the Ship they Plundered, but whose they could not tell; for
being suddenly separated by a furious Storm, they had not time to secure more
than the Child and his Nurse, who either for fear or spite dyed in half an hour
after she was taken; the Child was preserved in hopes of Ransom, or rather
Providence designed him for a better Fate.

The Duke de Almeyda, who had attended with violent Emotions this part of the
Story, was no longer able to forbear interrupting him, but with an
insupportable Agony, and the most violent Concern in the World, he enquired
what Fortune since had attended that instant: The Viscount wondering at his
Disturbance, only made answer, I hope he Lives; and began to examine, if he had
any Interest in such a Loss? The Duke in Tears briefly related his Misfortunes;
his Shipwreck, the Death of his Wife, and loss of his Child; which being
ended, he pressed with all violence to know if he had no Mark, no Remnant of his
Clothes, by which he might be convinced of his Hopes.

The Viscount having earnestly heard him, replied, How glad am I, and how
easily shall I depart this Life, since I leave my Octavio so brave, so good a
Father, for I am more than persuaded he is your real Son, look on this Signet;
took from off his Neck, wherein a handsome Cipher is ingraved, and call it to
remembrance if you can.

No sooner had the Duke surveyed it, but with all the Joy imaginable he cried
out, Thou infallible Oracle of Truth, I am now confirmed from these dear
Characters which contain the Names of my self and Wife, that it is the same
young Frederick wore, when he was Ravished from us; and thou my Guardian Angel,
let me know, by what strange Providence you have preserved the first dear
Pledge of all my sacred Vows, that in my trembling Arms I may receive the happy
Author of my future Peace, and pant upon thy Breast ten thousand Blessings,
before my joyful Soul expire with Transport.

The Viscount much surpised at this Discovery, and much pleased to find he had
fostered such a Noble Offspring, proceeded to his Relation.

Sir, (said he) this Child I Ransomed from the Pirates, with no inconsiderable
Sum of Gold, and with an unusual satisfaction bore him Home with me, where
having told the whole Adventure, it was looked upon as a particular Regard
Heaven had of my Interest, and therefore had thus miraculously sent this Child
to propagate my Name and Family, in lieu of that I had lost; my Wife being from
some Reasons so possessed by the Physicians, to be past hopes of more, it
seemed plausible to me, and from a wonderful Affection I had took to the Child,
I was inclinable to believe it the Decree of Heaven, and immediately with the
Consent of my Wife, Adopts him; and from his strange resemblance of my own,
named him after the Deceased Octavio: This was managed with all prudent Care
and Privacy, and had the good luck never to be suspected, which was a great
Satisfaction to all but my Wife, whom it had a quite different Effect on, for
the mighty Pleasure she saw us take in the early Virtues of that Infant, racked
her with Imaginations of the double Joys she had received from her own; which
her Humble, Modest Disposition endeavoring to conceal from me, for want of
Redress in time, broke her Heart.

From hence the Viscount missed not a tittle of Octavio's Life, to that of
Friar Adrian's sending for him to a place near Porto, where Melantius left him
wounded: I was hasting thither (said he) when I met with this ill accident,
which now I bear with less regret, since it has procured me your acquaintance,
and discovered so happy a Secret: concluding it was always his Design before
he died, to tell Octavio of his obscure Birth, that he might esteem himself
doubly engaged to the Interest of the Bozzo^o's, (that had chose him when Fate
had reduced him to the station of a Plebean) as likewise to put him upon some
glorious Attempt, to demonstrate to the World, that his Birth was noble, which
he ever believed, though till that lucky minute could never be convinced of:
Notwithstanding (said he) I have made it my search this five and twenty years,
I wondered much I never could find it out; for besides the token of this Cipher,
and his swaddling Clothes, he has that infallible Mark. In haste the Duke did
interrupt him there, A Star my Frederick bears upon his Breast. The same has my
Octavio, cried the Viscount. Not till this period did the Duke recollect how
much this long Discourse might discompose the Viscount, and being thoroughly
convinced, and overjoyed at this Discovery; caressing him with all the
Gratitude imaginable he left him to Repose.

Immediately he ordered his Coach to fetch Octavio, waiting with violent
impatience his arrival. By this time Octavio was pretty well recovered, and not
hearing from the Viscount, was preparing with all expedition for Italy, when
the Duke's Orders arrived: He knew not what to think of the Invitation, but
knowing the Duke to be in all respects the most nice in Honor, he could not
apprehend a Trick; besides, the Equipage and Address had too good a face of
Friendship to be covered with Deceit; he scorns to distrust, and resolves to
comply, and in order to that acquaints his Friend Adrian with this Summons,
desiring he would accompany him; Adrian readily consented, and they set forward
on their Journey. They were no sooner arrived, but the Duke met Octavio with
Tears of Joy, telling him, That Providence had put it in his power to
compensate a little for the Favors he had received from him, for Heaven, in
some small Capacity had made him the happy Instrument of serving his Father,
who in his speed to visit him had broke his Leg, and now lay dangerously ill in
his House, at whose request he had sent for him, (he feared) to take his last
Farewell.

Octavio returned the Duke the heartiest Thanks Gratitude could frame; and
having cursed his Stars and Destiny, for drawing into such Troubles all that he
loved or valued, he begged to be conducted to his Father; the Duke himself was
his Guide, who drew open the Curtains, and presented him to the Viscount.
Octavio soon recalled him to remembrance, though his Sickness had much
transformed him, and falling on his Knees, implored his Blessing, and then
religiously begged Heaven for his Recovery. He desired him to attribute the
Misfortunes he had brought to his Relations and Friends, as the heaviest Plague
on his own Head, it being the Decree of Heaven, and not within his power to
avert.

The Viscount embraced him with all tenderness, and after a pious Benediction,
told him, 'twas easy to forgive him any thing, so great was his Paternal Care
and Love; his joy was mighty for his Welfare, which he demonstrated by no
common satisfaction.

But now (said he) prepare, my dear Octavio, to hear a most surprising,
unexpected Story; you are no more my Son; turn to the Duke, and pay that due
Obedience, to that most glorious Author of your being; but when I am dead and
gone, (as soon I ^ear I shall) with grateful thoughts remember how I loved you.
This Speech confounded so Octavio, that he began to think his Brain
distempered; but the Duke not having patience to wait longer, fell on his Neck,
and told him it was true: he sent immediately for the Marquess de Leganes, and
Father Adrian, to whom at large he did relate each circumstance the Viscount
had told him, as well as that of his own Knowledge; which agreeing so exactly,
even to the Mark on his left side, it soon put the reality beyond dispute. This
when Octavio heard, and was so well convinced of, with all submission he
addressed himself to his new Father, who received him in his Arms with
exquisite delight, pouring forth Blessings on him, and confirming him his by
the Name of Frederick, which Name for the future he ordered him to assume.
Frederick, after this, applied himself to the Viscount, professing all
Acknowledgments a generous Soul could show for such unparalled Favors: He
told him he would still esteem him as a Parent, serve and obey him with the
Duty of a Son, and to the World declare his noble Usage.

This News was soon dispersed through Portugal, and every one congratulated the
Duke's good Fortune: But poor Frederick's Soul was so oppressed with Sorrow,
that all the Satisfaction he received stom this Discovery, was, that since his
Birth had doubtful been, he proved a Branch of such a noble Stock, and luckily
was hindered from adding to his many Sins, by marrying of his Sister: But the
Blood of Alcidas lay so heavy on his Breast, he never had Hopes of any real
Comfort, therefore was under much concern, that these Affairs had prevented his
design of leading a Monastic Life, which his own Desire and Friar Adrian's
Advice did prompt him to, by way of Expiation for the Murder of his Friend.
'Twas with these Hopes he kept the Friar with him, flattering himself, that one
day he should have an Opportunity to put in execution what he so much desired.

This he resolved, but otherwise Fate decreed; for in an Evening, to complete
their Joy, (some three months after this Discovery, which minutes he melancholy
had passed) entered the Room (where they were all assembled) Melant us,
Aspatia, Canace, (in her Cavaliers Dress) Laura and Montal; which unexpected
Guests amazed them all: Their Wonder was so great, that for some time they
gazed confusedly upon each other, without the power of moving or of speaking.
Aspatia first broke silence, who prostrate at her Father's Feet, with all the
Rhetoric that she could use, desired his Pardon: The good Indulgent Duke
o'erflow'd with joy to see his Daughter: her Pardon easily upon her Lips he
sealed, and raising her from off the ground, cried, Welcome my dear Aspatia.
With no less joy the Marquess de Leganes saw and received Melantius, and
declared Heaven showed so strong a hand in all these Revolutions, that they
were both convinced 'twas so decreed by Providence, to make the Event
successful to them all. During this time Canace was all Anxiety, striving to
bear an equal part before her Lover, whose Eyes she found more lovely now than
ever.

From their first entrance her Eyes ^^re fixed upon him, and hardly could she
stop the violent sallies of her Jealousy, although she knew Aspatia was his
Sister, which they had been informed of on their Journey, the Fame of so
remarkable a thing having rung throughout the Kingdom.

Curious was the Interview between Frederick and his Sister; his Passion now
was nobly turned to Friendship, and he could gaze upon her without love; he
confessed the Pain and misery that all-along had waited on that Flame, had
sufficiently revenged his Baseness to Canace, whom he still owned the Mistress
of his Soul; but Revenge, a rash Vow, and the Contempt she had baffled him with
(as he imagined) made him so violent in his last Amor; but now he finds 'twas
managed by an unseen Power, who by hidden ways, beyond our comprehension,
easily brings the darkest things to light. That power (replied Aspatia) we are
all obliged to, who by this Discovery had prevented wondrous Mischief, that
must have ensued; and now there remains no more to complete an universal
Happiness but the fair, the constant, the virtuous Canace. At this Don
Frederick blushed, and sighing said, Though I can love sincerely none but her,
yet by a direful Imprecation I have rashly made, Gods, that I live to speak it!
she never can be mine. Canace, who had heard with pleasure the most part of
this Discourse, felt so violent an effect of Passion at this Part, that, unable
to repel its force, she fell into a Swoon. All run to the assistance of the
young Cavalier, and wondered at the occasion of his sudden Illness. Aspatia
thinking it a fair opportunity to discover her, readily reveals both Person and
Disease; he was sensibly concerned, the Company joining in her behalf,
representing her matchless Love and Constancy, he took her in his Arms, (who
was but just revived) and pressing her upon his panting Breast, with a Sigh
that almost burst his Heart, he cried, Unless it is possible to call my Friend
Alcidas from the Grave, I cannot wed Canace.

Adrain, who till now had been a bare Spectator, thought it high time to act
his part; and in order to it, having demanded an attention, pulled off a Beard
and false Eyebrows, which hitherto he had wore for a Disguise; and with a Smile
took Frederick by one Hand, and Canace by the other, told them, That Heaven, in
regard of their mutual Affection, had raised Acidas from the Dead to do that
Friendly Office for them. All that knew him formerly were convine'd 'twas the
same, and was more astonished at this Adventure, then all that had happened to
them before; but Frederick still doubtful of his good Fortune, had scarce Faith
to credit what he saw, not daring to give way to any Joy, least he should meet
a Disappointment. Alcidas observing this, ran to embrace him, and with a Voice
that showed his mighty Joy, (he cried) Doubt not, my der Octavio, for now you
hold with is your Arms your Real former Friend Alcidas, who now is thoroughly
satisfied of the Contrition, for that unhappy Deed which Love, Despair, and
Jealousy provokt you to; and since I have been the fatal Cause of your
Misfortunes, I think it now my part to ask a Pardon. At this Frederick being
convinced, though with no small wonder received him with all the Joy and
Satisfaction that Friendship, Love, or Gratitude could move; here all those
nice Punctilio's that Emulation, Love, or Honor could inspire, did pass
between these Generous, Noble Souls: Thus linkt in one another's Arms with
strict Embraces, they there confirmed an everlasting Friendship.

This Transport being over, Alcidas by the Company was pressed to tell the Story
of his strange Escape; who (after some Ceremony to the Presence, and a
particular Address to Canace, whom he entreated for a Reconciliation) he
gratified with this Relation:

The History of Alcidas.
AFter the fatal Blow I received under Canace's Window, by the Deluge of Blood
that per^ued it, I was soon disabled from making any defense, but fell on the
Spot, and lay grovelling in my Gore: I had just sense enough left to hear the
unhappy Author lament my Fall, who soon after retired, leaving me for Dead. The
Corigidore and his Son going their Rounds, perceived the Body, which knowing,
and finding that I yet breathed, out of Care for my Preservation, conveyed me
to his own House, without raising an Alarm, which would have taken up too much
time; they stopped my Blood, and I (after some other Applications) recovered my
Senses, and immediately demanded, If they had secured any Body upon suspicion;
they answered, None; but excused that Neglect from their Industry to preserve
my Life; I easily forgave them, and having understood that none knew of my
Misfortune but themselves; I Bribed them to Secrecy, desiring to continue
concealed in their House, till I saw what this unlucky Accident would produce,
promising, if I was likely to Die, to discover as much as should take the Guilt
off them; and if I lived to advance their Fortunes: They had formerly been
Servants to my Family, and knew my Capacity of performing what I promised: Upon
this Score (tho under pretense of a powerful Ascendant I had over them) they
swore a solemn Secrecy to my Commands, and likewise procured me a Surgeon,
Skilful and very Faithful; thus I remained secure from suspicion in their
House; and was carefully concealed, during the public Search: After which,
happily recovering (tho not without great difficulty) my Eyes were open to the
Follies of the World; I abhorred my extravagant Passion, looking upon it as a
vast Crime, being a Breach of our most sacred and solemn Friendship, and the
fatal Cause of those many Troubles that ensued. This moral Reflection wrought
so effectually with me, that from that moment I resolved to quit the Vanity of
this World, and dedicate all my Love to Heaven, and the Remainder of my Days to
the Expiation of my pondrous Sins; 'twas some Pleasure to me also when I
reflected what a hearty Atonement this would prove for the Wrongs and Injuries
I had done to my dear Octavio. I deferred the Execution of my Vow some time,
least some unhappy Wretch might suffer for my Death, were not I there to clear
him; but all prospect of a Discovery being over, and the Unfortunate Alcidas
almost forgot, I found it a convenient time to Transport my self to Portugal,
where I entered my self in a Convent of Franciscans, and in due time took the
Habit and Order. Having left a Charge with the Corigidore not to reveal any
knowledge of me without my Order, unless the hazard of any Man's Life required
the Discovery, which Commands I find he has been very punctual in observing.
And thus you have heard the Fate of Alcidas, whom Heaven miraculously has
preserved; no more to interpose between your Joys, or be a Plague to any of
your Hopes, but placed in a Station, luckily to reconcile all Differences, to
unite mutual Love, and cement your reciprocal Contracts for ever.

The Affability, Bravery, and Zeal wherewith Alcidas delivered this Discourse,
and the Pleasure he showed, in hopes to be (after all the Misfortunes he had
caused) the happy Instrument to reconcile them, moved every Heart with an
extraordinary sense of his Merit, and from the sincere Dictates of Love and
Esteem, each addressed him a particular Congratulation; their Joy was
unlimited, and there required no Persuasions to make an unanimous, Assent to
gratify their Tenderest Wishes; the fierce Sallies of our Heroes youthful
Bloods could hardly be restrained within Bounds, nor could the subtilest
Artifice conceal the Ladies Transports, whilst their becoming Blushes betrayed
their Thoughts, and their dancing Eyes discovered their Impatience for the
approaching Happiness; nothing but the Viscount's Illness was an Obstacle to
their Bliss, for whose Recovery they waited; but he, the only Unfortunate,
having had the Pleasure of hearing this Relation, and the boundless Joy of once
again seeing and receiving to his Bosom his dear Canace, on whom he conferred
ten thousand Blessings; he had the Satisfaction to depart this Life in Peace,
laden with Honor, and with Years, leaving Frederick and she, the happy
Possessors of a vast Inheritance.

Sorrow for this Loss had something eclipsed the Tranquillity of every Breast,
and deferred their Joys, to pay a mournful Tribute to the blessed Memory of the
Noble Deceased, living in as much Comfort as the occasion would permit, till a
just time was expired for their Grief, when they consented to enter the Lists
of Matrimony, and Adrian performed the Nuptial-Rites.

I.
Now does each Bridegroom's Face appear
In Joy, which their warm Hearts express,
Waiting for That they purchased dear,
And Sighing, Languish to possess.
II.
The trembling Brides with wishing Eyes,
By equal Love and Tears oppressed,
Long to secure the Noble Prize,
But dare not, dare not think the rest.
III.
Thus to Compose the cruel Pain,
That Dying Lovers often endure,
When all Endeavor is in vain,
Hymen effects the mighty Cure.
The Ceremony was very magnificent, and at Bedtime Adrian confessed, That his
Soul was so absolutely resigned to Heaven, that he could see his Mistress in
the Arms of his Friend without regret. Where we will leave both Couple, it is
possible, to Repose.

The Curtains drawn, the rest must not be known,
Inquire no more, the time may be your own.

FINIS.

