The Ancient DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England Maintained in its Primitive
Purity.

CONTAINING A Justification of the XXXIX. ARTICLES of the Church of ENGLAND,
against Papists and Schismatics.

The Similitude and Harmony betwixt the Roman Catholic, and the Heretic,
with a Discovery of their Abuses of the Fathers, in the First XVI. Ages, and
the many Heresies introduced by the Roman Church.

Together with a Vindication of the Antiquity and Universality of the Ancient
Protestant Faith.

Written long since by that Eminent and Learned Divine DANIEL FEATLY D. D.

Seasonable for these Times.

Leo Mag. Ser. 1. de Epiph. Insanis veritas scandalum est and caecis Doctoribus
fit Caligo quod lumen est.

LONDON, Printed for Austin Rice, and are to be sold at the Crown in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, By Divine Providence, Lord B. of
DURESME, etc.
May it please your good Lordship;
AFTER I had taken a resolution to apologize for my departed friend, and make a
kind of hedge to his Via tuta, I seriously bethought my self, who would
maimtaine the fence, by one so made; and patronize this patronage of that his
worthy work. For though the cause in hand, be the truth of God; and the person
whom I undertake to defend against the Calumniations of his Adversary, be now
(...), out of the eye of Horat. Od. 14. l. 3. Sublatum ex oculis quaerimus
invidi. Ovid. l. 3. De Pont Pascitur in vivis livor post fata quiescit. Et
Iuvenal. Sat. 1. Nulli gravus est percussus Achilles, aut multum quaesitus
Hylas.
envy, and the reach of malice; yet I well know, that neither the
consideration of the one, nor regard to the other, will prove any Amulet
against the poison of the Aristoph. in Plut. (...), id est, annulis medicinalis
aut antidotus.
Sycophants tooth, or venom of the Detracters tongue. Death I grant, which sets
a period to all suits in Courts, should grant a Supersedeas of Course, against
all Arrests and molestations of them who have taken Sanctuary in the grave;
and therefore Brusonius facet et exemp. l. 1. Solon legem condidit, qua
prohibuit in defunctos maledicta consicere. Et Theodorus Chius censuit Pompeium
in egypt, admittendum addens Mortuos non mordere. Erosm. Apoph. p. 374.
Selon enacted a Law, whereby, under a great penalty, he prohibited any to
cast any foul aspersion on the dead. And Bruson. ibid, Asinius Pollio cum
orationes condidisset in Plancum quas post mortem ejus legendas ser^abat audlit
a Planco, cum mortuus non nisi larvas puguare.
Plancus sharply reproved the folly of Asinius Pollio (who threatened to
stigmatize him after his death, by publishing his declamations against him)
saying, None but Hobgoblins fight with ghosts. Notwithstanding this privilege
granted to the dead, even by the Law of Nature; I cannot remember without
horror, nor express without grief, what the Acts and Monuments of the
Church, present to the view of all men, concerning Popish malice surviving life
it self, and committing inhumane (not only unchristian) outrages on the
corpse, and not less upon the works of Orthodoxe Professors now with God. The
blessed Martyr, Saint Cypr. de lap. and Ep. l. 2. Saevitum est in plagas,
saevitum est in vulnera: and in servis Dei non jam membra torquebantur sed
vulnera: manabat pro fletibus sanguis and pro lachrymis cruor e semiustulatis
visceribus defluebat.
Cyprian, setting the cruelty of the heathen, as it were, upon the Rack, could
strain no higher after he had said, These Salvage Persecutors wreake their
fury on the bruised, and battered servants of Christ; and torture not so much
their members as their wounds. Yet there is a Plus ultra in the enraged malice
of our Romish Adversaries, Saevitum est in cadavera, saevitum est in ossa,
saevitum est in cineres. For they Vide hist. de mort. Spalatensis. M. S.
Arraigne the dead, they sue against them an Ejection out of their long homes,
and interre them in Acts and Monuments, volume 3. page 778. The body of Peter
Martyrs wife, at Oxford, was taken up by Doctor Marshall out of her grave, in
the Church of Saint Frideswids, and buried in a dunghill.
Lestals; nay they burn their Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 606. The body,
and bones of John Wickliffe, by the Decree of the Synod of Constance, were
taken up and burned, 41. years after he was buried, in his own Parish at
Lutterworth, and his ashes taken and thrown into the river; and so was he
resolved into three elements, Earth, Fire, and Water: thinking thereby, utterly
to exstinguish and abolish both his name and Doctrine for ever. Acts and
Monuments, volume 3. page 771. The Vice chancellor taking with him a public
Notarie, bound the Parishioners with an oath, to dig up Paulus Fargius his
bones: and received the like oath of Roger Davis, and William Hazell, for doing
the like with Martin Bucer, when they came to the place of execution, the
Chests were set up an end, with the dead bodies in them, and fastened on both
sides with stakes, and bound to the post with a long ^on chain, fire being
forthwith put to, as soon as it began to flame round about, a great sort of
books that were condemned with them, were cast into the same.
bones, and strew their ashes on the rivers.

Tantene animis coelestibus irae? Lo the bowels of them who most boast of
works of Mercy, (i) Edmund Camp. rat. 10. Clavinum and has principes unum
coelum capere non potest. Et Fishers resp. to Doctor White, and Doctor Featley.
c. 2. p. 152. Out of the unity of the Romish Church, no salvation. Et Coster
resp. ad refut. Osiander proposit. 8. wishes himself damned with Lucifer, if
ever any Lutheran were saved.
toward the bodies of true Professors, whilome, Temples of the holy Ghost: yet
their charity to their souls, exceeds this; for these they peremptorily
exclude out of heaven, and send them pell-mell, without Bail, or Mainprise, to
the dungeon of hell; and there sentence them to more exquisite Coccleus hist.
Hussit. l. 2. Multo graviora esse crediderim Wicklefi tormenta quam sint apud
inferos, vel scelera tissimorum hominum Iudae proditoris Christi, and Neronis
Christianorum persecutoris.
torments, than either Nero the monster of men, or Judas the betrayer of Christ
himself, endure. Of this strain is the Knights Flood, Spect. c. 17. per tot.
Papists dying in their Reliligion saved, Protestants damned.
Alastor, with whom I am to deal; whose perfect character your Lordship may
see in Sozimus, drawn to the life by Isidorus Pelusiota, (...),as your
Lordship may find likewise, an exact Emblem of his book in Pliny his
description of the Plin. not. hist. l. 9. c. 36.
Bears whelpe, Jnformis caro sine oculis, sine pilis, ungues tantum prominent?
In which consideration, (n) Ben. Sir. Apoph. (...), Sa^t^ns nutu stultus fuste
Drus. in Alph. v^t. sap. (...).
I thought it most needful to make choice of a Patron of eminent quality, who
with his Authority, might stop the mouth of such railing Rabshakah's; and if
need be, lend them a smart blow with his Crozure, as Hom. Is. s. (...).
Ulysses did Thersites with his golden Scepter. Now, although the Knight
vvanted not many Noble and vvorthie friends, and some of your Lordships Sacred
order, who honored him living, and would willingly have afforded him their
protection being dead. Yet two reasons were prevalent with me, to dedicate this
Apology to your Lordship. First, because none of your Lordships rank now
living, to my knowledge has so often entered into Lists with the Romish
Adversaries, nor served so long in this sacred Leguer as your Lordship; in so
much, that at my aboade in France, now 25. years ago: where I saw the Fitzg:
Hector Romulidum cecidit sub Achille Iuello. Rhemensi Hannibali Scipio Fulcu^
erat. Tum cor papicolis Rainoldus fregit in Hatto. Alba Stapletonum jugera
deinde premunt: Ac ^edes nostris prerium Deringe pa^yris. Net gemmae Renues
Annulus ire comes. Abfuit Elysiis tantum sua Laurea lucis. Te Deus in lu^os
tranflulit ergo suos.
Arms of other Champions of the truth blazoned in a Latin Epigram, I descried
your Lordships among them in an apposite Anagram, made by a renowned Pastor of
the French Church.

THOMAS MORTONIVS With this, or the like Euloge.

Quassanda est ista Pelias hasta manu. The other reason was, your Lordship in
your last, no less unimitable, then unanswerable Mort. institut. sacram. l. 3.
c. 3. p. 158. Of Romans Transub. This sentence I have seen lately canvased by a
Jesuit against a judicious and religious Knight, falsely imputing unto him
diverse falsities, etc. And l. 7. c. 7. page 545. Your Jesuit in his book of
Spectacles made in confutation of a judicious and religious Knight, among many
other of his Paradoxes and Absurdities etc.
masterpiece, held up your buckler over the Knight then living, more then once,
and ward off the Jesuits blows; and therefore I doubt not but that your
Lordship will now bestride him being dead, and save him from all further
injury. For my self, as nothing induced me to make this supplement to his
Apology, but the love of Gods truth, and the truth of my friends love: so I
hope that all who love the truth in sincerity, upon the impartial perusal
hereof, will do the Knight honor, and me right. For envy it self cannot
deny that he has much advantaged the common cause, both by convincing the
Adversaries, in all the maine points of difference between us, out of their
own mouths, and discovering more at large then any the mystery of their
Indices expurgatorij^; wherein though they profess to correct only their own
writers, and that but from the year 1518. yet the Knight has traced them
upwards, and detected their corruption of all sorts of Writers in all former
ages: whereby the judicious Reader may observe such indirect dealing in our
Adversaries toward us, as Melancth. orat. Tom. 1. de Od Sophist. Cum triginta
Tyranni, legem tulissent, ne quis e suo Catalogo in dict a causa necaretur
Critias tamen Therammenem collegam suum, cujus nomen in Catalogo scriptum erat,
in dict a causa interfici jussit cumque Therammenes legis occiliu^ peteret,
respondet, legem scriptam esse de iis quorum nomina sunt in Catalogo, se vero
jam Therammenes nomen in Catalogo delevisse.
Critias in the Athenian State practiced against Therammenes: there being a law
enacted in the time of the 30. Tyrants at Athens, that none of them should be
put to death without a legal trial, whose names were written in a certain
Catalogue, Critias bearing a spleen to Therammenes, first blots his name out
of the Catalogue, and then proceeds to sentence him to death; and when
Therammenes pleaded the privilege of the law, as being one of the thirty
Governors, whose name was set down in the Catalogue; Critias answered, that
the benefit of the law was restrained to those whose names were in the
Catalogue; but that he had newly struck out the name of Therammenes. Let any
that has a single eye, judge whether the proceedings of our Romish Adversaries
against us, are not altogether as injurious as this of Critias toward his
Colleague Therammenes. First, they raze out our Records, and burn our writings,
and then nonsuit us for want of Evidence. Secondly, they blot and cut out by
their Indices Expurgatorij, the most pregnant testimonies of Antiquity for us,
and then charge us with false Allegations, because, forsooth, they agree not
with their castrated Copies. I freely confess that if any man shall search all
the Knights quotations, especially out of the Romish Writers, in the latter
corrected, or rather corrupted Editions of them, or look upon him through the
Jesuits Spectacles unrubbed, he will think him very foul in some Allegations
at least: but let him inquire into the more Ancient and uncorrupted Copies, or
look upon the Knights writings without the Jesuits false glasses, and glosses,
or even through those Spectacles he has fitted for him in this last Pamphlet;
as they are now wiped and cleansed by me, he will find him a most fair and
ingenuous Writer.

There is no text of Scripture among many scores, no Allegation of Antiquity
among many hundreths, vellicated by the Jesuit, which is not here vindicated:
no argument seeming to be blunted, which is not sharpened, and a new edge set
on it; no paint, color, or varnish laid by the Jesuit on the rotten Pillars
of Popery, which is not here scraped out, or washed away. And thus at the
length the Case for the Spectacles begun by the Knight is finished: on which
I crave leave to imprint your Lordships Name and Arms; entreating your
Lordship to accept this Dedication as an indication of my sincere love to my
deceased friend, and withal an acknowledgment of that great debt of thanks I
owe your Lordship for your Lordships many undeserved favors, which I am able
no other ways to discharge, then by underwriting my self,

Your Lordships most humbly and affectionatly Devoted, DA. FEATLEY.

The CONTENTS of the first Part.
In the Epistle to I. R.
FAlsifications objected by the Jesuit, answered and retorted. page 2. Personal
succession of visible Professors is no certain note of a true Church. page 3.
The second Commandment is moral, and the Jesuits leaving it out of the
Decalogue, is unexcusable. page 8.
In the Answer to the Preface.
The Jesuits answer is full of railing, slanders, sophismes, and
tergiversations. page 16. CHAP. I. The Articles of the Roman Creed, published
by Pope Pius the fourth, were never anciently received. page 25. The 39 Articles
of the Church of England justified. page 30. Papists teach, that the Pope has
power to create new Articles of Faith. page 33. Many Doctrines of Popery are
new, by the confession of Papists themselves. page 38. Protestants have a
certain rule of Faith, Papists have not. page 45 The Roman translation of the
Bible, is most corrupt. page 51. Three sorts of corruptions, and abuses of
ancient Fathers. 1. By foysting bastard Treatises, and entitling them to the
Fathers. 2. By falsifying their undoubted Treatises by additions, detractions,
or mutations. 3. By alleging passages and places out of them, which are not
extant in their Works: and of all these three kinds, Romanists are proved
guilty. page 64. Corruptions, and falsifications of ancient Writers, by
Papists: In the first Age. page 65. In the 2. Age. page 67. In the 3. page 68.
In the 4. page 73. In the 5. page 77. In the 6. page 89. In the 7. page 90. In
the 8. page 92. In the 9. page 105. In the 10. page 109. In the 11. page 110.
In the 12. page 111. In the 13. page 112. In the 14. page 114. In the 15. page
115. In the 16. page 122.
Of implicit Faith, and blind Obedience, maintained by Papists. page 143. CHAP.
II. Papists their bitterness against reformed Churches is causlesse. page 148.
The definition of Heretics agrees to Papists, but no way to Protestants. page
151. Rome confessed to be Babylon, by learned Romanists. page 157. CHAP. III.
Cassander and Caesenus are justified. page 164. Corruption in Faith as well as
manners, are confessed to have been in the Roman Church by the learned of that
party. page 165. The Council of Trent intended a reformation of Faith as well
as manners. page 173. CHAP. IV. The Catholic Faith is not so indivisible, but
that a man may renounce it in part, though not in all, as many learned
Romanists have renounced the Trent Faith in part. page 178. Priests marriage is
lawful. page 181. CHAP. V. Romanists prefer their own interpretations of
Scriptures, before the ancient Fathers. page 188. CHAP. VI. Many errors have
crept into the Church, whose first Authors cannot be named. page 191. The
difference between Heresy and Apostacy. page 196. CHAP. VII. The petty degree
of the Romish Faith is drawn from the ancient Heretics, namely; the Osseni
Helcheseite, the Capernaites, the Manichees, the A^gelici, the Collyridians,
the Tacians, and the Cathorists. page 219. CHAP. VIII. The Antiquity, and
Universality of the Protestant Faith in general is proved by the testimonies
of our learned Adversaries. page 253. There are but 22 Canonical books of the
old Testament, as is proved by the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, both of
the Greek and Latin Church. page 276.
Errata in the first Part.
PAge 42. line 8. read his. lin. 17. r. authority, in marg. l. 2 r. ad Dard.
p. 57. lin. 11. r. their foreseen. p. 66. l. 4. r. the deep. p. 75. l. 20. r.
Angles. p 92 in mar. l. 8. r. alius, in text, l. 29. r. rejected. p. 93. l. 16.
r. serve. p. 109. l. 23. r. making him speak. p. 131. in mar. l. 12. r.
veniali. p. 138. l. 25. r. very corruptly. p. 139. l. 25. in marg. 1.
repurgata: p. 153. l. 22. r. homoousians. p. 164 in marg. l. 25. r. vicesimi
terrii. p. 173. l. 23. r. operierunt. p. 189. in mar. l. 17 sequuntur. p. 218.
l. 2. r. Vitalian. p. 219. l. 18. in marg. r. regnum. p 224. in marg. l. 10. r.
minus. p. 248. in marg. l. 12. r. curvat. and l. 14. r. pronus. and l. 18. r.
iudico. p. 251. l. 6. r. argument. p. 255. l. 3. r. ingenuously. p 257. l. 12.
r. true body. and l. 21. r. is. and l. 22. dele and. p. 270. l. 4. r. look. p.
271. l. 29. r. of the. p. 273. l. 3. dele to the p. 279. l. 22. r. when.

To J. R. AUTHOR OF THE BOOK CALLED A pair of Spectacles.
I Received a Treatise from you, (Mr. J. R.) not long since published against
me by the title of A pair of Spectacles, or, An Answer to a book called Via
tuta, The safe way: wherein you say the book is showed to be a Labyrinth of
Errors, and the Author a blind Guide.

To what end your Spectacles were made for a blind man I cannot tell; for sure
I am, if I were blind, a pair of your Spectacles could not make me see:
howsoever if the indifferent Reader will look but upon the Frontispice of your
own book, he shall easily discern that your glasses are deceitful, and do
justly occasion a Writ of Error to be brought against your self, for making
that to seem in S. Austin, your first Author, which is not. Your words are
these: Qui autem praetergreditur regulam fidei, non accedit in via, sed recedit
de via. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 98. Tom. 9. p. 487.
He that goes besides the rule of faith (which is the Catholic Church) does
not come in the way, but goes out of the way: wherein you have added these
words of your own (viz.) which is the Catholic Church, in the same character
with S. Austin: and in lieu of Scripture you pretend the Church to be the rule
of Faith; whereas that ancient Father assures us, Civitas Dei credit Scripturis
-- Unde fides ipsa concepta est, ex qua justus vivit. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l.
19. c. 18. Tom. 5. Sancta Scriptura nostrae doctrinae regulam figit. Idem de
bono Viduitatis. Tom. 4. c. 1.
that from the holy and canonical Scriptures, that faith is formed and bred by
which the just do live. Nay more, he expressly professes with us, that the
holy Scripture does fix or settle the rule of our doctrine. And thus in your
first citation you falsify S. Austin, and go besides the rule of faith and
good manners also, and by stumbling at the threshold, you show your self to
be the blind guide you speak of in the first page, and the first place.

I proceed to your Dedicatorie Epistle; first, you begin to descant upon my
name, in paralelling the words Lyend and Lie, howsoever (say you) The title of
Sir will be left for you.

These be the first flowers of your eloquence, and they savor sweetly. Now if
I should repay you in your own language, and show you what men are branded
with the letter (R) which stands for your name; if I should shoot back (I say)
your arrows, even bitter words, into your own bosom, would it not show
rather want of matter than proof of doctrine? If you delight to sit in the
seat of the scornful, it shall be my comfort to tread in the steps of my
Savior, who when he was reviled, reviled not again. To let pass your bitter
reproaches of my learning and breeding, I will come to the matter.

You have not stated the question (say you) fully and truly, for you were to
show the visibilitie of the Church by persons in all ages. Then you demand of
me where the Church was, which S. Paul called the house of God, and pillar of
truth; and thus you prescribe me my weapons, and teach me how to fight.

Touching the visibilitie of the Church, it is not to be confined within the
narrow compass of an Epistle; and therefore I will answer you and your
Jesuits challenge at large in place convenient: and as touching your demand
where the Church was, which is called the pillar of truth, I answer in brief,
not in Rome, but in Ephesus; for otherwise it might seem incongruous, that the
Apostle should exhort Timothy to walk circumspectly in the Church of God,
because the Church of Rome was the pillar and firmament of truth. And therefore
the Turk may better allege this place to prove Mah mets religion, being now
subject to his power, than you to justify the Romish religion, because Ephesus
was the pillar of truth.

You proceed, and by way of prevention you tell me the controversy is not so
much of the doctrine as of the persons: and then you conclude simply in the
very same page, The question is not of the doctrine, but of the persons.
Oportet esse memorem: I will but let you see your contradiction, I quarrel it
not, only I pray you tell me in the words of soberness and truth, did ever
any wise man (except your self) undertake to prove the true Church by the
visibilitie of the persons? May not Jews and Heretics by the same reason
claim a true Church, because they had visible persons in all ages?

But say you this has been the way which the holy Fathers have taken, either
in proving the Catholic faith, or disproving of heresies; and for your
Assertion, you cite Tertullian, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Optatus and Augustine: give
me leave to examine your Authors, for as yet you have produced but one ancient
Father, and him you have falsified in the Frontispice of your book.

Touching your first Author, Tertull. prescript. c. 32. and lib. 3. Car.
advers. Marcion.
Tertullian, (in the first place cited by you) he demonstrates two ways how
to discern the Church: first, by showing some Apostle or Apostolical person
to have founded it; next, by the conformity of the doctrine to the Apostles:
and in his third book against Marcion (which is your second citation) he has
nothing at all for your purpose.

Touching your second Author, Iren. l. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. and l. 4. c. 43, 45, 46.
Irenaeus, he is expressly against you; for in the first chapter and third
book (cited by you) he says, By the will of God they have delivered the
Gospel to be the pillar and foundation of truth. In the second he says, that
when Heretics are convinced by the Scriptures, they fall to accuse them, as
if they were not right, or of authority, and that they are ambiguous and
doubtful. In the third he proves the truth of the Church by the conformity
of doctrine to the Apostles, not by the visibilitie, as you pretend. In his
fourth book cited by you, he shows that bare succession is no note of the
Church; and in his 45. chapter, which you quote, there is nothing that makes
for your question. And lastly, in the 46. chapter he proves that the New
Testament is as severe against fornication as the Old, or rather more: and this
may touch the freehold of that Church which dispenses with Stews; but of the
point in question he speaks nothing at all.

Touching your third Author, S. Cyprian, Cypr. Ep. 52. and 76.
in the 52. Epistle cited by you, he persuades Antonianus rather to adhere to
Cornelius than Novatianus: and in his 76. Epistle alleged by you, he shows
that Novatianus succeeding none in that See, was ordained by himself, and
therefore could be no true Bishop; but as touching the controversy in
question, Ne gry quidem.

Touching your fourth Author, Optatus, Optat. advers. Parmen. lib. 2.
he handles not the question, neither makes any thing at all for you.

Lastly, August. Psalm. 2. part. Don. and Ep. 165. and de Utilit. credendi. c. 7.
touching S. Austin you cite the second Psalm, and there is nothing handled of
the question: you cite likewise his 165. Epistle, wherein he declares a
succession of Bishops from the Apostles time to Anastasius: Si ordo Episcoporum
succedentium considerandus est. Ep. 165. p. 751. Preculdubio ab Ecclesia
Catholica sumendum exordium. De Utilit. credendi. c. 7. Idem contr. Cresc. l.
1. c. 33.
If (says he) an orderly succession of Bishops is to be considered.

Yea but S. Austin (say you) particularly proves the question, where he tells
his friend Honoratus, he must begin his inquiry from the Catholic Church.

He that told the Manichees, we must take our Exordium from the Church, told
the Donatists likewise, we must resort to that Church for the resolution of
our faith, which the sacred Scriptures undoubtedly demonstrate to be the true
Church: for in them (says he) we have known Christ, Idem Ep. 166.
in them we have known the Church. If you can derive your succession in
person and doctrine, from Christ and his Apostles, we will answer you as
sometimes S. Austin answered Petilian the Donatist: Idem contr. l. Petil. l. 2.
c. 85.
Whether of us be Schismatiques we or you? ask you not me, I will not ask
you, let Christ be asked, that he may show us his own Church.

After these several passages you return again to your first Author
Tertullian, Tertull. prescript. c. 19.
and with him you conclude; where it shall appear that there is the truth of
Christian discipline and faith, there shall be the truth of Scriptures and
Expositions. And from hence you infer, that we are first to seek the persons
that profess the faith, that is, the Church. Whereas in truth his testimony
does rather prove the persons by the doctrine, than the doctrine by the
persons, and this is most agreeable to his own Assertion in the third chapter,
Idem c. 3.
Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? As if he should say, we
plainly prove the persons by the doctrine, not the doctrine by the persons.

Now put on your Spectacles, and take a review of your Authors. The first
makes nothing for you, the second is expressly against you, the third speaks
not to the point in question, the fourth and fifth handle the question, but not
at all to your advantage, or our prejudice: and thus you have produced
fourteen several places out of the ancient Fathers in one page, and all
either impertinently, or falsely, or directly against your self: by which the
Reader may conjecture what is like to be the issue of your whole work, who
have so grossly falsified so many authorities in your Epistle, and before the
entrance into the body of your book.

From your lame proofs of the Churches authority, you proceed to the
justification of your maimed commandments, viz. in leaving out the second, and
altering the fourth in your Breviaries and Psalters. You say you print them in
your Bibles, and therefore they are not absolutely left out, as long as they
are elsewhere: Mute quod scimus. It is true the words are contained in your
Bibles. But Dic quod rogamus, why do you not publish Gods commandments as he
wrote them? Admit that in your Catechismes you should set down this form of
Baptism, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and leave out the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, would it be sufficient to say it is not absolutely left
out, because it is contained in the Bible? Show me the man amongst your
Papalins that dare alter a Kings command or a Popes Breve, and will your Church
attempt more against the Precepts of God, than against a Popes Bull or a Kings
Proclamation? But the truth is, and you know it too well, if the second precept
were expressly set down in your Psalters, the common people would be too
busy in expostulating the cause why Image Worship should be commanded by the
Church, and yet condemned by Gods word.

Yea, but it is part of the first commandment (say you) or otherwise it is
ceremonial.

Let it be one or other, since God thought it needful to be added, how dare
you leave it out? Deuteronomy. 4.2.
It was the voice of God himself, You shall not add unto the word which I
command, neither shall you diminish ought from it, that you may keep the
commandment of the Lord your God. Again, how is it a part of the first if it
be ceremonial, when the first is agreed on all hands to be natural and
moral? The truth is, it is not ceremonial, but moral, and plainly distinct
from the former; for the first forbids the true worship of any false god, the
second forbids any false worship of the true God; and howsoever Peresius and
Catharinus, and you for company, would have gladly the Law against Images to be
positive and ceremonial, and so to cease at the coming of Christ; yet your
own Bellarmine disavowes it with a Non probatur: Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 7.
This opinion is not allowed of us, both for the reasons made against the
Jews, and for that Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and S. Austin, do all
teach that the commandments, excepting the Sabbath, are a Law wholly natural
and moral.

After your Apology for your maimed commandments, you grow so virulent, as if
the poison of Aspes were under your lips, you cry out, I notoriously falsify
some Authors, and impertinently allege others; you charge me with execrable
perjurie, you say, I am a framer of lies, and I offend in all kind of
falsehood: and lastly, you conclude the book to be none of mine, but some
Ministers, because you hear it from some, that I scarce skill of ordinary
Latin.

I profess for my learning I cannot boast of it; I do willingly assume that
saying of Origin, Gratias ago Deo, quod ignorantiam meam non ignoro. Orig. 1
Cor. 1.27. Psalm. 82.
I am not ignorant of my ignorance: but let me tell you, as in Gods cause I
seek no praise, so I fear no reproach; for God has chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise; nay more, out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings he has ordained strength, to still the enemy and the avenger. And
howsoever seemingly you condemn me for ignorance, yet I am verily persuaded
that if I were more ignorant than you make me, you would love me the more: for
your Church commends Ignorance for the mother of Devotion: and the rather,
because your own Clemangis tells us, Nich. Clemang. c. 6.
before the days of reformation, Many Priests who had cure of souls, were
sent to their flocks, not from their studies, or from the school, but from the
plough, and they understood as much Latin as Arabic; nay, they could not
read, and that which was shameful, they could not distinguish an Alpha from a
Beta. Neither can it be denied, that many Popes have dispensed with ignorant
men, who per saltum, without any learning, have leaped into a Bishopric. Pope
Paul the third created Robertus Venantius Archbishop of Armach, for two
special qualities; Tum quod Missam belle canere, tum quia cursu Veredario in
equo vehi perite diceretur. Gentil. Exam. Council. Trid. l. 2. sess. 1. p. 33.
the one, because he could sing Mass sweetly; the other, because he could
ride a Post horse skilfully. And in the latter ages it was so usual to admit
any Ignoramus's into a Bishopric, that when our King Edward the third
solicited Pope Clement the sixth, to create Thomas Hartfield Bishop of Durham,
notwithstanding the Cardinals cried out he was a Layman, and an Idiot, the
Pope replied, If the King of England had entreated for his Ass, Si Rex Angliae
pro asino suo supplicasset, votum suum hac vice obtinuisset. Walsing. citat.
apud Antig. Brit. in vita foh. Uffordi. And Godwin in his Catal. of Bishops, p.
526. Eras. Encom. Mor. Heb. 7.3.
he should have obtained it at that time. To come nearer to the times; Julius
the third made the keeper of his monkey a Mass Priest, and I presume he had
small store of Latin. The Friar who would prove from the words of Christ, An
non december facti sunt mundi? that God made ten worlds, had scrace skill of
ordinary Latin. And lastly, he was Sr. John Lack-Latine, who would prove
that Melchisedeck offered salt with bread and wine, because he read in the
text, Rex Salem, which is, the King of peace.

I speak not this by way of recrimination, but to let you know, how well you
and your fellows are read in the two titles of the Law, De maledicis, and De
Clerico promoto per saltum.

Take therefore from me what learning you will, distraine it, and impound it at
your pleasure, I will never trouble you with Replevin: only I say with S.
Austin, Seek others of more learning, but beware of them that presume of
learning.

And whereas you conceive a Minister made my book, and I bear the name only
for to countenance the work: If I had received help from some in this kind,
you need not blame me for it, for it is ordinary with your men, to have whole
Colleges join their helping hand in defense of your cause. But in answer to
your supposall, and to vindicate our Ministers from those great aspersions of
ignorance, of corruption, of obstinacy, of perjurie, laid unto their charge
(as Authors of the work) I witness a true confession before God, who knows I
lie not, a Minister was so far from making my book, Via Tuta. Via Devia.
that I neither had help from Clergyman nor Layman, for composing or making
either of my books.

Let it suffice for me to have said the truth, which although it appear never
so simple, yet it is able to remove a mountain of learning: if there be in
me, I say not any talent, but only a mite of a talent, my prayer unto God is,
and ever was, it may be bestowed wholly to the honor of his truth, and the
benefit of his Church. And whereas you charge me with obstinacy and malice
(which, say you, is the true cause of all my errors) let me tell you, if I
were in an error, you have not the patience to show it me, but by bitterness
and railing. Your learning happily may work miracles in the ears of the
unlearned that cannot judge; but it cannot turn darkness into light, nor
error into truth. And although your bitterness might justly occasion that
malice, of which you accuse me; yet it is so far from my thoughts, that I
pity you, and in requital of your pains, I pray for you: and that which S.
Paul said of the Israelites, Romans 10.1.
I wish to the Romanists and members of your Church, Brethren, my hearts desire
and prayer to God is that they may be saved.

But (say you) these were not your first fruits, for you translated and
published Bertram, an obscure Author, with a preface of your own, and thereby
gave sufficient trial of your ignorance and corruption, whereof you were
convinced by (O.E.) but never cleared your self of so foul a tax.

It is true that some ten years since I caused Bertram to be reprinted, and
published with a preface before it; and it is as true, that he being a Romish
Priest taught our doctrine of the Eucharist above eight hundred years since,
and therefore by way of prevention, you term him an obscure Author, though he
were famous in his time.

As touching the foul tax of ignorance and corruption, in false translating
it (wherewith you charge me) you are much mistaken; for I never translated it,
but only reprinted the old translation: this both he and you might have seen
in the Frontispice of the book, in these words: Translated and imprinted in
the English tongue, Anno Dom. 1549. and now the third time published: so that
the Translation into English was made before I was borne. Again, in the end of
my preface you shall find these words, Pity it were but this lamp should
receive a new light by reprinting him, which the iniquity of the time had
almost extinquished. Now I pray, Sir, what cause was there of any answer to
your namelesse Author, or rather what cause was there of his and your
bitterness, in charging me with false translating, with ignorance and
corruption? I profess I am not ignorant that your men are guilty of many such
false accusations (ad faciendum populum) to make your Proselytes believe, that
all our books are full of lies; of whom I may truly say, as S. Austin
sometimes spoke of the Donatists, When they cannot by sly and wily cosenage
creep like Aspes, with open professed violence they rage like Lions.

Lastly (you say) that an Answer to my book has hitherto been deferred,
because no man of learning would think it worth his pains to make any.

Let me tell you, I have received three printed answers to Via tuta, besides
two written copies from namelesse Authors: the first was from a Merchant, and
that is called Via vere tuta: the second from a Priest, and that is called A
pair of Spectacles to see the way: the third is from a Clerk, and that is
termed A Whetstone of Reproof. The first printed Author is termed Mr. John
Heigham, whose Treatise savours too much of blasphemy and ribaldrie: the
second is Mr. John Floyd, whose work is full of bitterness and subtlety: the
third is Tom Tell troth (for so he terms himself) whose pamphlet is fraught
with all childishness and impertinencie. Now if none of these were men of
learning, as you confess (because no learned man would take the pains to
answer it) what may I think of your wisdom, which has returned an answer
full of railing accusations (such as the Angel of God would not have brought
against the Devil himself)? I say, in regard your bitter lines are rather a
libell without a name, than a Christian and moderate confutation, I might well
have declined a replication to it, and have told you with S. Jerome, Your
bitterness deserves rather an answer with scorn, Magis indignationem
scribentis quam studium. Hieron. advers. Vigil.
than a refutation in earnest. But when I considered it was the fruit of your
religion, and common practice of your Church, that for want of matter you
commonly fall upon the person, I resolved with my self to call you to a sober
reckoning, that the truth of God might appear, and that by your own
bitterness, you might better discern the character of a bad cause, and an
evil spirit.

For a conclusion take but a short view of your bitter reproaches: you term me
a blind Guide, and a Ministerial Knight; you say my book is a Labyrinth of
errors; you cry out my surname has the two first letters of a lie; you say
the title of Sir will be left for me; you condemn me of execrable perjurie;
you affirm I am a framer of lies, and abound in all kind of falsehood; you tell
me, I scarce understand Latin, and it is conceived a Minister made my book;
you charge me with obstinacy, with malice, with corruption, with ignorance,
with false translating; you proclaim the fearful judgments of God upon me
for perverting souls, and as if I were past all grace, you say I am not
capable of any good advice; yet at last (as if you would make me some amends
for all your accusation) you conclude: I forbear to say any more, resting
howsoever your well-wishing friend.

Surely you have said enough, and you do well to forbear to say more; for I
think the words of your Epistle are so sufficiently dipped in lie and gall, that
they will serve for your whole work: but I pardon you, and shall return you
no other answer than the Arch-Angell gave to Satan, Jude verse. 9.
The Lord rebuke you: only let me tell you, I cannot think you a well-wishing
friend, whose heart and tongue is full of cursing and bitterness; for I may
truly say of you as Cato sometimes said of Lentulus, Dicam falli eos qui negant
os habere. Seneca.
They are much deceived that deny you to have a mouth (and a foul one too.) In
the mean time you must remember that for your idle and vain words you must
give account to God; and for your fifteen several falsifications you must
give an account to your Reader. And thus by way of Traverse and denial to all
other things impertinently alleged, I answer No: to your railing I answer
nothing.

AN ANSWER TO HIS PREFACE to the Reader.
Good Christian Reader,
FIrst thou shall observe, that the author of the Spectacles chief aim is
either by shifts and cavils to outface the truth, or by Sophistry and bitter
words to darken it: one while he cries down my book, and slights it in such
a scornful manner, as if it were not worth the answering; Page 20^.
another while he complains that there is no place in the whole book, which
is not either falsely or impertinently alleged: one while he proclaims, that
my endeavors are poor indeed, and far short of what is requisite in writing
books; another while he professes, It has somewhat in it which may draw away
an honest-minded man, and that his Catholic friend was stumbled at it. Now
what is the reason of these impertinent excursions and contradictions? It was
the observation of ancient Maxentius: Heretics when they find themselves not
able to yield a reason of their wilfulness, then they fall into plain
railing. And certainly such is the bitterness of this Author, that were I
persuaded Pythagoras transmigration of souls into other men's bodies, had been
true; I should believe that the soul of Rabshekah had been transported into
his body: for otherwise if he had but a grain of charity, he would never
spurn a blind man (for so he terms me) when Christian charity teaches him
another lesson. If he were well versed in Antiquities, he would never have
cited so many places of ancient Fathers falsely and impertinently in one page,
and yet condemn others of ignorance (and falsification) in the Fathers. If he
were well read in the Book of Wisdom (I mean, in the sacred Scriptures) he
would never have replied with such scorn and disdain; for without doubt the
Apostle spoke to Mr. Lloyd the Romanist, as well as to the rest of the Romans:
Romans 11.3.
Not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but soberly,
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith.

He that accuses another man of ignorance, of lying, of malice, of execrable
perjurie, and the like, had need be a man himself without all exception; yet
if we may believe the Doctors of his own Church, he is guilty of these and
much more: witness the Sorbonicall censure at Paris, wherein Hallier and
Aurelius accuse him of lying, Aurelius in libri sui titulo. Hallier in Admonit.
ad Lect. p. 8, 9.
of ignorance, of heresy, of profane scurrilitie, of blasphemy and impiety,
of furious, filthy, and devilish railing, of unsufferable arrogancy, and the
like: and as touching his bitter accusations, it seems it is his accustomed
manner of writing, witness his Spongia written against the Sorbonists,
Aurelius in Vindiciis. p. 385.
under the title of Hermannus Laemilius, otherwise discovered to be John Floyd:
I say he has drencht his sponge in that gall of bitterness (such charity and
unity is there amongst themselves) that I may truly say of him, as the
Spartans sometimes said of the Theban Orator; If he think as he writes, his
ignorance is desperate; if otherwise, his conscience is seared.

To give you a taste of the manner of his writing: when I cite authorities that
are pregnant, and beyond his just exception, he spares my person, and
condemns the Authors themselves, and complains they are branded with the note
of heresy and singularity: when as in truth they are branded only by their
Inquisitors, for speaking against the errors of their Trent Doctrine, being
otherwise, known members of the Roman Church.

When I cite an Author of our own, as namely, B. Usher, for translating
Aelfricks Homily out of the Saxon tongue, one while he cries out, Ushers
corruptions are laid open to the world: another while he tells me, I took the
words from Usher, because I understood not Latin, or perhaps because I would
be loath not to follow any errors or corruptions that come in my way: and thus
he spends about ten pages, sometimes inveying against our reverend and
renowned Bishop, sometimes against me, for false translating Aelfrick out of
Latin, when as the Latin cited by B. Usher in the margent, See B. Ushers
answer to the Jesuits challenge, chap. of the Real presence.
which he takes to be Aelfricks, is the Latin of Bertram, and not Aelfricks,
whose was translated out of the Saxon tongue, and not out of the Latin.

Again, when I cite an Author of his side, as namely, Petrus Crinitus, for
taking down of Images in Churches, he stretches his throat, and makes this
hideous exclamation: Page 303.
For your authorities of the Common Law, there are so many foul faults
committed by you, that I know not where to begin: then he taxes me with
leaving out two principal words (Humi and solo) whereas the Author, which I
cite, has no such words: I render the place truly as I find it, I put not to
him, I take not from him, I alter not one letter of his words or meaning, and
yet he cries out, the faults are so many, that I know not where to begin.

Again, when I cite ten or twelve Authors for our Communion in both kinds,
for our prayer in a known tongue, and the like: for most of them he sends me
to Bellarmine for an answer, and for the rest (says he) I Will question you. Then
he complains of falsifications, when as in fine, the Exception is against the
translation of some poor word (This) for (That): and when he is destitute of
any color of answer, his last refuge is this, The book is prohibited.

As touching my Englishing of Latin Authors, I confess I have not translated
whole sentences ad literam; for I intended not a volume, but a manuell: yet I
ever faithfully render the true sense and meaning of the Author. Well, what
exception could he take to this? Page 52.
One while he confesses I set down the Latin truly, but I do not translate
it literally: another while he cries out: It will not serve your turn, Page
224.
to say you place it in the English as you place it in the Latin, for
intranslation the sense is chiefly to be regarded.

Lastly, Page 459.
he protests for himself, that he has declined no Author, either modern
or ancient; when as it will appear, he sends many of them to Bellarmine for an
answer; others he rejects, as condemned by the Index Expurgatorius; others he
declines, as unworthy of his answer, by slighting them, or otherwise passes by
them, as children use to do; when they cannot read, they think it best to
skip over.

To say nothing of his Elenchs, his Sophismes, his Sophistry, his Fallacies,
which are many, I will trace him in his steps (God willing) laying aside all
bitterness and railing accusations. In the mean time I will say with the
Prophet David: Plead thou my cause, Psalm. 35.1.
oh Lord, with them that strive with me: for the floods are risen, the floods
lift up their voice, Psalm. 93.4, 5.
the floods lift up their waves, the waves of the sea are mighty, and rage
horribly; but yet the Lord that dwells on high is mightier.

An Answer to J. R. his book called A pair of Spectacles.
CHAP. I. The Sum of his Answer to my first Chapter.
IN this his first Chapter, he endeavors principally to prove, that the
Articles of the Roman Creed, published by Pope Pius the fourth, were anciently
received, though newly defined by the Council of Trent: for proof, he
instanceth in the first Council of Nice, and compares that Council and their
Creed with this of Trent: he proceeds by way of recrimination to question the
39. Articles of our Church; he accuses us for corrupting and misinterpreting
the Scriptures, for declining Traditions, Fathers, and Councels: he excuses
their Index Expurgatorius, and accuses us for falsifying the Fathers: and
lastly, he concludes with the doctrine of implicit faith: and this is the
substance and contents of his answer to my first Chapter. All which, and
whatsoever else is materially contained therein, and the rest of his sections
following, I will take into several parts distinctly, and return him a
moderate answer. The Reply to Mr. Lloyd. FIrst, touching your Trent Creed, you
complain that according to the common fashion of our Ministers, by way of
derision, I divide it into twelve points, as it were into twelve Articles,
which (say you) he and they might with as much reason divide it into four and
twenty.

Here you begin to quarrel at your first entrance, but I hope you will gladly
forgive us this wrong; for if we accuse your Trent Fathers, for coining twelve
Articles in stead of four and twenty, they and you are more beholding to us,
for laying the lesser number to your charge: and yet if you please to review
them, you shall find they fall most naturally within the number of twelve.

But you would know what difference there is betwixt the Council of Nice, and
the Council of Trent, and their two Creeds.

Let me tell you, if ever the proverb held true (Comparisons are odious) it
holds betwixt the two Councels, and their two Creeds: the Council of Trent is
not worthy to be named the day wherein the Council of Nice is mentioned. That
famous Council of Nice was the first, and best general Assembly, after the
Apostles time, that was summoned in the Christian world: it had in it 318.
Bishops, Totius orbis terrarum lumina, (says Victorinus) amongst whom were the
four Patriarchs of the Eastern and Western Churches. It was called by the
first and best Christian Emperor, Quasi servator and medicus animarum. Eusebius.
in vita Conslant. orat. 3. c. 10.
Constantine the Great, who was Vocalissimus Dei praeco, and (as it were) the
Preserver and Physician of our souls, (says Eusebius.) This Emperor exhorted
the Fathers and Bishops of that Council, Omni igitur seditios a contentione
depulsa, literarum divinitus inspiratarum testimoniis res in quaestionem adduct
as dissolvamus. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 7. p. 208.
to lay aside seditious contention, and resolve all doubts and questions by the
testimonies of divine Scriptures: and accordingly they framed their Creed out
of the doctrine of the Apostles, and all who were not of the Arrian faction did
assent and agree to it (says Theodoret.)

Now take a view of your Trent Council, and compare them together. Your
Council of Trent, like Demetrius Assembly, was summoned by Pope Paul the
third, without a lawful calling; the three Patriarchs of Constantinople, of
Antioch, of Alexandria, refused to be present; the Legates of the Kingdom of
Denmark, of Suetia, and the Dukedom of Prusia, were all absent, and returned
their answer, that the Gravamina opposita, Council. Trid. Causa. 1. page 21.
Pope had no right to call a Council. Our Queen Epit. rerum in orb gest. sub
Ferd. 1. ann. 1561. apud Scard. tom. 3. p. 2171. E Belgio in Insulam trajicere
prohibuit. ibid.
Elizabeth of blessed memory, disavowed the Council, in so much that when the
Pope sent Hieronymus Martinengus, as Legate into England, to summon our
Bishops, she would not suffer him to land, or set his foot on her Dominions.
The French King signifies by his Legate James Amiot, that he for his part,
neither held it for a general, not yet for a lawful Council; but for a
private Conventicle: and accordingly he wrote, Conventui Tridentino. The
Emperor, Innoc Gentil. sess. 12. and Hist. of Trent, l. 4. p. 319. Illyric. in
Protest. contr. Council. Trid.
Charles the fifth, declared by his Ambassador, Hurtado Mendoza, in the name
of the whole Empire, that the Bishops wholly hanging at the Popes beck, had no
authority to make laws, in causes of reformation of religion and manners.
Andreas Dudithius, Dudith. in Ep. ad Maximil. 2. de Calice, and Sacerdotum
conjugio.
the Bishop of five Churches, told the Emperors Maximilian and Ferdinand, that
the Trent Fathers were like a pair of country Bag-pipes; which unless they
were still blown into, could make no music. The Holy Ghost had nothing to do
with that Council, and therefore they could create no new Articles of faith.
Your history of Trent tells us, The history of Trent.
the Spirit was sent in a Carriers cloak-bag from Rome to Trent; but when there
fell store of rain, the Holy Ghost could not come before the floods were
abated, and so it fell out, that the Spirit was not carried upon the waters (as
we read in Genesis) but besides them. Look upon your Bishops, they were but
forty and two at the first meeting, and two of them titular; the rest, for the
most part (says Dudithius) were but hirelings, Andr. Dudith. ut supra.
young men, and beardlesse, hired and procured by the Pope, to speak as he
would have them. To say nothing of those Emperors (who called the first and
best Councels) and were present in person, when as the Popes send but their
Legates: Eusebius. in vita Constant. orat. 3. c. 16.
Ego intereram Concilio (says Constantine) I was present at the Council
amongst you, as one of you. Touching his Imperial seat in the Council, Ibid.
c. 10.
his throne was very great and passed all the rest (says Eusebius:) whereas
there is no greater distance in the time, Advertendum, quod locus ubi sedet
Imperator, (...) tenet (...) Pontifex. Liber. Ceremon. l. 2. c. 2.
than there is now difference in the places; for the Emperor is allowed but to
sit at the Popes footstool; and it is (specially) to be noted (says your
book of ceremonies) that the place whereupon the Emperor sits, may be no
higher than the place where the Pope sets his feet. Your Council of Trent
has made many decrees for reformation of manners, but did they ever reform
this abuse, and restore the ancient custom?

You then that are so confident in equalling those two Councels, do you think
there is no difference betwixt a conventicle and a general Council? betwixt a
Council lawfully called, and one summoned by usurpation? betwixt a late
Council, held in a corner of the world, in the worst age, and an ancient
Council, in a most famous city, held in the most flourishing age? betwixt a
Council that lays her sole foundation in the Scriptures, and one that builds
her first Article of faith upon Traditions? Bulla Pii 4. Art. 1.
betwixt a Council approved by the whole Christian world, and one that is
disclaimed by most Christian Kings and Bishops, and the major part of
Christendom?

But you would further know a difference betwixt their two Creeds.

Let me tell you in brief. When a Romanist, like your self, would needs know
of a Protestant, the difference betwixt his religion and ours, Subesse Romano
Pontifici omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, definimus and
pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Bonifac. 8. in Extr. de Major.
and Obed. cap. Unam sanctam.
because both believed the Catholic Church in the Creed; the Protestant made
answer, that we believe the Catholic faith contained in the Creed, but do
not believe the thirteenth Article which the Pope put to it: when the Romanist
was desirous to see that Article, the Extravagant of Pope Boniface was brought,
wherein it was declared to be altogether of necessity of salvation, for every
humane creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome. This thirteenth Article in
your Trent Creed (besides the newness of the rest) makes a great difference
(Mr. Lloyd) betwixt the two Creeds; and the rather, because it is flat
contrary to the decree of the Nicene Council, besides many other differences,
as shall appear hereafter.

But (say you) they agree in this, that as the Arrians of those times cried out
against that Creed, as being new, and having words not found in Scripture; for
example, Consubstantiation: so our Protestants cry out against the Trent
profession of faith, for the same reasons of noveltie, and words not found in
Scripture; as for example, Transubstantiation.

It is true, the Arrians at the time of the Council cried out against the
Nicene Creed, for defining the word Consubstantiall, or Coessentiall, as being
new: but it is as true they complained without a cause; for long before that
time the word was used by Origin, Doctos quosdam ex veteribus and illustres
Episcopos Homousii dictione usos esse cognovimus, Socrat. l. 1. c. 8.
and other ancient Fathers, as appears by Socrates: We know (says he) that
of the old writers, certain learned men, and famous Bishops have used the word
(...): and accordingly it was resolved by S. Austin, that the name was not
invented, but confirmed and established in the Council of Nice.

The word therefore Consubstantiall was not new, August. contr. Maxim. l. 3. c.
14.
which they complained of, but the word Transubstantiation is so new, that it
was altogether unknown till the Council of Lateran, Council. Lateranense, Anno
1215. Bellarm.
1200. years after Christ; and therefore your comparison holds not in the
first place. But ad nit the Council had first devised the word, Quomodo dicis
in Scripturis divinis (...), non inveniri? quasi aliud sit (...), quam quod
dicit, Ego de Deo patre exivi, and, Ego and Pater unum sumus. Ambros. de fide
contra Arrian. Tom. 2. c. 5. p. 223. in initio. August. Ep. 174. (...).
Athanas. Ep. quod decret. Synod. Nic. Congruis verbis sunt exposita. Nihil
refert hanc vocem non esse in Scriptura, si vox id significat quod Scriptura
docet. Vasq. in 1. Thom. Tom. 2. Disp. 110. c. 1. sect. 4.
yet it is agreed on all hands, that the meaning of the word is contained in
Scripture. S. Ambrose writing against the Arrians, puts to them this very
question: How do you say the word Consubstantiall is not in divine Scriptures,
as if Consubstantiall were any thing else, but I went out from the Father, and,
the Father and I are one: the word therefore was a pregnant word, agreeable to
the sacred word of God. And albeit (says S. Austin) the word perhaps be not
found there, yet the thing it self is found: and what more frivolous quarrel
is it, than to contend about the word, when there is certainty of the thing it
self? In like manner Athanasius answered the Arrians in those days, as I must
answer you: Touching the word (...), albeit it be not found in Scriptures, yet
it has the same meaning that the Scriptures intend, and imports the same with
them whose ears are entirely affected toward religion.

We cry not out against you simply, because your word Transubstantiation is not
found in the Scriptures, but because the true sense and meaning of the word is
not contained in them; for the words Unbegotten, Increate, the word Sacrament,
the word Trinity, and the like, are not found in Scripture; yet we teach
them, we believe them, because their true sense and meaning may be deduced
from the Scripture: and we profess with your Jesuit Vasques, Nihil refert,
etc. It mattereth not whether the word be in Scripture or no, so as that which
it signifies be in the Scripture.

To come nearer to you: do you but prove that the words, This is my body,
imply Transubstantiation, and let me be branded for an Arrian, if I refuse to
subscribe to it: but that the world may know we condemn you justly, both for
the newness of the word, and your doctrine also; hearken to the learned
Doctors of your own Church.

Your Schoole-man Scotus tells us, that before the Council of Lateran, Bellarm.
l. 3. de Eucbar. c. 23.
Transubstantiation was not believed as a point of faith. It is true, your
fellow Jesuits are ashamed of this confession, and thereupon Bellarmine
answers: Ibid.
This opinion of his is no way to be allowed: Suarez in 3. Tom. in Euch. disp.
70. sect. 2.
and Suarez, not content with such a sober reckoning, proclaims that for his
loud speaking he ought to be corrected: and as touching the words of
consecration, from whence you would infer both the name and nature of
Transubstantiation, Mont. in Luke 22.
your Arias Montanus says, This is my body, that is, my body is sacramentally
contained in the Sacrament of bread: and (he adds withal) the secret and
most mystical manner hereof, God will once vouchsafe more clearly to unfold to
his Christian Church. The doctrine therefore of your carnal and corporal
presence is not so clearly derived from the Scriptures: nay on the contrary
he protests, that the body of our Savior is but sacramentally contained in
the Sacrament (as the Protestants hold) and therefore not bodyily.

It is more than evident, that the word Consubstantiation (used by the Fathers)
was derived from the Scriptures, but you have not that infallible assurance for
your word Transubstantiation, witness your Cardinal Cajetan, Cajet. in Thom.
part. 3. q. 75. art. 1.
he assures us that there appears nothing out of the Gospel, that may enforce
us to understand Christ's words properly: yea nothing in the text hinders, but
that these words [This is my body] may as well be taken in a metaphorical
sense, as those words of the Apostle, The Rock was Christ: that the words of
either proposition may well be true, though the things there spoken be not
understood in a proper sense, but in a metaphorical sense only. Nay more,
your Jesuit Suare, Suarez Tom. 3. disp. 46.
confesses, that this Cardinal (in his Commentary upon this Article) does
affirm, that those words of Christ [This is my body] do not of themselves
sufficiently prove Transubstantiation, without the authority of the Church:
and therefore by the command of Pope Pius the fifth, that part of his
Commentary is sponged out of the Romish Edition. Thus one while you correct
your Authors, another while you purge them for delivering the truth in our
behalf.

Look upon your Cardinal Bellarmine; although he will not allow that sense
which the Lutherans give, Bell. de Euch. l. 2. c. 19.
yet he grants that those words [This is my body] may imply either such a
real change of the bread, as the Catholics hold; or such a figurative
change, as the Calvinists hold. And although he would seem to prove that the
words of Scripture are so plain, that they may compel a refractorie man to
believe them, yet having well weighed the reasons and allegations of other
Schoolmen, Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23.
at last concludes: It may justly be doubted, whether the text be clear enough
to enforce it, seeing men sharp and learned (such as Scotus was) have thought
the contrary. How therefore your Church should ground a point of faith upon a
doubtful opinion, or on such words as by the testimonies of your best learned
Divines may receive a double construction, I leave it to be judged.

But farther in proof of Pope Pius Creed, I could urge Sr. Humfrey (say you)
with the 39. Articles appointed by the authority of the Church of England, to
be uniformely taught by all Ministers, which they are to swear unto; which
Articles, though they be indeed new coined, as the foundation of a new Church,
yet Sr. Humfrey being his mothers Champion, will not (I suppose) yield her, or
her doctrine to be new. Thus you.

It is true as you say, there are 39. Articles appointed by our Church, to be
uniformely taught by all Ministers: and it is as true that they are published
and received with unity and consent (which your men acknowledge for a proper
mark of the true Church.) And withal, let me add this one thing for your
observation (and indeed it is a thing remarkable) whereas all your Trent
Articles have been questioned, and confuted by Chemnitius, Chamierus,
Gentilletus, and other Protestant writers, yet there was never any Papist could
go farther, than to tell us, as you do, I could urge you with the novelty of
the 39. Articles. I say, never as yet did any Romanist attempt, much less was
able to confute and overthrow our Articles, which stand like a house built upon
a rock, immovable, and cannot be shaken.

Let me tell you further, your comparisons betwixt our Articles and yours do
not hold; for all your Articles are fundamental points to your Trent
believers, and the denial of any of them makes them heretics, and damned
persons, as your Popes Bull expressly declares. Bulla Pii quarti.
On the other side, some of our Articles concern the discipline of the Church,
and are not essential to salvation; others concern the ancient and latter
heresies, wherein we teach the negative, and those are not properly Articles of
faith which we believe, but points of doctrine which we condemn, and believe
not. And that you may know our Articles are not new, nor newly coined by our
men; if you will put on your spectacles, you shall find that most of our prime
Articles are taught and received by your own Church, as well as ours; and
therefore I hope you will confess they are not coined, and built upon the
foundation of a new Church.

Briefly touching our 39. Articles. The first sort are in the Affirmative, both
ours and yours; and all those are uniformely received by both Churches. The
second sort are ours only, which we affirm, and you deny: and those are very
few in number, and are evidently deduced from the Scripture. The third sort are
yours, which we deny, and you affirm; and for that cause you term our
religion negative; and those remain for you to make good. Join therefore
those negative Articles, which are wholly yours, to those positive Articles
which you hold with us, and you shall easily discern (if the denomination
follows the greater part) those Articles may most properly be termed
Articles of your faith; for I dare confidently avow that of the 39. Articles,
there are above 35. yours, that is, either such which you hold with us, which
are at least twenty, or such wherein the affirmative is yours, and not ours,
which are at least fifteen: take therefore your own liberty, either confute
ours, or make good your own, and herbam porrigemus, and I will give you the
bucklers.

You proceed, and upon a false supposall, that our Church has created new
Articles, you proclaim in the name of your own Church these words: We teach
that for Articles of faith, the Church can make none, as she cannot write a
Canonical book of Scripture. Thus you.

When Diogenes saw a supposed Bastard casting stones in a press of much
people, he gave the boy this caveat: Take heed lest thou hit thy father. This
is like to be your case; for by this Tenet you will wound the Church your
Mother, and amongst others you will surely hit your holy Father the Pope.

It appears first, that you endeavored to show, that your Church has created
no new Articles of faith, but for want of solid proofs you begin to faint, and
think it the safest way to turn Protestant in this point, and say, the Church
can create none: but I wonder how you dare pronounce in the name of the Church
(we teach) whereas in truth your Church teaches it not. This is therefore but
a cunning device of yours, to dazzle the eyes of the ignorant with your false
glasses, and to make them believe it is the general Tenet of your Church; and
then you think they will conclude according to your Assertion: Ergo, The
Church has created none; when as your saying makes more strongly against you,
if either your Articles prove new, or the Pope and his Agents profess the
contrary.

Mr. Heigham, who first answered my Book, Mr. Heigham in his answer called Via
vere tuta, page 199. and 200.
was a member of your Church, and he cries aluod, that the Church has power to
decree, and promulgate new articles of faith: But your third Replyer, Tom
Tell-troth, in his Whetstone of Reproof, thought it the wisest way to decline
the question; for he knew well when you were both at odds, and taught flat
contrary doctrine each to other, the Whetstone of necessity would belong to
one of his fellow writers. But to let pass such differences amongst your
selves; be it spoken to your comfort, Friar Walden, about two hundred years
ago, affirmed the same that you do, Waldens doct. Fidei. Tom. 1. l. 2. Art.
2. c. 22. p. 203.
viz. that the Church could not create a new article of faith: How can any such
article (says he) framed after many years, be catholic and universal, when
as it was unknown to our forefathers for foureteen hundred years before? It
was not believed, because not heard of, when the Apostle tells us, faith comes
by hearing. Such an article therefore, although it be of faith, yet it cannot
be catholic: and this he proves directly from Fathers and Councels. And
whereas you affirm, that your Church can no more make an article of faith,
than she can make a Canonical Book of Scripture; Canus loc. Theol. l. 2. c.
7. p. 38.
Canus, your Bishop of Canaries, will join with you, That the Church of the
faithful now living cannot write a Canonical Book of Scripture: and he
gives the reason for it; There are not now any new revelations to be expected,
ither from the Pope, or from a Council, or from the universal Church: and
from hence it will follow of consequence by your own Logic; Therefore the
Church can create no new article of faith.

Thus far I have waded in your behalf, that you may the better justify your
own Assertion; for you will find your Church is like a house divided against it
self (and therefore cannot stand long). I say that Quere which was made in
Waldens days, was resolved above two hundred years before by your profound
Schoole-man Thomas Aquinas, in your Churches behalf, that the Pope had power
Condere articulos fidei, to create new articles of faith; to remove therefore
these fig leaves with which you would cover the naked truth: This learned
Doctor well understood that there were many new articles of religion crept
into the Church in his days; he knew well, that (albeit he were the prime
School man of his time) yet with all his sophistry he could not make them
comply with the ancient Catholic faith: and thereupon he thought it the
surest way, to give the Pope an absolute and independent power over faith and
religion, and accordingly resolved, Ad solam authoritatem summi Pontificis
pertinet nova Editio Symboli, sicut and alia omnia quae pertinent ad totam
Ecclesiam. Thom. 2.2. q. 1. Art. 10.
It belongs only to the authority of the Sovereign Pope, to make a new
Edition of the Creed, and all things else that concern the universal Church:
Then he concludes the question, and gives this reason for it; The publishing of
a new Creed belongs to his power who has authority finally to determine
matters of faith: and this (says he) belongs unto the Pope. Upon which
passages Andradius, a chief pillar of your Trent Council, confesses, that
the Bishops of Rome, Romanos Pontifices, multa definiendo quae antea
latitabant, Symbolum Fidei augere consuevisse. Andrad. Def. Council. Trid. lib.
2.
in defining many things which had been formerly hidden, have been accustomed
to increase their Creed. Now what think you of your Aquinas position, and your
Andradius confession? I hope you perceive that your learned Schoolmen are of
another opinion: And that you may know that your Church does not approve your
pretended Tenet for Catholic doctrine; hearken and consider, what your holy
Father the Pope declares, touching this question, and then consider in what
case you stand. Pope Leo the tenth sent out his Bull against Luther, and
amongst other articles, Certum est in manu Ecclesiae aut Papae prorsus non esse
statuere articulos fidei. Tom. 4. Conc. Par. 2. in Bulla Leon. 10. in fine
Lateran. Conc. novissimi. p. 135.
he charge him in particular with this, that Luther should say, It is
certain that it is no way in the power of the Church or Pope to ordain
articles of faith. This you see is Luthers Tenet, and this is yours. Now what
exception (think you) might the Pope take at this your Assertion? Behold, for
this and the like Tenets, he thundereth Anathema against him; he declares
this with the rest of his Articles to be a pestiferous, pernicious, scandalous,
and seducing error to well-minded men; he protests, it was contrary to all
charity, contrary to the reverence of the holy Church, and mysteries of
faith, and in conclusion condemns all his Articles as heretical, Inhibentes
in virtute sanctae obedientiae, ac sub majoris excommunicationis latae
sententiae. Ibid. p. 136.
forbids them to be received by virtue of holy obedience, and under pain of
the graund Excommunication.

You have heard the sentence of your Lord Paramount, and by it you may know
your own doom. If you hold with Luther, you are in danger of Excommunication,
and stand as a condemned heretic by his Holiness with the Lutherans: If you
forsake your hold, you have lost your faith: And thus you have a wolf by the
ears, you stand in danger whether you hold him, or let him go. I wonder that
you, having taken so long a time to answer so poor a Work, and having many
Assistants for the composing of it, they and you could be all ignorant of the
Popes infallible Bull. Your Cardinal Bellarmine, Quasi Ecclesia posterioris
temporis aut deserit esse Ecclesia, aut facultatem non habeat explicandi, and
declarandi, constituendi etiam and jubendi quae ad fidem and mores Christianos
pertinent. Bell. in Barcl.
who in these latter times has labored more than any other, to uphold your
new Articles of faith; yet in obedience to the Pope, and saving all advantages
to his cause, when (in the question of deposing Kings) he failed of antiquity
and proof out of Scriptures and Fathers, at last returns this peremptory
answer; As if the Church of these latter times had ceased to be a Church, or
had not power to explain and declare, yea to ordain and command those things,
which appertain to faith and Christian manners: and that you may know that you
and your Co-adjutors stand single in opinion against the Pope and his
Cardinals, your Jesuit Salmeron will show you, Doctrina fidei admittit
additionem in essentialibus. Salm. Tom. 13. Disp 6. Par. 3.. Est ergo. Idem
Disp. 8.
that it stands with great reason to make additions in essential points of
faith: and he gives this answer for it: Because nature is not capable of all
truths at one time: and from this and the like reasons he concludes, therefore
there may be new traditions concerning faith and manners, though they were
never created, or declared by the Apostles.

Thus you see the unity amongst your selves: and howsoever these positions may
seem strange to you and others of your opinions, yet your Schoolmen and
Lawyers have played the Popes Midwives: yea, Pope Leo the tenth has put to his
helping hand, to deliver your Pope Pius the fourth of that issue, I mean,
those newborn Articles, of which your Church has so long time before
travailed. Briefly let me tell you, your Articles are detected by your own
men to be grandement suspicious of new coynage; and if for no other cause, yet
for this alone, they give a just occasion and jealousy, when such poor shifts
and evasions are devised by your Pope and his adherent, to make them good: for
it is a true saying of a renowned Bishop, and it is the faith of all reformed
Catholics: B. Morton, Grand Impost. cap. 2. sect. 2.
He can only make an article of faith who can create a soul, and after make a
Gospel to save that soul, and then give unto that soul the gift of faith to
believe that Gospel.

I proceed to your doctrine: That is only to be called a new faith (say you)
which is clean of another kind, that is differing or disagreeing from that was
taught before. Thus you.

I will not take advantage of your first Assertion, that your faith is grounded
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles (which you can never prove;)
but will join issue with you upon your last Assumpsit, That is only to be
called a new faith, which is clean of another kind, and is different and
disagreeing from what was taught before: but such are many of the Articles of
Pope Pius the fourth, extracted from the Council of Trent, as shall appear by
proofs at large in their proper places. In the mean time let me tell you,
your Church teaches not only Nove, but Nova, not only Praeter, but Contra,
even besides, and contrary to that which she first received from the ancient
Church: so that howsoever you seek to darken truth by fair and specious
pretenses, yet in truth your Trent Additions are foreign to the faith, as
neither principles nor conclusions of it. And that you may know and acknowledge
with us, that your Trent faith is differing and disagreeing from what was
taught before; I pray call to mind your own confessions touching these
particular Articles of your Roman Church.

Your doctrine touching Lay-peoples communicating under one kind (namely in
bread only) is an Article of the Roman faith, and now generally taught and
practiced in the Roman Church: but this practice, by your own confession, is
different and disagreeing from what was taught before: for you say, page 253.
touching the Authors which you bring for proof, That it was the common
practice of the Church, for the Laytie to communicate in both kinds. I allow of
their authority.

Your Prayer and Service in an unknown tongue, as it is now used in the Roman
Church, by your own confession is different and disagreeing from what was
taught before; for, say you page 270. It is true, that Prayer and Service in
the vulgar tongue was used in the first and best ages, according to the precept
of the Apostles, and practice of the Fathers. In the beginning it was so.

Your doctrine of Transubstantiation, which at this day is generally received,
de substantia fidei, for an Article of Faith, yet by your own confession is
different and disagreeing from what was taught before; for, say you page 167.
Transubstantiation might well be said not to have been, de substantia fidei,
in the Primitive Church, (as Yribarne speaks) because it had not been so
plainly delivered nor determined in any Council, till Gregory the seventh his
time: and this was above a thousand years after Christ.

Your private or solitary Mass, wherein the Priests do daily communicate
without the people, is by your own confession different and disagreeing from
what was taught before and practiced; for, say you page 191. They say (speaking
of diverse Authors) it was the practice of the Primitive Church to communicate
every day with the Priest. I grant it.

These points of controversy, which are so eagerly pursued by your men against
the members of our Church, the strength and force of truth has extorted from
you, and therefore I may truly conclude Exore tuo, from your own confession,
that your Trent faith is new, because it is different and disagreeing from what
was taught before.

You that have taken an oath to maintain the Papacy, and are so ready to
teach others, you (I say) have either violated your oath, or at leastwise have
forgot your old lesson, Oportet esse memorem, etc. for verily it behooves him
that speaks lies and contradictions to have a good memory. But it seems you
did conceive the Reader might easily pass by many such contradictions, being
in several passages, and far distant pages. For otherwise it would seem
strange, that you, which so bitterly inveigh against our reformed religion,
should confess the antiquity of our Articles, and the noveltie of your own,
with flat contradictions to your own Assertions. I will say to you therefore,
as sometimes St. Hierome spoke in his Epistle to Pamachius and Oceanus;
Hieronym. ad Pamach. and Oceanum, Tom. 2.
Thou who art a maintainer of new doctrine, whatsoever thou he, I pray thee
spare the Roman ears, spare the faith that is commanded by the Apostles
mouth, why go thou about now after four hundred years (I may say foureteen
hundred years) to teach us that faith which we before never knew? why bring
thou forth that thing that Peter and Paul never uttered? Evermore until this
day the Christiam world has been without this doctrine.

To pursue the rest of your Allegations: The Church of England (say you)
admits of diverse Books of the New Testament for Canonical, whereof there
was doubt of three or four hundred years to gether in the Church of God, as
the Epistle to the Hebrews, the second Epistle of St. Peter, the Epistle of
St. Jude, the Apocalypse of St. John, and some others, which were after admitted
for Canonical; (...)
I would know of him whether upon the admittance of them, there were any change
of faith in the Church, or whether ever those books have received any change in
themselves. Thus you.

It seems you begin to fear that your Trent faith would be discovered to be
different and disagreeing from what was taught before, and thereupon you would
seemingly illustrate the antiquity of your new Articles by the authority of
the ancient Books of Canonical Scripture. But, I pray, where do you find that
the Books of the New Testament, as namely, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of St. Peter, and St. Jude, and the Apocalypse, were not received (for
three or four hundred years) for Canonical? It is true there was some doubt
who were the right Authors of those Books, but their divine authority was ever
generally approved by all Christian Churches, and allowed for Canonical. The
Epistle to the Hebrews was therefore doubted of by some, because the
difference and diversity of the style made them think it not to be St. Paul's;
and by others, because the Author of it seemed to them to favor the error of
the Novatian heretics, in denying the reconciliation of such as fall after
Baptism: The second Epistle of St. Peter (which you speak of) some doubted
of, because of the diversity of the style: The Epistle of St. Jude was
doubted, because the Author of it has borrowed both the matter and manner of
writing from St. Peter, and therefore he was thought some scholar of theirs, but
no Apostle. Others said he brought in a profane Author, concerning the strife
of the Arch-angell and the Devil about the body of Moses, which cannot be
found in Canonical Scripture. Lastly, the Revelation of St. John was likewise
doubted of; first, because of the noveltie of the title of John the Divine:
secondly, because of the difficulty and obscurity of his Prophecies. These
and the like reasons were motives to some in the Church, to question the
Authors of those Books: but it was never generally impeached. For further
proof of this Assertion, let antiquity be heard, and it will appear, that
all those Books were cited for doctrine of faith, by the writers of the first
ages, and consequently were approved from, and after the days of the Apostles.
Hieronym. ad Dardan^, de terra repromissionis, Ep. 129. p. 1105.
Look upon St. Hierome, he proclaims it to the Church, Illud nostris dicendum
est. Be it known to our men, that the Epistle to the Hebrews is not only
received by all the Churches of the East, that now presently are, but by all
Ecclesiastical writers of the Greek Churches, that have been heretofore; as
the Epistle of Paul, (though many think it rather to be written by Barnabas,
or Clemens,) and that it skilleth not who wrote it, seeing it was writby an
Author approved in the Church of God, and is daily read in the same. This
ancient Father shows plainly, that howsoever some doubt was made of the Author
of that Epistle, yet it was received both by the Eastern and Western
Churches. And howsoever some of the Ancients did attribute it to St. Luke;
others (as namely Tertullian) did attribute it to Barnabas: yet all agreed in
this, that it had an Apostolic spirit; and accordingly Cardinal Bellarmine
tells you in your ear, Inepte dici vetustatem de hac Epistola dubitasse. Bell.
de verbo Dei, lib. 1. cap. 17.
It is foolishly spoken, in saying Antiquity did doubt of this Epistle, when
there is but one Caius a Grecian, and two or three Romanists, in respect of all
the rest, that speak against it: and if we respect not the multitude, but the
antiquity of the cause, the Roman Clemens is more ancient than Caius; and
Clemens Alexandrinus than Tertullian; and Dionysius Areopagita than both, who
cites this Epistle of Paul by name.

Touching the second Epistle of St. Peter, it was cited by Higinus Bishop of
Rome, within an hundred and fifty years after Christ, and that by the name of
Peter. The Epistle of St. Jude was cited by Dionysius Areopagita by the name of
Jude the Apostle, within seventie years after Christ; Dionys. de divinis
nominibus, cap. 4. Tertuil. de habitu muliebri. Orig. l. 5. in c. 5. ad
Romanos. Cypr. in lib. ad Novatianum.
by Tertullian within two hundred years after Christ; by Origin and Cyprian
within two hundred and fifty years after Christ.

Lastly, touching the Revelation of St. John, it was received for Canonical in
the first and best ages: Dionysius Areopagita calls the Revelation, The secret
and mystical vision of Christ's beloved Disciple; Arcanam and mysticam visionem
dile cti discipuli. Dionys. Eccles. Hier. cap. 3. In Dial. cum Tryphone. Iren.
lib. 1. cap. ult.
and this was seventie years after Christ. Justin Martyr does attribute this
Book to St. John, and does account it for a divine Revelation; and this was an
hundred and sixty years after Christ. Irenaeus says, this Revelation was
manifested unto St. John, and seen of him but a little before his time; and
this was an hundred and eighty years after Christ. Tertull. de praescript. l.
4.
Tertullian, amongst other things, accuses Cerdon and Marcion of heresies, for
rejecting the Revelation; and this was two hundred years after Christ. Origin,
in his Preface before the Gospel of St. John, says, that John the son of
Zebedee saw in the Revelation an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven,
having the eternal Gospel; and he flourished two hundred and thirty years
after Christ.

Thus you see the Catholic Christians, and most ancient Fathers in the first
ages received both the Epistle to the Hebrews, the second Epistle of St.
Peter, the Epistle of St. Jude, and the Revelation of St. John, with one
consent, accounting them no better than Heretics, which either doubted of
them, or denied them: and yet you, to outface the truth, would make the world
believe, that it was three or four hundred years before they were received
into the Church, and made canonical; and upon this vain supposall you would
know of me, Whether there were any change of faith in the Church when they were
admitted, or whether those Books received any change in themselves.

To answer you in a word, your proposition is foolish, and your question is
frivolous; for those Books were always received, even from the first times:
and no more could that word of God be changed, than God himself, who is
immutable; and yet we see your faith is daily altered, for want of that
foundation, and thereupon it behooves you to get more, and better proofs, for
the confirmation of your new Creed.

From your justification of your Trent faith, you begin to look asquint through
your Spectacles at the reformed Churches, and after your wonted manner you cry
out, They have no certain rule of faith wherewith we may urge them;
authority of Church they have none: Scripture they have indeed, but so
mangled, corrupted, perverted by translation, and mis-interpreted according to
their own fancies, that as they have it it is as good as nothing. Thus you.

Have we no certain rule of faith? What think you of the Scriptures? Do not
we make them the sole rule of our faith? and is not that rule by your own
Cardinals confession, Bell. de verbo Deo. l. 1. c. 2.
Regula credendi certissima, tutissimaque, the most certain and safest rule of
faith? And as touching the authority of the Church, it is an Article of our
Religion, Art. 20.
That the Church has power to decree rites, or ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith; and yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another: This Article shows our
obedience to the Scriptures, it declares the authority of our Church, and it
vindicates our Ministers from perverting and misinterpreting of the Scriptures,
wherewith you charge us in the next place.

It is true (say you) Scripture you have indeed, but mangled, corrupted,
perverted by translation. Here your charge is general, and your accusation
capital; therefore you must give me leave, for the better discovery of the
truth, to send out a Melius inquirendum, that your Translation and ours being
compared in particulars, the truth may better appear.

First then it cannot be denied, that the Protestants in all their Translations
have a recourse still to the Original of Hebrew and Greek, which was inspired
by the Holy Ghost; and these they prefer before all Latin and Vulgar
Translations whatsoever: Bibl. Complut. in Proefat.
on the other side, your Translation (as your Interpreters fancy) hangs
between the Greek and Hebrew, as Christ hung between two thieves. Nay more,
your men esteem the Vulgar Latin before the Original: Bell. de verbo Dei,
lib. 2. c. 11.
Not (says Bellarmine) that the rivers of Translations should be preferred
before the fountains of Hebrew and Greek of the Prophets and Apostles, but
because the fountain is muddie in many places, which otherwise should run
clear; for without doubt, as the Latin Church has been more constant in
keeping the faith than the Greek, so likewise it has been more vigilant in
preserving her books from corruption.

These Paradoxes do open a gap to Atheism; for if the original Scripture be
corrupted, what assurance, what certainty can we have of true faith and
religion? (and if we doubt, we are condemned already.) Neither can it enter
into my thoughts, that profane Writers should be preserved in their simple
pureness from their first ages, and that their Translations should remain in
subjection to their copies, from whence they are derived, to be examined by
them; and yet the Watchman of Israel, who neither slumbers nor sleeps, for
want of providence, should suffer his sacred Word become a Tributarie to a
Translation. But by this the world may see the guiltiness of a bad cause; you
will rather charge the word of God it self with corruption, than fail to make
good the corruptions of your own Church.

Your learned Andradius condemns them that preferred the Latin before the
Hebrew of the Old Testament, (as pretending it was corrupted by the Jews.)
Andrad. def. fidei Trident. l. 4.
It was very inconsiderately conceived (says he) by some, that there was more
credit to be given to the Latin Edition than to the Hebrew, because the
Latin ever remained entire and incorrupt in the Catholic Church, and the
Hebrew was falsified and depraved by the perfidiousnesse of the Jews. And your
own Sixtus Senensis does witness of the Greek Text likewise, Sixth. Senens.
Biblioth. l. 7.
that it is the same which was used in the days of S. Hierome, and long before
him in the Apostles times, and is free from heretical corruptions, as by the
continual writings of the Greek Fathers (as namely) Dionysius, Justinus,
Irenaeus, Melito, Origin, Affricanus, Apolinarius, Athanasius, Eusebius, Basil,
Chrysostom, Theophylact, does most plainly appear; and yet your Gregory
Martin, and the Rhemists, are not ashamed to profess that the Translation
which they follow, is not only better then all other Latin, but even than the
Greek Text it self, Preface to the Rhem. Testam.
in those places where they disagree.

To examine your Translation in general, and so descend into the particulars
of yours and ours. First, it is decreed by the Council of Trent, that amongst
diverse Translations then in use, Council. Trid. Sess. 4. Decretam de editione
librorum.
the old and vulgar Translation should be declared to be authentical in all
public Lectures, Disputations, Sermons, and Expositions, and that no man
should dare or presume to reject it upon any pretext whatsoever. What
Translation was understood by the old vulgar, was not expressed in the
Council: It is pretended to be, and is called at this day St. Hieromes
Translation, and, which is remarkable, the Translation was decreed but by 42.
Bishops at the first beginning of the Council.

From hence arises the first Quere, which of St. Hieromes Translations your
Church does follow (for St. Hierome confesses that the first was corrupt, and
accordingly he did correct many things in his first Translation.) To this
Objection your Cardinal makes this fair and free confession; Bell. de verbo
Dei, l. 2. c. 9.
Although Hierome did perceive some things fit to be changed, and afterward
did change them, yet the Church did adjudge the first translation for true, and
chose rather to keep that for the vulgar Edition. And then he concludes:
Although the greatest part of the vulgar Translation be Hieromes, yet it is not
that pure Edition which he translated out of the Hebrew, but in a manner mixed.

Habemus confitentem reum. Now hear your own Sixtus Senensis: Albeit he
pretends that the different readings in the Bible be no prejudice to the Faith,
Sixth. Senens. Bibl. l. 8. p. 664.
yet (says he) we ing enuously confess that many errors were corrected by
Hierome in the old Translation, and likewise there are found in our new
Editions some falsifications, solecismes, barbarismes, and many things
ambiguous, not well expressed in the Latin; some things changed, other things
omitted; and the like. Here both confess that Hieromes first Translation was
erroneous, (and the one says that your Church has chosen that which is not
pure nor agreeable to the Hebrew, the other confesses it has Barbarismes and
untruths.) To speak ingeniously, the Sun never saw any thing more defective
and maimed than the vulgar Latin. Your Bishop Lyndan cries aloud, Lynd. de
opt. genere Interpret. l. 3. c. 1, 2, 4.6.
and protests it has monstrous corruptions of all sorts, scarce one coppie
can be found that has one book of Scripture undefiled, many points are
translated so intricately and darkly, some impertinently and abusively, some
not so fully nor so well and truly, sundry places thrust out of their plain
and natural sense: the Translatour possibly was no Latinist, but a smattering
Grecian.

I proceed to the examination of more witnesses. About forty years after Pope
Paul the third had decreed the vulgar Latin in your Council of Trent, Sixtus
Quintus by his Breve prefixed to his Bible, gives us to understand, that
certain Roman Catholics were of such an humor of translating the Scripture
into Latin, Breve Sixti 5.
that Satan, taking occasion by them (though they thought no such matter) did
strive what he could out of uncertain and great variety of Translation, so to
mingle all things, that nothing might seem to be left certain and firm in
them: and thereupon he takes occasion to publish a Latin Translation of his
own perusal, and withal makes his Declaration of it in this manner: We of
our certain knowledge and fullness of Apostolical power, Sixth. 5. in Bulla
praefix. Bibliis, An. 1588.
do ordain and declare that the Edition of the vulgar Bible of the Old and
New Testament, which was received by the Council of Trent as authentical
without any doubt or Controversy, is to be reputed or taken for this only
Edition; which being as well as was possible reformed and printed in our
Vatican, our will and pleasure is, and we do decree it to be read throughout
the whole Christian World in all Churches; with this our determination and
satisfaction for all men, That first it was allowed by a general and joint
consent of the whole Catholic Church and Holy Fathers; secondly, by a Decree
made in the late Council holden at Trent; and now lastly by that Apostolical
Authority and Power which God has given us: and therefore is to be received
and accounted for a true, lawful, authentical and undoubted Copy, to be
read, and no other, in all public and private Disputations, Lectures, Sermons,
or Expositions.

This Translation was published by Sixtus with great care and pains,
professing that he printed it in the Vatican at Rome, Nostra nos ipsi manu
correximus, siqua prelo vitia obrepserunt. Idem in Praefat.
and corrected the Errors of it with his own hands: he professes it was
approved by the general consent of the whole Catholic Church: he professes
it was received for the best and most vulgar Latin Edition, excluding all
other Translations private or public whatsoever; and thereupon concludes, Ibid.
Let no man attempt to violate this our Decree, our will and declaration
herein, or by rash boldness contradict it: for if any shall presume so to do,
let him know that he shall incur the indignation of Almighty God, and his
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

From hence will arise a second Quere, whether this Translation of Sixtus were
that Hieromes Translation formerly confirmed, and ratified by the Trent
Council. If it were his, and confirmed by a General Council, how came it to
be corrected by Sixtus? If it were not the same, how could Sixtus Bible be
allowed by a Decree made in the Council of Trent, (for so are the words of his
Bull) whereas the Council was called Anno 1545. and Sixtus published his Bible
Anno 1592. which was above 40. years after the Council was called? But
observe the sequel; The Decree of Sixtus was kept inviolable for a short time,
and approved by Urban the 7th, Gregory the 14th, and Innocent the 9th his
immediate Successors: But Pope Clement the eight, about seven years after the
death of Sixtus, called in question that Translation, and published another of
his own, Ad perpetuam rei memoriam, Clem. in praef. Sixti Bibl.
and corrects Sixtus Bible, under this pretense; that his Predecessor perceived
not a few things to have crept into the Bible through default of the Press,
and that it needed a second care, and that certainly he himself had intended
to bring the whole work to the Press again, had he not been prevented by
death.

These two Editions were published by two several Popes, and both commanded to
be read and followed in their several Breves: Pope Sixtus disclaimes all
Bibles whatsoever, both Manuscripts and printed, of the vulgar Edition, which
did not agree with his Edition Ad literam, to a letter. Pope Clement professes
that his Translation, although it be not absolutely perfect in all points, yet
without doubt it is more pure, and better corrected than any other that was
published before it. In conclusion, Ne minima quidem particula mutata. Sixth. in
Praef.
both agree that the Form of each must be inviolably observed without the
least particle of the Text added, changed, or detracted.

Now take your choice of which Translation you please; if you allow Sixtus, it
was corrected in many places by Pope Clement; if Clements, you must incur the
curse of his Predecessor Pope Sixtus: if you will receive the vulgar
Translation, which you term St. Hieromes, your Cardinal tells you it is not of
his purest Edition. Lastly, if you approve the vulgar Edition, decreed by the
Council of Trent, I say neither you, nor all the Papists living, can resolve
which is that vulgar Edition.

For a Conclusion, either your vulgar Translation before Clements time was
corrupt, or in vain did Clement command a Correctorium to pass upon it, and
to be read according to that correction. The work of Lucas Brugensis, who was
living at that time, has sufficiently discovered your corruptions in the Bible
of Sixtus, which in his time was reputed for that only Edition confirmed by
the Trent Council, commanded to be read throughout all Churches, and allowed
by the consent of the whole Catholic Church: this Bible (I say) which for many
ages was reputed the only authentical Edition in your Church, is purged and
corrected (I speak within compass) in above 3000 several places. And as it
has been observed by a painful labourer in that Vineyard, Dr. James in his
Bellum Papale.
your Translations in many places are flat contradictory each to other, (and he
that believes contradictions, believes nothing at all.)

From the charge in general, I will descend into particulars. And first, I
will give you an Instance in the Old Testament.

We read in the 34. of Exodus and the last verse, The Children of Israel saw
the face, that the skin of Moses face shone: Videbant faciem egredientis
Moisi esse Cornuta^. Sixth. Bibl. Ibid. v. 29, and 35.
your Sixtus Bible in the vulgar Translation twice renders it, They saw his
face horned; but your Sixtus Senensis complains of Hierome, that contrary to
the Original he so translated it. Thus one while you leave Hieromes
Translation when it savours not to your Palate, another while you excuse your
own by condemning of St. Hierome: (Now whether it were a part of that corrupt
Translation which your men use, and Hierome himself corrected, Rident ita que
nos, and execrantur Judaei quoties Mosen in noflris Te^plis cornuta facie
depictum espiciunt, quasi nos eum Diabolum quendam, ut ipsi stulie
interpretantur, esse putemus. Sixth. Senens. l. 5. Annot. 116. p. 368. (...).
I dispute not) but (says he) therefore the Jews do scoff and hate us
Christians, whenever they happen to see the picture of Moses painted with
horns, as though, according to their Imagination, we though him to have been
a Devil.

Look upon the particulars in the new Testament. In the third of Matthew for
Repentance you translate Penance, and by Penance you understand satisfaction
for sins. So that when the Evangelist says, according to the Greek
Original (Repent) you follow the Latin Translation, which has an ambiguous
construction, and say, Paenitentiam agite, which your Rhemists translate, Do
Penance. And in the 9th of St. Matthew, Math. 9.13. (...).
where he says, I am not come to call the Righteous, but sinners to
repentance, you translate, I am not come to call the Just, but sinners, and
leave out the word Repentance (which is in the Original.) And lastly, as if
you were guilty of a false Translation in both, in the first of St. Mark,
Mark. 1.15.
you translate the words according to the Original, and in stead of Do
Penance, you rightly interpret, Be penitent, and believe the Gospel.

In the 11 of St. Luke you have maimed and falsified the Lords Prayer: you say
in this manner; Father sanctified be thy name, thy Kingdom come, our daily
bread give us this day, and forgive us our sins, for because our selves also
do forgive every one that is in debt to us: And lead us not into temptation.
In this absolute form of Prayer, you have omitted all these words; Our --
which art in heaven, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, but deliver
us from evil. Thus Christ taught his Disciples to pray in one manner, and you
in that place teach your Disciples in another; and this is agreeable to your
vulgar Translation, but not to the Original.

In the 11 to the Romans we read, according to the Original; Romans 11.6.
If it be of grace, then it is not now of works, for then grace is no more
grace: but if it be of works, then it is now no grace, for then work is no
more work: your Rhemists according to their vulgar Edition render it; And if
by grace, not now of works, otherwise grace now is not grace: and leave out all
the latter part of the verse, in these words, But if it be of works then it is
now no grace, (...). Graec. Orig.
for then work is no more works; for what end let the Reader judge.

In the first Epistle to the Corinthians we read according to the Original,
Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God; (...). 1 Cor. 4.1.
your Rhemists following the Latin Translation read, Dispensers of the
Mysteries of God: and howsoever these words might be dispensed withal in some
sense, yet by no means as you force it. For when your Proselites do question
your Priests why they take away the Cup from the Lay people, with these words
so translated you answer them, We are the Ministers of Christ, and Dispensers
of the mysteries of God: and so by consequence we may dispense with the
Sacramental Cup, by the authority of Scripture. Witness your Council of
Trent touching the Churches power of dispensing with the Sacrament, Id autem
Apestolus non obscure visus est innuisse, etc. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 2.
which professes that the Apostle does plainly intimate unto us a dispensation
with the Sacrament in those words mentioned.

In the 15. of the Corinthians we translate according to the Original, 1 Cor.
15.51.
Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed: your Rhemists translate it according to the vulgar Latin, Rhem. Test.
ib.
flat contrary to the Original, and the meaning of the Holy Ghost; Behold I
tell you a mystery, we shall all indeed rise again, but we shall not be
changed.

In the second Epistle to the Corinthians we read according to the Original,
Wherefore henceforth know we no more after the flesh, yea though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more: Rhem. Test.
printed at Antwerp An. 1621. in 2 Cor. 5.16.
your Rhemists, doubting these words may trench too far upon your natural
and carnal presence, have quite perverted the sense by their last Edition in
these words, Therefore we from henceforth know no man according to the flesh,
and if we have known according to the flesh, but now know him no more. Here is
no mention at all of Christ, but the chief words (yea) and (Christ) which are
emphatically delivered by the Apostle, are quite left out; and I cannot
conceive but it is done wittingly, because you have carefully observed the
Errata upon the Annotations, but none upon the Text it self.

In the second of the Ephesians we read according to the Original, Ephesians.
2.10. (...).
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works: your Rhemists
following the Latin Translation deprave the Text, saying; Non satis commode
vertit vulg. Interpret. etc. Vega opusc. de Mer. and Justif. q. 6.
We are created in Christ Jesus in good works: Which is no fit interpretation
(says your own Vega) because we must beware lest that some take occasion from
the Latin, to attribute the cause of their creation in Christ, unto his
foreseen good works; than which nothing can be more contrary to St. Paul's
doctrine.

In the fifth to the Ephesians according to the Original we read, (...). Ephesians.
5, 32.
This is a great mystery (speaking of Christ's marriage to his Church) your
Rhemists, to prove Matrimony one of their seven Sacraments, follow the Latin
Translation, and say, This is a great Sacrament; Cajet. Coment. in hunclocum.
whereas your Cardinal Cajetan tells us, The learned cannot infer from hence
that Marriage is a Sacrament, for St. Paul said not, It is a Sacrament, but a
Mystery.

Lastly, to maintain your Image Worship, whereas we read in the Hebrews
according to the Greek, Jacob blessed both the Sons of Joseph, (...). Hebr.
11.21.
and worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff: your Rhemists according to
the vulgar Latin read it, Jacob dying, blessed every one of the sons of
Joseph, and adored the top of his rod.

Thus I have given you a taste of the differences betwixt our Translations, and
your vulgar Latin; now let the Reader judge which of those readings are most
agreeable to the Original. If we enquire of your Rhemists, they tell us that
we have no cause to complain of their Translation, unless we complain of the
Greek also. Nay more, they have not only proclaimed it to the Reader, but
they have outfaced the world in their Preface, that their Translation is so
exact and precise, according to the Greek, Preface to the Rhem. Testam.
both the phrase and the word, that delicate Heretics (for so they term us)
therefore reprehend us of rudeness, and that it follows the Greek far
more exactly then the Protestants Translations.

It is true indeed, that sometimes you would seem to affect the Greek,
sometimes the Latin tongue in your Translation; but withal you have cunningly
devised uncouth words and phrases, and for this purpose only, that the
Scripture may seem hard and obscure to the common people, that they might
either take no pleasure in the reading them, or reap no benefit for want of
understanding them: Romans 13.13. Galat. 1.14.24 Galat. 4.17. 1 Pet. 2.5. Phil.
4.10. Ephesians. 6.12. 1 Cor. 10.11. Hebr. 2.17. John 6.54. John 19.14.
as for instance; Not in chambering and Impudicities. I expugned the faith.
They emulate you not well, that you might emulate them. Be also your selves
superedified. Once at length you have reflourished to care for me. Against the
spirituals of wickedness in the celestials. But they are written to our
correption. That he might repropitiate the sins of the people. All shall be
docible of God. It was the Parasceve of Pasche. These and such like are the
exact and precise Translations which you so brag of, and for which we
condemn you.

Now do you join to these English phrases, your falsifying and corrupting the
genuine sense of the Holy Ghost by your Latin Translations, and tell me if I
may not truly retort your Assertion into your own bosom: Scripture you have
indeed, but so mang led, corrupted, perverted by Translation, that as (you)
have it, it is as good as nothing.

But you have misinterpreted the Scriptures (say you) according to your own
fancies.

Your bolt is soon shot, and if all your words were Oracles, and that Ipse
dixit were sufficient, your bare word (for other proofs you have none) would
easily conclude us; but I will show you so plainly, that without Spectacles you
may see that these Aspersions likewise reflect upon your selves.

It was a question amongst your fellow Jesuits, whether Jacob Clemens the
Dominican might by Authority of the Scripture kill Henry the third, B. Barloes
defense of the Articles, in his Preface, p. 7.
King of France; and one of your Jesuits reasoned thus with himself: Ehud
killed Eglon, and therefore I may kill Henry; for Eglon was a King, and so is
Henry; Eglon signifies a Calfe, and Henry is a Calvinist; and therefore
assuredly I may murder him by Scripture. I hope you will confess that this
Jesuit, although he were of your Society, did interpret the Scripture
according to his own fancy. In like manner, your Patriarch of Venice
concludes seven Sacraments from the words of Scripture, and I conceive, it is
according to his own fancy: That (says he) which Andrew spoke, Inn. Gentil.
exam. Council. Trid. l. 4. n. 26. Sess.
There is a Boy which has five loaves and two fishes, must be understood of
the rank of St. Peter's successors; and that which is added, Make the people
sit down; signifies, that salvation must be offered them, by teaching them
the seven Sacraments. And whereas the Prophet David says; Thou have put all
things under his feet: Antoninus your Archbishop of Florence, Anton. in Sum.
part. 3. tit. 22. c. 5.
about two hundred years since, expounded those words in this manner: Thou have
made all things subject to the Pope; the Cattle of the field, that is to say,
men living in the Earth: the fishes of the sea, that is to say, the souls in
Purgatory: the fowls of the Air, that is to say, the souls of the Blessed in
heaven: whether this Exposition be according to the sense which the Catholic
Church holds, or according to his own fancy, let the Reader judge.

To come nearer to you: Whitak. and Camp. Rat. 9.
Moses says, God made man after his Image: Pope Adrian infers, Therefore
Images must be set up in Churches. St. Peter says, Behold here are two swords:
Pope Boniface concludes, Extra. de Major. and Obed.
Therefore the Pope has power over the spiritual and the temporal. St.
Matthew says, Give not that which is holy unto dogs: Mr. Harding expounds it,
Juels Def. p. 52.
Therefore it is not lawful for the vulgar people to read the Scriptures. It
was said to St. Peter in a vision, Arise, kill, and eat: your Cardinal
Baronius hence infers, In voto Baronii contra venetos.
The Pope is Peter, and the Venetians are the meat which must be killed and
devoured. To let pass those far fetched and extravagant senses of
Scriptures, which your learned men wyer-draw for your Romish Doctrine. It is
the word of God, Go to my servant Job, and he will pray for thee: therefore
there is an Invocation of Saints in Scripture. Give us this day our daily
bread: Bellar. de Sa^ct. Beat. l. 1. c. 10.
therefore the bread must be given to the Common people, and not the Cup.
Roffens. adver. Luther. Art. 16.
Our Savior opened the Book of the Prophet Esaias, and afterward closed it:
Ledis. de divinis Script. Quavis lingua non legenda. cap. 22.
therefore Prayer and Service in an unknown tongue is commanded by the
Scripture. These and such like false glasses you temper for your Spectacles, to
deceive your poor ignorant Proselites with the name of Scripture; and for
fear they should make any doubt of the right interpretation of them, Si quis
habet interpretatione^ Ecclesiae Romanae, de loco aliquo Scripturae, etiamsi --
tamen habet ipsissimu^ verbum Dei. Hosius de expresso verbo Dei.
your Cardinal Hosius protests to all Romanists, If a man have the
Interpretation of the Church of Rome of any place of Scripture, he has the
very words of God; though he neither know, nor understand, whether, nor how it
agrees with the words of Scripture. This puts me in mind of that excellent
passage of St. Hilary, who speaking of the errors and Heresies crept into the
Church in the days of Constantius, makes this general complaint, which in
these days is truly verified in the Roman Church; Hilard. 3. ad Constant. and
l. 1. ad Constable. defunctum.
Faith is now come to depend rather on time, than on the Gospel; your state is
dangerous and miserable: you have as many faiths as wills; and as many
doctrines as manners; whilst faiths are either so written as you list, or so
understood as you will.

I come now to your forbidden Books, wherein the mystery of iniquity will
manifestly appear: and first touching the sacred Bible which is forbidden in
the first place.

The Bible (say you) is not so forbidden, but that it is in the Bishops power
to grant leave, if upon Conference with the Parish Priest or Confessor of the
party that desires leave, he find him to be such a one as may not incur
danger of faith, etc. which with any reasonable man may be counted sufficient
liberty.

It is true that by the fourth Rule of Pope Pius the fourth, the Bible may be
licensed by the Bishop, but the party must have the license in writing: and
withal it is decreed, Regula 4. in indice libr. prohibit. p. 16.
If any presume without such license either to read or have it, unless he
come in first and give up his Bible to his Ordinary, let him not have the
pardon of his sins. It is not lawful then to read the Bible without a
dispensation, but with a license any man may read it: and this (say you) is
sufficient liberty for any reasonable man. If I should grant you that which you
say, yet you are never able to make good that license: for Pope Clement the
eight about thirty years after, upon this dispensation so granted, gives us to
understand, That upon the Rule of Pius the fourth, Observatio circa 4. Regulam
Ibid. p. 22. in fine Council. Trident.
no new power was granted to the Bishops, or Inquisitors, or Superiors, to
license the buying, reading, or keeping the Bible in the vulgar tongue; seeing
hitherto by the command and practice of the holy Inquisition, the power of
granting such licenses, to read or keep Bibles in the vulgar Language, or any
part of Scripture, as well of the New as the Old Testament, or any sums or
Hystoricall Abridgement of the same in any vulgar Language has been taken
from them: Quod quidem inviolate servandum est; and this is inviolably to be
observed. You see then, that howsoever your Pius Pope gave a dispensation for
the reading of the Scriptures: yet Pope Clement his Successor, declared that
license to be void and of none effect; and that which concludes your Assertion
for an untruth, it was by him decreed, to be kept without any dispensation or
violation. Inviolate servandum.


Thus touching the sacred Bible you have several Translations, upon several
pains to be received, and both different each from other in many hundred
places: you have ranked the sacred Bible amongst the Books prohibited; and
lastly, you seemingly grant a license for the Ignorant to read the Scripture:
and by another decree you abridge that license so granted. I proceed from the
forbidding of Scriptures, to your purging and falsifying of the ancient Fathers.

As for Fathers (say you) it is most grossly false which the Knight after the
ordinary Ministerial tune, stands canting, that we blot out and raze them at
our pleasures. What is it then that these men would have? What is it they can
carpe at? Nothing but that they themselves are stung, in that hereby they are
kept either from publishing their own wicked works, or corrupting the Fathers
at their pleasure; and to wipe away this blemish from themselves, would lay it
upon us. Thus you.

It seems you have been well acquainted with Rogues and sturdy Beggars, who
have taught you the Term of (Canting) a word proper for such kind of people:
but whereas you say it is grossly false that you blot and raze the Fathers,
and that therein we seek to wipe away the blemish from our selves, and lay it
upon you; for the better manifestation of the truth, first, look I pray upon
the place where the corrupted Fathers were printed, and see by whom they were
licensed; then hear your own men witnessing their own confession, of purging
them; and lastly, peruse the places which I shall produce razed and corrupted,
and then tell me if the Mystery of Iniquity does not closely work in your
Roman Church, and that the ancient Fathers are grossly falsified, and
notoriously corrupted by your own men, even in the principal points of
Doctrine controverted betwixt us.

First then we must observe, that corruptions and abuse of ancient Fathers may
be of three sorts; either by foisting into the Editions bastard Treatises, and
intitling them to the Fathers; or by falsifying their undoubted Treatises by
additions, detractions, or mutations; or lastly, by alleging passages, and
places out of them, which are not extant in their works: and of all these
three kinds your men are guilty, Expurgari and emaculari curasti omnium
Catholicoru^ scriptoru^, praecipue veterum Patrum scripta. Sixth. Senens. in Ep.
Pio 5.
as it shall appear by instances in their several Ages, for the first 800.
years.

First, concerning the purging of Fathers; your Sixtus Senensis, in his Epistle
dedicated to Pope Pius the fifth, amongst his many and famous deeds, recounts
this for one of the greatest, That he caused the writings of all Catholic
Authors, but especially those of the ancient Fathers, to be purged. And
Gre^zerus your Jesuit proclaims it by way of justification; Gretz. l. 2. c. 10
If it be lawful to suppress or inhibite whole Books, as namely Tertullian
and Origin, then it is lawful likewise to suppress a greater or lesser part
of one, by cutting out, razing, blotting out, or by omitting the same simply
for the benefit of the Reader. And Possevine your Jesuit tells us, Adistos enim
quoque purgatio pertinet. Possev. l. 1. Bib. lioth. select. c. 12.
that Manuscript Books are also to be purged, as well as printed; which shows
your good intention to the ancient Writers. I may add to these, that you do
not only purge, and corrupt the Fathers (as shall appear in matter of fact in
several Ages) but you forge Bastard Epistles in the names of ancient Bishops,
and you thrust counterfeits into the Chair of the true and Catholic Doctors.
Peter Warbeck is taken for Richard Duke of York, and obscure Authors, as
namely Dorotheus, Hormisda, Hermes, Hypolitus, Martialis, and other
counterfeits, for famous Writers, and all to supply your defects of doctrine in
the Orthodox Fathers. Severinus Binius has published certain decretall
Epistles in the names of Clemens, Anacletus, Evaristus, Sixtus, and many
others, to the number of thirty one, all Bishops of Rome: Insomuch, as their
Epistles are cited by Bellarmine, by Peresius, by Coccius, by Baronius, by your
Rhemists, for several proofs of your Trent Doctrine. Gratian says, Great.
Did. 20. Decretales.
they are of equal Authority with Councels: nay more, he labors to prove out
of St. Austin, Distinct. 19. in Canonicis.
that those decretall Epistles were reckoned by him amongst the Canonical
Scriptures; and yet by the several Confessions of your learned Writers, are
adjudged to be all counterfeit: and without doubt, their leaden-stile, their
deep silence of Antiquity concerning them, the Scriptures alleged by them
after St. Hieroms Translation (being long before his time) do easily convince
them of falsehood. Antoninus Contius, the Kings Professor of Law in the
Universitie of Bruges, tells us that he brought many reasons in his Preface,
An. 1570.
and notes upon your Canon Law, which was printed at Antwerp, by which he
proved, and showed manifestly, that the Epistles of the Popes, Silvester An.
314.
who were before Silvester, were all false and counterfeit. The Preface, with
the reasons alleged against it, is now razed and purged; and Plantin the
Printer gives this answer for it, Raynold. and Heart. Cap. 8. Divis. 3. p. 451.
The Censor who was to oversee the printed Books, would not suffer it to
pass, and what became of it he remembered not, nor knew how to procure it. Thus
your men are not only ashamed to publish their Bastard Epistles, and equal
them to the Word of God, in behalf of your new doctrine, but you censure also
and purge your own men for condemning such lying inventions.

Whether to forge a false deed, or to raze a true one, be the greater fault, it
is not greatly material: for your own men are guilty of both. And lastly,
when neither purging, nor falsifying will serve the turn (which you have
practiced in Books set out the first 800. years) you bring a Prohibition
against all Authors, Priests, and Professors in the bosom of your own Church,
which testify the truth of our doctrine, and injoyne them silence by your
Index Expurgatorius, by cutting out their tongues, and refining them with a new
impression; and this has been your ordinary practice, for the last 800.
years. I will give you instances in both, and so I come to the second Age.

In the second Age, Ignatius Bishop of Antioch witnesses the antiquity of our
Doctrine: he shows that our Communion in both kinds was practiced in his
days: There is one Bread (says he) broken for all, and one Cup distributed to
all. (...). Ignat Ep. ad Philadelph.
In your Edition printed at Colein, you have quite altered the sense by a
corrupt Translation, saying: One Cup is distributed for all: and in the
Margent, Unus Calix, qui pro omninibus nobis distributus est. Bibl. Pp. Tom. 1.
Colon Agripp. An. 1618. p. 85. Bell. de Euch. l. 4. c. 26.
Una Eucharistia utendum. And that your corruption may not want an Advocate,
your Cardinal Bellarmine tells us; There is not much credit to be given to the
Greek Copies, for the Latin reads it otherwise: by which reason, a man may
appeal from the Original to a Translation; which is a thing unheard of.

Again, whereas he says in the same Epistle, Ignat. ibid. ut supra.
Oh ye Virgins in your prayers set Christ (only) before your eyes, and his
Father, being enlightened by his spirit: hereby teaching, that we ought to
directour prayers to the Trinity only, and not to Saints and Angels: your men
in their late Edition printed at Lions, by their corrupt translation have left
out the word Precibus, Ignat. Lugdun. impres. An. 1572.
and thrustin Animabus, souls for prayers; by which change of words, the sense
and meaning of the Father is clean perverted. It follows further in the same
Page, in speaking of Peter and Paul, and other Apostles, who betook themselves
to a married life; Severinus Binius, in his Annotations upon this place, tells
us that those words (viz. Peter and Paul, and other Apostles, betook themselves
to a married life) ought to be razed out; The third age, An. 200. to 300.
because (says he) it is probable the Grecians in honor of Marriage,
corrupted the Text: A fair warning for us to take notice, that in after
Editions that passage may also be clean left out.

In the third Age, Tertullian paraphrasing upon the words of Christ, Caro nihil
prodest, ad vivificandum scilicet. Tert. de Resurrect. carnis, c. 37. Caro
nihil prodest sed ad vivificandum. Tertul. Parisiis apud Michaelem Julianum.
An. 1580. p. (Mihi) 47.
The flesh profits nothing: (says) It is the Spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing, (namely) to quicken: your Tertullian printed at Paris,
has quite perverted the meaning of the Father, and causes him to speak flat
contrary both to himself, and to the sense of Christ, in these words: The
flesh profueth nothing (but) to quicken.

St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage is falsified and corrupted, for the
circumgestation of your Sacrament, and the Popes Supremacy. In his Tract of
patience he tells us, Nec post gustatam Eucharistiam, manus gladio and cruore
maculentur. Sic Cypr. Parisiis apud Petru^ Drovart. in vico Jacobaeo An. 1541.
fol. 89. Nec post gestatam Eucharistiam, etc. Cypr. de bono Patientiae.
Impress. Partsiis apud Claudium Chapelet Via Jacobaet An. 1616. p. (Mihi) 316
Post gustatam Eucharistiam, etc. After the eating of the Eucharist, the hands
are not, or ought not to be defiled with blood: In your Cyprian printed at
Paris and Colein, your men have wittingly altered the words, saying, Post
gestatam Eucha ristiam; and so by transmutation of one letter, do cite this
place for the circumgestation of the Sacrament: whereas the Ceremony of
carrying about the Eucharist, was not known in many hundred years after
Cyprians time. But Pamelius, a Canon of the Church of Bruges, and Licentiate in
Divinity, returns this answer in defense of it: Cum manu non gustetur
Eucharistia, sed olim gestari consueta sit, prorsus illud ex Cambrensi Codice
substituendum duxi, pro eo quod erat gustatam. Annot. in lib. de bono Patient.
page (Mihi) 321
Forasmuch as the Eucharist cannot be tasted with the hand, but was wont
anciently to be carried with the hand, I thought it best to change the word
Tasting, into Carrying; which I borrowed from an ancient Copy in Cambron
Abbey. The word then we see was changed by his own Confession, and the Cambron
Copy is brought for the defense of this forgerie: which differing from all
other Copies may be justly suspected. For his reason, that we taste not with
our hand, it is frivolous: For St. Cyprian says not, gustatam manu, but simply
gustatam; which taste yet was not without taking the Sacrament into the hand.

You have heard Pamelius confession: Now let us hear what Manutius has done
in publishing of St. Cyprian; for Pamelius tells us, that St. Cyprian printed
at Rome by Paulus Manutius, Indiculus. Codicum in Cypriano.
in the year 1563. is a much more bettered and corrected Edition, than any
other: and accordingly your learned Priest Mr. Heart assures us, that Pope Pius
the 4th, Heart and Raynolds, c. 5. Divis. 2. p. 167.
being desirous that the Fathers should be set forth and corrected perfectly,
sent to Venice for Manutius a famous Printer, that he should come to Rome to
do it; and to furnish them the better with all things necessary, he put four
Cardinals, wise and virtuous, in trust with the work; and for the correcting
of Cyprian especially above the rest, singular care was taken; by Cardinal
Baromaeus, a Copy was gotten of great antiquity from Verona, and the exquisite
diligence of learned men was used in it.

These Testimonies make a fair show of sincere and plain dealing: and no
doubt if there were not double diligence used by them, the Roman Cyprian does
exceed all the rest, and is freest from corruption: That the truth thereof may
appear, let us look into St. Cyprian in his book touching the Unity of the
Church. De Veritate Ecclesiae.
Whereas the ancient and true Cyprian says, The rest of the Apostles were
equal unto Peter both in honor and power; the Roman Cyprian, printed by
Manutius, and your late Paris Cyprian, Cypr. Parisiis apud Claudium Chapelet.
An. 1616.
has added these words, The Primacie is given to Peter. And whereas the
ancient Cyprian says, Christ did dispose the Original of unity beginning
from one; the Roman and Paris have added, Unam Cathedra^ constituit. p. 254
He appointed one Chair. And whereas the ancient Cyprian says, The Church of
Christ may be showed to be one; the Roman and Paris have added, Cathedra una
constituitur. ib.
and the Chair to be one. And because the Chair may be as well applied to
the Bishop of Carthage, Cathedram Petri. Ibid.
as to the Bishop of Rome, the Paris Cyprian has added Peter's chair. And
whereas it was in Cyprian, even in the Roman print too, He who withstandeth
and resists the Church, does he trust himself to be in the Church? the Paris
Cyprian adds; Qui C^thedram Petri, supra quam fundata est Ecclesia, deserit,
in Ecclesia se esse confidit? ibid.
He who forsakes Peter's chair, in which the Church was founded, does he trust
himself to be in the Church?

Now as you have heard that Manutius has added, and forged much in his Roman
Edition, for the Popes Supremacy, so likewise you shall observe, that he has
rased and purged an ancient Record and special Evidence, against the
universality and supremacy of the Bishops of Rome; It is an Epistle written by
Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea to St. Cyprian (which St. Cyprian translated
into Latin, as your Pamelius does confess) wherein he professes, that he is
justly moved with indignation, at the manifest folly of Stephanus (then Bishop
of Rome) that boasting so much of his Bishopric, At que ego hac in part just
indignor, ad hanc tam apertam and manifestam Stephani stultitiam. Firmilian.
Cyp. S. Ep. 75. p. 203 Noli te fallere, siquidem ille est vere schismaticus
etc. p. 204. Insuper and Cyprianum Pseudo-Christum, and Pseudo-Apostolum, and
dolosum operarium dicere, qui omnia inse conscius praevenit, etc. p. 205.
and that he has the succession of Peter, upon whom the foundation of the
Church was set; brings in many other Rocks, etc. He bids him not deceive
himself, he has made himself a Schismaticke by separating himself from the
Communion of the Ecclesiastical unity; for while he thinks he can separate
all from his Communion, he has separated himself only from all. He taxes
him for calling St. Cyprian a false Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceitful
workman; which he himself being guilty of, and privy to himself, that those
terms of right belong to himself; by way of prevention, he objected them to
another.

Touching these several Additions and Extractions, Pamelius (by whom the
Antwerp and Paris Cyprian were set forth) first excuses Manutius for adding
the words in his Roman print; and tells us, they were found in a written Copy
of the Cambron Abbey in Hannonia, which was the best of all the Copies he had;
and therefore, says he, we were not afraid to insert that Reading into the
Text. Nonsumus veriti in textum inserere.
Yet Manutius himself professes, he perused five and twenty printed and
Manuscript Copies, which had none of those Additions; and as touching the
Epistle to, or from Firmilianns (which proves a resistance anciently made
against the usurped power of the Pope) Pamelius thinks it was left out
purposely by Manutius; Argumentum Ep. 75. p. 198.
and, says he, Perhaps it had been more wisdom it had never been set out at
all: (but withal he adds) because Morelius did publish it before me, I
thought it not fit to let it pass, but print it.

Now let us look back, and examine the reason of these several Editions and
falsifications. Mr. Heart says, that the Additions were taken from a very
ancient Copy gotten from Verona; Pamelius says, they were borrowed from a
Manuscript in the Cambron Ahbey in Hannonia: but in 25. Copies the Additions
were not to be found. Mr. Heart says, the true Copy was printed at Rome, by
the Popes command, and with the advice of virtuous and wise men, to be
perfectly corrected, and free from all spots. Pamelius says, it was better
than any other; but withal, it was not so exact, but that the old Proverb
might take place, the latter is commonly the better. Lastly, touching the
razing out the Epistle of Firmilianus, Pamelius concludes that his Copy
(which does cite it) is so perfect, Indiculus Codicum in initio Cypriani.
that, be it spoken without envy, there will need no further recognition; yet
happily (says he) it had been better it had never come forth.

Thus you may discern, what forgeries are used by your men, to support the
circumgestation of your Sacrament, and the Popes Supremacy; which is a maine
Pillar of your Faith: And this may serve to show your falsifications and
forgeries in the third Age.

In the fourth Age. The fourth age. An. 300. to 400.
The first General Council of Nice is forged by Zozimus Bishop of Rome, in
behalf of his own supremacy. The pretended Canon is this; In Council.
Carthag. c. 1. Binius
Those who in the Nicene Synod gave their sentence concerning Appeals of
Bishops, said in this manner: If a Bishop shall be accused, and the Bishops of
his own Province shall thereupon condemn and degrade him, if he think fit to
appeal, and thereupon fly to the most holy Bishop of Rome, if he be pleased
to have the hearing of it, the Bishop is to write to the Bishops adjoining, and
let it be at his pleasure to do what he will, and as he in his judgment shall
think fittest to be done. This Canon is not to be found either in the Greek
or Latin Copies of the Nicene Council; and those Canons in all were but 20.
It is true that you pretend, that there were in all 60. Canons, where of 40.
were burned by the Arabians, (amongst which this Canon was one:) But if they
were extant, how were they burned? And if they were burned, how came you to the
knowledge of them? The truth is, their Bastardie (says Contius your Lawyer) is
proved even by this, that no man, no not Gratian himself, Raynold. chap. 9.
Divis. 2. page 575.
durst allege them.

Eusebius Caesariensis Bishop of Caesarea is corrupted, to prove the Popes
supremacy: In the Basil print translated by Ruffinus, he says, Peter, James,
Eusebius, impr. Basiliae ex Officina Henr. Petrina, Ruffino Aquiliensi Interpret.
Sed Jacobum, qui dicebatur Justus, Apostolorum Episcopu^ statuerat. Eus. l. 2.
Eccl. Hist. c. 1. p. 677. Petrum, Jacobum, and Johannem, non de gloria and
honor contendisse interse, sed uno consensu Jacobum Justu^ Hierosoly monum
Episcopu^ designasse. Coloniae Allobrogum, excudebat Petrus dela Roviere. An.
1612.
and John, after the Assumption of our Savior, although they were preferred by
him before all the rest of the Apostles, yet did they not challenge the honor
of Primacie to themselves, but appointed James, which is called Justus, to be
Bishop of the Apostles: In your Coleine Edition, you have altered the sense, in
this manner: Peter, James, and John, when they had obtained of our Lord a high
degree of dignity, they did not contend about glory and honor amongst
themselves, but with one consent made James Bishop of Jerusalem: Thus the true
and ancient Eusebius says Peter and the rest did not challenge the honor of
primacie; the latter says, they did not strive about glory and honor: the
ancient says, they appointed James, which is called Justus, to be Bishop of
the Apostles; the other says they nominated Justus Bishop of Jerusale^.

This Authority is so pregnant against the Popes Jurisdiction, claimed from
Peter, that Bellarmine has nothing to answer, but this: Although those words
be found in the Basil print, translated by Ruffinus, yet in a Colein print,
translated and published by a Roman Catholic, Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c.
26.
the word Primacie is not to be found; and in stead of the words [ Bishop of
the Apostles] are inserted, Bishop of Jerusalem. The Cardinal does not
complain, that Ruffinus Translation was false and corrupt (for they are the
words in the Original of the ancient Eusebius) neither could he say truly,
that the Colein was translated by a Catholic, for indeed it is the property of
an Here-ticke to falsify and corrupt the Text. And thus you have done in your
Colein Edition, where you have altered the sense in that manner.

Eusebius Emissenus Bishop of Emesa in Syria is forged by Gratian for the
doctrine of Transubstantiation: Great. Did. 2. de Consecrat. Quia corpus, fol.
(Mihi) 432.
his words are these; Christ the invisible Priest, turned the visible creature
into the substance of his body and blood, with his word and secret power,
saying; Take, eat, this is my Body: whereas there are no such words to be
found in all his Works.

The Council of Laodicea is falsified in favor of your I^vocation of Angels.
The words of the Original are these: (...). etc. Conc. Laod. Can. 35. Bin.
Tom. 1. p. 245.
Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and depart aside and
invocate Angels, and make meetings, which are things forbidden: If any man
therefore be found to give himself to this privy Idolatry, let him be
accursed. Now in the same Council published by James Merlyn, and Friar Crab,
by transmutation of a letter, you are taught a lesson contrary to sense and
reason, saying, Quod non oporteat Ecclesia^ Dei relinquere, and abire, at que
angelos nominare, and congregationes facere. Merlin Tom. 1. Council. edit. Col.
An. 1530. f. 68. Crab. edit. An. 1538. Colon. fol. 226. Verit as non quaerit
Angulos.
It is not lawful for Christians to forsake the Church of God, and go and
nominate or invocate Angels, or corners, and make meetings; and thus Angeli are
become Anguli, Angels are become Angles, or Corners, as if truth did seek
Corners, when so fair an Evidence is brought against Invocation of Angels.

St. Basil, the great Archbishop of Caesarea, was forged by Pope Adrian the
first, at the second Council of Nice, for the worship of Images; his words are
these: Pro quo and siguras Imaginu^ eorum honoro, and adoro, and veneror
specialiter, hoc enim traditum est a Sanctis Apostolis, necest prohibendum:
acideo in om^ibus Ecclesiis nostris eorum designamus Historias. Citat. ab
Adriano in Synod. Nic. 2. Act. 2. p. (Mihi) 504.
For which cause I honor and openly adore the figures of the Images (speaking
of the Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs) and this being delivered us by the
Apostles, is not prohibited; but in all Churches we set forth their Histories.
This Authority was cited by Pope Adrian, in the name of Basil the Great in his
Epistles; when as in all his Epistles, of which are extant 180. there are no
such words to be found.

St. Hierome is likewise forged for the same doctrine, and by the same Pope:
the words in the Epistle are these; Sicut permisit Deus ador are omnem gentem
manufacta, etc. Citatur ibid. Ep. Adr. p. (Mihi) 506.
As God gave leave to the Gentiles, to worship things made with hands, and to
the Jews to worship the carved works, and two golden Cherubins which Moses
made; so has he given to us Christians the cross, and permitted us to paint
and reverence the Images of Gods works, and so to procure him to like of our
labor. These words (you fee) are cited by your own Pope, at a general
Council, as you pretend, for a point of your Romish faith; and yet there are
no such words, nor the meaning of of them, to be found in either of those
Fathers; and without doubt there was great scarcity of true ancient Fathers to
be found at that time, to prove your adoration of Images, when your Pope was
driven to shifts and forgeries: especially, when your own Polydore tells you,
Polyd. de Reru^ Invent.
that the worship of Images, not only Basil, but almost all the ancient holy
Fathers condemned, for fear of Idolatry; as S. Hierome himself witnesses.
This puts me in mind of Erasmus complaint, that the same measure was afforded
to Basil, Eras. in Praefat. lib. de Spirit. Sanct. Bas.
which he had otherwise observed in Athanasius, Chrysostom, Hierome, that in
the middle of Treatises, many things were stuffed and forced in by others, in
the name of the Fathers.

St. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine is falsified and corrupted. Franciscus Junius
as an eye witness, Junius Praefat. in Ind. Expurg. Belg.
tells us, that at Leyden in the year 1559. being familiarly acquainted with
Ludovicus Saurius Corrector of the Printing house, and going to visit him, he
found him revising of St. Ambrose works which then Frelonius was printing:
after some conference had betwixt them, Ludovicus showed him some printed
leaves, partly cancelled and partly razed; saying, this is the first
Impression, which we printed most faithfully, according to the best Copies;
but two Franciscan Friars by command have blotted out those passages, and
caused this alteration, to my great loss and astonishment.

It may be the discovery of it by Junius might stay their further printing of
it, or else might be an occasion to call it in after the printing; for
otherwise if that Impression may be had, it were worthy the examination.
Bolseus dicit se in manibus Secretarii h^c testimonium vidisse, and.
inspexisse. In disp. de Antichristo in Apend. Nu. 49. and 53. Laurent. Rever.
Romans Eccl. p. 190. Non habent Petri haereditatem qui Petri sedem non habent.
Great de Paenit. Did. 1. c. Potest fieri.
But for a proof of this falsified Ambrose, Lessius the Jesuit tells us, that
Bolseck does confess he saw the Copy in the hands of a Secretary: howsoever
their later Editions are sufficient proof of your manifold falsifications. But
I will speak of Impressions (only) that have been within my view. First, to
prove your succession in doctrine in your own Church, Gratian tells us from
St. Ambrose, They have not the succession of Peter, who have not the Chair of
Peter; and thus he has changed Fidem into Sedem, Faith into Chair. This
forgery in time may creep into the Body of Ambrose; but as yet the words of
Ambrose are agreeable to our doctrine; that is, Non habent Petri haereditatem
qui Petri fidem non habent. Ambr. de Paenit. c. 6. Tom. 1. p. 156. Basil. apud
Joh. Frob. An. 1527. Ambr. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 5. Tom. 4. p. 393. Basil^ut supra.
they have not the succession of Peter, which want the faith of Peter. These be
the words of true and ancient Ambrose, hereby declaring unto us, and them, that
they may have the Sea of Peter, and yet want the faith of Peter.

Again, in his Book of the Sacrament St. Ambrose says, Fac nobis ha^c
oblationem ascriptam, etc. quod fit in figuram corports and sanguinis Jesu
Christi. Amb. Colon. Agripp. An. 1616 Tom. 4. p. 173.
Make this Oblation to be a reasonable and acceptable one (quod est figura)
which is a figure of the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ: Your Ambrose printed at
Colein, does mince those words, and says, (quod sit in figuram) as if it might
stand for a figure, but were no figure; and more particularly in the Canon of
your Mass, you cite all those former words of Ambrose to prove the Antiquity
of your Mass, but you leave out the latter (which is a figure of the Body) and
say; Ut nobis corp. and sanguis fiat dilectissimi fi^ii tui Domini nostri Jesu
Christi. Missale Parv. An. 1626 p. (Mihi) 82.
Grant that it may be to us the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
lastly, that Ambrose might seemingly appear to be yours, in the point of
Transubstantiation, whereas he shows the power and wonders of God in creating
all things of nothing by his word only, and from thence concludes, Si^ergo
tanta vis est in sermon Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non erant; quant
o magis operatorius est, ut sint quae erant and in aliud commutentur? Idem de
sacr. l. 4. c. 4. Basil ut supra, p. 392.
If therefore there be so great force in the speech of our Lord Jesus, that the
things which were not begun to be (namely, at the first creation of all things)
how much more is the same powerful, to make that those things may still be the
same they were, and yet be changed into another thing? Here St. Ambrose shows
plainly, that the Elements of Bread and Wine are the same in substance as they
were before, although they are changed into another nature. Your Inquisitours
knowing well that such Doctrine is flat contrary to their Tenet, which teach
that the Elements are not the things in substance they were before
Consecration, have wisely left out in their late Edition two poor words,
(Sint) and (et) and accordingly the sense runs after this manner; How much
more is the speech of our Lord powerful to make that those things which were,
Ut quae erant in aliud commutentur. Paris. An. 1603 and Colon. Agripp. An.
1616. Tom. 4. p. 173.
should be changed into another thing. And by this means St. Ambrose a
Protestant, is become a Mass Priest; and with a clipped tongue lispeth
Transubstantiation. Friar Walden in writing against Wickliffe, cites this place
by the halves (ut sint et in aliud commutentur) he would have the Elements one
thing, Wald. de sacr. Euch. Tom. 2. c. 82 p. (Mihi) 138. b.
and changed into another, but excludes the principal words (quae erant)
showing that they should be the same, which they were before; and Lanfranck
long before him stormed at Berengarius, for citing this place out of St.
Ambrose in behalf of our Doctrine, and cries out against him, O mentem
amentem! etc. O mad mind! O impudent liar! now truly there is no such words to
be found in all St. Ambrose his works, Ed. Parisiis 1632. Ex editione Romana:
In qua quae vel vitio vel incuria erant adjecta, sunt rejecta; quae sublata,
restituta; quae transposita, reposita; quae depravata, emendata, etc. In the
fifth age. An. 400. to 500.
etc. But there is an Ambrose lately printed at Paris, which makes a great
promise of integrity and purity, and yet the words are corruptly printed,
according to your other of Paris and Colein print.

In the fifth age, St. Chrysostom Archbishop of Constantinople is razed and
purged, touching the doctrine of the Sacrament: his words be these; If
therefore it be so dangerous a matter to transfer unto private uses those
holy Vessels (in which the true Body of Christ is not, but the mystery of his
body is contained.) These latter words comprehended in the Parenthesis, Chrysostom.
Antwerpiae apud fohannem Steelsium, An. 1537. Paris. apud Johannem Roigny. An.
1543. and Paris. apud Audoenum Parvii. Anno 1557.
in the Editions of Antwerpe and Paris are wholly left out, there is not a
syllable of them to be seen: for indeed the Author of that work says
negatively, that (the irue body of Christ is not) there, which overthrowes the
very ground of your Popish presence: and although your men make great brags of
Antiquity, to prove your real Sacrifice of the Altar out of St. Chrysostom;
yet in the 19. Homily upon St. Matthew, where he terms it the Sacrifice of
bread and wine, Sacrificium panis and vini.
they being also privy to this evidence, as against their own doctrine,
Sacrificium corporis and sa^. guinis Christi. Paris. apud Audoenum P^rvu^. An.
1557. in. c. 7. Matt. Ho^. 19.
in their Edition at Paris have taught him to speak the Trent language, in
these words; It is the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ.

Touching the Testimony of divine Scriptures, St. Chrysostom is purged; he
tells us in his 49. Homily, That from the time that Heresies invaded the
Church, Nunc autem nullo modo cognoscitur volentibus cognoscere quae sit
Ecclesia Christi, nisi (tantummodo) per scripturas. Idem Homil. 49 Tom. 2 p.
mihi. 858.
there can be no trial of Christianity, nor refuge for Christians, who are
willing to know the true faith, but to the divine Scriptures; for at that time
there is no way to know which is the true Church, but by the Scriptures only:
This authority is wholly agreeable to our doctrine, and thereupon these times
of Controversies and Heresies, that have overspread the face of the Church, we
say with St. Chrysostom, those that be in Judaea, let them fly to the
Mountains of the Scriptures. But what answer can be made, think you, to the
razing of so fair an Evidence? Behold Totus hic locus, tanquam ab Arrianis
insertus, e quibusdam Codicibus nuper emendatis sublatus est. Bell de verbo Dei
l. 4. c. 11.
Bellarmine tells us, that this whole passage (as if it had been inserted into
St. Chrysostom by the Arrians) is blotted out of the late corrected Editions:
and, as our learned Doctor Crakenthorpe in his answer to Spalatto observed,
there is above 70. lines in the Antwerpe Edition, Crakenth. in Spalat. p.
(mihi) 59.
published 1537. purged in this Homily. It seems then it is heretical
doctrine, to have recourse to the Scriptures only for finding of the truth;
But sure I am, it is the part of Heretics to raze ancient Records, and to
avoid the trial of their cause by the sacred Scriptures.

The fourth Council of Carthage (where St. Austin was present) is in part
forged, in part razed: In the 100. Canon it was thus decreed: Mulier baptizare
non praesumat. Council. Carthag. c. 100.
Let no woman presume to baptize. What answer therefore may we expect to this
Canon? Binius the publisher of the Councels, expounds the meaning of it thus;
The Council (says he) does decree that a woman should not presume to baptize,
that is, when the Priest is present: Binius ibid. in his Annot.
on the other side, Peter Lombard and Gratian, Pet. Lomb. l. 4. Sent. Did. 6.
Great. Can. Mulier de Consecr. Did. 4.
they have put in their exception, (nisi necessitate cogente) except it be in
case of necessity: so that in the absence of the Priest, and in case of
necessity, women may baptize by the authority of your Church, notwithstanding
the Councels decree. And this is according to Bellarmines confession: Although
(says he) those words of exception (nisi necessitate cogente) be not found in
the Tomes of Councels, Bell. de Baptis. l. 1. c. 7.
yet Peter Lombard and Gratian cite the Canon in that manner. And thus by your
own Cardinals profession, your Priests have added that exception to the Canon,
to dispense with women for Administration of the Sacrament, which is not found
in the Council.

Again, the same Council is razed both by the compiler of the decrees, and
publisher of the Councels: for the Council says in the 44. Canon, Clericus
nec comam nutriat, nec barbam radat, Council. Carth. Can 44.
Let no Clerk wear long hair, nor shave his Beard: The decretals, and your
late Councels published by Binius, have left out the word (Radat) and have
quite altered the sense of the decree, and so your Church has gone directly
against the meaning of the Council in shaving of Priests.

S. Austin Bishop of Hippo is both purged, and falsified in favor of your
doctrine. First, for the purging of him your own men make this declaration:
Augustinus nuper Venetiis excusus, in quo, praeter multorum locorum
restitutionem secundum collationem veterum exemplarium, curavimus removeri illa
omnia quae fideliu^ mentes haeretic a pravitate possent inficere, aut a
Catholica orthodoxa fide deviare. Praefat. Ind. lib. prohibit. ad Lectore^,
Genevae impress. an. 1629.
St. Austin was lately printed at Venice, in which Edition, as we have restored
many places accerding to the ancient Copies; so likewise we have taken care to
remove all those things, which might either infect the minds of the faithful
with Heresies, or cause them to wander from the Catholic faith. This public
profession your men have made, and accordingly the In hunc modu^ est
repurgatus, ut in libri inscripsione testa^tur qui editioni praefuerunt. Ibid.
p. 6.
Book was purged, as those who were present at that Edition do witness in
the Inscription of the Book: but let us return to the corrupted Editions in
our view.

St. De Civitate Dci lib. 22. c. 24.
Austin in his 22. book of the City of God and 24. Chapter, is cyted by Bell.
de Purg. l. 1. c. 4.
Bellarmine for the proof of Purgatory: yet in that Chapter (says Lud. Vives
in lib de Civit. Dei. c. 8.
Vives) in the ancient Manuscript Copies, which are at Bruges and Colein, those
ten or twelve printed lines are not to be found: And in the 22. book and 8.
Chapter he tells us, there are many additions in that Chapter, without
question, foysted in by such as make practice of depraving Authors of great
Authority.

Touching forgeries and falsifications in particular: The humane nature of
Christ is destroyed, if there be not given it, after the manner of other
bodies, a certain space wherein it may be contained. In your Edition of Paris,
printed by Sebastian Nivelle, An. 1571.
this passage is wholly left out: This is observed by Dr. Moulin, but the
Author so printed I have not seen. But when neither adding nor detracting
could make good your Transubstantiation, Friar Walden thought it the surest way
to forge a whole passage in the name of St. Austin, which indeed strongly
proves the very name and nature of it: The words are these; Wald. Tom. 2. de
Sacram. c. 83. p. (mihi) 141.
No man ought to doubt when Bread and Wine are consecrated into the substance
of Christ, so as the sabstance of bread and wine do not remain, whereas we
see many things in the works of God no less mavelous. A woman God changes
substantially into a stone, as Lots wife; and in the small workmanship of man,
hay and fern into glass. Neither must we believe that the substance of bread
and wine remains, but the bread is turned into the Body of Christ, and the
wine into his blood, the qualities or accidents of bread and wine only
remaining. This fo gery was judicially allowed by Pope Martin the fist, and his
Cardinals, in their Consistory, and yet it savours rather of a Glasse-maker,
than an ancient Father: but what answer makes Walden to this invention?
Egoenimreperi and tra^scripsi de vetustissimo exemplari scripto antiqua^ valde
manu formata. Idem Ibid.
I found it (faith he) and transcribed it out of a very ancient Copy written
with a set hand. Thus one while you add, another while you detract, another
while you falsify the ancient Fathers, if either they make for us or against
you; and yet you tell us, that we are guilty of corrupting the Fathers. But
above all, Gratian has most shamefully and lewdly falsified St. Austin, whom
he has made to say; Inter Canonicas Scriptur as decretales Epistolae
connumerantur. Did. 29. In Canonicis. fol. 19. A.
The decretall Epistles of the Popes are accounted in the number of Canonical
Scriptures.

The truth is, St. Austin in his book of Christian doctrine, informs a
Christian what Scripture he should hold for Canonical; and thereupon bids him
follow the greater part of the Catholic Church: Amongst which those Churches
are, which had the happiness to enjoy the seats of the Apostles, and to
receive Epistles from them. Gratian in the Canon Law alters the words thus:
Amongst which Canonical Scriptures, those Epistles are which the Apostolic
See of Rome has, and which others have deserved to receive from her; and
accordingly the title of the Canon is, Imer Canonicas Scripturas, etc. The
decretall Epistles of Popes are counted by St. Austin for Canonical
Scriptures. Now judge you what greater forgerie, nay what greater blasphemy
can be devised, or uttered against Christ and his Spirit, than that the Popes
Epistles should be termed canonical Scriptures, and held of equal authority
with the Word of God; especially since by your own men they are censured as
Apocryphal and counterfeit Epistles. Your own Bellarmine, as a man ashamed of
such gross forgeries, would seem to excuse it; Bell. de Council. Author. l. 2.
c. 12. Primo.
That Gratian was deceived by a corrupt copy of St. Austin, which he had
besides him, and that the true and corrected copies have not the words, as
himself reports. Thus Walden excuses his forgerie by an ancient Manuscript,
the Cardinal by a corrupt copy; and yet, by your Cardinals leave, this and
many other such like forgeries stand printed in the Canon Law, no Index
Expurgatorius lays hold on them, Idem de script Eccles. An. 1100 de Gratiano.
Aiph. advers. haereses, l. 1. c. 2. in fine. Ad transmarina qui putaverint
appellandum, a nullo infra Africam in Communione suscipiatur. Bin. in Council.
Milevit. Ca^. 22 and Codex Can. Eccl. Afric. Can. 28. v. Nisi forte ad
Apostolican sedem appellaverint. Great. causa 2. quest. 6. Placuit. fol. (Mibi)
153. Haec exceptio non videtur quadrare. Bell. de Pont. l. 2. c. 24.
notwithstanding he professes the work was purged and restored to his
integrity, by most learned men, by the command of Gregory the 13. in the year
1580. Your Alphonsus a Castro tells us, that this shameful error ought to be
made known to all men, lest others by this abuse, take occasion to err in
like manner; as namely, Johannes de Turrecremata, and Cardinal Cajetan, who
both cited this place out of Gratian for the Romish faith, and the Popes
Supremacy, and yet no such thing is to be found in St. Austin.

The Council of Milevis, alias, the African Council, is falsified by Gratian
for the Popes Supremacy: The words of the Council are these, Those that offer
to appeal beyond the Seas, let none within Africa receive them to Communion:
Gratian observing that this was a strong evidence and bar to the Popes
Supremacy, according to his custom, has thrust in these words into the Canon
(Except it be to the Apostolic See of Rome.) Now what says Bellarmine to
this falsification? He confesses that some say, This exception does not seem
to square with the Council: I know not how the squares go with your men at
Rome, but I find that amongst your party there is no rule without an
exception; especially if it make against your doctrine.

St. Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria is purged in the Text it self, and is forged
by Aquinas, for two principal points of faith; viz. Transubstantiation, and the
Popes Supremacy: Touching the first he says, That we might not feel horror,
Aquin. in Catena in illud Luc. 22, Accepto pane, etc.
seeing flesh and blood on the sacred Altar, the Son of God condescending to
our infirmities, does penetrate with the power of life into the things offered
(to wit, Bread and Wine) converting them into the verity of his owneflesh, that
the body of life, as it were a quickening seed, might be found in us. Here is a
fair Evidence, or rather a foul falsification for your carnal presence. But
what says your own Vasques the Jesuit? Citatur Cyrillus Alex. in Epistola ad
Casyrium, quae inter ejus opera non habetur, illius tamen testimonium citat S.
Thomas in Catena.
Cyrils testimony is eyted by Thomas, but there is no such Tract to be found in
all his works.

Again, touching the Popes Supremacy, he brings in St. Cyrill saying, As
Christ received power of his Father, over every power, a power most full and
ample, that all things should bow to him; so he did commit it most fully and
amply, Aquinas in opusculo contra errores Graecorum, ad Urbanum quartum
Pontificem maximum.
both to Peter and his Successors, and Christ gave his own to none else save
to Peter fully, but to him be gave it. And the Apostles in the Gospels and
Epistles have affirmed in every doctrine, Peter and his Church to be instead
of God. And to him, even to Peter, all do bow their head by the law of God,
and the Princes of the world are obedient to him, even as to the Lord Jesus.
And we, as being members, must cleave unto our head the Pope, and the
Apostolic See: That it is our duty to seek and enquire what is to be
believed, what to be thought, what to be held, because it is the right of the
Pope alone to reprove, to correct, to rebuke, to confirm, to dispose, to
loose, and bind. Here is a large and ample testimony cited in the name of an
ancient Father for the honor and power of the universal Bishop. This passage
is alleged out of Cyrils work entitled The Treasury against Heretics;
Thesaurus adversus haeticos. Tom. 2. p. 1.
but whereas there are 14. Books written by him of that Title, there are no
such words to be found in the whole Tract. But observe the proceedings of your
good Saint; he conceived the authority of one Father (though rightly cited)
was not a sufficient proof for an Article of faith, and thereupon, to make
good his former Assertion, he summons 630. Bishops, who (says he) with one
voice and consent made this general acclamation in the Council of Chalcedon;
Aquinas in opusculo, ut supra.
God grant long life to Leo, the most holy, Apostolic, and universal
Patriarch of the whole World. He tells us further, it was decreed by the same
Council, If any Bishop be accused, let him appeal to the Pope of Rome,
because we have Peter for a rock of refuge, and he alone has right, with
freedom of power, in stead of God, to judge and try the cause of a Bishop
accused, according to the keys which the Lord did give him. Without doubt this
decree was a good inducement for the Church of England to subscribe to the
Popes Supremacy (if you could make good this proof out of the Council of
Chalcedon) for it is one of the first four general Councels, which we
subscribe unto by our Acts of Parliament. An. 1. Elizab.
But where are those words to be found in that Council? Your Pope Zozimus
falsified a Canon in the first Council of Nice (as I have showed) and your
Popes Champion St. Thomas has falsified another, and both for the universality
of the Pope; by which you may easily discern, that you wanted antiquity to
prove your faith, when your men are driven to forge and feign a consent of many
hundred Bishops, in an ancient and general Council, See Council. Chalced. Can.
28. Act. 15.
for the supporting of your Lord Paramount; when as in truth it decreed the
flat contrary doctrine.

Gelasius Bishop of Rome is corrupted, Great. de Consecr. did. 2. c.
Comperimus. Gelasius Pap^ Majorico and Johanni Episcopis. Ibid.
where he condemns half Communion as sacrilegious: his words are these; We
find that some receiving a portion of Christ's holy Body, abstain from the Cup
of his sacred Blood, which because they do out of I know not what
superstition, we command therefore that either they receive the entire
Sacraments, or that they be entirely withheld from them; because the division
of one and the selfsame Mystery cannot be without grand Sacrilege.

Gratian, the compiler of the Popes Decrees, borrowed his chapter out of that
Epistle of Gelasius (says Bellarmine) and withal prefixed this Title before
it, Bell. de sacr. Euch. l. 4. c. 26.
The Priest ought not to receive the Body of Christ without the Blood; Ea
Epistola Gelasii, quae modo fortasse non extat. Ibid.
that is to say, without the consecrated Cup; and yet by Bellarmines
confession, That Epistle peradventure is not now extant: and which is more,
your Non conficient Priests do generally commit that Sacrilege, by receiving
the consecrated Bread without the Cup, flat contrary to the decrees of the
ancient Bishop of Rome.

In the sixth age, the second Council of Orange is falsified in the behalf of
your merits; the words of the Council are these: Hoc etiam salubriter
profitemur and credimus, quod in omni opere bono non nos incipimus, and posted
per Dei misericordiam adjuvamur; sed ipse nobis, etc. Council. Arausicanum, Can.
25. Bin. Tom. 2. p. 639.
We solemnly profess and believe, that in every good work we our selves do
not first begin, and are helped afterward by the mercy of God; but he, Nullis
praecedentibus bonis meritis, no good merits of ours going before, does first
of all inspire us with faith, and love toward him. This Council condemned the
Pelagians for their doctrine of Merits and Freewill; and accordingly declared
that we have neither free will of our selves to do good, neither any
foregoing works to merit any thing of our selves; and this is a safe and
humble confession both of our weakness, and Gods good grace and mercy toward
us. But observe your Churchmen, for the defense of their merits, they have
falsified the Canon, and quite perverted the sense and meaning of the Council;
and in the place of nullis meritis, no merits, have inserted the word multis,
many merits; so that the Fathers of the Council are taught to read a new
lesson, flat contrary to the ancient Doctrine of the Church, viz. We solemnly
profess that we first begin (many) of our own merits going before, etc.
than which assertion what can be more arrogant, in assuming power to our
selves, and derogating from the goodness of our God.

In the seventh age, Gregory the great Bishop of Rome is falsified: his words
be these; The King of Pride is near, Greg. Ep. lib. 4. Indict. 13. Ep. 38. p.
(mihi) 146. b. Edit. Antwerp. 1515. and Paris. An. 1521. fol. 384. in Aedibus
Francisci Regnault.
and, which is a heinous thing to name, Exercitus Sacerdotum, a whole army of
Priests is provided to attend his coming. In your Edition of Antwerpe and
Paris, for the word (exercitus) you thrust in (exitus Sacerdotum) so that
whereas Antichrist coming it is observed that an host of Priests shall belong
unto him; now on the contrary it is read, that at Antichrists coming there
shall be an end of Priesthood.

Now as you have detracted from Pope Gregory's doctrine in one place, so
likewise you have added to him in another, for honor of his See, and the
Canons of your Church: the words are these, Let not the reverence due to the
Apostolic See be trouhled by any man's presumption; Greg. l. 11. Indict. 6.
Ep. 42. Citatur a Bell. in Ep. ad Blackwell. contra jus regium. Vide Jacob.
Regis open a. p. 262. and 279.
for then the state of the members does remain sound, when the head of the
faith is not bruised by any injury, and the authority of the Canons always
remain safe and sound. This was urged to Blackwell the Priest, by your
Cardinal Bellarmine, as a principal testimony Contra jus regium; and yet, as
it is observed by a learned Divine, M. Stephanus.
these and many such particular passages are inserted into the printed Gregory,
which are not to be found in the ancient Manuscripts.

Again, in the former Epistle St. Gregory is likewise falsified by Stapleton,
in behalf of the Popes Supremacy: the words of St. Gregory are these, Greg.
Regist. l. 4. Indict. 13. Ep. 38.
Certainly Peter is the first member of the universal Church; Paul, Andrew,
and John, what are they but heads of particular people? and notwithstanding
they are all members of the Church under one head. And lest any should apply
the name of head to Peter, in his 36. Epistle, being the second Epistle before
this, he says, Omnia soli uni capiti cohaerent, viz. Christo. Ep. 36. Stapl.
de princip. doctrine. l. 6. c. 7.
All the members are joined to one head, Christ. Now observe the addition and
falsification of your learned Stapleton; Andrew, James, and John (says he)
were heads of several Congregations, and all members of the Church under one
head, Peter. And thus your Popes creature has left out Peter in the first
place, where he was made a member, and added the name of Peter in the last
place, to make him a head.

Again, Gratian, who was ever ready to supply all defects for the Popes title,
has given us an inexcusable forgerie, in the name of Gregory, for the Papal
power: the truth of it was this; When Anatolius Deacon of Constantinople, had
written to Pope St. Gregory, that the Emperor commanded another Bishop to be
chosen in the place of the Bishop of Justiniana, by reason of his headache;
St. Greory made this answer, Greg l. 9. Ep. 41. Indict. 4. p. 370.
You wrote unto me, that our most religious Lord the Emperor commanded another
to be chosen in the place of our reverend Brother John Bishop of Justiniana,
because of the pain of his head: by which tenor St. Gregory shows that the
Popes obeyed the Princes laws (so they were not against their Canons.) Now
observe Gratian he leaves out first the words, Great. causa 7. quest. 1. fol.
(Mihi) 186.
our most religions Lord, and in stead of the Emperors name, he assumes the
Popes person, saying, Your lovingnesse wrote to me, that I should command
another to be chosen, whereas in those days, by the confession of Pope
Gregory, the Emperors made Election of the Bishops, and not the Popes.

The sixth Council of Constantinople is falsified and corrupted by Gratian; in
the 36. Canon of the said Council it was thus decreed: We determine that the Sea of Constantinople shall have equal privileges and honor with the seat of
elder Rome, and in Ecclesiastical matters be advanced as far forth as it,
being next unto it: Gratian cites the former, non tame^ in Ecclesiasticis
(says he) but not in matters Ecclesiastical; which is flat contrary to the
meaning of the Council.

In the eight age venerable Bede was living, The eight age. An. 700. to 800.
and taught our doctrine touching the Sacrament, but was afterward forged by
Friar Walden, to prove the doctrine of Transubstantiation against Wickliffe;
Ibi forma panis videtur, ubi substantia panis non est, nec est ibi, inquit,
panis alius quam panis qui de coelo descendit. Wald. Tom. 2. de sacr. c. 82.
fol. (mihi) 138. b.
his words are these: There the form of Bread is seen, where the substance of
Bread is not, neither is any other Bread there, but that which descends from
heaven: This is alleged out of the Book de mysteriis Missae, in the name of
Bid, when as in all his 8. Tomes, he never wrote or mentioned any such work.

The Council of Franckford is likewise corrupted and falsified, for the honor
of your Images; for whereas Regino faith, Council. Franck-ford. An. 794. Bin. p.
(mihi) 141. Bin. Not. in Council. Fra^ c. p. (mihi) 164. b.
The false Synod of the Grecians, which they made for the defense of their
worshipping of Images, was erected by the Bishops assembled at Frankford, under
Charles the Great: Binius the publisher of the Councels, declares that the
Acts of the second Council of Nice in the cause of Images was confirmed by it;
which is so far from truth, that he is enforced to confess that therein he
does dissent, though unwillingly, from Baronius and Bellarmine: Quam sententiam
optarem esse veram, sed suspicor esse falsam. Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 14.. Multi.
and indeed Bellarmine professes; I could wish this opinion were true, but I
suspect it to be false. Again, to make the world believe that the Synod of
Franckford condemned not the second Council of Nice (the chief upholder of
Images) your men have razed out Nice, and thrust in Constantinople, which
altogether condemned Images: Now therefore take a short view of all these your
forgeries and corruptions.

In the first Age you have depraved the Scriptures by your false translations
and corruptions; and when all could not save your turn, you place the Bible
amongst the Books prohibited.

In the second Age you have forged Epistles in the names of 31. Bishops of
Rome, which were none of theirs; and to suppress our Doctrine touching the
Communion in both kinds, and to uphold your invocation of Saints and Angels,
you have corrupted Ignatius by a false Translation; and you would have the
Record razed touching the marriage of Priests.

In the third age you corrupt Tertullian for your Transubstantiation; you
falsify Saint Cyprian for your circumgestation of the Sacrament, and your
Popes supremacy.

In the fourth Age you corrupt Eusebius Caesariensis for the Popes supremacy;
you forge Eusebius Emissenus for your corporal presence; you falsify the
Council of Laodicea for your invocation of Saints and Angels; you forge Saint
Hierome and Saint Basil the Great, for your worship of Images; you falsify
Saint Ambrose for the Popes succession in the Roman See, and most corruptly for
the Doctrine of the Sacrament.

In the fifth Age you have razed two evidences in Saint Chrysostom, both which
confirm our Doctrine, the one concerning the Lords Supper, the other
concerning our trial by the Scriptures: you have falsified the Council of
Carthage for the baptizing of women, and for the shaving of Priests: you have
falsified Saint Austin for your Purgatory, and for your Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and your Popes decretall Epistles: you have forged the
Council of Africa for the honor of your Apostolic See: you have forged
Saint Cyrill for your Transubstantiation, and your Popes Supremacy.

In the sixth Age you have corrupted the Council of Orange for your Doctrine of
merits, and for the honor of your Priesthood over secular powers.

In the seventh Age you have razed Gregory the Great touching the coming of
Antichrist; you have purged him in an Epistle which makes against the Popes
Supremacy: you have falsified the Council of Constantinople in your Popes
behalf.

Lastly, in the eighth Age you have forged venerable Bede in behalf of your
Transubstantiation; and you have falsified the Council of Franckford in behalf
of your Image Worship; and yet for all this you are not ashamed to profess,
that for ancient Authors you note only what is amiss, but you neither raze
nor blot out any thing; that corner-correcting (say you) we leave for such
corner-companions as shun the light, p. 144. What credit can be given to you
or your Church, let the Reader judge, when as by your own confession, the
Trent Council has decreed it as a thing unlawful to change any thing in the
Books of ancient Catholics, Council. Trid. in Ind. lib. prohib. de correct. 4.
p. (mihi) 32.
except a manifest error appear to have crept in by the fraud of Heretics or
negligence of the Printer. Sure I am you will confess that all these mentioned
corruptions are not Errata, slips of the Printer; And as touching the fraud of
Heretics which did corrupt them, your Trent Council (which made the Decree)
could not mean the Protestants: for in those days they had printed no
Fathers, neither had they any Manuscripts, but such as were kept prisoners in
your Church: The name of Heretics therefore does properly reflect upon your
Pope Adrian, upon Gratian, upon Stapleton, upon Thomas Aquinas, upon Cardinal
Bellarmine, who appear to be Authors of your falsifications; and in general
upon your Roman inquisitors, who are the known Authors of your corrupting and
altering the true Fathers. And this must needs seem very probable to all,
because they are corrupted chiefly in those main Articles of Faith which make
against your Church. The ancient Records and Evidences which you have had many
hundred years in your possession, do all witness these forgeries and
corruptions in the printed Fathers, and will you claim the Fathers for your
Rule of Faith, when you make them speak more like children than fathers? Shall
a Guardian to an infant, having possession of his Lands, and keeping his Deeds
and Evidences during his minority, raze and falsify them, and thereby entitle
himself to the Wards Lands, because he was some time possessed of them, and
can produce forged Evidences for them? This is our very case: The Church of
Rome in her infancy was a faithful Guardian of her childrens right, she kept
the Manuscripts and the ancient Records of the Fathers, in that purity as she
first received the^; after the Pope had made an universal Title and claim to
all Catholic Churches, he intruded into other men's Rights by forgerie and
corruptions, he made the Fathers speak according to the Trent decrees, in an
unknown tongue, and now by forged cavillation detaines the possession against
the right owners. But let me tell you, as the Kings Subject, you are liable to
punishment in such cases in temporal affairs. See the title of Forger of
false deeds fol. (mihi) 180. b.
For if any person shall by false conspiracy, subtilty and falsity, forge any
Deed, Charter, or Writing, or shall pronounce, publish and show forth in
Evidence any such false or forged Deed or Writing as true, knowing the same to
be false and forged, and shall be thereof convicted, he shall be set upon the
Pillory in some open Market Town, and there to have both his Ears cut off,
and also his Nosthrils to be slit and cut, and seared with an hot iron, so as
they may remain for a perpetual note or mark of his falsehood.

Compare now this humane law with those forgeries of divine Evidences, and tell
me what you and your fellows can say for your selves, why the same judgment
should not be pronounced against you. For if the laws of Kings are so strict
in behalf of temporal records and assurances betwixt men, what may we think
the Lawgiver himself will require at their hands, who do not only raze and
falsify Evidences touching the greatest mysteries of Salvation, who I say not
only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them?

Thus much touching the razing and corrupting of the Fathers for the first 800.
years. Now I proceed to your Index Expurgatorius, your purging and blotting
out the modern Authors for the last 800. years.

Forasmuch (say you) as concerns the late Catholic Authors of this last age,
for this our Index (of which is all the difficulty) begins but from the
year 1515. whatsoever needs correction, is to be amended or blotted out;
yet for others going before that time, it is expressly said, that nothing may be
changed, unless some manifest errors, through the fraud of Heretics, or
carelessness of the Printer, be crept in: Thus you.

From your corrupting the ancient Councels and Fathers (which I have shown)
we are at last come to the correcting of modern Authors; and as I have led
you through an Hospital of maimed Soldiers, so now I will send you to the
house of correction, where I will leave you without Bail or Maine-prize, till
you have cleared your self and your associates, for wounding and cutting out
the tongues, of your own Authors, in speaking truth against the corruptions of
the Church.

But your correcting Index (say you) began but from the year 1515. P. 24. and
144.
and nothing is changed of Catholic Authors before that time.

I assure you, I have not heard as yet one sentence, nay scarce one word of
truth fall from your pen, wherein you dissent from us; and this your assertion
will prove as true as the rest. Yea, but (fay you) it is expressly declared by
the Church, that nothing may be changed; and if this be true (as true it is
indeed) the less credit is to be given you or your Churchmen, who make
decrees, and break them at their pleasure; for it shall appear that your
Index does extend it self to the time of the Apostles: and howsoever you
pretend to purge the Fathers only in the Index and Table of their Books; yet
I say some you have purged in the Text it self, others you have corrected in
the Index, in the express words delivered in the body of those Books. And as
touching your Assertion, that you purge the latter writers only from the year
1515. and not beyond that time, this is most false, and you had said more
truly, if you had confessed that for 1515. years together, your Church spared
no Authors, ancient or modern, if they speak not Placentia, agreeable to
your Popes faith and doctrine.

For the better manifestation of this truth, look first upon your Correctorium
(for so Lucas Brugensis terms it) your work of correction upon the Bible; and
tell me if you have not altered, by your Popes command, above three thousand
several places in the Scripture, even in your vulgar Translation, which you
call St. Hieromes; and although you dare not lay a Deleatur upon the sacred
word of God, yet upon the Commandments, upon the Lords Prayer, upon several
places of Scripture (as I have showed) there is a Deletur, a leaving out, and a
detracting from it.

Look upon your Index Expurgatorius, printed at Madrid, by Cardinal Quiroga,
and tell me if you have not purged certain places in the Index of the Bible,
which are ipsissima verba, the very words to a letter, in the Textit self: as
for instance; Justificamur fide in Christum, Galat. 2.16.
We are justified by faith in Christ: Justitia nostra Christus, 1. Cor. 1.30.
Christ is our Righteousness: Fide purificantur corda, Act. 15.9.
By faith our hearts are purified: Justus coram Deo nemo, Psalm. 143.2.
No man is righteous before God: Uxore^ habeat unusquisque. 1 Cor. 7.2.
Let every man have his wife, etc. All these passages I say are the very word
of God, in the Body of the Scriptures, and yet they are commanded Ind. Hisp.
Madr. f. (mihi) 15. B.
tanqua^ propositiones suspectae (for so are the words of your Index) as if
they were things questionable, to be blotted out. Again, when your glosses or
marginall notes agree not to your doctrine, you cause your Index Expurgatorius
to lay hold on them: as for instance; in the 26. of Leviticus, we read in your
own Translation, You shall not make to your selves an Idol or thing graven;
Deleatur illud, Sculptilia prohibet fieri. Idem fol. 7.
when the gloss in the Margent says, God forbids graven Images, Let that
passage (say you) be stricken out. And whereas Samuel says: Prepare your
hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only: Ibid. fol. 8. b.
the gloss upon the Text, which is the same in substance, viz. we must serve
God only, you command to be blotted out. These and the like places relating to
the Scriptures, being contrary to your Trent doctrine, you have excluded from
your late printed Bibles in the places aforesaid, as being too obvious to the
eye of every Reader. Ind. Hisp. Madrid. p. 6. 7. and f. 138. (Mihi) 62.
Crakenthorp. adv. Spal. p. 66. Bell. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 11. etc. Ind.
Madrid. fol. 62. a. Deleantur ex Textu illa verba: Sed ubi non habuerit Dei
timorem in seipsis, nec Jesum per fidem incolam, etc. Ibid. Eam vero solu^modo
naturam, quae increata est, colere and venerari didicimus. Ant. Meliss sermon. 1.
Bell. descript. Eccl. p. (mihi) 184.


Look upon the Fathers, and tell me if your Index Expurgatorius does not
correct both St. Chrysostom, and Austin, and Hilarie, and Hierome, in their
Index, touching the prime points of controversy betwixt us: Nay more, St.
Austin (says Vives) is purged ten or twelve lines in the body of his works;
St. Chrysostom in his 49. Homily is purged 70. lines; and by Bellarmines
confession, other places are razed out of him and other Fathers, as I have
showed before. Look upon St. Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, who was living above
1200. years ago, and tell me if your Inquisitors have not commanded a
Deleatur upon his words, in the very Text it self. Look before his time upon
Gregory Nyssen, and tell me if through the sides of Antonius Abbas (who was
living, by Bellarmines account, near 900. years ago) you do not wound that
ancient Father in the body of his works, in commanding this golden sentence to
be blotted out: Ind. Belg. p. 270. (...). Greg. Nissen. in Orat. 4. Tom. 2.
Edit. Graeco-lat. p. 146.
We have learned to worship and adore that nature (only) which is uncreated:
Parso^s warnword to Sir Fran. Hastings wast-word. Enc. 2. c. 9 p. 69.
your F. Parsons takes great pains to little purpose to excuse it; one while
he tells us, that the sentence is not to be found in Gregory Nissen (which is
most false:) another while he confesses, that they cannot stand to give a
particular reason of every censure or expurgation that is made (which is most
foolish.)

But tell me in good sooth, if those places of Scriptures and Fathers did make
for your Religion, would you purge them? Or must we believe, that your
Inquisitors would take such infinite care and pains to review all Authors for
1600. years, and sponge them only in the Index? Without doubt that man who
does willingly deface the Kings picture, stamped in his coin, would, if he
durst; attempt it upon his person: the Tables of Authors, and Glosses, were
especially intended for the benefit of the Reader, both for his better
understanding, and his more speedy searching of the truth.

They resemble the Phylacteries of the Jews, which had a Ribband of Blue upon
the borders of their garments, that by them they might the better remember the
Commandments of God: he that would have cut the fringes of those garments in
those days, to prevent the remembrance of Gods law, would (no doubt) have
offered violence to the Tables, on which God himself had written, if he durst
attempt it. The truth is, the words imprinted in the skirts and tables of your
Bibles and Fathers, are thorns in your eyes, and goades in your sides: and
from hence we may easily discern, why you leave out the second Commandment,
and alter the fourth in your Psalters and Breviaries, which you dare not alter
in your Bibles. And that your Assertion may more particularly appear to be
most untrue, viz. that you purge no Authors before the year 1515. I will
begin from the ninth age, where I last left, and show your own Authors
purged, and forbidden in all the succeeding ages for this last 800. years.

First therefore the Reader shall understand, that your Roman Inquisitors have
published an Index of prohibited Books, and in that Index they have divided
the Authors into three several Classes, or orders. Classis. 1.
In the first they rank all those Books which are adjudged by your men for
Heretics; as namely, Berengarius, Wickliffe, Luther, Cassander, Erasmus,
Raynolds, and diverse others; whose Books not only now written, but whatsoever
shall be published in their names hereafter, are prohibited as Heretical.
Classis. 2.
In the second Classis they have ranked all those whose doctrine is not very
sound, but suspected, and offensive, although the Authors themselves never
forsook the Church, and therefore not personally to be noted: and of this
sort are Charles the great, Agobardus, Bertram, Huldericus, Cajetan, and diverse
others, whose Books are now purged; and some of them lived 800. years since.
Classis. 3.
The third is of namelesse Authors, which (say they) deliver pernicious
doctrine, and are condemned by the Roman Church; and those only which have
been published without a name since the year 1584.

These three ranks of Classical Authors, according to our Adversaries doom,
may be destinated to these three several places. The first sort to Hell, which
contains the Heretics and damned persons, never to be redeemed. The second
sort to Purgatory, which are suspended and restrained upon suspicion of false
doctrine, or venial sin, and must not be freed till they be purged, and have
paid the utmost farthing to the Pope. The third, to Limbus Infantum, and those
are Anonymoi, such as were unbaptized, and have been published without a name,
from the year 1584. Of these three sorts, I will produce only the Authors of
the second Classis, which lived and died members of your Church, such as were
never condemned for heresy, but (touse you own words) have Suspectam
Doctrinam, that is to say in plain English, Protestant Doctrine: whereof some
you have purged in your new Editions, others you have forbidden to be read till
they be purged: The ninth age. An. 800. to. 900 See Crakenthorp, p. 56. Carolo
magno falso adscriptu^, de Imaginibus, cujus Titulus est, Opus illustrissimi,
etc. Ind. l. prohib. p. (Mihi) 18.
and this (as shall appear) was many ages before the time prefixed, 1515.

I proceed: In the ninth age Charles the Great wrote four Books concerning
Images; he professes that he began the work in his own Kingdom; and your
own Ecchius, and Luzenburgus, both witness that this Emperor wrote all those
Books: yet your Index Expurgatorius lays hold on him, and forbids the work;
pretending that it is falsely ascribed to him, when as the true reason is,
because he condemned Image Worship, and forbids the 7th. Council to be called
either agenerall, or lawful Council: for otherwise your own Hincmarus
Archbishop of Rhemes, Hinckm. Rhe^. contr. Hinchm. Jandun. Episc. c. 20.
who was living when these things were fresh in memory, professes, that a
general Synod was kept in Germany by the convocation of the Emperor Charles,
and there, by the Rules of Scripture and doctrine of the Fathers, the false
Council of the Grecians, was confuted and utterly rejected; of whose
confutation there was a good big Book sent to Rome by certain Bishops from
Charles the Great, which in my younger years I read in the Palace.

Now admit that Charles were not the Author of those Books (although your
own men witness he was) yet the Author you see was ancient, and living in
that age; he condemned your Image Worship, he confuted the reasons of the
Nicene Council, and by this it appears that your Church has transgressed her
limits above 700. years; and therefore your Trent decree was made suitable to
your Spectacles, which makes that seem to be, which is not.

Agobardus Bishop of Lions ( An. 840.) is purged, propter non sanam and
suspectam doctrinam; because he delivers our Protestants doctrine, which you
account non sanam, in these words; If the works of Gods hands be not to be
adored and worshipped, Sioperd manuum Dei, etc. Bibl. Pp. Tom. 9. p. (mihi) 590.
no not in honor of God, how much more the works of men's hands are not to be
adored and worshipped, in honor of those whom they represent? Titulo de
Imaginibus expurgantur omnia quae sub hoc titulo continentur, usque ad titulum.
2. Classis Ind. lib. prohib. page (mihi) 711.
This passage is yet extant in your late Bibliotheque of Fathers, under the
title of Images: but your Spanish Inquisitors have commanded all the things
which are contained under that Title to be blotted out, usque ad Titulum, to
the very title.

Papirius Massonus, the publisher of Agobardus works, delivered the argument
touching Images and Pictures in this manner; Detecting most manifestly the
errors of the Grecians (that is, the Fathers of the second Nicene Council)
touching Images and Pictures, he denies that they ought to be worshipped;
which opinion all we Catholics do allow, and follow the testimony of Gregory
the Great concerning them. This passage, together with more ample authorities
are already purged according to command, by the Divines of Cullen, in their
late corrupt Edition of the great Bibliotheque of the ancient Fathers: Bibl. P
P. Tom. 9. par. 1. edit. Colon. Anno 1618. p. 548. and p. 551.
but Gretzer your fellow Jesuit extremely wondreth that this judgment of the
Book of Agobardus should proceed from a Catholic; for Agobardus in that whole
Book does nothing else but endeavor to demonstrate, although with vain labor,
that Images are not to be worshipped: Usher p. 463.
and yet I say it is more to be wondered that your men should purge such Authors
of Antiquity contrary to your Trent Decree; and when by purging them they have
made our Faith and Doctrine invisible in them to the Reader, you call upon us
to show where our Church and Religion was visible before Luther.

Johannes Bertram, a Priest of the Monastery of Corbey in France, wrote a Book
of the Body and Blood of Christ: This Book is forbidden to be read by command
of your inquisitors, and condemned by the Council of Trent. But the Divines of
Doway, perceiving that the forbidding of this Book gave an occasion to many to
seek more earnestly after it, thought it better policy to allow it, and
accordingly they publish it with this Declaration, Ind. Expurg. Belg. p. 5.
edit. Antwer. Anno 1571.
Although we care not greatly whether this Book of Bertrams be extant or no;
yet seeing we bear with many errors in others of the old Catholic Writers,
and extenuate them, and by inventing some devise, oftentimes deny them, and
feign some commodious sense for them when they are objected in disputations or
conflicts with our Adversaries; we do not see why Bertram may not deserve the
same equity and diligent revisall, lest the Heretics cry out, that we burn
and forbid such antiquity as makes for them. This is a free and fair
confession of your men in our behalf, that the Fathers are but pretended for
your Doctrine, when as oftentimes they make against you; and indeed accordingly
you have framed a commodious sense for the better understanding of this Author:
as for Instance, where he says the substance of the Bread was to be seen
visibly, we must read it (say they) invisibly: and where he says, the
substance of the creature which was before consecration, remains after
consecration; by substance, say they, you must understand accidents: These
devises, howsoever at first they seemingly made some show of answer to the
vulgar people, yet they proved harsh and untunable to the ears of your learned
Proselytes, and thereupon your Romanists wisely by way of prevention at length
gave up this verdict; It were not amiss, nor unadvisedly done, Ind. Belg. p.
421 and Quiroga p. (mihi) 140. B.
that all these things should be left out. But it seems these small pills did
not sufficiently purge the Author; and thereupon, after more mature
deliberation, it was at last concluded, Totus liber penitus auferatur; Ind.
Belg. p. 17.
let the whole Book be suppressed. Now what answer do you think can be made
in justification of this proceeding? Your Jesuit Gretzerus briefly resolves
it: Dum prohibetur Bertramus, Gretz. de jure prohib. libr. l. 2. c. 10.
while Bertram is forbidden, I deny that a Father is forbidden; for the Father
is no natural Father, but a Stepfather, who nourishes not the Church with
wholesome food, but with darnell and pernicious grain together with the
Wheat: wherefore as the Popes have dealt with some writings in Origin and
Tertullian, by the same right may they now, according to their wisdom, abolish
any writing of others, either in whole or in part by cutting or blotting them
out. Thus first they dispensed with this ancient Author and our Doctrine; then
they correct him in some passages, by speaking flat contrary to his own
meaning; and when all would not serve the turn, they absolutely forbid him to
be read, or rather command him to be utterly blotted out, and totally
suppressed.

In the tenth Age (975.) Aelfricus Abbot of Malmesbury wrote an Homily touching
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, The tenth Age Ann. 900. to 1000. Aelfrichs
Sermon on Easter day.
which was thenread throughout all our Churches on Easter day, and consonant to
the Doctrine of our Articles. This Book is extant in the Saxon tongue in many
Libraries: but what is the reason he is not numbered amongst your Books
prohibited? Why surely you have foisted in a Parenthesis, which by a miracle
inferres your corporal presence, which makes some show for your Religion; and
yet because it is contrary to the whole scope of his Book, you confess that
Harpsfield in his History shows, That the Berengarian Heresy began somewhat
to be taught and maintained out of certain writings falsely attributed to
Aelfricke: and thus for one reason you will not prohibit him, or lay a deleatur
upon his works; but for the other reason there is a deletur upon him, and he is
a man clean out of your Books.

In the eleventh Age, The eleventh Age, An. 1000. to 1100. Ind. lib. prohib.
page 47 and p. 93.
Huldericus Bishop of Auspurg wrote an Epistle touching the single life of the
Clergy, wherein he taxes Pope Nicholas for restraining Priests from marriage,
and therefore is rejected by your Inquisitours; his words be these: Assuredly
you are not a little out of the way, Hulder. Episc. ep. de caelibatu Cleri.
when you do compel Clerks by force to keep themselves from marriage, which
you should admonish to forbear; for it is violence when any man is constrained
to keep a particular decree against the institution of the Gospel and the
Doctrine of the Holy Ghost; wherefore we counsel you, by the fidelity of our
subjection, that with all diligence you will remove such a scandal, and by
your discipline root out that Pharisaicall Doctrine from the flock of Christ.
And whereas it was objected, that Gregory the Great long before that time had
made a Decree for the restraint of Priests marriage, in his first Epistle to
Pope Nicholas, Ibid. p. (mihi) 482. Orthodoxagraphia Patrum, Tom. 1. p. (mihi)
481. Piusquam sex millia infantum capita viderit, p. (mihi) 1482.
he tells him, There be some which take Gregory for a maintainer of their
Sect, whose ignorance I lament; for they do not know this perilous Decree was
afterward purged by him, when as upon a day out of his ponds were drawn above
6000. childrens heads; which after he beheld, he utterly condemned his Decree,
and praised the counsel of Saint Paul, It is better to marry than to burn;
adding this also of his own, It is better marry than be an occasion of death.
Here you see our Doctrine was taught, touching the marriage of Priests; and
because it is a plain evidence for our Church, your Inquisitours have ranked
this Epistle amongst the Books prohibited.

Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury taught our Doctrine in the most substantial
point, touching faith and good works. The form of preparing men for their
death, was delivered to the sick man in this manner: Credis no^ propriis
meritis, sed passionis Domini nostri Jesu Christi virtute and merito, ad
gloriam pervenire? etc. Ind. lib. prohib. p. 696.
Do thou believe to come to glory, not by thine own merits, but by the
virtue and merit of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? Do thou believe
that our Lord Jesus Christ did dye for our salvation, and that none can be
saved by his own merits, or by any other means, but by the merits of his
Passion? then for a conclusion it follows (fol. 35.) No^ erit desperandum vel
dubitandum de salute illius, etc. Ordo baptizandicu^ modo visitandi. Imp.
Venet. Ind. Belg. p. 419. 1575. Ind. Madrid. p. 149. Ind. lib prohib. p. ut
supra.
We ought not to doubt or despair of the salvation of that man, who believes
with his heart, and confesses with his mouth the forenamed propositions. These
several passages are commanded by three several Indices to be blotted out:
Nay more, the Book which contains this Doctrine, you thrust it into the third
Classis, amongst those namelesse Authors, which deliver Doctrine (say you) in
some sort pernicious to the Catholic faith; as if the foundation of all
comfort in Christ were pernicious to the Christian faith: But let me tell you,
your Inquisitors have much forgot themselves; for they forbid that Book,
which, say they, was printed at Venice (1575.) when as by their own rules they
profess openly, that they never meant to condemn any namelesse Authors, but
such only as have been published since the year (1584.) nor any Author
whatsoever (by their Trent Decree) but from the year (1515.) Howsoever this
namelesse Author was both printed at See Bishop Ushers answer to the Jesuits
Challenge, cap. Of Merits, p. 513.
Venice, at Antwerp, at Coleine, at Paris, juxta ritum S. Romanae Ecclesiae
(for so be the words) according to the rites of the Roman Church. Cassan. in
Append. ad opusc. Jo. Roff. de fiducia and misericordia D^i.
Cassander tells us the Book was to be had in all Libraries, and particularly
was found inserted among the Epistles of Anselme, who was commonly accounted to
be the Author of it: and the like is confessed by Cardinal Hosius in
confessione Petri, cap. 73.
Hosius himself. But this was the time wherein the D^vill was let loose, and
wherein your Pope Hildebrand did not only Non solum fabulas comminiscitur,
annals corrumpit, res gestas invertit, sed etiam coelestia oracula adulterat.
Aven. Annal. l. 4. page 455.
invent Fables, corrupt Chronicles, and inverted things that were done, but did
also adulterate the Scriptures themselves; and therefore Cardinal Beno, who
wrote of the life of Hildebrand, and was living in that age, is Ind. lib.
prohib. p. 11. vide Illyric. de vita Hildebrand. p. 1322.
forbidden also to be read, because he touches to the quick your Caput fidei,
the head of your Church.

In the twelfth age Sigeberti liber contra Papam Gregorium, and contra Epist.
Paschalis Papae. Ind. lib. prohib. p. 85.
Sigebertus Monachus Gemblacensis wrote a Book against Pope Gregory, The
twelfth Age, An. 1100. to 1200.
and against the Epistle of Pope Paschalis; he lived and dyed a member of the
Roman Church, yet his Book is prohibited, because it complains of the state
of your declining Church; Sigebertus Ab. ep. p. 188. in lib. Goldasli Replio.
Hactenus interpretatur, ideo docuisse Petru^ per Babylonem siguare Romam, quia
tunc temporis Roma confusa erat Idololatria and omni spurtitie At nunc dolor
meus mihi interpretatur, quod Petrus prophetico spiritu dicens Ecclesiam in
Babylone collectam, praevidit confusionem dissentionis qua hodie scinditur
Ecclesia. Ibid.
For what greater confusion (says he) was there in times past in Babylon than
there is now in the Church? In Babylon there was a confusion of languages among
the Gentiles, in the Church of Rome the tongues are divided, and the minds of
the faithful. Saint Peter says, the Church which is Babylon salutes you;
hitherto he did interpret that Peter by Babylon did signify Rome, because
Rome at that time was confounded with Idolatry and all uncleanness: But my
grief does now interpret unto me, that Peter by a propheticke spirit, by the
Church at Babylon, foresaw the confusion of dissension, which does now rent the
Church of Rome.

If this testimony had made for our Church, (as it does against yours)
certainly you would never forbid the Record to be read nor to be blotted out;
but this shows that there was a revolt, a defection from the faith (after the
loosing of Satan) which were proper for your men to permit to be read and
seen in after ages, that the truth might appear in all and every age of the
alteration of the Church.

Arnol de villa. Novaopera nisi repurg^ntur. Ind. lib prohib. p. 5 and 36. and
37
Arnoldus Carnotensis (Abbas bonae vallis) his works are forbidden till they
be purged, and for no other reason, as I can conceive, but because he discovers
the errors of your Church. He tells us, that Cloister Monks are damned,
because they falsify the doctrine of Christ, and lead souls to Hell. He
tells us, that your Clergymen did most perfidiously mingle Philosophical
dreams with the sacred Scriptures. He tells us, that Masses did neither profit
the living, nor the dead; and for these and the like Protestations against the
abuses of his time, he is now condemned by your expurgatory Indices.

In the thirteenth Age, Anno 1215. Urspergensis in Anno 793.
Urspergensis Abbas is both corrupted and purged by the Inquisitours. The Synod
(says he) which not long before was assembled under Irene and Constantine his
son at Constantinople, called by them the seventh general Council, was
there in the Council of Franckford rejected by them all, as void and not to be
named the seventh, nor any Council at all. This Council was assembled at Nice
and not at Constantinople; but the word Constantinople is forged in stead of
Nice, that the honor of that Council for Images might not seem to be
impeached or condemned, when as the Synod at Constantinople banished Images.
Now what answer I pray is made in defense of this forgerie? August. Stench. de
Donat. Constant. l. 2. numero 60.
Behold your Augustine Stenchius, Keeper of the Popes Library, tells us that
we have forged those Books, and conveyed them into the Popes Library, where
they lie written in ancient hands. How probable this answer may seem, that we
should forge Authors in defense of your cause, and convey them into the
Vatican at Rome, I leave it to be judged; sure I am it stands corrupted in your
Copy, printed by command of your Inquisitours and Superiors.

Again, there be certain additions to the History of Urspergensis, which
treat of diverse memorable things, from the time of Frederick the second, Ind.
lib. prohib. p. 94.
unto the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth; that is, from the year 1230.
to the year 1537. all which are forbidden to be read; wherein are contained
the proceedings of the Council of Constance against Hierome of Prague, and
John Husse; where the decree is mentioned for the 19. Session of the Council
of Constance, viz. Sess. 19. decernitur, Haereticis non esse servandam fidem,
quam vocant Salvum conductum. Paralip. p. 378.
That faith is not to be kept with Heretics, which is wholly omitted and
purged in your printed Councels.

Honorius Bishop of Anthum in France, Anno 1220. Honorio Angustodunensi (falso
ut creditur) adscriptus liber de praedestinatione and libero arbitrio. Ind.
lib. prohib. p. 47.
wrote a Book of Predestination and Free Will, but so different from your
doctrine, that your Inquisitors forbid him to be read until he be purged.
What good soever the Elect do, it is God that works it in them, (as it is
written) God does work in us both the will and the deed, according to his good
pleasure; if therefore God do work in us, what reward is imputed to man? God
does work, and the Elect do work; God does work his Elect by his preventing
Grace to be willing, and by his subsequent Grace to be able, and both
cooperate by Free Will, by consenting with a good will, this good will is
rewarded in them, as it is written, We have received Grace for Grace; we have
received Grace when God prevented us to be willing, and followed us to make us
able.

Look into his forbidden Dialogues: Turn thee (says he) to the Citizens of
Babylon, consider the principal persons there, and thou shall find the Sea of
the Beast; for they neglect the service of God, pollute his Priesthood, seduce
his people, and reject all Scriptures which belong unto salvation. Vide Illyr.
p. 1426 in Dialog. d. Praedestin. and lib. arbitrio.
For these and the like discoveries of the corruptions in your Church, he is
forbidden, and under this pretense also, that the Book of Dialogues is falsely
ascribed to him.

In the fourteenth age flourished William Ocham a Friar Minorite and a learned
man, says Bellarmine; An. 1320. Bell. de script. Eccl. p. 269. de Gulielmo
Ocham.
but being too earnest a favourer of Ludovike the Emperor, by that means he
fell into some errors, and therefore deserved to have his name registered
amongst the Books prohibited. Now observe those errors; Ocham. Compend. Error.
Joh. 22.
He complained that many in his days perverted the holy Scriptures, denied the
sayings of the holy Fathers, and rejected the Canons of the Church, and civil
Constitutions of the Emperors; He professed, according to St. Hieromes and the
doctrine of Gregory the Great, that the Books of Judith, Idem. Dial. par. 3.
Tract. 1. l. 3. c. 16.
Tobit, the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus, and the Book of Wisdom, were not to
be received for confirmation of any matter of faith; He professed that the
Pope and Cardinals were no rule of faith; Idem Tract. 2. part. 2. c. 10. Dial.
part. 1. l. 5. c. 25. p. (Mihi) 494.
He professed that a General Council, although it be a part of the militant
universal Church, yet is not the universal Church: and consequently (says
he) It is rashness to say that a General Council cannot err against the
faith; Idem Dial. l. 3. prim. Tract. 3. part. c. 8.
He professes that it cannot be proved manifestly by Scripture, that Peter was
Bishop of Rome, or that he removed his seat from Antioch to Rome, or that the
Rishop of Rome succeeded St. Peter, Idem. Dial. part. 1. l. 2. c. 3. p. 413.
or that the Church of Rome has the Primacie, or that he governed the Church
of Rome, or any thing touching the Papacy thereof; He professes with us, Idem
Dial. l. 2. c. 1. part. 3. p. 788.
that though it be expedient there should be one Bishop over some part of the
Church and People of God; yet there is not the same reason there should be one
over the whole Christian world: And lastly, touching Pope John the 22. he
reports from the mouths of them that heard it, that in the year 1333. on
Monday being the third of January, Idem 2. part. proem. p. 740. Guliel. Ocham.
opus 90. dierum. Item Dialogi and script. omnia contra Johannem 22. Ind. l.
prohib, p. 4.
Pope John held a public Consistory, wherein by word of mouth, with great
earnestness he endeavored to prove that the souls of Saints being purged,
see not God face to face till after the day of judgment. These are the
supposed errors which caused his Dialogues and other of his works to be
prohibited.

In the fifteenth age, Anno 1420. Nicholai Clemangis opera quamdiu expurgata
non prodierint. Ind. lib. proh. p. 71. Clemangis de corrupto statu Ecclesiae.
Nicholas Clemangis Doctor of Paris, Archdeacon of Bayeux, so long as his works
remain unpurged (says your Index) are forbidden. Now observe the reasons why
he is put to silence. The truth is, he wrote a Book Of the Corrupt estate of
the Church; he declared that the Pope was the cause of all the calamities and
disorders of the Church; he shows that he was not contented with the fruits
and profits of the Bishopric of Rome and St. Peter's Patrimony, Idem. c. 4.
though very great and Royal; he laid his greedy hands on other men's flocks,
replenished with milk and wool: Cap. 5. and 7.
and usurped the right of bestowing Bishoprics and livings Ecclesiastical
throughout all Christendom: Cap. 5.
and disannulled the lawful elections of Pastors, by his reservations,
provisions and advowsons, Cap. 6. Cap. 7. Cap. 8.
and oppressed Churches with first fruits of one year, of two years, of three
years, yea sometimes of four years; with tithes, with exactions, with
procurations, with spoils of Prelates, and infinite other burdens, Cap. 9.
and ordained Collectors to seize upon these taxes and tributes throughout all
Provinces, with horrible abusing of suspensions, interdictments and
excommunications, if any man refused to pay them: Cap. 10. Cap. 11. Cap. 12.
and used such merchandise with suites in his Court, and rules of his Chancery,
that the house of God was a den of Thieves, Cap. 13.
and raised his Cardinals as accomplices of his pomp from Clergy men of low
estate, Cap. 14.
to be the Peers of Princes, and enriched them with his dispensations to have
and to hold Offices and Benefices, not two or three, or ten or twenty, but a
hundred or two hundred, yea sometimes four hundred or five hundred, or more,
and those not small or lean ones, but even the best and fattest: To be short,
in that he filled the Sanctuary of the Lord with dumb dogs, Cap. 19. and 20.
Cap. 7. and 14. Cap. 29. Cap. 42. Cap. 18. Cap. 3.4.5.9.
and evil beasts, even from the highest Prelates to the basest hedge-Priests,
through usurpations, exemptions, compositions, symony, prostitution and
fornication committed with Princes of the earth, and all to maintain the
pride, and lust, and riot of his wordly state, which he has lifted up above
Kings and Emperors. Lastly, he complains that the Study of Divinity is made a
mocking stock, and that which was most monstrous for the Popes themselves,
they preferred their own traditions before the Commandments of God. These be
the pretended errors (Mr. Floyd) which causes your Index expurgatorius to
spare no Author for his age; and yet you tell us, such corner-correcting you
leave for such corner-companions as shun the light, p. 144.

Aeneas Sylvius (who was afterward Pope Pius the second) is forbidden by your
Index: and the reason is given for it; Aeneas wrote in behalf of the Council
of Basil, when he was a young man ( says Bell. de script. Eccles. de Aenea
Sylvio. p. 289. An. 1450.
Bellarmine) but when he was an old man, and Pope, he retracted it, and so his
Books are deservedly forbidden. But what say you then to his Retractations?
are you pleased with them? No, Caute legenda opera Aeneae Sylvii; ipse enim in
Bulla Retractationis nonnulla quae scripserat, da^navit, etc. Ind. lib. prohib.
Class. 2. a. p. 3.
you must yet warily read the Works of Aeneas Sylvius, for in his Bull of
Retractations he has condemned something himself which he had written; and
therefore when a new Edition shall come out, let that Bull also be purged in
the beginning of his Works. It seems then, neither that which he wrote as a
private man in his younger days, nor that which he retracted as Pope in his
latter days, are well pleasing to your Church: Let us therefore compare the
difference of his Doctrine with the difference of his degrees, and then you
shall observe, whether according to the ancient saying, Honors have changed
manners. Aeneas Sylvius as a private man, protested that Ante Nicena^ Synodum
unusquisque sibi vixit, and parvus respectus ad Ecclesia^ Romanam habebatur.
Aene. Sylv. in Epist. 288.
before the Council of Nice each Bishop lived severally to himself, and
little regard was there then had to the Church of Rome: Pope Pius the second
(being the same man, but only that he was now become a Pope) does exhort and
Suadete omnibus, ut id solium prae caeteris venerentur, in quo salvator Dominus
suos vicarios collocavit, etc. Bulla Retract. Pii, 2. Tom. Council. 4. post
Council Floren. p. 739.
persuade all, that they would reverence the Sea of Rome, or that Throne of
Majesty above all. Aeneas Sylvius says, They think themselves well armed with
authority, that say, no Council may be kept without the consent of the Pope:
Ex hisce authoritatibus mirum in modum se putant armatos, qui Co^cilia n^gant
fieri posse sine consensu Papae: Quoru^ sententia, si ut ipst volunt inviolata
persistat, ruina^ secum Ecclesiae trahet. Quid enim remedli erit, si criminosus
Papa perturbet Ecclesiam, si animas perdat, si pervertat malo exemplo populos,
si denique contraria fidei praedicet, haereticisque dogmatibus inbuat subditos?
sinemusque cum ipso cuncta ruere? At ego dum veteres lego historias, dumastus
perspicio Apostolorum, hunc equidem morem non invenio, ut soli Papae Concilia
convocaverint, nec post; tempore Constantini magni, and alioru^ Augustoru^
adcongreganda Concilia quaesitus est magnopere Romani consensus Papae. Idem de
Council Basil. l. 1.
Whose judgment, if it should stand as they would have it, would draw with it
the decay and ruin of the Church. For what remedy were there then, if the Pope
himself were vicious, destroyed souls, overthrew the people with evil
example, taught Doctrine contrary to the faith, and filled his subjects full of
Heresies? should we suffer all to go to the Devil? Verily when I read the
old Stories, and consider the acts of the Apostles, I find no such order in
those days, that only the Pope should summon Councels: And afterward the time
of Constantine the Great, and of other Emperors, when Councels should be
called, there was no great account made of the Popes consent. On the contrary,
Pope Bulla Pii 2. Retractat. p. (mihi) 739.
Pius says, Order requires that inferiors should be governed by their
superiors, and all should appertain to one, as the Prince and Governor of
all things which are below him: As Geese follow one for a leader; and amongst
the Bees there is but one King; even so in the Church militant, as also in the
Church triumphant, there is one Governor and Judge of all, which is the Vicar
of Christ Jesus; from whence, as from a head, all power and authority is
derived into the subordinate members. Thus when he was young, and had read the
old Stories, and considered the acts of the Apostles, he found no such
Authority and respect given to the Pope: but when he was Pope, and old, it
seems he forgot the Apostles and ancient Writers; then he attributes all
power and reverence to the Pope of Rome. Briefly, Aeneas Sylvius says, De
Rom^nis Pontificibus liceret exempla admodum multa adferre, si tempus sineret,
quoniam aut haeretici, aut aliis imbuti vitiis sunt reperti. Idem de Council.
Basil. lib. 1.
Of the Popes of Rome we might show forth very many examples (if time would
permit) that they have been found either Heretics, or else defiled with other
vices. But Pope Pius says (speaking of these and the like assertions) Pudet
erroris, poenitet male fecisse, and male dictoru^, scriptorumque vehementer
poenitet, etc. Bull. Retract. ut supra.
I am ashamed of my error, I earnestly repent both of my words and deeds, and I
say, Lord remember not the faults and ignorance of my youth: And thus being
Pope (saving all advantages to his See) he has condemned him self and his
Writings, as published by him when he was a private man; and yet
notwithstanding, the Inquisitors profess he has retracted that, as Pope,
which afterward he condemned; and therefore by their doom he must have a
new purgation, and from thenceforth, Tum Pius Aeneas. But tell me I pray, was
he Pius Aeneas, when he complained that at Rome the Nam and ipsae manus
impositiones, and Spiritus sancti dona venduntur. Aene. Sylv. Ep. 66.
imposition of hands, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost were sold for money? Was
he Pius Aeneas when he complained that the Court of Quid est Romana curia his
qui summam tenent, nisi turpissimum pelagus ventis undique durissimis, and
re^pestatibus agitatu^. Idem. Ep. 188.
Rome, in the chief amongst them, was but a most filthy Sea tossed on every
side with winds and strong tempests? Was he Pius Aeneas when he protested with
grief, that Jacet spreta religio, justitiae nullus honos, fides pene
incognita. Ep. 398.
religion was despised, righteousness dishonored, faith in a manner unknown?
Or was he Pius Aeneas when he retracted, as Pope, that which he had written,
or when he condemned that which he had retracted? No surely, he was Pius in
nothing (in the opinion of your Church) but in his Bull of Retractations; and
he was Aeneas in nothing more than in condemning that which he retracted. And
accordingly he himself beggs of your Church, Bulla Retractat. Pii 2. Illud
Gentile nomen, parents indidere nascenti; hoc Christianum, in Apostolatu
suscepimus. Ibid.
Pium recipite, Aeneam rejicite, Receive you Pius, but reject Aeneas; and he
gives his reason for it; Aeneas is a heathenish Name, which our Parents gave us
at our Birth; but Pius is a Christian name, which we assumed in our Apostolic
calling.

You may add to this, Aeneas was a private man, and subject unto error, but
Pius was a Pope, and therefore in his determinations infallible; or rather you
may truly say with him, Nihil mentiti sumus, nihil ad gratiam, nihil ad odium
retulimus. Bulla Retractat.
that Aeneas before he was Pope, delivered the truth neither for fear nor
hatred, and yet he was forced to retract it: but Pius Cum doctrina^ non sanam,
and suspectam, and quae offensionem parere potest, contineant, etc. Class. 2.
in Ind. lib. prohibit.
when he was Pope, delivered false and suspected doctrine, and such as was
offensive to your Church, and for that cause is commanded to be purged.

Quid Pius Aeneas, in te committere tantum? What ill hap had good Aeneas, or
rather what ill fortune had Pope Pius, that he could neither satisfy your
Church, either as he was Aeneas, or as he was Pius? neither as a private
Doctor, nor as an infallible Pope? Rivet. Criticu^ Sacr. Specimen. c. 7. p. 49.
or rather I may say with your own Canus, What does it avail men who desire
to know the truth, to raze Records out of their Books, when they cannot blot
it out of their minds?

Petrus Crinitus was a Romish Priest, Anno 1450.
and is commanded to be purged; and if we shall examine the reason, we shall
find it for no other cause, but that he speaks the truth against your Pope,
and Popish Doctrine. To instance in particulars: Let both the Title and the
Chapter be razed (say your Inquisitors, touching Pope Boniface the 8.) Petr.
Crinit. l. 7. c. 13. de dom. Disciplina.
and the reason is pregnant: that Chapter shows the insosolencie and pride of
the Pope in particular, in matter of fact; and it further declares, that under
pretense of Religion, the Popes in general think they may do what they list.
Again, when he speaks of ancient Laws, Idem. l. 14. c. 5.
made in general for Marriage and propagation of Children, they command that
page to be stricken out; and there can be no other reason, but because on the
contrary it is a positive law of your Church to forbid Marriage. Lastly,
whereas he shows that Leo the Emperor made an Edict, Idem l. 9. c. 9.
that all Images in Churches and houses of the Christians should be razed; and
he declares in his opinion, that it does not appertain to Religion to adore
any man's Image; and that Valens and Theodosius made Proclamation to all
Christians, that they would suffer no man to fashion, to grave, or paint the
Image of our Savior, either in colors, or in stone, or in any other kind of
metal or matter; and that wheresoever any such Image should be found, they
commanded it to be taken down: Index Belgic. p. 421. Index Madrid. p. 150.
Ind. lib. prohibit. p. 79. and 718. Bulla Pii 4. Art. 9. Art. 22.
These and the like passages, your Inquisitors in three several Indices
command to be razed out; and what cause can you pretend, but that it makes
against a special Article of your faith, viz. that Images should be set up in
Churches, and worshipped? and by this means you strike likewise at the
Articles of our Church, and when you have made such Doctrines and Evidences
invisible, by razing the records, then you bid us show where the Church was
visible before Luther.

Now what credit shall the Reader give unto you and to your Trent Council,
that would assure us that your Church intended the purging of no Authors, but
from the year 1515. when as it appears plainly that you have spared neither
the writings of the Apostles nor the Fathers, in razing and falsifying their
own very words and sentences? And as touching other Authors in the latter
ages, you have gone beyond your Commission, hundreds of years, in falsifying,
corrupting, forbidding, and purging them; and this was long before your
prefixed year of 1515.

In the sixteenth age Luther began his Heresy (says Bellarmine) Anno 1517.
Anno 1517. Bell. Chronol. p. 3. page 117.
and your Church, to make some show that your Index Expurgatorius had a
relation only to Luther and his followers, took her rise from the year 1515.
(which was but two years before his coming) as if all the members of your
Church before his coming had lived in the unity of one faith and doctrine.
This deceivablenesse of your unrighteousness, I have in part discovered. Now I
come to your Authors of this last age (for I will cite none but your own
Authors) and therein lies another mystery not inferior to the first; and
that is this: your Index Expurgatorius was first proclaimed generally against
all Heretics (meaning the Protestants) but when it comes to examination, it
points especially at the particular members of your own Church; and that which
is most remarkable, after that your Trent Council had distinguished with
Anathema's her Roman faith from the faith of Protestants, after she had
forbidden and condemned by her Index diverse of your own Authors, as savouring
of suspected, and false, and scandalous doctrine; nay more, after she had
declared all to be Heretics, and their Doctrine Heretical, who would dare to
teach or publish any contrary belief to that which was once established by a
General Council; yet I say, the members of your own Church, and those not of
the meanest rank, both Bishops and Cardinals, have delivered in print many
points of Doctrine agreeable to the Articles of our Church; and yet you say
they never left the Church, they are not personally to be noted nor ranked
amongst Heretics; when for the very same Tenets we are accused, accursed,
forbidden, and utterly condemned as Heretics and Reprobates: and thus the
head of your Church being divided from the members, in points of saving faith,
may say unto the tongue, I have no need of thee, and consequently may cut it
out. Howsoever, this use we may safely make of your Index, that if in after
ages by new Impressions the true doctrine of Protestants shall be razed and
utterly abolished in your Roman Authors, yet your very Index will appear as a
strong Evidence, to show that such doctrines were taught in former Ages: and
howsoever the faction in the Papacy formerly prevailed, yet it is more than
evident by the Testimonies and Records of your own men, that we had not two
Churches before Luther, but that we had always Testes Veritatis, witnesses of
Gods truth and our own Religion in all Ages, in the bosom of the Roman Church.

I proceed to particulars in this last age. Anno 1500.


Cardinal Cajetan is purged in several and maine points of doctrine, being
different from your own Church: Touching the ground of Transubstantiation, he
denies that the words of Scripture (This is my body) are availeable to prove it
of themselves, and thereupon your Jesuit Suarez complains, Ex Catholicis,
etc. Ex Catholicis solus Cajetanus, in Commentario hujus Articuli, qui jussu
Pii 5. in Romana editione expunctus est, docuit, seclusa Ecclesiae
authoritateverba illa (Hoc est corpus meum) ad veritatem hanc confirma^dam
nonsufficere Suarez. Tom 3. Disp. 46. Sect. 3. quaest. 75. Art. 1. p. 515.
Impress. Mog. An. 1509.
Amongst the Catholics, Cajetan only teaches that the words, This is my
Body, be not sufficient, without the authority of the Church, to confirm the
truth of it: And therefore by the command of Pope Pius the 5. this passage is
blotted out in the Roman Edition. Touching justification by faith (only)
whereas he says, Absque exceptione aliqua co^ditionis, sexus, qualiatis, etc.
dicitur omni credenti, sola fides exigitur ad salutem. Cajet. Ep. Pauli etc.
Parisus 1571. fol. 4. Ind. lib. prohibit p. 876.
without any exception of person, of any Sex, or quality, or condition, It is
said of every Believer, faith alone is required to salvation: your Index
commands those latter words to be blotted out. Lastly, in speaking of the
Cross and the like, he says; These are altogether unlawful, and not to be
embraced, because they are part of an ill worship: you cause these words to be
stricken out, and in lieu of them, you subjoyne these words following (which
are flat contrary:) Idem. p. 805.
These are altogether lawful, and are to be embraced, because they are part of
the divine worship: and the better to color these miserable shifts and
falsifications, you give this Caveat to the Reader: Idem ibid. p. 805.
Be wary if you find any such Doctrine, for it is to be feared the Heretics
have suggested it.

Alphonsus a Castro wrote a large Book against Heresies, Anno 1500.
and in particular he charged Luther with many. Yet in his first Book and
fourth Chapter he attributes the same title of Heretic to the Pope, and
shows the Pope as Pope is subject to Heresy; but behold the record stands
published against Luther, but is wholly razed touching the Pope. Quod autem
alii dicunt eum quierraverit in fide obstinate jam non esse Papam, ac per hoc
affirmant Papam non posse esse haereticum, and in reseria verbis velle jocari.
Ad hunc enim modum quis posset citra impudentiam asserere, nullum fidelem posse
in fide errare? nam cum haereticus fuerit, jam desinit esse fidelis. Non enim
dubitamus an haereticum esse and Papam esse coire in unum possint; sed id
quaerimus, an hominem qui alias in fide errare potuisset, dignitas Pontificalis
efficiat a fide indeviabilem. Non enim credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem Papae
assentatorem, ut ei tribuere hoc velit, ut nec errare, aut in interpretatione
sacrarum literarum hallucinari possit. Nam cum constet plures eorum adeo
illiteratos esse, ut Grammaticam penitus ignorent, qui fit ut sacras literas
interpretari possent? Alph. a Cast. advers. haer. l. 1. c. 4. p. (mihi) 6. b.
Coloniae excudebat Melchior Nouesianus, Anno 1543.
The words in my Edition are these; Whereas some say that he which erreth
wilfully in the faith, is now no longer Pope, and thereupon concludes the Pope
cannot be an Heretic, they seem in a sad matter to dally with words: For
(says he) we make no doubt whether the Pope and an Heretic may agree in one
person; but this is our question, whether a man that otherwise might have erred
in the Faith, by virtue of the Papal dignity, be made such as he cannot err.
For I do not believe that there is any so impudent a flatterer of the Pope,
that will give him this pre-eminence, to say, that he can neither be deceived
nor miss in the expounding of the Scriptures; for seeing it is well known
that many Popes be so utterly void of learning, that they know not the
Principles of their Grammar, how may it be that they should be able to expound
the Scriptures? These words I have cited at large out of my Edition 1543. for
if you look into Alphonsus, printed within these last threescore years, I
believe you will find them razed in this particular without an Index
Expurgatorius; which plainly shows that as the Pope was and may be an
Heretic, so likewise falsifying of Records is a proper mark of Heretics.

Johannes Ferus a Friar Minorite, An. 1500. Usher p. 162.
and prime Preacher at Mentz in Germany, is purged and falsified in many points
of controversy which he held with us. Touching the power of Priesthood in
remitting of sins, it was the doctrine of Ferus: Non quod homo proprie
remittat peccatum, sed quod ostendat ac certificet a Deo remissum. Neque enim
aliud est absolutio quam ab homine accipit quam, si dicat, En fili, certifico
te tibiremissa esse peccata, annuncio tibi te habere propitium Deum, and
quaecunque Christus in Baptismo and Evangelio nobis promisir, tibi nunc per me
annunciat and promittir. Fer. Comment. in Matthew. l. 2. c. 9. Mogunt. An 1559.
Lugdun. apud Johannem a S. Paulo. An. 1609. Contr.
Man did not properly remit sin, but did declare and certify that it was
remitted by God: so that the absolution received from man is nothing else, than
if he should say, Behold my son, I certify thee that thy sins are
forgiven thee, I pronounce unto thee that thou have God favorable unto thee,
and whatsoever Christ in Baptism, and in his Gospel has promised unto us,
he does now declare and promise unto thee by me. Of this thou shall have me to
be a witness; go in peace and in quiet of conscience. This declarative power
of remitting sins was Ferus doctrine; this is ours. But behold the case is
altered; for in Ferus printed at Lions 1609. all those words are razed out, and
on the contrary says, that Sacerdos enim Dei minister vere remittit peccata,
ac certificat a Deo remissa. fol. (mihi) 160. b. In Matthew. l. 2. c. 9.
the Priest does truly remit sins, and, as the Minister of God, does also
certify that they are remitted of God.

Touching our justification by faith only: the true Ferus says, Nempe quod
sola fide in Christum, and nullis meritis nostris, justificamur. In Ep. Pauli
ad Romans c. 16. In verba illa deleatur. Ind. lib. prohibit. p. (mihi) 629. and
Ind. Madrid. fol. 133 and Ind. Belg. p. (mihi) 393.
That we are justified by faith alone in Christ, and by none of our merits;
That our own works, whatsoever they be, are not of that value that they
should merit a reward of condignitie or congruitie, but so far forth as God
in his mercy does accept them. These and the like passages are commanded to be
blotted out.

And whereas he says, Sic vere nullum hominum genus est quod minime movetur
verbo Dei, quam hi qui in sua justitia confidunt. Idem. in Joh. c. 1.
There is no kind of men that are less moved with the word of God, than those
which trust in their own righteousness; your men, as being guilty of their
trust in their merits of works, command this and the like passages to be
stricken out.

Your Index of prohibited Books, published by the Opera tamdiu prohibentur
qua^diu expurgatio no^ prodierit. Ind. l. prohibit. p. 56.
Cardinal of Sandonall and Roxas, tells us, that the works of Ferus are
forbidden to be read till such time as they shall be purged; and sure I am when
they are purged they are none of his. For I appeal to you and your fellow
Jesuits (Mr. Floyd) whether these passages following be his or yours; I mean,
either the Protestant doctrine, which he published before Luthers days, or the
Popish tenets which are since altered by the Inquisitors, and taught by the
Trent Fathers.

In the third of St. Matthew, the true Ferus says, Quod si aliquando mercedem
audis pollioeri, scias non ob aliud esse debitam quam ex promissione divina.
Ferus in Math. 3.
If at any time thou hear of a reward promised, know that it is not due for
any thing else, but for the divine promise sake. Your Inquisitors command it to
be altered thus; Quod si aliquando mercedem audis polliceri, scias non sine
promissione esse debitam Ind. Madrid. fol. (mihi) 125.
If thou hear of a reward promised, know that it is not due without the
promise. The one says, it is not due for any respect, but for the divine
promise, ex promissione divina; the other says, it is not due without the
promise: when the true Ferus adds Gratis promisit, gratis reddidit, He
promised freely, and he has given freely; you command these words to be
stricken out. And whereas Ferus commenting upon the words of Christ, Ind. Belg.
p. (mihi) 372. Ind. lib. prohib. p. 627. Qui hanc fidem nescit, ad Ecclesia^
non pertinet, etiamsi videtur primus esse in Ecclesia. Idem in Mat. l. 3. c.
16. p. (mihi) 25. Ind. Madrid. p. 125. Ind. Belg. p. 370.
Tues Petrus, etc. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church,
she wing that this Rock was meant of Christ by the confession of Peter's faith;
And (says he) whosoever is ignorant of this Faith, belongs not to the Church,
although he seem to be the chief in the Church. These words are otherwise
read in your general Indices, and are commanded to be stricken out. And upon
the words, Si quis natus fuerit, etc. he says, In Joh. c. 3. p. (mihi) 69.
Ind. lib. proh. p. 625.
The Preachers of Gods Word ought first to teach faith by which a man is
justified, and afterward good works; there the words (by which a man is
justified) are commanded to be stricken out.

Now as you have purged many places, so likewise you have forged and falsified
others by addition or retraction: Look upon his Commentary on the first
Epistle of Saint John, and you shall behold strange additions, and the true
Protestant Doctrine wrested to flat Poperty; as for instance, Scriptura sacra
data est nobis seu certa quaedam regula Christianae doctrinae. Idem in 1 Ep.
Joh. c. 2. edit. Antwerp. An. 1556.
The holy Scriptures (says the true Ferus) are given us as a certain sure
rule of Christian Doctrine. In Ferus printed at Rome, he is taught to say, The
holy Scriptures ( and Romana edit. An. 1577.
traditions) are given us as a certain sure rule of Christian Doctrine. The
true Ferus says, Justus lic et in Christo manet, tamen sine peccato nec esse
potest; septies enim in die etiam justus cadit. Idem in cap. 3.
Though the just man remains in Christ, yet he is not, neither can be without
sin; for even the just do fall seven times a day: your Roman Ferus adds,
Sine peccato originali.
not without venial sins. The true Ferus says, Fi^e^ and charitate^
conjungit Apostolus, ita tamen ut fidem praeponat. Ibid.
The Apostle conjoyneth faith and charity, yet so as he prefers faith: your
Roman Ferus adds, he prefers faith Additur, ordine, non perfectione.
in order, not in perfection. The true Ferus says, Charitas timoremexpellit,
quia fidem qua Christum, vita^, propitiationem and salvatorem nostrum
apprehendimus, probat and confirmat, certamque reddit. Ib. c. 4. Aliter.
Charity drives out fear, because it tries, confirms, and makes assured our
faith, whereby we apprehend Christ, our life, propitiation and salvation: your
Roman Ferus says, Charitas timorem expellit, quia peccata remittit, and
Spirit us sa^ctus eam consolatur testimonium perhibens quod filii Dei sumus.
Ibid.
Charity drives out fear, because it forgiveth our sins, and the Holy Ghost
does comfort it, giving testimony that we are Gods children. The true Ferus
says, Ibid. cap. 5.
There be some, who after faith do earnestly urge good works, but because
they teach not withal, to what end they are to be directed, and how much is to
be ascribed unto them, they give cause that almost all the common people do
trust in their own works, and so they build upon the sand: the Roman Ferus
says, There were some, who after faith, and with faith, did earnestly urge
good works; but because they cast away their necessity, and others ascribed
too much to them, they all did build upon the sand. Lastly, in the true Ferus,
sometimes by changing of a word, or by taking away of a word, you pervert the
sense and meaning of the Author: As for instance: whereas the true Ferus says,
Saint John condemned all glorying in our works (omnem gloriam;) your Roman
Edition has turned omnem into inanem, and says, Saint John condemned (inanem
gloriam) vain glory, Ridiculum est quod quidam bic volunt, Cephas idem esse
quod caput. Idem. in Joh. c 1. p. mihi (43)
etc. And whereas the true Ferus says, It is ridiculous that some will have
Cephas for the head: your Roman Ferus has left out the word (ridiculum est)
and says, That some will have Cephas taken for the head, which is most
ridiculous.

Claudius Espencaeus Bishop of Paris, lived and dyed a member of the Roman
Church; yet is purged, because he speaks not Placentia, suitable to your Trent
Doctrine. In his Commentary on the Epistle to Titus, in his first digression,
he is commanded to be purged (per quinque paginas) five leaves together; in
which he complains of the abuses and corruptions grown into the Roman Church
and See; he shows that their greediness of gain, and love of money caused
them to dispense with all kinds of wickedness; as namely, with unlawful and
forbidden marriages, with Priests keeping of Concubines, with incests, murders,
rapes, witchcraft, killing of Fathers, of Mothers, of Brothers, and things not
to be named; and under the name and title of the Taxes of the Apostolic
Chamber (for so they term them) in which Book (says he) being publicly and
daily printed, Taxae Camerae Apostolicae.
you may learn more wickedness than in all the sums and catalogues of
vices. Then he shows that the Council of Trent was a third time assembled by
the command of Pius the fourth; Adeo tamen Romanam curia^ repurgare non
permisit.
yet by no means would he permit that the Court of Rome should be reformed.
And thus in several pages, Ind. Madrid. f. 60. and Belg. p. 74. Delean tur
illa verba in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1. p. 74 p. 76, 77, 78. and 82, 83, 84.
where he complains of the like abuses in the Sea and Court of Rome, the
Inquisitors command to be blotted out.

Lastly, he proves out of Gregory the Great, and Saint Bernard, Ibid. p. 526.
In Tit. c. 3.
That every soul is subject to the higher power; that is, the Priesthood to
the secular power, the Bishops and Archbishops to Emperors and Kings: and in
conclusion, when it is questioned (says he) touching the reformation of the
Clergy, and orders of Monks, for sending the Shepherds to their own folds,
and compelling them to feed their own flocks, they say it is a thing that
belongs to a Synod, Res est synodica and pontificia Ibid. p. (mihi) 526.
and the Bishop of Rome: But was there any Reformation at the Council of
Trent? Did the Pope and Council cause them to be more diligent in their
calling? etc. This and much more to the like purpose they command to be blotted
out.

Polydore Virgil, a member of your Church, is purged in many points of Doctrine
which make against you. Possev. Appar. p. (mihi) 294. Tom. 2.
Possevine tells us, that his Book De inventionibus rerum is permitted to be
read, if it be such as Pope Gregory the thirteenth commanded to be purged at
Rome (1576.) Now if any man list to compare that and Polydore printed at Paris
1528. Parisiis ex Officina Roberti Stephani, Anno 1528.
he shall find that the true Doctrine of Polydore is not allowed, which
protests against many points of Popery; Polyd. de Invent. Rerum l. 2. c. 23.
in initio p. (mihi) 41.
but by the Inquisitors command he is enforced contrary to himself to speak
the Trent language. As for instance; whereas the true Polydore says, When God
is every where present, certainly there is nothing more foolish than to
counterfeit his image: in your later Editions you have added these words, In
the beginning after the first creation there was nothing more foolish; as if it
were wisdom to represent God the Father in these days, which in the beginning
of the world was foolishness.

In his fifth Book and fourth Chapter, Ibid. l. 5. c. 4. p. 84. usque adp. 87.
your Inquisitors command seven whole pages to be stricken out; and the reason
is pregnant: The marriage of Priests, which is prohibited by a positive Law of
your Church, is proved to be lawful, yea and in some case commanded by the
Apostles Doctrine, and justified by the examples of Saint Paul, of Peter, of
Philip, and other Apostles, that had wives; and he adds, that according to
Saint Paul's Doctrine, the Bishops and Deacons, and consequently all orders of
Priesthood, had them; and this custom (says he) continued long in the
Church: Porro, dum sacerdotes generabant legitimos filios, Ecclesia faelici
prole virum vigebat; tum sanctissimi erant Po^tifices, Episcopi innocentissimi,
Presbyteri Diaconique inregerrimi castissimique. Ib. p. 86, 87. Ibid. c. 9.
and withal concludes; Furthermore, whilst the Priests did beget lawful
sons, the Church flourished with a happy offspring of men; then your Popes
were most holy, your Bishops most innocent, your Priests and Deacons most
honest and chaste. Then he proves from Pope Pius the second, that as Marriage
upon good cause was taken from the Priests, so it ought to be restored upon
better. This and much more concerning the marriage of Priests, is commanded to
be stricken out.

In his ninth Chapter, he says, Worship thou one true and eternal God; but
worship thou no Image of any living creature, Ind. Belg. p. 175
deleatur (say your Inquisitors) let it be stricken out.

In his sixth Book, Idem l. 6. c. 13.
and beginning of his thirteenth Chapter, he testifies from St. Hierome, That
almost all the holy ancient Fathers did condemn the worship of Images, for
fear of Idolatry. He proves from the Law of Moses, that nothing made with
hands should be worshipped; and from the Prophet David, Confounded be all they
that worship graven Images. He shows further, that Gregory the Great, albeit
he reprehended Serenus Bishop of Marsilia for breaking down of Images, yet
he commends him for forbidding the worshipping of them. These and the like
passages are commanded to be stricken out, per octodecem lineas, Ind. Belg p.
177. Ind. lib. expurg. p. (mihi) 725.
for eighteen lines together.

Ludovicus Vives a Priest of your second Classis is purged, and namely by the
Divines of Lovan, Plantins print at Antwerpe, 1576.
in their Edition of St. Austins works at Antwerp, Anno 1576.

In his Epistle to King Henry the 8th, where he says, that Princes are supreme
Governors on earth next under God, this is commanded to be blotted out: And
where he says, The Saints are worshipped and esteemed by many, as were the
Gods among the Gentiles; this passage without a command, in the aforesaid
Edition is razed out.

Again, in his Comment on the 8th. Book of the City of God, he tells us how
your Romish Priests upon good Friday do celebrate Christ's passion upon the
stage. There Judas (says he) plays the most ridiculous Mimick, Lud. Viv. in
August. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 27.
even then when he betrays Christ; there the Apostles run away, and the
Soldiers follow, and all resounds with laughter; then comes Peter and cuts off
Malchus ear, and then all rings with applause, as if the betraying of Christ
were now revenged; and by and by this great Fisher Peter for fear of a Girl,
denies his Master, all the people laughing at her question, and hissing at his
denial; and in all these revels and ridiculous stirs, Christ only is serious
and severe; but seeking to move passion and sorrow in the audience, he is so
far from that, that he is cold even in the divinest matters, to the great
guilt, shame, and sin both of the Priests that present it, and the people
that behold it. These words and blasphemous actions, Ind. l. expurgat. p (mihi)
41.
as being ashamed of them, you do well to command them to be blotted out; but
yet they are reprinted, and your men are not a shamed to continue the practice
of it in your own Religion.

And lastly, where he says, That those who prefer the Latin Translation
before the Greek and Hebrew fountains, Idem in Aug. l. 15. c. 13. p. 83.
are men of evil minds and corrupt judgments; that passage is left out in
the Antwerpe print. And whereas he says, that the story of Susanna, Idem. l.
18. c. 31
of Bell and the Dragon, are Apocryphal Scriptures, and not received of the
Jews, nor translated by the Septuagint: Ind. l. expurg p. (mihi) 41.
all those words are commanded to be stricken out.

Jacobus Faber Stapulensis, a member of the Roman Church, taught the Protestant
doctrine in many points, and therefore he is purged by your several Indices.

Whereas the Rhemists translate the Greek word (...), Penance, he defined it
Repentance, Jac. Fab. in Evang. Matthew. c. 3. fol. (mihi) 13. b. Ibid. c. 5.
fol. 24. in initio.
and makes a distinction betwixt Repentance and Penance, such as the
Protestants do; and therefore it is commanded to be stricken out.

Again, speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees, who did attribute
righteousness to themselves and their own works; Ibid. c. 6. f. 30. a. Ind.
Madr. fol. 112.
The faithful (says he) which are of the Law of grace, do work most
diligently, but do attribute nothing to themselves, or their own works; but
all of them do impute their righteousness to the grace of God; All consists
with the one in the merit of works, with the other in grace: the one respect
themselves and their works, and are delighted therein; the other regard not
themselves, but the grace of God; they admire his goodness, and therein is
their chief delight. Again, if any man shall do good in this world, he must
not do it because it is his will, but because God commands it; For he which
is perfect has not a will peculiar to himself, but his will must be the will
of God; and this is the third Petition of the Lords Prayer.

In the sixteenth Chapter of St. Matthew, upon the words, Thou art Peter, etc.
he shows, that according to St. Paul's doctrine, Ibid. fol. c. 16. (mihi) 74. b.
the Rock was Christ; He shows that Peter was so far from being a firm
rock, that Christ himself did intimate the contrary, when he said, Get thee
behind me Satan, for thou savourest not the things of God, but of men: He
shows us further, that our Lord Christ promised to Peter the Keys of binding
and loosing, but withal testifies, that those Keys were not Peter's, but
Christ's, whereby Peter does not bind or loose by his power, but by the will of
Christ. He adds moreover, that not only Peter received those Keys, but also
all the rest of the Apostles: But (says he) there be some which understand by
the Keys of binding and loosing, the Popes power, as Christ spoke of that
faith, witnessing that he was the Son of the living God, which is one of the
Keys of the heavenly Doctrine, upon which the Church is founded, and Peter's
faith, as upon the true Rock Christ, was builded. Deleatur ab illis verbis, Ne
quis putet Petrum, etc. usque ad, Aeterni Patris infusio. Ind. Madr. fol.
(mihi) 113. and Ind. Belg. p. 51.
This and much more to the same purpose, for thirty lines together, is
commanded to be stricken out.

In his 20. Chapter he says, Verum qui operibus suis aliquo modo fidunt, minus
Deo fidunt, minusque amant Deum: qui autem nullo modo, sed pacto, sed
promissioni imo omnia Deo tribuunt plus Deo fidunt, cujus ineffabili bonitate
qui novissimi suerunt operando, factisunt primi gratiam recipiendo; and qui
primi operando, novissimi gratiam recipie^do: Quare bonum, etc. deleatur usque
ad Dei autem omnia. Ind. ut supra.
Those which any ways trust in their works, have the least affiance in God,
and love him the less; but those which give all to his promise, and to God
himself, they trust most in God; by whose ineffable bounty, those which are
last in working, are made first by receiving grace; and those that are first in
working, are become last in receiving: Whatsoever therefore a man does, it is
good for him to trust wholly to God his goodness, for it is the will of God,
and of his special grace, that we are saved, and not of our will or works:
These words, and much more to the same purpose in the same chapter, are
commanded to be blotted out.

Touching his Commentaries upon Saint John, your Inquisitors have pronounced
this definitive sentence, Ind. Madr. fol. (mihi) 115.
Because they cannot be handsomely purged, let them all be spunged and blotted
out.

Touching his Commentaries upon Timothy, In Tim. c. 3. fol. (mihi) 205.
he shows, that it was lawful for Priests to marry a Virgin till the time of
Gregory the seventh, (which was nine hundred years after Christ:) he shows
likewise that the Grecians kept the Apostolical Tradition in marrying of
Wives, and could not change them, and that other Churches which vowed single
life, by their incontinencie fell into the snares of the Devil: And lastly, in
his Commentary upon the Galathians, at large he proves, Per solam fidem Christi
infunditur justificatio. In Gal. c. 2. fol. 154.
That by the Faith of Christ alone we are justified, and that he which Idem c.
3. fol. 156. Qui autem confidit in operibus, in seipso confidit, and baculo
innititur arundineo, qui frangitur in seipso, and supernum lumen non videt,
unde descendit Justificatio.
trusts in his works, trusts in himself, and leanes upon a staff of Reed,
which is broken in it self; whereby he does not discern the heavenly light,
from whence our justification does descend: These and many other like passages
in several places of his Works, which are consonant to our Protestant
Doctrine, are commanded by the Ind. Madr. f. (mihi) 118, 119.
Inquisitors to be stricken out.

Friderici Furii Cenolani Valentini Bononia; sive, De libris sacris in
vernaculam linguam convertendis.
Fridericus Furius writes a whole Book of translating the Bible into the vulgar
tongue, for the benefit of the Lay people; he dedicates his Book to Cardinal
Bovadillius, and he tells him that we esteem it an excellent thing to read
the works of Greek and Latin Philosophers; and therefore much more ought we
to search and know the will of God out of his sacred Scriptures: for the one is
a matter of pleasure, and the other is a matter of necessity; the not knowing
of the one may hurt little or nothing at all, but to be ignorant of the other
brings a grievous mischief, besides eternal destruction of the soul. Again,
what is it (says he) to forbid the Scriptures to be read in the vulgar
tongue, than to forbid God his own purpose, and as it were to command God,
which does declare himself to all by his Word, that he should not be
manifested unto us? This is the whole scope of the Author, and for this cause,
lest the reading of the Scripture in a known tongue should discover
Antichristian Doctrine by frequent reading, Ind. lib. proh. p. (mihi) 36.
the Book it self is forbidden, till it be purged in this and the like places
witnessing against your Roman Doctrine.

Johannes Langus is numbered amongst your Heretics in the first Classis, page
51. Yet his Annotations upon Permittuntur vero ejusdem in D Justinum
annotatio^es, ite^ in Nicephorum scholia, si expurgentur. Ind. l. proh. p. mihi
51.
Justin Martyr, and his Commentaries upon Nicephorus, are allowed if they be
purged. Now let the Reader observe for what cause you would have him purged:
First touching his Annotations upon Justin Martyr; Multa continet parum
Catholicae Religioni consona, inter ea autem illud est praecipuum, quod
transubstantiationem non agnoscit, sed operte contendat, cum corpore and
sanguine Christi remanere veram panis and vini substa^tia^.
They contain many things disagreeing to the Catholic Religion; but among
those, that is chief, that he does not acknowledge Transubstantiation, but
does openly maintain, that the true substance of bread and wine does remain
with the body and blood of Christ. Again, Perverse admodum interpretatur illud
Malachiae, In omni loco offertur sacrificium nomini meo, de doxologia,
benedictione, laudibus, and hymnis. Sic Ind. ut upra.
He does very maliciously interpret that place of Malachy, In every place a
sacrifice shall be offered to my name, that is (says he) in giving of glory,
blessing, laud, and praise to the Name of God.

Gerardi Lorichii Adamarii collectio triu^ libroru^, etc. de missa
publicaproroganda. Ind. l. proh. p. 11.
Gerardus Lorichius is prohibited till he be purged for the reproving and
condemning your private Mass, and Communion in one kind; his words be these,
There be false Catholics, that are not ashamed by all means to hinder the
Reformation of the Church; they, to the intent that the other kind of the D^
Missa pub. Racemationum, lib. 2. Canonis pars 7. p. (mihi) 177.
Sacrament may not be restored to the Lay people, spare no kind of blasphemy.
Excusum an. 1536.
For they say, Christ said only to his Apostles, Drink ye all of this; but
the words of the Canon of the Mass, are, Take and eat you all of this: Here I
beseech them let them tell me, whether they will have this word (All) to
pertain only to the Apostles? Then must the Lay people abstain from the
other kind, of the bread also; which thing to say is an Heresy, and a
pestilent and detestable blasphemy.

Ambrosius Catharinus Archbishop of Compsa wrote against Cajetan; and (says
Bellar. de Ec. Scrip. p (mihi) 312.
Bellarmine) he wrote likewise against Luther: e Opuscula vero similiter
prohibentur, nisi corrigantur, Ind. l. prohib. p. 4.
Yet something he wrote is disallowed of the Church, as namely, touching the
words of consecration: other things are commonly refuted by the Doctors of the
Church, viz. the certainety of Grace, of Predestination, etc. therefore his
Works are warily to be read. Thus you have Cajetan against Luther, and
Catherinus against Cajetan, and Luther and both against the Tenets of their own
Church; insomuch as the Inquisitors have commanded a deleatur upon Cajetan and
Catharinus in the second Classis, and against Commentaria in Lucam, nisifuerint
ex repurga^^ and impress^^ ab an. 1581. vel nisi antea edita, expurgentur. Ind.
l. prohib. p 26. and p. 318. Ind-Belg. p. 317. Ind. Hisp. p. 63.
Luthers whole Works in the first Classis.

Didacus Stella is prohibited to be printed before he be purged. The places
which are purged are such wherein he teaches Protestant Doctrine, as may be
seen in See Appendix to the Romish Fisher caught in his own net.
Mr. Crashaw, and Dr. James, and D. F. Observations.

Andreas Masius in his Commentary upon Josuah is purged for this Protestant
doctrine; Ad solam vitae been actae imitationem, non etiam ad religiosum
cultum, quem adorationem vocant Theologi, Divoru^ monumen ta conservare fas
est. In Comment. Jos. hist. c. ult. Ind. l. expurg. p. 31.
We ought to preserve the Monuments of Saints only for the imitation of their
godly life, not for Religious worship, which Divines call Adoration. Again,
he says, Idem in Jos. c. 22.
The Church sets before our eyes the figure of Christ's Cross, (not that we
should worship it;) which latter words are commanded to be razed out.

Lastly, Cardinal Bellarmine, who was the first and best that ever handled all
controversies indifference betwixt us, Ind. Belg. p. 269.
was in danger of a prohibition, or rather of an absolute suppression of all
his works. Your own Barclay witnesses of him, Barclay of the authority of
the Pope. c. 13. p. 66. Engl.
That there is not one of the Popes party, who has either gathered more
diligently, or propounded more sharply, or concluded more briefly or subtly,
than the worthy Divine Bellarmine; who although he gave as much to the Popes
authority in temporalties, as honestly he might, and more than he ought, yet
could he not satisfy the ambition of the most imperious man Sixtus the 5th.
(who affirmed that he had supreme power over Kings and Prince of the whole
Earth, and all People, Countries, and Nations committed unto him, not by
humane, but by divine Ordinance:) and therefore he was very near by his
Pontificiall censure (to the great hurt of the Church) to have abolished all
the writings of that Doctor (which do oppugn Heresies with great success at
this day) as the Fathers of that order ( whereof Bellarmine was then) did
seriously report unto me. How probable this may seem, his work of
Recognitions does witness to the world; wherein he was enforced to recant that
doctrine, which he had both sincerely taught and published according to the
truth. As for instance; whereas he professed that the Pope was subject to the
Emperor in temporal affairs; on the contrary he recants it, saying, Bell.
Recognit. de summo Pont. p. 16.
I allow not that which I said ( with Albertus Pighius) that Paul appealed to
Caesar to be his lawful Judge. Again, whereas it was said the Popes used to
be chosen by Emperors, the word Emperor (potest, and forte debet deleri) Idem
de Cler. p. (mihi) 52.
it must, and peradventure ought to be blotted out. And when I said that Paul
was subject to Caesar, as to his temporal Lord, I meant it was so De facto,
non de jure. Ib. p. 17. Sapendo M. Paolo chasotto Sisto Quinto usci un Indice
de libri prohibiti, il quale se ben subito si occulto, non fu pero cio cosi
presto fatto che non ne restassero gli essemplari. Et in questo erano compresse
le opere del Bellarmino. In lib. Confirmatione del considerationi del M. Paulo
di Venetia, di M. Fulgentio Brestiano servita. In Venetia appresso Ruber. to
Mejetti 1606. Con licentia de superiori. in 4to.
in fact, but not of right.

And in truth it seems, that neither the Pope, nor his Inquisitors were well
pleased with this Catholic doctrine: For Friar Paul of Venice acknowledged
Cardinal Ballarmine and Baronius for learned men; and further says, that he
has known the one and the other in Rome; but he could wish withal, that they
had written that which they sincerely thought, without being forced to recant
any thing that they had spoken. For Friar Paul knew well that under Sixtus
Quintus there came out an Index of prohibited Books, which though it were
suddenly stayed and called in, yet it was not so closely acted, but that there
remained Copies of it; and in that Index the works of Bellarmine were
comprehended. If this learned Cardinals Book had been forbidden, you and your
fellows would have been to seek of an answer for many objections made
against you; for it is usual with you to refer me for an answer to
Bellarmine. But as it is observed, they recanted many things in their writings:
Dum plurima Annalibus digerendis pervolutanda fuere, agnovit ingenue quae
primis editionibus autma^ca, aut non omnino ad plenam veritatem abs se fuera^t
scripta, id quod in Annalibus non semel testatus est.
For Baronius confesses, that in his first Editions many things were
imperfect, and not altogether true, which were corrected in the other
impressions. And I am persuaded, ere long we shall have an Index Defe^sio
Joha^nis Marsilii in favorem respo^si 8. propositiones continentis, adversus
quod scripsit illustrissimus Cardinalis Bellarminus. Venetiis. 1606.
Expurgatorius lay hold on him; For (says Johannes Marsilius) I have heard
that as he has taken a liberty to mend the Fathers, Canons, and Historians, so
he will correct the Councels after his manner, and for his own purpose, and so
assume unto himself a license hereunto; which God forbid. Again (says he)
Marsil. p. 357. See B. Mortons encounter against M. Parsons reckoning, l. 1. c.
1. p. 10, 11
the Answers of Cardinal Baronius are not unlike the answers of Cardinal
Bellarmine, who whilst he cannot find an objected argument to be assoiled by
History, he says, that those words have been inserted into the Books: much
like to Mr. Floyd, when there is no answer to be made to some particular
objections out of the Authors, you reject them all as condemned by your
Inquisitors: And this answer I am sure may serve for all objections that can
be made from most Classical Authors.

The last thing which I here mean to speak of, is a certain distinction of
explicit and implicit faith, which the Knight and his Ministers cry out
against, and are pleased sometimes to make themselves merry withal, as if they
would laugh out; but it is too well and solidly grounded to be blown away
with the breath of any such ministerial Knight, as he is. Thus you.

You professed formerly to teach me for my learning; now it seems you would
instruct me for my manners: you tell me I make my self merry with your
doctrine, as if I would laugh out: truly I am sorry to think you teach such
ridiculous doctrine, as should deservedly cause laughter. Shall I make you my
Confessor? I cannot choose but smile when I consider what great pains you have
taken in this whole Chapter, to uphold the Articles of your Faith with six
pretended rules, and all infallible, as namely, Scripture in the plain and
literal sense; Tradition or common belief and practice of the whole Church;
Councels either general or particular, confirmed by the Sea Apostolic; the
authority of that whole See it self defining Ex Cathedra, though without
either general or particular Council; the common and uniforme consent of
ancient Fathers or modern Doctors and Schoolmen, delivering any thing unto
us as matter of Faith: All these six rules (say you) we acknowledge, and are
ready to make good whatsoever is taught any of these ways.

When I say you assume confidently, that all these are infallible rules to
lead men to the knowledge of your Faith, and at last you conclude, and as it
were shut up all those rules of knowledge, with the doctrine of an implicit
faith. This I confess is such a mystery of foolishness, as deserves rather
laughter than an answer. For, as Cato said, He marvelled that a Soothsayer did
not laugh when he saw a Soothsayer: So I am verily persuaded that your selves
do smile when you meet each other, to think how you cosen the poor ignorant
people with a blind obedience, and an implicit Faith. To let pass your Golden
Legends and leaden miracles, (which occasion sufficient mirth in long winter
nights for all sorts of people) what I pray is that implicit Faith, that you
condemn me and our Ministers for laughing at? Mistake us not, I know no
Protestant does laugh at an implicit Faith, which is directed to the proper
object, the holy Scripture; we laugh not at an implicit Faith, which cannot be
well unfolded or comprehended by reason, as namely, the unsearchable mystery
of the Trinity, of Christ's conception by the holy Ghost, and the like; but we
disclaim and condemn your Catholic Colliers Faith, which is canonized for
your Popish Creed; that is, to pin our Faith upon the Churches sleeve, and to
assent to every thing the Church propounds to be believed, without
examination whether it be agreeable to the Scripture, or besides it. We laugh,
or rather we pity that Merchant of Placentia, who chose rather to be a
Papist than a Protestant, Laurent. Discept. Theolog. p. 5.
because (says he) I can briefly learn the Roman faith; For if I say what the
Pope says, and deny what the Pope denies, and if he speak and I hearken unto
him, this is alone sufficient for me. And we cannot choose but smile at the
judgment pronounced by your Gregory de Valentia, upon this poor ignorant
Merchant; God (says he) will have nothing to lay to this man's charge at the
dreadful day of Judgment: His meaning, it may be is, God can charge him with
nothing, because this man knew nothing.

This doctrine of Obedience does well agree with Cardinal Bellarmines
exposition upon that place of Job, Bell. de Justif. l. 1. c. 7.
The Oxen did plow and labor, and the Asses fed by them. By the Oxen (says
he) are meant the learned Doctors of the Church, by the Asses are meant the
ignorant people, which out of simple belief rest satisfied with the
understanding of their Superiors. And accordingly your Cardinal Casanus
persuades his Proselytes to rely upon the Church, without further inquiry of
the truth; Cusan. exercit. l. 2. and l. 6.
For (says he) Obedience without reason is a full and perfect obedience, that
is, when thou obeyest, without enquiring of reason, as a horse is obedient to
his Master. He that shall make a question in your Church, whether the Pope can
err, must resign up his understanding with this belief, Bellar. de Pont. l.
4. c. 5.
If the Pope should so far forth err, as to command vices, and forbid
virtues, the Church were bound to believe that vices are good, and virtues are
evil, unless she will sin against her own conscience.

This is Bellarmines lesson, and that must be your Faith. Nay more, Cardinal
Tollet will assure you, that if one believe his Bishop, Toll. de Instruct.
sacerd. l. 4. c. 3.
although it be contrary to the faith, yet in believing that falsehood, he
shall perform an act meritorious.

I understand you are a Jesuit, and therefore I do not much wonder, that you
so much insist upon the justification of an implicit faith; for you had it
from your founder, and are enjoined to make it good by your own Order. There
is a little Pamphlet entitled Regulae Societatis Jesu, which your selves have
caused to be printed at Lions, in which Ignatius Loyala, the Spanish Soldier,
and Patron of your Sect, Anticotton, or a refutation of Cottons letter to the
Queen Regent, p. 24. printed at Lions by Jaques Roussin. Anno. 1607.
has laid down these rules to your Society: Entertain the command of your
Superior in the same sort, as if it were the voice of Christ. Again, Hold
this undoubtedly, that all which a Superior commands, is no other than the
commandment of God himself; and as in believing those things which the
Catholic faith proposes, you are presently carried with all the strength of
your consent; so for the performance of all those things which your Superior
commands, you must be carried with a certain blind impetuosity of will,
desirous to obey without further inquiring why or wherefore. And lest that such
command might seem sometimes unjust and absurd, he commands your Jesuits so to
captivate their understanding, that they sift not the commands of their
Superiors; but that they may follow the example of Abraham, who prepared even
to sacrifice his son at the commandment of God: and of Abbot John, who
watered a dry log of wood a whole year together, to none other purpose, but
to exercise his obedience; and another time put himself to thrusting down of
a great Rock, which many men together were not able to move, not that he held
them things either usual or possible, but only that he would not disobey the
command of his Superior.

This is that blind obedience and implicit faith which we laugh at, and this
is the ridiculous Doctrine which your Rhemists teach. He says enough, Rbem.
Annot. in Luc. 12.11.
and defends himself sufficiently, who answers he is a Catholic man, and
that his Church can give a reason of all the things which they demand of him.
But we have not so learned Christ; we are ready always, according to the
Apostles instruction, 1 Pet. 3.15.
to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the hope that is in
us. And for the better fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, we testify
with Moses, Secret things belong to the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the things revealed belong to us and our children, that we may do all the
words of the Law. We say therefore particular knowledge is to be joined with
the assent of faith; for no man can assent to that which he never heard, and
therefore I think no man of understanding, with a blind obedience and
implicit faith, will resign up his eie-sight, and look through such
spectacles as you have tempered for them. For without doubt it was the constant
and uniforme Doctrine of the ancient Church, that howsoever faith apprehends
mysteries not to be inquired into, yet the proposition and doctrine of all the
Articles of Faith were distinctly taught and conceived by all: and thereupon
Theodoret, who was then living, gives us to understand, that in his days You
might see every where the points of our Faith to be held and known, (...)
etc. Theod. Graec. Sermon. 5.
not only to them who are Masters in the Church and Teachers of the people,
but even of Cobblers, Smiths, and Weavers, and all kind of Artificers, of all
sorts of women; and all these you may find (says he) discoursing of the
Trinity, and the creation of all things.

CHAP. II. The sum of his Answer to my first Section.
THe Church of Rome, not without cause, bitter against the Reformed Churches,
because they are Heretics: Theodoret is impertinently alleged: Bellarmine is
falsified: The Catholic Church cannot be depraved because of her promises. And
this (setting aside your reproaches and impertinencies) is the substance of your
second Chapter, in answer to my first Section. The Reply. First you say in your
Title, The Church of Rome not bitter against Heretics.

It is true, the Church of Rome is not bitter against Heretics (as you
understand them for Protestants) for they are no Heretics: but if the terms
of Luthers whelps, Hell Hounds of Zwinglius, damned persons, and worse than
Infidels; if such terms (I say) be Catholic complements (which your fellow
Jesuits have given us) I shall freely confess your Charity is mistaken.

But (say you) the word Heretic, which is the worst of all, has ever gone
with such as have held new particular doctrines, 1 John 2.
and such St. John calls Antichrists.

Surely you have my assent and wishes with you, that is, that the name of
Heretic may always go as it has gone, with such as teach new and
Antichristian doctrine. But let me tell you, this description of yours is a
perfect Character of the Roman Church; and I verily believe that if all the
pictures and patterns of a Papist were lost in the world, they might all
again be recovered, and a Papist painted to the life in the description of
such an Heretic as you here define.

Look upon the particular doctrines of private Mass, your half Communion,
your Prayer in an unknown Tongue, and tell me if these be not new: why else
do you and your associates confess that the contrary Tenets were taught and
revived by the Ancients? And as touching the name of Antichrist, if that be
appropriate to Heretics, it cannot touch the members of our Church; for we
make Christ and his Apostles the sole rule of our Faith. On the other side, if
you consider the Pope, either as he sits in the place of Christ, as his Vicar
General, (...) is ag^^^^ Christ, and in the place of Christ as his Vicar.
or as he and his adherents teach and uphold a doctrine against Christ (for the
word Antichrist imports both) without doubt they bear the marks of
Antichrist, and consequently the word (Heretic) reflects upon your selves.

Cassander tells us, there be some who make the Pope of Rome Almost a God,
Cassand. de officio Pii viri.
preferring his authority not only above the whole Church, but above the
sacred Scriptures, holding his judgment equal to the divine Oracles, and for
an infallible rule of Faith. I see no reason (says he) but that these men
should be called Pseudo-Catholikes or Papists. Indeed I must confess I much
wonder, that any Protestant should give you that honorable title of Catholic,
especially when you term them by the name of Heretics.

Those that have the mark of the Beast imprinted in their foreheads, have
borrowed both the Name and Nature from him; and therefore your Cardinal tells
us, Bell. de Not. Eccles. c. 4.
The word Papist is derived from the Pope, such as was Peter. And more
particularly your Gregory Martin and the Rhemists give you to understand, Rhem.
Annot. in Acts. 11.26.
that to be a Papist, is to be a Christian man, a child of the Church, and
subject to Christ's Vicar. You that are so inquisitive after other men's
pedigrees, see if with all your Heraldrie you can make good your nominal
descent from Christ, and, as you style him, Pope Peter.

Your Father Bristow, Bristow. Demand. 8.
as a known Antiquarie in this point, gives your Father Bellarmine the lie;
for he avowes it for certain, that your name (Papist) was never heard of till
the days of Pope Leo the Tenth, and this was 1500. years after Christ; and
this opinion I am sure is most probable, and more suitable to the Noveltie of
your Religion.

But (say you) we Catholics style the Knight and the Reformers, by the common
name of Heretics.

You told me formerly the title of (Sir) would be left for me: now you have
added to the title the name of Heretic, and you profess it is the worst word
of all. It seems the worst word you have is good enough for me: But I pardon
you, and I must let you know that the name of Catholic is as comely with the
Professors of your new doctrine, as a golden ring in a swines snout. And as
touching the name of Heretic wherewith you charge me, you rightly resemble
Athalia, 4 Kings 11.
who when she understood that Joas the right inheritour of the Crown of
Judah, was proclaimed King, ran in her fury to the Temple, and cried out,
Treason, Treason, when the treason was not in King Joas, but in herself that
wrought it. Your Alphonsus a Castro has written a Book against the Heretics
in all ages; and in his Index haereticorum, I have searched diligently, and I
find the names of certain Popes among them, but mine own name I do not
find: For I profess with St. Austin, Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo, I
may err, but I will not be an Heretic. Shall I make my confession unto you?
I believe all things which are contained in the Scriptures, and nothing
contrary or besides them as matter of faith necessary to salvation: Cum hoc
credimus, priuscred^mus, nihil amplius credendum esse. Tertul. Ibid.
I believe the holy Catholic Church. This is an Article of my Faith, and this
I first received from the Apostles Creed. Next, I undoubtedly believe the
Nicene Creed; and this was called Catholic by those holy Fathers, to
distinguish the Heretics from the Orthodoxe Christians in the Primitive
Church; or, according to your own words, Chap. 1. p. 2.
appointed to be publicly professed by all such as meant to be counted
Catholics; Council. Trid. Sess. 3.
and for the same cause your Council of Trent decreed it to be received (as a
Shield against Heresies) and therefore by your own confession, the Councels
decree, and your Creed it self, I am free from the name of Heretic. Lastly, I
profess and believe Athanasius Creed, and that Holy and ancient Father
witnesses of that confession, Haec est fides Catholica, This is the Catholic
Faith.

If therefore I believe the Scriptures, and Catholic Church, which teaches
the true Faith; If I believe the Articles of the Nicene Creed, which
distinguishes the right Believers from the Heretics; If I receive Athanasius
Creed, which contains the sum and substance of all Catholic Faith and
doctrine, what remains then why I should not be exempted from the name of
Heretic, unless I shall acknowledge with you the fourth Creed published by
Pope Pius the fourth, and consequently subscribe to new particular doctrines,
which (as you confess) does ever accompany the nature of Heresy?

But the Reformers are Heretics.
He that shall hear but the word (Reformers) in all probability will conceive
that they were men which opposed some errors or heresies crept into the Church,
and for that cause desired a Reformation. In the Churches of Corinth, Galatia,
Pergamus and Thyatira there were some of the Sadduces opinion, who denied the
Resurrection, others that joined Circumcision and the works of the Law with
Christ, and the work of salvation. The Apostles you know did reprove those
errors in their days, and no doubt many accordingly did reform themselves:
Now will you condemn those reformed persons for Heretics, because they
differed from the rest with an utter dislike of those errors which the seduced
party retained? Surely this is the true state and condition of our Church; and
accordingly your Trent Fathers made a decree for Reformation in the Council,
and pretended that it was summoned to redress Heresies which were crept into
the Church; and will you say, if they had redressed them, the Reformers had
been Heretics?

The Rogatian Heretics would have made the world believe that they were the
only Catholics; and the Arrian Heretics called the true Christians,
sometimes Ambrosians, sometimes Athanasians, sometimes Homo^sians. And in this
manner St. Paul himself was called before the Judges to make answer to matter
of Heresy, and according to this way which you call Heresy, Acts 24.
so worship we the God of our Fathers, believing all things which are written
in the Law and the Prophets.

They that so rashly pronounce and call every thing Heresy, are often stricken
with their own dart, Alph. de Here Is. l. 1. c. 7.
(says your own Alphonsus) and fall into the same pit which themselves have
dug for others: He shows therefore by way of conclusion what he would
have called Heresy. Ibid.
This would I rather call Heresy (says he) to account men's writings among the
Scriptures of God; and so do they that think it a wicked matter to dissent
from the writings of man, no less than it were the judgments of God. Now that
your men are guilty of such Heresies in the highest degree, appears by his
own confession; Ibid. l. 1. c. 2. p. 14.
for he complains of Gratian, who did insert the Popes decretall Epistles
amongst the holy Scriptures, as if they were of equal authority with them:
and he speaks as an ear witness of others, who in their public Sermons
have declared, that whosoever shall dissent from the opinion of St. Thomas, is
to be censured for an Heretic. O fortes verbi Dei Praecones! O powerful
Preachers of the word of God (says he;) or rather I may truly say of St.
Thomas doctrine, l. 1. c. 7.
for by this means it will come to pass, that blessed Bonaventure must be
censured of heresy, Ibid. p. (mihi) 31.
for he crosses St. Thomas; and blessed Anselme must be suspected of Heresy,
because contrary to Thomas opinion, he thinks him not a lover of our blessed
Virgin who refuses to celebrate the Feast of her Conception.

As this Author wrote a tract against Heretics, so likewise he professes that
the head of the Roman Church, as well as the members are subject to that
capital accusation whereof you accuse the Reformers, and particularly he does
instance from Platina in Pope Liberius for an Arrian Heretic, and Pope
Anastasius for a favourer of the Nestorian Heretics, and withal he resolves
the question (which without all question is so to be resolved) that the Pope
(which you make one of the infallible Rules of your Faith) may become an
Heretic.

You shall do well therefore to forbear your name [Catholicke] till you can
free your Pope and his adherents from the marks of Heretics. In the mean
time I might more justly retort your own words, cum faenore, into your own
bosom, and say, We Reformed Catholics, not only style, but prove J. R. and
the Romanists to be rightly styled by the common name of Heretics.

I proceed to the rest of your accusations; Theodoret (say you) is wholly
impertinent. Bellarmine his meaning is abused, and his words corrupted. First
touching Theodoret: his proof (notwithstanding your exception) stands good;
for if the agreement of both parties in the Nicene Council, in his judgment,
ought to have allayed the heat of contention in the Church of Antioch, I might
well conclude much more, that the three Creeds, and the first four General
Councels (wherein both sides agree) ought to have abated the edge of your
sharp and bitter Invectives against our Church. And as for abusing of
Bellarmine, I assure you it was far from my thoughts; and you cannot be
ignorant that the inference, according to true meaning, stands thus. If
Protestants believe and hold all things necessary for all Christians, then are
they not to be accounted damned persons, and worse than Infidels: But they
believe the Apostles Creed, they teach the ten Commandments, and administer
some few Sacraments, which in your Cardinals opinion are those things which are
simply necessary for all to know and believe; and to this argument you answer
nothing, but you quarrel about words. When I translate [nonnulla] a few
Sacraments, you say I falsify Bellarmine, for the word (few) is not there; and
yet you know well, that by nonnulla he does not mean omnia, Nonnulla is a
diminutive term signifying not none, that is, some, be they never so fevv.
and therefore those which he means are but few. The word utilia is in the
same place of Bellarmine; and as for other words added or left out, they alter
not the sense, nor are we bound precisely to the words, but to the sense, in
translating a passage out of any Author.

But (say you) what man ever took Babylon for a true Church?

If by Babylon you understand literally the ancient City of Chaldea, or that
famous City in Egypt, once called by the name of Memphis, and now of Cair, you
know well that it is not my meaning so to take it; (for you confess that I
otherwise express my self:) but that a particular Church (as namely your
Church of Rome, which was sometimes a sound, that is, a right-beleeving Church)
may afterward fall into Heresy, and become spiritual and mystical Babylon,
this is not only my assertion, but your Romanists and fellow Jesuits in the
Church of Rome.

Ribera your fellow Jesuit of Salamanca in Spain, tells us by way of
prevention; If Rome shall commit the same things hereafter which she committed
in the time of John, she shall be called Babylon again; as it was in the case
of Jerusalem, which of a faithful City once, became afterward a Harlot. And
according to the Prophecy of St. John, he protests in this manner; We know
this truth so perspicuously by the words of the Revelation, Ut ne stultissimus
quidem negare possit, that the veriest fool cannot deny the same. Then he
concludes, Riberae Comment. in Apoc. 14. v. 8. in c. 14. number. 31. n. 32.
Since Babylon shall be the shop of all Idolatry, and of all impieties,
therefore it cannot be doubted, but that this shall be the condition of Rome
hereafter.

I will come nearer to you: Your Monk Sigebert about 500. years ago
interpreting the words of St. Peter ( The Church at Babylon salutes you)
delivers this doctrine: Sigeb. Ep. p. (mihi) 188. in. l. Goldasti Replic.
Hitherto Peter by Babylon did signify Rome, because Rome at that time was
confounded with Idolatry and all uncleanness; but my grief does now
interpret unto me, that Peter by a Propheticke spirit, by the Church of
Babylon, foresaw the confusion of dissension with which the Church of Rome at
this day is rent in pieces.

Honorius Bishop of Anthun in France, speaking of the fall of the Church of
Rome, not long after the same time, cries out to the members of his Church,
Honor. Angust. in Dial. de Praedest. and l. arbit.
Turn to the Citizens of Babylon, and see what they are; behold the buildings
of that damned City, consider the principal persons there, and thou shall
find the Sea of the Beast. Thus you see the first Babylonian tells what he
feared would come to pass in the Church of Rome hereafter; but these two later
proclaimed openly that Rome was become Babylon many hundred years since, and
for their loud cries their tongues are now cut out by the command of your
Inquisitors.

How undeservedly were these men punished and forbidden to speak the truth,
let the Reader judge; but that which is observable, you raze the Records which
testify for us; you forbid them to speak, if it make against your Church, and
then you demand of us, What man ever took Babylon for Rome?

I will give you one witness more, who is ancient and beyond exception, who
spoke (as it were prophetically) of the Church of Rome in her most flourishing
state. St. Hierome writing to Marcella, a noble Lady, exhorts her to depart
from Rome, which he compares to Babylon. Hier. ad Marcel. Ep. 17. To^. 1. p.
(mihi) 156.
Read (says he) the Revelation of St. John, and consider that which is there
said of the woman clothed in purple, of the blasphemy written in her forehead,
of the seven Mountains, of the great waters, of the fall of Babylon: Go out
from thence my people, Babylon is fallen, and is become the habitation of
Devils, and the hold and cage of every foul spirit.

Now that we might understand this was not spoken by him of heathen Rome, he
adjoyneth these words following: Est quidem ibi sancta Ecclesia: There is a
true or holy Church, there are the Trophies of the Saints and Martyrs, there is
the true confession of Christ published by the Apostle. Ludovicus Vives your
very friend, in commenting upon this place, tells us, that St. Hierome thinks
there is no other Babylon described by St. John in the Revelation than the City
of Rome; But now (says he) it has put off the name of Babylon, Lud. Vives in
August. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 22.
there is no confusion now; you cannot buy any thing now in matter of Religion,
without a fair pretense of holy Law for selling it, yet may you buy or sell
almost any kind of cause holy or hellish for money. In D. August. Annot.
Ludov. Vives prohibentur nisi corrigantur. Ind. l. prohibit. Class. 2.
For this and the like passages, your Vives is forbidden till he be purged.

I must confess I do not think that the Rhemists would have interpreted
Babylon for Rome, if it had not been to prove Peter's being at Rome: It is
happy therefore for you that Peter wrote his Epistle from Babylon, for
otherwise your succession from Peter had been questioned; and it is as well
for us that you are contented to allow Babylon for Rome, for by this means
your Antichristian Doctrine is discovered, and your succession of Peter's faith
is quite abolished.

But (say you) if you mean as you express your self, that a true Church may
be depraved, I know not what to say, but to stop my ears against that mouth
of blasphemy: And is it blasphemy to say, a true Church may be depraved? Sure
I am it is not blasphemy against the holy Ghost; for the mouth of St. Paul
has spoken it in parricular to the Roman Church, even at that time when she
was a most incorrupt Church; Toward thee goodness, Romans 11.22.
if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off: And
may not a Church (think you) be depraved, that is in possibility of being cut
off? What think you of the Church of Jerusalem? Psalm. 48.19.
Did not the Prophet David term it the City of God? and was it not afterward
termed a Harlot by the Prophet Esaias? What say you to the Temple of Solomon? was
it not termed by him, 1 Kings. 8.20.
the house of Prayer? and in Christ's time was not that house of Prayer become a
den of Thieves? Mat. 21.14.
He that says Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, does plainly
intimate, that the true Church may be depraved, and that before his coming
there was a true Church. In his answer to Card. Peron. p. 9. Eng.
What Babylon is (says learned Casaubon) thus much the matter it self does
plainly show, that whether some private Church be understood in that place by
the name of Babylon, or the greater part of the whole, it was before this a
true Church, with which the religious might religiously communicate; but after
it was more depraved, the religious are commanded to go out, and to break off
communion with her. And as touching the authority you cite, that he would be
with them to the worlds end, that the Church is built upon a Rock, that the
gates of Hell should not prevail against it; these promises (I say) concern
no more the particular Roman Church, than the seven Churches of Asia that are
fallen away. The blasphemy then you lay to my charge (if any such be) is but
against your Roman Church, and of such blasphemy many of your best learned are
guilty, in acknowledging a depravation of their faith, (notwithstanding all the
promises of Christ to the Catholic and universal Church.)

Your Bishop of Bitonto by way of prevention cries aloud in your Council of
Trent, Cornel. in Council. Trident.
Would to God they were not wholly with general consent gone from religion to
superstition, from faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist. I could
bring you a world of complaints against the falling away and depravation of
your Roman Faith, but that your ears will not endure such blasphemy.
Howsoever, since your best learned have acknowledged Babylon to be meant by
Rome, and that Rome is fallen from her first faith, Jerem. 51.6.9.
I say with the Prophet Jeremie, Fly out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver
every man his soul; we would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed;
forsake her, and let us go every one into his own Country, for her judgment
reaches unto Heaven, and is lifted up even unto the skies.

CHAP. III. The sum of his Answer to my second and third Sections.
IN the second Section he says I labor to prove the contention betwixt the
Churches to proceed originally from them. The third Section is to prove the
corruption both in faith and manners: Both which are easily answered; First by
asking, what is this to the purpose for the visible Church? Secondly, with the
contradiction of a former lie, he tells a new one; for the Reformation was
sought for manners only, and not for doctrine. This is the substance of your
third Chapter, in answer to my second and third Sections. The Reply. You have
answered two Sections almost in two words; the first, in denying it to be to
the purpose; the latter, in giving me the lie: And thus like another Caesar you
have briefly expressed the expedition of your victory in few words, Veni, vidi,
vici.
I came, I saw, I overcame.

First, you demand, what is this to the purpose of a visible Church? But I
rather wonder to what purpose you make such a demand; For my Book is entitled
The Safe Way, not the visibility of the Church. Yet let me tell you, the
Authors which I cite are for the most part members of your Church, and their
authorities tend much to the proof of a visible Church, if your Index
Expurgatorius did not sponge them, and cause their testimonies to be often
invisible. For instance; in our behalf I cite Cassander: To Cassander you
answer, he is like your self, an Heretic, or next door to them: and yet
elsewhere you say, with much ado he may pass for a Catholic. Page 21.
Oportet esse memorem.
I cite Cecenas General of the order of Franciscans, as witnessing the
visibilitie of our Church above 300. years ago; you answer, he was condemned
for disobedience and rebellion; for he said Pope John the 22. was an Apostata
and an Heretic, and therefore not true Pope: And in this manner you can
easily resolve all doubts, and reject all Authors that speak not Placentia,
according to your palate; only (say you) Saint Bede is a Catholic. Now if you
please, take a review of these Authors. Cassander (you know) was a learned man,
he was highly favored for his wisdom by two Emperors, Maximilian and
Ferdinand; he was moderate in all his writings, he sought to extenuate the
palpable errors and heresies of your Church, he indevoured to accord, and (if
it had been possible) to reconcile the differences on both sides; and lastly,
he lived and died in the communion of the Roman Church. Cecenas was a Friar,
and General of the Order of Franciscans, he was condemned de facto by the
Pope; but it does not appear quo jure, by what right, for if the accusation
were true, the Pope deserved the punishment, and not the innocent Friar: listen
therefore to the rebellion and disobedience for which he was accused. Cecenas
shows in particular that Pope John was a schismaticke and an heretic, in his
peremptory opposition against the Word of God and the Catholic Church; Mich.
de Cecena tractat. contra errores Papae p. (mihi) 1314. and 1336 in Tom. 2.
Gul. Occham. de Jurisdictione Imperiali. Naucler. Gener. 45. Anno 1324.
he charged him with twelve several errors, which you may read at large in
the place cited; and for those and the like accusations he was excommunicated
and deposed by the Pope. I confess the accusation was capital, but it was no
other than was justly laid to his charge. For Nauclerus says, Many great and
famous Divines of great learning and good life proclaimed Pope John (by the
name of Pope) to be an Heretic for certain errors; Tepide.
which errors notwithstanding it is said that he (coldly) revoked at the time
of his death; and he adds withal, that Pope Benedict his immediate successor
openly condemned the same errors. You see then it was not the Franciscan Friar
only, but many Divines both good and learned did condemn him of Heresy; and
not they alone, but the Pope himself who succeeded him, publicly condemned
him for an Heretic. And thus much touching Pope John the 21. called by some
the 22. There was another Pope John, by the name of 22. otherwise called 23.
who was living one hundred years after; he was chosen Pope at Plat. in Joh. 24.
Bononia, by the consent of all the Cardinals. Against this John, it was
specially objected at the Council of Constance, Quinimo dixit, and pertinaciter
credidit, animam hominis cum corpore humano mori, and extingui ad instar
animalium brutorum. Council. Constant.
That he obstinately held that the soul of man dies together with the body,
and is consumed to nothing, as the soul of brute beasts: Neither did he hold
this Tenet as a private man (which is your general Answer) for Antoninus says
plainly, Pope John held this error in the time of his Popedom, Johannes
sermone^ faciens in publico consistorio, dixit quaedam haeresin sapientia.
Anton. part. 3. tit. 21. c. 6.
and pronounced words savouring of heresy openly in the Consistory. Neither
was this accusation of these men accounted rebellion and disobedience in them,
as it was in Ceaenas; for (says Gerson) Falsitas doctrinae Papae Joba^nis
vicessimi, quae da^nata fuit cum sono buccinarum vel tubarum coram Rege
Philippo per Theologos Parisienses. Gers. sermon. in Festo Paschae Tom. 4. page
(mihi) 491.
his false doctrine was condemned by the Divines of Paris, and proclaimed with
sound of trumpets in the presence of King Philip; and withal the Council it
self deprived him of his Popedom (which shows plainly, the authority of a
Council is above the Pope.) And to his deposition subscribed 4. Patriarchs,
29. Cardinals, 47. Archbishops, 270. Bishops, 564. Abbots and Doctors, in all
above 900. deposed both Benedict the 12. and John the 23. and yet these men are
reputed by you for an infallible Rule of the Roman Faith. And thus not only
Ceaenas was deposed for his disobedience toward an Heretic, and is now
thrust into your first Classis of damned Authors, but the whole Council of
Constance touching that Session (where they decred the Council to be above the
Pope) is rejected, and disavowed by your Church.

It is no difficult thing then to prove your infallible Pope may be an
Heretic; but if any man of your own Church shall say so, and manifestly
prove it, yea although it be a general Council, it must therefore be censured
and condemned by your Church: And this may briefly serve in answer to what you
say against my second Section.

The third Section (say you) is of corruption both in Faith and manners, Page
50.
which the Knight proves out of the Council of Pisa, and out of the Council
of Trent; To which I answer: For matter of manners we willingly acknowledge a
reformation to be needful, but for doctrine with the contradiction of his own
former lie, he tells a new one.

It is a true saying of Chrysostom, A liar thinks no man speaks the truth;
Qui mendax est neminen^ verum putat dicere. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 19
But that the truth of my assertion may appear, look upon the Letters of
summons; they declare that the Council was called to reform errors that
concerned Faith; they show there was a due and wholesome reformation to be
made, as well of the Church doctrine, as of the manners of men, for quieting the
consciences of the faithful: And accordingly Pope Alexander did assemble the
most learned of all Nations; Idem dixit, quod ipse volebat vacare circa
Reformationem Ecclesiae, etc. Acta Council. Pis Sess. 20. Bin. Tom. 3. Pars 2. p
(mihi) 837.
the Cardinals did bind themselves with an Assumpsit, that they would not
proceed to the election of a new Pope (when his predecessors Gregory the 12.
and Benedict the 13. were deposed) unless the Pope would agree to a
reformation in the Head and Members; and will you say the Pope did assemble the
most learned of all Nations to teach good manners only? Cardinal de Aliaco
was living in his days; De squallor. Romans Eccles. p. 34. in Biblioth.
Westmonasteriensi. Gers. declaratio defect. viroru^.
he complains that Pagan abuses, and diabolical superstitions were so many in
the Church, that they could not be imagined.

Gerson (Chancellor of Paris) complained of particular errors, that Images in
Churches occasioned Idolatry; Apocryphal Scriptures were brought into the
Church, to the great damage of Christian Faith. Occham compe^dium contr.
errores Papae p. 957. Incipit Prologus.
Look into the age before him; Occham (a Friar Minorite) cries out, Alas the
time of which the blessed Apostle prophesied (when men will not suffer
wholesome doctrine) is altogether fulfilled in our ears; For behold there are
many that pervert the holy Scriptures, deny the sayings of the holy Fathers,
reject the Canons of the Church, and civil Constitutions of the Emperors.
Look into the age before him; Matthew. Paris. p. 843.
Grosthead (Bishop of Lincoln) complains that there was a defection, a
revolt, an Apostasy from the true Faith. Look into Bernards time, and there
you shall find by his own confession, Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 33. p. (mihi)
673.
The wound of the Church was inward, and past recoverie. These former
complaints and grievances in the Church did sound aloud in the ears of the
later ages, and she made great mourning and lamentation for her children,
because they were not such as she first bred them; and accordingly no doubt
they wished for a reformation of errors in doctrine, as well as Discipline in
the Church.

Look after Pope Alexanders time, and before the Council of Trent, and your
Bishop of Bitonto will show you the state and miserable condition of your
Church, as it were in a Glass. In Ep. ad Roman. c. 6.
Alas (says he) how were the Scriptures neglected in the later Ages, to the
detriment of all people! Rivet. Sum. Controv. p. (mihi) 98.
There was then in request a tedious and crabbed Divinity about Relations,
about quiddities and formalities; and all those things were handled and wrested
with Syllogismes and humane Sophistry, which (without doubt) by the same
authority as they were received, might be refelled. The whole Age was spent
about the decrees of men, which were contradictory amongst themselves, and
irreconcilable, and nourished perpetual contention. He was accounted the best
Divine, that knew best how to devise the greatest wonders for his Traditions.
It was a part of their honor and vain glory to speak big words with great
looks among women, not to be understood when they disputed of the Scriptures.
The Preachers of the word were all sworn to the word of their Masters: and
from hence sprung six hundred Sects; as namely, Thomists, Scotists,
Occhamists, Alexandrians, etc. O heinous wickedness! The Gosspels and Epistles
of the Apostles were laid aside, true Divinity lay hid, and was handled of
very few; but coldly, I will not say, unfaithfully.

In what state the Church remained in those days, when Papal Traditions and
cunning Sophistry prevailed against the sacred Scriptures, let the Reader
judge: Onus Ecclesiae c. 16. p. (mihi) 79
Your own St. Francis foretold that the times were at hand, wherein many
differences should arise in the Church, when charity should wax cold,
iniquity should abound, and the Devil should be let loose, and that the purity
of his Roman Religion should be depraved; and accordingly (says my Author) the
Image of the Cross in the Church of St. Damian spoke unto him; Vade, repara
domum meam, quae ut cernis, tota labitur.
Go and repair my house which you see is altogether decayed. Thus Bishops,
and Friars, and Images, stocks and stones cried out of the falling away of your
Church (if we may credit your own Authors) and yet by no means you will
assent to a reformation of doctrine or manners.

At Luthers first rising, which was almost 30. years before the Council of
Trent, your Guicciardine tells us, Guicciard. Hist. lib. 13.
that there were that year many meetings at Rome, to consult what was best to
be done. The more wise and moderate sort wished the Pope to reform things
apparently amiss, and not to persecute Luther. Hieronymus Savanarola told the
French King, Charles the 8. he should have great prosperity in his voyage into
Italy, to the end he should reform the state of the Church, which if he did
not reform, he should return with dishonor; and so (says he) it fell out.

I come to the Council of Trent it self, where you may read many decrees for
reformation, and yet neither doctrine nor manners reformed. But let us hear
your own confession. It is true, the Council indeed complains with great
reason of the avarice of such whom the Knight calls the Popes Collectors,
though the Council speaks not of the Pope: but false it is which he says,
that the Council complains of Indulgences, an Article of faith (as his words
are.) The Council likewise complains of many things crept into the
celebration of the Mass, and the words of the Council are right cited by him
in Latin in the Margent, but in the English he foully corrupts them: For in
stead of many things, he translated many errors, which is a gross error and
corruption in the Knight.

These be your grand exceptions to the gross corruptions laid unto my charge;
but all this while you do not discharge the accusations laid justly to your
Church. And in this I must needs say, you play the Hypocrite, who can discern
a mote in your Brothers eye, and cannot see a beam in your own: First
therefore cast the beam out of your own eye, and then you shall easily disccrne
without Spectacles, that the Collectors of Indulgences are the Popes
Collectors, although the Pope is not mentioned in that place; and Indulgences
are an Article of Faith created by that Council, although the Council
proclaim it not an Article of Faith: so that (multa) many things, might well
stand for many errors and corruptions, since they were errors in practice.
Neither would I have set the Latin in the Margent if I had meant to corrupt
them in English; and withal, if you had taken the last edition (as you ought
to have done) you should have found them in another Character, and then all
your waste words of foul corruptions, had been needless. But in this you
resemble Palladius a lewd fellow, who in like manner charged St. Hierome with
falsifications and false translations: He preaches and publishes abroad
(says Hierome) that I am a falsarie, Hieron. ad Pa^mach. de optimo genere
interpret. Tom. 2.
that I have not precisely translated word for word, that I, in stead of the
word Honorable, have written these words, Dearly beloved: These things and
such trifles (says he) are laid unto my charge. Now hear what Answer St.
Hierome makes; Whereas the Epistle it self declares, that there is no
alteration made in the sense, and that there is neither matter of substance
added, nor any doctrine devised by me, verily by their great cunning they prove
themselves fools, and seeking to reprove other men's unskilfulnesse, they
betray their own. Let us hear therefore the rest of your Things (for so you
will have me term them) which are crept into your Church, and need a
Reformation.

The Council (say you) seems to acknowledge the avarice of Priests in saying
Mass for money, was not far from Symonie. It speaks of the use of Music,
wherewith some wantonness was mixed, as also of certain Masses or Candles
used in certain number, proceeding rather from superstition than true
Religion. This you confess is true in your Council, but to these you answer
nothing. Council. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 9.
You might have added to these abuses both Superstition and Idolatry in the
Mass, for your Council confesses them both: and I think it touches your
errors in Doctrine. But have you reformed all or any of these things? Is your
superstitious number of Masses and lights in the Church abated? Are your
lascivious and wanton songs, set to the Organs, and mingled with other Church
music, redressed? Is your covetousness in Priests, with their Superstition
and Idolatry in the Mass, abolished? Mirae mirae entis Res. Juvenal.
These corruptions are things and things (as you call them) and such as I
wonder your Council was not ashamed to confess, much more to tolerate, or
rather to practice in the daily sacrifice of your Mass. I hasten to the
Reformation in doctrine: but you tell me it is a Lie, the Council never
intended it; I instance in private Mass, Latin Service, etc. You answer it is
most false, for the doctrine is the same still, and ever was.

I perceive your passion makes you much forget your self: for your doctrine (I
confess) which is commonly received, is the same now, that was decreed in the
Council of Trent; but that it was ever the same, as now it is, all the
College of Cardinals and Jesuits cannot prove. Look upon your own confession
in those two particular instances: Your private Mass, where the Priest
communicates alone, is not the same now, as it was heretofore; For (say you) it
was the practice of the Primitive Church for the people to communicate every
day with the Priest. Spectacl. page 191.
Your Prayer in an unknown tongue is not the same now as it was heretofore,
for (say you) Prayer and Service in the vulgar Tongue was used in the first and
best Ages; Page 271.
and now the vulgar is become the Latin unknown tongue. Take heed therefore of
these confessions, for by such palpable contradictions you may lose your
Proselytes, and bring the Lie upon your self.

Again, you confess that the Council wishes that the standers by did
communicate, not only spiritually, Page 53.
but also sacramentally: and does not your Church in this wish a reformation in
doctrine? Does it not in this prefer the practice of the reformed Churches
before their own, and in a manner confess an error in the allowed practice of
the Roman Church? Your Council commands Pastors that have care of souls, to
expound that to the people, which is delivered in the Mass in an unknown
tongue; and do not those that require the Priests to expound it to the people,
show likewise that without such exposition the people are little better for the
Mass, and that the Church intended the people should understand it? What is
this else, but to join hands with the Protestants, and to acknowledge a
reformation needful in your Church, for requiring Service to be celebrated in
a known tongue, that the people may understand it? But that I may make good my
assertion, and that the Reader may know I have said nothing but the truth, in
affirming the Council of Trent did make decrees for Reformation for doctrine
as well as manners, look upon the second Session, and tell me if they did not
profess a real intention in both. Council. Trid. Sess. 2.
the words of the Session are these; Whereas it is the special care and
intention of the Council, that (the darkenesle of Heresy being expelled,
which so many years has covered the earth) the light and parity of the
Catholic truth may shine, through the help of Christ which is the true
light; and that those things which need reformation may be reformed; the Synod
exhorts all Catholics assembled, or to be assembled, and especially those
who are skilful in the sacred Scriptures, that with continual meditation they
may diligently consider with themselves how these things may be effected; that
they may condemn those things which are to be condemned, and approve those
things which are to be approved, that the whole world with one mouth, and
confession of one and the same faith, may glorify God the Faiher, and our Lord
Jesus Christ. Take a review of the words of your Council; First, Praecipua
cura and intentio, ut propulsatis errorum tenebris, quae per tot annos
operiarunt terram; the chief care to dispell the darkness of error which
covered the earth: which words cannot be meant of the Protestant doctrine. For
our light is pretended by you to be lately come in, and but in a part or corner
of the world. Secondly, peritiam habeant sacrarum literarum, ut sedula
meditatione secum ipsi cogitent, etc. ut probare probanda, and damnare damnanda
queant. There needed not this diligence and skill in Scriptures for Luthers
Religion, for they were condemned before by the Pope. Thirdly, Nullus debeat
etc. obstinatis disceptationibus contendere, which should not be about Lutheran
points, but about doctrines of their own. Fourthly, in the third Section, de
extirpandis haeresibus, etc. which (say they) is adversus spirituales nequitias
in caelestibus, which heavenly places are meant by their own Church, not by
Luthers, as is most evident. For they would never acknowledge our Churches
heavenly places.

Now I pray, what think you of your Councels Decrees? Will not they extend to
a Reformation in doctrine? or will you say that Heresies in manners crept into
the Church, and the most learned in the Scriptures were chiefly to be employed
for reforming them, that thereby there might be one Faith of Papists and
Protestants through the Christian world? De extirpandis haeresibus, and moribus
reformandis, quorum causa praecipue est congregata. Sess. 3.
Look upon the third Session, and there likewise you shall find a Decree for
rooting out of Heresies in doctrine, as well as rectifying of manners and the
discipline of the Church; and for both those causes (says your Decree) the
Council was principally called. It is a most evident truth then (howsoever you
redouble the lie upon me) that the Council did intend a Reformation in
doctrine; for otherwise, to what end should the Pope summon all Christian
Bishops out of all Nations, even at that time when the Protestants were in
number infinite, and had discovered and proclaimed the errors of the Roman
Church? Besides, to what purpose were those disputes and oppositions in the
Council against particular points of Doctrine, if they had not been adjudged
erroneous, and needed a reformation? But herein the Reader shall easily
discern the policy of your Church. At the first calling of the Council (when
these first Sessions were made) the number of Bishops were but few, (about 40.)
but after the faction of the Popes creatures in multitude prevailed, all hope
of reformation was abandoned; And thereupon the Bishops of Apulia publicly
declared, that the Trent Fathers were nothing else but the Popes creatures, and
his bondslaves; See Crakenthorpe.
and accordingly there was an oath proposed severally to be taken in this
manner;

I vow and swear true obedience to the Bishop of Rome, Bulla Pii 4.
etc. And all other things likewise do I undoubtedly receive and confess,
which are delivered, defined, and declared by the sacred Canons, and general
Councels, and especially the holy Council of Trent; and withal, I condemn,
reject, and accurse all things that are contrary hereunto, and all Heresies
whatsoever, condemned, rejected, and accursed by the Church; and that I will be
careful this true Catholic faith (out of the which no man can be saved, which
at this time I willingly profess and truly hold) be constantly (with Gods
help) retained and confessed whole and inviolate to the last gasp; and by
those that are under me, or such as I shall have charge over in my calling,
holden, taught and preached, to the uttermost of my power: I the said N.
promise, vow, and swear, So God me help, and his holy Gospels.

Now what good (says Dudithius) could be done in that Council, Andr.
Dudithius in Ep. ad Maximil. 2.
which only numbered, but never weighed suffrages? Though our cause was never
so good, we could not come off with victory; for to every one of us, the Pope
was able to oppose an hundred of his own. This Author was sent as Ambassador
to the Council from the state and Clergy of Hungary, and he consirmes what I
have testified of their proceedings. But observe the mystery of iniquity
displayed in your Council, after it had continued eighteen years, Sess. 25. c.
1. Decre^. de Refor. p. 312.
and during the lives of eight Popes, in conclusion they declared in their last
Session, contrary to their former decree of Reformation, that the Synod was
(chiefly) called for restoring of Ecclesiastical discipline; and hereby is
plainly discovered their deceivablenesse of unrighteousness; insomuch as I may
truly say with that learned Gentleman and Translator of the Trent History, The
Bishops of Rome, Sir Nathaniel Brent in Ep. to the History of Trent.
in stead of being Christ's holy Vicars, as they pretend, have been the
greatest, and most pernicious quacksalving Juglers that ever the earth did
bear. Those Bishops therefore that boast of the Law of God, and make as it
were a covenant with him, to renew the ancient Faith, and restore it to her
first integrity (as your Trent Bishops professed) let them consider with
themselves how near that Prophecy of David does concern them, who deny a
Reformation; For unto the ungodly (said God) why do thou preach my Laws,
Psalm. 50.16, 17.
and take my Covenant in thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be reformed, and
have cast my words behind thee.

CHAP. IV. The sum of his Answer to my Fourth Section.
TO this Section, the title whereof is, That many learned Romanists have fallen
from the Catholic Faith to be Protestants, he says, the Catholic Faith is
indivisible, and they that renounce it in part, renounce it in all: He
affirms that in Priests, who cannot contain, to marry, it is a greater sin
than to keep a concubine. This is the substance of his fourth Chapter, in
answer to my fourth Section. The Reply. I showed in my fourth Section, that
many learned Romanists, convicted by evidence of truth, either in part, or in
whole, renounced Popery before their death. Page 58.
That some have renounced the same inpart (say you) is foolishly said, for no
man can renounce the Catholic Faith in part, it being indivisible.

If I shall prove your assertion to be a strange Paradoxe, the foolishness
will return into your own bosom. For the better illustration therefore of
your Tenet, Oration in laudem Athanasii.
hear what division Gregory Nazianzen makes upon that ground: When one takes
up water in his hand (says he) not only that which he takes not up, but that
also which runs forth, and finds passage between his fingers, is divided
and separated from that which he holds and incloseth in his hand: so not
only the open and professed enemies of the Catholic Faith, but they also that
seem to be her best and greatest friends, are sometimes divided one from
another. What think you of this ancient Father? Is your Faith indivisible by
his Doctrine? or will you say it is foolishly spoken of him? But (say you) he
that cease to believe one point, cease to believe any one as he should: And
is this wisely spoken think you? Is not this your latter error greater than
the first? For proof therefore of your assertion, show me that man, who
before the Council of Trent held all the points of your Faith, as they are now
taught and received in your Church; I say, give me but one since the Apostles
time, who within the compass of fifteen hundred years believed all your
doctrines of Faith, entirely in all points, and for that one man's sake, I will
confess your Faith is indivisible, and submit my obedience to your Church.

Your Index Expurgatorius discovers the weakness of your opinion: I speak not
of Authors which were condemned in your first and third Classis for Heretics,
Propter suspectam doctrinam Ind. lib prohibit.
but of those Romanists who in the second Classis are purged for their
suspected doctrine (as you term it) and yet never forsook your Church; I dare
confidently avow, that there are above four hundred of those Classical
Authors, all members of the Roman Church, never excommunicated, never condemned
for heresy in your Church, and yet are commanded by your Inquisitors to be
blotted out in some particular points of doctrine, which make against your
Trent Faith. If these men therefore have renounced your Faith in part, how is
your Faith indivisible? Or if they cease to believe one point, why does your
Church cite their testimonies, and allow their opinions in other doctrines
consonant to your Church, when as (by your Tenet) he that cease to believe
one point, cease to believe any one as he should? If you should forsake all
Authors that forsake your doctrine in part (or in some particular points) you
will generally suffer a Recoverie against your own Church. I will give you but
one instance. It is the common Tenet of the Roman Church at this day, that the
blessed Virgin was conceived without original sin: yet the contrary Tenet
is likewise maintained by the members of your own Church. Ludovicus Vives
tells us, that two orders of Friars, Ludov Vives in lib. 20. de Civit. Dei.
cap. 26. p. 828.
both fierce, and both led with undaunted Generals, set this question a foot;
the Dominicans by Thomas Aquinas, and the Franciscans by Duns Scotus: the
Council of Basil decreed, that she was wholly pure without all touch of
sin, but the Dominicans objected that it was no lawful Council, and the
Minorites of the other side avowed that it was true and holy, and called the
Dominicans Heretics for slandering the power of the Church; so that the matter
had come to a shrewd pass, but that Pope Sixtus forbad this Theme to be any
more disputed.

To proceed to the rest of your observations. I produced for a witness Paulus
Vergerius, who renounced Popery, being a Romish Bishop, by the testimonies of
Sleidan, and Osiander; I cited the Council of Basil, for dispensing with the
cup to the Lay people; Aeneas Sylvius for Marriage of Priests; Mr. Harding
against your private Mass; Mr. Casaubon for your translating of the
Scriptures; Lord Cook for the Papists frequenting our Churches, till the 11th.
of Qu. Elisabeth: Now let the Reader judge of your moderate and learned
confutation: First, Page 59.
Sleidan and Osiander (say you) are notorious fellows both for lying and
heresy; Paulus Vergerius, when he dyed, cast forth a horrible stench, and
roared most fearfully like an Ox; The Council of Basile (you know) is of
little or no authority with Catholics, as being reproved by the Sea
Apostolic; Aeneas Sylvius, what he wrote in the time of that Council, is
revoked by him in his Bull of Retractations; Touching Casaubon, you say there
is shame enough in store for us both; Touching the Lord Cook, he was soundly
answered by a Catholic Divine, and so exposed to the scorn of the world for
his notorious falsehoods.

These be your several answers, and this is a confutation of their
authorities: but I say to you, if these men have spoken untruth, bear witness
of their falsehood, if otherwise they delivered the truth, why do you reproach
them? Either let their proofs be plainly and moderately confuted, or let the
lying lips (says David) be put to silence, Psalm. 31.20.
which cruelly, disdainfully, and despightfully speak against the righteous.

Such as is your charity, such is your chastity: for when I cite your Jesuit
Costerus for a witness, Coster. Enchir. cap. 17. propo. 9. Page 64.
that a Priest does sin more grievously in marrying a wife, than keeping a
concubine, you scoffingly return me this answer: You seem to take this for a
great error, but in Priests who cannot marry, it is a greater sin to marry,
for it is not marriage. Thus you.

And is the marriage of Priests no marriage? Was there no marriage in all the
Tribe of Levi? What will become of all the sons of Aaron? were they all
bastards? Ignatius ad Philadelph.
I wish (says Ignatius) that I may be found meet before God to follow their
steps which reign in his Kingdom; as namely, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph,
and Esaias, and other Prophets; of Peter and Paul, and other Apostles, who lived
in matrimony, and used conjugall rites. And in conclusion he answers your
assertion in these words; If any man call lawful copulation and procreation of
children, Idem, ibid.
corruption and uncleanness, that man has a serpent, the Devil (that fell
from God) dwelling in him. Great. Par. 1. did. 56. fol. 67. Osius Palea.


Again, your own Gratian tells us from Pope Damasus, that many Bishops of
Rome were Priests sons, as namely Pope Hosius, Bonifacius, Agapetus,
Theodorus, Silverius, Deusdedit, Faelix, Gelasius, all these were Popes, and
Priests sons: and then he concludes; Co^plures etiam alii inveniantur, qui de
sacerdotibus nati, Apostolicae sedi praesueru^t. Ibid.
There were many others also to be found, who were begotten of Priests, and
governed in the Apostolic See. Athanas. ad Dracontium. p. (mihi) 518.
And Athanasius writing to Bishop Dracontius, tells him, that in his days many
Monks were Parents of children, and Bishops likewise were Fathers of Sons;
and this was 340. years after Christ.

But I presume you will not say, that the marriage of those Priests was no
marriage, and their brood was spurious and illegitimate. Those who account it a
Capital offense for a Priest to marry, and a venial sin to keep a
concubine, do rightly resemble the old Heretic Aerius, who used to say,
Epiph. haeres. 76.
To have the company of a woman out of marriage, is no more sin, De bono
Matrim. did. 27. Quoniam.
than for a man to claw his ear. St. Austin puts the question, and resolves it
in this manner; Some say they be adulterous that marry after they have made a
vow; but I tell you (says he) they sin grievously that put such asunder. And
elsewhere more particularly he concludes against your Tenet; Augustinus de
bono viduitatis cap. 10.
They that say the marriage of such men or women as have vowed continency, is
no marriage, but rather adultery, seem unto me not to consider discreetly
and advisedly what they say. And in his Tract of holy virginity he plainly
shows the Antiquity of your error, August. de sancta Virgin. c. 34.
and refutes it, where speaking of vowed persons, he tells us; that many of
them are kept from marriage, not for love of their godly purpose of Virginity,
but for fear of open shame; which shame proceeds of Pride, for that they are
more afraid to displease men than God: they will not marry, because they cannot
without rebuke, yet better were it for them to marry, than to burn, that is
to say, with the flame of their concupiscence to be wasted; they are sorry for
their profession, and yet it grieveth them to confess it. Chrysostom. contra
Judaios Gentil. and haeret. sermon. de nuptiis Cana in Galil.
In like manner Chrysostom in the same age does elegantly illustrate the
honor of marriage in Spiritual persons. Our Lord honored Marriage with his
presence, and say thou that Marriage is a hindrance unto godliness? I tell
thee Marriage is no hinderance. Had not Moses a wife and children? Helias, was
not he a virgin? Moses brought down Manna from Heaven, so did Helias fire:
Moses caused Quails to fly in the heaven, and Helias shut it with a word.
What hurt did virginity to the one? what impediment was wife and children to
the other? See Helias coached in the air, and Moses traveling through the
Sea. Behold Peter a Pillar of the Church, he had a wife, therefore find no
fault with Marriage.

Look into the Ages following; your Angelical Doctor Thomas Aquinas resolves
the question flatly against you and your fellow Jesuits. The Acolothytes were
those that lighted the Tapers at the reading of the Gospel in the Mass.
If an Acolothyte (says he) do confess to a discreet Priest, that by no
means he can contain, the Priest does not much offend in giving him this
counsel, that he should marry privately, and closely blind the eyes of the
Bishop. And if afterward he be willing to take Orders, we hold it less sin
for him to use his wife, than to commit fornication; for it is a less offense
to accompany with his wife, than to commit fornication against the Divine
Precept. They who pretend chastity, and make a vow to keep it, when they
enter into holy Orders, do break it even in this, when they allow a
concubine. Aeneas Sylvius was conscious to himself of the danger of that
sin, and therefore he wished that marriage were restored to Priests; yea,
whilst he was a Cardinal he had his concubine, to whom at last he gave
threescore Florens for her Dowry: and it seems when he was well in years, in
or about the time of his Popedom, he confessed; I cannot boast of any merit in
my chastity, Magis me Venus Jugitat, quam ego illa^ horreo. Ep. 92.
for to tell the truth, venerie does rather fly from me, than I from it.
Neither was it his particular case alone; for the Book called Taxae Camerae
Apostolicae, which your Bishop Espencaeus complained of, does sufficiently
witness the damnable effects of such divellish doctrine. The gravest Cardinals
in Rome, who were appointed by special Commission, and presented their
information to Pope Paul the third, do sufficiently witness the forbidden
fruits of such an evil tree: The words are these; In this City of Rome the
Curtezans pass through the streets, Wolph. Lect. Memor. Anno 1535 p. 403.
or ride on their mules, like honest Matrons, and in the midst of the day,
Noblemen and Cardinals dear friends attend upon them. We never saw such
corruption, but only in this City, which is the example and pattern of all
other: moreover, they dwell in fair and goodly houses.

On the other side, you would make us believe, that your Curtezans go
altogether on foot; that they have a special badge of dishonestie, whereby
they may be known; that they are despised and reviled of the people, but
especially by Cardinals and the Nobles; that they dwelt in outhouses and back
lanes: but to ride on horseback, to be attyred as honest Matrons and Noble
Ladies, to be attended by Priests and Cardinals friends, and to dwell in fair
and beautiful houses, this shows that your dispensation for stews is
occasioned chiefly by the forbidding of marriage; and by this means marriage,
which is honorable in all, Heb. 13.4.
and the bed undesiled, by the Apostles doctrine, is now become a sin, and
your Apostolic See the Mother of Fornications. This occasioned your own
Agrippa to complain of your casting up of the Bawds rents with the revenew of
your Church. Agrip. de vanit. scient. c. 64. de Lenonia.
I have heard (says he) the accounts cast up in this sort; he has two
Benefices, one cure of twenty Ducats, a Priorie of forty Ducats, and three
whores in a brothell house.

I list not any longer to stir this filthy puddle, Camerinam movere. Eras.
Adag.
which stinkes in the nosthrils of God and good men; the counsel of your
Canonist is safe and good in this particular. Panor. de Cler. Conjug. Cap. Cu^
Olim.
The Church (says he) should discharge the part of a good Physician, who when
by experience he finds one medicine rather hurt than help, he removes it,
and applies another: and there he gives the reason, Because we find by
experience, that the Law of single life has brought forth contrary effects:
and the rather, because it is resolved by your learned Cardinal: Cajet. in
quodlibet contra Lutherum.
It cannot be proved either by reason, nor yet by authority, to speak
absolutely, that a Priest does sin in marrying a wife; for neither the Order
of Priesthood, in that it is Order, nor the same Order, in that it is holy, is
any hindrance to matrimony; for Priesthood does not dissolve matrimony,
whether it be contracted before Priesthood or afterward, if we (setting apart
all other Ecclesiastical Laws) stand only to those things which we have
received of Christ and his Apostles.

Again, Panorm. l. extr. de Elect. C. Licet. de Vit. Ab.
your own Panormitan tells us, that the Priests of Grecia, being within
Orders, do marry wives; and we see they do it (says he) sine peccato,
without sin, or breach of Law, either of God or man: And thus by your own
Tenet you stand with the positive law of man against the law of God; you stand
in opposition against the Greek Church, which ever used it; and lastly, you
are at difference among your selves, Espencaeus de Continentia. l. 1. c. 11. p.
116.
when many prime members of your own Church utterly condemn it. The doctrine
of St. Paul is evident and plain, It is better marry than burn. This Law is
clean perverted by your Jesuits doctrine; Utrumque est malum, nubere and uri,
imo pejus est nubere, quicquid exclamant adver (arii: praesertim ei qui habet
votum solenne. Bell. de Monach. l. 2. c. 30. Hist. of Trent. l. 5. fol. 400.
and 680.
for (says Bellarmine) Let our adversaries say what they will, it is worse to
marry than burn, especially for him that has made a solemn vow: So that the
Law of God must give way to the Law of man, and chiefly for reason of state and
policy. For (says Cardinal Rodolpho) if the marriage of Priests were
tolerated, this inconvenience would follow, the Priests having house, wife, and
children, would not depend upon the Pope but on the Prince, and their love to
their children would make them yield to any prejudice of the Church: they will
seek also to make their Benefice hereditarie, and in a short space the
authority of the Apostolic See will be confined within the walls of Rome.
And to these reasons you may truly add this, as appendant to the rest; the
dispensation of Stews would be neglected, and consequently the great Revenue
of the Roman See would be utterly lost; and therefore the Index Expurgatorius
will not lay hold of any such doctrine.

For a conclusion of this point. If you say marriage of Priests be malum in se,
evil in it self, you comply with the Devilish doctrine of Tatianus; If it be
evil quia prohibetur, because it is forbidden only, then fornication, which
is evil of it self, and in it self, must needs be the greater sin.

CHAP. V. The sum of his Answer to my Fifth Section.
OF this Section (says he) there is not much to be said, for there is nothing
in it, but a little of the Knights own raving. Maldonat approves and commends
St. Austins explicacation, but adds another of his own. After this, the
Knight has a great deal of foolish stuff, which needs no answer. The Reply.
Your answer is short, but your words be somewhat sharp: and you can find
nothing in that Section but raving and foolishness? If it be raving to cite
Texts of Scripture against your maimed Commandments, your Invocation of
Saints, your Prayer in an unknown tongue, your worship of Images, and the
like: If it be raving to say Purgatory is created a point of Faith, and that
Faith is confirmed by Councels, merely for the benefit of the Pope and
Clergy; that you do not exercise the power of your Priesthood in binding as
well as loosing, by reason no man will give money to be bound, but to be loosed
in Purgatory: If it be raving to say your Jesuit Maldonat preferres his own
explication of Scripture before St. Austins, only because it more crosses the
sense of the Calvinists; and withal confesses that St. Austins opinion is
more probable; If this I say may be deemed raving, then will I confess your
railing is a good answer. But he despaires (say you) of his cause, who sees
Maldonats saying practiced by the Church of Rome against his Church and
doctrine.

I confess with the blessed Apostle, Acts 5.38, 39.
If our counsel or work be of men, it will come to naught, and then I might
despair of it, but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye
be found even to fight against God. We have no cause (blessed be God) to
despair of our Religion, which in one Age has spread over the better part of
Christendom. But I conceive there is little hope of you or your cause, who
have sold your selves either with Ahab to work wickedness, and maintain
Idolatrous worship for your own advantage; or like Maldonat, See Maldonat.
Col. 1536. Unum e duobus intelligatur necesse est, aut tunc non scandaliz
abimini, cum videritis filium hominis ascendente^ ubi erat prius: aut (contra)
tunc magis scandaliz abimini: prioremsensum plerique sequa^tur, Chrysostom.
Augustine. etc. Yet Maldonat follows the latter.
openly to profess greater hatred to Protestants, than love to the truth it
self. For it is apparent, ex professo, he prefers his own opinion without
any authority, before St. Austin, nay contrary to St. Austin, and he gives
this reason for it; Because this sense of mine does more cross the sense of
the Calvinists. But I may say to you, as sometimes Ludov. Viv. de Civ. Dei. l.
13. c. 24.
Ludovicus Vives spoke upon the like occasion: St. Austin is now safe, because
of his age, but if he were alive again, he should be shaken off as a bad
Rhetoritian, or a poor Grammarian. And yet this good Saint was so far from
defending any opinion against the known truth, that on the contrary, he
prefers the interpretation of August. contr. Cresc. Grammat. l. 1. c. 32.
and l. 2. c. 32. p. (mihi) 218. and 241.
Cresconius a Grammarian, before St. Cyprian the Martyr, because it seemed to
him more probable and agreeable to the truth.

CHAP. VI. The sum of his Answer to my Sixth Section.
THe Knight (says he) seems to acknowledge that he cannot assign the time
and persons when and by whom the errors of the Roman Church came in. Good
Physicians use to enquire of the causes, effects, and other circumstances, and
upon the circumstance depends the knowledge of the disease. We plead
prescription for our doctrine from the beginning. The difference betwixt
Heresy and Apostasy. The Church cannot fall away, without some special note
and observation. The Reply. I^ is to be wondered what art and policy your
Church does use to put off the trial of her cause, when it should come to
hearing. If we speak of a depravation of your Faith, you cry out it is
blasphemy; If we show your own men's complaints for a reformation of your
doctrine, you say they meant a reformation only of Discipline; If we plainly
prove the noveltie of your Trent Articles, by comparing them with the Tenets of
ancient Religion, you threaten to bring an action of the Case against us for
slandering and defaming of your Church, except we can assign the precise time
and person when those errors came in. Let us use the words of your fellow
Campian; Can I imagine any to be stuffed in the nose, Camp. Rat. 2.
that being forewarned cannot quickly smell out this subtle juggling? Why do
you not rather complain of the Noveltie of our doctrine, and bid us show the
time when, and the Authors who first broached our two Sacraments, our Communion
in both kinds, our Prayer in a known tongue, our spiritual presence, and the
like; if I fail in these, then say, The Knight seems to acknowledge he
cannot do it.

The errors in your Church which we complain of, are negative Articles
amongst us, and the proof lies on your side: If you cannot show Apostolical
Authors for your own doctrine, must we be therefore condemned, because we do
not prove the Negative? Or otherwise it must needs follow by your Logic, that
it is the same doctrine which was once delivered to the Saints, because we
cannot show the first Author of it.

You cannot deny that there are many particular errors in the Church, whose
first Authors cannot be named by you nor us, and therefore will you conclude
they are no errors? The custom of communicating little children in the
Sacrament of the Lords body and blood was an error, and continued long in the
ancient Church, yet the first Author of it was not known. There were many did
hold there was a mitigation and suspension of the punishment of the damned in
hell, by the suffrages of the living; this error was anciently received, yet
the first Anthor was not known. The opinion that all Catholic Christians, how
wicked soever, shall in the end be saved, as by fire, was an ancient error, but
the Author is not known. Again, Alph. contr. haeres. verbo Indulgentia. p.
(mihi) 354.
there are many things (says your Alphonsus) known to later writers, which
the Ancients were altogether ignorant of. There is seldom any mention of
Transubstantiation amongst the Ancients; almost none of Purgatory; what
marvel if it so fall out with Indulg ences, that there should be no mention
of them by the Ancients? If therefore such errors crept into the Church in the
first and best Ages, which are now condemned by your selves and us, without
enquiring after the time, and Authors that first broached them. Nay more, if
your points of Faith, as namely, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and
Indulgences, were altogether unknown to the Ancients (as your men confess)
why should you require us to show the first Authors of your doctrines, which
were utterlie unknown to the ancient Fathers? Or rather, why do you not
condemn them with us, as you do the errors which were received for true
doctrines amongst the Ancients? If St. Peter were at Rome, no doubt the Church
received and believed his Prophesies; There shall be false Teachers among you, 2
Pet. 2.1.
who (privily) shall bring in damnable heresy. If the Apostle both forewarned
you and us, that errors and heresies must steal in privily, sensim sine sensu,
secretly and by degrees into the true Church, and yet would not reveal the
Authors of the heresies, what madness were it in you or us to pass by those
damnable Heresies, or rather to plead for them, because we cannot learn the
name of the false Teachers?

Vincentius Lyrinensis, Vincent. Lyr. de haeres. c. 15.
who was living 400. years after the Apostles time, complains that certain
in his days did bring in errors secretly, which a man (says he) cannot soon
find out, nor easily condemn. The Serpent hides himself as much as he can
(says Tertullian) and shows his chief skill in wreathing himself into
folds, Tertull. advers. Valent. c. 3.
and in thrusting himself into dark and blind holes: Such is the nature of
false teachers, they seek nothing more (says the same Author) than to hide
that which they preach, Idem c. 1.
if yet they may be said to preach that they hide.

But good Physicians (say you) use to enquire of the causes, effects, and
circumstances; Page 73.
for upon these circumstances depends the knowledge whether it be a disease
or no. It is most true that Physicians will enquire of the causes of the
disease, but will they deny the Patient to be sick, or refuse to minister
Physic to him, unless he tell them precisely how or when he first took his
disease or infection? For this is our case, and the point in question touching
a reformation. Neither does the knowledge of the disease of the body depend
upon the circumstances of time, place, and person. I think you never read such
Aphorisms either in Gallen or Hyppocrates; neither does your knowledge of
errors and heresy in your Church depend on the circumstances of time, place,
and persons: For some Authors, at the same time, and in the same place, might
have broached truth, when another set his heresy abroach; as namely, Saint
Austin precisely in the time and place, delivered the Orthodox Doctrine of
grace, when and where Pelagius spread his heresy.

From your Rules of Physic you return to the Rules of Divinity, and tell us
from Saint Austin, that Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum,
sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditu^ rectissime
creditur. De Baptis. contr. Donat. l. 5. c 24. in initio. Tom. 7. p. mihi 433.
whatsoever the Catholic Church does generally believe or practice, so as
there can be no time assigned when it began, it is to be taken for an
Apostolical tradition. This place of Austin you neither quoted in your Answer,
neither have you recited his words faithfully, for he speaks not of assigning
the time when the Doctrine begins, but whatsoever the universal Church does
hold, not being ordained by Councels, but has been ever held, that is most
rightly believed for an Apostolical tradition. This is his Tenet, and this is
ours: but you have put in the word (Catholic) in your sense for universal,
you have added (general belief and practice) you have thrust in these words
(so as no time can be assigned when it began) and you have omitted the
principal verb [that has been ever held] which makes me suspect you omitted
the citing of this place, lest your fraud should be descried: But I pardon you;
let us hear the rest; P. 73.
But such (say you) are all those things which you are pleased to call errors.
If this were as easily proved as spoken, you should not need to put us to the
search of times and Authors for the first Founder of your Faith; For if your
Popish Doctrines were always held by the universal Church, and not ordained
by Councels, we should not need to look into your Council of Lateran for your
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, nor into your Council of Constance for
Communion in both kinds, nor into your Council of Florence for your seven
Sacraments, nor into your second Council of Nice for your worship of Images:
for these and many such traditions were first ordained by Councels, and were
not the general belief and practice of the Church. Again, if the universal
Church had always held your Doctrines from the Apostles times, why do you
your self confess, that your prayer in an unknown tongue, Page praecedenti.
your private Mass, your half Communion, were taught otherwise in the
primitive Churches? Nay, if they be Apostolical, how comes it that they are
flat contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles? And thus much of your two rules
of Physic and Divinity; let us he are the rest of your authorities.

Tertullian (say you) has this Rule for discerning heresy from truth, Tertul.
praescrip. 31. p. mihi 78.
That which goes before is truth, and that which comes after is error. This
Rule is most true, but these words you cite by the halves; for he says
expressly, Id autem extraneum and falsum quod sit posterius immissum.
Id Dominicum and verum quod sit prius traditum: That was first delivered,
which was true, and came from the God of truth; and this was the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles; for that which comes after (says he) is sarre
different: where he shows likewise in these words following, that after
Christ's time, and in the days of the Apostles, there might be heresies, Ut
aliquem ex Apostolicis viris (qui tamen cum illis persever averint) habent
authorem. Ibid.
for the mystery of iniquity began then to work; and therefore he will not
have it enough to derive a Doctrine from a man which lived with the Apostles,
unless it can be proved that he continued with them: and the reason (as I
conceive) was given by Nicephorus; After the sacred company of the Apostles was
come to an end; Niceph. l. 3. c. 16.
and that their generation was wholly spent, which had heard with their ears
the heavenly wisdom of the Son of God, then that conspiracy of detestable
error, through the deceit of such as delivered strange Doctrine, took
rooting; and because that none of the Apostles survived, they published boldly
with all might possible the doctrine of falsehood, and impugned the manifest and
known truth.

But we plead (say you) prescription from the beginning.] It is not sufficient
to plead it, you must prove it. The Mahometists at this day assume the name of
Saracens (as your men do the name of Catholics) as if they came from Sara the
free woman, Abraham's true and lawful wife, when in truth they took their
first beginning from Agar the bondwoman; neither can there be any prescription
against the ancient Records and Evidences of the Word written by Christ and his
Apostles. Indeed you have found a right and easy way to claim a prescription
from the time of the Apostles; for you have razed many prime Evidences of the
Fathers for the first 800. years, which make for our Doctrine, and you have
proscribed many learned Authors and their Records (as I have showed before) for
the last 800. years, which testified against your errors: And now I come to
your Churches apostacy or falling from the truth, which occasioned these
errors.

Apostacy (say you) is a defection, or forsaking of the Name of Christ, and
profession of Christianity, as all men understand it.

I showed in this Section, that in the primitive Church, when any heresy did
arise that endangered the foundation (such as was the heresy of the Arrians,
of the Pelagians, and the like) the Authors were observed, the times were
known, the place was pointed at, and forthwith letters of Premonition were
sent to all the sound members of the Catholic Church; by which public
advertisement the steale-truth was discovered, and herein the Author, the time,
and place was observed and known to all: but in the Church of Rome it was
otherwise; there was first an Apostacy, a falling away from the truth, which
was first caused by an error secretly stolen into the Church; and therefore it
is sometimes called a mystery of iniquity, because mystically, covertly,
secretly he shall wind his abominations into the Church of God: and
accordingly the Apostle gives Timothy to understand, that in the last times
some shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1.
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, and such as speak
falsehood in Hypocrisy: which place plainly shows (says a learned Divine)
that Antichrist himself shall not professedly renounce Christ, Mr. Bedel
against Wadsworth. p. 40.
and his Baptism; that his kingdom is a revolt, not from the outward
profession, but inward sincerity and power of the Gospel. And therefore all
do not understand Apostacy, a forsaking of Christ and Christianity: Not all,
no not the same Apostle, where he uses the same word Apostacy to the
Thessalonians: (...), etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except
there come (an Apostacy) a falling away first: He speaks of the departing
from the orthodox Faith, not from Christianity. Not all, no not your Rhemists
in their Annotations upon this place: Rhem. Annot. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
For it is very like (say they) be it spoken under correction, that Gods
Church, and all learned Catholics, that this great defection and revolt shall
not be only from the Roman Emperor, but especially from the Roman Church, and
withal from most points of Christian Religion, or (as they interpret in their
Margin) from most Articles of the Christian faith. Not all, no not Campian your
fellow Jesuit, who terms Luther an Apostata, for falling from your Church,
not from Christianity. Not all, no not your Decretals, who term a Monk, for
leaving his Order, or a Clarke forsaking his habit, an Apostata. Not all, no
not Gregory the Great, Greg. l. 6. Ep. 24.
who called John Bishop of Constantinople, an Apostata, for assuming the title
of universal Bishop. Lastly, Not all, no not your Council of Basil, where
900. condemned and deposed your Pope Eugenius for a Symonist, Council. Basil.
sess. 34.
a forsworn man, a man incorrigible, a Schismaticke (an Apostata) a man fallen
from the faith, and a wilful Heretic. I say therefore, not all, nor any of
these did understand an Apostacy to be a forsaking of the name of Christ and
Christianity; and therefore I hope you will confess, that your assertion is
neither Catholic nor universal.

When therefore we lay Apostacy to your Church, we do not charge you with a
total falling from Christian Religion, like that of Julian the Apostata, with
an obstinate pertinacie, in denying the principles of the faith necessary to
salvation, or a renouncing your Baptism, and consequently the name of
Christianity: We charge you not with Apostacy in such a fearful and
horrible sense, unless you will assume it to your selves; Lyra in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
but we think with Lyra, that as there was an Apostacy or revolt of many
Kingdoms from the Roman Empire, and of many Churches from the Communion of the
Roman Church; so there has been an Apostacy from the Catholic says in the
midst of the Church, not for that all at any time did forsake the true Faith,
but for that many fell from the sincerity of the Faith.

After your definition of Apostacy, you proceed in this manner; How then can
we be Apostatas? in no wise certainly: but if we err, we err as heretics,
and if we be heretics, you confess you must assign the persons, time and
place.

I have cleared you from the heinous title of Apostata in your own sense, but
not in ours; D. Potter p. 19. and 60.
yet let me tell you (with grief and pity be it spoken) your profane and
wicked application of the Apostles Creed, as you pretend, in jests, is a
fearful sign of falling from Christ and Christianity it self: and
therefore, although I may free your Church in general of that name, and in that
sense, yet it behooves you to acquit your self in that particular. But this by
way of friendly admonition.

If we err (say you) we err as heretikes] I shall easily condescend unto you
in that: For the errors in the Roman Church caused an Apostacy at first, and
was mystical and secret; now after long practice and usage in the Church, is
become an heresy; and so we may truly assent unto you, that you err as
heretics: And although I am not bound upon this acknowledgment, forthwith to
assign you the Authors of your heresies, because they came in by degrees, and
at several times, privily, and insensibly; yet because you are so inquisitive
after you predecessors, Ecclefia sua definitione non facit talem assertionem
esse haeresin, cum etiamsi ipsa non desnivisset, esset haeresis; sed id efficit
Ecclesia, ut nobis persuam censuram pateat illud esse heresin. Alph. a Castr.
l. 1. c. 8. D. Potter sect. 4. p. 101. and 97.
if you will have but patience, I will draw your pedigree in the next Section.
In the mean time let me tell you, it is another error in you to say, They
come to have the name of heresy, only by the condemnation of the Church. For
the Church condemns them, because they are heresies; contrariwise, they are
not heresies, because the Church condemns them. The Doctrines of Arrius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Eunomius, and Dioscurus, were themselves
heretical, even before they were solemnly condemned in the four general
Councels: but woe to us and all the reformed Churches, if this Tenet were true
and Catholic, for then are we condemned already. But I pray, what if your
Pope (whom you Jesuits now make the only Church) admit, I say, your Pope were
an Heretic, such as was your Pope Eugenius, or your John the 23. or Pope
Vigilius, or Pope Honorius, were they able to judge of heresies in others, that
were tainted with them themselves? or must their definitive sentence in
Cathedra stand for a Law, Si autem Papa erraret praecipien ^o vitia vel
prohibendo virtutes, etc. Bell. de Pont. l. 4. c. 5. Sand. de visibili Monarch.
l. 7. An. 1541. p. mihi 595.
and make that heresy which is no heresy? Indeed your Cardinal says, The
Pope has power to make that no sin which is sin, and accordingly he has
placed that Tenet amongst the Heretics, and by the same Law he makes that to
be heresy, which is no heresy. Your learned Sanders tells us, it is heresy
to translate the Scriptures into the vulgar Tongue, and accordingly he has
placed that Tenet amongst the Heretics. Your Chancellor of Paris and Director
of the Council of Constance tells us, it is heresy to communicate in both
kinds; and accordingly he has wrote a Tract, De haeresi communicandi sub
utraque specie. And to pass by all the Trent Articles (the denial of all or
any of which makes a man an Heretic) your infallible Pope Nicholas
proclaims, Qui Romanae Ecclesiae privilegium auferre conatur, hicproculdubio
labitur in haeresin.
that whosoever goes about to abrogate the privileges of the Church of Rome,
he is no doubt an Heretic.

If the denial of all or any of these make an Heretic, there is no doubt, all
the Reformed Churches stand guilty of that capital crime, by the law of your
Church, and your Popes doom. Yet let me tell you; the Scriptures were
translated into all Languages in the Primitive times, and Christ and his
Apostles did communicate in both kinds; and your first four general Councels
did bound and limit those privile dges of the Church of Rome, which are now
extended into all parts of the Christian world; and were all these Heretics?
If you call this Heresy, go on, and fill up the measure of your wrath, until
the time come that Christ and his Saints acquit us, or condemn us of that
imputation. In the mean time you shall do well to reflect upon your self,
and consider rather the case at this day betwixt the Sorbonists and the
Jesuits, which merely touches your own particular. Aurcl. in vindiciis,
page 383. Idem in libro sine titulo.
Hermannus Laemelius, that is to say, John Floyd, terms the propositions of
the Parisians, destructive to the Church, and heretical; on the other side,
they accuse him of heresy, Hadier in ad m^ait. ad Lect. p. 8. 9. 16. 24.
blasphemy, and impiety, and the like. Are you all members of one Church,
under one head the Pope, and are your propositions different and heretical on
both sides, and must I say, that you and the rest have the name of heresy
only by the condemnation of the Church? But you are sure the Pope will not
condemn his own members, and without his judgment they are but words of
course, or at best but course phrases delivered in heat against an adversary:
For (say you) The Fathers did forbear absolutely to condemn things for
heresies, till they had acquainted the Bishop of Rome, and had his judgment,
as is clear by St. Cyrill of Alexandria, in the case of Nestorius. Neither do
we deny, that in this and the like case the Bishop of Rome ought to be
acquainted; For Nestorius was Patriarch of Constantinople, and therefore good
reason the Bishop of Rome, as another Patriarch, should be acquainted with it,
that he might be judged by his Peers; but in other cases they sent Letters
without acquainting the Bishop of Rome: neither ought you to require or expect
that we should produce any such letters of premonition against the points of
Trent doctrine, for which we now condemn you, because those errors which then
began to spring in the Church, by custom and pertinacies became heresies in
many ages after. About that time, and in that very Age St. Austin condemned the
superstition of some in worshipping Sepulchers and Images (which at this day is
an Article of your Faith:) but you answer that he condemned the heathenish and
superstitious worship of dead, perhaps wicked men's tombs and pictures: and for
a solution of this place you refer me to Bellarmine. It seems you could give
me no satisfactory answer of your own, and therefore you return me to your
Cardinal; but I wonder why you do not recite his answer to this place. I
conceived that you were ashamed of it, or there was some misprision that made
you conceal it; and thereupon I have perused it, and find that he has
falsified both the place and meaning of it. As for instance: whereas Austin
says, Aug. de moribus Eccles. ^a thot. l. 1.6.34. p. (mihi) 774. To^. 1. Bell.
de Reliquiis Sanct. l. 2. c. 4.
I know many worshippers of tombs and pictures, your Cardinal leaves out the
word pistures, and says, I know many worshippers of tombs; and for his full
solution he subjoyneth, Austin wrote this in the beginning of his first
conversion. Again, he cites another place of S. Austan, as it were to
illustrate the former, without any respect or mention of the worshippers of
pictures, and tells us, Ibid.
that the Emperor did pray at the Sepulcher of St. Peter, yet proves not the
point in question, that he did worship the Sepulcher it self; for who doubts
but that we also may worship God at St. Peter's shrine, and yet not woe ship the
shrine it self. Nay, he goes on further, and she was that Austin did not
reprehend Chrysostom, and Hierome, but the ignorant sort of people: for
Chrysostom says, Let us adore the Tombs of Martyrs; when as there are no
such words in Chrysostom, but rather, Let us adorn them. Ut Tumulos Martyrum
de center cur ari. Chrysostom.
And whereas he says further, that Hierome wishes Marcella, a Lady, to
worship the ashes of the Prophets in Bethlem; so likewise I say, he does wish
her in the same place to lick their dust; and therefore it was not to be
understood as a thing spoken properly, but figuratively. For elsewhere he says
expressly against Vigilantius, I say not, we worship not nor adore thereliques
of Martyrs, but neither the Sun, nor the Moon, nor Angels, nor Archangels,
nor Cherubin, nor Seraphin. Neither did S. Austin speak as you say of the
heathenish and superstitious worshipping of wicked men's Tombs, Andr. resp. ad
Card. Bell. page (mihi) 49.
but of them which in ipsa vera Religione, in true Religion were worshippers of
pictures and shrines. For he shows, that his own mother Monica did usually
bring to the shrines of Saints certain Bread and Wine, August. Confess. l. 6.
c. 2.
and other provision; but because the celebrating after the manner of the
memory of the dead, did very much resemble the superstition of the heathen, she
was forbidden it by St. Ambrose; which forbidding (says he) she did so
piously and obediently embrace, as that my self did wonder to see her made
(with such ease) rather a condemner of her own ancient custom, than a
questioner of the present prohibition. For a conclusion; whereas you would
excuse it, that St. Austin did condemn only the superstitious worship of
wicked men's Tombs, your men are likewise guilty of the same worship: For your
own Cardinal will tell you, Bell. de Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 7.
that the people (of the Roman Church) did for a long time celebrate Sulpitius
for a Martyr, who afterward did appear and told them, that he had heene a
thief and was damned; Idem, ibid.
And that Alexander the third reprehended certain men for worshipping one as a
Martyr, that was killed in his drunkenness: and thus (to use your own words)
for these, I send you back again to Bellarmine for an answer.

I come to the rest of your answers. First I cited out of Ferus, that Masses,
Monasteries, Ceremonies, Feasts, Images, are otherwise now used than they were
in the beginning: I produced likewise Polydore Virgil, Erasmus, Scotus,
Agrippa, Cassander, Gregory de Valentia, in several points against your new
doctrine; now let us hear your several answers to them. Touching Ferus, he is
a Friar (say you) in your Books, but not in ours, save only in the Roman
Index of forbidden Books. Touching Polydore, he says as the Knight tells
us, and as much as any Heretic can say, but it booteth not, for his Book is
forbidden. Touching Erasmus, he is no Author for us to answer, he is branded
in the Roman Index. Touching Scotus, you neither condemn him, nor answer him:
he tells you plainly, that Transubstantiation was not received for a point of
Faith till the Council of Lateran, above 1200. years after Christ; but of
this passage Ne gry quidem: And yet you might have answered with Bellarmine,
this opinion of his is no way to be allowed; or with Gregory de Valentia, for
this saying he ought to be corrected. As touching Agrippa and Cassander, you
will not vouchsafe them an answer, but reject them inter damnatos authors, as
men to be cast out of your Synagogue. Lastly, touching Gregory de Valentia,
you sav his authority does make against the Knight, why else should he corrupt
and mangle it? But whether I or you have corrupted it, let the Reader judge; my
words were these, The Communion in one kind, when it got first footing in the
Church, minime constat, it does not appear (says Greg de Valentia:) Youto
prove my corruption, cite the words in this manner; When that custom began in
some Churches, it appears not; but that there has been some use of one kind
ever from the beginning. I showed before; so Valentia; and thus you.

But in truth, this is none of Valentia's own period, but one of your own
making, who cunningly join the latter words which follow in Valentia, 4. or 5.
lines after, to the former, with a But, which is none of Valentia's; and the
former part of the period is notably mangled by you: For thus it stands, When
that custom began in some Churches, Augustana Confessio.
it appears not, as is acknowledged by the Augustane Confession. Now in that
Confession, the words are these, The custom of both kinds remained long in
the Church, neither does it appear when, or by what Author it was changed; so
that he plainly speaks of the Church in general, and shows the corruption
here pretended by M. Floyd to be but a cavil, viz. That Valentia says this,
not of the Church in general, but of some particular Churches. Thus either you
blot and prohibit all Authors that make forus, although they be members of your
own Church, or else you vouch safethem no answer, or else you quarrel without
any just occasion offered; and this will prove an easy way for the weakest
scholar in your Church to answer all that can be produced against your faith
and doctrine.

Now as the Reader has heard your answer in the general, so let him see your
exceptions to the particulars: For whereas I said with St. Paul, Forbidding of
marriage is a doctrine of Devils, you answer as if you were angry with St.
Paul, that he has been answered more often than the Knight has fingers and
toes; and it seems, for that reason you will vouch safe him no answer at all.
This puts me in mind of the saying of Ludovicus Vives, amember of your own
Church, who assures us, Lud. Vives de Civ. Dei. l. 13. c. 24.
If St. Paul were living in these days, he would be held either a mad man, or
an heretic. And since you will not resolve me of St. Paul's meaning in that
place, I will appeal to St. Bernard, an Abbot who was restrained from marriage
by the law of your Church; who speaking of that restraint, gives us the true
sense and exposition of St. Paul in these words: All heresies have an heretic
for their founder; the Maniches had Manes, Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 66.
the Sabellians had Sabellicus, the Arrians had Arrius, etc. so that we know
the Authors of those plagues; but by what name will you term the Author of
those that forbid marriage? Surely it is not of man, or by man, and far be it
from the spirit-of God, but it is foretold (by the Apostle St. Paul) to be the
fraud and doctrine of devils.

But marriage (fay you) is not a thing evil in it self, but because it less
agrees with the holiness which is required for the exercise of Priestly
function. I pray then what think you of a concubine? Does company with her
better agree for exercise of your sunction, than with a wife? Sure I am, this
is the doctrine of your Church: nay more, your Pope Siricius would infer by
authority of Scripture, that martiage is unholy in it self, for he cites the
Text for it, They that live in the flesh cannot please God. Qui in carne sunt
Deoplacere non possunt.
Now I pray you what difference is there betwixt the ancient heretics, and the
members of your Church? The Montanists, the Tatiani, the Eucratitae, did not
prohibit marriage to all, no more than you do, but only to their perfecti,
as being a disparagement to their perfect estate; or as you interpret, not
agreeing to the holiness of Priesthood. Again, whereas I proved out of Polydore,
that the marriage of Priests was not altogether forbidden till the time of
Gregory the 7. that is to say, above a thousand years after Christ; you
answer, that which Polydore cites is most evidently false, as appears
particularly by a Canon of the first Council of Nice, and the second Council
of Carthage. Now if Polydore were mistaken, it concerns not me, for I cited
him truly, and he is a member of your Church; but the truth is, you are much
mistaken touching those two Councels. Sozom. l. 1. c. 22.
For the Council of Nice (says Sozomen) commended Paphnutius judgment, and
touching this matter of marriage, made to decree an all, but left it to each
man's own will, without any force of necessity; And the Council of Carthage
forbids not marriage in Priests, but commands abstinence from marriage
rites for a certain time, as St. Paul does, that they may more freely give
themselves to prayer, and the offices of their sacred function. Which plainly
shows, that both Priests were married in those days, and consequently, that
those two Councels make flatly against you. But Marius (say you) cannot find
the beginning of this prohibition; Polydore finds it, and yet both make for
the Knights purpose. And without doubt they do, for they contradict not one
the other: Polydore speaks of public, absolute, and real prohibition;
Marius of the first condemning it in any Priest; and these confessions may well
stand together.

CHAP. VII. The sum of his Answer to Sect. 7.
1. That the imputations of ancient Haeresies are false. 2. That Succession
besides Antiquity imports continuance, and perpetuity without intermission.
3. That Protestants have no shadow of succession in person or doctrine. 4.
That Papists have a most clear personal succession, being able to show 200.
and odd Popes succeeding the other in place and office. 5. That personal
succession is a firm argument of succession in faith.
IT is my promise in my seventh Section, to show a descent of both Religions
(as namely) that the Romish faith was derived from ancient Haeretiks, and the
Protestant faith was drawn down from Christ and his Apostles. But (say you)
It is one thing to prove a thing to have been anciently taught, another to
have been successively taught: It is true, Antiquity and Succession differ;
neither did I undertake to prove that those Haeretikes, or your Church had a
perpetual succession in person and doctrine; but for the truths sake I have
acknowledged the antiquity of your Trent faith, although descended from ancient
Haeretikes, and I made the first instance in Latin Service, and prayer in a
strange tongue brought in by Pope Vitolian (as is witnessed by Wolphius:) but
you cry out, It is a most strange absurdity to aver fuch a known falsehood
upon no other authority, page 87.
then a professed Haeretike.

And is he an Haeretike that speaks the truth of your Religion? What say you
to your prime Champion Mr. Harding? He says expressly, About nine hundred
years past, it is certain the people in some Countries had their service in
an unknown tongue, Iuel in his 3. Article, Divis. 1.
as it shall be proved of our own Country of England. Now observe the
difference, Wolphius said, the Latin Service came in after Christ about the
year (666.) Mr. Harding (who wrote these (67.) years since) as appears by
Bishop Iuels Epistle, tells us it came in (900.) years past: compute Wolphius
(666.) with Mr. Hardings time of (967.) and you shall find that they agree
about one and the same time, and therefore it was neither absurd, nor false,
which Wolphius uttered.

Neither do you disprove the reason of Wolphius, but you make a qu^ere upon
his assertion; During his (600.) and odd years) what other Lyturgies were
there in the Latin Church, but Latin? And I may as well say, what were there in
the Greek Church but Greek? But this demand makes against your Service in an
unknown tongue, not against Wolphius, who affirms not that the Latin Service
was not in the Latin Church before the year (666.) but that the Pope obtruded
it upon all Churches, even there where the Latin was not understood, as (in
England says Mr. Harding) and elsewhere. For Origin tells us before that time,
Orig contrd Celsum. lib. 8.
the Greeks call upon God in the Greek tongue, and the Latins in the Latin
tongue, and all several Nations pray unto God, and praise him in their own
nature all and mother tongues, for he that is the Lord of all tongues, hears
men praying in all tongues, none otherwise then if it were one voice pronounced
by diverse tongues; for God that rules the whole world, is not as some one man,
that has gotten the Greek or Latin, and knows none-other. The ancient
Primitive Churches therefore taught the Doctrine in a known tongue, agreeable
to the profession at this day. But the truth is, A. 30.666 A. 1.666 T. 300.666
E. 5.666 I. 10.666 N. 50.666 O. 70.666 M. 200.666 Sed and (...) nomen
sexcentinum sexagiata sex, numeru^ habens valde verisimile est quonlam
verissimum nomen hobet vocabulum. Latini enim sunt qui nunc regna^t, sed non in
hoc nos gloriabimur.] Irenae. l 5. cap 25. p mihi. 355.
the Latin Service, and the name of the Latin Church is one of the most
essential marks of the Roman Hierarchy. And I know not whether it were by
conjecture, or by inspiration, that Irenaeus above fourteen hundred years
ago, in the word Lateinos, found out the name of Antichrist, and the number of
(666.) The name Lateinos (says he) containing the number of six hundred sixty
six is very likely, because the truest kingdom has that name; for they are
the Latins that now reign, but (says he) we will not glory in this.

You proceed to the Haeretikes Ossem, and you say first, I am notably mistaken
in placing them toward the Apostles time, and withal, you have read the
Chapter there twice over, and the second time more attentively then the first,
and yet you find not any such word so cited by me.

First, Trajan, Anno 100. Bell. de script Eccles. page mihi.
this Sect continued till Trajans time, not an hundred years after the
Apostles; and therefore it was no error in me to place them toward the
Apostles time: and if you please to peruse the place a third time with your
Spectacles, you shall find these words, (...). Epiph here is. 19
Nemo quaerat interpretationem, sed solum in oratione haec dicat; and there he
repeats a Prayer, which (if you peruse the Greek text) is more express. Let
no man inquire after the meaning, only in his Prayer, Let him say such words,
(viz.) such Hebrew words which Epiphanius there sets down. Are not these
Heretics (think you) near kin to them who say, Hear Latin Mass, and say
after the Priest, it mattereth not whether you understand what he says, or
not.

From Epiphanius you fly to Saint Ambrose, and there you make a great
complaint, that I put in words of my own in the same Character with Saint
Ambrose, which are none of his (as namely) There were certain Jews amongst
the Graecians, Ambr. in 1 Cor. 14.
as namely, the Corinthians, who did celebrate the Divine Service, and
Sacraments, which the common people understood not.

I confess ingenuously, it is an error in the print, and I shall willingly
alter the letter, but not the words, at the next impression. But I confidently
profess, it is agreeable to the true sense and meaning of the Author; and the
strength of the argument is not in the words, but in the sense: and therefore I
may truly answer you with S. Austine, What folly is it to contend about words,
Aug. Ep. 174.
when there is the certainty of the thing it self?

It cannot be denied, that Ambrose taxes the Hebrews, who amongst the
Corinthians, in Tractatibus and oblationibus, used sometimes the Syriack, and
sometimes the Hebrew tongue, which without doubt, the Greeks understood not.
And therefore, in his Commentary on this place, he gives the Hebrew to
understand; If you meet together to edify the Church, Ambr. in 1 Cor. 14.
those things must be delivered which the hearers understand: for to what
purpose, or profit is it, that any one speak a tongue which he himself only
understands, and whereof he that hears can reap no fruit? And a little
after; The Apostle says, I had rather speak five words in the Church,
according to the Law, that I may edify others, than any long and large
discourse in obscurity. Again, by [Oblationibus] (which you interpret,
Offerings) Saint Ambrose cannot mean, the peoples gifts or offerings; (for there
was no need of any speech, much less a long speech at these offerings.) It must
therefore follow, that either he means the celebration of the Sacrament, or
some spiritual sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving.

You proceed from one heresy to another, (viz) from your unknown Service, to
your Transubstantiation. This Doctrine I showed, had his descent from the
Heretics, Helcesaitae, from Marcus, from the Capernaites. Touching the
Helcesaitae, (you say) It is an heretical fable: for those Heretics make two
Christ's, page 92.
we acknowledge but one, and the same both in heaven, and in the consecrated
Host.

It is true, this particular Instance is cited amongst the Tables of Theodoret;
but yet you have affinity with their Tenets, as near as cosen Germans once
removed. For as you acknowledge but one Christ in the heavens, and in the Host,
no more did those Heretics in words; for they rehearsed the Apostles Creed, Et
in Iesum Christum, and not in Christos: and as they made a twofold Christ, one
in heaven, another in earth; so likewise you teach, that Christ in the
Sacrament (here on earth) is invisible and indivisible, but in heaven at the
same time visible, and with dimensions of quantity, and distinctions of
Organs. And what is this, but consequently to make two Christ's, or at least, to
make contradictories true at the same time, of one and the same Christ, in
respect of his humane nature to be visible and invisible?

Touching Marcus the Heretic, (you say) He changed the color; but you teach,
that the color and accidents remain, and the substance is changed.

It is true; and your opinion in this, is more absurd than that of Marcus: for
he changed the Color, to make the people believe it was true blood; and you
make them believe it is blood, when there is neither taste, nor color of blood.

Lastly, touching the Capernaites; you deny there is any likeness of Doctrine.
For (say you) the Capernaites thought they should eat Christ's body
piece-meale, but we receive Christ whole and entire, not in the form and
shape of flesh, but of bread, etc.

But I pray, which of the Evangelists ever charged them with any such conceit?
The truth is, they understood the words of Christ as you do, in a gross and
carnal manner: and therefore Christ in reproving them, says not, Flesh eaten
piece-meale, profits nothing; but absolutely, The flesh profits nothing. As
touching your eating of Christ, whole and entire; it is all one with their
eating of him by piece-meale: for there may be many differences in eating, but
all eating the flesh of Christ with teeth and jaws, is Caperniticall. But you
neither see, nor taste the flesh of Christ, which they dreamed they should; for
you receive it, Not (say you) in the form of flesh, but of bread. I will
return you an Answer from a learned Divine on our side: B. Bilson, in the
difference between Christ subject, and unchristian Rebellion. page 748.
You chaw the flesh of Christ actually with your teeth, and swallow the same
down your throats, and these be proper actions, and right instruments of
external and Caperniticall eating; your eyes and your taste be not; else blind
men, and such as by reason of Sickness can taste nothing, by your Divinity
can eat nothing. Since then you concur with the Capernaites (in eating and
swallowing) notwithstanding you vary from them in sight and taste, yet your
opinion establishes a corporal eating of Christ's flesh, and a perverting of
the meaning of Christ's words, no less than theirs did.

Let me parallel them together with the most favorable construction I can, yet
your Church must have her Antiquity and descent from those Capernaites. For,
suppose the Capernaites did believe that Christ would kill himself, and give
his body to be eaten; yet the Church of Rome teaches, that Christ did eat his
own flesh, a thing no less barbarous (being meant literally) than to kill
himself. Admit the Capernaites did believe that Christ would give his flesh to
be mangled by pieces, or by halves; yet your Churches opinion is no less
cruel, to believe that in the Sacrament, Christ's flesh is swallowed up whole
at one morsel. Lastly, let it be granted that the Capernaites did believe,
that Christ's flesh should be eaten when he was dead; yet the opinion of the
Romanists is more brutish, to imagine his flesh to be eaten when he was alive
(being a higher degree of cruelty to devour men alive, Apertissimi loq^imur,
corpus Christi very a nobis attrectari, manducan, circumgestari, dentibus
atteri, sensibiliter sacrificari, non min^^^ quam ante consecrationem panis.
Alanus, lib. 3. de. Euchar. cap. 37.
than when they are dead.) Sure I am, they both agree in this, that according
to the letter they should eat the flesh of Christ, Orally, Corporally, and
Substantially: they both agree in the sensible handling of his body, in
devouring him with the mouth, and in grinding him with the teeth. Alanus the
Romanist professes openly in the name of the Church, Apertissimi loquimur, We
affirm plainly, the body of Christ is truly handled of us, carried about,
ground with the teeth, and sensibly sacrificed. Long before him Pope Nicholas
confirmed this doctrine in a Council at Rome, and taught it for a lesson to
Berengarius, Verum Corpus Domini nostii Jesus Christi sensucliter non solum in
Sacramento, sed in veritate manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi, ac fidelium
dentibus atteri. Great. de con. secr. d. 2. c. 4.2. Ego Berengarius.
to let him know the great difference betwixt Papist and Protestant in the same
Church, I believe that the body of our Lord Iosus is sensibly and in very deed
touched with the hands of the Priest, and broken, and rent, and ground with the
teeth of the faithful. This confession stands a Record in the Roman Decrees,
and unless you mince the words strangely, you must needs acknowledge that you
eat the flesh of Christ peice-meale, and then you sympathize in all things
with your first Parents the Capernaites.

From Transubstantiation you proceed to the Popes Supiemacy, wherein you say,
page 93.
I am mistaken in saying that Phocas gave that authority to the Bishop of
Constantinople. It is true this is a mistake of the Printer, but no corruption,
Rogatu Bonifacij phocas constituit sedem Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesie caput
esse omnium Ecclesiarum, nam antea Constantinopolitana Ecclesia se scribebat
primam omnium. Vsperg. in Phoc. fol. mihi.
and in the last Impression (which you should have taken you shall find (Rome)
for Constantinople: and this you might well understand to be an error in the
print, because my purpose was to show a descent of the Bishop of Romes
Supremacy, not of the Bishop of Constantinople: And this authority stands good
against you (notwithstanding all your exceptions) viz. that the Pope of Rome,
and that the Sea of Rome should be the head of all Churches; for before that
time (says Vspergensis) the Church of Constantinople did write her self
chief of all Churches; so that (antea) before that time, the Bishop of Rome
had no Supremacy: and this agrees to Pope Gregory's own confession, None of my
Praedecessors did ever use that profane Title. Nullus unquam praedecessorum
meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo uti consuevit. Greg. ep. 36. l. 4.
Nay more, you had two Bishops of Constantinople, (viz.) John and Cyriacus, who
both successively assumed the title of Universal Bishops, before ever the
Bishop of Rome had any: and those Bishops were suborned by Mauritius, a bloody
Emperor, like unto Phocas, who at that time made Constantinople the chief
place of his aboade, and by means of advancing the Bishops dignity, sought to
win the greater credit to the City. Gregory the Great, writes unto them both
severally, as they lived in their Sees, and does accuse them of Pride, of
Singularity, of error, of vanity, and blasphemy in that new title; neither does
he make claim to it himself, being then Bishop of Rome, For mine own part
(says he) I seek to increase in virtues, and not in vanity of titles; Greg.
lib. 1. ep. 30.
for if you call me universal Bishop, you deny your selves to be that which
indeed you are. And when Mauritius the Emperor did countenance the Supremacy
in the Bishop of Constantinople, Gregory greets him in this manner: Idem. l. 4.
Indict. 13. ep. 32. p. mihi.
I have received letters from my virtuous Lord, that I should be at peace with
my brother and fellow Bishop, John; indeed it well beseems a Religious
Prince to command Bishops in such things, but this was heavy to me, that my
Sovereign Lord did not rebuke him for his Pride. After the death of John the
first Oecumenicall cumenicall Bishop, Cyriacus succeeded in the Sea of
Constantinople and continued that title of Oecumenicall Bishop by the power of
the Emperor; and accordingly Pope Gregory writes again to Mauritius, not to
take part with Cyriacus, and withal writes to Cyriacus at his first entrance
into his Bishopric, Idem. l. 6. ep. 28.
that he would abolish the word of Pride, by which there was so great scandal
given to the Church.

After the death of Mauritius, Phocas (who was a soldier and fought under the
banner of Mauritius) was proclaimed Emperor by the mutineirs, who having
committed many murders and cruelties, (which Cyriacus could not approve) (for
otherwise it is probable he might have continued the title of Oecumenicall) he
called a Synod at Rome, consisting of (62.) Bishops, and by virtue of his
power, granted his Letters Patents to Boniface then Bishop of Rome, whereby
your Popes had the first authority of (Volumus and jubemus) we will and
command. And thus Phocas procured his Imperial authority by treachery and
blood; Boniface obtained his power and Supremacy by policy, and flattery of a
bloody Emperor; and this (says Platina) was magna cum contentione, with great
contention. Neither did Boniface enjoy this Title many months, nor
Phoeaeescape the heavy hand of God; for he was afterward slain by Heraclius,
Quo quis peccat, eo punitur.
as Mauritius was by him.

From Phocas you ascend to your first Progenitors, the Kings of the Gentiles,
wherein I showed the original of your Papal Supremacy, not that your Popes
did lineally succeed them, but that they did exceed them far in Tyranny.
But the Pope uses to style himself servum servorum Dei, the servant of the
servants of God, page 95.
and will you have it (say you) that by reason of his humility, there must not
be any Superiority? Surely, no; for he that said, learn of me, for I am lowly
and meek, made likewise this promise to him that would follow his lesson,
Matthew. 20.25.
He that humbles himself shall be exalted. Howsoever, it is not the title of
servus servorum, that makes him Christ's disciple, or a universal Bishop; for
in that he succeeds rather Canaan then Boniface: but he must follow Christ's
precept, and his example: his precept was, Luke 22.27.
That none of his Apostles should reign as Lord over his Brethren: his example
was, I am among you, as he that serves. Neither is it the title which he
assumes unto himself, that makes him humble; neither do his Proselites and
followers so much undervalue him as a servant: For says Gerson, Gers. de
potest. Eccles. consider. 12.
Fawning, deceitful flattery, whispereth into the ears of ecclesiastical
persons, especially of the Pope, in a shameless manner, saying; as there is no
power but of God, so there is none, either Temporal or Ecclesiastical,
Imperial, or Regal, but from the Pope, in whose thigh Christ has written,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, of whose power to dispute is sacrilegious
boldness, to whom no man may say, sir, why do you so? though he alter,
overturne, waste, and confound all States, rules, and possessions of men: let
me be judged a liar (says he) if these things be not found written by them
that seem wise in their owno eyes, and if some Topes have not given credit to
such lying and flattering words. You see then, the Popes own creatures and
servants would make all other to be servants unto him. But it is strange to see
how many of your men would palliate, and extenuate the Popes power, and
Tyrannical usurpation, sometimes under the veil and title of a servant, and
sometimes by a ceremony used at the time of his creation: your Mr. Harding
witnesses both, and seconds his humility in the title of a servant, with his
(privy) reason, that is (says he) lest the Sovereignty of honor exhibited
unto him, Iuel and Harding.
should in his own conceit lift him higher, then the degree of humane
condition; to that purpose (says he) seems the stool of easement at his
creation, to be set before him to temper the highness of that vocation, with
the base consideration of humane infirmities and necessities. That is to say,
that he may remember himself in the midst of all his glory to be but a man;
when as in truth, it is recorded, that the Porphirie stool serves to put the
Pope in remembrance of his virility, Vt sedentis genitalia abuitimo diacono
attrectentur ^sa bellicas.
that the world may know he is no woman. Howsoever it seems the title of
servant is not sufficient to teach him humility, without the stool of
easement; (and a stool of easement is no sweet badge of his humility.) But
this is as common to others as to himself; and therefore by that way of
Hamilitie, he will not merit a Superiority.

But (say you) because he must carry himself like a Servant, must he not
therefore feed the lambs, and sheep of Christ?] God forbid. But Saint Bernard,
who otherwise maintained the Popes Supremacy, told us about 500 years since,
that the Bishops of Rome, as well as other Bishops, who had the charge of Gods
Church, were not Teachers, Bernard ad Eug. lib. 2. de Confiderat.
but Deceivers; they were not Feeders, but Beguilers; they were not Pralates,
but Pilates. And certainly, if his whole Prerogative hang upon feeding the
flock, his Superiority will quickly come to naught: for most of them feed
not, many are utterly ignorant, and cannot feed; others, especially the later
Popes, feed their flocks for their own ends. August. in John, Tract. 123.
And (says Saint Austine) Whosoever they be that feed the sheep, to the end
to make them theirs, and not Christ's, they love themselves and not Christ; for
desire either of glory, or of rule, or of gain.

For a Conclusion, the Popes humility is no other, 2 These. 2.
then that which Antichrist professes, Advancing himself above all that is
worshipped, or called God: no other then Dioclesian the persecuting Emperor
used, commanding by Proclamation, Alexander ab Alexandro.
That all should fall down and kiss his feet. And as for his feeding of
Christ's sheep, Nicholaus Clemang is a Doctor of Paris, about 200 years since,
Clemang. de corrupt. Ecclesiae statu. cap. 5 and 7.
complained that the Pope, Not contented with the fruits and profits of the
Bishopric of Rome, and Saints Peter's Patrimony, though very great and
royal, laid his greedy hands on other men's flocks, replenished with milk and
wool, and usurped the right of bestowing Bishoprics, and livings
Ecclesiastical throughout all Christendom: Cap. 13.
he raised his Cardinals, as accomplices of his Pomp, from Clergymen of low
estate to the Peers of Princes, and enriched them with the dispensations, to
have and to hold offices and benefices, not two, or three, or ten, Cap. 14.
or twenty, but a hundred, or two hundred, yea sometimes four hundred, or five
hundred, or more, and those not small or lean ones, but even the best and
fattest. Nay more, instead of feeding the lambs and sheep of Christ, Cap. 19,
20.
He filled the house of God with dumb dogs, and evil beasts, even from the
highest Prelates to the basest hedge-Priests, Cap. 3, 4, 5, 9.
and all to maintain the pride and riot of his worldly state, which he has
lifted up above Kings and Emperors; and yet this man is Servus Servorum. If
this man therefore must carry himself a Servant, (as you pretend) why does he
take upon him to be Lord Paramount? If he be a servant, who shall be his
master that shall teach him obedience? Your book of Ceremonies tells us, Liber
Cerem. 3. cap. 2.
that The Pope himself gives no manner of reverence to any man alive, neither
openly by standing up, or by bowing down, or by uncovering his head. Neither
is he a servant to the Emperor; for as soon as he sees the Pope, he
worshippeth him with bare head, Idem, l. 1. Sect. 5. c. 3.
touching the ground with his knee. Again, when he comes to the foot of the
Popes Throne, he kneeleth down. Last of all, when he comes to the Popes
feet, he kisseth them (devoutly) in the reverence of our Savior. This is a
part o^ the Emperors duty, and the greatest Grandee upon earth must yield to
this humble Servant of Servants. This is that Servant of Servants, that set the
Imperial crown upon the Emperors head, Henry the sixth, (not with his hand, but
with his foot) and casting it off again with the same foot, said, I have power
to make Emperors, Celestinus 3 us.
and to unmake them again at my pleasure. Paschalis 2us.
This is that Servant of Servants, that set up the Son of the Emperor, Henry
the fourth against his Father, and dispossessed him of his Kingdom. Adrian 2us.
this is that Servant of Servants, that did correct the Emperor Frederick, for
holding the left stirrup of his horse, when he should have held the right.
Clemens 5us. luel, page 379.
This is that Servant of Servants, that caused Franciscus Dandalus the
Ambassador of Venice, to come before him tied in iron chains, and to wallow
under his Table with dogs, whilst his Holiness sat at supper. This is that
Servant of Servants, Innocentius 3us.
who caused King John to kneel down at his Legates feet, and offer up his
crown into his hand. Matthew Paris, page 844.
This is that Servant of Servants, that termed King Henry the third, the eldest
Son of King John, the Popes vassal, and England his Jade. To conclude, by this
Servant, Rex superbiae, the King of Pride, Rex superbiae in foribus est. Greg.
l. 4 Ep. 38.
(which S. Gregory foretold in his days to be nigh at hand) is now manifested
to the world.

From the Popes Supremacy, you proceed to the worship of Images; and then you
cry out, Page 96.
Here again the Knight gives more ample testimony of his notorious naughty
dealing. Well, what is this grievous accusation? Why, when he said the
Heretics had the picture of Christ made, as they said, by Pilat; why I say,
could not he have gone on with Irenaeus? Thus you.

Let me tell you, I have omitted nothing material of your exceptions, nor
nothing in the Authors; but if I should recite at large, all the words of my
Authors, which either make for us, or against you, I should have wearied both
my self and the Reader with impertinencies. Let us go on with Irenaeus; they
crown them, and propose them with the Images of the Philosophers of the world,
to wit, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and the rest; and use such other
observation toward them, as the Gentiles do. Then you triumph before the
conquest, in a vaunting fashion, Does not this answer you, Sir Humphrey? Do
you not here find a difference between their worship and ours? between
Idolatry and Religion? etc. This is too too gross for such a subtle Knight as
you are.

To pass by your idle words, I must tell you plainly, this does not answer
me. For the Carpocratrans (I confess) that as they worshipped the Images of
Philosophers, they were heathenish; but as they worshipped the Images of Christ
and his Apostles, I say, in that point of Idolatry, they are your Predecessors.
But (say you) the Heretics crowned the Philosophers Images.] It is true; and
so was Marcellina reckoned, and detested as an Heretic by Irenaeus,
Epiphanius, and Saint Austin, for having the Images of Christ and Saint Paul,
in her Closet, and setting Garlands on their heads, and burning Incense to
them. Nay more, She her self, Aug. de Here Is. here is. 7.
says Saint Austine, was of Carpocrates Sect, and worshipped the Images of
Jesu, Paul, Homer, and Pythagoras, with bowing her self, Epiph in 80 here is.
anaceph.] Idem, lib. 1. here is. 27.
and burning Incense. Epiphanius likewise charge the whole Sect of
Carpocrates, with the same fault. The Heretics called Gnostici, besides all
this, have Images painted with colors, and some of gold and silver, which they
say, are the Images of Jesu; and made in the time of Pontius Pilat, when Christ
was conversant amongst them. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24.
And so does Irenaeus also witness, they all restraining, and adjudging it to
be Heresy and Idolatry, to cense, and bow to the Image, even of Paul, or
Christ's. But do you not find a difference (say you) between their adoring the
creature of wood and color, in place of the creature, and our adoring the
Creator represented by the creature?

If there be any difference in the manner of the Pagan worship and yours, it is
in this: That the Christians who know God, and set up an Image unto him, offend
rather than the Gentiles, who know him not: and if to worship a creature, which
is the work of Gods hands, be flat Idolatry, how inexcusable is it to worship
the work of men's hands, and the shadows of Creatures represented by art, and
applied by man's vain conceit to resemble the Creator? And in this respect,
Saint Austine preferred the Pagans and Heathens before the Manichees, which
were Christians: For the Pagans worship things that be, Pagani colunt ca quae
sunt, etc. Aug. contia Faust. l. 20. c. 5.
though they be not to be worshipped; but you (says he) worship those things
that be not at all, but are fained by the vanity of your deceitful fables and
tales.

It is true, (as you say) the Heathen did worship the Creatures of wood, in
place of the Creator: Gentes Ugnum adorant, quia Dei Imagmem putant. Ambr. in
Psalm. 118. Sermon. 10.
but the reason is given by Saint Ambrose, because they think it to be the
Image of God. And do not you the like, when you worship the picture of Christ
in wood, or any other metal, I most firmly avouch, that the Images of Christ,
and the Mother of God, and other Saints are to be worshipped. Bulla Pij (4)
Act. 9.
because it is the picture of Christ? Those that worshipped the golden Calfe,
knew whereof it was made: neither could there be such a Calfe amongst them, to
think it was a true God. Tertullian up braideth the Pagans, That in their own
consciences they knew well enough, that the Gods which they worshipped were but
men, that it was to be proved in what places they were borne, where they had
lived, Tert. Apolog. cap. 10. Provocamus ad conscientiam vestram, etc.
and left a remembrance of their works, where they were buried: and may not
the like be proved by many of your Saints which you worship in your Church?

If the Pagans had adored their Images for God, there had been some difference
betwixt you; but they could answer the Christians, as Celsus the Philosopher
did Origin: Orig. contra Celsum, l. 7.
If the Christians deny things made of wood, stone, brass, or gold, to be God,
we grant it; for otherwise it were a ridiculous opinion; for who but a stark
fool did ever account them for gods? But in conclusion, they join hands with
you. These (say you) are the services unto the gods, or else certain
resemblances of the gods. I will come nearer unto you. It is the voice of the
Heathen man in Clemens, Clem. Recognit. ad Jacob. lib. 5.
We worship the Images which we may see, in the honor of that God which cannot
be seen. You may read the like excuse of a Heathen man in Saint Austine: I
worship neither the Image, nor the devil, but by a Corporal figure, Aug. in
Psalm. 113. Concion. 2.
I behold the sign of that which I ought to worship. Now change but the name
of Pagan into Papist, and these sayings will fully agree with your men: and
therefore, if it be flat Idolatry in them that know not God, the greater sin
lies at your Churches door, who join with Pagans and Idolaters, which
otherwise profess to know him, and worship him as he ought to be worshipped,
in spirit and truth. The difference only betwixt you and them, is this: They
worshipped the Images of the heathen Philosophers, aswelas of Jesus; and you
say that you worship Images of Christ, and not of the Gentiles. And herein,
your later error is greater than the first; for if you had told a Carpocratian,
Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, (because God has forbidden it)
Clemens says, he would have replied (as you do) By thy Neighbor is
understood, the Neighbor of the Gentiles. Clem. Strom. l. 3.
And thus they excuse their disordered Lust; and you to decline your Idolatrous
worship, savor of one and the same spirit, and therefore (to use part of your
own words) This doctrine is too gross for so subtle a Jesuit as you are.

To conclude, you would know how our Doctrine against Images, does succeed the
second Commandment? Here you quarrel about the word Succeed, when I say no
such thing, but that it is derived; and thus you fight with a Paper-man of your
own making. And lastly, you say the word Image is not in the Scripture, when
as your vulgar Translation in Exodus is Sculptile; and yours in Deuteronomie,
Sculpta similitudo; both which signify, A graven Image, or the likeness of
any thing. Take for a Conclusion, that friendly admonition which Origin
sometimes gave to Celsus the Pagan, Communis sensus cogitare nos cogit, etc.
Orig contra Celsum, l. 3.
Common sense does will men to think that God is not delighted with honor of
Images made by men, to represent his likeness, or any signification of him:
yea, who (says he) that has his right wits, will not laugh at him, who after
those excellent and Philosophical disputations concerning God, or the gods,
does look to Images, Ibid. l. 7.
and either offers prayers unto them, or by the contemplation thereof, as of
some visible sign, goes about to lift up his mind to the cogitation of God,
thereby to be understood. And thus much may serve touching your Patrons, and
first founders of Images.

From your Images, you proceed to your Communion in one kind, which I showed
was derived from the Manichees, etc. You to excuse the matter, say, That before
there were Manichees in the world, the blessed Sacrament was administered
sometimes in one kind, sometimes in both. You say so, but you say nothing to
prove it; and your ipse dixit will hardly carry it against a cloud of
witnesses. For confirmation of what I said, that in this point of Doctrine you
succeed the Heretics, hearken to Leo Bishop of Rome; Leo, Sermon. 4. de
Quadrages.
The Manichees, to cover their infidelity, venture to be present at our
mysteries, and so carry themselves in receiving of the Sacraments for their
more safety, that they take the body of Christ with an unworthy mouth: but in
any wise, they shun to drink the blood of our Redemption, which I would have
your devoutnesse (speaking to the people) learn; for by this sacrilegious
simulation, they may be noted by the Godly, that they may be chased away by the
Priestly power. Leo (you see) speaks of the Manichees by name, and those
Laymen also; and calls the forbearing the Lords blood, a Sacrilegious
slight. Against these Heretics also, wrote another Bishop of Rome in the same
age, Great. de Consecrat. Did. 2. Comperimus.
namely, Pope Gelasius: We have intelligence (says he) that certain men,
receiving only a portion of the sanctified Body, abstain from the Cup of the
sacred blood, who, for that it appears they be entangled with I know not what
superstition, let them either receive the whole Sacraments, or be driven from
the whole; because the dividing and parting of one and the same mystery, cannot
be without grievous Sacrilege.

What think you of your half Communion, you that brag so much of the
antiquity of your Church? The Manichees, without doubt, were the first Authors
of your Doctrine; and by the suffrages of two infallible Popes, your Sacrament
is sacrilegious. But (say you) as at that time the Church forbad the use of one
kind, so now it forbids the use of both, and may again give way when it
shall seem convenient for the use of both kinds. Thus you.

It seems you make no scruple to thwart the Institution of Christ, nor the
Custom of the Ancient Church: but because in this point your Church is branded
with Sacrilege, I think indeed you could be content to join with the
Protestants, and restore the Cup to the Lay People; but I would gladly know how
it can be done? Is not your Communion in one kind, published and decreed by
your Pope and Council, for an Article of Faith? And is it in your Churches
power to alter, and dispense with Articles of Faith at her pleasure? Bulla Pij
(4) Act. 6. and Council. Trid Sess. 13
Surely this Confession proves, that your Church can create new Articles of
Belief, which elsewhere you deny; or else this is no Article of Faith, being
contrary to the practice of the first and best ages; and by consequent, your
infallible Pope and Council, are guilty of Error and Sacrilege in a high
degree.

For a conclusion of this point, you say the words, Drink ye all of this,
(from whence we draw our succession in Doctrine) were spoken to the Apostles,
and in them to Priests, not to the Laity.

By this reason who sees not, but you may as well take the Bread from the Lay
people as the Cup, for that also was given only to the Apostles? but if the
Cup were proper for the Priests only, why do you deny it to your
Non-conficient Priests? do they stand in the place of Lay people? Nay more,
were not all Non-conficients at the time of Christ's Institution? what strange
shifts and evasions has your Church, to uphold the Novelty of your faith? I
will give you but one testimony of Antiquity: There is (says St. Chrysostom)
where the Priests differ nothing from the people, Chrysostom. 18. in 2. Corinthians.
as when we must receive the dreadful mysteries; for it is not here, as it was
in the old Law, where the Priest eats one part, and the people another,
neither was it lawful for the people to be partaker of those things of which
the Priest was; but now it is not so, but rather one Body is proposed to all,
and one Cup (to all.)

To pass by innumerable authorities of the Ancients, which you know are full
in our behalf, I will shut up this haereticall point of doctrine (for such is
the foundation of it) with a testimony of your own side. Gerard. Lorichius de
Missa publica proroganda. p. mihi.
There are some false Catholics that fear not to stop the Reformation of the
Church, what they can; these spare no blasphemy, lest that other part of the
Sacrament should be restored to the Lay people: for (say they) Christ spoke,
drink ye all of this, only to the Apostles; but the words of the Mass be
these, Take and eat ye all of this: Here I would know of them whether this
were spoken only to the Apostles: then must lay men abstain likewise from the
Element of bread; which to say, is an haeresie, yea, a pestilent and detestable
blasphemy. It is therefore consequent that both these words. (Eat ye, Drink
ye) were spoken to the whole Church.

Thus your Ancient Bishop of Rome termed your half Communion a Sacrilege, and
this latter Author of your own, terms it an haeresie, and a pestilent
Blasphemy; and this may serve to prove your descent from the Haeretikes the
Manichees in this point.

From your half Communion, you proceed to your Invocation of Angels, which I
derived from the Haeretikes Angelici; and for answer to them, you say, they
were Haeretikes swarving from the rule of the Catholic faith by excess, that
is, honoring Angels more then their due.

And this is your very case, for you do not only honor them, but religiously
worship them, and call upon them. I will compare your worship with theirs, and
let the Reader judge, if you be not the children of those haereticall Authors
called Angelici. St. Austin says, Angelici in Angelorum cultu inclinati. Aug.
de haeres. c. 35. Angelici vocati quia Angelos colunt. Isid. Orig. in l. 8. c.
5. Rhem. Annot. in Apoc. 19. Sect. 4.
that those haeretikes were inclined to the worship of Angels; or as Isidore
notes, they were called Angelici, because they did worship Angels. The one
says, they were but inclined to worship, the other says, they did worship. On
the other side you teach, that there is a religious reverence, honor, and
adoration, which is not to be denied to Angels, nay more, you make it a point
of Faith, and have decreed that the Saints and Angels reigning with Christ are
to be worshipped and prayed unto. Art. 8. in Bulla Pij. 4.
Thus whereas the ancient Haeretikes were but inclined to adoration, your men
have made it a doctrinall determination flatly to adore them; and whereas they
did worship them with a religious honor, (as a custom learned from the
Heathen Philosophers) you receive it as a Dogmaticall resolution of your Faith,
delivered by your Trent Fathers; and surely in this if there be any excess in
the worship, it is in your selves.

Again, those Haeretikes learned their lesson from the Gentiles; For Celsus
the Philosopher had said of the Angels, Orig. lib. 8. contra Celsum.
that they belong to God, and in that respect we are to put our trust in them,
and make Oblations to them according to the Laws, and pray unto them that they
may be favorable untous: And is not this your very doctrine? and yet these men
(say you) swerve from the rule of the Catholic faith. Observe then what was
the Chatholike doctrine of those times; Origin returns his answer in the name
of all true believers, Idem Ibid.
Away with Celsus council, saying, that we must pray to Angels, and let us not
so much as afford any little audience to it. Again, St. Chrysostom was living
in the fourth age, when Apostrophes began to be used to Saints and Angels, yet
he tells us, it was the Devils doing to draw men unto the calling upon
Angels; These (says he) be the enchantments of the Devils, though he be an
Angel, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Homil. 1.
though an Archangell, though they be Cherubins, endure it not; For, neither
will those powers themselves admit it, but reject it, when they see their Lord
dishonored; I have favored thee, says he, and have said, call upon me; and
do thou dishonor him with calling upon others? This agrees with the doctrine
of Theodoret, showing, Theod. in Coloss. 3.
that the Synod of Laodicea following that rule, made a Law, that they should
not pray unto Angels, nor forsake our Lord Jesus Christ: and accordingly, they
decreed it with a curse, Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and
depart aside, Council. Lao. dic. Can. 35. Anno 364.
and invocate Angels, and make meetings, which are things forbidden. If any man
therefore be found to give himself to this privy Idolatry, let him be
accursed. Merlin Edit. 1530. fol. 68. Crab Edit. 1538. fol. 216.
This Canon makes so plainly against your Church doctrine, that both Merlin
and Crabbe (as I have showed) have turned the word Angelos into Angulos, and so
by transposition of a letter, say, we must not leave the Church of God, and
have recourse to (Angles) or corners. Heiron. Epist. ad Riparium.
And St. Heirom at the same time opposed Vigilantius, and professes of
himself and the Catholic Christians of his time, We do not adore or worship
the Relics of Martyrs, no nor the Sun, nor Moon, nor Angels, nor
Archangels, nor Cherubins, nor Se raphins, nor any name that is named in this
world, or in the world to come, lest we should serve the creature, rather then
the Creator, who is blessed for ever, You see then, by these few observations,
that you are righth descended from the Haeretikes in this point, and
accordingly you have swerved (with them) from the Catholic faith by excess;
Wherefore I will conclude this Invocation, with that memorable passage of St.
Austin, August. lib. Confess. 10. c. 42.
Whom should I find that might reconcile me unto thee? should I have gone unto
the Angels, with what prayer? with what Sacraments? Many endeavoring to
return unto thee, and not being able to do it by themselves, as I hear, have
tried these things, and have fallen into the desire of curious visions, and
were accounted worthy of illusions.

From your Angell-like or Angelical predecessors, you proceed to the Cathari
or Puritans. These were Novations (say you) who out of pride and self
conceits, as if they were more clean and holy, did condemn Catholics. And
do not your Cloister Monks so conceive of themselves, who believe they do
more then God commanded, and that they can supererrogate; and do they not
condemn the Reformed Catholics as the Novatians did? To come nearer to you,
is not the proud generation of Merit-mongers derived from the Catharists?
Epiph. haeres. 59.
But (says Epiphanius) whilst these men call themselves Puritans, by this very
ground they prove themselves to be impure; for whosoever pronounces himself
to be pure, does therein absolutely condemn himself to be impure.

Again, touching your Predecessors, who for bad Marriage, I cited (out of
Epiphanius, and St. Austin) the Haeretikes Tatiani, and the Manichees; But say
you, That they did disallow it, especially in Priests, I do not find it in
Epiphanius. It is true, neither did I cite him for it, but I cited Saint Austin
in the Margent, which you wittingly omitted. Aug. ep. 74.
Yet both Authors declare the Haeretikes to be founders of your doctrine.
Continentiam viro hic praedicat, nuptias autem scortationem and corruptionem
putat. Epiph. haeres. 46. and 47. p. mihi 93.95. Auditores eorum ex carnibus
vescuntur, and si voluerint uxores habent, quorum nihil faciunt qui vocantur
electi. Aug. ep. 74. Qui cum uxore exercent carnale commercium in carne sunt
and Deo placere non pessunt, sancti esse non possunt. Did. 82. cap.
Proposuisti.
Epiphanius shows that the Tatiani had two proper marks of your Church; for
their first Leader, Tatianus accounted of Marriage, as whoredom and
corruption, and forbad the eating of meats. St. Austin likewise tells us that
the Manichees did permit their hearers to eat flesh, to use husbandry, and to
marry wives, but those which were called Elect, did use none of those things.
Now if those Elect were not the hearers, they must needs be their Teachers, and
consequently their Priests; And thus you have two forts of Haeretikes to defend
your Monasticke life, the one (viz.) the Tatiani, who agree with Pope Innocent,
saying, They which live in the flesh cannot please God, neither can they be
holy. The other (viz.) the Manichees who permit Marriage to all, but to their
Priests.

Lastly, touching the Collyridian Haeretikes, so called from the Collyrides or
cakes which certain women used to offer to the blessed Virgin; I say again,
they were your first Leaders, and particularly for this reason, which you
allege to excuse your selves, Because they did exceed the measure of honor
due to our blessed Lady. Page 99.
And as touching the Antidico-Marianitae (with which haeresie you charge us)
they were such who out of malice to the blessed Virgin, being puffed up with
pride or envy (says Epiphanius) would possess men, Epiph. haeres. 78 p. mihi.
244.
that after the birth of our Savior, Joseph knew Marie, which never Protestant
to my knowledge, ever taught, or thought. Therefore by way of prevention, you
put this as a scandal upon our Church, to excuse your own; But the truth is,
we ascribe honor of pre-eminence unto that glorious person, before all other
vessels of blessedness; we proclaim it with the Angel Gabriel that she was
highly favored, and blessed among women; Luke 1.28.
but withal we testify with Epiphanius, Christ said unto her, woman, what
have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet come; lest any man should think
our Lady was of greater excellency, Epiph. l. 3. haeres. 79. contr.
Collyridianos.
he called her woman, as it were prophesying of the kinds and sects of
haeresies that were to come into the world; lest any man having too great an
opinion of that Holy Saint, should fall into this haeresie and into the dotage
of the same. And as touching her perpetual virginity, that golden saying of
St. Hierome against Helvidius we unfainedly profess and testify with heart
and voice, Hleron. contra Helvidium.
That God was borne of a Virgin, we believe because we read it; That Mary had
Matrimonial company with her husband after her delivery, we do not believe,
because we read it not. And to make good my assertion, that you tread in the
steps of those haeretikes, which did exceed the measure of honor due unto our
Lady, first look upon Epiphanius, who opposes this haeresie, he tells us,
Although Mary be beautiful, Epiph. l. 3. haeres. 79.
and holy, and honorable, yet is she not to be adored; For these women
worshipping St. Mary, renew again the Sacrifice of Wine mingled in the honor
of the Goddess Fortune, and prepare a Table for the Devil, and not for God,
as it is written in the Scriptures, Their women boult flower, and their
children gather sticks to make fine Cakes, in the honor of the Queen of
Heaven. Therefore let such women be rebuked by the Prophet Jeremy, and let
them no more trouble the world, and let them not say, we worship the Queen of
Heaven.

Here we see, the words which were spoken of the Heathenish Idols, were
applied by Epiphanius unto the Mother of Christ, not to deface the blessed
Virgin, but to declare the fond errors of the Haeretikes. Now let us compare
this doctrine with yours. Bernardinus de Busto, Adornamentum regni terreni est,
quod habeat Regem and Reginam etc. Bernard. de Busto part 9. Sermon 2. Bb. Vshers
answer to a shalling. p. mihi. (437.)
who was living almost 200. years since, tells us, That it is for an ornament
of an earthly Kingdom, that it should have both a King and a Queen, and
therefore when any King has not a wife, his subjects often request him to take
one. Hereupon the eternal King and Omnipotent Emperor minding to adorn the
Kingdom of Heaven above, did frame the Blessed Virgin, to the end that he
might make her the Lady and Empress of his Kingdom and Empire, that the
Prophecy of David may be verified, saying unto her in the Psalm, upon thy
right hand did sit the Queen in clothing of Gold. He tells us further, that
your Pope Sixtus the fourth, granted an Indulgence of twelve thousand years
for every time, that a man in the state of grace should repeat this short
Salutation of the Virgin, Hail most holy Mary, the Mother of God (the Queen
of Heaven) the Gate of Paradise, the Lady of the world; thou art a singular and
p^re Virgin, thou did receive Christ without sin, thou did bear the
Creator and Savior of the world: Deliver me from all evil, and pray for my
sins. Amen.

Look upon Gregory the Great, printed at Antwerpe, Apud Iohannem Keerbergium.
1615. Tom. 1. p. mihi 490.
Anno 1615. and there you shall find the Miter of Pope Sylvester the first, who
was living Anno 314. with the picture of the blessed Virgin, and Christ in her
arms, figured with this Motto, Ave Regina Coeli; Hail Queen of Heaven. And
this was in the same age, wherein Epiphanius complains of the women's custom
in his days, We worship the Queen of Heaven.

Lastly, Bellar. in Praef. de Eccles. Militante.
Bellarmine himself does term her (Regina Coeli) the Queen of Heaven: which
attribute is rebuked, and forbidden by Hieremie, says that ancient Father, and
in his days condemned for a Heresy. Constituta quippe est super omnem
creaturam, et quicueque Jesus curuat genu, matriquoque primus supplicat, and
filij gloriam cum matre non tam communem i^di^o quam eandem. Arnold. Carnotens.
tract. de laudibus Virginis.
And as touching the excessive honor (which you complain of) that the
Heretics gave unto our Lady, I verily believe, if your Churches Magnificats be
compared with theirs, they will be found to exceed them far. For first, the
same Author testifies, That she is constituted over every Creature; and
whosoever boweth his knee unto JESUS, does fall down also, and supplicate unto
his Mother, so that the glory of the Son may be judged not so much, to be
common with the Mother, as to be the very same.

Neither are your men contented to make her the Queen of Heaven, and to make
her equal to him, whom she her self termed her Savior and Redeemer; but your
Schooleman Bonaventure goes in a high strain, and in one of his Orizons
prescribed to her, he says, O Empress, Iure Matris impera tuo dilectiss^mo
filio, nostro Jesus Christo. Bonav. Corona. B. Mariae Virginis Operum. Tom. 6.
edit. Romans An. 1588
and our most kind Lady, by the authority of a Mother, command thy most beloved
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, (or as we may read in the 15th Psalm of your
Ladies Psalter) Incline the countenance of thy Son upon us, compel him by thy
prayers, to have mercy upon us sinners. But that which is most remarkable, the
Psalms of David, which were wholly framed and dedicated to the honor of our
Lord, E tranverso, are all applied to the name and honor of our Lady: as for
Instance; Psalter Bonav. edit. Partsiis. An. 1596. Psalm. 15.31.56.71.94.
Preserve me o Lady, for in thee have I put my trust. Blessed are they whose
hearts do love thee, o Virgin Mary, their sins by thee shall mercifully be
washed away. Have mercy upon me, o Lady, have mercy upon me, because my
heart is prepared to search out thy will, and in the shadow of thy wings will I
rest. Give the King thy Judgments, o Lord, and thy mercy to the Queen his
Mother. O come let us sing unto our Lady, let us make a joyful noise to Mary
our Queen, that brings salvation. And for a conclusion, Let every spirit,
Psalm. 150.
or every thing that has breath, praise our Lady.

After all these, and many such like passages of excessive honor, attributed
to our Lady, your Bernardinus at last concludes: Truly, if it be lawful to
speak it, thou in some respect did greater things to God, then God himself
did to thee and to all mankind. Volo ergo ego dicere quod tu ex humilitate
reticuisti. Tu enim folus cecinisti. Quia fecit mihi magna qui potens est, ego
vero cano and dico. Quia tu fecisti majora ci qui potens est. Bernardin. de
Bust. Martial. part. 6. Sermon. 2. memb. 3.
I will therefore speak that, which out of thy humility thou have past in
silence. For thou only did sing, He that is mighty has done to me great
things; but I do sing and say, That thou have done greater things to him that
is mighty.

Now I appeal to your self, and to all your fellow-Jesuites, whether your
Hyperdulia to the blessed Virgin be not transcendent, or (to use your own
words) does not exceed the measure of honor due unto our Lady? And
consequently, whether in this particular, upon your own confession, you are
not descended from the Collyridian Heretics, your first parents?

This is so apparently true, that you know no way to free your selves from the
guilt of Heresy, but by waving the question, telling us, The line should be
drawn along by a continued succession, from the beginning to the end: whereas
I told you at first, I did not undertake to prove that those Heretics, or your
Church, had a perpetual succession in person and doctrine; but to show, How
near affinity you have with their adulterate issue. (For those were my very
words;) and thereupon I concluded, that you had no succession in person and
doctrine: but let us hear your answer? This is so false, and so apparently
false, as that it is not to be doubted, but he that shall aver it, will make
no soruple of any lie, how lewd soever. Thus you.

Good words, and found proofs would better become men of your profession. If
you affirm that you have a Lineall Succession, the proof lies on your side:
and when I shall see it as plainly proved, as spoken, I shall readily confess
my error, till then, let me tell you, it is not your Catalogue of Popes, which
you say are sold, and printed at London, that can make a firm agreement of
succession in Faith. For by that reason, our Queen Elizabeth of blessed
memory, succeeded Queen Mary in Faith; and consequently, our Faith must be
good by your own confession. By that reason, Ahaz and Manasses, that shut up
the door of the Temple, succeeded David in the Faith. By that reason, Pope
Liberius the Arrian, succeeded Julius a Catholic Bishop, in the Faith. By that
reason, your Cardinal Poole succeeded Bishop Cranmer our Protestant Martyr, in
the Faith. This (most firm Argument) therefore (as you call it) is but weak
and infirm; and accordingly it was resolved by Saint Ambrose, and the ancient
Fathers, Ambr. de Poenit. cap.
They have not the succession of Peter, that want the faith of Peter.

In fine, if for no other cause, yet for this alone, your succession in Faith
is interrupted, because you your self confess, that some Articles which are
received as points of Faith in your Church, are different from those which were
received in the Primitive Churches; and therefore want succession in the true
doctrine. And that you may yet farther know there was an interruption of the
true Faith in succeeding Ages, Genebr. Chrone. lib. 4.
your own Genebrard confesses, that there were fifty Popes succeeding one
another, rather Apostaticall, than Apostolical. Cardinal Bellarmine in his
Chronology, tells us of six and twenty Schisms in the Papacy, wherein it was
questionable betwixt the Popes and Antipopes, who were the true successors of
Peter. Your Cardinal Baronius tells us, that base Harlots bear all the sway at
Rome, Baron. An. 912.
and gave Bishoprics at their pleasures, and intruded their Paramours into
Peter's chair, false Popes, whose names are written in the Catalogue of Popes,
only to note and design the times. It is not then your Catalogue of Popes
(which you so much brag of) that can free you from Heresy, or make good your
succession in the Faith: and therefore I will conclude as I first began; The
pedigree of the Romish Faith is drawn down from the ancient Heretics, and
the Protestant Faith from Christ and his Apostles.

CHAP. VIII. The sum of his Answer to Sect. 8.
1. That I allege but three Authors, Adrian, Coster, and Harding; and them
falsely, or impertinently, for three several points of the Protestant Faith,
none for the universality of it in general, as the title promises. 2. That it
is not sufficient to name some in the Roman Church, who held some of our
opinions, but that I must show a distinct company from the Roman, making a
Church. 3. That it is not to purpose, to show the Antiquity and Universality
of those points wherein we agree with you, but in those other points wherein we
disagree. 4. That if it were granted, the Protestant Church in former ages lay
hid in the bosom of the Roman Church, that proves it to have been invisible,
rather than visible.
The Reply. IN the eighth Section, I assumed to prove the Antiquity, and
Universality of our Religion, by and with the consenting testimonies of the
Roman Church: you tell me, It is a bold and unlikely adventure, and it is
shameless and impudent.

These words be like a house full of smoke without fire: but what is the
occasion of all this heinous complaint? Forsooth, the Knight brings not one
Author, I say, not one for the Universality and Antiquity of his Church. And
is this so grievous an accusation? Surely, I thought there was none so ignorant
or impudent, as to deny both the Universality and Antiquity of three Creeds;
two Sacraments instituted by Christ; the two and twenty books of Canonical
Scriptures; of the first four General Councels; of the Apostolic Traditions;
of the Ancient Liturgies; of the Ordination of Priests and Deacons. These are
our Tenets, and these were the particular Instances which I made: and to bring
Authors for the proof of these, as if we made a doubt of that which all true
Christians did generally receive and believe, I say with St. Austin,
Insolentissimae dementiae. Aug.
It were a sign of most insolent madness.

But admit I should produce some Authors for proof of this general belief,
would their Authority free me from your terms of Shameless, and impudent
adventure? Certainly no: for (say you) If he should have one, two, or three,
or ten men, it would not be sufficient for him, unless he have the Authority
of the Catholic Church, or Church of Rome.

To cite many Authors, or to bring none, then is all alike to you; for in your
doom, nothing will free me from the name, and punishment due to Heresy, but
the authority of the Church: and yet in this, you have granted me more than I
could expect; for you have given me liberty to take my authority from the
Church, so it be from the Catholic, or the Roman. And hereby you have made
your Roman Church distinct from the Catholic, which is most true; which, both
you your self, and most of your fellow Jesuits have made all one, and
confirmed by the title of (Roman Catholic) in all your writings.

This being granted, I proceed to the rest of your exceptions. In this Section
(say you) he brings only three Catholic Authors, Adrian, Costerus, and
Harding, but no word for Antiquity, or universalitie. Thus you.

He that shall read my Section in Via tuta, with this your Answer, must needs
confess that you deal not fairly, nor ingeniously with me: for sometimes you
leap from the beginning of a Chapter to the end, then you return again to
the beginning, being willing to conceal or confound the truth of my
Assertions. You so mingle my words with your own in the same Character, that a
prudent Reader can hardly discern mine from yours: but most usual it is with
you to cry down my words with bitter passages, and decline the question in all.
As for Instance, in this Section, whereas I said, the Church of Rome does
confess the Antiquity, and Universality of our Religion long before Luther,
I instanced in our three Creeds, and the rest before named. One while you cry
out of my impudency, that I cite no Authors; another while, that if I did cite
them, they would not serve my turn: but you never mention either the Creeds,
or Scriptures, or Councels, or any of the points which you well knew had
Antiquity, and Universality in the name and opinion of all Christians. After
that, you fly to the later end of my Section, and there you tell me, I cite
but three Authors, and yet none prove the Antiquity or Universality of our
Faith. Then you go back again, and you tell the Reader, I say nothing here
of the man's notable cunning and falsehood, in making him believe, as if we did
excuse our selves in those things whereof they accuse us.

If such extravagant excursions and reproaches you call a Reply, or a Catholic
Answer, I will lay my finger on my mouth, and say with your Cardinal, Qui
decipi vult, decipiatur.

Briefly, the substance of my Assertion was this: The three Creeds, the
Canonical Scriptures, the Apostolic Traditions, the four first general
Councels, and the rest were so generally received in the bosom of the Roman
Church, that for that reason it might seem a senseless question, to demand
where our Church was before Luther.

Next I showed that the positive Doctrines of our Church (mentioned in our
(39.) Articles) were contained in a very few points, and those also had
Antiquity and Universality; then I showed that those doctrines which they
obtruded upon us, were but Additions and Negative Tenets in our Articles, and
that many of those additions were condemned, or at least excused, by their own
men: And I instanced in three Authors before mentioned, for three several
points of their Doctrine; and this is the substance and true meaning of that
Section; and thus much by way of advertisement to the moderate Reader. Now to
answer you distinctly to that you have produced confusedly.

Your first exception is touching Pope Adrian the sixth: you say, It is not as
Sr. Humphry puts it, to wit if the consecrated Bread be Christ, but if it be
rightly consecrated.

And do not you still by Adrians confession excuse your adoration, by implying
a condition? and is it not all one according to your doctrine? For if it be
rightly consecrated, it is Christ, if not, it is a Crust, and no man amongst
your Communicants knows what it is, because he knows not the Priests
intention. Take it therefore which way you will, yet my assertion stands true;
we condemn you for adoring the Elements, for ought you know, of bread and
wine, because it does depend upon the intention of the Priest, whether Christ
be there or no; but yet you cannot condemn us for adoring Christ's, rent body
in the Heavens: and however the Priests do consecrate, yet (says Gerson) when
the host is adored, that condition is ever at lest to be supposed (if it be
rightly consecrated) that is, Gers. compend. Theol. Tit. de tribus virtut. p.
111.
if it be truly the body of Christ; And this is that Pope Adrian has
delivered by your own confession, and therefore they are not to be cleared
from Idolatry, because they intended to worship one God, (as indeed there was
but one God) but because they adored him there where he was not, and in that
manner as they supposed him to be. The case (says Catharinus) is like in the
host not consecrated: Cathar. Annot. in Caiet. p. mihi 134.
For God and Christ is not adored simply, but as he is existing under the
forms of bread and wine. If therefore he be not there, but it be found that
Divine worship is given to a creature insteede of Christ, there is Idolatry
also: For even in this regard they were Idolaters who adored Heaven, or any
other thing, supposing with themselves that they adored in it the Divinity,
whom they called the soul of the world. Compare then the certainty of your
faith, with ours (which is the point in question) and tell me if in this we are
not more certain and safe then you can be. First, your own Bellarmine tells
us, Bell. de Iustific. l. 3. c. 8.
that none can be certain by the certainity of faith that he does receive a
true Sacrament. No man (says Andreas Vega) can believe assuredly, that he
receives the least part of the Sacrament, Vega l. 9. de Iustific. c. 17.
and this is so surely to be credited, as it is apparent that we live; And both
give one and the same reason for it: For there is no way, except it be by
Revelation, that we can know the intention of the Minister, either by outward
appearance, or by certainty of faith. From this dangerous consequence, we
condemn your adoration, and resolve to let you know from your own men, Th.
Salistar. de art Praedicandi. c. 25.
that No man, be he never so simple, or never so wise, ought precisely to
believe that this is the body of our Lord that the Priest has consecrated, but
only under this condition, if all things concerning the consecration be done
as appertains; for otherwise he shall avouch a creature to be the Creator,
which were Idolatry.

Now as this way in the general is uncertain and dangerous; so likewise there
are many other ways, which may easily occasion this Idolatry; and therefore
you cannot deny us to be in the more certain and safe way. As for instance
Johannes de Burgo, who was Chancellor of Cambridge about (200.) years since,
gives us to understand that a Priest may fail in his intention many ways. As
for example, Pupilla Oculi c. 3. and 5. etc.
If the Bread be made of any other then wheaten flower, which may possibly
happen, or if there be too much water in quantity, that it overcomes and alters
the nature of wine; if the wine be changed into vinegar, and therefore cannot
serve for consecration; If there be thirteen cakes upon the Table, and the
Priest for his consecration determine only upon twelve, in that case not one
of them all is Consecrated: Lastly, if the Priest dissemble, or leave out the
words of Consecration, or if he forget it, or mind it not, in all and every of
these ways, there is nothing Consecrated, and consequently the people giving
divine honor to the Sacrament all Bread or Cup, commit flat Idolatry.

When I hear the Apostle proclaim to all Christians, that he which doubts
is condemned already; I cannot choose but pity the state and condition of that
miserable man, who has a doubtful, perplexed, and uncertain faith, who
takes all upon trust, and upon the report, sometimes of an Hypocrite,
sometimes of a malicious Priest, who has no intention at all to administer the
true Sacrament. History of Trent.
For (says your Trent history) if a Priest having charge of four or five
hundred souls were an Infidel, but a formal Hyppocrite, and in absolving the
Penitent, baptizing of children, and Consecrating the Eucharist, had an
intention not to do that which the Church does, it must be said that the
children are damned, the penitent not absolved, and that all remain without
the fruit of the Communion.

Now let the Reader judge which doctrine is most certain and safe, either that
of your Church which may occasion flat Idolatry in the worshiper, or our sursum
corda, with hearts and eyes lifted up to Heaven, where we adore our Savior
Christ in his bodily presence according to the Article of your Faith and ours;
and this is agreed on both sides to be without fear or peril of Idolatry.

Lastly, as if you were guilty of false accusations, you say, suppose Adrian
has erred in this, or in any other point, does it follow that he agreeeth with
you in all other? Then you tell a story of the Popes Bull against Luther.

You quarrel with your own shadow, for I had no relation at all to your Pope,
nor made any instance of him more then in a Marginall Note; but since you stand
so much upon the justification of his Doctrine, hearken I pray wherein he
makes for you, and wherein he is wholly against you. Agrippa de vanit. scient.
c. 64. p. mihi. cap. de Lenonia.
Your Agrippa tells us, that in these latter times Pope Adrian erected a most
famous Stews at Rome. I confess in this particular you may challenge him
wholly for your own; But whereas you say he detested Luthers doctrine as most
wicked and damnable, you might have added likewise, he wished a reformation of
his own, and withal taught that doctrine for which you condemn both Luther
and all his adherents for Haeretikes. History of Trent. l. 1. page 25. 26. and
30.
First, witness his Nu tio Francisco Chiericato, who had Commission from his
Holiness, To ackowledge that the confusion of the Church, was caused
especially by the sins of Priests and Prelates, confessing that some
abominations, some years since, were committed even in the Holy See, that
there were many abuses in spiritual things, so that it may be said, that the
infirmity is passed from the head, to the members, from the Popes, to the
inferior Pelates; And lastly, he resolves himself that he would use all
diligence that the Church of Rome should be first reformed; and the rather,
because he saw all the world did earnestly desire it. And that you may know
the Church of Rome, as well as the Court of Rome was fallen into errors and
heresies, he himself publishes, that he heard it related of his Predecessor,
Pope John the 22th. That he would have induced the University of Paris to
believe, that the souls of the righteous do not see God face to face; and
that no man should take his degree in Divinity, unless he should first
swear to maintain that perstiferous. Heresy, and perpetually to cleave unto
it. And that you may be assured he was not wholly yours, he affirms for
certain, one Position which would confound all Popery, Adrian in 4. de
Sacram. Confir. sub finem.
(viz.) That the Pope may err, even in things touching the Faith, and avouch
that which is Heresy y his determination, or decree. And thus your Pope Adrian
complains of many abominable things in his own Church: he tells us, his
Predecessor was reputed a Heretic: he confesses, that both himself, and all
his Successors after him, were in possibility of erring, even in matters of
Faith: and it is very probable in his erring opinion, he began to erect that
most noble Brothell-house in his own See. And thus much touching the Marginall
note of Pope Adrian.

Your second exception is touching Costerus, occasioned by these words, We
accuse them for taking away the Cup from the Lay People; they excuse it, that
it was not taken up by the commandment of the Bishops, but is crept in, the
Bishops winking thereat (says Costerus.) In answer to this, say you, I would
know what excuse you can find for such a notorious lie.

Let the Reader judge, whether this modesty of yours deserve an Anser, or
whether this saying of Costerus may not be termed, an Excuse. Howbeit (say you)
this custom came in, not so much by the commandment of the Bishop, as by the
peoples use and practice.] Well, take it as you would have it; yet, I say, his
meaning must be understood not at all by the Commandment of the Bishops, for
that which is done by Command cannot be said to have crept in. But the truth
is, under color of quarrelling with words, and giving me the lie, you seek to
dazzle the eyes of your Reader, and when you omit the weightier things of your
Church, then you question, Where is Costerus testimony for Antiquity,
Universality, Certainty, and Safety, when as you know well this testimony
was not cited for that end; And thus you strain at a Gnat, and swallow a
Camel. Let us hear the rest of your verbal discourse.

Since you are so shameless as to say, That we do not condemn you for
receiving in both kinds, Look into the Council of Trent, and see whether you
do not find a heavy curse, etc. Thus you.

And are you sure that your Council has sufficiently cursed us, For following
Christ's example, and receiving in both kinds; for those were my very words,
Following Christ's example: (which you altogether omitted.) If therefore we have
altered any part of Christ's Institution, I say again, Curse on in Gods name,
and let your curses take effect: but if the celebration of our Mysteries be
answerable to his will and word, that first ordained them, you curse not us
whom you would hurt, but him that your cursed tongues cannot hurt, which is,
God to be blessed for ever. But let us hear your Councels? The Council of
Trent (say you) lays a heavy curse against any that shall say, that all and
every of the Faithful ought, by the precept of God, or necessity of
salvation, to receive both kinds.

This cursing Council touches not my Assertion: for this Canon speaks of
the Precept of Christ, whereas I spoke of his Example only. Bell. de Euch,
(...). cap. 7.
and for proof of this, we have Bellarmines testimony as well as ours: It is
not to be doubted, but that is best, and sit to be practiced, which Christ
himself has done. And therefore my Assertion still stands good, (viz) You do
not condemn us for following Christ's example.

Touching the Council of Constance, it condemns not our receiving in both
kinds, but prevents the condemnation of her own. They decreed their half
Communion with this Caution, Council. Constant. Sess. 13.
that If any should obstinately maintain that it was unlawful, or erroneous,
to receive in one kind, he ought to be punished, and driven out as an
Heretic. And howsoever you would seem to condemn our Assertion, yet you
condemn not our practice as unlawful; for the Council of Basil, not twenty
years after your Decree in the Council of Constance, granted the use of the
Cup to the Bohemians.

Your third exception is touching Mr. Harding, who in the question betwixt him
and Bishop Iuel, of Private Mass, stands not to justify his solitary, or
private Mass, but rather excuses it in this manner; Iuels Articles of Private
Mass. page
That it is through their own default and negligence, whereof the godly and
faithful people, have sithence the time of the Primitive Church much
complained. This (say you) has no sense, for here is a Relative (Their)
without an Antecedent. And let me tell you, this is a poor Pedanticall
observation; for to spend many lines about such toys and trifling words, and
to pass by the maine sinew and strength of the Citation; this is to confess
in plain terms, that you cannot justify your doctrine: and the rather it
appears in this particular point, wherein Master Harding does not only
condemn the people for their neglect, but excuses hereby your Churches
ordinance in general, as being not guilty of the coldness of the people. Nay
more, he plainly intimates the Antiquity, and Universality of our Doctrine
in these words; Iuel. Divis. 7. p. mihi, 11.
In case the people might be stirred to such devotion; as to dispose themselves
worthily to receive their Howsel every day with the Priest, as they did in the
Primitive Church; what would these men have to say? And as touching Safety, and
Certainty of our Doctrine, he freely expresses his thoughts, and liking of
our Communion of Priest and People, saying; It were to be wished, Iuel in Art.
1. Divis. 9 p. 17.
as oftentimes as the Priest does celebrate the high Sacrifice, that there were
some, who worthily disposed, might receive their Rites with him, and be
partakers Sacramentally, of the Body and Blood of Christ with him: and he
gives a reason for it, Idem, Divis. 25. p. mihi, 45.
Because it would be more commendable, and more godly on the Churches part. And
thus much touching your three Authors, whom (say you) I have so egregiously
belyed.

Touching your worshipping of Images, I refer it to his proper Section. And
whereas we charge you with flat Idolatry in the adoration of the Sacrament,
of Relics, of Images, and the like; howsoever, I say, you excuse your selves
with the manner of your adoration, yet (to our endless comfort be it spoken)
you cannot charge us in the Positive Doctrine of our Church; no, not with the
least suspicion of Idolatry. This I told you before, and (blessed be God) you
have not wherewith to charge us in your Reply. But you say, It is far greater
evil for you to be truly charged with Heresy, than for us to be charged with
Idolatry: yet neither you, nor all your fellow-Jesuits could ever prove us
guilty of either. But what may we think of your Church, which is justly
charged, and highly guilty of both? Your Popes (which the Jesuits resolve to be
the Church) are condemned for Heretics by your Councels, acknowledged
Heretics by the Popes themselves, and condemned of Heresy by your best
learned Divines. Your worship of Images and Saints, concludes in flat
Idolatry; and in particular (by the Doctrine of your own Church) the
adoration of the Sacramental Bread and Cup, (for want of a right intention)
becomes an Idol in the Temple. These things I have in part proved, which in
place convenient, shall be more fully handled hereafter.

But it is observable, after I had ended my Section with this point of
Idolatry, I say, after this conclusion, you fly back to the middle of the
chapter, and now question me where our Church was before Luther: but when I
answered that from your addition, and Articles of Faith, The question does
truly result upon your selves; Where was your Church? that is, where was your
Trent Doctrine, and Articles of the Roman Creed, received de fide before
Luther? You are so far from showing it, that you cunningly suppressed these
words, and not so much as mentioned them: and thus, one while suppressing the
point in question; other whiles, by declining the true state of the question,
you show your wit is better than your cause, and declare your Sophistry to be
better than your Divinity.

But to follow you back again, you say, We must show you a company of men
in former times distinct from yours.

It were no difficult matter, to show you many that did separate both from you,
and the errors of your Church in former Ages. The Waldenses were a distinct
company of Believers, and separate from your Church above 500. years since:
Reinerius the Inquisitor confesses upon their examination, that he found they
had in one Diocese, one and forty Schools, in another, ten; B. pp. Tom. 13.
Reiner. contra Wald. cap. 3. p. mihi, 299.
and withal, reckons up forty Churches by name in Lombardy, in Province in
France, and other Kingdoms; he protests that amongst all Sects, There was
none more pernicious to the Church of Rome, than it, and that for three causes:
First, Ibid.
because it is of longer continuance; for some say it has continued from the
time of Sylvester, (which is three hundred years after Christ) others say,
from the time of the Apostles. Secondly, because it is more Universal, for
there is scarce any Country, wherein this Sect has not crept. Thirdly, whereas
all other sorts blaspheme God, this Sect has a great show of godliness: for
they live justly before men, they believe all rightly concerning God, and the
Articles of the Creed; only they speak evil of the Church of Rome, and hate
it; and by this means draw multitudes to their belief after them. Thus if you
require Antiquity for their Doctrine, they derive it either from Christ, or
from Sylvester, 300. years after Christ; if Universality, all Countries were
filled with their Doctrine; if good life, they lived well before men, and
believed all rightly concerning God, and the Articles of their Faith; and this
the force of truth has extorted from your grand Inquisitor.

Augustus Thuanus Presicent of the Parliament of Paris, Thuan. hist. Tom 1.
1550. p. 457. and 465.
tells us, that these who are commonly called Waldenses, Picards, Albigenses,
Cathari, Lollards, though by their difference of place they had diverse names,
yet they held the same faith, which Wicliffe held in England, and Husse in
Bohemia, and gathered strength at the coming of Luther, especially in the
Caparienses, who professed a Religion agreeing almost in all things with Martin
Luther: But withal he ingeniously professes that Cardinal Sadolet did
examine them, and found many things maliciously fained against them.

Poplinerius says, that about the year 1100. these men did publish their
doctrine differing but a little from the Protestants, Poplin. Hist. Franc. l.
1. Bb. Usher de statu. Eccl. c. 8. p. 209.
not only through France, but also through all the coasts of Europe: For both
French, Spaniards, English, Scots, Italians, Germans, Bohemians, Saxons,
Polonians, Lituanians, and other nations do peremptorily defend it to this
very day; And by reason they separated from the doctrines of the Roman Church,
Pope Innocent the third, about the year 1198. authorized certain Monks, who
had the full power of the Inquisition in their hands, to deliver the people by
thousands into the Magistrates hands, and the Magistrates to the Executioners.
Histor. of the Wald. c. 3.
St. Dominick who instituted the order of the begging Monks, called Dominicans
was a great persecutor of them and their doctrine. The Mother of this Monk
says your Martyrologe, Martyrologe in the life of St. Dominick P. (mihi) 556.
before he was yet borne, dreamed that she was delivered of a whelpe, with a
firebrand in his mouth, with which he set the whole world on fire; and your
learned Doctors have interpreted this dream, that Dominick should be that
dog that should vomit out the fire which should consume the Haeretikes. your
infallible Pope likewise tells us, that he saw in his sleep the Church of St.
John Lateran, to totter and ready to fall, Ibid. p. 562.
and that St. Dominick supported it, and held it up with his shoulders,
signifying thereby, that he, and those of his order should do great good to
the Catholic faith. And howsoever these reports may pass for dreams, yet
this dog behaved himself so worthily in the persecution of those Christians,
that from that time forward, the Monks of his Order have bin always employed
in the Inquisition. Histor. Wald. c. 2.
But herein we may admire the great mercy and goodness of God unto this
separate Church, that notwithstanding this grievous persecution, it was
recorded by George Morell, at that time a Pastor amongst the Waldenses, that
there were then remaining according to common report, above eight hundred
thousand persons that made profession of the same faith. And thus breefely I
have given you one company of men in former times distinct from yours. If we
look beyond those times; the Greek Church was likewise separate from yours
above eight hundred years ago, and differed in the points of
Transubstantiation, of Purgatory, of private Mass, of Prayer in an unknown
tongue, of Marriage of Priests, of the Communion in both kinds, and the Popes
Supremacy, I say in all these they separated from your Church; and this Church,
if you require Antiquity, is before Rome in time; if Universality, she has
larger bounds, and multitudes of people, most of the Patriarchs, seven
universal Councels, the Greek tongue wherein the New Testament was written,
inso much as your Bishop of Bitonto was not ashamed publicly to profess, It
is our Mother Graecia, Council. Trid. Episc. Bitont.
unto whom the Latin Church is beholding for all that ever she has. And as
touching the procession of the Holy Ghost, which your men say they deny (and
therefore charge their Church with a known haeresie) it may seem rather that
this is an aspersion laid upon them then any just exception; Council. Florent.
Sess. 35.
For at the Council of Florence, about 200. years sithence, your Pope
Eugenius answered the Graeoians, that he was well satisfied by them touching
the procession of the Holy Ghost; and that you may know they agreed with us in
the principal points of our doctrine, the Greek Patriarch congratulates with
the reformed Churches in this manner. We give thanks to God, the Author of all
grace, Patr. resp. 2. in init, and resp. 1. page 148.
and we rejoice with many others, but especially in this, that in many things
your doctrine is agreeable to our Church. For a conclusion, the Muscovites,
Armenians, Egyptians, Aethiopians, and diverse other countries and Nations (all
members of the Greek Church) taught our doctrine from the Apostles time to
ours. This is so true an evidence in our behalf, that Bellarmine, Bellarm. de
ver. Dei. l. 2.6. ult. in fine.
as it were in disdain of the Churches, makes this answer; We are no more moved
with the examples of Muscovites, Armenians, Egyptians, and Aethiopians, then
with the examples of Lutherans, or Anabaptists, and Calvinists, for they are
either Haeretikes or Schismatikes. So that all Churches (be they never so
Catholic and Ancient) if they subscribe not to the now Roman faith, are either
Schismatic or Haereticall.

Thus I have briefly showed you two sorts of Christians, who were distinct
from you, and yet lived in the Communion of the Catholic Church. I showed you
others also which lived and died in the bosom of the Roman Church, but as
far different in opinion from your now professed Faith, as those that went
out from you. The first sort separated themselves from your Church and
Doctrine, the latter continued in communion with you, but separated themselves
from the errors of prevayling faction in your Church: the one sort you
persecuted unto death, for the other you cut out their tongues for speaking
truth.

But you are not of it (say you) since the time you have begun to be against
it. And this you would infer from Tertullian, That us out of the mild, fat,
and profitable Olive, Tertull. de praescrip. c. 36.
the sower bastard Olive grows; so have errors fructified out of the true
Church, but became wild by untruth and lying, degenerating from the grain of
truth, and so not yours; and this does fully answer the matter (say you.)
Surely if you compare the true and fruitful Olive to your selves, and us unto
the bastard, and wild Olive, the matter (as you say) will be easily answered:
but this is to beg the point in question, neither indeed can it be granted to
you, without a sin against the Holy Ghost. For the Spirit of God has spoken
it in particular to the Roman Church, that, Thou were cut out of the Olive
tree, which is wild by nature, Romans 11.24.
and were grafted contrary to nature into a good Olive tree. Now if the
haeresies and errors (which are compared to the wild Olive) have sprung out of
that good Olive tree, into which you were first grafted, or if the wild Olive
is now returned to its own nature, I will say to you, as sometimes Diogenes
said to the Philosopher, A me incipias, and erit verus sillogismus, let the
wild Olive be applied to your Church (as it ought to be) and the comparison
will redound upon your selves, and return into your own bosom.

From the Communion with your Church, you question the Antiquity and
Universality of those points wherein you differ from us; and you would have me
show the denial of them to have been anciently and universally taught. Page
121.


Your demand to the first is unreasonable; For it is sufficient for us, that we
profess that Faith which was once given to the Saints; besides, those new
Articles which you thrust upon the Church, are wholly yours, and the proof
lies on your part to make good, as being properly your own: on the other side,
to show the denial of them to have bin anciently taught is unsensible; for the
explicit denial of them could not be taught till such Articles were offered
and obtruded to us, but the implicit denial we prove by the positive
doctrines of the Ancient Fathers, which is incompatible with your new additions
and corruptions.

From the Doctrine in general, you descend into the particulars; and you say,
one of our Sacraments is an empty piece of Bread, and a sup of wine. Page 123.
Hannibal of Carthage, Cicero de Oratore lib. 2.
when he heard Phormio the Orator talk pleasantly a long while together, being
afterward demanded what he thought of his Eloquence, made answer in this
homely sort; Multos se vidisse deliros senes, sed qui magis quam Phormio
deliraret, vidisse neminem. I will leave the application to your self, and the
interpretation to the Reader, because you say I cannot translate Latin.

Some truth or modesty I should gladly hear from you; but this is such an
impudent Calumny, as Bellarmine himself would have been ashamed to have heard
it fall from the Pen of any learned Papalin; hear therefore what your own men
confess of Calvin and others, and what we profess in the name of our Church.
Your F. Kellison says of Calvin, Kellis. Surney. lib. 4. cap. 5. p. mihi, 229.
That if he did mean as he speaks, he would not dispute with him, but
would shake hands with him, as with a Catholic. And then he repeats Calvin's
words; I say that in the Mystery of the Supper, by the sign of Bread and
Wine, is Christ truly delivered, yea, and his Body and his Blood. And a little
before those words, he gives the reason; Because, says he, Christ's words,
[This is my Body] are so plain, that unless a man will call God a deceiver,
he can never be so bold as to say, that he sets before us an empty Sign.
This is likewise Bellarmines confession of him; Bell, de Euch. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Non ergo vacuum and inane signum, It is no vain and empty sign. Thus you see
your fellows and you agree like Harp and Harrow; you say it is an empty piece
of Bread, they answer in Calvin's behalf and ours, that it is not an empty
sign: Idem ibid. c. 8.
Nay, says Bellarmine, both Calvin and Oecolampadius, and Peter Martyr, do
teach the Bread is called Christ's Body figuratively, as being a sign or figure
of his body, but they add withal, it is no bare (and empty) figure, but such
as does truly convey unto them the things signified thereby; Bilson in the
difference betwixt Subjection, and Christistian Rebellion. Part. 4. p. mihi,
779.
for which truths sake, Christ said not this Bread is a figure of my body, but
it is my body.

To give you an instance in some of our Church; God forbid (says our learned
Bilson) we should deny that the flesh and blood of Christ are truly present,
and truly received of the Faithful, at the Lords Table. It is the Doctrine
that we teach others, and wherewith we comfort our selves. We never doubted
but the Truth was present with the Sign, and the Spirit with the Sacrament, (
as Cyprian says) We knew there could not follow an operation, if there were
not a presence before.

Neither do I think you are ignorant of this, but that you have inured your
self to falsities and reproaches. For it is apparently true, that the question
in these days, is not of the truth of the presence, but of the manner: that
is, whether it be to the Teeth and the Belly, or Soul and Faith of the
Receiver. And thereupon our learned and Reverend B. Andrews returned his Answer
to Bellarmine; We believe the presence, We believe, B. Andrew. ad Bell. Apol.
Resp. c. 1. p. mihi. 11.
I say, the presence as well as you: concerning the manner of the presence, we
do not unadvisedly define; nay more, we do not scrupulously inquire, no more
than we do in Baptism, how the blood of Christ cleanses us.

From the Sacraments; you procceed to our two and twenty Books of Canonical
Scripture, and indeed we allow but two and twenty. But will any Catholic
(say you) allow this to have been Catholic Doctrine?

Yes, without doubt, (Scil.) Orig. in Exposit. Psalm. 1.
many good Catholics did follow the Hebrew Canon of the Jews, which (says
Origin) compriseth but two and twenty books of the old Testament, according
to the number of the letters among them.

Melito, Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 20.
Bishop of Sardis, was a Catholic, and (says Bellarmine) he did follow the
Hebrew Canon of the Jews.

Hilary, Hilar. in Prolog. in Psalm. explanat.
Bishop of Poictiers, was a Catholic, and he told us, The old Testament was
contained in two and twenty books, according to the number of the Hebrew
letters.

St. Cyril, Cyril. Catechis. 4.
Bishop of Jerusalem, was a Catholic, and he gave us the like Lesson; Peruse
the two and twenty books of the old Testament, but meddle not with the
Apochrypha.

Athanasius, Anthanas. in Synops.
Bishop of Alexandria, was a Catholic, and affirms, that the Christians had a
definite number of books comprehended in the Canon, which were two and twenty,
equal to the number of the Hebrew letters.

Ruffinus was a Catholic, Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 20.
and Bellarmine confesses he did follow the Hebrew Canon, which contained our
two and twenty books.

Gregory Nazianzen was a Catholic, Naz. Carm. Iamb. ad Seleucum. Iamb. 3.
and he showed to Seleucus, a Catalogue of the Canonical books, and he
cites the books in order from Genesis to Malachie, the last of the Prophets;
and leaves out all the Apochrypha.

The Fathers of the Council of Laodicea were Catholics: Council. Laod. cap. 59.
and in the 59th Canon, they allow only those two and twenty books for
Canonical, which we receive.

There are others whom you term Catholics; as namely, Damascene, Hugo de
Sancto Victore, Lyranus, Hugo Cardinalis, Tostatus, Waldensis, Driedo, and
Cajetan: all which differ from your Tenet of the Apochryphall books which are
canonized by your Trent Council (such agreement is there amongst your best
learned, touching the greatest point of your Belief) and yet forsooth your
Church cannot be depraved.

But here is one thing (say you) which gives me much cause of wonder; which
is, that you talk of Traditions, as distinct from Scripture. I ever took you
to be so fallen out with them, that you made the denial of them a fundament
all point of your Religion, that you would not endure the word Tradition; but
always translated, or rather falsified it into Ordinances. Thus you.

It is a true saying of the Heathen Orator; Cicero.
He who once goes beyond the bounds of Modesty, had need to be lustily
impudent. I protest, I only termed your Additions, Traditions; and you
question our Church, for false translating of the word. And cannot we endure
the word Traditions? Do not we allow of all the Apostolical Traditions, which
agree unto the Scriptures? Nay more, do we not translate the word Traditions
in the Scripture, when the Text will bear it according to the Greek
original? Look upon the fifteenth of Matthew, Matthew. 15. v. 2, 3, 6.
and in three several verses, 2, 3, 6. we use the word Tradition. Look upon
the seventh of Mark, Mark 7. v. 3, 8, 9, 13.
and in four several places of that chapter, you shall find likewise, we
translate Traditions. Look upon Saint Paul to the Colossians, Galatians, and
upon Saint Peter; Colos. 2.8. Galat. 1.14. 1. pet. 1.18.
and in all these, in the Translation joined with your Rhemish Testament, you
shall find the word Traditions. How may your Proselytes believe you another
time, when you say, We always translate it, or rather falsify it into
Ordinances?

For a conclusion of this Section; you say, that the three Creeds, the two
Sacraments, the four General Councels, the two and twenty books of Canonical
Scripture, We had them from you. Let it be your comfort then, that you had
something in your Church which was worth the gleaning, after the devil had
sowed the Tares amongst the good Corn. But I would not have you overmuch
confident of that neither; for originally we had them from the Church
Catholic, before there was a Roman. For, the Gospel was preached in England
before it was in Rome; and we had in England, a Christian Church and King,
before Rome had a Christian Emperor, yea long before Popery, or the name of
Pope was heard of in the Christian world; (in the sense you now take it.) And
in after Ages, when the Gospel of Christ was rooted out by Heathen persecutors
(where it was first planted) it was afterward replanted by Preachers, partly
sent from Rome, partly by the Greek Church, but by neither was the Faith
preached and restored; which your present Church now teaches, and maintains
at this day.

And lastly, if we had the three Creeds, the two Sacraments, the 22. books of
Canonical Scripture, and the first four General Councels from you, then you
cannot deny that we teach the Ancient Faith, first given to the Saints; and
that we had a Church visible long before Luthers days, (for those Tenants were
sufficient of themselves to make a glorious, and a visible Church in the first
and best ages) they were received by succeeding Christians in all the later
Ages, and are now become the Positive, and Affirmative Articles of our Belief,
which for the greater part, were ever taught and received in the bosom of your
own Church. To shut up all your bitter Aspersions, of Corrupting, of
Falsifying, of Lying, of Lynding, and I know not what reproaches, cast upon me
in these first (8) Sections; I will shut up all, I say, which hitherto has
been delivered by you, with that answer of Socrates to his accusers, before
the Judges: Plato in Apologia Socratis.
My Lords (says he) in what sort your affections have been stirred with mine
accusers eloquence which you heard them speak, I cannot tell. But well I wot,
for mine own part, I my self, whom it touches most, was almost persuaded to
believe, that what they said was true, yea although it were against my self;
so handsomely they can tell their tale, and so likely, and so smoothly they
convey their matters: every word they spoke, had appearance of Truth, and yet in
good sooth, they have scarsely uttered one word of Truth.

The Titles of the several Chapters, and Sections in the ensuing Treatise.
Chap. 9. Alphab. 1. Sect. 1. Of Justification by Faith only. Page 2. d: Sect.
2. Of Transubstantiation. Page 12. Sect. 3. Of Private Masses. page 42. Sect.
4. Of the seven Sacraments. pa. 69 Sect. 5. Of Communion in both kinds. pa. 127
Sect. 6. Of Prayer in an unknown tongue. pa. 145 Sect. 7. Of the Worship of
Images. pa. 176 Sect. 8. Of Indulgences. Alphab. 2. page 8.
Chap. 10. Of the certainty of the Protestant, and uncertaintie of the Romish
Faith. page 44 Chap. 11. Of the greater safety and comfort in the Protestant
Faith, then in the Romish. pa. 68 Chap. 12. Of respect due to the Ancient
Fathers. pa. 84 Chap. 13. Of razing Records, and clipping Authors tongues, by
the Roman Indices Expurgatory. pa. 92 Chap. 14. Of the perfection and
perspicuitie of Scripture, and our Adversaries blasphemous Exceptions against
it. pa. 104 Chap 15. Concerning Bellarmine his subscription to Protestant
Doctr: in the main point of Justification. pa. 122 Chap. 16. Of Martyrs, and
particularly, that the primitive Martyrs were not Papists. pa. 128 Chap. 17.
Concerning the Protestants charitable opinion of Papists, page 137. And in what
sense some affirm the Roman a true Church. page 148 Chap. 18. Concerning the
Confession on all sides for the Safety of the Protestant Religion. pa. 154 A
Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful Sir Humphrey Lynde, at
Cobham in Surrey. p. 171
Errata in the second Part.
PAge 5. lin. 7. read authors. in marg. l. 15. read gloriamur, p. 17 l 8. r.
eat ye, p. 22. l. 8. in mar. r. fieri, p. 40 l. 1. dele of. p. 98. l. 28. in
marg. r. alleviationem. p. 109. l. 2. in mar. r. de pecc. mer. p. 148. l. 10.
r. at the first in. p. 151. l. 9. r. Of. p. 191. l. 12. in mar. r. perhibeat.
p. 202. l. 12. dele visible. p. 203. l. 6. r. Miracles. l. 14. wonders show. p.
218. l. 6. dele the.

Alphab. 2. page 39. l 12. in mar. r. hic. p. 51. l. 5. add he. p. 58. l. 16
r. et. and l. 26. r. her. p. 62. l. 19. r. Of. p. 92. l. 8. r. Caietans. p.
134. lin. 5. r. the.

Errata in the Sermon. Page 181. l. 12. in mar. r. vertit. p. 184. l. 14 in
mar. r. Condemnant. p. 191. l. 1. r. menacing. p. 192. l. 35. in mar. r.
illaqueet. l. 36. oblectet. p. 195. l. 27. r. conseruare. p. 202. l. 8. in
marg. r. puteum. p. 204. l. 16. in mar. r. (...). l. 17. r. (...) pa. 211. l.
6. in mar. r. volentibus. l. ult. r. his. p. 212 l. 3. r. doors. l. 8. in marg.
r. Christo pa. 214. l. 7. in marg. r. obd^citur. and l. 11. in mar. r.
Epitaphii. and l. 14. in mar. r. la^rymis implentur.

CONCERNING JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH ONLY.
Spectacles Chap. 9. Sect. 1.
THE Knight fails in the proof of his first point of Justification,
producing but one only place out of a book entitled, Ordo baptizandi and
visitandi, and that of no special good anthoritie, as he alleges it out of
Cassander and Author placed in the first Classis in the first index librorum
prohibitorum; and even in that which he alleges, there is nothing that does
not very well stand being rightly under stood with the Catholic faith which
we now profess, L. 1. de Iustific. c. 7. prop 3.
for there is nothing but that which was showed before out of Bellarmine, to
wit, that in regard of the uncertaintie of our own justice that is, whether
we be just or no, and for the peril of vainglory it is most safe to put
our whole confidence in the sole mercy and benignity of God; Which word sole,
does import confidence in that, and in nothing else with which it may stand
very well, that men in the favor and grace of God may do works meritorious
of increase of grace and glory, which is the controversy between us and
heretics.

The Hammer.
AS David cut off Goliahs head with his own Sword, a Eras. Apoph. Laconum.
and Brasidas ran through his Antagonist with his own Spear, and Iustine
Martyr refuteth the Philosophers out of the principles of Nature; and
Constantine the ancient Romans out of the Oracles of Sibylla, and Eusebius the
Gentiles out of their own Historians, b Credis te non posse nisi per mortem
Christi servari? respondet insirmus; etiam, tum illi dicitur age ergo dum super
est in te anima in hac sola morte fiduciam tuam constitue, in nulla alia re
fiduciam habe, huic morti te totum commit, hac sola te totum contege: si
dixerit tibi quod meruisti damnationem, dic, Domine, mortem, D. nostri Jesus
Christi obtendo inter me, and mala merita mea ipsiusque meritum, offero pro
merito quod ego debuissem habere, nec habeo: credis quod Dom: noster Jesus
Christus pro nostra salute mortuus sit? and quod exproprijs meritis vel alio
modo nullus posset salvari nisi merito passionis eju^? Impres. Venet, 1575.
and S. Paul the Athenians out of their own Poets: so does the Knight here in
a litigious case, of greatest moment, convince the Jesuit out of his own
evidence a book entitled, The form and order of baptizing and visiting the
sick; printed and reprinted, and practiced for many hundred years without any
check, or control. In this book the Priest is directed to put this question
to the sick; Do thou believe that thou can not be saved but by the death of
Christ? the sick person answers; I believe; then the Priest goes on saying,
Go too therefore as long as thy soul remains in thee, place thy whole
confidence in this death only, have confidence in no other thing, commit thy
self wholly to this death, with this alone cover thy self wholly, if he say
unto thee, thou have deserved damnation, say Lord, I set the death of our Lord
lesus Christ betwixt me and my bad merits, and I offer his merit in stead of
the merits which I ought to have and yet have not. What could Luther or Calvin,
or Zuinglius, or Peter Martyr, or any Protestant in the world speak more
expressly for the renouncing all merit, and relying upon Christ wholly and
solely for justification and salvation? Yet our Spectacle-maker by a false
gloss, as it were, a false glass, would make us believe, that the author of
the Liturgy cast his eyes another way, and that this allegation makes nothing
for us.

First, he excepteth against this Author as a single witness, you produce,
says he, but one only place out of one author, etc. I answer as the Lioness
does in the fable to the aemulous beast twitting her, c Aesop. Fab.
that whereas other females had many young ones at once, she had but one, ac
pol leonem in quit; but, says she, that one is a Lion of more worth then
twenty whelps: so I grant, that in this place he insisteth but upon one
allegation, but it is a most remarkable one; It is very likely that this ordo
visitandi, as other parts of the Liturgy and Catechismes, and confessions
might be penned by one man: yet atfer they are generally received, and
approved, and pass current for many ages, they carry the authority of many,
yea the whole Church; and howsoever the Jesuit would intimate that the Author
was an anonymus, yet he might have learned from their great Hosius Conf.
Petricon. c. 73 Sed and Anselmus Cantuar. Interrogat quasdam praescripsisse
dicitur infirmis in extremis constitutis.
Cardinal Hosius that he was the famous Archbishop of Canterbury. Neither is
there any reason to make scruple thereof, for it has been anciently printed
with his Works, and passed under his name, and both the style and the doctrine
in it is very conformable to that we find in his unquestionable writings, as
namely in his Comment upon Romans chapter the eight ( v. 18.) I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us, if a man, says he, Si homo mill annis
serviret Deo etiam ferventissime, non mereretur ex condigno dimidium diem esse
in regno caelorum.
should serve God a thousand years, and that most fervently, he should not
deserve of condignity to be half a day in the kingdom of heaven. Neither is
Cassanders testimony of this book (at which the Jesuit gives so many a
flert) to be slighted, for he was a man of eminent note, and in high esteem
among the learned of his age, he was a favorite of two great Emperors, and
lived and died in good reputation, as appears by the sundry encomiums before
his Works; as also the Epitaph on his Tomb. As for the setting him in the
first Classis of prohibited books, no whit ecclipseth the glory, but rather
enobleth him, for that Index is a kind of Ecclesiastical ostracisme, by which
the Romanists banish as far as their power stretches, the most eminent
Authors, and most free and ingenuous professors of the truth. As Tertul in
Apologet. c. 5. consulite commentarios vestros illic reperietis primum Neronem
in hanc Sectam Romae oriente^ Caesariano gladio ferocisse. Sed tali dedicatore
damnationis nostrae etiam gloriamu^ qui enim scit illum intelligere potest non
nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum.
Tertullian draws an argument to prove the sincerity and holiness of the
Christian Religion from the barbarous decree of wicked Nero against the
professors thereof; it must needs, says he, be singular good which that
damned monster condemns: so if any man peruse the Authors censured, and the
passages expunged in the Index expurgatorious, he shall find them to be of
special note, and singular use. Albeit the Inquisitors pretend that they
change not, nor blot out any thing, but only where manifest error is crept
in, and that since the year 1515. Yet the Knight has demonstrated before by
undeniable instances in all ages, that they blot out of the Index of the Bible,
the writings of the ancient Fathers; and since 800. years out of the Doctors
of their own Church, what makes most against their errors and superstitions.
Yea, but says the Jesuit, this supposed book of Anselme has been printed,
and reprinted by heretics, and therefore may well fall under the Inquisitions
censure; so has Ignatius, Cyprian, Theodoret, and Ambrose, and Austine; yea
and the originalls of the old and new Testament, and must they therefore come
under their file, and be subject to their Index correction? As John 18.23.
Christ spoke to the high Priests servant; If I have spoken ill, bear witness
of the ill, if well, why smitest thou me? So say we of these books printed
and reprinted by those whom he terms heretics, because they impugn his
errors and heresies, if they have printed ought amiss declare it: if not, why
do you prohibit or correct their impressions?

Well (says he) for all this, if the worst come to the worst, if this Author
prove to be S. Anselme and his words Gospel, the Knight gains nothing by it,
or we lose, for though it be the safest way to cast anchour at the last in the
bottom of Gods mercy, and put our whole confidence in Christ's merits, it does
not from hence follow, but that men may do works meritorious of increase of
grace and glory. First, why does he lispe here, and not speak plain out the
Romish tenet which is that our Works do merit not only increase of grace and
glory, but remission of sins, and Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 32. Si quis
dixerit hominis justificati opera non vere mereri augmentu^ gratiae and vitam
aeternam, and ipfius vitae aeternae, si tamen in gratia decesserit,
consecutionem, Anathema sit.
eternal life? Next, I would feign know how mercy and merit, nay sole mercy
and merit can stand together? Certainly as mercy excludes merit, so sole mercy
all merit. Can those works which is S. Anselmes judgment will not bear scale
in Gods balance, weigh down super-excellens pondus gloriae, a super-excellent
weight of glory? Certainly the Spectacle-maker put in a burning glass into
his Spectacles which has much impaired his eyesight, or else he could not
but read S. Anselmes words in this place, in which he renounceth all merit,
and that in most direct and express terms, I believe that none can be saved
by his own merits, Vid loc. sup. cit. p. 4.
or by any other means, but by the merit of Christ's passion. I set the death
of Christ betwixt 'mee and my bad merits, and I offer his merits in stead of
the merits which I ought to have, and have not.

Concerning Transubstantiation Spectacles chap. 9. Sect. 2. a page 132. ad 187.
THE Knight and the Protestants commit a great sin in administering the
Sacrament of Baptism without those Ceremonies which were used in the Church
from the Apostles times.

Elfrick was not the Author of the Homily and Epistles,

The difference of Catholic Authors about things not defined by the Church
makes nothing for Protestants,

Cajetan is falsely alleged by putting in the word supposed, and
Transubstantiation: This is my body, do not sufficiently prove the real
presence of our Saviors body for which he is worthily censured by Suarez and
the whole school of Divines.

Biel affirms that it is expressly delivered in holy Scriptures,

Alliaco his opinion makes nothing for the Knight being a Calvinist,

B. Fisher denies not that the real presence can be proved out of Scripture;
Luther: but that laying aside the interpretation of Fathers, and use of the
Church, no man can be able to prove, that any Priest now in these times, does
Consecrate the true body and blood of Christ.

Durand B. of Maundy does not deny Transubstantiation to be wrougnt by virtue
of the words, This is my body; For though in the first place he says that
Christ then made the bread his body when he blessed it, yet he after adds
that we do bless, illa virtute quam Christus indidit verbis, Durand. rat. c.
41. n. 14.
by that power which Christ has given to the words.

Odo Cameracensis calls the very form of Consecration,

Christopherus de capite fontium is put in the Roman Index of prohibited
books, Trent, and all Writers did agree till the late time of Caietan, as if
Caietan were since the Council of Trent; and in citing this place, the Knight
is against himself, for whereas he makes Cardinal Caietan, and the
Archbishop of Caesarea his two Champions against the words of Consecration, as
if they did both agree in the same: here this Archbishop says quite contrary,
that all are for him but only Cajetan.

Salmeron relates it indeed to be the opinions of some Graecians that Christ
did not consecrate by those words, This is my body, Chamier says expressly in
the place coted by the Knight, l. 6. de Eucha. c. 7.

Bellarmine in the place alleged says nothing, De Euchar. l. 3. c. 23.
to wit, that though the words of Consecration in the plain connaturall and
obvious sense infer Transubstantiation: yet because in the judgment of some
learned men, they may have another sense, which proves only the real
presence, it is not altogether improbable, that without the authority of the
Church, they cannot enforce a man to believe Transubstantiation out of them.

Alfonsus a Castro affirms that of Transubstantiation there is rare mention
in the ancient Fathers: Castro in that place is to show, that though there be
not much mention in ancient Writers of a thing, or plain testimony of
Scripture, that yet the use and practice of the Church is sufficient, bringing
in for example this point of Transubstantiation, and the procession of the holy
Ghost from the Son.

The meaning of Yribarne and Scotus, Lateran is only this, that whereas the
words of Consecration may be understood of the real presence of our blessed
Saviors body either by Transubstantiation, or otherwise; so the substance of
bread do remain: the Church has determined the words are to be understood in
the former sense. And moreover Yribarne says, that Transubstantiation was not
from the beginning de substantia fidei, because it had not been so plainly
delivered, nor determined in any Council, till Gregory the 7 his time wherein
it was first determined against Berengarius.

It is not the real presence whereof either S. Austine or Maldonate speaks,

Gregory de Valentia having brought two or three several and substantial
answers to a place alleged out of Theodoret concludes somewhat roundly with
the heretics in this manner, he means Theodoret and Gelasius) might err
in this point, and that Bellarmine Suarez, and others answer the place
otherwise, to whom he remitteth the Knight.

Cusanus speaks not of ancient Fathers, Knight declares his belief of
Transubstantiation. Excit. l. 6.


The Waldenses agree not with Protestants in the point of the Sacrament; hoc
est corpus meum, but seven Pater nosters, with a blessing over the bread.

Durand affirms not,

Gaufridus and Hostiensis,

Tonstall with Scotus,

Erasmus is not an Author to be answered or named as the Knight has been
often told.

The Hammer.
AS Nugno wrote of an Argument of Suarez the Jesuit, In 3. p. Tho q. 61.
insolubile est argumentu^ Suarez propter intricationem and obscuritatem non
difficultatem.
that it was in a manner insoluble, not in regard of the difficulty of the
matter, but in regard of the intricacie and obscurity in the manner of
propounding it: so this Section may be truly said to be uncapeable of a clear
and distinct answer thereunto, not in regard of any difficulty in the matter
it self; for there is nothing contained in it, but Crambe centies cocta; but
in respect of the confusion thereof, the Adversary following no tract at all,
but leporis instar viam intorquens, purposely like a Hare leaping out of the
way, that he might not be caught, for which cause I have been enforced to
leave the order, or rather disorder in his Paragraphes, and cull out of the
whole Section here and there, what he materially answers to the Knights
allegations, and reduce it to the numbers following, whereunto I purpose to
refer my ensuing animadversions.

To the first Exception. Apolog. c. 2. Page 57.
acknowledges that it began but about Constantines time (as Aurelius the
Sorbonist observes in his book entitled Vindiciae censurae, wherein the
Jesuit is trimmed, as such a shaveling deserves.)

To the second concerning Elfrick. That Aelfrick was not the Author of the
Homilies we acknowledge, neither does this any whit derogate from their
authority, but add rather. For the more ancient the Author was, the more
authority the Sermons carry. Now it appears out of an ancient Manuscript,
that these Homilies were extant in Latin before the days of Aelfrick, In Bib.
Bodeliana, Oxon.
who was commanded by the Archbishop of York Wolstanus to translate them into
English, which after he had faithfully done, the Bishops at a Synod commanded
them to be read to the people on Easter day before they received the
Communion. As for the shameful corruption he objecteth to the Knight by false
translating the Homilies in five places, I cannot sufficiently pity the gross
stupidity and blindness of the objecter. He who has made a pair of
Spectacles for the Knight, had need to have a Festrawe made for himself to
spell withal; for here he most absurdly and ridiculously mistaketh a
Collation for a Translation, and Bertram for Aelfrick. Doctor Usher now Primate
of Armath, whom the Knight here followed step by step, makes a kind of
parallel between the words of Bertram, and diverse passages in the Homilies and
Epistles translated by Aelfrick, to show the conformity of the doctrine in
both. This parallel by this blind buzzard is taken for a translation, Cic.
Phil. 2.
Viste, asine, literas doceam, says Tully to Anthony, non opus est verbis sed
fustibus: yea but the Author of this Homily is so far from condemning
Transubstantiation, that he professedly teaches it in these words, Sicu^^
Paulo antequam pateretur, panis substantiam et vini creaturam convertere potuit
in proprium corpus quod passurum erat, and in suum sanguinem qui post fundendus
extabat, sic etiam in deserto Manna, and aquam de ^erra in suam carnem, and
sa^gui^e^ co^vertere praevaluit.
As therefore a little before he suffered, he could change the substance of
Bread, and the creature of Wine into his proper Body, which was to suffer, and
into his Blood which was there extant to be afterward shed, so in the Desert
he was able to change Manna and water into his own body and blood. I answer,
this passage he does well to whet like a sharp knife to cut the throat of
Transubstantiation. For let it be granted according to the doctrine of ^lfrick
and Bertram, that Christ so turned the Bread into his Body at his last supper,
as he turned Manna and water into his own flesh in the wilderness, what will
hereupon ensue? but that the conversion or change which is made in the elements
is not real, and corporal, but spiritual and sacramental, as that was in
the Desert: of which the Apostle speaks, the 1 Cor. 10.4
spiritual rock followed them, and that rock waes Christ. When Manna fell, and
the rock was stricken, Christ was not incarnate, nor many hundred years after:
how then could the Manna, or the water be really and properly turned into his
flesh and blood? Moreover, howsoever he eludeth the former words of Aelfrick;
There is a great difference betwixt the body wherein Christ suffered, and the
body which is received of the faithful, the body in which Christ suffered, was
borne of the flesh of Mary, and consisted of blood and bone, but the other is
gathered of many corns without hloud and bone, (by saying) that the difference
which Aelfrick shows between Christ on the Cross and Christ on the
Sacrament is in his manner of being, not in the being it self, not denying him
to be really in both: yet the later words which contain an inference upon the
former: therefore there is nothing to be understood in the Sacrament bodily,
but spiritually: admit of no colorable evasion, for if nothing be there
understood bodily but spiritually; then must needs the words, This is my body,
be understood figuratively, then must we not according to the doctrine of those
times understand any substantial change of the bread into Christ's very body,
or the Wine into his blood really and corporally.

To the third. viz. hoc est corpus meum. But he neither changed the bread into
his Body by the one, nor by the other; Ergo, he changed it not at all. Not by
the precedent benediction, as Aquinas and Bellarmine prove. For till the last
instant of the prolation of the words This is my Body, the substance of bread
remains. Not by the words of Consecration: for as Durand and Odo
Cameracensis, and Christopherus Archbishop of Caesarea prove, Christ could not
have said after he had blessed the Bread, This is my body, unless by blessing
it he had made it his body before. If when Christ said Take ye and eat. yea at
that time the Bread by benediction were not changed, it would follow that
Christ did command his Disciples to take, and eat the substance of Bread,
which to say is to deny the article of Transubstantiation. Neither can the
Jesuit heal this sore by his vertuall salve, in saying, that those men above
alleged, who impugn the prsent tenent of the Schools concerning the words of
Consecration, in which the essence of the Sacrament consists vertually
retracted such opinions, because they submitted their writings to the censure
of the Catholic Church: for so we may say with better reason, that what they
held against us, they vertually retracted by submitting their judgment to the
Catholic Church, which we can easily prove not to be the particular Roman,
but the Universal, which in all times, and all places through the Christian
world has professed the common faith once given to the Saints without any of
those later Articles which P. Pius the fourth, Jud. 13.
and the late conventicle of Trent has pinned unto it.

To the fourth, Cajetan is truly alleged by the Knight; for though neither the
words Transubstantiation, nor supposed are in him, yet the sense of them is to
be found in him; for as both Suarez and Flood himself acknowledges ( p. 147.)
Cajetan said, that these words, This is my body, do not sufficiently prove the
real presence of our Saviors body without the presupposed authority of the
Church; and if in his judgment they prove not so much as the real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, much less prove they the presence thereof by
Transubstantiation, or turning the bread into it. By the word supposed, which
the Knight adds more fully to declare Cajetans meaning, he intended not
suppositions, or barely pretended authority of the Church, but truly
presupposed, which makes not the speech sound at all contemptibly of the
Church as Flood would have it, whose stomach is so bad, that it turns sweet
and wholesome meat into choler; Nectar cui fiet acetum
and vaticani perfida vappa cadi.


To the fifth. Knight transcribeth so much out of Biel as was pertinent to his
purpose: with the rest he thought not fit to trouble the reader. In Can. Miss
Lect. 40. notandum guod quamvis express tradatur in scriptur a quod corpus
Christi veraciter sub speciebus panis continetur, and a fidelibus sumitur,
tamen quomodo sit ibi corpus Christi an per conversionem alicujus in ipsum, an
sine conversione incipiat esse corpus Christi cum pane manentibus substantia,
and accidentibus panis in Canone bibliae non invenitur.
The whole passage in Biel stands thus, It is to be noted, that though it
be expressly delivered in Scripture, that the body of Christ is truly
contained under the form or species of Bread, and received by the faithful,
yet it is not found in the canon of the Bible, how the body of Christ is there,
whether by conversion of any thing into it or whether it begins to be there
without conversion, or turning the substance, and accidents of bread remaining.
The former words in which passage, make nothing against the Knight: Who in this
chapter for the most part condemns Papists out of their own mouth, and
therefore taking Biel for such, he makes use of his testimony against the
Roman Church in point of Transubstantiation. Which is very direct and express,
and the Jesuits answer is very weak and unsufficient thereunto, to wit, that
he denies only that Transubstantiation is found in Scripture in express
words. For first Biel says not non invenitur expressum, but non invenitur; It
is not found in Scripture, whether Christ's body be there by conversion of any
thing into it. Now many things are found in Scripture, as the Trinity of
persons, the eternal generation of the Son, the procession of the holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son, the number and nature of Sacraments: which yet
are not set down in express words. Secondly, it is evident out of the former
words of Biel, that he accounted those things expressly to be delivered in
Scriptures, which yet are not set down in express words: for he says that
it is expressly delivered in Scriptures, that the body of Christ is truly
contained under the species of bread, and yet those words are not found in
Scripure. If we should admit then of Flood his gloss upon Biel,
Transubstantiation is not found in Scripture, that is, is not found expressly:
Yet our Argument from Biels testimony is no way disabled thereby, because it
appears out of Biels own words, that he holds that to be expressly
delivered in Scriptures, which is either expressed in word, or sense; the real
presence, he says is express, not in the letter or form of words in the
text, yet in the sense: but so says he, is not Transubstantiation; the
apparent opposition between the members of his sentence shows that what he
believed of the real presence, he believed not of Transubstantiation, but the
former he believed could be proved out of Scripture, though not in express
words yet in sense: therefore the later he believed could not be proved so
much as in sense, much less in express words.

To the sixth. Petrus de Alliaco inclines rather to the Lutherans opinion in
the point of the Sacrament, then to the doctrine of the Church of England: yet
the Knight upon good reason produces him as a witness; for he speaks home
against Transubstantiation: Camerace. in 4 sent. q. 6. art. 2. patet quod ille
modus sit possibilis, nec repugnet rationi, nec authoritati bibliae imo
facilior ad intelligendum and rationabilior est quum, etc.
his words are that (the conversion of bread into Christ's body) cannot
evidently be proved out of Scripture, and that that manner or meaning which
supposes the substance of bread still to remain in the Sacrament is possible,
neither is it contrary to reason, or to the authority of the Scripture; nay it
is more easy to be understood, and more reasonable then that which says, the
substance does leave the accidents. If this be not as Flood will have it so
much as in show for the Knight, I am sure it is both in show and substance
against the Trent faith: for if it be granted that Consubstantiation is not
contrary to Scripture, nor reason; it follows necessarily that
Transubstantiation is grounded upon neither, but rather repugnant to both, for
as trans. denies con. so con. trans. If the remaining of the substance of
bread with the substance of Christ's body be not repugnant to the authority of
Scripture, nor the meaning of Christ's words, then do not these words, This is
my body signify, or make Transubstantiation which necessarily abolisheth the
substance of Bread, and puts in place thereof the substance of Christ's
body. If Consubstantiation be more easily to be understood, and more
agreeable to right reason in Alliacoes judgment then Transubstantiation: it is
evident but for fear of his Cardinals cap, he would have simply avowed the
former, and renounced the latter.

To the seventh. Roffensis his words at the best, the Jesuit is at a great
loss: admit he said no more then I.R. here confesses that no man can be
able to prove, that any priest now in these times does consecrate the true body
of Christ: see what will follow hereupon, that no man is able to prove that
your priests and people are not gross Idolatours, adoring a piece of bread for
Christ. Secondly, that none is able to prove that Christ is really and
substantially offered in your Mass: for if it cannot be proved that he is
there corporally present, as Roffenfis confesses, and you be are him out in
it: it cannot be proved that he is corporally offered, restat itaque ut
missas, missas faciatis; Roff. cont. Luth captiv. Bab. c. 4 neque ullum positu^
hic verbum est, quo probetur in nostra missa veram fi lci carnis, and sanguinis
Christi praesentiam: non potestigitur per ullam scripturam probari.
it remains therefore that you dismiss your misses, or Masses. For what can
they avail the living, or the dead, if nothing but mere accidents and shows
of Bread and Wine be offered, which are mere nothing. We may yet gather
farther upon Roffensis his words, if it cannot be proved by any Scripture,
that Christ's body and blood are present in the Roman mass: it cannot be
proved that they are present in any Mass, unless it be granted that the
Roman masses are of a worser condition then others: if not in any mass, much
less must Papists say in any Sacrament without the Mass. What then becomes
of the maine and most real article of the Trent faith, which has cost the
real effusion of so much Christian blood, I mean the real and carnal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament. To Roffenfis I.R. should have added
Cajetan, and so he might have had a parreiall of Cardinals, for the Knight
alleged him, and his words are most express, not only against the proof of
Transubstantiation, Caje. in 3. p. Tho. g. 75. dico autem ab ecclesiacum non
appareat ex Evangelio coactivum aliuod ad intellg ^^dum haec verba proprie quod
evangelium non explicavit express ab ecclesia accepimus, viz. conversionem
panis in corpus.
but also of the corporal presence of Christ (as out of the words hoc est
corpus meum.) The Cardinals words are, that which the Gospel has not
expressed we have received from the Church, to wit, the conversion of the
bread into the body of Christ, I say from the Church, because there appears
nothing out of the Gospel that can enforce a man to believe that the words,
This is my body, are to be taken properly. How does this Flood swell in pride,
that to so great a Cardinal, so profound a Schoole-man, so eminent a Doctor,
so divine a Commentatour, so golden a Writer (all which titles are given by the
Roman Church to Cajetan) he vouchsafes not a look. But indeed he held a Wolf
by the ears, and was in a quandarie what to do, whether to keep his holt, or
to let him go: if he had taken notice of his testimony against the Roman
Church, either he must have disparaged the Cardinal, or given his Trent faith
a grievous wound.

To the eight. Durand his words are plain enough to prove that the conversion
of bread into the body of Christ, is wrought by the virtue of Christ's
benediction before he uttered the words, Benedixit benedictione caelesti, and
virtute verbi qua convertitur panis in substantiam corporis Christi. Dur. rat.
c. 41.
This is my body, he blessed, says he, the bread by his heavenly
benediction, and by virtue of the Word, whereby the Brend is turned into the
substance of Christ's body. Yea but faith Flood, he adds, We bless, ex illa
virtute quam Christus indidit verbis, we bless by that power or virtue which
Christ has given to the words, true: verbis benenedictionis, not
consecrationis according to Durands mind by that power which Christ gave to the
words of benediction going before, not those words which you call the words of
Consecration ensuing after, viz. This is my body, which words yet Durand there
rehearses not to prove the conversion to be wrought by them, but to prove
Christ's body to be truly there.

To the ninth. Odo Camerac. in can. mis. did. 4. benedixit suum corpus fecit
qui prius erat panis benedictione factus est caro, non enim post benedictionem
dixisset, hoc est corpus meum, nisi in benedictione sieret corpus suam.
yet it is certain that Odo Cameracensis distinguishes the one from the
other, and ascribes the conversion of bread into Christ's body to the virtue of
the precedent benediction, and not of the subsequent Consecration, Christ
blessed the bread, he made it his Body, that which before was Bread by his
blessing is made flesh; for he would not have said after he had blessed it,
This is my Body, unless by blessing it he had made it his Body. Yea, but
Flood threatens to bring a place out of Odo expressly to the contrary, which is
this, Take away the words of Christ, Odo Camera. expos. in Can. miss. did. 5.
toll verba Christi, non fiunt sacramenta Christi, vis sieri corpus, and
fanguinem, appone Christi sermonem.
and take away the Sacraments of Christ, will thou have the Body and Blood of
Christ made, put thereto the word of Christ, but which word of Christ? for
therein is the cardo questionis, whether the word of Benediction going before,
or the word of Consecration following after? In Odo his judgment by the word
of benediction; for he says Benedictione factus est caro, by blessing it
became flesh, and that before he uttered the words, This is my Body; which in
Odo his apprehension as we heard before, could not be true: unlelesse bread
had been turned into Christ's body, before he pronounced them.

To the tenth. I.R.
Here Johannes de Rivis, or John of the Flood speaks very disgracefully of
his Father Christopher us de capite fontium, Christopher of the head of the
Fountains: Nay, to a most reverend Father, the Archbishop of Caesarea; for the
Archbishop of Caesaerea his book, says he, De correctione Theologiae
scholasticae; I do not so much as look into him, but remit it to the Roman
Index, where you shall find this book by you here cited forbidden, and even
the arrogancy of the title shows it to deserve no better a place. Solinus c.
43. Bonasus Tauri similis si insequantur Agasones, vebementius fimum emittit
per tria jugera and quicquid tangit Vrit.
The Bonasus when he is hard followed casts dung in abundance on the pursuer,
and brayeth hideously; so does I.R. cast filth, and rail down right, when he
is so hard pressed with a testimony that he has nothing to reply. The Roman
Index Prohibitorum librorum is to Flood like the Philosophers pons asinorum in
all extremities he flies to it. But what is this Index to us? he might as
well allege the Turks Alcharon against the Knight. This Index of prohibited
books deserves not only a prohibition, but a purging by fire. For in the
first rank we find the holy Bibles translated into vulgar languages to be
set, and after them most of the prime and Classick Writers, almost in all
professions. There is nothing so easy as to prohibit this or any other book:
but unless our Adversariee back this Papal prohibition with detection of
errors and heresies contained in such books, and a solid confutation thereof;
this tyrannical Prohibition of the works of Authors will prove an evident
conviction, that they forcibly smother that truth, the light whereof dazleth
their eyes. Yea, but says Flood, there is a gross historical error, in that
he says, that in that opinion of his, both the Council of Trent, and all the
Writers did agree till the late time of Cajetan, as if Cajetan were since the
Council of Trent. No historical error at all in the Archbishop, but a
frivolous cavil in Flood. For he says not that the Council of Trent was
before Cajetan, but that the Council of Trent, and all Writers (before it
also) did agree till the late time of Cajetan. Yea, but the Knight makes
Cardinal Cajetan, and the Archbishop of Caesarea his two champions against the
words of Confecration, as if they did both agree in the same, whereas here the
Archbishop says quite contrary, that all are for him but only Cajetan. A
ridiculous sophisme, ex ignoratione Elenthi: the Knight alleges both
Cardinal Cajetan, and the Archbishop of Caesarea against the words of
Consecration, but not ad idem, not to prove the same conclusion: he alleges
Cajetan to prove that there is nothing in the words hoc est corpus meum to
enforce Transubstantiation; but the Archbishop of Caesarea to prove that the
supposed conversion is made, not by the words of Consecration, This is my body,
but by the precedent words of Benediction, Christoph. de correct. theoscholast
fol. 11.41. usque ad 63. nisi prius quam ista verba diceret Christus corpus
suum ex pane factum erat, ista proposito non fuisset vera, hoe est corpus meum,
etc. Fol. 23.
and this he proves against all Papists strongly after this manner; Unless
before Christ uttered those words, this is my body, his body had been made of
bread, this Proposition had not been true, This is my body, for when Christ
said, take ye, eat ye, if at that time the Bread by benediction were not
changed, it will follow that Christ did command his Disciples to take and eat
the substance of bread, and so we must deny the article of
Transubstantiation; therefore, says he, (certo certius constat Christum, non
solum per ista sola verba non consecrasse, sed ne quidem illa partem aliquam
fuisse consecrationis quam fecit) it is most certain that these words were no
part of the Consecration; And this he proves to be the opinion of all the
ancient Fathers by name of Iustine Martyr, Dionysius, S. Austine, Hesichius, S.
Jerome, Gregory, Ambrose, Rupert, Alquine, Bernard, Seotus, Landulph, Peter de
Aquila, Pelbert, and others.

To the eleventh. Knight alleges not Salmerons opinion, but his relation of
the opinion of other men: and although his credit be cracked with Protestants,
yet it is whole with Flood and his fellow Jesuits: as Chamierus on the
contrary, his credit is good with Protestants, though none with Pontificians.
P. 162.
Yea but says Flood, Chamier discovers the Knights bad dealing, I would
feign know how, or wherein; first how? by the spirit of prophecy? or by some
letter sent to the Knight after Chamier his death; for Chamier was dead many
years before the Knight wrote. Were he alive what bad dealing could he
discover in the Knight, Cham. de Euchar. l. 6. c. 7.
who out of him truly and sincerely relates the words of Salmeron the Jesuit
concerning the Graecians in these words, seeing the benediction of the Lord is
not superfluous or vain, nor gave he simply bread; it follows that when he
gave it, the transmutation was made, and those words, This is my Body, did
demonstrate what was contained in the bread. What fault finds he in this
allegation? If the Greeks had no such opinion, or Salmeron relates no such
thing, the blame must light between Salmeron and Chamier; howsoever the Knight
is free. For he truly quoteth Chamier, neither dare Flood say that Chamier
misquoteth Salmeron; P. 161.
For, says he, though I found not this place in him, yet I will not say but
it may be there. Let this Spectacle-maker put on a better pair of Spectacles,
and he shall plainly read the words alleged out of Salmeron in the place
quoted by Chamier. Cie. Orat. pro Rosc. Amerino.
The geese in the Capitol, if they gagled without cause, were to be beat for
it: and the dogs to have their legs broken, if they barked when there was
no suspicion of a thief approaching; Some such like punishment they deserve in
Tullies judgment, who lay foul aspersions upon others without any color of
proof or semblance of truth.

To the twelfth. Knights allegation out of Bellarmine, Flood here nibleth, but
can no where fasten his tooth, he excepteth at the changing of the singular
number into the plural, and translating Scriptures for Scripture, and the most
learned and acute men, such as Scotus for most learned and acute men. It
seems this Jesuit is descended of the race of Domitian; Sueton in Domitian.
whose greatest exercise was all day to strike at flies with a sharp iron
bodkin: read Scriptures in the plural, or Scripture in the singular or most
acute, Bellar. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 23. Dicit Scotus non extare locu^ uilum
soripturae tam expressum, ut sine ecclesiae declaratione evidenter cogat
transubstantiationem admittere: at que id non est omnino improbabile: nam
etiamsi scripturae nob is tam apertae videantur, ut cogant hominem non
protervu^: tamen merito dubitari potest cum homines doctissimi and acutissimi
qualis imprimis Scotus fuit, aliter sentiant.
or the most acute, the confession of Bellarmine makes still altogether as
strongly against the grounding of Transubstantiation on Scripture. Scotus
says, that there is no place of Scripture so express (viz. for
Transubstantiation) which setting aside the declaration of the Church evidently
enforces a man to admit it. For though the Scripture, viz. That text of
Scripture brought by him to prove Transubstantiation, seemed to be so plain
as to enforce a man not refractorie to believe it; yet it may be doubted
whether that text, viz. Hoc est corpus meum be clear enough to enforce it,
seeing most learned and acute men, such as Scotus was, thought otherwise. If it
may be justly doubted whether the text, This is my body, infer
Transubstantiation, why do our Adversaries blame us for doubting of it? If
sharp-sighted Scotus, and other most learned and acute men thought the text
enforces no such thing: let our Adversaries give us leave to prefer their
opinion before the judgment of Flood and others, neither so learned nor so
acute.

To the thirteenth. L. 8 con. haeres. verb. indulg. de transubsla^tiatione
panis in corpus Chrislirara in antiquis scriptoribus mentio rara, etc.
The Knight regarded not at what Alfonsus a Castro aimed, but he took up his
arrow where he found it, and shoots it against your Trent doctrine. Of the
Transubstantiation, says he, of the bread into Christ's body, there is rarely
or seldom any mention made in ancient Writers: What does I. R. answer
hereunto? Alfonsus (says he) says true, and the Knight most false. For
though of Transubstantiation there be no mention, yet of the conversion of the
bread into Christ's body there is most frequent mention; P. 164.
Read my riddle, wats this? rare mention of Transubstantiation, but not rare
mention of the conversion of the bread into Christ's body, pugnantia te loqui
non vides? Is not this a flat contradiction? I would feign know, what
difference there is between Transubstantiation, and the conversion of the
substance of Bread, into the substance of Christ's body in the Sacrament.
Neither can the Jesuit free himself here from uttering an evident
contradiction in the same sentence, by saying that Alfonsus speaks of the
word Transubstantiation, not of the thing it self. For Alfonsus there speaks
of things not of words, as Flood himself confesses in the same page five
lines after, saying, that Alfonsus his drift in that place is to show, that
though there be not much mention in ancient Writers of a thing, or plain
testimony of Scripture, that yet the use and practice of the Church is
sufficient, bringing in for instance the point of Transubstantiation, and
procession of the holy Ghost. See here Alfonsus speaks not of the word
Transubstantiation, but of the point or thing it self; and of this thing or
point (he says) there is rare or seldom mention in ancient Writers.

To the fourteenth. Scotus nor Yribarne speak of the interpretation of the
words, This is my body, Bellar. l. 3. de Euch. c. 23. unum addit Scotus, etc.
quod ante Lateranense concilium Transubstantiatio non fuit dagma fidei. Yrib.
in 4. did. 11. q. 3. disp. 42. in primitiva ecclesia de substantia fidei erat
cotpus Christi sub speciebus contineri: tamin non erat de fide substantiam
panis in corpus Christi converti. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. omnia quae
continent fidem, and mores in illis inveniuntur quae aperte posita sunt in
seriptura. Chrysostom. in 2. ad These. hom. 3. manifesla sunt in divinis
Scripturis quaecunque, sunt necessaria. Rivet Cathol. orthod. q. 18.138 Gat.
discourse of Tran. page 60.61. Scotus 4. Sent. did. 11. ad hoc multum express
videturloqui Ambrosius.
nor of the manner of the deliverie of the doctrine of Transubstantiation in
former times, but de dogmate fidei, of a doctrine of faith, which they expressly
deny Transubstantiation to have been, and what they say, may be confirmed by
Flood his own answer in this place. For if Transubstantiation in former ages
was not plainly delivered, as he confesses, p. 167. it could not be then
dogma fidei, or de substantia fidei, any doctrine of faith. For all doctrines
of faith are plainly and evidently set down in holy Scriptures, as S. Austine
and S. Chrysostom jointly teach. As for the passage alleged by Scotus out of
S. Ambrose it is fully answered, and retorted by Andrew Rivet, Mr. Gataker, and
others; Whereunto I think fit to add nothing, but that Scotus in the place
alleged speaks not confidently of S. Ambrose, that he held the doctrine of
Transubstantiation: but that in words he seemed to favor that opinion.

To the fifteenth. Austine in the place alleged by the Knight speaks not
expressly against your carnal presence, yet by consequence he quite
overthrows it; for if the unbeleeving Jews in the Desert, and Judas in the
new Testament died spiritually, after they had received the Sacrament: it
follows that neither the one, nor the other in S. Austines judgment received
Christ's true flesh, which whosoever eats shall live for ever. Again, it
follows that the true flesh of Christ cannot be eaten, but by faith only, and
does not this make much for the Knight? Yea, but says the Jesuit, with due
reverence be it spoken to S. Austines authority, Maldonat his interpretation
is more suitable to the text, and discourse of our Savior in the whole chapter
then that of S. Austines. And with due reverence be it spoken here, Flood and
Maldonat two Jesuits like Mules in the Latin proverb, Mutuum scabunt,
scratch and claw one the other; But let any man examine the interpretation of
Maldonat, and that other of S. Austins, and apply them, both to the words of
Christ, and his maine scope and drift in that sixth Chapter, and he will find
S. Austins discourse in that tractate to be pure gold; and Maldonate his
gloss to be dross or Alcumie stuff, which will not endure the fire.

To the sixteenth. Gregory de Valentia concludes not roundly with heretics,
Greg. de Val. de trans l. 2 c. 7. minime mirum est si unus aut alter, aut etiam
aliqui e veteribus minime considerate, and recte hac de re senserint.
(as Flood speaks) but deals very squarely, confessing in effect that
Gelasius and Theodoret are against Transubstantiation. Yea but (says Flood)
Bellarmine, Suarez, and Valentia himself bring other substantial answers to
those Fathers. Very substantial answers indeed, that by substance are
understood accidents like to the gloss in the Canon law, statuimus, id est,
abrogamus, and quo magis id est, quo minus. The words of Theodoret are, that
the mystical signs after Consecration do not go out of their proper nature,
but continue in their former substance, shape and figure, and may be seen and
felt as before. How does the Jesuit think you, expound these words? P. 175.
Theodoret speaks not (says he) of the substance of bread, as if that did
remain, but he only says that the accidents remain in their own substance,
that is their own entitie, nature or being, which to them is not accidental,
and therefore may be termed their substance; for it is plain that accidents
have a certain being of their own, different from that of their subject
wherein they inhere, or rest. I grant that it is plain they have: but it is as
plain or rather plainer, that Theodoret in that place by sabstantia
understands no such thing. For in this very Dialogue he exactly
distinguishes between substance and accidents, and tells us that by ((...))
or substance, he means not accidents, but substance properly so taken,
saying, Theod. Dial. 2. c. 22.
we call a body a substance, but health and sickness an accident. Besides
that which he here calls signum mysticum, he in this very Dialogue terms
donum oblatum, the gift offered, and eibum ex seminibus, bread made of seeds;
and afterward, a thing visible and tangible: but who ever heard of accidents
without a subject offered to God for a gift? or that dimensions or colors or
figures are a nourishment made of seeds, or that accidents without a subject
can be felt? Again, it is evident and confessed by all, that accidents
properly so called have not shape or figure. For that implies thrt the
accidents should be one thing, and shape and figure another, whereas shape and
figure are mere accidents themselves. Lastly, if Theodoret had thought that
the substance of bread and wine cease, and is changed into the very body and
blood of Christ: and that the accidents thereof only remained; Theodoret ahd
not taken the heretic in his own net, by retorting a similitude drawn from
the Sacrament upon him; but the Heretic had taken Theodoret after this
manner; It is granted by us both, that the body of Christ after his ascension
is so changed, as the sacred Symbolls after Consecration: but the sacred
Symbolls are so changed, that in the Eucharist there remains only the outward
shape and form of bread, and not the real substance; therefore Christ's body
after his Ascension is so changed, that the shape and form of flesh remains,
and not the very nature and substance. Of this see more in the Romish Fisher
held in his own net, P. 144.
Yea but (says Flood) Theodoret speaks of something which is wrought or made
by Consecration, and which is understood and adored: What is this that is made
here? not the accidents for they remain the same, not the substance of the
bread, for that was before, neither is that said to be heleeved, much less
adored. I answer briefly; of bread that was before common, a holy Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood is made, and believed and reverenced as a most sacred
mystery: as when Wax is made a seal, or bullion the Kings coin, or money:
The^d ibid non mutans (...) rum sed ^^^urae adijceers graetiam.
the substance is not changed, but the use, significancie or efficacy: so in
the Sacrament according to the mind of Theodoret there is a change made, but
accidental only, not substantial.

To the seventeenth. Cusanus is not produced by the Knight, as a witness
speaking plain against Transubstantiation: but as lisping something to that
purpose, not as maintaining professedly Consubstantiation: for that had not
been safe for him, the Roman Church from whom he held his Cardinals hat
determining the contrary: Excit. lib. 6. si quis intelligeret panem non
transubstantiari, sed supervestiri nobiliori substa^tia^. Prout guidam veteres
Theologi intellexisse reperiuntur.
but yet secretly favoring that opinion, his words are, that some ancient
Divines are found to have understood ( by the words, This is my body) the Bread
not to be transubstantiated, but to be over clothed with a more noble
substance. Had he held Transubstantiation an article of faith, he would have
branded those who held the contrary with a note of heresy, and not said some
ancient Divines: but some old heretics thought, that the words, This is my
body, employed not Transubstantiation, but rather a kind of Consubstantiation.
As for that error of the Printer in the marginall quotation at which the
Jesuit glanceth, as if the Knight had mistaken libros excitationum, for
exercitiorum or exercitationum. I answer, the error is as happy as that in the
Colen edition of S. Cyprian, cessat error Romanus, for error humanus; and that
in Platina, nisi qui duarum partium ex Carnalibus integra suffragia tulerit,
Plat. in vit. Clement. Sander. l. 1. de scbism. Aug. Or in Garnets Apology by
Eud. Iohann. rebustioribus est proponendus hic cibus Olidus for Cibus Solidus.
for Cardinalibus; or that of the Printer of Ingolstade, Wolfeum conatu summo
nixum esse primam toties ecclesiae sedem occupare, and vanitatis sacerdotalis
fastigium conscendere, for unitatis: For indeed those books of the Cardinal
are no other then the exercise of his readers patience, or at the best of his
own wit or imagination.

To the eighteenth. Wickliff and the Waldenses, the Knight insisted not upon
their testimony, though well he might; (for they were most eminent
professors of the truth, and most free from those foul aspersions which their
sworn enemies, and bloody persecutors cast upon them) because his purpose was
in this chapter, as he professes in the title, vos vestris gladijs jugulare,
to cut your throat with your own swords, and condemn you out of your own
mouth, as Christ does the evil servant in the Gospel. It Is true, Wickliffe
was condemned for an heretic in the Council of Constance many years after
his death, and barbarous inhumanitie was also exercised upon his bones. Yet
will it follow no more from hence that Wickliffe was an heretic, then that
Jeremy was a false Prophet, or Christ and his Apostles false teachers, because
they were condemned by counsels of Priests. And of all Counsels that of
Constance carries the least credit, because it is not only condemned by all the
reformed Churches, but by the Roman Church her self, and the Decrees thereof
repealed in later Counsels. Touching the Waldenses what the Jesuit here
writes of them he confirms by no testimony, and the contrary may be
demonstrated out of Orthwinus Gratius, Histoire des Vaudois.
and the History and confession of the Waldenses lately set forth out of
authentical records in French.

To the nineteenth. Durand concerning the material part of bread remaining in
the Sacrament, but not the substance, implying that the material part of
Bread, and the substance are different things is not material nor true. For
though the material part of any substance be a distinct thing, both from the
form and the compositum: yet is it a substance, and has accidents inherent in
it. For according to the axiom of the metaphysickes, ex non substantijs non
fit substantia, a substance or substantial compound is not made or composed of
non substances. Since the whole is not distinct really from all the parts united
together, the compound cannot be substantial, unless the parts of which it
consists be substances. Durand therefore affirming that the material part of
the bread remained in the Sacrament after Consecration: held that some part of
the substance of bread remained, and therefore the Knight no way wrongeth
Durand, but Flood the Knight. If Durand held that the whole substance of the
bread was turned into the body of Christ according to your Trent Decree: De
Euch. l. 3. c. 13.
why does Card. Bellarmine censure his doctrine as heretical: if he taught not
that the whole substance was converted, he must needs hold that some part of
the substance remained as it was before; which is all the Knight charge him
with. As for that the Jesuit adds to salve the matter, that he acknowledges
all others to be against him in this point, Durand. in 4. sent. did. 11. q. 1.
let him put on his Spectacles and read the place again, and he shall see
there are no such words. Only I find quest. 3. This modest parenthesis salvo
meliori judicio. Which indeed are respective words befitting a modest man: but
no way amounting to a confession that his opinion in that point was singular,
and that all others were against him, which notwithstanding Flood puts upon him.

To the twentieth. Gaufridus and Hostiensis cited by the Knight out of Durand,
In 4. sent. did. 10. q. 1. n. 13.
it is evident that howsoever they might peradventure incline to that, which
the Roman Church determined, viz. the second opinion that the bread does not
remain, but is changed, yet they no way condemn the third opinion, viz. the
substance of bread remains, and is together with tho body of Christ. For as
Durand well notes, they call it an opinion, not an error, or an heresy;
neither do they say it is to be reproved, but let it pass without any
censure, which they would not have done, if they had held Transubstantiation to
be a doctrine de fide to be believed of all upon pain of damnation.

To the twenty one. Cutbert Tunstall was a Bishop, and in great esteem among
all the learned in his time, In his Epitaph in Lambeth Chancell he is styled
Aureusiste Senex. Tunst. de Euch. l. 1. page 46. de modo quo id fieret fortasse
satius erat curiosum quemque relinquere conjecturae sicut liberum fuit ante
concilium Lateranense.
and therefore not lightly to be filliped off, and slighted by a priest and
Jesuit de face vulgi, by saying that the matter is not great, whether Tunstall
said, that for which he is alleged or no, because one single Author or two
contradicted by others carries no credit. For I find not that he is
contradicted by any. His words are these, of the manner and means of the real
presence, either by Transubstantiation, or otherwise perhaps it had been
bettter to leave every man that would be curious to his own conjecture, as
before the Council of Lateran it was left free. Neither did that learned
Bishop of Duresme ever retract this opinion. For Mr. Bernard Gilpin a holy man,
and a kinsman of the Bishop affirms, that the Bishop his Diocesan often told
him, that Innocent the third had done very unadvisedly, in that he had made the
opinion of Transubstantiation an article of faith. Neither do we find that
any in his days or since before Flood taxed this Bishop for this his opinion.

To the twenty two. Erasmus will live both in his own works, and in the
writings of the ancient Fathers, and other Classick Authors corrected and set
forth by him, when a thousand Floods, and Leomelij, and Daniels a Jesus shall
be buried in perpetual oblivion. Erasmus was in great esteem with Archbishop
Waram, and Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chancellor of England, and of diverse Bishops,
yea and Cardinals also beyond the Sea, and what Tully spoke of Aristotle may
be truly said of him, A golden river. A hellish lake.
there is in his writings, aureum slumen: but in the Jesuit his adversary,
lacus averni.

Concerning private Masses, Spectacles Paragraph 3. a page 187. vsque ad 199.
OUR Saviors words take ye, eat ye, make nothing against private Mass, for
Christ there spoke to all his Apostles who did all eat: and out of that place
a man might as well say, that all must communicate that are in the Church at
the same time as two or three.

S Paul's words where he inviteth Christians to imitate him, Paul therein,
because they are ready to communicate with all such as come worthily to
receive, but the Knight must prove that S. Paul would not say Mass, unless
others would communicate with him, or that he teaches that other Priests must
not.

Where S. Paul 1 Cor. 11. to tarry one for another when they came together to
cate he speaks to the people, who made the suppers called Agape, as is
plain by the text wherein be reprehendeth the Abuses that were committed, as
that some did exceed, others did want, some were drunk, some went away hungry,
which could not pertain to the blessed Sacrament; besides the distribution of
that belonged to the Priests not to the people who are here instructed, and
reprehended for their manner of making their suppers.

The cup of blessing is called a Communion, because it uniteth us to Christ our
head, Knight were good, it would follow that not only some, but that all the
people must receive together with the Priest.

The Catholic Doctors cited by the Knight say indeed, Bellarmine and Durand
prove manifestly that there was no such necessity or dependence of the Priests
celebrating upon the peoples communicating, that they might not celebrate
unless the people did communicate. For S. Chrysostom says of himself that
he celebrated every day, though there were no body to participate with him.

The Council of Nants forbidding Priests to celebrate alone, Dominus vobiscum,
and the like; but what is this to saying Mass without some body to communicate
with him?

The Council of Trent does not bless and curse out of the same mouth,

The Hammer.
THe Jesuits answer to this Section of the Knight, wherein he impugneth
private Mass by four texts of Scripture, two Canons of Counsels, and twelve
pregnant Confessions of Romish Doctors, consists partly of sophismes, and
partly of sarcasmes, to both which I purpose to return a short and smart
answer, first by refuting his sophismes, and after by retorting his sarcasmes.

To the first sophistical answer I reply. Take, eat, Mat. 26.26.
this is my body were spoken to all future communicants as well as to the
Apostles then present, for they contain in them an institution of a Sacrament
to be celebrated in all Christian Churches, till the end of the world, as the
Apostle teaches us from the 23. to the 28. especially at the 26 verse, 1 Cor.
11.
as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death
till he come. This the Apostles in their persons alone could not fulfill, for
they lived not till Christ's second coming: they must of necessity therefore
be extended to all that in succeeding ages should be present at the Lords
Supper, who are as much bound by this precept of Christ to communicate with the
Priest, or dispencer of the Sacrament, as the Apostles were to communicate with
Christ himself, when he first in his own person administered it; otherwise if
the precepts Take, eat, do this in remembrance of me appertained to the
Apostles only, what warrant has any Priest now to consecrate the elements? or
administer the Sacrament? nay, what command have any faithful at all to
receive the Communion? Yea but says the Jesuit, if not only the Apostles and
their successors, but all the faithful are here enjoined to eat: it would
follow that whenever the Sacrament is administered, all must communicate that
are in the Church at the same time. It will follow that all who are bid to the
Lords table, and come prepared to whom the Priest in the person of Christ
says, Take eat, this is my body ought to communicate; De eccles. observe.
sciendum juxta antiquos patres quod soli co^municantes divinis mysterijs inter
esse consueverint. Orat. de consecrat. did. 2. peracta consecratione omnes
communicent nisi malint ecclesiasticis carere liminibus.
and this was the custom of the ancient Church as Micrologus teaches, We
must know, says he, according to the ancient Fathers, that none but
Communicants were wont to be present at the mysteries, and therefore before the
Communion, the Catechumenie and penitents which were not prepared to
communicate, were commanded to depart ite, Missa est: and we find an ancient
Canon of the Roman Church attributed to Gelasius, enjoining all under pain of
excommunication that are present after the Consecrationis finished, to
participate of the blessed Sacrament.

To the second. be ye followers of me as I am of Christ, 1 Co. 11.1. is
general, and reaches as well to acts of piety, as charity. As non est
distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, so non est restringendum ubi lex non
restringit; as we may not distinguish where the law does not distinguish: so
we must not restrain where the law has no restriction. The Jesuit himself
says, that S. Paul's imitation is directed to all, if to all, then to Priests;
and again he says, these words come in very fitly to prove that in all
things that appertain unto salvation we should seek to imitate S. Paul as
he does Christ. And I hope the Jesuit holds the worthy receiving of the
Sacrament a matter of salvation. I am sure the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. He
that eats and drinks unwerthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself.
But what need we dispute this point any further? since the Apostle after he
had delivered this precept in the beginning of the chapter, in pursuit thereof
at the 23 verse instanceth in the Sacrament it self, saying, What I received
of the Lord, that I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night he
was betrayed took bread etc. Surely if we are to follow the Apostle in the
performance of moral duties, much more of religious, and this the Jesuit in
the end is compelled to grant, and therefore adds for his further answer,
that Catholic Priests do imitate S. Paul in the administration of the
Sacrament, because they are ready to communicate with all such as come worthily
to receive. Catholic Priests, that is in his language Romanists imitate S.
Paul in their Mass; wherein? and how? he administered a Sacrament, they offer a
sacrifice: he prayed in a known tongue, they in the Latin unknown to the
people: he acknowledges no Lords supper where there is not a Communion, 1 Cor.
10.17.
whereby many are made one bread and one body, because they all partake of that
one bread; they say private Masses in which the Priest bids the people eat,
and drink, but eats and drinks all himself: he speaks of breaking of
bread, they break none at all: he commands every one to examine himself,
and so to eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, ver. 28. They forbid the
Laytie to touch the cup: and call they this an imitation of the Apostle? is it
not rather an immutation and violation of the Apostles holy precepts and
practice? in these things they tread in the Apostles steps, as the Antipodes
do in ours, who are therefore so styled, because their feet and steps are
diametrally opposite to ours. P. 194.
Yea but says Flood, there are many things which S. Paul did, and wherein he
did desire to be followed, as chastening of his body, fasting and prayer, in
which Protestants are not so well able to prove themselves followers of him, as
Papists can do. I answer, that although S. Paul in this place speaks of no
such thing, neither can his words reasonably be stretched to the chastening
and beating down of his body to bring it in subjection, because he adds, as
I am of Christ be ye followers of me as I am of Christ. Now we read not
that Christ beat his own body, or needed to endeavor to bring it into
subjection, which was always so from the beginning: yet let him rightly
understand the Apostles practice in taming his flesh, and subduing his body,
and he will find Protestants as ready to follow him as any the most austere
Papist. For by taming his body he means not whipping or scourging, which
Papists receive by tradition from the heretics called flagellantes or the
whippers: nor was his fasting an abstinence from flesh and feeding on the
daintiest fish, and pouring down the sweetest and strongest wines, Act. 28.33.
Ye have continued fasting, having taken nothing, wherefore I pray you to take
some meat, for this is for your health.
but an afflicting his body by watching, continual labor, and fasting from
all kind of sustenance, and such fasts not only private Christians among us
keep often, but our whole Church in public calamities by the command of
supreme authority religiously observes, and has reaped singular benefits
thereby.

To the third. That the precept of S. Paul, to tarry one for another when they
came to eat, appertains to the Sacrament is evident, 1 Cor. 11.20.
first by that he calls it the Lords supper which they came together to
eat, when ye come together in one place, this is not to cate the Lords
Supper. Now that by the Lords Supper, not the Agape which were not instituted
by him, but the Sacrament is meant not only S. Austin and S. Cyprian, Ep. 118.
tract. de coen. dom. and the Fathers generally quoted by Casaubonus, Exercit.
16. sect. 23. Baron. annal. tom. 1. An. 34. Constat coenam domini sic enim
patres appellare consuevere institutionem sacratissimae Eucharistiae. Greg.
Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 1. puncto 1. solet vocari hoc sacramentum coena
domini sicut appellavit
but Baronius and Gregorius de Valentia, and the Fathers in the Catechism of
the Council of Trent expressly affirm. Secondly, it is evident by the
coherence of the Apostles discourse in this chapter, who having reproved some
abuses in eating the Lords Supper, to set an edge upon his reproof relates,
v. 23. and sequentibus the institution of the blessed Sacrament, and from
thence infers, verse the 33. and 34. wherefore my brethren, when you come
together to eat tarry one for another, and if any man hunger let him eat at
home, that ye come not together to condemnation. Yea but says the Jesuit,
Apostolus 1 Cor. 11. and Chrysostomus, hom 1. de coena dom. quamsane
appellationem tanqua^ a veteribus patribus usurpata^ commemorat quoque
catechismus Romanus. Catechis. Trid. pat. tract de sacram. Alt sanctissimi
patres Apostolorum authoritatem secuti coenae etiam nomine eucharistiam
interdum vocarunt, quod illa novissima coena salutari mysterio a Christo domi
no sit instituta.
some among the Corinthians exceeded others, and some did want, some were
drunk, and some went away hungry, which could not pertain to the Sacrament
as every one knows. I grant these abuses could not fall out in the very act
of receiving the Sacrament in which every one had but some part of the
Consecrated bread, and a draught also of the holy Cup in such a small measure
and quantity, as they could not be distempered thereby: neither does the
Apostle tax these abuses at the Lords Supper, but in their own supper which
they took before, v. 21. their disorders in these he sharply reproves, not
only as breaches of the Moral law, and acts of intemperance, but also as
profanation of the Sacrament, to which they ought to have come with a holy
preparation before. Yea but says the Jesuit, the distribution of the Sacrament
belonged to the Priests, not to the people who are here reprehended for their
manner of making their suppers. I answer, that albeit it appertains to the
Priests to deliver the sacred elements, and the people to receive them from
them: yet because the Priests cannot give, if none be to take from them, the
people who either absented themselves from the Communion, or came not together,
but one after another, are justly reproved: because by this their negligence or
disorder, the Sacrament could not be so decently, or solemnly celebrated, as
it ought. Now if the Apostle as the Jesuit will have it, requires the people
to tarry one for another, before they began their feasts called Agapae; how much
more think you would he require this duty of expecting one the other before
they began the Lords Supper? which is one of the chiefest and most public Act
and service, whereby we profess, and express the Communion of Saints. The
neglect of the former duty in not staying for their guests at their Agapae,
could be at the most but a discourtesie or incivilitie; but the neglect in the
later, as the Apostle teaches, trenched upon their conscience, and hazarded
their salvation, wherefore my brethren, says the Apostle, v. 33.34. When you
come together to eat tarry one for another, and if any man hunger, let him
eat at home that you come not together to condemnation.

To the fourth. The text of the Apostle, the cup of blessing, which we bless,
1 Cor. 10.16:
is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the Bread which we break, is
it not the Communion of the body of Christ, for we being many are one bread
and one body, because we are all partakers of that one bread, is pertinently
alleged by the Knight against private Mass, which is a communion without
communicants; much like to Caesar's monument, Philippica. 1.
which the Orator fitly terms insepultam sepulturam, an unburied burial.
How is the cup of blessing a Communion if none pledge as it were the one the
other in it? how is the Bread a Communion if it be communicated to none? How
are the people made one bread, and one body by it, if they partake not of it. I
grant the union between the head and members, and Priest and people may
remain though the Priest say Mass, and the people receive not: as likewise it
may remain though the Priest say no Mass, nor communicate himself, because,
there are other means of this Communion besides the Sacrament: yet because
this Sacrament was ordained principally to confirm this union, and communion,
and from thence takes its name, they who impropriate a common, and of a
public communion make a private Mass, destroy both the name and nature of
this Sacrament. Moreover, as the worthy participation of the Sacrament
wonderfully confirms: so it was instituted by Christ to represent the union
of the Priest with the people, which cannot be done in private Masses wherein
the Priest communicates alone. For that represents rather a distinction and
separation of the Priest from the people, then an union. Yea but (says the
Jesuit) if this argument of the Knight were good, it would follow that not only
some, but all the people must receive together with the Priest, and that the
people must not receive one without the other. I answer, that it follows
indeed that all the people that are solemnly invited by the Priest, and come
prepared, ought to receive together; and this the Apostles words strongly
enforce, we being many are one bread and one body, 1 Cor. 10.17.
because we are all partakers of that one bread, mark it, all partakers of
one bread, and therefore all one bread and one body. How can Papists make this
argument good out of their private Masses, wherein none partaketh of the Bread,
or tastes of the Cup but the Priest?

To the fifth. Jury of twelve men true and honest in the Jesuits account, (for
they all lived and died in the communion of the Church of Rome) all Priests
that say, (I cannot say celebrate) private Masses are cast as transgressors of
the traditions and customs of the primitive Church; Nay farther as novelists
and innovators. For they all testify and that jointly, that the practice of
the primitive Church is for our public Communion, and against their private
Masses, true says the Jesuit, they testify concerning the practice of the
primitive Church, but they affirm not that the contrary practice was
unlawful: the people then did communicate ordinarily with the Priest, but
there was no necessity so to do. Admit this answer were true, that the
verdict of this Jury passed for the practice and manner of the primitive
Church, not for any Canon or precept so to do: yet the Knight has the better
of the cause. For they all prove that for which he produces them, viz. that
by the confession of our Adversaries antiquity is for us in this point, and
that there was a Church celebrating the Lords Supper as we do, in the first
and best ages when there was no Church extant in the world, either maintaining
or practicing private Masses. No man doubts but that the constant and
uniforme practice of the primitive Church ought to sway more with all religious
Christians, De sacrific. Miss. Dur. rat. l. 4. c. 53. in primitiva ecclesia
omnes qui celebrationi missarum intererant communicabant. Bellith. in explicat
can. c. 50 Micro. de eccles. observat. Tolos de Ritibus c. 38. Innocent. 3. l.
6. myster. mis. c. 5 Odo. in expos. ean. antiquitus nullae missae sine
collecta, hoc est, caetu aliquo modo offerentium, and sacramenta
participantiura agebantur. Justin. in 1 Cor. 10. olim quod nunc etiam Graeci
usurpant, ex uno eodemque pane co^secrato delibatae particulae singulis
tribuebantur ut melius unio and conjunctio cum Christo atque apertius
significaretur.
then any novell constitution or practice of any later Church whatsoever. If
we had nothing but their practice, that alone were of great moment. Yet we
have more, I mean their judgment. For since whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, especially in actions of this nature, their constant and uniforme
practice in this kind, may serve as a demonstration to any sober-minded man,
that what they did, they thought most agreeable to Christ's institution. But the
Witnesses depose farther, for some come home to the point of unlawfulness of
private Masses. Albeit Cocleus says no more then that anciently the Priests
and people did communicate together; and Durandus, that all that were present
at the celebration of the Mass did every day communicate. And Bellichus and
Micrologus, and Tholosanus, and Innocentius the Third, that in the infancy of
the Church, all that were present together at the Sacrament were wont to
communicate. Yet Odo Cameracensis goes a step farther, saying, in the
Primitive Church they never had Masses without the convention of the people to
communicate together. Justinian adds to the practice of the primitive Church,
the present practice of the Greek Church backing them both with a good reason,
In ancient times, says he, which the Greek Church uses at this day of one
loaf of bread Consecrated, diverse parts were distributed to each communicant,
that by this their Communion their union with Christ might be more plainly
expressed. Hugo de S. Vict. in spec. eccles. post baec dicitur communio quae
sic appellatur ut omnes communicemus, vel dicitur communio quia in primitiva
ecclesia populus communicabat quolibet die. Cassand. de solitar. miss. proprie
communio dici non potest nisi plures de eodem sacrificio participant. Joan
citat Cassand. consult de solit. miss. res ipsa clamat tam in Graeca quam in
Latina ecclesia non solum sacerdotes sacrificantes, sed and relics
presbyteros, diaconos, nec non and reliquam plebem aut saltem aliquam plebis
partem communicasse, quod quomodo cessaverit mirandu^ est, etc. Bellar. li 2 de
miss. c 9 et 10 Durandus de hoeret. l. 2. c. 4.
and Hugo out strippeth him, saying, it is therefore called the Communion, to
teach us that we ought all to communicate of it, or because the people in the
primitive Church did communicate every day together. Cassander enforces the
Argument drawn from the name of this Sacrament yet farther against private
Masses, it cannot be said properly a Communion, but where some people are
partakers of the same sacrifice with the Priest. And lastly Johannes
Hoffmisterus not only speaks plainly, but cries out against your private
Masses, The thing it self does speak and cry alowd, that both in the Greek
and the Latin Church, not only the sacrificing Priest, but the other Priests
and Deacons, and the rest of the people, or at least some part of the people
did communicate together, and how this custom ceased it is to be wondered,
and we ought to endeavor that it may be restored again in the Church. Yea
but says the Jesuit, Bellarmine and Durand prove by manifest authority, that
in the Eastern Church in the time of S. Ambrose, S. Austine and Chrysostom,
the people did communicate but once a year: and yet S. Chrysostom even there
where he complains of the peoples coldness, says of himself, that he
celebrated every day, though there were none to communicate with him. I answer,
that the public and solemn time at which all were bound to communicate in the
Eastern Church, was but once a year, to wit at Easter: yet did the people in
those days both at other times, and especially when they lay on their
deathbed, receive the Communion: which was therefore called Viaticum
morientium. As for S. Chrysostom; it is true that he much complains of the
backwardness of the people in coming to the Communion, and professes for his
own part, that he neglected not his duty to celebrate the holy Sacrament,
though he were much discouraged therein by the paucitie and raritie of those,
who presented themselves at the Lords Table: yet I find not that he any where
says, that he celebrated the Communion when there was none to participate with
him. For though it may be at some time especially on the week days, none of
the people did communicate with him: yet always some of the Clergy, who
assisted that action communicated with him; and therefore the Jesuits
inference, that by our doctrine the Priest must not say Mass once in seven
years, unless the people be so devout as to receive with him, is most
absurd. For in all Colleges, and Cathedral Churches, the Priests and Deacons
communicate every month at the least, though none of the people sometimes
receive with them. But in parish Churches it were a profanation and a mere
mockery to administer the Communion without some of the people, to say, Take,
eat, and drink you all of this, when there is none to eat or drink but the
Priest himself, none, I say, neither Layk nor Clergy man.

To the sixth. Nants is mounted against solitary Masses; and what are solitary
Masses but private Masses? the Fathers in that Council account it a ridiculous
superstition in a Priest, to say, the Lord be with you, and lift up your
hearts, and we give thanks unto the Lord, or let us pray, when there is none
to make answer, Council Nan. c. 30. and Cassand. p. 83.
or present whom he inviteth to pray with him; and is it not altogether as
absurd and ridiculous for the Priest to say as he does in all private Masses,
Take, eat, De myster. missae, c. 15. pie credendum est quod Angeli dei comites
assistant orantibus.
and drink ye all of this, when there is none to eat or drink with him?
Neither will Innocentius evasion serve the turn, that we are piously to
believe that though there are no men present, yet that the Angels accompany
them that pray; for neither can the Angels join in such forms of prayer as
are used, look upon our infirmities, and deliver us from fornication and other
deadly sins: neither is it agreeable to sound Divinity or Philosophy to bid
Angels that are spirits receive the body and blood of our Savior. Here for
want of better answer the Jesuit picketh a quarrel with the Knight for not
citing the Council of Nants out of any original but out of Cassander, Flood.
p. 197.
beyond whom and one or two more such fellows, says he, it seems his
learning did not stretch. I will repay him in his own coin. For the Jesuit
himself cites not the Council of Nants out of any original but out of
Bellarmine and Burchard, beyond whom, P. 197, l. 27.
and one or two more such fellows, it seems his learning did not stretch. Is
it no disparagement for Flood a professor in Divinity, and writer of
Controversies to cite a Canon of a Council out of Bellarmine his
fellow-Iesuit, and is it a disparagement for a Knight no professed Divine, to
cite a Canon of a Council out of Cassander a most learned Doctor, and great
Antiquarie in high esteem when he lived in the Roman Church? If the Jesuit
answer that he could not cite the original, because that Decree is not now
extant in any Council of Nants that we have, with one and the same answer he
justifies the Knight as well as himself. It is no argument of Ignorance, but
rather of faithfulness and sincerity when a man cannot come to the sight of a
record himself to transcribe it out of others verbatim, who have seen it and
avouch them for it.

To the seventh. Trent like Satyrus in the Poet blows out of the same mouth
hot and cold; 3. V. 11.
or like the fountain in S. James, sends forth at the same place sweet water
and bitter, c. 6. can. 8. optaret quidem sacro-sancta synodus ut populus qui
astat communicaret, quod hujus sanctissimi sacrificij fructus uberior
proveniret.
for the Council accurseth them who say private Masses are unlawful, and yet
wishes that there might be no private Masses. It is true that it is one thing
to wish that the people would communicate because to hear Mass and receive
withal, will be more profitable: another to say, if there be none to
communicate the Priest must not say Mass, or that such Mass is unlawful, yet
there is such affinity between these two sayings, that a good argument may
be drawn from the one to the other. For he that wishes a reformation in
private Masses, or (which is all one) that of private Masses they were made
public Communions, consequently acknowledges that private Masses are faulty,
or defective: and if faulty so far as they are faulty, unlawful.

And thus the indifferent reader may see that the water of this Flood wants
ashes and soap to be mingled with it, lavat enim non perluit, for it washes
but scowreth not, nor fetches out foul stains in the Mass Priests linen.

Having refuted his sophismes, Loemel. spong feles unguentorum fragrantia, and
Tigres pulsu tympanorum in rabiens aguntur.
I come now to retort his Sarcasmes. Tigers if they hear a drum grow mad: in
this section the Knight sounded an alarm, and caused the drum to beat hard,
at the sound whereof the Jesuit his adversary after the manner of the Tiger
grows stark mad, and snappeth at every one he meets. First he falls
upon the Knight for creating a Cardinal, to wit, Hugo de S. Victore, Flood p.
188.
of his own free goodness to make up the number of his Bishops and Cardinals.
I answer for the knight, that he created no supernumerall Cardinal: for he
would not usurp upon the Poges privilege; but committed a small error in an
(...) and cry, which was made after one Hugh in stead of another, yet
peradventure it was not the Knights mistake, but the Correctors. For Hugh of S.
Victor, though he has his Cardinals hat in the margent, yet he stands
bareheaded in the text ( it is called a Communion, Lynd safe way p. 119.
because it is a common union of Priests and people, otherwise, says Hugo, it
is called a Communion, for that the people in the primitive Church did
communicate every day.) But admit the Knight mistook Hago de S. Victore, for
Hugo Cardinalis, as Bellarmine confesses, that many learned men of his own
side mistook Anselmus Laudunensis, for Cantuariensis; yet Flood should have
pardoned or let pass and overseene this small oversight, because we took him
at a worse fault in the like kind in examining his last Section, wherein as I
there showed he grossly mistaketh Bertram for Elfrick, and a collation of two
Authors for a translation of one.

Loripedem rectus derideat Aethiopem albus. Eras. Adag.
after this he jeareth at the Knight for saying that the Council of Trent
wished well to our doctrine, P. 189.
What, says he, have you Masses Sir Humfrey? take heed it may cost you money:
an Informer that should hear this might catch you by the back, and bring you
in for so many hundred marks as you have received bits of bread in your
Church, which truly might prove a dear ordinary for you. The Orator said
well, Cic. pre Coel.
nihil tam volucre quam maledictam, nothing is so easily cast out as a
contumelious word, and I may add nothing so easily returned back. The Knight
no where says that we have any Masses in our Church, but only that the
Council of Trent wishes well to public Communions wherein the people
communicate with the Priest, which are not certainly your private Masses: but
admit he had said we have Masses in our Church, he might very well have
defended this speech by my Lord of Duresme his distinction of Christ his Mass,
Tho. Mor. episc. Dunelm. l. nitit. Christ his Mass.
and the Pope his Mass. We have Christ his mass at every communion, neither
is any man merced for being present at it, but for being absent from it. For
Masses are not sold with us, as they are with Papists where there is a price
set for dry Masses, and wet Masses, for low Masses and high Masses; the
ordinary was but a groat for the one, and a tester for the other, but now it
is raised; and so to speak in the Jesuits language the Priests Masses prove a
Dear ordinary for the Laity. After this mad Tiger has left the Knight,
he fastens his teeth upon our Communion Table, calling it an empty Communion,
nothing but a morsel of bread, P. 190.
and a sup of wine, and a pretty service and good fellow Communion. P. 199.
Flood is the same full and fasting, in jest and in earnest, for in both he
contradicts himself, which discovers an idle and addle brain. If our
Communion be empty and nothing but a morsel of bread, and a sup of wine what
good-fellowship can there be in it? But in good earnest how can the Jesuit
call ours an empty Communion, which is every way full, and fuller then theirs,
both for the signs, and the things signified? for the signs, we have the
substance of Bread and Wine, they nothing but hungry accidents and shows, a
bit of quantity, and a morsel of colors, and a soppe of figures; neither have
the Laity among them so much as a sup of the consecrated cup. For the thing
signified we teach that all communicants by faith feed on the very body and
blood of Christ, and all that so feed partake of all the benefits of Christ's
passion: they teach that Infidels and reprobates eat Christ's body, and reap
no benefit at all by it. As for his good fellow Communion, let him take it to
himself, for Aquinas notes, that sometimes their Priests are overseene by
drinking the liquor in the Consecrated cup, Missal. in cautel. si in casu gulae
Eucharistiam evomuerit.
and the cautels of the Mass appoint what is to be done in case the Priest
being drunk before cast up the host. As for our Communion there can be no
excess, or as he terms it good-fellowship in it. For the people have
warning a week at least before to prepare themselves, and they receive always
fasting before, and the quantity is so small that it cannot distemper any,
which this bone Compaignion could not be ignorant of: But it seems he took
a cup of vinum Theologicum in the Tavern before he set pen to paper in this
section. For besidemanifold contradictions before noted, he terms in it our
Commnuion sacrilegious, P. 199.
not considering that they sacrilegiously take the cup from the Laity, and that
we have restored it, and he concludes the Section with these words, here is
enough of such an idle subject. Now the subject as appears by the argument of
the Section, and the title he puts throughout, is Private Mass. Nay which
is a most certain demonstration of his distemper; when he wrote this Section
he forgot that he was a Priest, and reckons himself among the Laity,
saying, the union may remain between us and the Priest, P. 197. l. 1.
though he say Mass, and we not receive.

Concerning the 7. Sacraments, Spectacles, paragraph. 4. a page 199. usque ad
242.
THe Knight unjustly charge Bellarmine for laying a foundation of Atheism,
Council. Trid. Sess. 7. can. 1. Bell. de effect. sacram. l. 2. c. 25. si
tollamus authoritatem praesentis ecclesiae, and praesentis concilij, in dubiu^
revocari poterunt omnium aliorum co^ciliorum decreta and tota fides christiana.
1 Eliz. 1.
in saying that if we should take away the credit of the Roman Church and
Council of Trent (which decrees the precise number of 7. Sacraments;) the
Decrees of other Councels, nay even Christian faith it self might be called in
question, for if such a general Council may err, the Church may err; if the
Church may err, the faith which that Church teaches may fail, and
consequently there can be no certainty. S. Gregory the great, did often say,
and write, that he did hold the 4, first Councels in the same honor that he
did the 4. Gospels, which is the same, as to say they could as little err as
the 4. Gospels. And the Parliament laws of England give as great authority to
those 4. first Councels, as S. Gregory does, acknowledging that for heresy,
whatsoever is condemned for such by any of them, which is in other words to
acknowledge them for a Rule of faith, and consequently of infallible
authority: neither can any thing be said more against the present Church, and
present Council of Trent, then against the Church of that time, and the
Councels of those times.

The Knight impertinently alleges the testimonies of S. Paul, You know that I
have withdrawn nothing that was profitable v. 27. I have not shrunk to
declare unto you the whole counsel of God.
Acts 20.20. and Bellarmine l. 4. d. verb. Dei. All those things are written by
the Apostle, which are necessary for all men, and which they preached
generally unto all. For S. Paul speaks not of the written word, but of the
doctrine of Christ by him preached; neither does Bellarmines saying help any
thing, because though those things which are necessary in general for all to
know, which are but few be written, there be yet many more not written, which
are necessary to be known by some in the Church.

The Knight in praying that the Anathema decreed by the Council of Trent might
fall upon his head, Ecclesiasticus 3.11.
nor out of passion. For as the Scripture says, maledictio matris eradicat
fundamenta, the malediction of a mother does root out the foundations.

The Knights definition of a Sacrament, Gods promises are true is senseless,
and without ground, largely refuted by Bellarmine, Bell. l. 1. de sac. in
genere. c. 14.16.
and proved to be most absurd. For how can the Sacraments be seals to give
us assurance of his words, when all the assurance we have of a Sacrament is
his word? this is idem per idem. Besides, what promises are these that are
sealed? or if they be sealed, what need we more seals and Sacraments then one?
if there may be more, why not seven as well as two? Again, how do we see
the promises of God in the Sacraments? these are but foolish fancies bred in
heretical brains, and so to be contemned.

The Knights Argument against five of our Sacraments, but of an inferior
rank, and not so agreeable to the high estate of Priesthood.

That S. Ambrose, Austine, Chrysostom, and Bid Aug. in Johan. tract. 15 de
latere in cruce pendentis lancea percusso, sacramenta ecclesiae profluxerunt.
teaching, that out of Christ's side came the Sacraments of the Church prove no
more two then seven Sacraments. For they say not that they were then
instituted, or that there were no more Sacraments instituted, or that other
Sacraments did not issue from thence.

Saint Ambrose makes express mention of the Sacrament of confirmation, L. 2.
de sacram. c. 24.
and of penance, as Bellarmine shows: who also yields a reason why S.
Ambrose in his books de Sacramentis mentions no more but three Sacraments,
because his intent in that work is only to instruct the catechumenie in those
things which are to be done at the time of Baptism. For he neither writes
to the believers of his age, but only to some beginners, as is manifest by the
title of one of his books: neither does he there speak of the Sacraments
which the Church has taught and declared, but of the Sacraments which those
beginners that he spoke to, had newly received.

S. Austine in those places where he speaks of two Sacraments restrains
not the number to two only. Respice ad munera ecclesiae, munus sacramentorum in
baptismo in Eucharislia, et caeteris sanctis sacramentis.
For in his first Sermon upon the 103. psalm, he says, cast thine eyes upon
the gifts, or offices of the Church in Baptism, the Eucharist, and the rest of
the holy Sacraments: and in his Epistle 118. having brought in the two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, he adds this general clause, and
if there be any thing else commended in canonical Scriptures. Neither does
the place the Knight cites out of the third book de doctrina christiana
avail him any thing; for it is plain by the word sicuti, that he brings in
Baptism, and the Lords Supper for example only, which does no way restrain
the number. Besides, his word in this place is not sacraments as the Knight
cites him, but signa signs, which is therefore a corruption of the Knights.

S. Cyprian de ablutione pedum, Cyp. doi ablut. ped. propter hoc benignissime
Domine, pedes lavas discipulis quia post baptismum quem sui reverentia iterari
non patitur, aliud lavacrum procurasti, quod nunquam debeat intermitti.
but that it pertained not to his purpose to speak of more in that place: his
scope being only to speak of such Sacraments as had relation to our Saviors
last Supper, and by ablutio pedum, that Author means the sacrament of
penance, as appears by the words following, for this, O most benign Lord,
thou did wash thy Disciples feet, because after Baptism which may not be
iterated, thou have procured another laver which must never be intermitted.

S Isidore in his sixth book of Etymologies cited by the Knight, Isidore held
more then the three Sacraments the Knight speaks of, in his second book de
Ecclesiast. offic. c. 16. and l. 23. c. 19. he mentions two more, Penance and
Matrimony.

Alexander hales in the place alleged by the Knight says not, Par. 4. q, 5.
n. 7. art. 2. that there be neither more nor fewer then seven Sacraments; it is
true indeed that Hales was of opinion that the form and matter which we now
use in the Sacrament of confirmation were not appointed by our Savior but by
the Church in the Council, at Melda: but this Hales says, sine praejudicio,
that is with leave, not stiffly nor arrogantly maintaining his own opinion.

Hugo de Sancto victore excludes not Penance from being a Sacrament. 23.
chapter he calls Penance the second board after shipwreck, C. 12. Septem
sunt principalia ecclesiae sacramenta, etc.
and says, that if any man endanger his cleansing, which he has received by
Baptism, he may arise, and escape by Penance. Moreover, the same Hugo in his
Glass of the mysteries of the Church says, that there are seven prinoipall
Sacraments of the Church, whereof five are called general, because they belong
unto all, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme unction;
and two special, to wit, Matrimony and Order.

Although Bellarmine denies that Extreme Unction can be deduced out of the
last of S. Mark: Cajetan out of the first of S. James, and although Hugo, and
Peter Lomberd, and Bonaventure, and Alenfis, and Altisiodorensis deny it to
be instituted by Christ: yet none of them all deny it to be a Sacrament.

Bessarion the Cardinal says not that there are but two Sacraments; Florence,
wherein seven Sacraments are precisely taught: but that we find these two
Sacraments expressly delivered, and that we find none other, and none of the
rest so delivered, that is, so plainly.

Soto, though he denies that ordination of Bishops,

Durand says indeed that Matrimony is not ae Sacrament univocally,

Cajetan says indeed, that the prudent reader cannot infer out of the words
of S. Paul, 5. hoc est magnum Sacramentum, that Matrimony is a Sacrament: yet
he denies it not to be a Sacrament. Locor. Theol. l. 8. c. 1. si Lutheram de
hoc matrimoniorum genere disceptare voluerint, intelligant se in scholae
disceptationem incidisse, necoportere catholicum ad eorum argumenta respondere:
sin vero argumententur matrimonium cum sacris ceremonijs administratum
Sacramentum ecclesiae non esse tunc catholicus respondeat fidenter, secure
contra pugnet.
it may be inferred from oiher; or if neither from that nor other, yet it may
be deduced out of tradition.

Canus tells us that the Divines speak so uncertainly of the matter and
form of Matrimony, that he should be accounted an unwise man, who in so
great differences of opinion, would take upon him to establish any thing
certainly: yet he denies not Matrimony to be a Sacrament. For these are his
words, if the Lutherans argue that Marriage administered with sacred Ceremonies,
sacred matter, sacred form, and by a sacred Minister, as it has ever been
administered in the Roman Church, even from the Apostles time; if I say they
argue that this is not a Sacrament of the Church, then let a Catholic answer
confidently, let bim defend stoutly, let him gainsay securely.

Vasquez does not say, that Matrimony is not a Sacrament properly so taken:
Austine speaking of Matrimony does use the word Sacrament but in a large
sense: This is true, but it is but Vasquez his private and singular opinion,
not in a point of faith, but only in the meaning of one Father, in the use of a
word, and in this his opinion he is contradicted by other Catholic Divines.

Bellarmine says, De Sacram. in Genesis l. 1. c. 9.
one thing past, to wit, the Passion of Christ; another thing present, to wit,
sanctifying grace, which they work in our souls; another thing to come, to
wit, eteruall life. The signification of these three things is most apparent in
Baptism, and the Eucharist: but not so apparent in the rest. Thus far the
Knight quoteth Bellarmine, but leaves out that which follows, tamen certum
est implicit illa omnia significari; but it is certain that the rest of the
Sacraments signify all these things at least implicitly.

The Hammer.
ALthough the Jesuit was very angry when he wrote this Paragraph, as
appears by his snarling at every passage almost: yet in his discretion he
thought good not to meddle with some things, which were too hard for his teeth.
To Theophylact, Fulbert, and Paschasius, and the last passage out of S.
Austine, as also to the refutation of the popish arguments for their septenarie
number of Sacraments, from incongruous and ridiculous congruities, he replieth
not a word, and three of their prime Schoolmen, Durand, Vasques, and Cajetan,
he lets shift for themselves, defend them he neither will nor can; yet for all
this he puts up as if he had done wonders in this Paragraph, and fills up
the defect of solid answers with bragges, and swelling words of vanity;
Bullatis vndique nugis pagina turgescit.But these bubbles we shall see will
dissolve of themselves, in the particular answer to his twenty several
exceptions against the Knights discourse.

To the first. Jesuit in this Paragraph thinks that he discourses very
profoundly, for page 201. he says, the Knight is not capable of it; whereas
his chanel here is so shallow, that any child instructed in his Catechism, may
wade through it. Without an infallible rule, says he, there can be no certain
belief in God. An extreme verity, without an unerring Pope no certain rule
of faith, an extreme falsitie: the Iesait cannot see Christ for the Pope, nor
the Scripture for the Trent Canons. Let him remove them out of the way; and if
he have an eye of faith, he may clearly see both, and in them an infallible
rule of faith, and certain means to learn true belief in God. The occasion
of this discourse of the Jesuit was the Knight charging Cardinal Bellarmine
for laying a foundation of Atheism in saying that if we should take away the
credit of the Roman Church and Council of Trent, the Christian faith it self
might be called in question. The charge lies heavy upon the Cardinal. For
to disparage the selfe-sufficiencie of the holy Scriptures, and suspend our
Christian faith upon the Decrees of a late factious conventicle, rejected by
the greater part of the Christian world, is a ready way to overthrow all Divine
faith, and true religion. Yet the Jesuit seeks to cover the nakedness of the
Cardinal with these fig leaves, If agener all Council may err, the Church
may erne; if the Church may err, the faith which that Church teaches may
fail, and consequently there can be no certainty. How easily are these
leaves plucked away, and torn in pieces. 1. Though such a Council as the
Council of Trent, consisting of a few Bishops swaied by the Italian faction
may err, it would not from thence follow, that the whole representative Church
might err. 2. Though the whole representative Church in a free and general
Council lawfully called might err, yet many millions in the Catholic Church
may hold the orthodox belief, and consequently the faith of the Church not
totally fail. Yea but says the Jesuit, take away the infallibility of the
Church there is no rule of faith. This assertion of his is open blasphemy, as
if God would not be true, though all men were found liars: though the Roman
Church and Pope err a thousand times, yet the rule of faith remains
unvariable in the holy Scriptures. Yea but S. Gregory equalizeth the four
first general Councels to the Gospel, and says in effect, that they could as
little err as the 4. Gospels, and that upon the denial of their authority
the Christian faith might be shaken as well as by the denial of the Gospels:
and the like authority gives your Parliament unto them. I answer, S. Gregory
equalizeth the four first general Councels to the four Gospels, not in
respect of authority, but in respect of the verity of the articles defined in
them: he says not, they could as little err, but they did as little err, in
their decisions, or to speak more properly that their doctrine was as true as
Gospel, because the determinations in those first general Councels against
Heretics are evidently deduced out of holy Scriptures. Our Parliament
alluding to the words of S. Gregory speaks in the same sense, as he does.
Yea but says the Jesuit, your Parliament laws acknowledge that for heresy
whatsoever is condemned for such in any of those Councels, which is in other
words to acknowledge them for a rule of faith, and consequently to be of
infallible authority, and to join them in the same rank with the Canonical
Seriptures. Idem jungat Vulpes; by the like reason the Jesuit might say we
join the book of Articles of Religion, and Homilies in the same rank with
the Canonical Scriptures, because we condemn for heretics all that
obstinatly maintain any doctrine repugnant to them: which we do not, because
we hold the Decrees of a provincial Synod, to be of in fallible authority:
but because we are able to prove all the Articles there established, to be
consonant to the holy Scriptures. Yea, but further says the Jesuit in the same
statute, P. 203.
you give power to the Court of Parliament, with the assent of the Clergy in
their Convocation to adjudge or determine a matter to be heresy, which is the
very same as to give it power to declare faith, or to be the rule thereof. I
answer, the statute gives power to the Convocation, to declare faith, and
determine heresy out of Gods word, and by the sentence thereof, and no
otherwise. In such sort to declare faith, is not to be the rule of faith, but
to judge and measure things by the rule. There is a maine difference between
these two, (which yet the Jesuit here confounds as if they were coincident)
to declare faith, and to be the rule of faith every Judge declares the Law,
yet is he not the rule of the Law. The Inquisitors in their jndices
expurgatorij, and the Sorbonists in their censures declare what is heresy: yet
the y are not Itrow the Rule of popish faith, every meater in the market
declares that such or such is the measure of corn and grain: yet is not
every, or any corne-meater the Winchester standerd. It is one thing to be the
rule, and another to measure by the rule, and declare what we have measured.
But to retort the Jesuits phrase upon himself, he is not capable it seems of
this discourse which yet every market-woman or boy is. Well, let the authority
of general Councels be great in the Church, and of the four first Councels
greatest of all, quid hoc ad Rombum? what makes this for the infallibility of
the Trent conventicle? much says the Jesuit every way, for what, says he,
can you say more against the present Church, and present Council of Trent,
then against the Church and Councels of those times? What can we say? nay what
can we not say? what have we not said? or what could all the Papists in the
world answer to what we have already said? After he has taken away the
legal exceptions made against this conventicle by the Author of the history
of the Council of Trent, and of the litterae missivae, and Jewel his Treatise
affixed to that History, and Chemnisius his Examen, and Doctor Bowls his
latin Sermon preached to the Convocation, and lately printed: after he has
proved which he will never be able, that the Assembly at Trent was a free
and general Council, and called by lawful authority, and all the
proceedings in it according to ancient Canons: yet it will still fall as short
of the Council of Nice in authority, as in antiquity: that consisted of most
eminent, learned, and holy Bishops and Confessors: this for the most part of
hungry animals depending on the Popes trencher as Dudithius a Bishop present
at that Council declares at large in his letter set before the History of
the Council of Trent, to which I refer the reader.

To the second. Knight for the sufficiency of holy Scriptures are ponderous,
and weighty, and the Jesuits exceptions to them are slight, vain, and
frivolous. To the testimony out of the Acts, I have kept back nothing that
was profitable unto you, and I am pure from the blood of all men, Act. 20.20.27
for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the Council of God, he says
that S. Paul speaks of the doctrine by him preached, not of the written word
of God: as in like manner our Savior says, that what he heard from his
Father he made known unto them, John 15.15. and yet delivered not one word in
writing. It is true, S. Paul speaks of the doctrine which he preached, but it
is as true that the doctrine which he preached he confirmed unto them by
testimony of Scripture. For S. Luke says Acts 17.2. that S. Paul as his
manner was, reasoned with them out of the Scriptures opening and alleging that
Jesus whom he preached unto them was Christ, and they that received the word
with all readiness of mind searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things
were so: Act. 24.14.
and again I confess that after that way which they call heresy, so worship I
the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law, and
the Prophets. If the Jesuit had read the verse immediately following, testifying
to the Jews and Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ: he could not but have seen the absurdity of his answer,
wherein he denies that S. Paul speaks of the written word. For who knows
not that repentance toward God, and faith toward Jesus Christ are written
almost in every Sermon of the Prophets, and chapter of the Evangelists. What
he adds for confirmation of his answer, (from the example of our Savior,
who made known to his Disciples whatsoever he heard from his Father, and yet
delivered not one word in writing) no whit at all helps his cause. For albeit
we grant that our Savior wrote nothing (except we give credit to a relation
in Eusebius of a letter written by him to King Abgarus) yet he commanded his
Apostles to write those things which they had heard and seen, what thou see
write it in a book, Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 1. Apoc. 1.11.
and send it to the seven Churches; and S. Peter says, 2 Ep. 8.20.
that no Scripture is privatae (...), that is, as Call vin well rendereth the
words privatae impulsionis, of private impulsion or motion: for the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost: and therefore Irenaeus says expressly, Advers.
haeres..3. c. 1. non per alios dispositionem salut is accepimus quans per quos
E vangelium ad nos pervenit, quod primum praeconiaverunt, posted secundum Dei
voluntatem in script is reliquerunt, columnam and firmamentum fidei futurum.
Eusebius. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 14. fideles iterat is precibus impetrarunt a
Marcout monumentum illud doctrinae quod sermon, and verbis ill is tradidisset,
etiam script is mandatum apud eos relinqueret. Esaias 8.20.
that what the Apostles preached first by word of mouth by the will of GOD,
they afterward delivered in writing to be a pillar and foundation of our
faith: and S. Austine affirms, that what Christ would have known of his
words and deeds as needful to our salvation, that he gave in charge to his
Apostles to set down in writing. If this suffice not, I will stop the mouth of
this Jesuit with the free confession of a greater Jesuit then he, Gregory of
Valence in his eight book of the Analysis of faith the fifth chapter, minime in
ipsorum arbitrio positum fuit scribere, aut alio tempore aut alijs verbis
scribere, the penmen of the holy Ghost were so guided by the spirit that it was
not in their power, or at their choice to write, or not to write, or to write
at another time, or to write in other words then they did. To the testimony of
Bellarmine the Jesuit gives as slight an answer as to the former out of S.
Luke, whereunto I need to reply nothing, because in a case so clear we need
not the Cardinals confession, having such express testimony of Scripture and
Fathers, as namely of Esaias, to the law and to the testimony, if they speak
not according to this word, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them. And Moses
wrote this law, and delivered it to the Priests which bare the Arc. Gal. 1.8.
2 Timothy 3.15.
it is because there is no light in them, of Moses, ye shall not add unto
the words which I command you (which to be spoken of the written law is
apparent by comparing this text with Galathians 3.10. and Deuteronomie 31.9.)
And the words of Christ, John 5.39. search the Scriptures, for in them you
think you have eternal life. And of S. John his beloved Disciple, John 20.31.
these things are written that ye might believe that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, and that believing ye might have life through his Name. And of S. Paul,
if we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any other Gospel then that ye
have received; Advers. hermog. c. 22. adoro scripturae plenitudinem: scriptum
doceat Hermogenes, Epist. ad Pomp: nihil innovetur in quit Stephanus, quod
traditum est, unde est ista traditio? Vtrum de Dominica, and Evangelica
authoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis, and epistolis veniens? ea
enim facienda quae scripta sunt Deus restatur, siergo aut in evangelio
praecipitur aut in Apostolorum. epistolis aut Actibus continetur, observetur
haecsanctatraditio.
(that is as S. Austine expounds it praeterquam quod in Scripturis legalibus
and Evangelicis accepist is, if any preach unto you any Gospel beside that
which is contained in the writings of the Law and the Gospel, let him be
accursed. And, thou have known the Scriptures from a child which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus, for all
Scripture is given by Divine inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction and righteosnesse, that the man of
God may be perfect thoroughly furnished to all good works. And of Tertullian,
I adore the fullness of Scriptures; let Hermogenes prove what he says out of
Scriptures, or otherwise let him fear the woe denounced against all such as
add any thing thereunto, or take therefrom. And of S. Cyprian; our brother
Steven will have nothing to be altered in the Church tradition; Whence is this
tradition, is it from the Gospel, or the Acts of the Apostles, or their
Epistles, if it be so then let this holy tradition be kept, for God himself
witnesses that we ought to observe those things that are written. And of
Athanasius, Athanas. orat. 1. cont. Arr. Sufficient per se inspiratae
scripturae ad veritatis instructionem. Basil. Sermon. de side: (...). Hom. 3. in
2. ad Tbess. (...). Et in 2. ad Cor. Hom. 3 (...). Ierom. advers. Helvid. c. 3.
credimus quia legimus, non credimus quia non legimus. Augustine. de doc. Chris.
l. 2. c. 9. in ijs quae aperte posita sunt in scriptura inveniuntur illa amnia
quae continent fidem and mores. Cyril in Evang. Johan. l. 1.2. c. 68, ea
conscripta sunt quae scribentes Sufficere put drunt ad mores dogmataque.
Vincen. Lyrin. advers. Haeres. hic requirat aliquis cum sit perfectus
scripturae canon sibique ad omnia sat is superque sufficiat. Biel in can. mis.
lec. 71. quae agenda, and quae fugienda, quae amanda, and quae contemnenda,
quae timenda, and quae audenda, and quae credenda, and speranda, and caetera
nostrae saluti necessaria, quae omnia sola docet Sacra scriptura.
the holy Scripturesare sufficient to instruct us in the truth. And of S Basil,
it is a manifest falling away from faith, either to refuse any thing of those
that are written, or to bring in any of those things which are not written. And
of S. Chrysostom, all things that are needful are manifestly set down in
holy Scriptures; And again, in the holy Scriptures we have a most exact
balance and rule of all things. And of S. Jerome, who makes the Scripture a
two edged sword cutting heresies on both sides, both in the excess, and in the
defect, We believe, says he, because were ade in Scriptures, we believe not
what were ade not. And of S. Austine, among those things which are openly set
down in Scriptures, all such things are to be found as appertain to faith
and manners. And so of S. Cyril, all things which Christ spoke and did are not
written, but all are written which the writers of the Gospel thought to be
sufficient for doctrine of faith and manners. And of S. Vincentius Lyrinensis,
the Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and over and above sufficient for all
things. And of the prime of the Schoolmen Gabriel Biel, The Scripture alone
teaches us what we ought to believe and to hope for what things are to be
done, and what to be shunned, and all other things that are necessary to
salvation. And of William Pepin, Dom. 2. advent sala haec scriptur adocet
perfect and plane quid credendum, etc. The holy Scripture alone teaches
perfectly and plainly, what we ought to believe as the articles of our Creed,
what we ought to do, as all divine precepts what we ought to desire as
heavenly joys, what we ought to fear; as eternal torments. And of Scotus; In
prim. sent. prol. q. 2. sacra scriptura sufficienter continet doctrinam
necessariam viatori.
The holy Scripture sufflciently contains doctrine necessary for away faring
man, that is in his travel to heaven. Howbeit, because Cardinal Bellarmine
bears down all before him, the more to convince this Jesuit, and nonplus all
Papists, I will examine what the Knight alleges out of him to our present
purpose; All thing, are written, says he, by the Apostles, which are
necessary for all men to know: If all things which are necessary for all men
to know, then all things which are necessary for all Priests, Bishops,
Cardinals, yea and the Pope himself to know, unless the Jesuit will prove
them to be no men. Assuredly the Apostles and the Fathers assembled at Nice
and Constantinople set not down a different Creed for the Priest, and for the
people, but one for all Christians. Yet I grant, that as the measures of the
sanctuary were double to the common; so the learning of a Priest ought to be
double at least to that of the common sort: a more exact, full, and exquisite
knowledge of all, both the principles, and conclusions of faith is required in
thom then in the other: yet nothing is required of them as necessary to
salvation, which may not be drawn out of holy Scriptures, in which are
contained all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 2 Timothy 3.16.17. Oecum.
and Chrysostom. in huno locum (...) Lit. ad Phil. Hisp. reg. Nam quod ad Theologiam
attinet quae summa Philosophia est, his libris omnia nostrae religionis, and
divinitat is mysteria explicantur: quod vero attinet ad eam partem quae moralis
nominatur, hinc quoque omnia ad omnes virtutes praecepta colliguntur, quibus
quidem duabus partibus omnis nostrae salutis, and falicitat is ratio
continetur. Banes in 1. p. Tho. q. 1. art. 8. conclus. 1. omnia quae non
consonant judico eorum gravioribus censuris inurunt idque tanta facilitate ut
merito irrideantur.
The Apostle says not only they are able to make wise unto salvation
indefinitely, but that the man of God, that is the minister of God, may be wise
and not only wise unto salvation, but furnished to every good work, that is,
as S. Chrysostom and Oecumenius expound it, fully accurately, and exactly
instructed. And for ever to seal the Jesuits mouth; thus much Gregory the
thirteenth Pope of Rome in his letters to Philip King of Spain, freely
confesses thus expatiating in the praises of holy Writ, as for Theology which
is the prime Philosophy or metaphysick in these books (speaking of the Bible)
all the my steries of our religion, and divine knowledge are unfolded, and as
for that part which is termed moral; from hence all precepts to all virtues
are gathered, and on these two parts depend all the course or means of our
salvation and happiness.

3. To the third. What Dominicus Banes wrote of certain Divines in his time,
that were so free in their censures of other men, that they became a laughing
stook to all men of judgment, may be truly applied to the Bishops assembled
at Trent, who are so free in casting their thunderbolts of anathemaes against
all that differ from them in judgment, that the learned and judicious account
diverse of their Canons no better then Potguns. As arrows that are shot bolt
upright fall down upon their heads that shoot them, unless they carfully
look to it: so causeless curses fall always upon the cursers themselves, and
hurt none else. This made the Knight so much slight the bruta fulmina of your
Trent Council. Yea but says the Jesuit, It is a heavy thing to have the
curse of a mother, Apo. 17.5.
and such a mother which does not curse without cause. The Church of Rome I
grant is a mother, but matter fornicationum, as she is termed the mother of
fornications and abominations of the earth; but she is none of our mother,
Jerusalem, or to speak more properly the catholic christian Church is our
mother, the Roman Church must speak us very fair; if we own her for a
sister, even this shows her to be no Mother, that she is ever cursing us:
the true Mother would by no means suffer her child to be divided. This cruel
Stepdame not only suffers those whom she would have taken for her children
to be cut in sunder, but her self as much as in her lies by her curses,
divides them from God, and all the members of Christ's mystical body, yet we
spare to apply the words of the Psalmist unto her; she loved not blessing, and
therefore it shall be far from her; Ps. 109.17.18
she delights in cursing, and therefore shall it enter like oil into her
bowels, and like water into her bones. Howsoever we are not scared with the
bugbeare, the Jesuit goes about to fright us withal; Maledictio matris
eradicat fundamenta, the curse of a Mother does root out the foundation; For
first the book out of which he cites this text is not Canonical. Next we
deny that the text any way concerns us, who are blessed and not cursed by
our Mother the true Catholic Church; as for the Roman Church she can in no
sense be termed our mother. For we had Christian Religion in this Island,
before there was any Church at Rome at all, as I have elsewhere proved at
large. Lastly, the text the Jesuit alleges is falsely translated,
Ecclesiasticus 3.11.
he should have rendered the Greek thus; A Mother in dishonor or defamed, is a
reproach to her children, such a Mother we grant the Church to be a reproach
to all her children.

To the fourth. Jesuit here as also Baylie the antagonist of Rivet insult upon
us, as if it were unpossible to prove the precisenumber of two Sacraments and
no more, because neither the name, nor the number of Sacraments is any where
set down in terminis in Scripture: yet they shall find that we fail not in
proofs of this point, but they in their answers. For to reserve the refutation
of their five to the next Paragraph, we demonstrate our two by arguments drawn
first from the name, secondly from the definition of Sacraments, thirdly from
the example of Christ, fourthly from the end of the Sacraments, fifthly from the
testimonies of the ancient Doctors of the Church.

1. From the name, Sacramentum is derived from the verb sacrare, to
consecrate, and signifies a holy thing, a holy Rite whereby we are
consecrated unto God. Now it is evident that by Baptism we give our names to
Christ, we take our militare sacramentum, to fight under his banner, and that
thereby we are sanctified and consecrated to his service: the like we may
observe in the Lords Supper, wherein we offer our bodies and souls, as a holy
and lively sacrifice unto God, we are incorporated into Christ's body, and made
one bread and one body, because we partake of one bread, the bread which we
break; Is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? the Cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? In the rest
which our Adversaries term Sacraments, there cannot be given the like reason
of the name. For by them we neither put on Christ, as in Baptism: nor are
made members of his mystical Body, as by the Lords Supper.

2. From the definition of Sacraments; every Sacrament of the New Testament is
a seal of the new Covenant. Romans 4.11.
Now it is agreed on all parts that he only has authority to seal the
charter, in whose authority it is to grant it. But we find that Christ in the
New Testament set only two seals, Baptism, the Institution whereof we have,
Teach all nations baptizing them, Math. 28.19.
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; and the
Lords Supper, the institution whereof we have, be took bread and brake it,
saying, Luk 22.19.
this is my Body, do this in remembrance of me. In these Sacraments we have
all the conditions required, first an outward and visible sign, in Baptism
water, in the Eucharist bread and wine. Secondly, an Analogy or
correspondencie between the sign and the thing signified, between Water
which washes the body, and the spirit which washes the soul; between bread
and wine which nourishes the body, and Christ's body and blood which nourishes
the soul. Thirdly, a promise of sanctifying and saving grace, to all that use
the outward rite according to our Lords institution: the promise annexed to
Baptism we find, Mar. 16.16. Mtch. 26.28.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; to the Eucharist we find,
this is the blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you, John 6.51.
and for many, for the remission of sins, and if any one eat of this bread
he shall live for ever. When our adversaries shall prove in each of their five
supernumerarie sacraments, these three conditions we will subscribe to their
whole number of seven, till then we content ourselves with our two.

3. From the example of Christ. Mat. 3.15.
This Christ himself intimates, when being repelled by S. John from his
baptism, saying, I had need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me?
He answered, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness. And S. Austine says therefore Christ would be baptized, Sermon.
de Epiph. baptizari voluit quia voluit facere quod faciendum omnibus imperabat,
ut bor us magister doctrinam suam non tam verbis insinuaret quam actibus
exerceret.
because he would do that which he commanded all others to do, that as a
good master he might not so much insinuate his Doctrine by words, as exhibit
it by acts. But this our good Master exhibited by acts the doctrine of two
Sacraments only, whereof he participated himself: of Baptism, Math. 3.16.
And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straight way out of the water: of the
Eucharift; Matthew. 26.29. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until the day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.
Which words necessarily imply that before he uttered them, he had drunk of
the cup which he gave to them, saying, Drink ye all of this.

4. From the end of the Sacraments.

5. From the testimonies of the ancient Doctors of the Church, S. Anstine, L.
2. de Symb. ad catechumenos. c. 6. percussum est latus ut Evangelium loquitur
and statim manavit sanguis, and aqua quae sunt ccclesiae gemina Sacramenta;
aqua in qua sponsa est purificata; sanguis ex quo invenitur esse dotata. I sid.
l. Origin. sunt autam Sacramenta baptismus and Chrisma corpus and sanguis
Christi. Rupert. de vict. verb. l. 12. c. 11. quae and quot sunt praecipua
salut is nostrae sacramenta? Sacru^ baptisma, sancta corporis ejus, and
sanguinis Eucharistia geminum spiritus sancti datum. Pasc. l. de coena dom.
sacramenta Christianae Ecclesiae Catholicae sunt baptismus, and corpus, and
sanguis Domini. Fulbert. ep. 1. lib. part. Tom 3. tertium est noscere in quo
duo vitae sacramenta continentur.
Christ's side was stricken, as the Gospel speaks, and presently there issued
out of it water and blood, which are the two twin Sacraments of the Church,
water whereby the Spouse is purified, and blood wherewith she is endowed. S.
Isidore, the Sacraments are Baptism and Chrisme, the body and blood of Christ.
Rupertus, which and how many are the chief Sacraments of our salvation? He
answers two, holy Baptism and the holy Eucharist of the body and blood of
Christ, the double gift of the holy Ghost. Paschasius, the Catholic
Sacraments of the Christian Church, are Baptism and the body and blood of
Christ. Fulbertus, the way of Christian religion is to believe the Trinity and
verity of the Deity, and to know the cause of his Baptism, and in whom the
two Sacraments of our life are contained. Of all these arguments brought by
Protestants the Jesuit could not be ignorant. Yet he glaunceth only at one of
them, to wit, the second which he would make us believe to be an absurd
begging the point in question; How can, says he, Sacraments be Seals to give
us assurance of his Word, when all the assurance we have of a Sacrament is his
Word? This is idem per idem, or a fallacy called petitio Principij. As S.
Austine spoke of the Pharisees, Quid aliud eructarent quam quo pleni erant,
What other things should these Pharisees belch out, then that wherewith they
were full: we may in like manner ask, what could we expect for the Jesuit to
belch out against the Knight, then that which he is full of himself, sophismes
and fallacies. That which he pretends to find in the Knights argument every
man may see in his, to wit, a beggarly fallacy called homonymia. For the Word
may be taken either largely for the whole Scripture, and in that sense we
grant the Sacraments are confirmed by the Word, or particularly for the word of
promise, and the Word in this sense is sealed to us by the Sacrament: and this
we prove out of the Apostle, against whom I trust the Jesuit dare not argue;
what Circumcision was to Abraham and the Jews, that Baptism succeeding in the
place thereof, is to us: but Circuncision was a Seal to them of the
righteousness of faith promised to Abraham and his posterity: Romans 4.11.
therefore in like manner Baptism is a seal unto us of the like promise. What
Bellarmine urges against our definition of a Sacrament to whom the Jesuit
sends us, is refuted at large by Molineus Daneus, Rivetus, Willet, and
Chamier, to whom in like manner I remand the Jesuit, who here desiring, as it
seemed, to be catechized asks, what promises are sealed by the Sacraments? I
answer, of regeneration and communion with Christ. His second quaere is, what
need more seals then one? or if more, why not seven as well as two? I answer,
Christ might add as many Seals as he pleased, but in the new Testament he
has put but two, neither need we any more, the first seals unto us our new
birth, the second our growth in Christ. If I should put the like question to
the Jesuit concerning the King, what need he more Seals then one? or if he
would have more, why not seven as well as two? I know how he would answer,
that the King might affix as many seals to his patents, and other grants as
he pleases: but quia frustra fit per plur a quod fieri potest per pauciora,
because two seals are sufficient, the Privy seal, and the broad seal:
therefore his Majesty uses no other. Which answer of his cuts the windpipe
of his own objection. His last question is a blind one, how may we see, says
he, the promises of God in the Sacraments? S. Ambrose and S. Austine will tell
him by the eye of faith, Magis videtur, says S. Ambrose, quod non videtur,
that is more or better seen, which is not seen with bodily eyes; Sacraments,
says S. Austine, are visible words, because what words represent to the ears,
that Sacraments represent to their eyes, which are anointed with the eye salve
of the spirit. In the Word we hear, the blood of Christ cleanses us from our
sins, in the Sacrament of Baptism we see it after a sort in the washing of
our body with water: in the Word we hear Christ's blood was shed for us: in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist after a sort we see it, by the effusion of the
Wine out of the flagon into the Chalice, and drinking it; In the Word we
hear, that Christ is the bread of life, which nourishes our souls to
eternal life: In the Sacrament after a sort we see it by feeding on the
Consecrated elements of Bread and Wine, whereby our body is nourished, and our
temporal life maintained and preserved.

To the fifth. those Arguments which the Logicians term Dicticall, (...).
in this we are to make good our Elencticall; in the former we proved
positively two Sacraments in this privatively we are to exclude, and casheere
all that the Church of Rome has added to these two which devises Sacraments
upon so weak grounds, and detorteth Scripture in such sort for the maintenance
of them, that a learned Divine wishes, that as for the remedy of other
sins, so there were a Sacrament instituted as a special remedy against
audacious inventions in this kind, and depravations of holy Scripture to
convince them. For of an Epiphonema this is a great mystery, Ephesians. 5.32.
they have made a Sacrament, the sacrament of Matrimony: of a promise, whose
sins ye remit, John 20.23.
they are remitted; they have made a second Sacrament the sacrament of Penance:
of an enumeration of the Governors and Ministers of the Church, Ephesians. 4.11.
And he gave some, Apostles: some Prophets: some, Pastors some, Evangelists:
some teachers, a third Sacrament, the sacrament of Order: of a relation what
the Apostles did, Acts 8.17. In laying hands on them, who received the gift of
tongues; a fourth Sacrament, the sacrament of Confirmation: Of a Miracle in
restoring the sick to their former health by anointing them with oil in the
name of the Lord; a fifth Sacrament, the sacrament of Extreme Unction. A child
cannot be bishopped; a single party contracted; a Priest or Deacon ordained; a
penitent reconciled; a dying man dismissed in peace, without a sacrament, the
sacrament of Extreme Unction. If they take Sacrament in a large sense, for
every divine Mystery, holy Ordinance, or sacred Rite, they may find as well
seventeene as seven Sacraments in the Scriptures: if they they take the Word in
the strict sense for such a sacred Rite, as is instituted in the New Testament
by Christ, with a visible sign or element representing and applying unto us
some invisible sanctifying and saving grace; I wish the Jesuit might but
practice one of their Sacraments, that is, do penance so long till he found
in Scripture that, and the other four Sacraments which they have added to the
two Instituted by Christ. To begin with them in order, and give Order the first
place, we acknowledge the ordination of Priests and Deacons by Bishops to be
de jure divino, and we believe where they are done according to Christ's
Institution, that grace is ordinarily given to the party ordained, but not
sacramental grace, not gratia gratum faciens, but gratia gratis data, a
ghostly power for the good of others, not a necessary grace of the Spirit
sanctifying and saving the soul of the ordained. Besides, this Sacrament of
order is out of order. For it has no element added to the sanctified form of
words. Yes that it has (says Flood) the Host, Chalice, and Patent, or Letters
of order. The Bread and Wine, I grant are elements appointed by Christ, but in
another sacrament the Eucharist, not in this, and it is confessed on all sides,
that as in the Sacraments of the old Law, so of the New, the elements must not
be confounded. Neither does Christ any where command that in the ordination of
Bishops, or Priests, such a Rite or Ceremony should be used: neither does the
Host or Chalice signify or represent the invisible Grace, or Ghostly power
then given. And as for the instrument it is a parchment, but no element; it is
a legible writing testifying the party is ordained, but no visible sign of an
invisible grace; no Seal of the new Covenant. For the Patent, Chalice, and
Bible, they are not, as before was said, any sacramental signs of divine
grace, but only ensigns and tokens of their several offices and functions, or
instruments that are to be used in their ministration besides, every one of
these orders is conferred by words and Ceremoniss clean differing one from
another, whereupon it follows, that either none of them is a Sacrament
properly so called, or that each of them apart is a Sacrament, and so the
number of Sacraments will be near doubled. Bellarmines evasion De Sacram.
ordin. l. 1. c. 8. to wit, that they are all unum genere, and referred to one
end will not serve the turn, for so all the other six Sacraments are unum
genere, and all referred to one end, to wit, to unite the receivers some way to
Christ, or derive some grace from Christ to them, and yet they are not one
Sacrament, but as they teach, six distinct species.

For Confirmation, we allow of it as an Apostolical tradition, not as a
Sacrament of Divine Institution. For where does Christ command that those who
have heene baptized, should be after confirmed by a Bishop? Where is an
element or form of words prescribed by Christ as in Baptism and the Lords
Supper? The Jesuit answers that the element in this Sacrament is chrisme, or
oil, but this cannot be: as well because in diverse Sacraments there ought to
be diverse elements, and therefore since Chrisme and oil is the element in
Extreme Unction, which takes the name from thence, it cannot be the matter
or element in Confirmation. Accedit verbum ad elementum, says S. Austine, and
fit Sacramentum, the word of promise being added to another element appointed
by God makes a Sacrament. In this we have neither Word nor Element, therefore
as the Greek Orator spoke of the evil laws enacted in his time, Aristor.
Rbet. l. 2.
(...), the laws need a law to mend them: so we may say of this Sacrament of
Confirmation, it needs confirmation and better proof for it, then yet we see.

For Penance, as it is practiced at this day in the Roman Church, it is not of
divine institution: as it was practiced in the Primitive Church, and is at this
day in ours is a Divine ordinance, but yet no Sacrament: because we find in it
no outward element with a form of words prescribed by Christ: no visible sign
of invisible grace. No (says Flood) is not the true sorrow of heart declared
by humble confession, together with prayer, fasting, and Almsdeeds, an
outward element, or thing to be perceived by sense? I answer, that every thing
perceived by sense, is not presently an element in a Sacrament, it must be as
the Schools out of S. Austine define a visible sign of invisible grace.
Confession and prayer are indeed audible, but not visible: Fasting and
Almesdeedes are visible, but visible works of piety and charity, not visible
elements in the Sacraments: they are moral duties, not sacramental Rites. For
what correspondencie is between these, and absolution or remission of sins?
how does Fasting or Alms exhibit to the eye this invisible grace? Contrition
of the heart of which he speaks, is no visible or sensible sign, Confession
is sensible, but not visible, nor ordained as the elements are in Sacraments to
signify the grace of God, but to ask it: the sacred signs ought to be
administered by the Priest, but Confession is made by the penitent, the same may
be said of corporal satisfactions which are accomplished by the sinner, and
commonly in his house by fastings, or whippings, or abroad by pilgrimages,
whereas sacred signs are to be administered by the hands of the Priest, and
ordinarily in the Church; Absolution also cannot be a sacred sign of the
grace of God, seeing that if it be good and available, it is the grace of God;
besides this Absolution, is not an element, nor a visible sign of an invisible
grace, for the words are not seen: if it be said that it is sufficient, that
it is significantly the grace of God, by the same reason the preaching of the
Word should be a sacrament, for it is significantly the grace of God. In all
Sacraments the Word must be joined to the element; but here they will have the
Word to be an element: the imposition of the Priests hands on the penitent is
a visible action, but not a visible element, nor is it instituted by Christ.
When the Trent Council, and the Roman Catechism come to assign the matter of
this Sacrament, they do it very faintly with a quasi materia, Sess. 14. de
poenit. c. 3. and Catechis. Romans part. 2. c. 5. They say the actions of the
penitent are, quasi materia, and such as the matter is, such is the Sacrament
quasi sacramentum.

For Matrimony, it is a holy ordinance of God, but more ancient then the New
Testament, and therefore can be no seal of it: it was instituted by God in
Paradise, not by Christ in the Gospel: yea but (says the Jesuit) though it
were before a natural contract, yet might it not be exalted by Christ to the
dignity of a Sacrament? I answer, the Jesuit must not dispute what Christ
might do, but what he did; When he proves out of the Evangelists or
Apostles, that Christ exalted it to the dignity of a Sacrament, we will hold
it in that high esteem, but this he can never do: for none of the
Evangelists relate that he altered the Law, or nature of Matrimony: but only
that he confirmed it, and honored it with his presence, and the first Miracle
which he wrought. Other exaltation we find not in the Gospel; And as S.
Jerome speaks in the like kind, quia non legimus, non credimus, because we
read it not, we believe it not.

Our second exception against the Sacrament of Matrimony is, that in it there
is no outward element sanctified by the Word of promise. To this the Iesnit
answers; the bodies of men and women, are they not as much as an outward
element? Yes surely as much in quantity and more too: Bell. l. 1. de matrim.
c. 6. Si matrimonium consideretur. Vt jam factum and celebratum conjugati sunt
materiale Synbolum and externu^ cujus re fut at. vid. apud Chamierum Panistrat.
Cathol. de sacr. l. 4, c. 27.
but none ever before this Jesuit and his Master Bellarmine makes men's bodies
outward elements in any Sacrament: the bodies of men and their souls are
either the Ministers, or receivers in every Sacrament, not the elements or
material parts thereof. The element in every Sacrament has the denomination
of the whole, as when we say the sacrament of Circumcision, of the Passover,
of bread and wine: but who ever heard of the sacrament of men and women's
bodies. Our third exception against the sacrament of Matrimony is that if it
be a sacrament conferring grace, as they teach, ex opere operato, why do they
deprive Priests of it? and make them take a solemn vow against it? The Jesuit
answers, that though Mariagebee a holy thing, as Order also is, yet as Order
is forbidden to all women, so upon good reason Marriage is forbidden all
Priests. It Is true, I grant that all holy things in themselves are not fit for
all ages, sexes, and callings. In particular it is no way fit that women should
be admitted into holy Orders, because they are forbidden to speak in the
Church; 1 Cor. 14.34
and it seems to be against the law of nature, that the weaker and more
ignoble sex should be appointed to instruct and govern the stronger and more
noble: but there is not the like reason in Order and Matrimony. Heb. 13.4.
For the Scripture says, Marriage is honorable among all, but not that the
order of Priesthood is commendable in all men. Much less women, yet the Jesuit
says, that upon good reason Marriage is forbidden Priests, because it is not
agreeable to the high and holy estate of Priesthood and religious life. A
strange thing that a sacrament should not be agreeable to the most sacred
function, that a holy Rite conferring grace should not be agreeable to a
religious life. If Marriage were any disparagement to the holiness of
priesthood, why did God appoint married Priests under the law? and Christ chose
married Apostles in the Gospel? Eusebius says of Spiridion, that though he
were married, and brought up children, Sozom. Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 11. Chrysostom.
in Genesis 5.22.
vet that he was nothing thereby (...) hindered or disparaged in his sacred
function, and S. Chrysostom in his Homily upon those words, Enoch walked with
God, notes it that it is said twice for failing, Enoch walked with God, and
begat sons and daughters to teach us that marriage is no impeachment to
holiness, or the highest degree of perfection, whereby we are said to walk
with God. To shut up this point concerning Matrimony, Cardinal Bellarmine
teaches us, that the seven Sacraments anwer seven Virtues; Baptism answers
to Faith, Confirmation to Hope, the Eucharist to Charity, Penance to Justice,
Extreme Unction to Fortitude, and Matrimony to continence or temperance; if
so, then certainly Matrimony is most agreeable to the office of a Bishop or
Priest; 1 Timothy 3.2.
For a Bishop must he continent and modest, and as it there follows, the
husband of one wife; and unless the rules of Logic fail, if Matrimony hold
correspondencie with temperance, the prohibition thereof, and forced single
life must needs answer to intemperance, as the testimony of all ages proves
it.

For Extreme Unction the lagge of all their Sacraments little or nothing can
be said. For it wants all the three conditions requisite to a Sacrament: it
has neither element, nor form of words prescribed by Christ, nor any promise
of saving and sanctifying grace. The Apostles indeed used oil, but as a
medicine to heal the body, not as a sacrament to cure the soul. As the
Apostles used oil, so Christ spittle in restoring sight to the blind: will
they hereupon make spittle an eighth sacrnment? Sacraments ought to be of
perpetual use in the Church, whereas the Unction whereof the Scripture
speaks, whereby the sick were miraculously cured, is ceased long ago; if the
Jesuit will not give ear to us, let him yet yield so much respect to Cardinal
Cajetan, as to peruse what he commenteth on that text of Scripture on which the
Church of Rome foundeth this Sacrament; Is any sick among you, James 5.14.15.
let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins
they shall be forgiven him. Cajet. com. in hunc locum neque ex verbi^s, neque
ex effectu, verba baec loquuntur de Sacramentali Unction, seu sacramento
Extremae Vnctionis sed magis de Unction quam instituit Dominus Jesus in
Evangelio a discipulis exercenda in aegrot is: textus enim non dicit infirmatur
quis ad mortem? sed absolute infirmatur quis? and effectum dicit infirmi
allemiationem. and de remissione peccatorum non nisi conditionaliter loquitur,
cum extrema Vnctio non nisi prope articulum mortis detur, and direct ut
ejus-forms sonat, tendit ad remissionem peccatorum add quod Iacobus ad unum
aegrum mult os praesbyteros tum orantes, tum. Vnguentes mandat vocari, quod ab
Extremae Unction is ritu alienumest.
On these words thus Cajetan infers, it cannot be gathered either from the
words, nor from the effect here mentioned, that the Apostle speaks of
sacramental or Ex. treame Unction, but rather of that anointing which Christ
appointed in the Gospel to be used in healing the sick, for the Text says
not, is any man sick unto death, but simply is any man sick; and the effect he
attributes to this anointing is the ease or raising of the sick; of remission
of sins he speaks but conditionally, where as Extreme Unction is given to
none but at the point of death, and directly tends to remission of sins as
the form imports. Add hereunto that S. James commands many Elders to be
sent for, both to pray and anoint the sick, which is not done in Extreme
Unction.

To the sixth. Knight having shot two arrows out of S. Austines quiver, the one
with a head, the other without, yet sharp pointed: the Jesuit quite concealeth
the one, and endeavors to blunt the other. The former he drew out of S.
Austine his treatise de symbol ad catechumenos, where speaking of Baptism and
the Lords Supper, he says, haec sunt Ecclesiae gemina Sacramenta, these are
the two twin Sacraments of the Church. De latere in cruce pendentis lancea
percusso sacramenta Ecclesiae profluxerunt.
to this the Jesuit answers, negry quidem. To the other taken out of the 15.
tract upon S. John, that out of the side of Christ the Sacraments of the
Churchissued, he would seem to answer something. First he quarrelleth at the
quotation, saying, I do not think you will find in Chemnitius your good
friend S. Ambrose and Bid cited: Whereunto I answer, that though the Knights
good friend Chemnitius cite not Ambrose and Bid, yet the Jesuits good friend
Card. De Sacram. in genesis l. 2. c. 27. Amb. l. 10. in Luc. and Bed. c. 19. Ioh.
intelligunt per sanguinem qui e latere effluxit redemption is pretium, and per
aquam baptismum.
Bellarmine cites them both, his words are, Ambrose in his tenth book upon S.
Luke, and Bid in his comment upon the 19. of S. John understand by blood which
issued out of our Saviors side the price of our redemption by water Baptism.
Next the Jesuit endeavors to untwist this triple cord, by saying that these
three Fathers speak of Sacraments issuing out of Christ's side, but no way
restrain the number to two. Whereunto I reply, that though the word Sacramenta
for the number may be as well said of seven as two Sacraments: yet where S.
Austine alludeth to the same text of Scripture, and falls upon the same
conceit, he restrains the number to two, saying, there issued out of Christ's
side water and blood, quae sunt Ecclesiae gemina Sacramenta. Now I would feign
know of the Jesuit where ever he read gemina to signify seven, or more then
two? Were the Dioscuri which are commonly known by the name of gemini seven,
or two only, to wit, Castor and Pollax? As for S. Ambrose and Bid though they
say not totidem verbis, that the two Sacraments of the Church issued out of
Christ's side, as S. Austine does: yet they can be understood of no more then
two Sacraments: for there were but two things which issued out of our Saviors
side, to wit, water and blood, whereby they understand Baptism and the Lords
Supper. Had there issued out of our Saviors side, together with water and
blood Chrisme or balsamum, or had a rib been taken from thence, the Jesuit
might have some color to draw more Sacraments out of it: but now since the Text
says there issued only two things, water and blood; and the Fathers say the
Sacraments of the Church are thereby meant: it is most apparent that by
Sacramenta they meant those two only: which they there name in express words,
Baptism and the price of our redemption, that is Christ's blood in the
Eucharist.

To the seventh. The authority of S. Ambrose is as a thorn in the Jesuits
eye, for it cannot but be a great prejudice to their cause, that so learned a
Bishop as S. Ambrose, writing six books professedly of the Sacraments omitteth
the Romish five, and spends his whole discourse upon our two. If the Church
in his time believed or administered seven Sacraments, he could no way be
excused of supine negligence for making no mention at all of the greater part
of them: it were all one as if a man professing to treat of the elements, or
the parts of the world which are four, or of the Pleiades or the
Septentriones, or the Planets which are seven should handle but two of that
number. Bellarmine therefore and after him Flood pluck hard at this thorn, but
cannot get it out (saying that S. Ambrose his intent was to instruct the
Catechumeni only, as the title of one of the books shows.) For first S.
Ambrose has no book of that title, viz. An instruction to them who are to be
catechized, or are beginners in Christianity. The title of that book is De
ijs qui initiantur, of those who are initiated or entered into holy mysteries.
Secondly, this is not the title of any of the six books de sacramentis
alleged by the Knight, but of another tractate. Thirdly, admit that S.
Ambrose, as S. Austine and Cyrill wrote to the Catechumeni, and intended a
Catechism: yet they were to name all the Sacraments unto them, as all Divines
usually do in their Catechismes: because the Sacraments are always handled
among the grounds, and principles of Christian religion. And though the
Catechumeni are not presently admitted unto all, yet they are to learn what
they are, that they may be the better prepared in due time to receive them.
Fourthly, it is evidently untrue (which the Jesuit says) that S. Ambrose
writes not to the believers of that age, but only to some beginners. The very
front of his book proves the Jesuit to be frontlesse. For S. Ambrose his
first words are, I will begin to speak of the Sacraments which we have
received, etc. In Christiano enim viro prima est fides, for the first thing in
a Christian man is faith. And as he writes to all believers not beginners
only, so he speaks also of the chief Sacraments of the New Testament, and
not of those only which the catechumeni received, as is apparent out of the
fourth chapter of the first book De sacramentis. Wherein he proves according
to the title of that Chapter, Quod sacramenta Christia. norum diviniora sint,
and priora quam Indaeorum, That the Sacraments of the Christians are more
ancient and more divine then those of the Jews; and he instanceth especially
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Lastly, the Jesuit in this answer
apparently contradicts himself, first, saying that S. Ambrose intent in that
Work was only to instruct the catechumeni in those things that were to be done
in the time of Baptism, p. 210.
and within a few lines after he says, Bud. deasse, Veritas nonnunquam invitis
erumpit as fallens inter mendacia ab audientibus demuns agnoscitur cum interim
loquentes adbuc se habere in potestate putent.
that he writes of the Sacraments whereby they were so initiated which are
three, Baptism, Confirmation, and the Eucharist. So true is Budaeus his
observation, That lies dash one with the other, and truth breaks out of the
mouth of the liar ere he is aware. Who ever heard of the Eucharist to be
administered in the time of Baptism, or that the Eucharist was administered at
all to the punies or catechumeni whilst they were such, certainly if the
catecumeni or younger beginners, to whom he says S. Ambrose wrote, were
capable of the doctrine of the Eucharist, containing in it the highest
mysteries of Christianity, they were much more capable of Penance, Matrimony,
and Extreme Unction, which are easy to be understood by any novice in
Christian religion.

To the eight. Austine in this maine point of difference, between the Reformed
and the Roman Church, I will weigh what is brought on both sides, first what
the Jesuit alleges for seven: and then what the Knight for two. S. Austine
having written diverse Catechisticall treatises, in which he had occasion to
name and handle the Sacraments: yet no where defines the number of them to be
seven, neither names all of them either jointly or severally: this the Jesuit
knowing well enough, brings no one testimony for the proof of their seven
Sacraments out of him, but forces only some sentences to prove out of them
that he held more then two, as namely out of his first Sermon upon the 103.
Psalm, Cast thine eyes upon the gifts or offices of the Church in Baptism,
the Eucharist, and the rest of the holy Sacraments, and Epist. 118. having
brought in two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, he adds such a
general clause, and if there be any thing else commended in holy Scriptures;
which words of his import that he held more sacraments then Baptism and the
Lords Supper, in that very sense wherein those two by him named are called
Sacraments. I answer, S. Austine in neither of these places takes the word
Sacrament in a strict sense: but in a large for every sacred rite commended in
Scripture, or gift and office of the Church. As for the word coeter is, the
Jesuit insisteth upon: it imports only a generical convenience and similitude
not a specificall; and so we acknowledge that there are many sacred rites in
the Church, which agree with Baptism and the Lords Supper in the genericall
notion of Sacraments: but not in the specificall as the word Sacrament is taken
for a peculiar seal of the New Testament, having thereunto annexed a promise
of justifying grace. Now let us weigh what the Knight alleges out of S.
Austine for two Sacraments only, De doct. Chris. l. 3. c. 9.
Our Lord (says that Father) and his Apostles have delivered unto us a few
Sacraments in stead of many, in performance most easy, in signification most
excellent, as is the Sacrament of Baptism and the Lords Supper. To disappoint
this testimony, the Jesuit first lays corruption and falsification to the
Knights charge, because S. Austines words are signa pauca, not sacramenta.
Which is nothing but a mere cavil, for signa and sacramenta are in S. Austine
no other then synonima, by signa he can mean no other then sacramenta. For he
instanceth there in no other, neither did Christ deliver unto us any other
signa or sigilla but these two. Yes, says the Jesuit, for it is plain by the
word sicut, that he brings in Baptism and the Lords Supper for example
only, and does not restrain the signa to these two. It is not plain, for
sicut brings in an example be it one, or more, neither can we from thence
infer that there are more. For S. John speaking of our Savior says, vidimus
gloriam ejus sicut unigeniti filij Dei, We beheld the glory as of the only
begotten Son of the Father. Will the Jesuit from thence infer that God had
more only begotten sons? but to expound S. Austine out of himself those
signs or Sacraments which here he calls a few, in his 118. Epistle he
terms most few (Sacrament is numero paucissimis) surely seven Sacraments are
not numero paucissima, fewest in number, but two are so: and therefore in his
book De symbolo ad catechumenos, he terms them gemina Ecclesiae sacramenta;
which passage the Jesuit takes no notice of, because he could give no answer
at all unto it, yet he sets a good face upon the matter saying, this may
suffice for such testimonies as were alleged out of S. Austine. Of all the
Roman Captains I cannot liken him fitter to any then to Terentius Varro, who
though he fought so unhappily against Hanniball at Cannae, that he lost
40000. men upon the place, yet he seemed to be little daunted therewith, and
the Roman Senate sent him public thanks, quod de republica non desperasset,
that he despaired not of the Commonwealth.

To the ninth. De ablutione pedum, who was far later then S. Cyprian,
mentions indeed five sacraments which are more then two, yet less then
seven, and for those five he names, it is evident he intended not that they
were Sacraments in a strict sense. For one of them is ablutio pedum, which if
it be a Sacrament in the proper sense, then has the Jesuit an eighth
sacrament as himself is sapientum octavus. Not so, says he, for ablutio
pedum which that Author means is the sacrament of Penance. Then belike Peter
and the Apostles did Penance whilst Christ washed their feet. Although there
may lie hid some mystery in that ablution, L. 2. de sac. c. 24.
and therefore it may be termed a Sacrament in a large sense, as Bellarmine
expounds that author. Yet our Lord himself reveals unto us no other
mystery, nor makes any other inference from it then a pattern of humility,
Ioh. 13, 14.
If I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one
another feet. Yea but (says Flood,) the author speaks of another Laver
after Baptism, and what can that be other then Penance? He speaks of
another laver, not of another Sacrament, which laver is no other then the laver
of penitent tears. But dicis causa, let ablutio pedum be Penance, yet we have
but four Sacraments mentioned by this Author, what becomes of the other
three? To this he answers that the Author mentioned not them because his
scope was in that place to speak of such Sacraments as had relation to our
Saviors last Supper. A ridiculous evasion, for what relation has Baptism, or
Penance, or Confirmation, or order to our Lords Supper? But the Jesuit like a
Lawyer that has taken his fee of his Client, thought himself bound in
conscience to speak something in behalf of this Author, though nothing at
all to the purpose, like Erucius in Tully Ego quid acceperim scio, quid dicam
nescio. Cic. pro. Rosc. Amer.


To the tenth. The Jesuit in his answer to S. Isidore bewrayes extreme
negligence. For the Knight quoting S. Isidore at large in his sixth book, and
not naming any chapter, this Desultorius Miles posting through one chapter, and
finding not the words there, charge the Knight with falsification; whereas in
the chapter immediately following, to wit, the 19. according to the later
edition of S. Isidore (but in the 18. according to the former) the testimony
alleged by the Knight is found in express words, and Baptism, Chrisme, and
the Lords Supper reckoned by him for the Sacraments of the Church there,
without addition of any other; If he had held seven sacraments, questionless
in that place he would have named all, or at least the major part of them. The
Jesuit applies a plaster to this sore, to wit, that elsewhere the same
Father mentions Penance and Matrimony. But the plaster is too narrow, and
the salve of no virtue at all. First, it is too narrow, for though Penance and
Matrimony be added to Baptism, Chrisme and the Lords Supper, we have yet but
four (or if we take Chrisme not for a Ceremony used in Baptism but a
distinct Sacrament from it) at the most, but five: we are still out of our
reckoning, we hear nothing of Order and Extreme Unction. Secondly, as the
plaster is too narrow, so the salve spread on it is of no virtue at all. For
though S. Isidore compares Penance to Baptifme in respect of the effect
thereof, viz. washing away of sin, yet he makes not thereby Penance a
Sacrament. Whatsoever washes away sin is not therefore a Sacrament, Acts
15.9.
Faith purifieth the heart, as the Apostle speaks; Luke 11.41.
and Christ himself says, do Alms, and all things shall be clean unto
you; Yet does it not from thence follow, that either Faith or Charity are
Sacraments. For Matrimony he says indeed there are three boones or good
things in it, or as the Jesuit translateth the words, three goods of it, fides,
proles and sacramentum, faith, issue, and a Sacrament, but by sacrament there
he understands the great mystery of the union of Christ with his Church,
whereof Matrimony is a sign, and he alludeth to the words of the Apostle,
Ephesians. 5.34.
(...), this is a great my sterie, Apoc. 17.17. I will tell thee the myslerie
of the woman and of the beast.
which the Latin interpreter translateth sacramentum, as he does also the
sacrament of the woman, and as strongly might they conclude out of him, that
the Whore of Babylon is an eight Sacrament, as Matrimony is the seventh. So S.
Aug. de pecca^^^^t, and remis. l. 1. c. 26 calls bread which was given to the
Catecumeni an holy Sacrament, and in Psalm. 44. the mysteries of Christian
religion Sacramenta docl rinae.
In our book of Homilies Marriage is called a Sacrament as all sacred Rites may
in a large sense. The Jesuit should have proved according to his undertaking
page 202. that Marriage is a Sacrament in a strict sense, but his proofs are as
his honesty is at large.

To the eleventh. Hallensis lived in a dark age, yet in this point he saw
some light through a chinke, whereby he discovered that three of their supposed
Sacraments, to wit, Order, Penance, Part. 4. q. 5. memb. 2.
and consequently were not to be said properly the Sacraments of the new Law:
and he gives us also a sufficient reason to exclude the fourth, to wit,
Confirmation; because as he teaches, the form and matter thereof were not
appointed by our Savior, but by the Church in a Council held at Melda. Yea
but says the Jesuit he adds, fine praejudicio dicendum, let this be spoken
with leave, adding, let us hear but such a word from the Knights mouth, and
he shall see the matter will soon be ended. For answer whereunto I say,
first, that the words of Hallensis, sine praejudicio, no whit prejudice the
truth of his assertion: but only show the modesty of the man. Next, for the
Knight, whosoever peruseth his Book with the Preface, shall find that he
speaks far more modestly and submissively then Hallensis here does, Part.
4. q. 5. memb. 7. art. 2
Sed tumor Iesuitae non capit illius modum. What Hallensis concludes that
there be neither more nor fewer then seven Sacraments, makes little against
us, for he neither adds Sacraments properly so called, nor Sacraments of the
new Law, in quibus vertitur cardo quaestionis; if the Jesuit so expound
Hallensis he makes him contradict himself, and so utterly disableth his
testimony. For all Sacraments properly so called of the new Law must be
instituted by Christ, the author of the new Law, which Hallensis denies of
Confirmation. Again, they must have their being by the new Law, not before
which he affirms of three of the seven Sacraments as I showed before.

To the twelfth. Knight makes mention of Hugo, the Jesuit makes an hideous
noise like an hue and cry, you say, says the Jesuit, P. 231.
of Hugo, that he excludes Penance from the number of the Sacraments and
admits holy water. For both which Sir Humphrey a man may hold up his finger
to you, and wagge it, you know what I mean, etc. The Knight knows well what
you mean, and also what manner of men they are, who hold up their finger in
such sort, viz. fools or madmen, utrum horum mavult accipiat. Is it a matter
that deserves such hooting to allege Hugo de sancto victore out of Master
Perkins in his Problemes a most learned work, against which never a Papist yet
durst quatch. How many hundred testimonies do Bellarmine and Baronius, and
this Jesuit allege at the second hand? Were the allegation false, Master
Perkins must bear the blame, who misquoted Hugo, not the Knight, who rightly
alleges Master Perkins, but the Jesuit neither does nor can disprove the
allegation, but out of another book of Hugo he alleges a passage for seven
Sacraments, which yet as I shall show hereafter may well stand with that which
Master Perkins alleges out of him against Penance. But before I expound Hugo,
I wish the reader to observe in the Jesuit, how true that is which the
Naturalists relate concerning Serpents, that the more venomous they are, Plin.
l. 8. c. 23. Aspidi hebetes oculi dati, eosque non in front sed in temporibus
habet.
the shorter sighted they are. He who odiously and maliciously charge the
Knight with a false quotation in this very place falsely quoteth the same
Author himself. For the words he alleges out of him, to wit, that there
are seven principal Sacraments of the Church, are not found in the book he
quoteth, viz. speculum de mist. Eccles. c. 12. It is true such like words are
found in another Treatise of his, to wit de sacrament is, but this neither
excuses the Jesuits negligence, nor helps at all his cause. For he that
says there are seven principal Sacraments, implies that there are more then
seven, though less principal. Either Hugo takes the word Sacrament in a
large or strict sense: if in a large, he contradicts not us; if in a strict
sense, he contradicts the Jesuit and the Trent Fathers, for they teach there
are no more then seven Sacraments, whether principal, or not principal. Hugo
reckoning seven as principal tacitly admits other as less principal. Yet
the Jesuit sings an Iopoean to himself, and most insolently insulteth upon
the Knight, P. 231.
saying, Bcause you may less doubt of Penance, whereof for thus abusing your
author and reader you deserve no small part, he has a particular ^^ hapter,
wherein he calls it as we do with S. Jerome the second board after
shipwreck, and says that if a man endanger his clensing which he has
received, by Baptism he may rise and escape by Penance. How say you to this
Sir Humfrey? have I not just cause to tell you your own? Agreed, suum cuique
let the Jesuit tell the Knight, and I will tell the Jesuit his own; the Knight
neither holds with the doctrine of Merit, nor the sacrament of Penance; the
Jesuit who holds both may by his belief merit their holy sacrament of
Penance, for egregiously abusing Hugo de Sancto Victore, and S. Jerome and his
reader, by making a Sacrament of a metaphor, and out of them arguing thus
wooddenly against the Knight. Hugo has a particular chapter wherein he
calls Penance as we do with S. Jerome, the second board after shipwreck,
Ergo, Penance is a Sacrament of the new Law; does he not deserve for concluding
so absurdly, to have the character of his own sacrament indelebly imprinted
upon his flesh?

To the thirteenth. Knight alleges not Bellarmine nor Hugo, nor Peter
Lombard, nor Bonaventure, nor Hallensis, nor Altisiodorensis, nor Suarez
himself; as if they expressly and in direct terms denied Extreme Unction to
be a sacrament: this they do not, neither as things stood with some of them
might do safely, the Roman Church having defined the contrary. Yet so great
is the force of truth, that what in words they affirm they consequently deny;
and thus much Suarez ingenuously confesses; some, Suar. tom. disp. 39 sect 2.
nonnulli negarunt hoci sacramentum fuisse a Christo institutum ex quo plane
sequebatur non esse verum sacramentum.
says he, have denied that this Sacrament was instituted by Christ, whence it
follows by plain consequence that it is no true Sacrament. Yea but says
Flood, if those Schoolmen had lived in this age, they would have said that
Christ did institute it. Whereunto I answer, that all Judgments proceed ex
allegatis and probatis, not allegandis and probandis upon things alleged, and
proved not upon things to be alleged and proved in future times, neither is it
likely that they would have altered their opinion, upon notice of the Trent
decision, for if the Church of France, and diverse other Romish Catholics, as
they term them, submit not at this day to all the Decrees of that Council:
much less may it be thought that those ancient and acute school Divines, who
bare the greatest sway in their times, would have suffered themselves to
baffled by the pretense of a petty Council, charging her canons with nothing
but paper-shot: every Sacrament of the New Testament is supported with two
pillars, institution by Christ, and a promise of justifying grace annexed to
the due receivers thereof set down in Scripture, the former pillar the ancient
Schoolmen take from Extreme Unction: the later Bellarmine and Cajetan, how
then can it stand? The Jesuit answers upon a third pillar unwritten
tradition. But this I have proved before to be a weak and rotten one: and to
speak the truth it serves Papists as pons Asinorum did the ancient Logicians
to which they fly for shelter, when all other help fails them. Albeit they
brag much of Scripture, yet upon examination of particulars it will appear,
that their new Trent Creed consisting of twelve supernumerarie Articles, has
no foundation at all in Scripture: and therefore they are forced for their
support to fly to verbum Dei non scriptum, an unwritten word of God, which I
would feign know of them how they prove to be Gods word? Whether by Scripture,
or by unwritten tradition? by Scripture they cannot say, for it implies a flat
contradiction, that verbum non scriptum should be scriptum, that unwritten
traditions should be found in, or founded on Scripture; if they say they prove
it to be Gods word by tradition, then they prove idem per idem the same thing
by it self, and build their faith upon a silly sophisme called petitio
principij, the begging the maine point in question.

To the fourteenth. Bessario the Jesuit charge the Knight with ambiguous
translation, P. 225.
and so placing the words, that they may have a double sense, the one to
deceive the simple, and the other to excuse himself against the objections of
the learned: and for this he pronounces a woe against him, vae peccatori
terra^ ingredienti duabus vijs, Woe to the sinner going on the earth two ways:
But the truth is, as Pentheus after he was distracted, imagined, duplices se
ostendere Phoebos, Oresles apud Euripidem Electram sororem appellat Furiam quod
eam ne fureret in lectlo constringeret.
that he saw two Suns, when yet there was but one in the sky: so the Jesuit
in a fit of frantic malice, imagined the Knight to go two ways whereas he
goes but one, and that a fair and straight way, for he sets the Latin
words of the Cardinal without any adition or detraction in the margent, haec
duo sola sacramenta in Evangelijs manifest tradita legimus, and he
translateth them faithfully: we read that these two Sacraments only were
delivered us plainly in Scriptures; he rendereth not the words we read
plainly in Scriptures, that there were two only Sacraments delivered unto us,
which had been a misplacing of Bessarions words, and mis-interpretation of his
meaning, bu we read that these two only were plainly delivered in the
Gospel; there is no more ambiguitie in the translation then in the original,
which though it denies not that other Sacraments may be delivered in the
Gospel, yet it affirms that these two only are plainly delivered there, and
consequently that these two only are, de fide, matter of faith, and upon pain
of damnation to be believed; for as I proved before out of S. Austine, and S.
Chrysostom, all things that concern faith and manners, and are necessary to
salvation are plainly delivered in holy Scriptures.

To the fifteenth. Flood confesses deny the four inferior Orders to be
Sacraments, P. 234.
and Soto denies the superior, what a confusion is here in your sacrament of
order? If the ordination of Bishops be not truly and properly a Sacrament, as
Dominicus Soto acknowledges, neither is the ordination of Priests a Sacrament;
for what can be alleged more for the one then the other? and if the ordination
of Priests be no sacrament, much less Deacons, or subdeacons or Acolytes or
Exorcists. Whether there be the same character imprinted in the ordination of
Bishops, and Priests, it is not material to our present question, for if it be
the same, then it follows according to the doctrine of the Schools, that
they are one and the selfsame Sacrament: if a diverse character be imptinted
by the one, and by the other, then are they two distinct Sacraments. If they
are the same Sacraments, then Soto denying the one, consequently denies the
other to be a Sacrament: if they are distinct Sacraments, then there are eight
Sacraments. Yea but says the Jesuit, Whither there be a new character in a
Bishop, or the same extended is no matter of faith, and therefore we are not
to dispute with you of it, but keep you off at the staffes end, or rather out
of doors: when you are once admitted into the Catholic Church, we may admit
you to speak of a Schoole-point or else not. We know well that ye are loath
that we should hear of your differences among your selves: but the fire of
contention cannot be kept within the walls of your Schools, quis enim
celaverit ignem? Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo, it breaks out, and if
ye look not to it, it will set on fire the whole fabric of your Romish Babel.
Mean while the Jesuit gives us great encouragement to desire to be admitted
into the Roman Church, because then forsooth we shall have leave to tread the
endless mazes of scholasticall disputes.

To the sixteenth. If Soto come short, Durand comes home to the point in
question, for he affirms that which is alleged by the Knight, and confessed
by the Jesuit, that Matrimony is not a Sacrament univocally, if not
univocally, not truly and properly, but equivocally or analogically. Yea but
says the Jesuit, all acknowledge it for anerror in Durand: he says all, but
he names none. Surely the Divines of the reformed Church acknowledge it for no
error in Durand, but defend it for a truth: and for such Romish Divines that
adhere to the Council of Trent, they are but a faction in the Church, nor is
their authority more to be urged against the Doctors of the reformed
Churches, then the authority of the Doctors of the reformed Churches against
them: which yet if any should produce against any of the Articles of their new
Creed, they would not vouchsafe them so much as a look. For the definition of
the Church in the Council of Florence, which the Jesuit touches upon, it is of
little or no authority, because that Council was not general, nor called by
lawful authority, but by the schismatic Pope Eugenius the fourth, who was
deposed by a general Council held at Basil.

To the seventeenth. Jesuit is forbidden by the Popes law to taste of the fruits
of Matrimony, at which it seems his mouth waters, he is content to let the
tree fall to the ground, for want of support. To Cardinal Cajetan who gave a
strong push at it, by denying that it can be proved to be a Sacrament. Out of
the words of S. Paul Ephesians the fifth, he answers nothing but with ifs, if
it be not proved out of that place it may be out of others, if out of no other,
yet out of tradition to his ifs I return fies; fie for shame that they should
bind all their followers under pain of a heavy curse to believe this
Sacrament of Matrimony, and yet know not where to ground this their belief,
upon Scripture or tradition. If it may be proved to be a sacrament out of S.
Paul, Ephesians. 5.
their most learned Cardinal Cajetan is out: if it may not be proved out of
those words, Cardinal Bellarmine and almost all Papists that wrote since
Cajetan are in an error. The Jesuit holds a Wolf by the ear: he dares
neither hold with Cajetan, nor against him: but puts the matter off with an
if. If it cannot be proved to be a Sacrament out of that passage, as Cajetan
affirms, yet it may be out of other texts. What texts? why does he not name
them? it is a sign he fears his coin is counterfeit, that he dare not
bring it to the test. If that place which seems to make most for his Romish
tenet, make nothing at all, as the acute Schooleman, and most learned Cardinal
Cajetan confesses there is no likelihood that other texts which have less
appearance will stand them in any stead, and therefore for his last refuge he
flies to unwritten traditions, as the old Dunces as I noted before, ad pontem
asinorum.

To the eighteenth. Canus puts a strong sharp weapon in our hands to wound
your Trent doctrine concerning Matrimony, Canus loc. Theol. l. 8. c. 5. in
materia and forma hujus Sacramenti, viz. Matrimonij statuenda, adeo sunt
inconstantes and varij, aaeo incerti and ambigui ut ineptus juturus sit quis in
tanta illorum varietate, and discrepantia rem aliquam certam, constantem, and
exploratam conetur afferre.
but withal forbids us to strike with it, as the Jesuit Flood tells us,
as if we were at his beck, and might not use our weapons as we list. But let
him know, though he be so foolish as to give advantage, we will not be so
childish as to leave it. If that be true which he writes, that the Divines of
Rome write so uncertainly of the matter and form of Matrimony, that it were
folly in any to go about to reconcile these differences, and determine any
thing certain in the point: we will infer upon him that it is likewise folly
to define Matrimony to be a Sacrament, for if the matter and form of
Matrimony be so unknown as he says, the genus of it must needs be
unknown. For the genus as Porphyrie teaches, is taken from the matter, L. de
praedicab. c. de genere.
and answers thereunto as the difference is taken from the form. If the
genus be uncertain, how can it be an article of faith, that matrimonium is
species sacramenti. The whole nature of a thing consists of matter and form,
which if it be unknown, the specificall essence is unknown, and if the
specificall essence be unknown, how can it be ranked in his predicament under
its proper genus? What Papist soever therefore defines Matrimony, and puts
it under a Sacrament as the proper genus, Canus puts the fool upon him take
it off when you can.

To the nineteenth. Vasquez gives the Jesuits cause not so light a blow (as
he imagines) in saying that where S. Austine calls Matrimony a sacrament,
he takes the word Sacrament in a large sense, and not in the strict and
proper: for if S. Austine be so to be understood, he held not Matrimony a
sacrament properly so called, but in a large sense only, and if that were his
judgment, we have a great advantage of our Adversaries in the cause, for S.
Austine carries a great stroke, not only because he is held the acutest of
all the ancient Fathers, and father of all the Schoolmen: but especially,
because the Pope in the Canon law professes Augustinum sequimur in
disputationibus, We follow for the most part, says Pope Gelasius, S. Jerome
in the interpretation of Scripture, S. Gregory in matter of morality, but S.
Austine in point of controversy. Yea but says Flood, this is but Vasquez his
private and singular opinion concerning S. Austine. Neither does the Knight
otherwise urge it then as the singular opinion of a singularly learned Jesuit
enforced by evidence of truth, to give over their chiefest hold of antiquity
in this point the authority of S. Austine. Well, be it so says Flood, Vasquez
is so far for you, yet we have an Oliver for a Rowland, Bellarmine for
Vasquez; for this opinion of Vasquez, is contradicted by other Catholic
Divines, and by Bellarmine in particular. Where is then the unity our
Adversaries so much brag of? two of the greatest Champions of the Pope
Vasquez and Bellarmine strive about S. Austine, and the one refelleth the
reasons of the other, so that it seems our popish Divines are as ill resolved
about the proof of their doctrine, as I showed before out of Canus, that they
were in a wood concerning the doctrine it self. Moreover I add, that though
Bellarmine may go in equipage with Vasquez: yet Vasquez against them more
disparageth their cause, then Bellarmine for them helps it. For a testimony
from an enemy is of more force for us, then the testimony of a friend, or
rather sworn vassal to the Roman Church can be for them.

To the twentieth. Bellarmine will have this signification necessarily to
contain in it three things, the Passion of Christ, sanctifying grace, and
eternal life. And whereas farther he confesses that the signification of
these three things is most apparent in Baptism and the Lords Supper. The
Knight strongly concludes out of him that our doctrine concerning two
Sacraments is more certain and evident, then theirs concerning seven, and
consequently that our belief is safer in this point then theirs. As for that
which the Jesuit adds out of Bellarmine, that the rest of the Sacraments
signify all these things at least implicitly were it true, yet we had the
better of the cause. For our two Sacraments, as it is confessed, signify these
things plainly and evidently; theirs obscurely and implicitly; but indeed it is
not true that they signify or represent those things at all. For what
representation is there between imposition of hands in orders, or joining of
hands in Matrimony, or confessing sins in penance, or chrisme in
Confirmation, or oylein Extreme Unction, and the Passion of Christ, and
eternal life? What the Jesuit adds for conclusion, that the rest of the
Knights section is nothing but such foolish stuff as he is wont to talk,
without rhyme or reason, needs no other answer then this that the Knight
indeed from p. 157. to 161. takes an inventorie of a great deal of foolish
stuff, but it is theirs, not the Knights, to wit, that Christ satisfied the
people with five loaves and two fishes which make seven, and that which Andrew
said, there is a boy here which has five loaves and two fishes, must be
understood of the rank of S. Peter's successors, Tyrabosc. pat: Ven. vid.
Gentilet examen council. Trid. l. 4.
and that which is added; make the people sit down, signifies that salvation
must be offered to them, by teaching them the seven Sacraments. Again, there
are seven Virtues, seven mortal sins, seven Planets, the Lord rested the
seventh day, seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread; Balak effered seven
Bulls, and seven Rams; and in the Apocalips we read of seven Candlesticks,
seven Seals, seven Trumpets, seven Angels: Ergo, there are seven Sacraments
properly so called, or rather properly so proved.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Are such argumemts the reasons of men,
sobriae and vigilant is fidei, as S. Austine speaks, are they not rather
dreams of the seven Sleepers? or as Epictetus spoke of arguments against the
truth, Ex Hnmfr. in Vit. Iuelli.
Haec sunt infernorum somniorum Phantasmata.

Concerning the Communion in both kinds. Spectacles, chap. 9. Section 5. a
page 242. usque ad 259.
THe Knight in alleging the Council of Constance touching Communion, omnis
and totus Christus, whereas the words are, totus atque integer Christus, that
is, whole and entire Christ.

In bringing this Decree, to beat himself withal, for the non obstante which
he would join with Christ's Institution in both kinds, as if the Council
forbid it in both kinds, notwithstanding Christ did so institute it, is not so
joined in the Council, but otherwise thus; Though Christ did Institute this
venerable Sacrament after supper, and administered it in both kinds, yet
notwithstanding this, the approved custom of the Church has observed, and
does observe, that this Sacrament is not to be Consecrated after Supper, nor
to be received by the faithful but fasting; which Decree I suppose the Knight
will not condemn.

This was no new thing begun by that Council,

Though Christ did institute the Sacrament in both kinds,

The Council of Trent does not any way contradict Christ's institution or
practice as the Knight would have it: Christ did institute and deliver the
blessed Sacrament to his Apostles in both kinds in the last Supper, yet is
Christ contained whole and entire in one kind, and a true Sacrament received,
wherein says he, I would feign see, what opposition the subtlety of the
Knights wit can find? what reason can he give? why it may not stand with
Christ his institution in both kinds, that he be whole under one, and if whole,
why not also a true Sacrament?

The words, Drink ye all of this, do this in remembrance of me were spoken
and appertain only to the Apostles, and in them to Priests, as appears more
plainly by S. Mark, who shows all which our Srviour meant of when he said,
Drink ye all of this, for says S. Mark, and they did drink all.

Though Christ at his last Supper did institute a Sacrament in both kinds,
Emmaus.

The Knight needs not to produce ten or eleven Authors to prove it to have
been the practice of the primitive Church,

Bellarmine brings six several Rites or practices of the ancient Church
which Protestants cannot deny,

The Nazarites among the first Christians in Jerusalem did communicate in one
kind,

The Knight in alleging Tapperus against the Communion in one kind, Tapper,
art. 16. is this, it were more convenient if we regard the Sacrament, and the
perfection thereof to have the Communion under both kinds, then under one: for
this were more agreeable to the Institution thereof, and to the integrity of a
corporal refection, and the example of Christ; but in another consideration,
to wit, of the reverence which is due to the Sacrament, and to the end we may
avoid all irreverence, it is less convenient, and no way expedient for the
Church, that the Christian people should communicate in both kinds.

In the laws of King Edward the sixth revived and confirmed by Queen
Elizabeth,

That it is not requisite that every article of faith have sufficient and
express proof of Scripture, Dial. 2. cont. Lucifer. etiamsi sacrae scripturae
authoritas non subesset, totius orbis in hanc partem consensus instar praecepei
obtinerct.
for as S. Jerome teaches, although the authority of holy Scripture were
wanting, the consent of the whole world on this side should have the force of a
Precept.

The Hammer.
IN this Section the Jesuit begins merrily with a fiddle, but ends sadly,
and every where answers sorily. For to omit his omission of some things that
pincht him shrewdly, as namely, first that the Council of Constance by reason
the first Sessions judged the Council above the Pope, is condemned, and
rejected by the Council of Florence and last Council of Lateran; but for the
last Sessions wherein the half Communion is established contrary to Christ's
precept, and holy institution, it is allowed by Pope Martine the fifth, and
rectived of all Catholics; whereby it appears that Papists are more tender
of the Popes supremacy, then Christ's honor; Secondly, De Euchars l. 4. c. 7.
that Bellarmine says, that it is not to be doubted; but that is best and
sit to be practiced that Christ has done. Now it is evident out of
Scriptures, and confessed by the Fathers in the Council of Constance and
Trent, that Christ instituted and administered the Sacrament in both kinds:
Lastly, that the Papists in this point apparently contradict themselves, for
they require antiquity, universality, and consent, as the proper marks of
Catholic doctrine, and yet confess that in this the practice of their Church
is contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church, nor was it ever received
in the true Church, till above a thousand years after Christ. Dichotomived.
To let pass these his preteritions, all that he says in reply to other
passages of the Knights may be dicotomized into idle cavils, and sophistical
evasions, as shall appear by the examination of each particular,

To the first. The Jesuit as it should seem took Ennius the Poet for his
pattern, who as Horace observes, Nunquam nisi potus ad arma prosiluit, etc.
never undertook the description of a war, or set himself to write strong
lines before he had comforted his heart with a cup of strong liquour. For if
the French wine had not assaulted his Capitol, as the Frenchmen did sometimes
the Roman: if a strong fume had not made his head so dizzie, that he thought
all things before him went round, he would never in so serious a subject as is
the Sacrament of Christ's blood use such light and comicall saracasmes as he
does; against this says he, he brings two places of Scripture, P. 243.
and the practice of the Primitive Church, and so concludes the antiquity and
universalitie of his Church, this goes round with a fiddle Sir Humfrey: if he
had a purpose to make sport to his reader in the merry pin he was set on, he
should rather have said you Creed Sir Humfrey goes round with a crowd. But
crowde or fiddle whether he please to term the learned discourse of the
Knight, I hope it will prove like David's Harp, and conjure the evil spirit
out of the Jesuit. To fall upon the particulars in order, whereas in the first
place he charge the Knight with false and absurd translation of the Decree
of the Council, rendering totus Christus, all Christ, not whole Christ, and
would make us believe that all can in no sense be attributed to Christ; he
forgot that text of the Apostle that Christ is all in all. Surely it should
seem this Jesuit is descended from Pope Adrian, who was choked with a fly,
for what a silly fly choaketh him here? The Knight to avoid a tautologie in
translating totus and integer Christus, whole and whole Christ, rendereth the
word all and whole Christ, and what falsitie or absurdity is there in this?
does not every punie know that omnis in Latin, and all in English is often
taken collective, as when we say Lazarus was covered all over with sores, do
not the Papists themselves sometimes so render the word totus, as namely in
those places, I have stretched my arms all the day long to a rebellious
people? and all the day long have I been punished, and all Scripture is given
by divine inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteonsnesse that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works: In which passages it is most
evident that all is taken for whole, and so the best interpreters render (...),
tota scriptura, that is the whole Scripture.

To the second. Knight in bringing the Decree of the Council of Constance,
has not brought in a staff to beat himself withal, but to beat all such
Romish curres as bark at the light of the Sun, I mean the clear words of
Christ's institution, Sess. 13.
Drink you all of this. Yet says that Council to the Laity, none of you
drink of this. If Christ had said in like manner, receive you the Communion
after supper, we would never receive it fasting. It is true that he instituted
it the night he was betrayed after supper, which circumstance yet binds us
not now to receive it at that time: but the argument no ways follows from the
change of a circumstance to the change of a substantial act: the Church may
dispense with the one, not with the other. We argue not barely from the
practice of Christ and his Apostles, but from their doctrine and practice. What
Christ did and taught, as S. Cyprian soundly collects, must be perpetually
observed in the Church: but he taught and practiced the Communion in both
kinds, fecit and docuit, he both did so, and taught us so to do; but for the
circumstances of time, number of Communicants, and gesture sitting or leaning,
though at that time he used such circumstances: yet he commanded not us to use
them, and therefore we may administer the Sacrament at another time, to a
greater or lesser number then twelve, we may receive it also with another
gesture then Christ or his Apstles used, because he no where tieth us to those
circumstances, but we may in no wise administer or receive it in one kind,
because he commands us to communicate in both, saying, drink ye all of this;
and what though the Council join not the word notwithstanding to Christ's
institution in both kinds, but to his administering after supper: yet this no
way excuses the Fathers in it from confronting Christ, and abrogating his
commandment by their wicked Decree: for notwithstanding Christ's command,
drink you all of this; that Council by a countermaund forbids any Priest
under a great penalty to exhort the people to communicate in both kinds, or
to teach that they ought so to do.

To the third. If the Jesuits forehead had not been made of the same metal
which he worshipeth in his images, he would have blushed to utter so
notorious an untruth contrary to the Records of all ages, and the confession of
all the learned of his own side. Never any before this Jesuit durst to say,
that the half Communion was the belief, and practice of the whole Church
before the Council of Constance, for besides Salmeron, Arboreus, Aquinas,
Tapperus, Alfonsus a Castro: the Council of Constance, Bellarmine and
Cassander alleged by the Knight, See grand Sacrilcg. Sect. 17.
I could add Estius the Sorbonist, Ecchius the great adversary of Luther,
Suarez their accomplished Jesuit, Soto their acutest Schoole-man, and Gregory
de Valentia, who of all other has most (...) labored in this argument, all
not only affirming, but some of them also confirming that the Communion in both
kinds was anciently, and universally administered to the people. It is well
known that the Eastern Churches in Greece and Asia, and Southern in Africa,
and Northern in Muscovia have ever, and at this day do administer the
Communion to the Laity in both kinds: and in the Western and Roman Church it
self for a thousand years after Christ and more, the Sacrament was delivered
in both kinds to all the members of Christ's Church, which is manifest says
Cassander, Cassand. consult. art. 22.
by innumerable testimonies of ancient Writers, both Greek and Latin. And
when the new custom of communicating in one kind began a little before the
Council of Constance, Soto artic. 12. q. 1. in did. 12. non modo inter
baeretieos verum inter Catholicos ritus ille multo tempore iuvaluit.
it was impugned not by heretics, as Flood would bear us in hand, but by
good Catholics, as Soto a man far before Flood ingenuously confesses.

To the fourth. genus, and an Institution is as the species, every command is
not an institution: but every institution is a command; for what is an
institution, but a special order or appointment in matter of Ceremony or
Sacrament? was not the institution of Circumcision an express command to
circumcise every male child? was not the institution of the Passover a command
for every family to kill a Lamb, and eat it with sour herbs? Was not the
institution of Baptism a command to Baptize all Nations in the name of the
Father, Son and holy Ghost? Was not the institution of the Lords Supper by
words imperative, Take, eat, do this in remembrance of me, and drink ye
all of this? Yea but the Jesuit instanceth in Marriage, which we acknowledge to
be instituted by God, yet not commanded. I answer, all sacred Rites (and namely
the ordination of Marriage) are injunctions and commands to the Church, or
mankind in general, though they bind not every particular person, but such
only as are qualified for them; Genesis 2.24.
if crescite and multiplicamini, be rather a benediction upon Marriage, then a
command to marry, yet certainly those words used in the Institution of
Marriage, therefore shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife, and they shall be one stesh, contain da direct command not to every
man simply I grant, but to every one that has not the gift of continency. 1
Cor. 7.2.
to avoid fornication, says the Apostle, let every man have his own wife,
and let every woman have her own husband. And again, if they cannot contain
let them marry, V. 9.
for it is better to marry then to burn.

To the fist. Trent Council and Christ's institution; the dullest wit cannot
but stumble upon it. For if whole Christ be received in either kind, why did
Christ who does nothing superfluously, institute the Sacrament in both kinds?
If the Sacrament can no otherwise exhibit Christ unto us then by virtue of his
Institution, how can we be assured that whole Christ is communicated unto us,
when we violate his institution administering the holy Communion but by halfes?
the Sacrament exhibiteth nothing but what it signifies, but the bread
signifies Christ's body not his blood: the wine signifies his blood, not his
body; therefore accordingly the one exhibiteth only his body, the other his
blood. Again, if Christ be whole in either kind, then a man might receive
whole Christ in drinking of the cup only, though he eat not at all of the
bread, and consequently a man may without sin at the Lords board drink only
of the Consecrated cup, and not eat of the bread which yet no Papist to my
knowledge ever durst affirm.

To the sixth. Jesuit is exploded by Philip Morney, De Euch. l. 1. c. 10.
and Chamierus tom. 4. resp. Bellar. and in D. F. his conference with Everard
p. 256. and diverse others. This may suffice for the present, for the overthrow
of this general answer of all Papists to the words of the institution, Drink
you all of this, viz. (that by all in S. Matthew and S. Mark, Priests only are
to be understood.) First I note at this time the Apostles were not fully
ordained Priests. For as yet Christ had not breathed on them, nor given them
the power of remission of sins: next admit they were Priests, yet in the
institution of this Sacrament they were non conficients, supplying the place of
mere communicants, and therefore consequently whatsoever Christ commanded
them, he commanded all receivers after them. Thirdly, Christ commanded the
same to drink, to whom before he said, Take, eat, this is my body; but the
former words, take, eat, are spoken to the Laye-people as well as Priests,
therefore the words drink you all of this, are spoken to them also, Math. 9.6.
those things which God has joined together let no man put asunder. Fourthly,
I would feign know of our Adversaries when Christ says, This is the cup of the
New Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins, who are those
many? will they say Priests only? have the Laytie no sins, or no remission of
sins by Christ blood? if they have, as all profess they have, why do they
forbid them that which Christ expressly commands them, saying, Drink ye all
of this, for it is shed for you and for many. All worthy communicants are to
drink Christ's blood for whom it was shed, thus much Christ's reason imports;
but it was shed for the Laytie as well as the Clergy, they therefore are alike
to drink it. If the Laytie expect life from Christ, they must drink his blood
as well as eat his flesh, John 6.53.
for except a man eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, he
has no life in him. Lastly, 1 Cor. 11.28.
when the Apostle enjoyneth all to examine themselves before they receive the
holy Communion, I desire to be informed by our Adversaries, whether this
Precept of examination concerns not the Laytie especially? I know they will
say it does, because the people most need examination, that they may confess
their sins, and receive absolution for them before they presume to
communicate: let them then read what follows in the same verse, and so let
them eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup, let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup: the coherence of the
members in this sentence infers, that as none are to be admitted without
precedent examination: so that all who have examined themselves are to be
admitted to the Lords table, both to eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

To the seventh. Jesuit would make from Christ his breaking of bread with the
two Disciples at Emmaus, to prove the Communion in one kind, for neither is it
likely Christ instituted any supperafter his last Supper, neither was the place
fit for a Communion being a common Inn: neither read we of any preparation
on the Apostles part, nor of any words of institution used then by Christ:
neither could the Jesuit allege any one Father, who says that Christ at that
time administered the Communion to those two Disciples in bread only. For it is
well known to all that are acquainted with the language of Canaan, that
breaking of bread in Scripture by a Syneodoche is taken for making a meal, and
it is very unlikely that the disciples traveling at that time of the year in
so hot a country as Iudaea is, when they came to their Inn for a repast,
should call for bread only and no drink.

To the eighth. Jesuit make many a bravado here, and elsewhere: yet upon the
matter in granting to the Knight that the general practice of the primitive
Church was to communicate in both kinds, he yields up the bucklers. For the
maine scope of the Knight in this and other Sections is to prove the
visibilitie of our reformed Church in former ages by the confession of our
Romish adversaries: this he does in the point of the Communion in both kinds
abundantly in this Section, and the Jesuit cannot deny it; it follows
therefore that in this maine point of controversy between us and the Church
of Rome, we have antiquity, universalitie, and eminent visibilitie, and the
Roman Church none of all: whereby any understanding reader may see that the
Knight has already won the day; Yet for the greater confusion of the Jesuit
I add that what the primitive Church did uniformly, they received it from the
Apostles, and what the Apostles did jointly, no doubt they did by the direction
of the holy Ghost, according to our Lords will: and so their example amounts
to a Precept. Again, the practice of the Catholic Church is the best
expositour of Scripture, therefore the question being concerning the meaning of
that text of Scripture, Drink you all of this, whether they concern the
Laytie, or Clergy only, that must be taken for the true exposition which the
Catholic Church by a constant and uniform practice has allowed. Lastly,
either this practice of the Catholic Church was grounded upon some divine
Precept, or it is a mere will worship which the Jesuit dare not say: if it be
grounded upon any divine precept undoubtedly upon this, Drink ye all of this,
that is, as well Ministers as Lay people, as Paschasius commenteth upon the
words.

To the ninth. Bellarmine drawn from six ancient Rites to prove the frequent
use of Communion in one kind are answered at large by Philip Morney, and
Chamierus, in the places above mentioned, and they are every one of them
retorted against Bellarmine himself by D. F. in his book entitled the Grand
sacrilege, cap. 14. accipe quomode das si tibi machera est, and nobis vervina
est, if it be sufficient for him to object by proxe, why may not we answer by
proxe?

To the tenth. Nazarites, I answer first, that I read of no other Nazarites
since Christ's time in the writings of the ancient Fathers, then certain
Heretics so termed of the sect of Ebionites, who went about to cloth the
Gospel with the beggarly rudiments of the Law, upon whom S. Austine passes
this verdict, L. De haeres. ad quod vult Deum dum volunt Iudaei esse and
Christiani nec Iudaeisunt, nec Christiani.
that whilst they labored to be both Jews and Christians, they became
neither Jews nor Christians, but a sect of heretics, partly judaizing,
partly Christianizing. Secondly, if there were any Nazarites that sincerely
embraced the Gospel, questionless they communicated in both kinds: for
though they had vowed against drinking of wine, yet either their Vow was to be
understood of drinking it civilly not sacramentally: for their corporal
refection, not for their spiritual repast: or if their vow were absolutely
against wine, yet Christ's command, Drink ye all of this, implied a
dispensation for their Vow in that case. A private vow of any man must give
place to a public command of God: even now a days those who upon any great
distemper of body or mind by wine, vow to abstain from it, yet make no scruple
of conscience to take a small quantity of it physically for the recoverie of
their health: how much more ought they to do so notwithstanding their vow, if
it be prescribed by the heavenly physician for the cure and salvation of their
souls?

To the eleventh. Tapperus the Knight no way misquoteth him though he leave
out some passges in him; for the truth is Tapperus halteth between two
opinions, he speaks some words plainly in the language of Canaan, and others
he lispeth in the language of Ashdod, where he speaks in the language of
Canaan, as he does most plainly in those his words (if we regard the
Sacrament and perfection thereof, and the integrity of corporal refection,
and the example of Christ, it were more convenient to have the Communion under
both kinds) the Knight hearkeneth to him: but where he lispeth in the
language of Ashdod, saying, (that in consideration of the reverence due to this
Sacrament it is ill and inconvenient to communicate in both kinds) the Knight
had reason to turn a deaf ear to him, for it is cousin germane to blasphemy
to say that is ill and inconvenient, which Christ and his Apostles, and the
whole Church in all places for more then a thousand years practiced: the
Knight might well say to Tapperus in the words of him in the Poet, (...), I
will be sober with you, but I will not run mad with you.

To the twelfth. Edward the sixth, the meaning is, unless among the people
there be some that either by a natural antipathie to wine or other
infirmity, cannot receive the Sacraments in both kinds, it is ordained that
it be delivered to every one in both kinds, cessante ferrea necessitate
obtinet haec aurea regula, that all receive the whole Sacrament in which the
Statute, and the articles of Religion, published first in the reign of this
blessed Prince, fully accord; For so we read Article the thirtieth, both
parts of the Lords Sacrament by Christ's ordinance and command ought to be
ministered to all Christian people alike.

To the thirteenth. Philip Morney in his Preface to his book De Eucharistia,
Bilson of Supremacy part the fourth Abbot against Bishop, chapter the seventh;
and Laurentius de disp. Theolog: Neither does S. Jerome any way contradict them
or us, for we believe that the consent of the whole Christian Church is an
infallible argument of truth. Albeit we teach that any particular Church, as
namely the Roman or the French, or the Dutch or the Greek Church may err: yet
we deny that the catholic Church universally has ever erred, or can err in
matter of faith necessary to salvation: and further I add for conclusion,
that as the words of S. Jerome alleged by the Jesuit make nothing against us,
so if they be applied to our present subject they make most strongly against
him, being propounded after this manner. Although the authority of holy
Scripture were wanting for the Communion in both kinds, (which is not so) yet
the consent of the whole world, on this side testified by their uniforme
practice confessed by Papists themselves, ought to have the force of a divine
Precept, and so there would be an end not only of this Section as the Jesuit
speaks, but of this whole Controversy.

Concerning Prayer in an unknown tongue. Spectacles, Sect. 6. a page 259.
usque ad 283.
THe Knight falsely charge the Council of Trent with approving prayer in the
vulgar tongue:

It has been the general practice and custom in the Church of God, Italy,
Spain, France, Germany, England, Africa, and all other places, and so
likewise in Greek in the Grecian or Eastern Church, though it were as large
in extent, and had as much variety of languages in it as the Latin Church
has.

Uniformity which is fit to be used in such things and unity of the
Catholic Church is excellently declared,

The use of vulgar tongues in the Mass or Church office would cause not only
great confusion,

The use of vulgar language in such things would breed a great contempt of
sacred things,

The place of Scripture alleged by the Knight concerning announcing our Lords
death,

The text of S. Paul where he asks how he that understands not the prayers
shall say Amen,

Haymo requires not that all that are present at Divine service should
understand,

Justinian the Emperor is ordinarily taxed for taking too much upon him in
Ecclesiastical matters: Knight, he requires nothing more, but that Bishops
and Priests should pronounce distinctly and clearly that which according to
the custom of the Eastern Church was to be spoken aloud.

The Canon law capite quoniam in plerisque

Lyra, Belithus, Gretzer, Harding, Cassander, and the rest of the Authors
quoted by the Knight say indeed, that in the beginning, Prayers were in the
vulgar tongue, but the reason was because those three holy languages, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin dedicated on the cross of Christ, were then most vulgar,
none of them speak a word of any Precept.

There is no precept in the Scripture commanding prayers in a known tongue,

It was more needful in the Primitive Church that the people should
understand, Bellarmine notes, because that belongs only to the Clarke.

That the Knight contradicts himself in one place, the days of Honorius
having learned the words of Consecration by heart, pronounced them over their
Bread and Wine in the fields, and thereby Transubstantiated them into flesh and
blood, and for this profane abuse were stricken dead by the hand of God. In
another place he says, that the alteration was brought in by Pope Vitalian
about the year 666. which cannot well agree with his former observation, for
Honorius the first was the sixth Pope before Vitalian, by which computation the
alteration must have been fourscore, or a hundred years before Vitalian.

The Hammer.
AMong the known errors of the Roman Church, there is none more gross or
palpably absurd, then this concerning Prayers in an unknown tongue; For as
Velleius the Epicure in Tully, goes about to maintain by reason that it had
been better a man had not been endued with reason then with it: so in this
argument our Adversaries in good earnest strive cum ratione insanire, to prove
by reasons, that it is best to exhibit to God an unreasonable service to speak
understandingly for speech without understanding, and that in the public
worship of God: to persuade civil men that in their prayers the Priest ought
to be a Barbarian to the people, and the people to the Priest; In a word, to
enforce the people instead of offering the calves of their lips to God, to
offer to him the lips of calves bellowing without understanding. The Knight
therefore upon very just reason takes the Church of Rome to task for this
unsufferable abuse, and undeniable aberration from the Primitive, and
catholic Church. Wherein he confounds all Papists not only with pregnant
testimonies of Scripture, and ancient Fathers, but also with the confession of
the learnedest of their side. Yea, but Flood the Jesuit makes great brags that
he will reckon with him for it; and reckon he does according to his best skill
in Arithmeticke, but to halves, for the Knight presses the Romanists with the
history of the Council of Trent, and the contradictions of their Bishops
there, and other passages of moment which the Jesuit lisently passes by, being
willing to charge himself with no more then he thought he was fairly able to
put off. What he says either by way of objection against the practice of the
reformed Churches, or in answer to our arguments shall be particularly
discussed in my reply to his particular heads.

To the first. Knight says not that the Council of Trent approves in
express and direct words the practice of our Church, Council. Trent. Sess. 22.
c. 8.
but that by consequence it does so in saying the Mass contains great
instruction for the common people, and commanding that the Mass Priest, or
some other should frequently expound or declare unto them the mysteries of the
Mass: for if the Mass contain as the Council says great instruction for
the people, and for that end ought to be expounded unto them, by the same
reason it ought to be translated into the mother tongue, and so read unto them;
Unless they will say that the people receive as much instruction form that
they understand not, as from that they understand. Which none will say but he
that were a degree below S. Paul's idiot. In 1. ad Cor. c. 14. melius ad
edificationem ecclesiae est orationes publicas quae audiente populo dicuntur
dici lingua communi clericis and populo quam dicilatina.. Contar. in catec.
interrogat ult. populus lingua non intellect a orans caret eo fructu quem
perciperet, siorationes eas quas ore proferunt, etiam intelligerent nam and
speciatim intenderent animum, and mentem in deum, ut ab eo impetrarent etiam
speciatim ea quae ore petunt, and magis aedificarentur ex sensu pio earum
oraftonum quas ore proferunt.
Doubtless that which was written and appointed to be read before the people
for their instruction, and edification, ought to be delivered unto them in a
language which they understand: but the Mass was written and appointed to
beeread before the people for their edification and instruction (as the
Council agnizeth) therefore it ought to be celebrated in a known tongue. This
reason alone prevailed so far with two Roman Cardinals, Cajetan and Contarenus,
that they subscribed to the doctrine of the reformed Church in this point. The
former his subscription is in these words, It were better for the edification
of the Church, that the public prayers which are made in the audience of the
people should be said in a tongue common to the Priest and people, then that
they should be said in Latin. The other in these words, The people that
prays in an unknown tongue wants that fruit which they might reap, if
they understood those things which they pronounce with their lips, for they
would in a special manner apply their mind to God, that they might obtain of
him those things which they pray for especially, and they would be more
edified by a godly feeling of those prayers which they utter with their mouth.

To the second. It alie, Spain, France, Germany, England, Africa, and
wheresoever the divine service was celebrated in the Latin tongue, the people
generally understood the Latin. If the Jesuit speak of later times after the
inundation of Goths and Vandals, when the Latin tongue was corrupted and
degenerated into several languages, as Italian, Spanish, and French, in such
sort, that the people in those parts underdood not the Latin: God stirred up
in these Western parts many religious and learned men, who turned the Bible,
and the common prayers into the vulgar tongue, and the Bishops of Rome were
very much to blame, who commanded not the like to be done throughout all their
jurisdiction, and it is worth the observation that Irenaeus teaches, L. 5. c.
30.
that the number 666. contains the name latinus, and that in that very year
of our Lord Pope Vitalian commanded the Latin service generally to be received
in the Western Church, though at that time in most parts few of the people
understood it.

To the third. We are not so much to regard uniformitie in the Church. service,
as conformity to the will and word of God, which requires that all things in
the Church be done to edification, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16.26.
that we pray with the spirit, and with understanding also, that the people
join with the Priest in all parts, as well prayers as giving of thanks and
testfie it by saying Amen, Which cannot be done if prayers be said in a tongue
which people understand not. Moreover, as diversity of instrumentstuned
together marreth not the music, but makes it sweeter: so diversity of
languages, in which the same prayers are said, breeds no deformity at all, but
uniformitie rather. Since it is not the different sound of words, but of sense
that makes a difference either in the belief or practice of the Church. There
was never more unity then in the Apostles time, Acts 2.46.
when all the be leevers were of one mind yet then they praised God in diverse
languages, Acts 2.9.
Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in
Indaea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and
the parts of Lybia, about Cyrene and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites,
Creets and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful
works of God.

To the fourth, Severus translate them into the Syrian, S. Jerome into the
Dalmatian, S. Chrysostom into the Armenian, Vlphila into the Gothian,
Methodius into the Slavonian? Bid into the British, and the Divines of Doway
and Rhemes of late into the English? Aeneas Sylbist. Bohem. c. 30.
Nay, why did the Pope himself sign and subscribe unto the Petition of
Cyrill, and Methodius Monks sent to convert the flaves, and Dalmatians who in
behalf of their Converts, desired of his holiness, that he would give leave
to say service unto them in the Slavonian tongue, which the Pope consented unto
upon their much pressing him with that text of holy Scripture, Ps. 150. v. ult.
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord, and let every tongue
confess unto him.

To the fifth. Jesuits reason at all, it would prove that neither the Scriptures
of the Old Testament should have been delivered to the Jews in the Hebrew,
nor the New Testament to the Greeks in the Greek. For Hebrew was then the
vulgar tongue of the Jews, and the Greek to the Gentiles, yet we find that
neither the writing the Old Testament in the Hebrew, nor the New in the Greek,
which were then the vulgar languages to those people, bred any contempt of
sacred things with profaneness and irreligiousnesse, but the clean contrary
effects. The use of Scripture in a vulgar tongue is not the cause why any
disesteeme or undervalew it, but want of instruction in heavenly mysteries, and
careless and superficial reading without searching into the bottom of the
spiritual meaning, where Orient Pearls lie. A counrerfeit stone if it be
often handled is discovered to be false, and thereby loses its value, whereas
a rich Diamond though it be worn every day on the finger, loses nothing of
the price, or value of it. If the public use of Scriptures would have
derogated any thing from the worth and value of it, God would never have
commanded the children of Israel to rehearse the book of the Law continually
to their children, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9
to talk of it when they tarried in their house, and when they walked in the
way, when they lay down, and when they rose up, to bind the words of the law
for a sign upon their hand, and as frontlets between their eyes to write them
upon the posts of the house, and upon the gates. Worldly wise men seek to
improve their knowledge by concealing it, or at least impropriating it to some
few: but God contrariwise valeweth his wisdom by making it common. Earthly
commodities the rarer the dearer, but heavenly Jewels the more common they are,
the more precious: of other liquour the less we taste, the more we thirst
after it, but heavenly wisdom thus speaks of her self, He that drinks
of me, the more he drinks the more he shall thirst. As the comfortable
beams of the Sun which shines daily upon us are not less valewed, then the
rays of those stars that seldom appear in our horizon: so the word of God
which is the light of our understanding issuing from the Sun of
righteousness loses nothing of the reverend estimation, and religious respect
due unto it by the frequent irradiation thereof at the preaching and reading of
Scripture, nay it gains rather with all hearers in whom there is any spark
of grace. As for danger of heresy, Rain.l 1. de Idol.
indeed Claudius Espenceus writes, that a friend of his in Italy told him,
that in that country they made shie of reading Scripture, for fear of being
made heretics thereby, but by heretics he means such as S. Paul was, who
after the way which they call heresy worship the God of their Fathers, Acts
24.14.
believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, for
otherwise if heresy be taken in the proper sense for erroneous doctrine in
point of faith, it is as absurd to say, that the stequent use of Scriptures is
a cause or occasion to bring men into heresy, as that the often taking of a
sovereigne antidote against poison, is the ready means to poison a man. (...).
Chrysostom. tom. 5. Matthew. 22.29.
S. Chrysostom in his Homily de Lazaro exhorts all his Christian hearers to
the frequent reading of Scriptures, as a special means to preserve them from
errors and heresies. For all errors in point of faith arise from the
ignorance of Scriptures, as our Savior teaches the Saduces, saying, Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures. Assuredly there is less danger of falling into
heresy by reading Scriptures, then any other book whatsoever, partly because
they alone are free from all possibility of error, partly because God
promises a blessing to those that read and meditate on them: yet our
Adversaries suffer all other books to be translated out of the learned
Languages into the vulgar, only they forbid the translation and public use of
the Scriptures, which contain in them most wholesome receipts, not only against
all the maladies of the will, but of the understanding also: not only against
all morallvices, but also all intellectual errors in matters of faith which
we call heresies.

To the sixth. Had the Jesuit but an ounce of discretion and common
understanding he would never translate (...) to announce, which is no English
word at all, neither is he of sufficient authority to coin new words at
Doway or Saint Omers, and make them current in England. For the matter it self
it is false which he says, that the Actions at the Lords Supper without the
words show forth, or as he speaks, announce the death of our Lord, for Bread
is broken, and Wine poured out at common meals, yet our Lords death is not
thereby declared: both must concur, mysterious rites, and sacred forms of
words lively to present Christ's death. The Knights argument therefore stands
firm. The Sacraments ought so to be celebrated, that by them the Lords death
might be showed forth: but it cannot be showed forth, unless the Evangelicall
story, and especially the words of the Institution be pronounced in a language
that may be understood. For to speak Latin to the people that understand it
not, is surdo narrare fabulam, to tell a tale to a deaf man, or to set a
beautiful picture before him that is blind, or in the Knights phrase to speak
to a wall; at which notwithstanding the Jesuit ridiculously carpeth, saying, I
never heard before, that it was all one to speak Latin, and to speak to a
wall, were he according to our English proverb as wise as a wall, he could
not but understand what was the Knights meaning, to wit, that to speak Latin
prayers and exhortations, as Papists do at their Mass to those who understand
them not, is no better then to speak to so many walls, when the Apostle
touching upon the same string the Knight does, 1 Cor. 14.9.
terms the uttering words in an unknown tongue, as speaking into the air;
This Jesuit in the spirit of Lucian might in like manner have jeared at the
Apostle, saying, I never heard that to speak in an unknown tongue, be it
Greek, Latin, or Hebrew, is to speak to the air. The meaning of both
phrases, to speak to a wall, and to speak into the air, is all one to lose a
man's breath to speak idly and unprofitably, or to no end and purpose, when
no man is the better for it, as the Jesuit afterward confesses, saying, The
other reason from the Apostle is, that those which hear a prayer in a strange
language, are nothing the better for it, nor can say Amen unto it. What then
can the common people be the better for hearing popish Mattens or even-song,
which are chaunted in Latin, a language which they understand not?

To the seventh. speak into the air in our private devotions, much less in
our public. But the truth is, the Apostle speaks evidently of public
prayers, and all the parts thereof; first of petitions v. 15. secondly, of
giving of thanks v. 17. thirdly, of prophesying and interpreting of Scriptutes
v. 4. fourthly, of singing Psalms v. 15. and all this when the whole Church
be come together in one place v. 23. Moreover, he speaks of prayers made in
the Church, v. 19. of the edification of others, v. 12.26. and of blessings
also wherein the people are to join with the Priest v. 16. and what can such
prayers, benedictions, hymns, and thankes-givings be other then part of the
public Liturgy in the Church in those days? Yea, but says the Jesuit, he
cannot speak of the public prayers of the Church which no man can doubt
either for the truth or goodness of them, and therefore he may confidently
say Amen to them, though they be uttered in an unknown tongue. I answer, that
the Apostle here speaks not of confidently saying Amen, but understandingly
saying it, which no man can do, who is utterly ignorant of the tongue in which
the Priest prays. Hos. de verb Dei. I believe what the Church believes, the
Church believes what I believe.
And howsoever none of the coliers implicit circnlar faith can make any doubt
of the truth or goodness of the prayers said in the Mass: yet those whose
eyes are not put out with the Romish coal dust, may very well doubt of them;
first they may well doubt whether the Church of Rome which appoints them may
not err as other Churches have done, especially considering what the Apostle
speaks expressly of that Church, Romans 11.22. Vid. Bull. praefix breviar. Romans
Melcbior loc. theol. l. 11. c. 5. nec enim animus est meri omnes historias quae
passim in ecclcsia loctitantur. Claudius Espen. in 2. ad Tim. c. 4. digres. 2.
nostri quantum me pigeant falsa in ecclesia Dei cantica canentes quantae nugae
canore mihi audibiles? in uno hymno praeter ineptitudinem sententiarum mendacia
ad minus 24. reperi. Petrus Pictau: ep. 31. conqueritur inepta ac falsa in
laudem Sancti Mauri super aquas currentis afficta.
that if she continued not in her goodness, she should be cut off. Secondly,
he may doubt whether all those corruptions and abuses which the Fathers in the
Council of Trent complain to have crept into their Mass are reformed.
Thirdly, he may doubt whether the Priests book may not be some-where false
printed. Lastly, he may doubt whether the Priest always reads true; surely
that Priest who baptized a child, in nomine patria filia, and spiritua sancta;
and another who read in the Doxologie glia pni: flo: and spui sco scutrat in
primpo scla sclorum, Amen, said Mass by rote, and could not have skill of
brachygraphy, nor well spell Latin, and can no man then doubt of the truth and
goodness of any of the prayers that are said by your Mass Priests?

To the eighth. Knight draws out of Haymo his quiver, flies home. For first
he expressly teaches that S. Paul speaks of public prayers, 1 Cor. 14.
and among other reasons used by the Apostle against the conceiving of prayers
in an unknown tongue, he insisteth upon that v. 16. when thou shall bless
with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the Room of the unlearned say
Amen at the giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?
adding if one knows that only tongue wherein he was borne and bred; if such
an one stand by thee whilst thou do solemnly celebrate the mystery of the
Mass, or make a Sermon, or give a blessing, how shall he say Amen at thy
blessing, when he knows not what thou say? for as much as he
understanding none but his mothers tengue, he cannot tell what thou speak
in that strange and barbarous tongue. Hereunto the Jesuit answers, that if
we take Haymo altogether, we shall find he does not require, that all that
are by, shall understand, but that he that supplieth the place of the idiot,
or laye-man in answering for the people shall understand. An answer befitting
an idiot indeed, for does not S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.16.
and after him Haymo speak indefinitly of any that occupy the place of the
unlearned, or stands by at Service or Sermon in an unknown tongue? or is it
less absurd for any other man to be present at a prayer which he understands
not, then for a Parish-Clarke whom alone he will have here to be understood.
Who is very much beholding to him for bestowing the name of idiot upon him, and
truly such a Clarke as the Jesuit here defines, may very well take the idiot
in the worst sense to himself. For he requires no more in a Clarke then that
he understand the Service so far, P. 265.
as to be able to answer Amen. But it seems the Jesuit took his holy orders
per saltum, and skipt over the Clarke. For if he had well considered what
belongs to the Clerks office, he should find that he has more in his part
then to say only Amen; for in all ancient and later Liturgies that I have
seen, many short sentences or responds are to be said by him, as namely
Christ eleeson and cumspiritn tuo, and habemus ad Dominum, and the like,
neither can he say Amen to any prayer in the Apostles sense, unless he
perfectly understand it: for to say Amen, is not only to utter the word which a
Parret or Popenjay may do, but to join in prayer with the Priest, and to give
his assent to every clause.

To the ninth. Jesuits answer to Justinian is lame on both feet. For whereas
he taxes him for taking too much upon him, it will appear to any who
peruseth the Code and Digests, that he takes no more upon him then God
commends to Princes, to wit, the custody of both tables: he did no more then
S. Austine affirms appertains to Christian Kings, to command those things
that are just and honest not only in civil affairs, but also in matters of
religion; for what he did, he had many excellent presidents before him in
David, Solomon, Hezekiah, and Josiah, Kings of Judah; and Constantine and
Theodosius, and other Christian Emperors, as is declared at large by B. Bilson
in his defense of the oath of supremacre, and Doctor Crakenthorpe in his most
learned Apology of this Emperor. Next what he says that the Decree of this
religious Emperor may well stand with the present practice of the Roman Church
is most false. Novel. constit. 123.
For the words of the Emperor are general, commanding all Bishops and Priests
to celebrate the sacred oblation of the Lords Supper, and prayer used in
Baptism, not in secret, but with a loud and clear voice, that the minds of
the hearers might be stirred up with more devotion, to express the praises of
God. Now I would feign know to what end all Bishops and Priests are commanded
to pronounce their words clearly and distinctly, both at the administration of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; but that their hearers might undetstand what
they say, and be affected with those things they hear; which cannot beif the
Priest speak to them in an unknown tongue? For how can the loud pronouncing of
words in a strange language stir up the devotion of the people to praise God
for his benefits, which the Emperor here requires under a great penalty,
saying? Let the Bishops and Priests know that if they neglect to do according
to our princely command, they shall yield an account in the dreadful judgment
of the great God for it, and we having information of them will not leave them
unpunished.

To the tenth. Knight alleges a text out of the Canon law, not to show his
skill in both laws, as the Jesuit would have it, but to demonstrate that the
practice of the Roman Church in this point of prayer in an unknown tongue, is
against all law both Ecclesiastical and civil, Tit. 3. de Offic.
and that the walls of the Romish Babell are battered by her own canons; for
though the Decree of Pope Gregory were made upon a special occasion: yet it
is grounded upon this general rule, that Service and Sacraments must be said
and administered to the people in a language they understand, which the Jesuit
himself confesses in part, saying, that it is a matter of necessity in the
administration of some Sacraments to use the vulgar tongue, as in Marriage and
Penance; as for the Council of Lateran, and the Pope in his Decree, they
speak indefinitely of holy Service and Sacraments, and the Logitians rule is
that indefinite propositions in materia necessaria are to be taken for
universals, and by the same reason, which the Jesuit alleges for Penance and
Marriage to be celebrated in a known tongue we may conclude, that Baptism
also, and the Lords Supper ought to be so celebrated. For in both, questions
are put to the people, to the god fathers in the one, and communicants in the
other, and answers are expected from them.

To the eleventh. Jesuit is like them taxed by the Apostle who knew not what
they spoke, nor whereof they affirm. Our question is not, whether divine
Service ought always to be said in the mother tongue, for we our selves do
other ways in diverse Colleges: but the point in controversy is, whether the
service ought always to besaid in a tongue understood by those that are
present: this all the Authors alleged by the Knight affirm, and therefore
they make for us, and assuredly if for seven or 800 years the public prayers
of the Church were offered to God in a language understood by the people, as is
confessed: questionless in many places the prayers were turned into vulgar
languages. For it cannot be imagined that all the people in the Christian world
before Pope Vitalians time understood Hebrew, Lyra in 1 Cor. 14. in primitiva
ecclesia been dictiones, and coetera fiebant in lingua vulgari. Gretz. def.
Bell. l. 2. de verb. Dei lingua auditoribus non ignota omnia peragebantur, and
consuetudo tunc ferebat ut omnes psallerent. Harding. apud Jewel. ia 3. art.
divis. 28 Verily in the primitive Church prayers were made in a common tongue
known to the people. Liturg. canonicam precem, and in primis dominici
corporis, and sanguinis consecrationem ita veteres legebant, ut a populo
intelligi, and Amen ucclamari possint. Ioban. Belit. in sum. de divin. offic.
in primitiva ecclcsia prohibitum erat ne quis lo queretur ling u is nisi esset
qui inter pretaretur quid enim prodesset, etc. Wald. in doct. art. eccies. tit.
4. c. 31. fuit ergo ratio talis benediction is in ecclesia tempore Apostoli cui
respondere solebat non tantum clerus sed omnis populus. Aquin as lect. 4. ideo
erat insania in primitiva ecclesia quia erant rudes in ritu ecclesiastico.
Greek, or Latin, neither is it a point much material, whether the Authors
alleged by the Knight speak of any Precept of praying in a known tongue or
not, it is sufficient, that they confess that it was the general practice of
the Primitive Church, to perform their devotions in the vulgar tongue. For
certainly what they generally practiced in their divine Service, they thought
to be fittest and most agreeable to Gods commandment. If we had nothing but
their practice for us, it alone would prove the visibilitie of our Church in
this maine point, wherein we stand at a bay with the Roman Church; but the
truth is, though the Jesuit would be loath to hear it, his own witnesses
Cassander, Belithus, Waldensis, and Aquinas speak home to the point even of a
Precept; the words of Cassander are, the Canonical prayers, and especially the
words of Consecration of the body and blood of our Lord; the Ancients did so
read that all the people might understand it and say Amen according to the
precept intimated by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 16. The words of Belithus are,
that in the Primitive Church it was forbidden that any should speak with
tongues, unless there were some to interpret; for what says he, should
speaking avail without understanding? Waldensis says more then that, in the
Apostles time, the giving of thanks was in a known tongue, he confirms the
practice with a reason, saying, There was reason it should be so, because in
those times not only the Priests, but the people also were wont to answer Amen.
Aquinas goes a step farther, that it was madness in the Primitive Church for
a man to have prayed in an unknown tongue, because then the people were rude
and ignorant in Ecclesiastical rites. Now if the Jesuit think that it was not
prohibited in the Apostles time, to do any mad act in time of divine
Service, he himself is bound for the Anticyrae. Now for that the Jesuit adds
for the imbellishing of his former answer, that none of the vulgar languages
but the three learned, to wit, the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, were Dedicated
on the cross of Christ, and consequently that they being the best and
perfectest of all languages were fittest for divine Service to be said in them:
it is more plausible then substantial. For though I grant that every devout
soul so affects the person of our Lord and Savior, that she loves the
very ground he trod upon, and honors those languages above all other in
which his titles were proclaimed, for the greater advancement of his kingdom:
yet the reason holds not in our present case. For though a golden key be
simply better then a key of iron, yet a key of iron which will open to us a
casket of most precious Jewels, is better for that use then a key of gold
which will not open the lock. Admit the original languages of Greek and
Hebrew are simply perfecter, and better then any other which are derivatives
from them, yet the Mother Tongue, or vulgar language, is better and fitter for
the congregation in time of divine Service, because it answers the wards of
their understanding, and opens to their capacity the Divine mysteries then
celebrated, which the learned languages cannot do. As for Pilats writing over
the Cross, it is certain he had no end therein to honor the three Languages,
with this title: but to dishonor our Savior thereby, and put a scorn upon
him; and therefore that inscription in the three languages was rather a
pollution then a Dedication of those tongues. If Pilats action herein be of
any force it makes rather against then for our Adversaries. For Pilat
therefore commanded the title to be written in those three languages, that it
might be understood of all, or the greater part of those that then were at
Jerusalem. By which reason people of diverse languages ought to have their
mysteries (for so the Jesuit calls this title) celebrated in their own
several langurges. Praef. in psalm. his maxim tribus linguis sacramentum
voluntatis Dei, and beati regni expectatio praedicatur ex eoque illud Pilati
fuit, ut in his tribus linguis regem Iudaeorum Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum
esse praescriberet.
S. Hilarie who is alleged by Baylie the Jesuit for the consecration of these
tongues, neither says that these tongues were consecrated by that inscription,
not that Christ's kingdom is to be proclaimed in them only. His words are in
these three languages, especially the mystery of Gods will, and the
expectation of his blessed kingdom is preached; and hence it was that Pilat
wrote our Lord Jesus Christ King of the Jews in those three tongues. This
testimony cutteth the throat of our Adversaries, for the adverbe maxim or
chiefly implies that the mysteries of Christ's kingdom were to be preached in
other tongues, though in these especially, because these were then, and are
some of them at this day most generally known and understood. Inc. 15 Marc.
Deus voluit ut causa mortis Christi varijs linguis scriberetur quo ab omnibus
intelligeretur. Et Hieron. ib. hae tres linguae in crucis titulo conjunctae ut
omnis lingua commemoraret perfidiam Iudaeorum. Baron. tom. 10 Anno Chris. 880.
ep. 147. liter as Slavonicas, a Constantino philosopho repertas quibus Deo
lauds debitas resonent jure laudamus, and ut in cadem lingua Christi Dei
nostri praeconia, and opera enarrentur, jubemus: neque enim trilus tantum
linguis, sed omnibus Dominum laudare authoritate sacra monemur, quae praecepit
dicens, laudate Dominum omnes gentes: nec sane fidei vel doctrinae allquid
obstat five missas in eadem Slavonica lingua canere, sive sacrum evangelium,
vel lectiones divinas N. and V. Testamenti been translatas, and interpretatas
legere, out alia horarum officia psallere quoniam qui fecit tres linguas
principales Hebraeam scilicet Graecaem, and Latinam, ipse creavit and alias
omnes ad laudem and gloriam suam.
Lyra and S. Jerome harp upon this string, God would have says Lyra, that the
cause of Christ's death should be written in diverse tongues that every tongue
might declare the treachery of the Jews, and which marreth all the Jesuits
music, the Popes Diapason sounds out the same note, for so we read in Bope
John's Epistle to the King of Moravia, we commend the Slavonian letters found
out by Constantine the Philosopher, whereby those of that country set forth
the due praises of God, and we command that the preaching and works of Christ
our God be declared in them, for we are admonished by the Divine authority
which commands, saying, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, to praise the Lord
not in three tongues only, but in all, for he who made the three principal
languages, Hebrew, Greek and Latin; he created also all other for his glory.

To the twelfth. To this insolent interrogation of the Jesuit we answer, that
in general, prayer in an unknown tongue is commanded in all those texts of
Scripture, which require us to come near unto God, and pray unto him with our
heart. For by the heart the understanding as well as the will and affections
are meants, as appears by that prayer of Solomon, Da mihi cor intelligens? in
particular and express words it is commanded in the 1 Cor. 14. chapter through
the whole, out of which we thus argue, if it be better in the Church to speak
five words with understanding, that by our voice we may teach others, then a
thousand words in an unknown tongue: then certainly the public Service of the
Church ought to be in a known tongue; but it is better in the Church to speak
five words with understanding to instruct others thereby, then a thousand words
in an unknown tongue, v. 19. Therefore the public Service of the Church ought
to be in a known tongue. If all things ought to be done in the Church to
edification, then ought the public Service to be in a known tongue; (for he
that speaks in an unknown tongue edifieth not, v. 5.) but in the Church all
things ought to be done to edification, v. 26. Ergo, the public Service ought
to be in a known tongue: If in the prayers of the Church the people are to
join with the Priest, and testify their consent with him by saying Amen to
his prayers, and giving of thanks: then ought the public Service to be in a
known tongue: But in the prayers of the Church, the people ought to join with
the Priest, and testify their consent by saying Amen to his prayers, and
giving of thanks. Ergo, the public Service ought to be in a known tongue.
If in the Church prayers we ought to pray and sing with understanding, then
ought Church service to be in a known tongue ( for if we pray in an unknown
tongue our spirit prays, but our understanding is unfruitful, v. 14.) But in
the prayers of the Church we ought to pray and sing with understanding, v. 15.
Ergo, the public Service ought to be in a known tongue. Neither can the
Jesuit shift off these passages with a wish, saying that S. Paul indeed
advises and wishes, that when any prayer is made in an unknown tongue, there
should be some to interpret, but that he requires no such thing to be
observed as a divine precept: for v. 37. he adds, if any man think himself
a prophet or spiritual, let him know that the things which I write unto you,
are the commandments of God. To conclude, when S. James commands, that
whosoever prays, James 1.6.
ask in faith, nothing doubting but that he shall receive what he asks, he
necessarily implies, that we ought to pray to God in a known tongue. For how
can he believe that he shall receive what he prays for, if he knows not
what himself says in his prayers, or what an other prays for him, to whose
prayers he says Amen. To the Jesuits second quaere, where prayer in an
unknown known tongue is forbidden. I answer, Esaias 29.13. and Mark the 7.10.
Well Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, this people honors me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me: and 1 Cor. 14. where the Apostle
professedly disputes against speaking in the Church in an unknown tongue. But
the Jesuit excepteth, that S. Paul in that chapter condemns not simply
prayers in an unknown tongue, though he prefers prophecy. By which his
ignorant exception, it should seem that he read that chapter in an unknown
tongue; for he speaks so wide from the matter as if he understood never a
word in it. It is true that the Apostle in that chapter comparing the gift of
tongues, and prophecy together condemns neither of them, but prefers the
gift of prophecy; and in prosecution of the comparison falls upon those who
used the gift of tongues in public prayers in the Church, and he expressly
condemns that practice of them, because they that prayed in such sort
uttering words that were not understood, spoke not to men, because no man
understood them, v. 2. spoke into the air, v. 5. edified. not by those
prayers, v. 12.17. because others could not join with them in their prayers,
nor say Amen to their thanks, v. 15. Now if the Apostle reproved the use of
the miraculous gift of tongues (which redounded so much to the honor of God)
in the Church, without an interpreter, v. 28. saying, if there be no
interpreter, let them keep silence in the Church; How much more may we
conceive would he have sorbidden the use of an unknown tongue acquired by
humane industry? To his third quaere, what authority we can bring for our
selves, or example? I answer, that the Knight has brought the authority, and
example of the catholic Christian Church for 700. years at the least, and
because he calls upon us to name any Father, who teaches as we do, that the
service of the Church ought to be in a known tongue, Exposit. in psalm. 18.
vult ut quod conamus intelligamus ac humana ratione non quasi avium voce
canamus nam, and psittaci, and corvi, and picae, and hujusmodi volucres saepe
abhominibus docentur sonate quod nesciunt sciunter autem cantare naturae
hominis divina bonitate concessum est.
I name S. Chrysostom, who in his Commentary upon the 14. chapter of the
first to the Corinthians says that the Apostle teaches, that we ought to
speak with our tongues, and withal to mind what is spoken, that we may
understand it; and S. Austine wills, that we understand what we sing like
men endued with reason, and not chatter like birds, for ousels, parrats,
crows, pies, and such other birds, are often taught by men to sound out that
which they know not, but to know what they sing, or sing with knowledge and
understanding, is by Gods will peculiarly given unto man. I name also Iustine
Martyr, and S. Basil, and many other ancient Doctors, whose testimonies are
plentifully alleged by Bishop Jewel, Article the third, and Bilson of
Supremacy, part the fourth, and not yet answered by any Papist to my knowledge.

To the thirteenth. Bellarmine concerning the different custom of the ancient
Church, and the present Roman, makes rather against the Jesuits then for them.
For who will not attribute more to the uniforme practice of the primitive
Church, then to the heteroclyte practice of later Churches? assuredly the
practice of the primitive Church wherein the people answered the Priests, and
not the Clarke only, is most agreeable to the doctrine of S. Paul, and
consonant to reason. For public prayers were instituted especially for three
ends, first, for the most solemn worship of God, when thousands of hands are
at once lifted up to him, and as many tongues confess his name: secondly, for
the stirring up of greater devotion, when many hundreds praying and blessing,
and singing together, like so many coals on the same hearth kindle one the
other, and increase the flame. Thirdly, for more prevalencie with God, when we
offer violence, as it were to heaven, and send up our united devotions like a
vollie of shot to batter the walls of it; They who pray in a tongue which the
people understand not, and therefore cannot join with them in their prayer,
fail of all these ends. Yet to sodder all, the Jesuit bears us in hand, that
the Mass being the same continually, the people understand it sufficiently for
the exercise of their devotion, though not to satisfy vain curiosity; which
speech of his is partly senseless, and partly blasphemous: it is senseless to
imagine that a man who never learned his Grammar, nor ever was taught Greek or
Latin, by hearing only the Mass read over, though a thousand times should
come to understand it; secondly, it is blasphemous to say that to desire to
understand the particular contents of the Epistles and Gospels read in the
Mass, or the psalms of David, sung in the Church is vain curiofitie, or
heretical pride. Lo here Flood his channel falls again into the Stygian
lake.

To the fourteenth. There is no contradiction at all in the Knights
observations. Vitalians time; who in the year 666. verified the number of the
name of the beast in himself, which according to the interpretation of S.
Irenaeus, who flourished within two hundred years after Christ, is lateinos,
as before I noted. But for mine own part I have no faith at all in that
legendarie fable of the Sheepheards; First because those that coined it, agree
not in their tale, for some say, that the Bread and Wine were transubstantiated
into flesh and blood, and the sheepeheards for their profane abuse struck
dead: others tell it otherwise, Cassand. liturg. c. 28. Honorius in Gem.
animae, Bellar. l. 2. de Mis. c. 22.
that neither the Bread nor the Wine were transubstantiated, but consumed by
fire from heaven, nor the sheepheards stricken dead, but only laid for dead.
As for the Author of the book called Pratum spirituale, he is of no credit
at all. For in his Spiritual meadow, as he terms his work, there are many
such Eutopian flowers, as this is, where I leave the Jesuit to gather him a
nosegay, till I have leisure to meet with him in the next Section.

Concerning worshipping of Images. Spectacles, Sect. 7. a page 283. usque ad 319.
THe text of Scripture which the Knight quoteth,

It follows not the Jews might not adore Images; Ergo, we may not: for the
Jews might not eat blood nor swines flesh, nor many other things which we
may.

If the second Commandment were moral, Knight could not have his wives
picture, nor she his, without breach of that Commandment: therefore in that
sense he cannot urge it more against our pictures, then we against his.

Cornelius Agrippa was a Magician,

Philo Iudaeus says nothing,

It is no marvel that the Jews hate crucifixes,

Notwithstanding the prohibition in the second Commandment,

There may in the New Testament be some precept, John says that all is not
written, or rather a very small part is written as his words import.

We have the example of our Savior and his Apostles testified by good
authentical histories, Abgarus King of Edessa, who had a desire to see him:
the other was that of Veronica, which he made with wiping his face, as he was
carrying his Cross: a third was one which Nicodemus gave to Gamaliel, all
which are testified, not only by grave and learned Authors, but by God
himself, though not in Scripture, yet by great and wonderful miracles.

S. Austine takes not Simulachrum for an image, Knight falsely translateth him,
but for an idol, and so commends Varro for coming nearer to the knowledge
of the true God, and going further from idolatry then other Gentiles.

Eusebius says not, mos gentilis, the fashion of their own people, and
kindred, who were wont to honor such that had done them any benefit, or help
by erecting statues in memory of them. Moreover, Eusebius relates this story
of the woman's statua with approbation; upon the basis or foot thereof, there
grew a certain strange and unusual kind of herb, which as soon as it grew
up so high as to touch the hemme of the brazen garment, it had virtue to cure
diseases of every kind.

The Council of Elliberis, 19. Bishops only, without any certainty of the
time when it was held, to which we oppose one of Constantinople, another at
Rome, under Gregory the third, and a third at Nice, of 350. Bishops. Moreover,
this Council forbids not pictures absolutely, but painting on walls, and
soleaving them to the fury, and scorn of the Gentiles, and it is plain, that
the Council made the Decree out of honor to images, because they thought not
the walls a place convenient, because the plaster breaking off in some places,
they might become deformed, and so contemptible.

Valens and Theodosius whom the Knight joyneth in making a law against images,
together: Valens being killed 23. years before Theodofius was borne; besides
Valens was a wicked Arrian heretic, upon whom God did show his judgment by a
disasterous end, and the law made by him cited by the Knight is fowly
corrupted, and the meaning wholly perverted, for the law was made in honor of
the Cross, towit, thus we command that it shall not be lawful for any to
carve or paint the sign of our Savior Christ, either on the ground, or in any
stone or marble lying on it.

Nicolaus Clemanges was himself a Wiclefian heretic.

Cassander, Erasmus, Wicelius, are of no account in the Roman Church.

The Council of Nice, Constantine and Irene, was not condemned at Frankford;
Nay, in that very Council an Anathema is said to all such as deface Images.

Polidore Virgill, Moses and Hezekias: nay farther, Polydore accounts him a
dissolute and audacious man, who judges otherwise of the worship of Images,
then has been approved by the Decree of two or three Councels which he there
alleges.

Peresius denies not the worship of Images, Catholic Church touching the
worship of Images.

Agobardus his drift in his book De picturis and imaginibus,

Although it were true that some silly women, utile perinutile non vitiatur.

The Hammer.
AS those who beheld the head of Medusa wereturned into stocks and stones, and
presently deprived of all life and sense: so those who gaze upon with
admiration, this head of the Romish doctrine concerning Image Worship, become
so stupid and senseless, as if they were turned into those stocks and stones,
to which they give religious veneration. A notable experiment hereof we have in
a conference in France, in which a Sorbon Doctor present, hearing how absurdly
the Patrones of Images maintained the worship of them said, of a truth I find
the words of Psalmist verified, those that make them are like unto them, and so
are all they that put their trust in them. But we need not go so far for an
instance; the Jesuit in this Section makes good that observation, showing us a
forehead of the same metal the images are made for which he pleads. For he
loadeth the Knight with shameless calumnies, and most impudently defends
such gross idolattie as the wiser of the heathen were ashamed of: he whetteth
his poisonous tooth, and like a mad dog snaps at all he meets with, and
far out-raileth Rabsekah himself, as the Reader cannot but judge if he
peruse but a few passages ensuing, namely first, page 298. This is your
discourse Sir Humphrey, wherein you have given so sufficient testimony of
notorious had dealing, especially in the two places of Eusebius, and of the
civil law: that if there were nothing else falsified or corrupted in your
whole book, this were enough utterly to deface all memory of you, from among
honest men. And page 301. What say you to all this Sir Humphrey? look now into
your own conscience, and see whether it can flatter you so much, as to say you
are an honest man. And page 205. May not you then bear away the bell from all
lying, and corrupting fellows that have ever gone before you? He that sees
such foul stuff come out of the Jesuits mouth, would he not think that he
were sick of the disease called miserere? but I leave his Grobian language,
and come to consider first what he lays to the Knights charge, and after,
how he discharges himself of the idolatry and superstition, wherewith the
Knight in this chapter burdeneth the Roman Church. First, he charge the
Knight with false translation, of the Council of Trent. We teach that the
image of Christ, the Virgin Mother of God, and other Saints are chiefly in
Churches to be had, and retained, which Decree he might have translated a
little better, and more clearly by saying, that those images are to be had,
and retained especially in Churches, the Latin word being praesertim, and his
translating it chiefly, and placing it so odly, gives cause to think he had an
evil meaning therein, as if he would have his reader think that the Council
taught that those images were the chief things to be had in Churches, etc. It
is a sign of a light head to stumble at a straw: yet here lies not so much as
a straw in the Jesuits way: only he wanted a festrawe to point to the accent,
which is set upon Churches not upon had, the meaning of the Council and the
Knights is all one, to wit, that images by that Decree were to be had, and
retained chiefly or especially in Churches, not to be had or held to be the
chief thing in Churches. For no man would imagine that the Council could be
so absurd and impious, as to prefer images before the sacred Scriptures, the
Font and Chalice, the Altar or communion Table: much less the sacred Symbols
of Christ's body and blood. Secondly, he charge the Knight with gross
ignorance, in Chronology, But I may ask you, says he, how come you to say
the Jews never allowed adoration of Images for four thousand years, when as
the people of the Jews were not such a people above two thousand years; nay
Moses lived not past 1500. years before our Savior, so that of your own
liberality and skill in Chronology you have added 2000. years to make your
doctrine seem ancient. There is a gross mistake I confess, but in the
Jesuit, not in the Knight: who says not 4000. years, but for almost 4000.
years in the first edition, and in the later editions this escape of the press
is mended, and the figure altered. For the matter it self, the Knight might
truly have said, that the people of God, who lived partly under the law of
nature, partly under the law of Moses, never allowed adoration of Images for
4000. years: so ancient is the doctrine of the reformed Churches in this
point. Thirdly, he charge the Knight with Simbolizing with Jews in the
hatred of Christ, You says he, in alleging the Jews hate of the cross, as
an argument why you should also hate the same, tacitly confess that you love
Christ so well as they: 1 Cor. 16.22.
A fearful charge: for whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be
anathemamaranatha, but a ridiculous proof; for a man may hate an idolized
crucifix, out of love of Christ, because he cannot endure Christ his honor to
be given to graven images. Heat of zeal against idolatry, does no way argue
coldness of affection to the true religion; 2. King. 15.4.
Witness King Hezekiah the non pareil of a religious Prince, who demolished
the brazen Serpent, and stamped it to powder, calling it nehustan, though it
were an image and type of Christ crucified, as Christ himself teaches us. Io.
3.14.
As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, So must the Son of man be
lifted up; Witness Saint Peter, who loved Christ more then the rest of the
Disciples, 1 Pet. 4.3.
Diligis me plus quam hi? and yet he brandeth all Image worship by the title
of abominable idolatry. Nay, witness S. John the beloved Disciple, who went
behind none in zeal against idolatry, 1 Io. 5.21.
saying, babes keep your selves from idols. It is one thing to dislike
crucifixes in Churches out of hatred of Christ, as Jews, Turks, and Infidels
may do: and another thing to disallow them out of hatred of idolatry and
superstition. To stab the Kings picture, or any way deface it out of hatred, or
contempt of his person is disloyalty: yet to take a piece of counterfeit coin
prohibited by law, though bearing the Kings image, and prick it full of holes,
or nail it to a post, is no argument of disloyalty, but contrary, an act of
Loyalty, and obedience also to the Kings laws. Lastly, he charge the
Knight with Sacrilege and profanation of holy things, saying, You, and such
as you, have had your shares in pulling down of images, and silver shrines,
this last hundred years, are more like to be drawn with the love of gain, to
the pulling down of Images, then we that lose all for maintaining and setting
them up: for what we and our Ancestors have parted with from our selves, and
out of our own purses for the honor of God and his Saints; you or men of your
religion, pull back from God and his Saints, to bestow upon your backs and
bellies, and upon your Ministers, their wives and brattes. I would cast this
dunge back again on your Nuns bellies, and Popes face, and tell you of the
brats of the one buried in the earth, and drowned in moates, to cover the shame
of the parents, and give you a bill of the expense of the other upon their
mistresses, far surmounting the charge of all the Ministers wives in England;
but I choose rather to purge the Knight from all foul aspersion herein, who is
so far from having any hand in pulling down your silver shrines, and images,
and making sale of them, that he was not then borne, when by command of King
Edward the sixth those Monuments of idolatry were knocked down and defaced,
which yet was accounted a work so acceptable to God, Vit. Ed. 6. by Sir John H.
that the self same day that the images were broken down in London, God gave
us a notable victory in Scotland; but the truth is, the Knight charge the
Jesuit home with the example of Demetrius and his followers maintaining images,
because they were maintained by them. For who sees not in all popish
countries, how when all other Artificers shut up their shoppes, to wit, on
Sundays and holy days the Priests open theirs, setting out as it were their
golden puppets on the stalls, whereof they make no small advantage? and
therefore to all his railing rhetoric with which he concludes this section, I
hold sit to return no other answer then the French provethe, The Ass brayeth
never so hideously, as when he is over-hard girt. Thus having held up my
buckler for the Knight, and warded off the Jesuits blows: now I fall on
whetting and sharpening the Knights sword, wherewith he wounds the Idolatrous
superstition of the Roman Church, the edge whereof the Jesuit endeavors to
dull by the twenty exceptions above mentioned, which now I will scan in order.

To the first. Jesuit arm his forehead with the metal of his images, he would
blush to say that the texts alleged by the Knight make against idols, Vulg.
lat. ex edit R. Stephani, non facietis vobis idolum, and sculptile nec titulos
erigetis, nec insignem lapidem ponetis in terra vestra ut adoretis eum. Lorinus
in Act. 7. v. 29. sculptilis imago distinctius ac enixius prohibita est,
quoniam cultus idolorum versa batur potissimum insoulpta imagine vel statua
quae soliditate partium, atque crassitie mag is exhibet personam, quae adoranda
proponitur, quam si haec in superficie duntaxat coloribus exprimatur. Tertul.
cont. Marcio. l. 4. c. 22. nec enim imagines eorum, nec staiuas populus
habuisset lege prohibente. Vasquez. disp. 5. in 3. p. Tho^ and disp. 94. c. 2.
substantia praecepti fuit, usum quemlibet imaginum auferre.
and not at all against images; for the first text, Levit. 26.1. word for word
according to the original, and agreeably to the vulgar Latin is thus to be
rendered, Ye shall make you no idols nor graven images, neither rear you up a
standing image, neither shall you set up any image of stone in your land to bow
down to it. The second text Exodus 20.4. is thus to be translated, Thoushalt
not make thy self any thing carved or graven, in Hebrew Pesel derived from
pasal, signifying to carve or engrave, in Greek (...), in the vulgar Latin
unto which all Papists are sworn sculptile. To which Commandment Tertullian
alluding says, Peter knew Moses and Elias by the spirit, when they appeared
with Christ in the Mount, not by any picture or image which he had seen of
them, for the people of the Jews had no such, the law prohibiting it. And
Vasqnez the Jesuit convinced by the evidence of the text confesses, that God
in the second Commandment forbids not only to worship an image for God, but
also to worship God in any similitude, and consequently he thereby takes away
all use of any image of God. Yet were there any mist in the word pesel, the
words following clearly dispell it; nor the likeness of any thing, that is in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth, thou
shall not bow down to them, viz. with thy body, nor worship them in thy soul:
Papists do both, and therefore though they could escape the net laid for them
in the first words (non facies tibi sculptile) yet they are caught and
strangled in the next. For albeit they could prove that their images are no
idols prohibited in the word pesel, yet certainly they are the similitudes of
something that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth. The third text alleged by the Knight out of Dent. Custodite
solicit animas vestras, ne forte deceptifaciatis vobis sculptam imaginem, vel
similitudinem masculi vel foeminae.
4.15.16. and 17. is thus rendered in their own vulgar Latin, keep carefully
your souls, you saw no similitude in the day in which the Lord spoke to you in
Horeb out of the midst of the fire; take heed lest peradventure being deceived,
you make to your selves any graven image, or the likeness of male or female.
Neither is the last allegation out of Esaias the fortieth, less prevalent then
the former, to batter down all popish images, v. 18.
to whom will you liken God? or what likeness will you compare unto him? in
the vulgar Latin, quam imaginem ponetis ei; and verse the 20. the worke-man
melted a graven image, and the Goldsmith spreads it over with gold, and
casts silver chains, he that is so impoverished, that he has no oblation,
chooses a tree that will not rot, he seeks unto him a cunning workman to
prepare a graven image that shall not be moved, etc. And this may serve to
illustrate the texts alleged by the Knight. Now for the words imago and
idolum, upon which the Jesuit foundeth his distinction of image worship, and
idol-worship, if we respect the original, and ancient use of them, they are
all one for (...) is derived from (...), signifying the shape, or form of any
thing; L. de sensu and sensibili.
and Aristotle calls the species of such things as we apprehend by sense
idola; and Tullie interprets the word imagines by idola: Cic. de fin.
imagines quae idola nominantur.
and the second Council of Nice, action the sixth, terms the images then
used in the Churches idols, saying, these idols may be converted to other
uses. And lastly, Cardinal Cajetan in his Comment upon the 20. of Exodus
speaking of the images of the Angels in the Arc terms them idola
Cherubinorum, word for word, the idols of the Cherubins. But if we have regard
to the more common use; the words imago and idolum, differ as much as mulier
and scortum, a woman and a strumpet. For as such women only as are abused, and
defiled by corporal fornication are termed strumpets: so now for the most
part, those images only which are abused to spiritual fornication are called
idols. Thus Tertullian defines idolatry to be the consecration of images, De
idel c. 4. imaginum consecratio est idololatria. Isid. l. 8. Orig^ c. 11.
idolum est simulacrum quod humana effigy est consecratum.
or devoting of them to a religious use, or setting them up to be worshipped;
and agreeably hereunto S. Isidore defines an idol to be an image, consecrated
in a humane shape, and such were all idols at the first, but in process of
time as men in a quagmire sink still deeper, and more foul themselves: so the
Pagans fell by degrees into grosser idolatry, and turned the glory of God,
not only into the similitude of a corruptible man, but also of beasts and
fowls, and creeping things, Romans 1.23, 24. The difference which Cardinal
Bellarmine makes between an image and an idol, viz. that an idol is the
representation of that which has no existence in nature, De tradit. p. 3.
multa idola erant in qui^us, nec demon aliquid respondebat, sed tantum
benefactorum Deum representarunt.
but an image the likeness of something existent, is very false and absurd.
For as Martinus Paresius confesses, there were many idols of the Gentiles, in
which they represented God as a benefactour. The mother of Mica dedicated the
hundred shekels of silver unto the Lord, to make a graven and a molten image,
L. 2. de imag. c. 24. idololatria non solum fit cum adorantur idola relicto
Deo, sed etiam adoratur idolum cum Deo, quod si latria quae exhibetur imagini
propter aliud est idem cultus cum eo qui exhibetur Deo, aeque colitur creatura
atque ipse Deus, quae certe idololatria est. Lor. Comment in Act. c. 17. si
verum est Cherubin ore, manibus, cruribus, erectione corporis humanam, jubis a
pectore, and cervice pendentibus leoninam, alis Aquilinam, ungulis pedum
vitulinam figuram retulisse
and persuaded her self that God would bless her for it: yet no man doubts
but that was an idol, and she an idolatresse, Iud. 17.4. Nay, the Cardinal
him self ingenuously acknowledges, that to exhibit divine worship, even to
the image of God is idolatry; which, says he, is committed not only when an
idol is worshipped in stead of God, but also when an idol is worshipped
together with God. By his own confession then, an image made to represent the
true God, may be an idol, by attributing to it latria, or the worship proper
to God. Moreover, the Cherubins he will have to be as they were indeed
images, and not idols in his sense: yet never was there any thing in nature
existent in that form, as they were expressed, namely, as the Rabbis teach,
and the popish Painters draw them at this day, in the shape of a child with
wings; or as Lorinus has it, with the face, hands, thighs, and body of men,
but with the mane of Lions, wings of Eagles, and parted feet of Calves. And no
man doubts but that the image which Aaron made, and which Ezekiah brake
down, and which the Philistines consecrated, and the Baalites worshipped were
idols: yet were they representations of things existent in nature, the first
of a calfe, the second of a Serpent, the third of a fish, the fourth of the
Sun.

To the second. Jesuit makes a brutish reply unworthy a Christian, much less
a Divine. For who knows not, that delectus ciborum, the difference of meats
was apart of the Ceremonial law abrogated by Christ, who teaches us, that it
is not that which goes into a man which desileth him, Matthew. 15.17
but that which comes out of him; Who sent Peter to Cornelius, Acts 10. and
by a miraculous vision revealed unto him, ver. 14.15. that he might not account
any meat common or unclean, what God has cleansed, says he, that call not
thou common. Let the Jesuit show us a like abrogation of the law concerning
making and worshipping of images, and then we will free his Church from
idolatry in this point. But on the contrary, it is so evident, that the
second commandment in the Decalogue is not ceremonial, and positive, but
moral, Clemens Alex. in protrept. Tertul. de Idol. c. 4. Bellar. de imag. l.
2. c. 7.
that not only the ancicient Fathers; but their great Cardinal is forced to
confess as much; nay, he is so zealous in the point that he takes Peresius,
Catharinus, and all such Romanists to task, as affirm the second Commandment
to be juris positivi, and solidly proves out of Irenaeus, Cyprian, and S.
Austine, that it is a moral, and consequently binds us as strict as the
Jews.

To the third. Jesuits argument is a non sequitur, for God by Moses forbids
not simply to make any image, but to make any image to our selves, thou shall
not make thy self any graven image, to wit, to bow down to it, or to worship
it, as the words following declare, thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. Now what a loose kind of arguing is this of the Jesuit, the law
forbids us to make any image of God thereby to worship him: therefore it
forbids us to make any image of man or woman to remember them: the law
forbids all superstitious use of images, therefore it forbids all civil use
of them scilicet?

To the fourth. Cornelius Agrippa wrote books De occulta philosophia, wherein
he seems to hold too near correspondencie with Magicians, and Conjurers, yet
this does not altogether disable his testimony. For Eusebius and Constantine
the great made good use, not only of the prophecies of the Sybbillaes, who for
ought appears were heathenish women: but also of the Oracles of Apollo,
dictated by the devil himself. Seneca would have taught the Jesuit a better
lesson by precept, non quis dicat, sed quid dicat; we are not to consider so
much who it is that speaks, as what it is that is spoken: and Virgil by his
practice, who often read the Poemes of Ennius, whose skill was little in
poetry, and language obsolete, and being questioned for it, answered aurum e
stercore, I gather gold out of muck. By the Jesuits rule no Physician or
Apothecarie should make use of a precious stone called Bufonites, because it is
found in the head of a Toad, or of a Turks; or Lyncurie, because it issues
out of the body of a spotted beast, called Lynx. Let Cornelius Agrippa be in
his eyes as ugly as the Lynx or Toad, yet the sentence or testimony rather
which the Knight takes from him like the Lyncurie or toadstone, it is of price
and of good use, to wit, that the Jews were so far from making any thing
that they worshipped, or worshipping any thing that they made, that they
abhorred nothing more then images.

To the fifth. Philo Iudaeus in this point is Philo-Christianus a friend to our
orthodox Christian doctrine, concerning the unlawfulness of making any image
of God, Antiguit. l. 18 c. 11. Iudaei supplicant ne se a deam necessitatem
cogeret, neve sacratam urbem pollueret vetitis imaginibus, tum Petronius,
pugnabitis igitur cum Caesare, nec illius opes, nec vestram imbecillitatem
adbibentes in concilium, non pugnabimus niquiunt, and ^oriemur citius quam
discedamus a legibus simulque procumbentes, nudantes jugulos, paratos se
aiebant ad excipiendos gladios. Aelius Lamp. in Alex. Strom l. 5. and 6. Moses
multis ante seculis aperte legem sanxerit, nullam op^rtere sculptilem, vel
fusilem, velfictam, vel pict am imaginem simulacr umve facere, quoniam inquit
nihil in robus genit is potest refer Dei imaginem. Lib. de Spectac. c. 23 jam
ver o ipsum opus personarum quaero an Deo placeat qui omnem similitudinem vetat
fieri, quanto magis imaginis suae, non amat falsum outhor veritis at is,
adulterum est apud illum omne, quod fingitur. Orig. l. 4. cont. Celsum; Dei in
corporei, and invisibilis nullam effigiem faciunt (...). Minut. Fell. in Octav.
quod enim simulacrum Deo fingam cum si recte aestimas sit Dei homo
ipsesimulacrum? Lactant. divin. instit. l. 2 c. 8. quare non est dubium quin
religio nulla sit ubicunque simulacrum est: nam si religio ex divinis rebus
est, divinum autem nibil est nisi in caelestibus rebus; carent ergo religione
simulacra, juia nihil potestesse c^eleste in ear quae fit ex terra. Council.
Elib. can 36. placuit pictur as in ccclesia esse non debere ne quod colitur,
aut adoraturin parietibus pingatur. Orat. cont. Greg. Sabel. stultorum, and
vecordium ista sunt verba, oculis, and loco volentium compeehendi id quod
incorporale est.
or setting it up in the Church or Temple. For in his book wherein he treats
of his Embassy to Cajus he writes, that the Temple from the first beginning
to his time never admitted any image, being the house of God: for the work,
says he, of painters and carvers, are the images of material gods, but to
paint the invisible God, or to feign any representation of him, our Ancestors
held a wickedness. Philo is seconded by Josephus, When the Emperor Caligula
was desirous to have his own image set up in the Church of Jerusalem, the
Jews, says Josephus, first entreated him, that he would not defile the holy
City with images forbidden by the law, and for their own particular, they
resolved rather to die, then suffer the law which forbad the setting up of
images in Churches to be abrogated. Neither was this the common opinion only
of those learned Jews, that none could, or ought, express the majesty of God
by pictures: but of the Christian Doctors in all succeeding ages, for

In the second age Adrian the Emperor commanded, that Temples should be made
in all Cities without images, and thereupon it was presently conceived, that he
intended those Temples for Christians. Clemens Alexandrinus teaches, that
Moses made a law whereby he plainly and expressly forbad any image molten,
carved, or painted, to be made of God, because, says he, there is nothing in
the creature that resembles the image of God. Tertullian living much about the
same time, in his book De spectaculis affirms, that God has forbidden the
likeness of any thing to be made, much more the likeness of his own image:
the author of truth does not love any thing that is false or counterfeit, and
all that is feigned or formed by art of him, is nothing but counterfeit. Origin
spea king of the South Church, says, the Christians make no image of the
incorpor all and invisible God.

In the third age Minutius Felix, when the Gentiles demanded of the ancient
Christians, why they had no Images returned this answer, What image shall I
make to God, when man himself, if we rightly judge, is Gods image? Lactantius
concludes peremptorily, there is no doubt that there is no religion,
whersoever there is an image, for seeing religion consists of Divine things,
and nothing divine is to be found, but in heavenly things; images therefore are
void of religion, because nothing that is heavenly can be in that thing which
is made of earth.

In the fourth age, the Council of Eliberis decreed, that no pictures should
be in Churches, lest that which is worshipped and adored, should be painted on
walls. Athanasius condemns them for fools and senseless, who liken God to
corporal things: Eusebius. evan. praef. l. 3. quid simile baber corpus humanum
menti Dei? and quis tam amens erit ut dei formam, and imaginem statua viro
simili referri perhibeat?
Eusebius is as hot in the point as Athanasius, what similitude has the body
of man with the mind of God, who would be so mad as to imagine the form and
image of God to be resembled by an image and statue like unto man; and in his
Epistle to Constantia the Empress, who sent to him for an Image of Christ, he
thus debateth the matter, What image do you require of Christ, such an one as
may express the characters of his divine nature? but I think you are
sufficiently instructed of this, that no man has thus seen the Son, but the
Father. Do you require the image of the form of a servant which he took?
Epiph. ep. ad Johan. Ierus. ep. 60. inveni ibi velum pondens in foribus ejusdem
ecclesiae tinctum atque depictum, and habens imaginem quasi Christi vel. sancti
alicujus non enim satis memini cujus imago fuerit: cum ergo hoc vidissem in
ecclesia Christi contra authoritatem scripturaru^, hominis pendere imaginem
scidi illud. and magis dedi consilium custodibus ejusdem loci ut pauperem
mortunm eo obvolverent, atque efferrent. Jerome in Ezekiel. l. 4. c. 16. nos unam
habemus vivam, and unam veneramur imaginem quae est imago invisibilis, and
omnipotentis Dei. Amphiloc. citat. a pat. council. Constantinop. An. 754 (...).
Aug. de mor. Eccl. c. 34 novi multos esse sepulchroru^ and picturarum
adoratores, etc. Ep. 109. ad Ian. in primo praecepto prohibetur coli aliqua in
figmentis hominum Deisimilitudo, non quia, non habet imaginem Deus, sed quia
nulla imago ejus coli debet, nisi illa quae hoc est quod ipse. L. de fid. and
symb. tale simulacrum Deo nefas est Christiano in templo collocare.
but you must understand that that was joined to the glory of his Godhead, in
so much, that his Apostles could not behold the glory of his flesh in the
mount; much more glorious is it now having put off mortality, who is therefore
able with dead and livelesse colors, and a shadowed picture to express those
bright and shining beams of so great glory. Epiphanius as zealous as either
for entering into a Church at Anablathra, and finding there a veil hanging at
the door died, and painted, and having the image as it were of Christ, or some
Saint, seeing this, that contrary to the authority of Scriptures the image of
a man was hung upin the Church of Christ, he cut it, and the veil and gave
counsel to the Keepers of the place, to wrap and bury some poor dead man in
it, and he entreated the Bishop of Jerusalem to give charge hereafter, that
such vailes as that was, being repugnant to Christian religion should not be
hanged up in the Church of Christ. S. Jerome in his Comment upon the sixteenth
of Ezekiel teaches, that Christians never acknowledge, nor worship any image
of the invisible and omnipotent God save one, to wit, his Son.

In the fifth age Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium instructs us what account the
Church made of images in these words, We have no care to figure by colors the
bodily visages of Saints in tables, because we have no need of suchthings; But
by virtue to imitate their conversation; and S. Austine treating of the
catholic Church professes that he knew many worshippers of graves and
pictures, and withal adds the Church censure of them, but the Church, says
he, condemns them, and seeks every way to correct them as ungracious
children: and in his 109. Epistle to Ianuarius, C. 11. he writes that in the
first Commandment, any similitude of God devised by man, is forbidden to be
worshipped, not because God has not an image, but because no image of him
ought to be worshipped, but that which is the same thing that he is; as for
drawing him after the similitude of a man he utterly disliketh it, saying, it
is unlawful for a Christian to erect any such image, and place it in the
Church; for as elsewhere he argues, images prevail more to bow down the
unhappy soul, in that they have a mouth, eyes ears, Psalm. 113. Conc. 2. plus
enim valent simulacra ad curvandam infaelicem animam, quod os babent, oculos
habent, aures habent, nares habent, manus habent, pedes habent, quam ad
corrigen^am quod non loquantur non videant, etc. God. li. 8. tit. 12.
prohibemus basilicam alicujus imagine obscurari. Greg. Regis l. 7 ep. 109. ad
Seren praeterea judico dudum ad nos pervenisse, quod fraternit as vestra
quosdam imaginum adoratores aspiciens easdem ecclefiae imagines confregit atque
projecit, and quidem zelum vos ne quid manufactum adorari possit, habuisse
laudavimus, sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse judicamus, idcirco enim
pictura in ecclesia adhibetur, ut 'hi qui liter as nes^iunt saltem in
parietibus videndo legant, quae legere in codicibus non valent. Vid. Council.
Nic. 2. Act. 6. Zonoras hist. Tom. 3. (...).
nostrills, hands and feet, then to correct it, in that they neither hear, nor
see, nor smell, nor handle, nor walk.

In the sixth age. The Emperor Justinian sets down a law made by Theodosius
and Valentinian, which forbids Churches to be obscured with any images or
painted tables.

In the seventh age. When Images began to be set up in the Churches, Serenus
Bishop of Marsilis brake them down, which fact of his, though Gregory
disliked, because he thought that images might profitably be retained as
laymens books: yet in this he commended his zeal, that he would by no
means suffer them to be worshipped.

In the seventh age. There was a Council held at Constantinople, Anno 754.
whereinlt was decreed by 338. Bishops in this manner, We do declare that all
images of what nature soever, made by the wicked art of the Painter be cast out
of Christian Churches, whosoever from this day forward shall dare to set up any
images of God either in the Church, or in a private house; if he be a Bishop
let him be deposed, if he be a layman let him be accursed. Zonoras says,
that in the hearing of all the people they openly forbad the worshipping of
Images, H. de orthodox fid. l. 4. c. 17. and orat, de imag.
calling such as adored them idolater. And in the year 794. Charles the great
called a Council of 300. Bishops of France, Italy, and Germany, in which the
second Synod of Nice, which decreed the erecting and worshipping of images is
refuted and condemned; yea, and some of the patrones of images, as namely
Durand, and Gregory the second professedly inveigh against all Images and
Pictures, made to represent the Deity or Trinity, it is unpossible, says
Damascene, that God who can neither be seen by man, nor circumscribed, should
be expressed in any shape or figure; nay, says he, it is extreme madness
and impiety to make a representation of the Godhead: Ep. Greg. ad Leo. Imper.
de imag. in.
and Gregory the second gives this reason to Leo the Emperor why they
painted not God the Father, Quoniam quis sit non novimus, because we know not
who he is, and the nature of God cannot be painted, and set forth to man's
sight.

In the eighth age. Rhem. cont. Hinc. Laud. c. 20.
Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes tells us, that not long before his time a
general Synod was called in Germany by Charles the great, and therein by the
rule of Scriptures and Fathers, the Council of Nice indeed says he, a wicked
Council touching images, which some would have to be broken in pieces, and
some to be worshipped was utterly rejected. In this age in the year 824. a
Synod was held at Paris under Ludovicus Pius, where the foresaid Council of
Nice was likewise condemned.

In the ninth age. Jonas Aurelian. de cultu imag. l. 1. quae picturae non ad
adorandum, sed solummodo test beato Gregorio, ad instruendas nescientium
mentes in ecclesijs sunt antiquit us fieri permissae. Agob. l. de ^ict. and
Imagine. recte nimirum ad ejusmodievacuandam superstitionem ab orthodoxis
fratribus definitum est picturas in ecclesia fieri non debere, ne quod adoratur
in parietibus depirgatur. Rhemig. in psalm. 96. non sun sunt adoranda simulacra,
nec enim Angelus adorandus est. Ansel. gloss. interlin. in Deuteronomy. c. 4. formam
non vidistis ne scilicet volens imitari sculpendo faceres idolum tibi. Vid.
Symph. Cathol. p. 822. Ann. lal 2. (...).
Jonas Bishop of Orleans wrote against Claudius Bishop of Turin concerning
images, wherein he holds, that the images of Saints are not to be
worshipped, though they may be set up in Churches for ornament, and to bring
into the mind of simple people the story of the Bible. And Agobardus Bishop of
Lions tells us, that the orthodox Fathers for the avoiding of superstition,
did carefully provide that no pictures should be set up in Churches. Rhemigius
boldly professes, that neither images nor Angels are to be worshipped.

In the tenth age. Anselmus Laudunensis the author of the interlineare gloss
upon the Bible, composed of the Fathers writings, expounds that text of
Deuteronomie, Ye saw no manner of similitude in this sort, lest that willing
to resemble that similitude by engraving, thou should set up an idol to thy
self.

In the eleventh age. Nicetas Croniates a Greek historian reports in the
life and reign of Isaac Angelus, one of the Eastern Emperors, that when
Frederick Emperor of the West made an expedition into Palestine, the Armenians
did gladly receive the Almaines, because among the Almaines and Armenians the
worshipping of images was forbidden alike.

In the twelfth age. Annal. p. 1. Hist.eccl. l. 18. c. 53. imagines patris, and
spiritus sancti effigiant quod est pe rabsur dum. Durand. in 3. sentent.did.
9. q. 2. facere imagines ad repraesentandum deu^ patrem, et spiritu^ spiritu^
sanctu^, aut venerari ej us imagines fatuu^ est; unde Damascenus dicit quod
insipientiae summae, and impietatis est, figurare quod est divinu^. Ave^t.
hist. Bavar. l. 7. In Deuteronomy. 4. in imaginibus signantibus Deum unde scilicot
trinitatem duo inconvenientia sequi possunt primu^ idololatriane etiam imago
colatur, secundum error, and haeresis scilicet attribuere Deo illam
corporeitatem, and essenti^lem differentiam guale^ tres illas figuras figurare
co^spicimus.
Roger Hoveden an English Historian condemns the worship of images: for
speaking of the Synodall Epistle written by the Fathers of the second Nicene
Council, wherein Image worship was established, he adds, quod omnino
ecclesia Dei execratur, which the Church of God altogether abhors.

In the thirteenth age. Nicephorus writing of the Iacobites says, that they
made images of the Father, and the holy Spirit, which, says he, is most
absurd. Durand stoutly maintains, that it is utterly unlawful to picture, or
represent the Trinity, or God, otherwise then as in Christ he took our
flesh: and Pope John the 22. calls certain men that dwelt in Bohemia and
Austria, Anthropomorphitas (that is, heretics ascribing an humane shape to
God) because they painted the Trinity in form of an old man, with a young man
and a Dove.

In the fourteenth age. Abulensis is utterly against all painting of the
Trinity, because from thence two inconveniences may follow; first the peril
of idolatry, in case the image it self should come to be worshipped:
secondly, error and heresy by ascribing to God such bodily shapes and forms,
as the Trinity is usually pictured withal. And Gerson commenting upon the
first Commandment speaks fully in the Protestant language, all images are
forbid to be made to adore or worship them: thou shall not adore nor worship
them; that is, thou shall not adore them with any bodily reverence, as bowing
or kneeling to them, Gerson compend. theolog. de pri. praecep. ad adorandum,
and colendum prohibentur imagines fieri.
thou shall not worship them with any devotion of mind.

But to return back to Philo, whose testimony the Jesuit would feign put off
by a double answer, first, that the Jews had not in their Temple any picture
of God, because he cannot be painted: next that they had no picture of Saints,
because there was none as yet might have the honor to have their pictures in
the Temple, being not yet admitted themselves into the Temple of God. The first
of these answers, the better it is, the worse it is for himself; the stronger
it is, the more it makes against the practice of his own Church: in which we
see the Trinity familiarly painted. In his second answer he palliateth
idolatry by impiety, and that he may have some color to set up images of
new Saints in Churches upon earth, he excludes all the old Saints before
Christ, out of the heavenly temple of God. Not to digress here to a dispute
about their imaginary Limbus, I would feign know of the Jesuit, where did Enoch
walk with God after he was translated, that he should not see death? to what
place was Elias carried in a fiery chariot, not into heaven? When Dives soul
was dragd by Devils into hell, was not Lazarus soul carried by Angels into
heaven? the text says, Luke 16.22.
he was carried into Abraham's bosom; and where is that S. Austine will
inform you, even where the soul of his friend saint Nebridius, and other
blessed Doctors and confessors now live: whatsoever place, says he, is
meant by the bosom of Abraham, ibi vivit Nebridius meus quis enim alius locus
tam piae animae? August. Confess. l. 9. c. 3.
there my Nebridius lives, for what other place were meet for so godly a
soul?

To the sixth. Antipho to pursue his own fancy, or shadow, to set up a man of
straw, and push him down with a festraw: the Knight does not thus argue, the
Jews hate the Image, and cross of Christ, therefore Christians ought so to
do: for by the like reason it will follow that we should condemn the very
Gospel, yea and hate Christ himself, because the Jews do so; that is not
his argument, but the Jesuits phantasme. The Knights argument stands thus if
of his enthymem we make a Syllogism;

None may or ought to give a scandal to Jew or Gentile.

But by setting up images or crucifixes in Temples, the Jews are so
scandalized, that even those among them, who other ways might be inclined to
embrace the Christian faith are made utterly averse from it: because they
cannot persuade themselves that it can be the true religion which maintains
image worship, which is so directly and expressly forbidden by God in the law.

That the Jews are thus scandalized at the idolatrous practice of the Roman
Church, the Knight proves by an eyewitness Sir Edwine Sands, who in his
description of the religion in the West parts observes, that the worship of
images as it is at this day practiced by the Roman Church, is such a stumbling
block to the Jews, and hinderance to their conversion, that when they come to
Christian Sermons, as in Rome they are enjoined at least once a year, so long
as they see the Preacher direct his speech to a little wooden crucifix that
stands on the Pulpit by him, to call it his Lord and Savior, kneel to it,
embrace it and kiss it, to weep upon it, as it is their fashion in Italy, it
is preaching sufficient for them, and persuades them more with the very sight
of it to hate Christian religion, then any reason the world can allege to love
it.

To the seventh. Tertullian, De idol. c. 5. Apostolus affirmat omnia tunc
figurate populo accidisse, and addit been quod idem Deus quilege vetuit
similitudinem fimilitudinem fieri, extraordinario praecepto serpent is
similitudinem fieri mandavit, si eundem Deum observas, habes logem ejus
nefeceris similitudinem, si and praeceptum factae postea similitudinis
respicis, and tu imit are Mosen ne facias adversus legem simulacrum aliquod,
nisi and tibi Deus jusserit.
the Apostle, says he affirms, that all things happened to the Jews in
figures, and he adds well, the same God, who in his general law forbad any
similitude to be made, by an extraordinary precept commanded some similitude to
be made, if thou do serve the same God, thou have his law; Make to thy self
no graven image, or similitude, if thou regardest the Precept of making a
similitude (as of the Cherubins, or brazen serpent, ande.) imitate thou Moses,
make thou no image against the law, unless God command thee by a Precept.
Whereunto we may farther add, that the Cherubins were not made publicly to
be seen and gazed upon by the people: but were kept in the holy place whither
the Priests only resorted; neither were they worshipped by the Priests, as Lyra
(cited by the Jesuit) who was himself a Jew at the first, and well knew their
practice, professes, the Jews, says he, worshipped not the Arc nor the
Cherubins, nor the mercy seat, but the true God which promised to help them,
neither were they set up in the Temple for adoration, but for ornament, L. 9.
c. 6. q. 7. non ut adorarentur sed ob ornatum, and pulchritudinem Tabernaculi
vel Templi, and ad majestatem Dei before ostendendam. Lorin. in Act Apost c.
17. de Cherubinis jussu Dei factis, and de alijs imaginibus ^ Solomone
dicendum, fuisse duntaxat ut appendices, and additamenta ornatus alterius rei
non vero per se propositas modo accommodato ad adorationem quam conslat quoque
ab Haebreis ipsis, non fuisse exhibitam, quod utrumque docet Tertullianus
eritque id magis verum, si verum^est Cherubin ore, manibus, cruribus, erectione
corporis bumanam, jubis a pectore, and cervice pendentibus Leoninam, alis
aquilinam ungulis pedum vitulinam figuram retulisse. Vasq. I de adorat. 2.
disp. 4. c. 6. nunquam cherubinis honor, aut adoratio adhibita fuit, aut
osculo, aut genuflexione, aut oblatione ^huris, aut alio signo peculiari ad
ipsos directo, nec quisquam nisi ex suo cerebro, and absque ullo fundamento
contrarium poterit affirmare.
as Azorius convinced by evidence of truth acknowledges, saying, the Cherubins
were not painted or engraven on the Arc, to the end they might be adored, but
only to adorn and beautify the Tabernacle, and more fully to express the
majesty of God, with whom Lorinus and Vasquez accord, concerning the Cherubins
made by the command of God; and other images in Solomon's Temple, we must say
that they were there as appendices and additions for the adorning of something
else, not set forth by themselves in a manner fit for adoration; which it is
manifest that the Jews never exhibited to them, both which Tertullian
teaches. Vasquez comes not behind Lorinus, teaching a contrary lesson to
Flood here, his words are, That the Cherubins were never adored nor worshipped,
neither by kissing them, nor with bowing of the knee, or by offering
Frankincense, or by any other means, neither can any man affirm the contrary,
except it be out of his own brain without any foundation or ground at all.

To the eighth. Jesuit shows from whence he and his fellows are descended,
L. 3. cont. haeres c. 2. cum ex scripturis arguuntur in accusationem
convertuntur ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non recte haheant, neque sint ex
auiboritate, and quia vary sint dictae, and juia non possit ex his inveniri
veritas, ab his qui nesciunt traditionem, non enim perliter as traditam illam,
sed pervivam vocem. Aug. in 10. tract. 49. Sanctus Evangelifia testatur multa
Dominum Christum and dixisse, and fecisse quae scripta non sunt: electa sunt
autem, quae scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. Cyr. in
10.12. c. 68. non omnia quae Dominus fecit conscripta sunt, sed quae scribentes
sufficere put arunt tam admores quam ad dogmata, ut rect a fide, and operibus,
and virtute rutilantes, ad regnum caelorum perveniamus.
viz. from the ancient Gnostics and Valentinians, who as Irenaeus testifies
against them, When they are convinced of their heresies out of Scripture, they
fall on accusing the Scriptures themselves, impeaching their authority, and
charging them with ambiguity, and saying that the truth cannot be found out of
them by those who know not tradition, for that it was not delivered by letters,
but by word of mouth. But because I have beat the Jesuit heretofore out of
this dodge, and have proved abundantly the sufficiency and perfection of
Scriptures, I will spare farther labor herein, and only show how shamefully he
depraveth one text to the derogation of the whole Scripture, S. John in the
place alleged by him speaks not of points of faith or manners, precepts, or
examples for our imitation, but of miracles, 10.20. 30. Many things truly did
Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this book;
Upon which words S. Austine and S. Cyrill thus gloss full in the Protestant
language, the holy Evangelist testifies that Christ did, and said many things
that are not written, but those things were chosen to be written, which seemed
sufficient for the salvation of them that believe; and S. Cyrill, all things
which Christ did are not written, but what the writers thought to be
sufficient as well for our conversation as doctrine, that shining with theright
faith and virtuous works, we may attain to the kingdom of heaven.

To the ninth. Jesuit speaks of authentical, and these stories gospel: yet
the Adversary would gain nothing thereby, nor we lose; For we are none of the
Iconomachi that bid battle to Images, and knock them down wheresoever they
find them with battle-axes. Forbear the representation of the invisible Deity,
and blessed Trinity, and remove all scandal from the people, and peril of
idolatry, and let the images and pictures of Christ and his Saints stand where
they do for memory, history, and beautifying and adorning the walls and
windows. We dislike it not as the Jesuit may read in our books, and see in
our Churches, and houses. But the truth is, neither are the stories of credit,
nor the authors of them of that account as the Jesuit would have them.
Comment. in 2 Timoth.
Of some of them we may truly say, as Espencaeus does of Nicephorus, that they
are in these relations, si non mendaces, saltem audaces, if not altogether
fabulous, yet very audacious; for the image sent to King Abgarus, it is of no
more credit then the letter sent with it, which the Romish Church, as all other
Christians, hold to be Apochrypha were it Canonical it should make a part of
the New Testament. And for the second we cannot but wipe our eyes in bewayling
their folly, who believe that Christ by wiping his face, as he was carrying
his Cross, should imprint his image in his handkerchiefe. Yea but these images
are confirmed by wonderful miracles wrought by them. I answer first out of
Biel upon the canon of the Mass, Did. in prophano cultu Diabolus plurimum
delectatur, and quantum valet cooperatur ac assistit apparentibus miraculis.
Cic. in Ver. act. 6. multa prodigia vim ejus numenque declarant. Strab. l. 8.
Geograph. Espenc. loc. sup. cit. daemonum spectris and mulierum somnijs parum
verecunde utchantur. Edwin Sands discourse of his Travels, and Apolog Herodoti
per R. Stev.
that the Devil is much delighted in profane worship (such is your worship of
images) and helps it forward as much as he can by seeming miracles; next,
that this was the heathens plea for their worshipping of images; for Tully
speaking of the image of Ceres in Sicily, says, many wonders do show the
divine virtue thereof; and the Graecians as Strabo writes, used to set upin
tables the diseases cured by Aesculapius in Epidaurius, as the Papists at this
day do, the diseases cured by the image of the blessed Virgin in Lauretto.
Thirdly, that learned Papists find much fault with the seventh general
Council for founding the worshipping of images upon the delusion of Devils,
and old wives tales, and dreams. Lastly, most of the Popish legendary stories
in this kind, may easily be proved to be no miracles of God, nor wrought by
sorcerie or enchantment through the power of Satan, but to be mere impostures
wrought by their Priests, who are the greatest juglers in the world in this
kind.

To the tenth. Austine makes great account of this speech of Varro, for he
twice makes mention of it in this fourth book. First chapter the ninth, L. 4.
De civit. Dei, c. 9. Varroni simulacra ita displicuerunt, ut cum tantae
civitatis perversa consuetudine premeretur, nequaquam tamen dicere and scribere
dubitaret, quod hi qui populis instituerunt simulacra, and metum dempserunt,
and errorem addiderunt;
Varro was so far out of love with images, that though he were pressed with
the perverse custom of so great a City as Rome was, yet he made no bones,
both to say and write that they, who first brought in Images, both took away
religious fear of God, and added error to boot: and in his thirty one
chapter he has this memorable observation, the Romans worshipped their gods
more then a 170. years without images, and if they had done so still, says
he, the gods had been more chastely or purely worshipped by them. Yea, but the
Jesuit with a wet finger turns over these passages, as if nothing were said
by S. Austine or Varro to the prejudice of their images shrines, or Altars: for
S. Austine by Simulacrum means not animage, but an Idol, not the
representation of the true, but a resemblance of false and feigned deities. The
distinction of image and idol, I have before refelled: nothing remains for
the refutation of this answer of the Jesuit, but that I show out of S. Austine,
De fide, and Symb. c. 7. nec id ipsum quod sedere pater dicitur flexis po
litibus fiert purandumest, tale simulacrum Deo nefas est Christianoin Templo ^^
locare.
that by Simulacrum he means any image, even of the true God. And not to
trouble the reader with many instances those words of his in his Treatise of
faith, and the Creed, clearly convince the Jesuit, We must not think, says
he, that God the Father who is said to sit, sits in heaven-with bowed knees,
as a man sits in a chair, such a simulacrum or image, it is not lawful to
set up in the Temple of Christians, had the Jesuit but perused the chapter
pointed to by the Knight, to which he professes to give a direct answer, he
would have given himself the lie, and checked his former interpretation of S.
Austines words; for immediately after the former period, the Father adds, that
Varro in proof of his assertion alleges the custom of the Jewish nation;
Hujus sententiae suae testem adhibet gentem Iudaeam. Vnum Deum, a quo mundum
crederet gubernari, sine simulacre colendum censuit.
and a little after he says, that Varro thought that God by whom he believed
the world was governed, ought to be worshipped without an image: by which words
it is evident, that by simulacra he meant, not only the images of false gods,
which alone the Jesuit calls Idols, but also of the true God; For the Jews
whose custom he brings in for himself, abhorred all Images or Pictures
even of the true God: and Varro himself by that Governor of the world whom
he would have to be worshipped, without an image, meant the true God, as S.
Austine himself testifies of him. Howsoever the title which he there gives
him of anima mundi, or soul of the world, sounds harshin a Christian ear:
yet S. Austine allows of Varro his assertion or opinion, as coming nearer to
the truth, then other of the heathen Phiosophers, in that he taught but one
God, and him to be not material or corporeal, but of a spiritual and
invisible substance, and therefore not to be drawn with pensill, or
counterfeited with colors, without error or impiety.

To the eleventh. Eusebius relates the story of Veronica her statue dedicated
to the memory of Christ's miraculous cure wrought upon her, with approbation
there of as being a lasting monument, and standing testimony of her gratitude
to our Savior, and much tending both to the confirmation of the Gospel in
general, and that particular miracle of Christ, for who would not believe that
the woman was cured of her bloody issue by touching the hemme of Christ's
garment, when he saw an unusual kind of herb growing at the foot of that
Statua, which as soon as it grew up so high, as to touch the hemme of the
brazen garment, received a miraculous virtue from it to cure diseases of every
kind; notwithstanding all this fair weather Eusebius falls foul upon the
Original of this erecting statuaes to the memory of the dead, attributing it
to a heathenish rite or custom. Neither does the Knight any way wrong Eusebius
in the relation, or translation of this passage. For certain it is, that the
people of God began not first to set up images, or erect statuaes. The first
which we ever read of, was consecrated to Belus, the successor of Ninus by
the Assyrians who were Paynims, and the word (...) ethnicus or gentilis,
signifies Gentile or Heathen; whatsoevr the Jesuit alleges out of Thomasius
Dictionarie to the contrary, saying, Look in your Dictionarie of Thomas
Thomasius, whether amongst all the Englishes of Gentilis which are there set
down, P. 300.
you can find heathenish, which I dare say you cannot. The Greek word in
Eusebius text is (...), and the Latin gentilis signifies the same thing, to
wit, belonging to a country, people, stock, or family, had the Jesuits, and
Seminary Priests at Doway and Rhemes, better studied Thomas Thomasius
Dictionarie, they would not have fraught their English translation of the
Bible, with so many affected harsh-sounding, and uncoth words to English ears,
as announce archisynagogue, azymes, commessations, depositum, didrachme,
euroclydon, exinanited, holocaust, hosts, victimes, paraclete pasche,
resuscitate, neophyte, superedified, and the like. Again, though Thomasius
render not the word Heathenish, yet he rendereth it gentile, which is all one;
and let the Jesuit turn over all his Thomasius, and Eliots, and Riders, and
Coopers, and Calepines, and see whether he can find any other proper Latin
word answering to the English Heathen, or heathenish, then gentilis or
ethnicus, a word derived of the Greek (...) or (...), the very word used by
Eusebius in this place. When so often in the holy Scriptures of the old
Testament the word gentes occurreth, as in the 2 Psalm. v. 1. the 9. v. 5. and
the 10. v. 16. and the 44. v. 2. and the 98. v. 1. and the 135. v. 15. and
elsewhere, what can the Jesuit mean by it but Gentile, Orat. de obit.
Theodos. regem adoravit, non lignum utique quia bic gentilis error est, and
vanit as impiorum.
or how can he translate it in pure and proper English, but heathen or
heathenish nations: according to the meaning of the holy Ghost in those texts?
What will he say to the words of S. Ambrose, When Helena read the title upon
the Cross then newly found, she fell down and worshipped what or whom? The
King (says that Father) to wit, Christ there entitled the King of the Jews;
not verily the wood, for that is a heathenish error, and a vanity of ungodly
men. Does not gentilis here signify profane, Pagan and heathenish, therefore
the Knights credit is salved in that his translation of Eusebius, and the
Jesuits credit and cause also lies a bleeding. For though the word (...) in
Greek, and gentilis in Latin; sometimes in good authors signifies no more
then belonging to a country or nation, Verisimile est quod majores nostri ad
gentilis consuetudins similitudinem, quamprimum accedentes, eos qui tanquam
servatores illis fuissent, apud se honor ad hunc modum afficere consueverunt.
be it Christian or heathenish: yet in this place of Eusebius it cannot be
other ways taken then for heathen, for Eusebius a little before says, it is
not to be wondered that those who are sprung of the Gentiles, or came of
heathenish parents, and received benefits of our Savior where he lived, did
thus unto him, adding it is very likely, that our ancestors herein followed
the custom of the heathen; who honored all such with Statuaes who had been as
saviors unto them preserving their lives.

To the twelfth. The Council of Eliberis is as a thorn in the Jesuits eyes,
and therefore he has many plucks at it: yet he plucks it not out, but pricketh
his own fingerse. First, he says it was an obscure Council, Vid supra verba
Agobardi.
without any certainty of the time when it was held. As obscure as he makes
it, it is a Council of reverend antiquity cited by S. Agobardus, and approved
by him, and honorably mentioned by all Writers, who impugn idolatrous
innovations, and corruptions in the Church. As for the time Baronius and the
best Chronologers affirm, that it was held in the year of our Lord 305. in
the time of Marcellus the first, and was consequently more ancient then the
first most famous Council at Nice; if to this Council the Jesuit oppose one
of Constantinople, the other at Rome under Gregory the third, and the third at
Nice in favor of images: we in like manner oppose to those idolatrous and
heretical, many Councels of better note, condemning imageworship, as namely
the Council of Constantinople, held in the year 754. and another celebrated
there in the year 814. and a third at Frankford in the year 794. and a fourth
at Paris under Ludovicus, in the year 824. together with the book of Charles
the great, and the Epistle of the English Bishops penned by Alcuinus, and
mentioned by Houeden in his story of England, and many other tractates of
famous writers of England and France, who professedly impugned and refuted the
Decrees of the second Council at Nice, establishing image worship. Yea, but
says the Jesuit, the Canon of Eliberis shoots not home to the point in
question, for it forbids not pictures absolutely in Churches, but only
painting them on the walls. I reply first, that the Council forbids
pictures in Churches absolutely, the express words of the Canon are, placuit
in ecclesia pictur as esse non debere, it seemed good to the Council, that
pictures should not be in Churches; Whereof the 19. Fathers present at that
Synod render this reason, ne quod collitur in parietibus depingatur, lest that
which is worshipped should be painted on the walls. Secondly, I reply if the
Council of Elliberis, as the Jesuit grants, forbids any image to be
painted on the Church-walls, why do Papists every where in their Churches at
this day paint images on the walls? Yea but the Jesuit adds, who is best at a
dead lift, that we are besides the matter, in producing the Canon of this
Council against images, which was made in honor of them, si crederefas est.
For the Council, says the Jesuit, forbad painting images on the walls of the
Church, because they thought not the walls a place convenient, lest the
plaster breaking off in some places, they might become deformed, and so
contemptible. Where unto I rejoyne, first, that if the Council did this out of
honor to images, Canus loc. theol. non modo imprudenter, sed and impie
decretum.
why does their learned Bishop Canus so severely tax this Decree, tearming it
not only a foolish, but an impious Canon? Secondly, if the Council made this
Deeree out of honor to images; Why do not all Papists, who stand so much for
the honor and worship of images, obey this Decree, and deface all images that
are painted on Church-walls? Thirdly, if it be an honor to images to be
removed out of all Churches according to the purport of this Decree in the
Jesuits understanding, then the reformed Churches may justly be thought to have
showed the most respect, and done the greatest honor to images of all other,
by casheering them out of their Churches, prae amore excluserunt for as; no
doubt out of love they shut them out of doors. Fourthly, this reason taken
from plaster breaking needs a plaster to make it whole, for if for this
reason images may not be painted on walls, for fear of being defaced by
weather or the plaster breaking: by the like reason they should not be
painted in cloth, or upon board, because they are in like manner subject there
to be soyled, razed, stolen away, or many other ways to be injured.

To the thirteenth. Jesuit sueth a Duplex querela against the Knight concerning
Valence the Emperor; first, because he styles him a good Emperor; next,
because he ranketh him with Theodosius as Copartner with him in the Empire,
whereas Valence was killed twenty three years before Theodosius was borne.
Against his first quarrel I need plead nothing, because Valence is not so
styled by the Knight in the last corrected edition of Via tuta. If the Knight
had so styled him in any former edition, Bapt. in Chro^.
he might have vouched a good author for it, namely Baptista Egnatius who
speaking of Valence, and his brother Valentinian says, Digni imperia fratres,
and inter bonos referendi, they were worthy the Empire, and to be ranked among
good Princes, saving that Valence was somewhat blemished by being seduced in
judgment by the Arrians; Invect. in Julian.
as also was Constantius the Emperor; and yet Gregory Nazianzen commends
him for a religious Prince, that much promoted the affairs of the Christians
against the heathen. and for the blotte of error in his judgment he lays
the blame of it upon the subtle wits of the Arrian heretics, who put tricks
upon that other-wayes good Emperor. For the second quarrel he pickes, it is
not worth a straw. For though Valence and Theodosius lived not together, yet
they might both enact the same law. Valence might first make it, and after
Theodosius confirm and revive it, as King James has revived many laws made
by Queen Elizabeth, and other her predecessors, though they never reigned
together in this Kingdom; howsoever if there were any error in relating this
law out of the Coad as the Jesuit pretends, Zanch in praec. 2. Sed Petrus
Crinitus scribit aperte se vidisse legem ipsam in antiquissimis codicib. qaae
simpliciter habebat. ne pingeretur nulla mentione soli, out marmorum humi
positorum facta. (...).
he ought to pluck Petrus Crinitus by the beard for it; for the Knight quoteth
not the Coad or Digests for this law, but Petrus Crinitus, De honesta
disciplina, l. 9. c. 9. where he may find the precise words alleged by the
Knight, unless peradventure his Petrus Crinitus has felt the razor of the
Popish Inquisition, and if so, let him look to more ancient editions of
Crinitus, quoted by the Author of the English Homilies, and Zanchius in his
Comment upon the second Commandment, where this golden lock of Petrus
Crinitus is not cut off. For what Timon spoke concerning the Editions of Homer,
may be said of Crinitus and other Romish Authors, the most correct copyes are
those that were never corrected.

To the foureteenth. Jesuit should have said a Paulian heretic, for Clemanges
and Wickliffe profess with Paul, Acts 24.14. That after the way which they
(the Papists) call heresy, they so worship the God of their fathers in spirit
and truth, that they believe all things written in the Law and the Prophets;
and nothing as necessary to salvation, which is not written in them. It is
true, Wickliffe was condemned for an heretic: but it was many years after
his death, when he could not plead for himself: and the Council which
condemned him was a perjured and a condemned Council, not only in the
judgments of Protestants, but also ingenuous Papists; for in that Council
three Popes were deposed, and a fourth chosen, Martin the fifth Huz and Jerome
of Prage, contrary to the safe conduct, sent them under the Seal of the
Emperor Sigismund, were burnt to death, and their ashes thrown in the River.
Now as it is an honor laudari a laudato, to be commended by men that
themselves deserve commendation: so it is no disgrace or disparagement at all
damnari a damnato, to be condemned by a Council which is condemned, and
reproved it self even by the Roman Church at least in the first Sessions of
it. Bellar. de Council. c. 7. Concilium Constantiense quantum ad primas
Sessiones ubi definit concilium esse supra Papam reprobatum est, in concilio
Florentino, and Laterananensi ultimo.
And such as are the first fruits, such is the whole lump.

To the fifteenth. Jesuits Geese are Swannes, Multa Dircoeum levat aura Cygnum,
etc.
but our Dircaean Swannes with him are no better then geese, antiquum obtinet;
this was just the fashion of the ancient hereretiques, the Gnostics, and the
Donatists, if any came over to their side, he was presently cried up for a man
of singular parts and virtues, but if he returned to the bosom of the Church,
he was cried down for a Weather-cocke, or a tressis agaso. It was well says
Saint Austine, for Maximianus and Primianus, that they fell to the Donatists
sect, whereby presently they gained the reputation of great Clerks and prime
men, where as other ways if they had kept their old station, Maximianus would
have been held Minimianus, and Primianus Postremianus: but let me tell the
Jesuit that how much soever he sleighteth Cassander, Erasmus, and Wicelius:
that the worst of them in the time when he lived, was of better account then I.
R. or Leomelius, or Daniel a Jesus. As for gravitie and wisdom, he comes
far short of Cassander, for zeal and integrity, of Wicelius: so if we
speak of all kind of learning, he is not worthy to carry Erasmus books after
him; Dispeream, si tu matulam praebere Mamurrae dignus es.

But I spare him in this kind, because for his impudency and ignorance: two
Sorbon Doctors, Aurelius and Lallier, have disciplined him to the purpose, and
I will be 10th saevire in plagas and vulnera. Yea but some of these men's
Works are marked in the Roman Index, says the Jesuit, they are so indeed to
the eternal praise of their ingenuity: and to the everlasting infamy of the
Romish Inquisitors cruelty, who so deal with the witnesses of truth, as Pope
Sergius did with Formosus his predecessor after his death; they mangle and
deface them, cutting off their thumbes and fingers wherewith they testified and
signed the truth in their writings.

To the sixteenth. Jesuit is totus in fermento: it wonderfully transporteth
him, and puts him in a cold sweat, that the Knight should say out of
Chemnitius, that the second Synod of Nice, in which Imageworship was
established, was condemned in the Council of Frankford held in the year of
our Lord 794. P. 308.
The Magdeburgians, says he, and other your own Authors affirm, that that
very Council of Frankford did say an Anathema to all such as deface images; is
not this then abominable falsehood in your friend Chemnitius to cite, nay forge
it against images, and in you to follow him in it? ne Saevi magne Sacerdos: let
not the Jesuit lay about him so furiously, lest peradventure he lend a blow to
his best friends, for besides other Historians of good note, Hincmarus
Archbishop of Rhemes, P. 306. Hincma. Rhem. advers. Hincma. Laudunens. c. 20.
Graecorum pseudo-Synodus destructa est, and penitus abdicata. Ado. Vien. in
cron. aetat. 6. pseudo-synodus quam septimam Graeci appellant pro imaginibus
adorandis abdicata penitus. Idem habet Regino ad. ann. 794. Bellarmine, lib. de
Council. c. 7. Concilium Francofordiense reprobatur, quantum ad alteram partem
in qua exerrore damnatur septima Synodus.
whom himself calls a Catholic indeed; nay, and Cardinal Bellarmine
himself also (...) says as much as Chemnitius or the Knight, to wit, that the
Council of Nice was condemned in the Council of Frankford; neither does the
Anathema pronounced in that council against such as deface images, fall upon
us who fight not against images, as the Iconomachi did, but against
image worship, as that Council of Frankford does.

To the seventeenth. Poly door Virgill are these, Deinvent. l. 6 c. 13. de
simulacrorum cultu jam agamus quem non modo nostrae rellgionis expertes, sed
test Hieronymo omnes fereveteres sancti patres damnabant oh metum idololatriae.
Let us now speak of the Worship of images, which not only those which were
ignorant of our religion, but as Saint Jerome testifies, almost all the
ancient holy Fathers condemned for fear of idolatry. To this allegation the
Jesuit says, that Polydore is to be understood of the Fathers of the Old
Testament only. Although Polydore has not the word Old Testament, but ancient
Fathers and Saints, which style the Church of Rome never attributed to any
before Christ. But be it so, let us take what he grants, we have then the
testimony of the true Church before Christ's Incarnation against image worship:
and this is advantage enough, unless the Jesuit could confront their judgment
by Christ and his Apostles, or some of the Fathers of the New Testament. Yet
what if Polydore Virgill in that place names some of the Fathers in the New
Testament? Divus quoque Gregorius Serenum episcopum Marsiliensem reprehendu
quod imagines fregisset, and laudat quod coli inhibuisset.
will not that stop the Jesuits mouth? read then a little further in
Polydore in the same chapter courteous Reader, and thou shall meet with these
words. Saint Gregory also reproves Serenus the Bishop of Marsellis for
breaking down images, and yet commends him in that he forbad the worship of
them.

To the eighteenth. Peresius says, that there can be no sound proof brought
either out of Scripture, or tradition of the Church, or common consent of
Fathers, or determination of a general Council, or any other effectual
reason to persuade a man, that the image of Christ, L. de tradit. nullum quod
ego viderim, afferunt validum fundamentum, neque scripturas, neque traditionent
ecclesiae, neque communem consensum sanctorum, neque concilij generalis
determinationem aliquam, nec etiam rationem qua hoc efficaciter suaderi posset,
scilicet imagines Christi, and sanctorum adorari debere, eadem adoratione qua
and res quae repraesent antur. P. 242.
and the Saints are to be worshipped with the same adoration that the samplers
are. Is this nothing against you? then Aquinas, and in a manner all the
Schoolmen, Ludovicus Paramo, Bernardus, Pind, Franciscus Petigianis, Petrus
de Cabrera, Azotius, Lamas, Rubio, Bustus, quoted by the Bishop of Ely, in his
reply to Fisher, with diverse others reckoned up by Bellarmine, l. 2. de imag.
c. 20. were no Papists. For all the abovementioned, hold that opinion for
Catholic, which Peresius condemns.

To the Nineteenth. Agobardus the greater reason we have to make account of
him: for the first he alleges the Council of Eliberis against setting up of
images in Churches: next he affirms that the ancients had pictures of Saints
painted or carved, ad recordandum non ad colendum, to remember the Saints by
them, not to worship them. Lastly, he averreth that there is no example in all
the Scriptures, or Fathers for adoration of images: and what does or can any
Protestant say more against the doctrine of the Roman Church in this point,
then this Agobardus does, whom this Jesuit canonizeth for a saint? neither can
he put him off by saying, Hic author caute legendus est, quoniam laborat eodem
errore quo Agobardus, and reliqui ejus aetatis Galli, qui negabant sacris
imaginibus ullum deberi cultum religiosum.
that he speaks against Idoll-worship, or some abuse of Images which crept
in in his time; for Bellarmine who better studied Agobardus, then this Jesuit,
in his book of Ecclesiastical Writers, ad annum 820. in his censure of Jonas
Bishop of Orleans says, this Author is to be read with caution, because he
was infected with the same opinion that Agobardus, and other French Bishops of
that age were, who deny any religious worship to be due to images.

To the twentieth. Sententias loquitur Carnifex; this is the first essay we
heard from this Jesuit, but nothing to the purpose, for we grant that things
that are good in themselves, and of a necessary and profitable use, are not to
be taken away for the abuse: but we deny that Images in Churches are of that
nature; neither is his law-Axiome universally true, Vtile per inutile non
vitiatur, that which is profitable, is not corrupted or made bad by that which
is unprofitable. For the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness was for a time
utilis, profitable, curing them that had been stung by the fiery Serpent: yet
perinutile vitiabatur, it was corrupted and made scandalous and unprofitable by
the peoples abusing it to idolatry: and if that Image being a type of Christ,
and set up by Gods special command, was yet broken in pieces by good King
Ezekiah, after the people began to worship it: how much more ought those images
to be knocked down, and stamped to powder, which are set up in popish
Churches against GODS commandment, and have been abused to idolatry above
eight hundred years in such a gross manner, especially by the vulgar, that as
Polydore Virgill ingenuously confesses, many of the ruder sort of them, magis
ijs fidunt quam Christo, put more confidence in the image then Christ himself?

Concerning Indulgences, Spectacles, paragraph 8. a page 319. usque ad 345.
THE Knight himself grants the use of giving Indulgences,

Christ's Merits lying in store for the need of all men,

Saint Paul forgave the incestuous Corinthian,

That the merits of Martyrs were applied to others, Tertullian, who being
become now an Heretic, did reprehend that custom, saying, that a Martyrs
merits were little enough for himself, without having any surplussage to help
others withal.

Many a man continues his great austerity of Fasting, 1, 2, 3, 7, 10, or 12
years (for example sake) he then leading the same life for 20, 30, 40, 50, or
60 years, as many have done; what shall become of all that satisfaction which
is over and above, for that sin or sins which he committed before? It does
not perish or pass without fruit, though not of him, yet of others: and if
they be not applied presently, why may they not then be said to lie in
deposito, as money in a Treasury?

Since all grant Indulgences for the living,

The authority which the Knight cites,

It is false which the Knight averreth, after death. For we do not so,
neither do we understand those Pardons, wherein are mentioned such number of
years so, as if men were without those Pardons, to remain so long in
Purgatory: but we understand those years according to the penitential
Canons, by which, many years penance were due for one sin, and many men's
sins being both very grievous, and as a man may say, without number,
according to the account of the ancient penitential Canons, they may soon
amount to thousands of years, which, though a man cannot live to perform here
in this world, nor even in Purgatory, for the length of time; yet he may in
Purgatory, in few years space, nay, few months, or few weeks space, suffer
so much punishment as is answerable to all that penance of many thousand of
years, which a man should have performed here, if he could have lived so long.

The Authors alleged by the Knight,

Though some Fathers mention them not, Cyprian and Tertullian, as you may see
in Bellarmine, lib. de indul. c. 3. and besides them, the authority of certain
Councels, as that of Nice, Ancyra, and Laodicea.

Though we had not either the testimony of these Fathers, Knight groundeth
thereon, to wit, that we want antiquity, and consent of Fathers for them; for
it is a most strong argument of antiquity, that it is the practice of the
Catholic Church, time out of mind, and of consent, that no man is found to
have spoken against them, In contrariu^ est generalis consuetudo and doctrina
ecclesiae quae contineret falsitatem, nisi per indulgentias dimitteretur
aliquid de paena peccatori debita.
such as the Waldenses, who were the first impugners of Indulgences.

Durand, whom the Knight alleges in the first place, having propounded the
question, in 4. sent. dis. 20. q. 5. an aliquid valiant indulgentiae, after the
manner of the Schools, puts two arguments against them in the first place,
and then comes with his arguments. Sed contra, agreeing expressly with his
conclusion. On the contrary, says he, is the general custom and doctrine of
the Church, 13. De here sibus, l. 8. tit. indulg. verum ^tsi pro indulgentiarum
approbatione sacrae scripturae testimonium apertum de sit, non tamen ideo
contemnend e erunt, quoniam ecclesiae catho licae usus a multis annoru^
centuriis tantae est autboritatis, ut qui illam contemnat haereticus merito cen
seatur.
if something of the punishment due to a Sinner, should not be forgiven by
Indulgences; and presently after, he names Saint Gregory, and says of him,
that he did institute Indulgences at the stations in Rome.

Alfonsus a Castro, though he confess the use of Indulgences, not to have
been so much in those ancient times as since; yet he allows them so far,
as to condemn any man for an Haeretike that shall deny them.

14. The Knight prateth very freely of the Popes selling of Indulgences, and
bringing money to his own coffers by them: but to that I need to make no other
answer, but that it is such riff-raff-stuffe as their Ministers are wont to
eeke out their books, and Sermons, without being able to show any Bull of
Pope, or testimony of good author of any Indulgence so granted.

For the Knights profane jest out of Guicciardine of playing a game at Tables
for an indulgence, Protestants, who in their pots have made so bold with
Almighty God himself, as to drink a health to him; and were not this a fine
argument to prove that there is no God?

It is intolerable presiemption in the Knight to take upon him to censure so
great a Council as that of Trent. Catholic Church, for learning and sanctity
was gathered together, the splendor of which Council, was so great, that your
night owl Heretics durst not once appear, though they were invited to go
and come freely with all the security they could wish.

Whoreas the Knight says that it is a senseless and weak faith that gives
assent to doctrine, Bellarmine. De verbo Dei. l. 4. c 7.


The consent of Doctors of the Catholic Church cannot more err in one time
then another, Holy Ghost being always the same, no less in one time then
another, Tertull. de prescript. cap. 28. quod apud multos unum invenitur, non
est erratu^ sed traditum.
and Tertullians rule having still place, as well in one age as another, that
which is the same amongst many, is not error but a tradition.

St. Paul thought, he answered sufficiently for the defense of himself, (1
Cor. 11.) If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God.

It is false which the Knight again repeateth,

As no less credit is to be given to the Apostolical preaching,

St. Austine defends many points of faith, De baptism. l. 2 c. 7. l. 5 c.
25. cont. Maximin: l. 3. c. 3. et Epist. 174. de Genesi ad litteram. l. 10. c.
23. l. de cura pro mortuis. et Epist. 118. de unit. eccles. c. 22. et tract.
98. in Johan.
either only or chiefly by tradition, and the practice of the Catholic
Church; as single Baptism against the Donatists, consubstantiality of the
Son, the divinity of the Holy Ghost, and even unbegottennesse of the Father
against the Arrians, and the Baptism of children against the Pelagians: to say
nothing of prayer for the dead, observation of the feasts of Easter, Ascension,
Whitsontide, and the like. Nay, this truth was so grounded with him, that he
accounted it most insolent madness to dispute against the common opinion, and
practice of the Catholic Church. In his book of the unity of the Church, he
says, that Christ bears witness of his Church; and in his Tractates upon
John, having occasion to handle those words of St. Paul. If we, or an Angel
from Heaven, etc. wherewith the Knight almost concludes every Section, he thus
commenteth upon them, the Apostles did not say, if any man preach more then ye
have received: but besides that which you have received, for if he should say,
that he should prejudicate, that is, go against himself, who coveted to come
to the Thessalonians, that he might supply that which was wanting to their
faith, but he that supplieth, adds that which was lacking, takes not away
that which was before: these are the Saints very words in that place, by which
it is plain, that he takes the word praeter besides, not in that sense, as to
signify more then is written, as you would understand it, but to signify the
same that contra. St. Paul himself uses the same word (...), para, besides,
Romans 16.17. for contra, and you in your own Bibles translate it so. I beseech
you brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.

The Hammer.
AS Erucius the accuser of Roscius Amerinus having little to say against him,
Cic. pro Rosc. Amer.
to fill up the time, rehearsed a great part of an invective which he had
penned in former time against another defendant: so the Jesuit here, failing in
his proofs for indulgences (for which little or nothing can be said) to fill
up the Section, transcribeth a discourse of his, which he had formerly penned,
concerning the necessity of unwritten traditions, which has no affinity at all
with the title of this Chapter, de Indulgentiis. In other paragraphs we find
him distracted, and raving; but in this he turns Vagrant, and therefore I am
to follow him with a whip as the law in this case provideth. Touching the point
it self of Indulgences, which Rivet fitly terms Emulgences, but the Jesuit
the Churches Treasury: whosoever relieth upon the superabundant merits and
satisfaction of Saints for his absolution, for his temporal punishment of
sin after this life, shall find according to the Greek proverb (...)
instead of treasure, Eras. Adag. Thesauri Carbones.
glowing coals heaped upon his head in hell. For neither are there any merits
or superabundant satisfactions of Saints, Luke 17.10.
Christ saying, when you have done all, you are unprofitable servants, nor were
there any, could they be applied or imputed to any other men, 2 Cor. 5.10.
the Apostle teaching that every man shall receive according to that which
himself has done in his body, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 11.15.
nor has the Pope any more power to dispose of this treasury for the remission
of sins; our Savior, Matthew. 18. v. 18. and John, 20.23. conferring the same
power of remitting sins upon all the Apostles which he promised to S. Peter,
Matthew. 16. Neither, if the Pope had any special power of granting Indulgences,
could it extend to the souls in Purgatory, quia non sunt de foro Papae,
because they are not subject to the Popes court, Sermon 2. de defunct. 9 9.
as Gerson rightly concludes. Neither lastly, can it be proved, that there is
any Purgatory fire for souls after this life, St. John expressly affirming,
that the blood of Christ purges us from all our sins. 1 John 1.7.
the fire therefore of Purgatory is rightly termed chymerica and chymica,
chymericall and chymicall; chymericall, because a mere fiction, and chymicall,
because by means of this fire, they extract much gold. The Apostle says,
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. If no condemnation,
no punishment, Romans 8.1.
eternal or temporal. The Prophet says, Mica. 7.18.
he will cast our sins into the depth of the Sea, surely there is no fire to
purge them: if we repent us of our sins, Ezekiel. 18.22.
God promised us that they shall be remembered no more, if they shall not be so
much as mentioned, surely they shall not be sentenced to be punished with fire,
either temporal or eternal. In that time, says the Lord, Ierem. 50.20.
the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the
sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I
reserve: from which text we thus argue. All their sins whom God pardons,
shall be found no more, if found no more, then to be purged no more, especially
after this life. Where there is no spot, there needs no purging, or clensing,
but in the souls of all believers there remains no spot, as Bellarmine
himself confesses, L. 2 de Indul. c. 3. cum dicimus ex sancto Iohanne quod
sanguis Jesus Christi purgat nos ab omni peccato, respondet Apostolum loqui de
remissione culpae quae maculam proprie gignit in anima, macula enim est quae
ablutione tollitur, non paena quae debitorem non sordidum facit.
shaping this answer to our objection, out of St. John (that the blood of
Christ purges us from all sin) the Apostle speaks of the remission of the
fault which properly begets a spot in the soul, for it is the spot which is
taken away by washing. When we say that Christ's merits are applied to us, our
adversaries jeare at us, holding it for a most absurd doctrine, that the merits
of one should be imputed to another: and yet what they deny to Christ, they
attribute to Saints: that which they deny to God, they attribute to the Pope:
they will by no means hear that God imputes to us the merits and sufferings
of his son, although the Scripture is express for it: and yet they teach
that the merits and satisfactions of Saints by the Pope, may be applied to us,
and that they satisfy for our temporal punishments. But to leave farther
prosecution of the point in general, and to graple with the Jesuit in the
ensuing particulars.

To the first. Jesuit plays the Sophister, and feign would deceive the simple
Reader with the ambiguitie of the word Indulgence, which the Knight accuratly
distinguishes; and shows, that the Indulgences now granted by the Pope, are
no more like the Indulgences in use in the Primitive Church, than an Apple is
like to a Nut. The Indulgences whereof we read in the ancient Fathers, were
mittigations of some censures of the Church, before inflicted on the living for
their amendment: Cyp ad Demet. postquam hinc excessam est nullus datur
penitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus.
these are reluxations from satisfactorie pains in Purgatory flames after
this life. After which, notwithstanding, as Saint Cyprian truly informs
Demetrian, there remains no place for repentance, no effect of satisfaction,
here eternal life is either gained or lost.

To the second. Jesuit does sometime answer to that which we object not, so he
often proves that we deny not. We attribute more to Christ's merits than any
Romanist does; for we teach, that they are a Treasure of infinite value,
abundantly sufficient, without the addition of any Saints merits to them, to
discharge the infinite debt of all mankind: to release all who by faith apply
them to themselves, from all temporal, as well as eternal punishment. We
profess, with that religious Divine, Effusio justi sanguinis Christi tam dives
fuit ad pretium, ut si universitas captivorum redemtorem su^m crederet, nullum
diaboli vincula retinerent: The effusion of Christ's righteous blood is so rich
in price, that if all the captives did believe in their Redeemer, the devils
bands could hold none. And in very deed, this is one of our mainest exceptions
against the Roman Church, that they infinitely wrong the infinite bounty of our
Redeemer, by going about, as it were, to ^^ke out his merits by the
excrescensie and superabundancie of Saints satisfactions. What they arrogate to
Saints in this kind, they derogate from our Savior; we acknowledge his merits
to be a rich Treasury, containing in it, many millions of pure gold;
whereunto, to add the sufferings of any Saints or Martyrs, were no better than
to take away pure gold, and instead thereof (to fill up the room, not the
sum) to lay a few brass tokens. This seemed so absurd to some of the acutest
Schoolmen, as by name, Durandus a Sancto Portiano, Durand. in 4. sent. did.
20. q. 3.
and Johannes de Mayro, that they excluded all Saints satisfactions out of this
treasury: their reasons are specially these, Nothing needs, or indeed can be
added to that which is of infinite value, but such are Christ's merits and
sufferings. Secondly, the Saints are already abundantly rewarded, and that far
above their desert, as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 8.18. I account, that the
afflictions of this present life are not worthy the glory which shall be
revealed: and (2 Cor. 4.17.) our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Wherefore,
the Saints sufferings being so fully recompensed already, cannot help toward
the expiation of the sins of others. Ego teneo cum Francisco de Mayro in
tractato de indulg. quod cum merita sanctorum sint ultra condignum remunerata a
deo, et sic exhausta quod solum dantur (indulgentiae) ex merito Christi and
passionis ejus, cujus minima gutta sanguinis vel sudoris sufficeret ad
expiationem omnium peccatorum quae unquam fuerunt perpetrata aut perpetrabuntur.
To which point, Angelus de Clavatio, verbo Indulg. numero. 9. I hold, says
he, with Francis Mayro, in his Treatise of Indulgences, that forasmuch as the
merits of Saints are rewarded of God beyond their merit, and thereby the
treasure of them is exhausted, that Pardons are only given for the merit of
Christ and his passion: the least drop of whose blood, or sweat, would have
been sufficient to expiate all the sins that ever have been or shall be
committed. Thirdly, the intention of him that meriteth, is most necessary
required to this, that the fruit or reward of his merit redound to another:
but, supposing that the Saints were so rich in merits and sufferings, that they
had any to bestow upon others, yet it cannot be proved, that the Saints had
ever any such intention, to transfer the fruit of their passions upon others.
Fourthly, if the Saints sufferings could expiate our sins, the Saints might
be accounted our Redeemers, which Aquinas himself blushed to affirm, Durand.
in 4. sent. dis. 20. q. 3. quia intentio merentis est necessaria ad hoc quod
fructus seu intensio merent is redundet in alterum fic enim fructus metiti
passionis Christi in nos redundat ex ejus epressa intention quod autem
intentio quorumcunque sanctorum fuerit fructum passionum suarum in nos
transfer, nulla historia docet. Aquin. sum: part. 3. q. 48. art. 2. passiones
sanctorum proficiunt ecclesiae non quidem per modum redemtionis, sed per modum
exempli.
and therefore resolves the quite contrary; the Sufferings of Saints profit
the Church, not by way of Redemption, but by way of Example.

To the Third. Corinthian, whose punishment Saint Paul released, was alive; our
question is of Indulgences, releasing souls after death. Secondly, the
incestuous Corinthian was excommunicated, and thereby excluded for the time,
from the Communion of Saints: our question is of those that died reconciled to
the Church, in the state of grace, Whether they by the Popes Indulgence, may
receive ought out of the treasury of Saints sufferings, to purchase their
freedom from Purgatory, or at least, mittigation of their pains there?
Thirdly, the Indulgence Saint Paul granted the Corinthian, was the releasing
the sentence of Excommunication, not abating flames of Purgatory. Fourthly,
Saint Paul condescended more willingly to grant that excommunicate Corinthian
his absolution, for the earnest prayers and entreaty of some of his neighbors
and friends: he did not impute the sufferings or merits of his friends unto
him, and in that consideration absolved him. These things therefore, agree as
well as Harp and Harrow, to absolve the living from sentence of
Excommunication, at the suit or request of persons that have well deserved of
the Church, or have a special interest in our love: and to release the dead
out of Purgatory, by imputing the surplussage of another man's merits and
satisfactions unto him.

To the fourth. Jesuit might have learned of Dr. Francis White in his reply to
Fisher the Jesuit, from whom he borrowed this objection, an Answer thereunto:
or if he thought much to learn of him, he might have been beholding to his
own Pamelius, so far, as to inform him, that the Indulgences which
Tertullian impugned, were not such as we treat of, but the same whereof Saint
Cyprian speaks, Ep. 10.11.12.
to wit a relaxation of canonical censures, and penance to adulterers and
other notorious sinners upon the request of martyrs, being in prison and yet
alive. Now it seemed to this Father to be unjust and unfitting, both that the
Martyrs in such cases should be intreaters, and that the Church should grant
absolution to such persons, or mitigate the censures most justly imposed upon
them. Whether Tertullian in this were in the right or not, it makes nothing for
the Jesuit, or against us, for he speaks of living Martyrs and not dead: of
forgiving the crime it self, not only the temporal punishment, and that in
this life, not in Purgatory. As this is one of the most impertinent allegations
in his book, so he handles it as strangely and absurdly; for first, he
discrediteth and disableth his witness, by branding him with the note of an
Heretic, and then he produces him.

To the fifth: rope of sands has the Jesuit here twisted; first he can never
prove that any man can fully satisfy for the least finne committed against the
infinite majesty of God, much less by any penance he can endure, though never
so long, satisfy over and above as he speaks. Secondly, the continuance of
his penance, if it be done in true humility, and sincerity, shall not be
without fruit to himself, for it shall be a means to mortify his fleshly
lusts, and prevent future sins and through faith in Christ, to obtain a
greater reward in heaven. Thirdly, had the Saints any such surplussage of
merits, and were there nothing allowed to themselves for it here, or hereafter:
yet could not these their merits be communicated to others for their behoof,
because God has set it down in his law expressly, Ezekiel. 18.20.
that as the sin of the sinner, so the righteousness of the righteous shall be
upon himself. To the Jesuits quaere therefore. Why may not the overplus of
their sufferings lie in deposito as money in a treasury, for the benefit of
others? I answer briefly, because there is no such money, nor such treasury,
nor order from the master of the house, to lay up such supposed money in such
an imaginary treasury, as it were in a Bank, for the benefit of others. Do we
say this only, do not the Scriptures and the Fathers say the same. Job 9.3.
Does not Job demand how should man be just with God? if he contend with him,
he cannot answer him one for a thousand. Does not David? Psalm. 19.12.
Who knows how often he off ends? Pro. 20.9. Esaias, 64.6. James, 3.2.
Does not Solomon? Who can say, I have made my heart clean? I am pure from my
sin. Does not Esaias ingenuously confess? Bas. l. de penit. non Angeli sumus
sed homines, et cadimus et resurgimus, idque saepius eadem hora. Ambros. apol.
David, c. 2. unusquisque nostru^ per singulas horas quam multa delinquit
Bernard de quadrup. Debit quis amplius grunniet dicens n^mium laboramus, nimium
jejunamus nimium vigilamus, cum nec millessime nec minime parti debitorum
suorum quis valeat respondere. Sermon. de virgin. Stulta petitio, vix justus
salvabitur, vix Sanctis justitiae suae oleum sufficet ad salutem, quanto minus
and sibi and proximis.
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
rags, and St. James, in many things we offend all, and after him St. Basil,
We are not Angels, but mon, we fall and rise again, and that often times in
one and the selfsame hour. And Ambrose. Every one of us how often do we
sin? every hour. And most fully of all, St. Bernard, Who dare gruntle from
henceforth, saying? we labor too much, we fast too much, we watch too much,
seeing that a man cannot answer the thousandth, nay, not the least part of his
debt. And again, commenting upon those words, 25. of Matthew. and the 8. Give us
of your oil, a foolish petition, the righteous shall scarce be saved, the oil
of their own righteousness, hardly suffices the Saints to salvation, how
much less will it serve themselves and their neighbors.

To the sixth. The reason is not alike, for Indulgences for the living, are the
releasing of Ecclesiastical censures inflicted upon their persons, which
undoubtedly the Bishops have power to mittigate upon the submission of the
party, whereof they can take notice: which can have no place, in the souls of
the deceased, as the Church has no power to enjoyne them penance for their
misdemeanour, so neither to take it off: for as the Jesuit himself confesses,
Pope is no superior in respect of the souls in Purgatory, nor are they under
his power. P. 328. Absolution is a iuridicall act to be performed by a
superior and judge toward an inferior and a subject being under his power,
which the souls in Purgatory are not in respect of the Pope.
Here by the way, let the Reader observe how the Jesuit unwittingly strikes a
blow at the Popes triple crown. For if the souls in Purgatory are none of his
subjects, where is his third Kingdom? Why should he wear a triple crown, if
he may not bear his sword in Purgatory? the word Mysterium anciently engraven
upon the Popes Miter, was wont to be thus declared, that the three Crowns
compassing it, signify the rule he bears in Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory, but
if he has of late lost that kingdom, and is not now as the Jesuit says,
Superior to the souls that fry in Purgatory. What power has he to mittigat
their fine, or release their mulct, or abate their fire? much less wholly
absolve them from the guilt of temporal punishment there in toto? As for that
he adds, concerning communion of Saints, it yields no support at all to his
cause: for the communion of Saints, which all Christians believe, is partly in
the blessings of this life, partly in the use of spiritual graces, whereby
they pray one for another, admonish, instruct, and comfort one the other; this
communion no way extends to inward habits, as faith, hope and charity, nor to
outward penal sufferings, which can be imparted to no other, as may be most
evidently deduced out of Scriptures, and the joint testimonies of the ancient
Fathers. First therefore we say, that the Saints have no superabundance of
merits or satisfactions, as I have proved before: next that admitting they had
any, they cannot dispose of them to others, for every one shall bear his own
burdens, every one shall receive the things done in his body, according to that
he has don, whether it be good or bad, not according to that which he has don
or suffered in the body of another. Gal. 6.5. de pudicit. c. 22. Quis alienam
mortem sua solvet nisi solus fi^ius Dei, proinde qui illum emular is donando
delicta si nihil ipse deliquisti plane patere pro me si vero peocator es
quomodo oleum facuiae tuae sufficere tibi and mihi porerit. In Johan. tract.
24. Et si fratres pro fratribus moriantur, tamen in fraternorum peccatorum
remiss^one nullius sanguis martyris funditur. Leo ep. ad Palest. Accepere justi
non dedere coronas, et de fortitudine fidelium nata sunt exempla patientiae non
dona justitiae singulares, quippe eorum mertes fuerunt, nec alterius quisquam
de bitum suo fine persolvit. Bernard. ep. 198 cont. Abelard. Satisfactio unius
omnibus imputatur, sicut omnium pecca-ta ille unus portavit, nec alter
invenietur qui fore fecit, alter qui satisfecit, satisfecit ergo caput pro
membris.
the wise virgins said to the foolish that begged of them oil to fill their
lamps, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and for you; the righteousness of
the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him,
Ez. 18.20. Who ever (says Tertullian) satisfied by another man's death, his
own death, but only the Son of God: therefore thou, who imitatest him in
forgiving sins, if thou have sinned in nothing thy self I pray thee suffer for
me; but if thou art^a sinner as I am, how will the oil of thy little lamp
suffice for thee and for me? If Tertullians coin be not current, I am sure St
Austine and St Leos is, Although, says St Austine, brethren dye for their
brethren, yet the blood of no Martyr was ever shed for the remission of their
brothers sins. For, as St. Leo testifies, the righteous have received, they
have not given crowns: from the fortitude of true believers; we receive
examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness. For their death was singular;
neither did any of the^ by it discharg the death of another; the head has
satisfied for the members, and the satisfaction of one is imputed to all.
Mark, he says of one, not of more, and the head satisfied for the members,
not the members one for another.

To the seventh. Paternosters, and seven Avemaries, is no more for the dead
then for the living. For done to such an intent, neither are the better for it,
neither the living nor the dead are gainers, but only the Pope himself and
his Agents, who sell paper and lead at a deerer rate, than any Merchant or
Stationer in Christendom. Yet, by the Jesuits leave, Pope Gregory granting
14000 years of Pardon, and Nicolas the first, as many, and Sixtus the fourth,
twice as many, which make up the full number of 56000; must needs be thought,
to intend benefit to the souls in Purgatory, or in hell: unless you will
make the Pope to be so absurd, as to suppose that any were to live upon earth
so many thousand years, which had been an error 55000 times worse than the
error of the Millenaries. For they taught, that the Saints should live a
thousand years with Christ on earth: but these, that sinners should live in
durance here, or in Purgatory 56000 years, which is 50000 years longer than
by all computations, the World has, or as most think, shall last.

To the eighth. Jesuit for this his incredible paradox? If we should grant him
such a Purgatory as he desires, which no man yet could find either in the Map
of this world, or in the Table of holy Scriptures: yet is it impossible to
defend with any probability this position of his, that in few weeks space, a
soul might suffer punishment answerable to the Penance of many thousand
years. For, the learned Romanists generally accord, that Purgatory fire
differs little from hell, but in time; that the one is eternal, the other
temporal: they believe it to equalize, or rather exceed any fiery torment on
earth. How then can they imagine so much fuel to be laid on that fire, and the
torments in it so improved, that a man may suffer so much punishment in a few
weeks, which may weigh down, or bear scale with the penance of 56000 years;
or if the torments could be so increased, what soul would be able to bear
them for those few weeks, nay rather a few hours?

To the ninth. Knight, namely, Durand, Sylvester Prierias, Major, Fisher Bishop
of Rochester, Alfonsus a Castro, Antoninus, Cajetan and Bellarmine, speak not,
as the Jesuit would have it, comparatively, but positively. Durand says,
Durand. 4. sent. did. 20. q. 3. de indulge^tiis, pauca dici possum per
certitudinem, quia nec scriptura express de iis loquitur, sancti etiam patres
Ambrosius, Hilarious, etc. minime loquuntur de indulgentiis. Prierias, cont.
Luth. de Indul. Indulgentiae authoritate scripturae non intuere nobis sed
authoritate ecclesiae and Romanorum Pontificum. Major, in 4. sent. did. 2. q.
2. Difficile est modum indulgentiarum fundare authentice in scriptura sacra.
Roffensis, artic. 18. cont. Luther, Quamdiu nulla fuerat de purgatoria cura
nemo quesivit indulgentias, nam ex illo pendet omnis indulgentiarum estimatio
ceperunt igitur indulgentiae postquam ad purgatorii cruciatus aliquandiu
trepidatum erat.
The Scriptures speak not expressly of Indulgences, neither the Fathers,
Austine, Hilarie, Ambrose, Jerome, etc. Sylvester Prierias affirms, that
Pardons have not been known to us by the authority of Scriptures, but by the
authority of the Church of Rome, and the Popes. Fisher Bishop of Rochester
confesses, that of Purgatory there is little or no mention amongst the
ancient Fathers, and that as long as Purgatory was not cared for, there was no
man sought for Pardons: since Purgatory therefore has been so lately known
and received of the whole Church, who can now wonder concerning Indulgences?
And here Master Flood is at a stand, his Flumen is turned into Stagnum; for
having made offer to answer Durand, and finding that his answer would not hold,
his heart failed him, and he durst not venture to shape any answer at all to
the Authors last mentioned, namely, Alfonsus a Castro, Alfon. de verbo Indulg.
Harum usus in ecclesia videtur sero receptus, de Transubst antiatime rara in
antiquis mentio de purgatorio fere nulla, quid ergo mirum si ad hunc modum
contigeret de indalgentiis ut apud priscos nulla sir mentio? Antonin part. 1.
tit. 10. de indulgentiis nihil express habemus in sacra scriptura aut etiam
patrum scriptis. Cajet. opus. 15. 1. Nulla scriptura sacra nulla priscorum
doctorum grecorum aut latinorum authoritas indulgentiarum ortum ad nostram
deduxit notitiam. Bellor. de indul. l. 1. c. 17. Neque mirum videri debet si
authors antiquiores non habemus, qui harum mentiorum faciunt.
whose words are; There is nothing in Scripture less opened, or whereof the
ancient Fathers have less written, than of Indulgences; and it seems the use
of them came but lately into the Church: there is seldom any mention of
Transubstantiation among the Ancients, almost none of Purgatory. What marvel
then, if it so fall out with Indulgences, that there should be no mention of
them by the Ancients? Antoninus; There is not any express testimony, for
proof of Indulgences, either in Scriptures, or in the writings of the ancient
Fathers. Cajetan; There is no authority of Scriptures, or ancient Fathers,
Greek or Latin, that brings the original of Indulgences to our knowledge.
Bellarmine; It is not to be wondered, if we have not many ancient Authors
which make mention of Indulgences; for, many things are re^^^ned in the Church
only by use and custom, without writing. See how the Romanists second one the
other: Bellarmine says, That not many ancient Authors make mention of
Indulgences. Cajetan and Antoninus say, Not any. Durand says, that The
Scriptures speak not expressly of them. Prierias says, That they speak not at
all of them.

To the tenth. Paradise have with Styx or Avernos; or Simon Peter with Simon
Magus; or Phillip the Apostle with Phillip King of Macedon, as I showed before.

To the eleventh. Jesuit has neither proved the practice of the Catholic
Church, nor of the Roman, time out of mind, for Indulgences: but only
practices of later times, since manifold abuses crept into the Roman Church. As
for his negative Argument, to wit, that It is a strong evidence of consent, for
Indulgences, because none is found to have spoken against them: unless he
otherwise qualify it, it will no more prove Purgatory, or the lawful use of
Indulgences, than it will prove there is a Commonwealth in Eutopia, or Cities,
or Countries in the Moon, or many worlds; because, peradventure none is found
to have spoken or written against them. And for the Waldenses, that they were
the first impugners of Indulgences, is said by the Jesuit, but not proved; much
less, that these Waldenses were known Heretics. For they were far from
heresy by the confession of their greatest adversary, the Inquisitor
Rainerius. Cont. Wald. cap. 4.
They live, says he, justly before men, and believe all things well
concerning God, and all the Articles contained in the Creed, Solummodo Romanam
Ecclesiam blasphemant. and Clerum, only they speak evil of the Roman Church
and Clergy.

To the twelfth. Durand, that he lived before the Inquisition and Index
Expurgatorius. Durand. in 4. sent. did. 2. q. 3. Quod dictu^ est Petro. Mat.
16. tibi dabo claves, etc. intelligitur de potestate ei data in foro
poenitentiae, de collatione autem indulgentiarum non est quomodo debeat
intelligi, sancti enim Ambrosius, Hilarious, Augustinus, Hieronimus, minime
loquntur de indulgentiis.
For he argues so strongly against Indulgences, saying, (that Little can be
spoken of any certainty concerning them, because the Scripture speaks not
expressly of them; for what is spoken, Matthew the 16. to Peter, I will give
thee the Keys, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven;
is understood, of the power given him in the penitential Court, and cannot be
understood of the bestowing of Indulgences; for the holy Fathers, Ambrose,
Hilarie, Augustine, Jerome, speak not at all of Indulgences) that his
writings, if not his person, would have been purged by fire, if he had lived
in these times: yet, true it is, that having argued strongly against
Indulgences, and the Church Treasury, so far as it consists of the merit
of Saints, he bethought himself, and pro forma, alleges to the contrary,
the Custom and Doctrine of the Church, meaning the Roman Church; whose lash
he feared, if he should not have given back that by Wholesale, which he
had taken away from her by Re-tale. Its true also, that he mentions
Indulgences at the stations of Rome in the days of Saint Gregory: but let it
be noted, that Gregory is without the compass of the Primitive times, and that
he was interested in the cause; for, Purgatory fires began to singe men in
his time, and thereupon, Indulgences to be in request, which afterward proved
a Staple commodity to the Sea of Rome. Lastly, Mart. Epig. de Lab. Non es
creed mihi bonus: quid ergo ut verum loquar optimus malorum Pisones Senecasque
Memmiosque, et Crispos mihi read sed priores fies protinus ultimus bonorum.
as Martial writes of Labulla, it may be truly said of this Gregory, that he
was the worst of the good, and best of the bad Popes.

To the thirteenth. The Knight, after Alfonsus, quoted Antoninus, Cajetan, and
Bellarmine, to prove the noveltie of Indulgences, and that there is no ground
for them in Scriptures, or the writings of the ancient Fathers: to whom, the
Jesuit answers not a word; and here the second time, he is Gravelled in this
Section. Alfonsus he seems to say something, but upon due examination as
good as nothing: first he falsifieth his words, saying, page 334. that
Alfonsus confesses the use of Indulgences to be most ancient, and of many
hundred years standing; whereas his words are not; that the use of Indulgences
was most ancient, but that it was said by some, to be most ancient among the
Romans: Apud Romanos vetustissimus praedicatur illarum usus; this praedicatur
is of no more credit, than Pliny his fertur, or Solinus his aiunt. For
notwithstanding this report, Alfonsus resolves in that very place, It seems
that the use of Indulgences came but lately into the Church. Secondly, the
Jesuit forces a wrong Inference from Alfonsus his words. For albeit, he
affirms that Indulgences are not to be contemned, because they have been in
use in the Church for some hundreds of years: yet he condemns not a man for
an Haeretique that shall deny them, but any one that shall contemn the Church
or despise her authority: his words are Quoniam ecclesia Catholica tantae est
authoritatis ut qui illam contemnat Haereticus merito censeatur, we say the
same also, Matthew. 18.17.
and the Scripture bears us out in it, tell the Church and if he refuse to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a Publican, but what if
Alphonsus out of fear blows hot and cold with one breath, what is that to us?
He lived and died a professed Papist, and therefore what he writes against
Protestants, is little to be set by, but what he writes against the Church of
Rome whom he had a mind to defend in all things, and whose feed advocate he
was, must be thougt to be drawn from him by evidence of truth; howsoever let
it be noted that Alphonsus calls not him an Haereticke, who denies
Indulgences, as the Knight does, Vid. Rain. These. Romana ecclefia nec est
Catholica nec sanum membrum Catholicae ecclesie.
but who contemns the Catholic Church, which neither the Knight, nor any
Protestant does: we deny not, much less do we contemn the authority of the
Catholic Church. But we deny that the Roman Church is the Catholic, or a
sound member thereof.

To the fourteenth. Flood, and other Jesuits, bring muddy stuff in their
sermons, out of Petrus de Voragine, and the like fabulous Authors: but what
they produce in this kind against the Pope for his base sale of Indulgences,
and making merchandise of his ghostly power, they prove out of good Authors,
grave Historians, Canonists, and Schoolmen, such as are the author of the
lives of Popes, and the book called Taxa camerae Apostolicae and Centum
granamina, together with Wescelius Croningensis, Guicciardine, Henricus de
Gandavo, and Altisiodorensis. If Altisiodorensis words are not plain enough,
Sum: l. 4. d. relap. Dicunt quidam quod relaxatio non valeat quantum ecclesia
permittit, sed facit ut excitentur fideles ad dandum, et decipit eos ecclesia;
some say that the Popes Indulgence prevails not so much as the Church
promises, but that thereby men are stirred up to give more freely and that
therein the Church deceaveth them; what say they to that note in Taxa camerae
Apostolicae, Nota diligenter quod hujusmodi gratiae non conscedu^tur
pauperibus; quia non sunt, nec possunt consolari. Matthew. par. in Hen. 3.
Romanorum loculos impregnare.
note diligently that such favors, to wit, Indulgences are not granted to
poor^ folk, because they have not wherewithal, they cannot be comforted: or
that pregnant phrase of Matthew Paris; that Christ's blood alone though it be
all sufficient to save souls, yet the same without saintly satisfaction
applied by the Pope, is not sufficient to impregnate his holiness Coffers. If
the Jesuit smell not in th^se sentences the fat steame of the Popes Kitchen he
has no nose.

To the fifteenth. Jesuit terms the drinking of a health to Almighty God, a
tale, and by his quoting no authou^ or it, shows that it was a signal lie of
his own inventing, when he was between hawke and buzzard: Never any but
himself who can blush at nothing, affirmed any such thing of any Protestant,
that ever came to that height of impiety and prophannes, as to drink a health
to his Maker: Historia Ital. l. 13. Leo nullo temporum et locorum habito
delectu per universam orbem amplissima privilegia quibus non modo vinis
delictorum veniam consequendi sed and defunctorum animus, ejus ignis in quo
delicta expiari dicuntur paenis eximendi facultatem pollicebatur, promulgavit,
quae quia pecuniae tantum a mortalibus extorquendae gratia concedi notum erat
and a questoribus hui^ negotio praefectis impudenter administrabantur magnam
plerisque locis indignationem offensionemque concitarant, and presertim in
Germania ubi a multis ex ejus ministris hujusmodi mortuos penis liberandi
facultas parvo pretio vendi, vel in canponum tabernis aleae subiici cernebantur.
but Luitprandus and Polonus, tells us of one John the twelfth, a Pope of
Rome, and consequently no Protestant: who made so bold with Almighty God, as to
give Orders in a Stable, and so familiar with the Devil, as to drink a health
to him. As for the Knights profane jest as he calls it: it is no jest, but
a serious testimony out of a grave historian, convincing the Popes agents of
Atheism and prophannes, and the Popes themselves, of sordid covetousness, his
words are, Leo published large privileges through the whole world without any
distinction of times and places, by which he promised not only pardon to the
living, but also power to deliver souls of the dead out of Purgatory pains;
which because it was known that they were granted only to fill the Popes
coffers, and because his farmers carried themselves lewdly in the sale of them,
great offense was taken at them, especeally in Germany, where such Indulgences
were set at a low price, and seen to be staked in Tavernes and Alehouses at
games of Tables.

To the sixteenth. Trent Synod was not a Council, but a Conventicle, wholly
swayed by the Italian faction, wherein not the flower of the Catholic Church
for learning: but the bran of the Romish, boulted by the Pope, was gathered
together. Let Andreas Dudithius the Bishop of Quinque eccles. Ep. ad Maximil.
who was present at this Council, speak his mind of it, the matter came to
that pass, through the wickedness of those hungry Bishops that hung upon the
Popes sleeve, and were created on the sudden by the Pope, for the purpose,
that that Council seemed to be an assembly, not of Bishops, but of Hobgoblins,
not of men, but of Images, moved like the statues of Daedalus by the sinews of
others. What the Jesuit adds of night owls, not daring to appear in the
splendor of that Council, has no color of truth. For it is no news for
owls to appear at popish Counsels. At a Council held at Rome by Pope
Heldebrand, Fascic. rerum expetend. and sugiend.
Ortwhinus Gratius writes, there appeared an huge great Owl, which could not
be frayed away, but scared all the Bishops. As for Protestants, whom this
Blacke-bird of Antichrist terms night Owls, if they had flocked to that
Council, they had showed themselves not Owls, by appearing in that twilight
at Trent, but very Wood-cocks, to trust any security offered them by those, who
after public faith given to John Huz, and Jerome of Prage, notwithstanding the
safe conduct of Sigismond the Emperor, for their going to, and coming from
the Council at Constance, most cruelly burned them at a stake to ashes.

To the seventeenth. Catholic faith, which wants consent of Fathers. As for
those Fathers whose authority Bellarmine draws ob torto collo, to testify
for unwritten traditions de verbo Dei. lib. 4. cap. 7. the Jesuit may see them
fully answered in Iunius Whitaker, Daniel Chamierus, and Dr. Davenant Bishop of
Sarum, and a far greater number of Fathers alleged to the contrary, by
Robert Abbot in his answer to William Bishop, cap. 7. Phillip Morney in his
preface to his book, de sacra Eucharistia and Iacobus Laurentius in his
singular tractate de Disputationibus, and others.

To the eighteenth. Catholic Church of Christ in any age, with any
fundamental error, though we may the Roman; Tertullian his rule may have
still place, and as well in one age as another if it be rightly taken, and not
misconstrued and misapplied; for if it be taken generally, that whatsoever is
the same amongst many, is no error but tradition, it is it self a great
error. For the same opinion concerning the inequality of the Father and the
Son is found amongst many; to wit, the Arrian Churches: the same doctrine
concerning the procession of the Son from the Father only, is found amongst
many, namely, all the Greek Churches at this day: the same practice of
administering the Eucharist to children, was found amongst many; namely, all the
Churches of Africa in St. Austines time, yea, and in all Churches subject to
the Bishop of Rome for many ages, as Maldonat the Jesuit confesses; yet the
above named Positions, and this latter practice are confessed on all sides to
be erroneous. But Tertullian by many understands not the practice of some
particular Churches, Tertul. de prescrip. Age nunc omnes ecclesiae erraverint
verisimile est ut tot et tante in unam fidem erraverint.
much less of factious persons of one Sect, but the general and uniforme
doctrine and practice of the whole Church as his words in the same Chapter,
quoted by the Jesuit declare. Go too now, admit that all Churches have erred,
is it likely so many, so great Churches should erringly conspire in one faith?

To the nineteenth. Catholic Church, let the Jesuit produce out of good
Authors any such custom for Indulgences to redeem souls out of Purgatory
flames by Papal Indulgences, and this controversy will soon be at an end;
howsoever let me tell the Jesuit the way, that this text of St. Paul is
impertinently alleged to prove this or any other article of the Trent faith.
For St. Paul in this place speaks not of any Article of faith nor matter of
manners necessary to salvation, but of habits, gestures fashions, and
indifferent rites: in matter of which nature there is no question at all, but
that the custom of the Churches of God ought to sway, as is abundantly proved
by Dr. Andrews late Bishop of Winchester, in his printed Sermon upon that text.

To the twentieth. Disputabamus de alliis respondet Iesuita de cepis, we
dispute of Indulgences, the Jesuit answers of Traditions in matter of Faith.
These are very distinct questions, and so handled by all that deal
Work-man-like in points of difference between the Reformed, and the Roman
Churches, but the Jesuits common place of Indulgences was drawn dry, and
therefore he sets his cock of Traditions on running, which yields
nothing but muddy water. What though Faith be ancienter than Scriptures, the
Argument is inconsequent? Ergo, Scripture is not now the perfect rule of Faith.
Faith neither is, nor can be more ancient than the Word of God, upon which it
is built, this Word of God is now written; and since, the consigning and
confirming the whole Canon of the written Word, by Saint John in the
Apocalypse, is become the perfect, and as the Schools speaks, the adequate
rule of Faith. It is true, Christ and his Apostles first taught the Church by
word of mouth; Lib. 3. advers. here is. cap. 1. Non enim per alios dispositionem
salutis, nostrae cognovimus quam per eos per quos Evangelium pervenit ad nos,
quod quidem tunc praeconiaverunt postea per dei voluntatem in scripturis nobis
tradiderunt fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futuram.
but afterward, that which they preached, was by the commandment of God,
committed to writing, to be the foundation and pillar of Faith; as Irenaus
testifies in express words.

To the twenty one. Jesuit could prove as undoubtedly any words of the
Apostles that are not set down in Scriptures, to be their own words, as we
can prove the writings we have, to be theirs; we would yield no less credit
to them, then to these: but that neither can he, nor so much as undertaketh to
do. And whereas he further faith, that the credit of the Scripture depends
upon Tradition; unless he qualify the speech some way, it is not only
erroneous, but also blasphemous; for it is all one, as if he should say, that
man gives credit and authority to God (as Tertullian jeareth the Heathen, In
Apolloget.
not receiving Christ for God, because the Roman Senate would not give their
consent and approbation to make him one, Iam homo deo propitius esse debet) or
that the credit and authority of Gods Word depends upon man's receiving it.
Whereas in truth, Gods Word is not therefore of divine and infallible
authority, because the Church delivers it to be so; but on the contrary, the
Church delivers it to be so, because in it self it is so; and the Church
should err damnably, if she should otherwise conceive of these inspired
Writings, then as of the undoubted Oracles of God, to which we owe absolute
consent and belief, Vid. August. supr. cit.
without any question or contradiction.

To the two and twentieth. Austine defends no point of Faith against Heretics,
either only or chiefly, by the Tradition and practice of the Catholic Church;
but either only or chiefly by the Scriptures. For example, in his book of
Baptism, against the Donatists, after he had debated the point by Scriptures,
he mentions the custom of the Church, and relates Stephanus his proceeding
against such as went about to overthrow the ancient custom of the Catholic
Church in that point. But he no where grounds his Doctrine upon that custom,
though he does well approve of it, as we do. Again, in his book against
Maximinus, and his 174 Epist. to Pascentius, he confirms the faith of the
Trinity by the written Word, against those Heretics: his words, Ep. 175, Haec
siplacet audire quemadmodum e Scripturis sacris asserantur.
to the same Pascentius are; Here thou may hear, if thou will, how these
points of our Faith are maintained by Scripture. So far is he from founding
those, or any other points of faith only, or chiefly upon unwritten Traditions.
What the Jesuit alleges out of his tenth book, De Genes. ad literam, cap.
23. Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae in baptizandis parvulis nequaquam spernendus
est, neque ullo modo superflua deputanda.
no whit advantageth his cause; for there Saint Austine says no more, but The
custom of the Church in baptizing Infants, is no way to be despised, or to be
accounted superfluous. We all say the same, and condemn the Pelagians of old,
and Anabaptists of late, who deny Baptism to be administered to children, or
any way derogate from the necessity of that Sacrament. The Jesuit says, he
will say nothing of Prayer for the dead, yet he quoteth Saint Austine, de cura
pro mortuis, as if in that book he taught Prayer for the dead, and grounded
it upon unwritten Tradition. Whereas in that book, he neither maintains
Prayer for the dead, nor makes mention of any unwritten Tradition for it; but
on the contrary, solidly out of Scriptures proves, Esaias Propheta dicit,
Abraham nos nescivit, et Israel non cognovit nos: si tanti patriarchae, quid
erga populum ex his procreatur, ageretur, ignoraverunt quomodo mortui vivorum
rebus atque actibus cog noscendis adjuvandisque miscentur; et paulo post ibi
ergo sunt spiritus defunctorum ubi non vident quecunque aguntur, aut eveniunt
in ista vita hominibus. Ep. 118. Si quid hocum sic faciendum divinae Scripturae
praescribat authoritas, non est dubitandum quin ita facere debeamus, similiter
si quid per orbem tota frequentat Ecclesia.
that the Saints departed have no knowledge of our affairs upon earth: the
Prophet Esaias says, Abraham knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of us. If so
great Patriarchs knew not what befell their posterity after their death; how
can it be defended, that the dead intermeddle with the actions or affairs of
the living, to help them onward, or so much as to take notice of them? A
little after, he concludes flat upon the Negative, The Spirits therefore of the
dead there remain where they know not what befalls to men in this life. To
what end therefore, should we call upon them in our troubles and distress
here? Neither has this Father any thing in his 118 Epistle for the Jesuit, or
against us; for there he speaks of Ecclesiastical Rites and Customs, as
appears in the very title of that Epistle, not of Doctrines of Faith: and yet,
even in these, he gives a pre-eminence to the Scriptures. If, says he, the
authority of divine Scripture prescribe any Rite or Custom to be kept, there
is no question to be made of such a Rite or Custom: and in like manner, if the
whole Church throughout the world constantly uses such a Rite or Custom. The
Jesuits next allegation out of this Fathers book De unitate Eccles. cap. 22.
falls short of his mark; he says there, that Christ bears witness to
his Church, that it should be Catholic, that is, spread over the face of the
Earth, and not to be confined to any certain place; as the Province of
Africa. We say the same, and add, that the bounds of it, are no more the
territories of the Bishop of Rome, than the Provinces of Africa. We grant,
that Whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church, to wit, the
Catholic, or universal Church, resists, or goes against our Savior, who
promised by his spirit, to lead her into all truth, and to be with her to the
end of the World. Which promise may yet stand good and firm, though any
particular Church err in Faith, or manners, as did the Churches of Asia,
planted by the Apostles themselves, and the Church of Rome does at this day.
Cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 6.
Now, because that testimony of Saint Austine, wherewith the Knight concludes
almost every Section; If we, or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you any
thing, whether it be of Christ, or of his Church, or any thing which concerns
Faith, or manners, besides that which you have received in the Legal and
Evangelicall Scriptures, let him be accursed; is as a beam in all Papists
eyes; therefore, they use all possible means to take it out, but all in vain;
for the words of the Apostle, on which Saint Paul commenteth, are not as the
Jesuit would have them: If any man preach unto you, Contra against; but if any
preach unto you, Praeter besides: Ep. ad Galat. (...). Neque enim inquit si
contraria solum predicaverint intulit anathema esto, sed si evangelizaverint
preter id quod ipsi evangelisavimus, hoc est, si plusculum quidpiam adjecerent.
as Saint Chrysostom and Theophylact accutely observe. The Apostle says not
(if Chrysostom rightly understand him) if they should preach any thing
contrary; but if they shall in their preaching, add any thing, be it never so
little, besides that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. And
Theophylact is altogether as plain as Chrysostom, in his Gloss upon the
words, The Apostle infers not, if any man preach contrary to that ye have
received; but if any preach besides that which we have preached unto you, that
is, if they shall presume to add any thing, though never so little, let them
be accursed. Neither does Saint Austine in his tractate upon Saint John, upon
which Bellarmine, and after him, Flood, so much bear themselves, any whit
contradict the former interpretations of Saint Chrysostom and Theophylact. For
his words in that place carry this sense, The Apostle says not, if any man
preach more unto you, than you have already received, that is, perfectly
conceived and apprehended: for then he should go against himself, who says,
that he desired to come to the Thessalonians, to supply that which was lacking
to their Faith; to supply, I say, that which was lacking to their Faith, not to
the Gospel which Saint Paul preached: he says not, let him be accursed, who
further informs you in the Doctrine of the Scriptures, or delivers you more
out of them, than ye have yet received within that Rule; but he that
delivers you any thing besides that Rule. And that this is his meaning,
appears by the words immediately following, which the Jesuit cunningly
suppresseth, to wit, these, Qui praetergreditur regulam fidei, non accedit in
via, sed recedit de via; He that goes besides the Rule of Faith, does not go
on in the way, but departs out of the way. Yea; but the word in the Greek
translation, (...), here used, is the same with that, Romans 16.17. which we in
our Bibles translate, against, not Praeter, besides. Yea, but the Jesuits in
their own Latin vulgar translation, to which they are all sworn, (as we are
not to ours) render this (...), or Praeter besides, and not Contra against: and
that this translation is most agreeable to the Apostles meaning, appears by
comparing this text, Romans 16.17. with a parralell'd text, 2 These. 3.6. Withdraw
your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
Tradition which you have received of us. There is no necessity therefore, of
expounding (...), in that text to the Romans, by Contra against; we may as
well (or better) expound it by Praeter, that is, besides: yet, if in one place
(...) might signify Contra, it does not follow that it must be so taken,
Galathians 1.8. for it is well known, that the natural and most usual
signification of (...) in Greek, is Praeter besides, not Contra against; and
words are to be taken in their most proper and usual signification, unless
some necessary reason, drawn from the circumstances of the text, or analogy
of faith inforceth us to leave it, which here it does not. As for Saint
Austines judgment in the point it self, to wit, that Scripture is the perfect
rule of Faith, he plainly delivers it, both in his 49 tractate upon John,
and in the ninth chapter of the second book De doctrina christiana; and in the
last chapter of his second book De peccatorum meritis and remissione, and in
his book De bono viduitatis, cap. 11. What words can be more express and
direct for the sufficiency of Scripture, than those in his 49 tractate upon
John? The Lord Jesus did, Quae saluti credentium sufficere videbuntur. In iis
quae aperte posita sunt in Scriptura inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent
fidem, moresque vivendi. G. ult. Credo etiam h^ic divinoru^ eloquioru^
clarissima authoritas esset, si homo illud sine dispendio salutis ignorare non
posset. Sancta Scriptura nostrae doctrinae regulam sixit, ne auderemus sapere
ultra quam oportet.
and spoke many things which are not written, as the Evangelist testifies; but
those things were chosen to be written, which seemed to suffice for the
salvation of Believers: unless those in his second book, De doctrina
christiana, Among those things which are openly or plainly set down in
Scriptures, all things are found which concern or contain Faith or manners:
or those in his second book of the remission of sins, I believe that the
authority of divine Scriptures, would have been most clear and evident in
this point, if a man could not have been ignorant of it, without peril of his
salvation: or lastly, those in his book in the commendation of Widowhood, What
should I teach thee more than that which thou read in the Apostle? for the
holy Scripture setleth the rule of our Doctrine, lest we should presume to be
wise above that we ought.

Concerning the infallible certainty of the Protestant faith, and the
uncertainty of the Romish; Spectacles, Chapter the 10. a page 346. usque ad 380.
THE Knights failing in his proofs of our novelty is a sufficient proof of
our antiquity,

The Jesuits may not be ashamed of the oath they take to defend the Papacy,
Catholic Church and salvation of all souls from Christ his own time, to the
very end of the world; has, does, and still shall depend.

Catholic Doctors whom the Knight charge with division among themselves,

The Knight can have no certainty of his Christianity, because that depends
upon his Baptism, or the faith of his parents which he cannot know.

He can have no certainty of his Marriage, or the legitimation of his children,
Knight is in no better case then his adversaries in this respect.

It is clean a different thing to dispute of the certainty of the Catholic
faith which we maintain, Catholic Church.

It might be good and profitable as Bellarmine notes, to invoke the Saints,
Knight would prove out of Peter Lumbard and Gabriel Biel, who though they doubt
of the manner, yet they doubt not of the thing it self; Gabriel says, the
Saints are invocated not as givers of the good things for which we pray, but as
intercessours to God the giver of all good. And Peter Lumbard says that our
prayers become known to the Angels in the word of God which they behold, so
also do Saints that stand before God.

Though it be true which Caietan says, Ep. 68. vivebant ut latrones,
honoraebantur ut martyrs.
to err; and whereas St. Austine says that many were tormented with the
Devil in Hell, who were worshipped by men on earth: it may be well understood
of the Martyrs of the Donatists, who were Canonized by those Haeretikes to be
Martyrs, whose souls were tormented in Hell: and whereas Sulpitius and
Cassander speak of wicked Robbers and damned persons honored by the name of
Holy Martyrs, it follows not that because some people in St. Martins time did
err in worshipping a dead thief for a Saint, without any approbation of the
Church: ergo Catholics may err in worshipping of Saints Canonized and
Authorized by the Church.

Though Gregory, of Purgatory: yet, none rejects the belief of Purgatory
it self. And as for Saint Austine, alleged by the Knight to the contrary, his
words are to be meant of the final and eternal place of souls. For
otherwise, Saint Austine is so express for Purgatory, in the very book and
place quoted by the Knight, to wit, in his Enchiridian ad Laurentium, that Mr.
Antonie Alcock, a zealous Disciple of Luther, as it seems, translating it
into English, is feign to write certain annimadversions upon this Chapter,
wherein he confesses, C. 110. Neque negandum est defunctorum animus, etc.
Saint Austines opinion is here for Purgatory. The Saints own words are,
Neither is it to be denied, that the souls of the dead are relieved by the
piety of their friends living, when the sacrifice of our Mediator is offered
for them, or alms given in the Church. The same Father elsewhere says, The
whole time between the death of a man, and the general resurrection,
contains the souls in hidden receptacles, as each is worthy, either of ease
or pain.

The Doctrine of Catholics, Nice, it requires not only kissing of Images,
and a civil kind of embracing, but a prostration on the ground, and praying on
the knees before them: Gregory de Valentia takes the word Simulacrum, in a
good sense, and concludes out of Saint Peter, that some Imageworship is lan
full, not any Idol worship, as the Knight imposes on him.

The Hammer.
IN this Chapter, the Jesuit in the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, twelfth,
fifteen, and sixteen Paragraphs, does nothing but sees again his old
Coleworts, which were tasted before, and after cast into the dunghill. From
whence, I purpose not to gather them again, or set them before the Reader,
lest his stomach should rise at them: but I address my self to examine only
such Sophismes, Cavils and Evasions, whereby he indeavoureth to elude or
retort the Knights arguments, brought against him in this Section, in order as
I have set them down.

To the first. Jesuit, drawn from the Knights supposed failing in his proofs,
fails many ways, as may be proved by manifold instances. For albeit, many
later Mathematitians fail in refuting Copernicus his giddy opinion of the
earths circular motion, and the heavens standing still: yet this their failing
is no sufficient proof of Copernicus his new fancy: neither will it follow,
that the religion of Pagans and Infidels has sufficient ground, because
Lactantius fails in his proofs of Christianity, in Saint Ieromes judgment:
and Cyprian also in the judgment of Lactantius. The defects of the Patron or
Advocate, ought not to be imputed to the cause. It is a weak and silly
Religion, whose whole strength consists in the weakness of some of the
opposers of it. The truth is, the Knight has not failed in his proofs of the
noveltie of the Trent Creed, as the judicious Reader will find: yet if there
were any defect in them, it may be abundantly supplied out of Iuels challenge
at Saint Pauls-Crosse, Abbots answer to Bishop, entitled, The true ancient
Roman Catholic, and Doctor Faner in his Book of Antiquity, triumphing over
noveltie, and diverse others.

To the second. Jesuits are bound by a fourth, and supernumerary vow to defend,
is a bold and blasphemous assertion, derogatorie to Christ himself, who is the
Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23. 1 Cor. 3.11.
and only foundation which bears up the weight and frame of the whole
Catholic Church. When Christ said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church; he meant not, as Saint Austine rightly
observes, To build himself upon Peter, but Peter and the whole Church upon
himself; non super te edificabome, sed super me edificabo te. The Church was
founded and established before there was any Pope or Bishop at Rome, and shall
so continue, when Rome shall, perchance, be burnt with fire, Tract. de
auferibilit. Papae.
and the Papacy which now tottereth, shall be utterly destroyed. Does not
their own Gerson teach, that the Pope may be quite removed, and yet the
Catholic Church still remain? how then can the Jesuit say, that the weight
and frame of the whole Catholic Church depends upon the authority of the
Pope?

To the third. Knight used a dilemma, or two-forked Argument. Either the Popes
sworn-Servants, and our sworn enemies, whose depositions before we heard,
against diverse articles of the Trent Faith, concurred with other Papists in
judgment, or not: if they concurred, then by the joint confession of all, for
those points, at least, they are destitute of universality, which yet they make
a prime note of their Church: if others concurred not with them in judgment,
then their Doctors are divided amongst themselves, and consequently, they want
another special mark of their Church, which they make unity in point of
Faith. To avoid the push of this Ram, the Jesuit starts Quintil. Institut.
orat. lib. 6. Diverticula et anfractus suffugia sunt infirmitatis, ut qui cursu
parum valent flexu eludunt.
aside into a Scholasticall speculation, whether any thing is to be held for an
article of Faith before it be defined, and resolves the matter thus: When a a
thing is once defined, to wit, by the Church, then it becomes a matter of
Faith. He should rather determine, because this or that is a matter of Faith,
therefore the Church defines it to be so, and not because the Church defines
it to be so, therefore it is a matter of Faith. For Faith, if it be divine, is
founded upon Gods Word, not the Churches definition: if nothing be matter of
Faith, before it be defined by your Church, then Transubstantiation was no
article of Faith, before the Council of Laterane, and Innocentius the third
his days; nor the Doctrine of Concommitancie, and lawful communicating in one
kind, before the Council of Constance, under Martin the fifth; nor the Popes
superiority to Councels, before the Council at Laterane, under Leo the tenth;
nor most of Pope Pius the fourth his Articles, before the late Council of
Trent, wherein those points were first defined. Then which, what Argument can
be more forcible, to convince the novelty of the Romish Faith? But whether an
article of Faith is to be accounted such, because it is defined to be such by
the Church; or whether it be defined to be such by the Church, because it is
such in its own nature; it will little serve the Jesuits turn to make up the
breaches of the Roman Church. For certain it is, that their Doctors differ
amongst themselves, even in points defined by the Church. For after the books
of the Old Testament, with all the parts (known by the name of Apocrypha) by
the Council of Trent were defined to be of Canonical authority; Sixtus
Senensis makes scruple of some of them. Sixtus Senens. bib. Sanct. l. 1.
After the immaculate conception of our Lady was defined by Sixtus the fourth,
and the feast in testimony thereof, authorized by him; yet, the Dominicans
generally hold, that she was conceived in sin. After Justification by
inherent righteousness, De Cause. instit. l. 7. c. 21.
was defined in the Council of Trent, Albertus Pighius and others, cited by
Vegas held the contrary. And though the Council of Trent stigmatize the
doctrine touching assurance of salvation, yet Ambrosius Catharinus, a learned
Papist, set forth a learned treatise de certitudine salutis. Lastly, though
Pope Leo the tenth, in the Council of Lateran, defines the Pope to be above a
general Council, yet the Sorbonists at this day maintain, that a general
Council is above the Pope. Therefore as St Thomas Moore said pleasantly of a
poor Physician that he was more then medicus, to wit, by one letter, Mor. in
Epigr.
meaning that he was mendicus. Vna tibi plus est litera quam medico; so it may
truly be said of the unity Papists brag so much of, that it is more then Unity
by a letter, to wit, Vanity.

To the fourth. Knight or any Protestant suspended the efficacy of their
Baptism upon the faith of their Parents, or (as all Papists do) upon the
intention of the Priest, the Jesuit might with some color object to us the
uncertainty of our Christendom: but let him know if he does not, that we
maintain generally that the effect of Baptism depends not upon the faith of
the Parents and Godfathers, nor yet upon the intention of the Priest, known
to God only and himself; but upon his outward action and his words known to
all the Congregation. We say that the observation of Christ's institution in
baptizing the party in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, and not the Priests hidden intention makes Baptism effectual to
all that belong to the covenant.

To the fifth. Jesuit most absurdly infers absurdities upon his own Tenet,
supposing it to be ours, whereas we disclaim it, affirming that although the
Church uses in marriage, all means possible by questions and answers, by
joining hands, by plighting their troth in most significant terms, and
confirming their mutual promises by giving and receiving a ring, and
denouncing Gods judgments against them in most fearful manner, if they know
any thing one by the other, why they should not be joined in marriage, yet
because the heart is known to God alone, the validity of marriage with us
depends upon the outward profession, and sacred action done before sufficient
and undoubted witness and not the secret intentions of the party. What the
Jesuit adds by way of jeare, that a small deal of orders serves our turns,
for he sees not any thing done by virtue of our ordination which any man or
woman may not do without it. I hold it not worthy any other answer then that,
since he professes his eye sight to be so dim, he would make use of the
Spectacles he made for the Knight, by help of them if he be not stark blind,
he may see, that by virtue of our ordination, men in holy orders preach the
Gospel, administer the Sacraments, remit and retain sins: which if he
think any man or woman may do without ordination, like the fool in the Poet,
Dum vitant stulti vitia in contrario currunt.
he is gone from one extreme to the other, and of a Papist become an
Anabaptist. With us none may execute the Priests office, but he that is called
thereunto, as was Aaron. If the Jesuit mean that any man or woman may do the
outward acts of Priesthood de facto, though not de Iure: may they not do the
like also sometimes among them? does not their Legend tell us that some Boys
getting by heart and pronouncing the words of Consecration, hoc est Corpus
meum, turned all the Bakers bread in the street into flesh? Do not Lady
Abbesses and Nuns chaunt Mattins together in Romish Chapels? Do not Midwives
christen children in their Church? With what face then can he charge us with
those disorders whereof all the world sees we are free, but he and his Church
most guilty?

To the sixth. If his hope be only in this life, the Apostle affirms
expressly, 1 Cor. 15.19.
that he is of all men most miserable; and certainly he is but little better
if all his hope in the life to come be no better then a guess, or slender
conjecture. Justly therefore did Martin Luther term the Romish doctrine
concerning uncertainty of salvation, non doctrinam fidei sed diffidentiae, no
doctrine of faith but of diffidence and distrust, which if this Jesuit stiffely
maintains, I would feign know of him how he interprets that Article of the
Creed, I believe the remission of sins. Is the meaning only this, that there
is a remission of some sins in the Church? if so, then the Devil believes as
much concerning this Article as he, but if as he believes in the Article of
the Resurrection, the Resurrection of his own flesh, so in the Article of
remission of sins, the remission of his own sins; then his own
justification, and particular belief of his own saltion is a part of his
Catholic faith; and if that be but conjecturall, then there is no certainty in
the Catholic Faith. It is true, that it is a different thing to dispute of the
certainety of the Catholic faith in general, and of every man's private and
particular belief of his own justification, and salvation: yet there is such
a dependence between them, that if the former be uncertain the latter cannot
be certain. Yea but (says the Jesuit) we are certain, by the certainty of
divine faith, not only that there be seven Sacraments, but that they are also
truly administered in the Church, so as there can be no danger of the failing
of either, to the notable prejudice of faith and the salvation of souls. I
reply first, that for five of the seven as was discussed at large, Section the
fourth, the Jesuit is so far from any certainty that indeed he can bring no
probability that there be any such Sacraments in the Catholic Church; and for
the other two which we acknowledge to be Sacraments properly so called, he
cannot be certain that they are ever effectually administered in his Church
according to their own Tenants, who suspend the efficacy of them upon the
Priests intention. Nay farther, he cannot be certain that they have any Church
at all amongst them, for there can be no Church (as they teach) without a
visible succession of lawful Pastors, whereof he cannot be certain, since no
man knows whether the Bishops, who ordained their Priests, or the Archbishop,
who ordained their Bishops, or the Pope, who consecrated their Archbishops,
intended that which your Church intends; and if there failed an intention in
any of all these, or in him who baptized or ordained their first Pope, (since
the Bishops of Rome began to be Popes) he has no certainty according to his
own grounds, of any Priesthood or Christianity in his Church.

To the seventh. surdo fabulum narrare, to tell a Tale in the care of a deaf
man. Where do the Scriptures, or ancient Fathers give any approbation to such
senseless devotion? can a man call upon him with faith, or any hope of
obtaining his suit, whom he conceives to be out of his hearing? Yea, but
Gabriel Biel speaks not doubtfully, but certainly, of Invocation, though he
seem to doubt of the manner how Saints in heaven know our necessities on
earth. Biel indeed lispeth somewhat that way, but he speaks not plain; he
says, Invocantur sancti, not sancti sant invocandi; he speaks confidently
and certainly of the practice of the Roman Church, out not of the truth of
this point of the Romish Faith, that Saints ought to be called upon: for that
he taught, In Can. Missae Did. 31. videri probabile.
that It may seem probable that God reveals to Saints, all those suits which
men present unto them: consequently holds, that it may seem also probable,
that the living may pray unto them. But what is this his probabile, or Peter
Lumbards not incredibile, to build an Article of Faith upon? Yea, but Peter
Lumbard, though he make some doubt, whether the Saints hear our Prayers as
they proceed from us, (they being in Heaven, and we in Earth, they being but
in one place, Sicut enim Angelis, ita etiam sanctis qui Deo assistant,
petitiones nostrae innotescunt in verbo Dei quod contemplantur.
and those that call upon them in a million of places, distant far one from
the other) yet, He makes no doubt of their knowing and seeing our Prayers in
the Word of God, as the Angels do. I answer, that this imaginary Glass of
the Schoolmen, wherein they conceive, that the Saints and Angels see all
things by the contemplation of God, in whom are all things, has been long
ago battered in pieces. For if, because they see God, they must needs see all
things that are in him, and know all that he knows; it would hereupon ensue,
that the Saints knowledge should be infinite, as Gods is: that they should know
the day and hour when Christ shall come to judgment, contrary to the express
words of our Savior, Mark 13.32. that they should know the secrets of all
hearts, which the Scripture ascribes as a singular prerogative to God. To
avoid these Rocks, if our Adversaries will confine the knowledge of the Saints
or Angels, to such things only, as God shall be pleased to reveal unto them,
they beg then the point in question, which they ought to prove: viz. That God
will reveal to every Saint, what every man on earth prays to him for.

To the eighth. Jesuit in this answer flatly contradicts Cajetan, whom he
undertaketh to defend: for, if the Church groundeth not the canonization of
Saints upon the report of miracles voyced on them: Cajetans Argument in that
place is weak, and of no force. Secondly, for the authority of the Sea
Apostolic, and the infallibility of the Popes judgment, they are as
uncertain, or more then that such persons canonized by the Pope are Saints. L.
3. ep. 3. nec quisquam sibi quod soli filio tribuit pater vindicare se putet,
ut ad areum pargandam, etc. 1 Kings 8.39.
Saint Cyprian in his time, severely censured those who arrogated to themselves
that which the Father has given to the Son only; to wit, in the floor of
the Church, to take the fan in his hand, and sever the Wheat from the Chafe.
If God only knows the hearts of all the children of men, either the Pope
must be God, as the Canonists blasphemously called him, or he cannot
infallibly know who are true Saints, and sincerely believe, and love God. As
for Saint Austines complaint (that many were worshipped by men on earth that
are tormented by the devil in hell) they are indefinitely spoken, and not
restrained to Donatists, or any other Heretics: yet, were it so, we may see
in those Donatists a perfect picture of Papists. For what Donatus did in
Africa, that does the Pope in Europe; he canonizeth those of his faction for
Saints. And as the Donatists gave the honor of Martyrs to those, who justly
suffered death for Robberies and Murders, so do the Papists crown the heads
of Murderers and Traitors with the garland of Martyrdom; witness Becket,
Campian, Oldcorne, and Garnet; whereof the first stands in the Calendar of
Romish Saints, the later in the Register of Jesuiticall Martyrs. Neither can
the Jesuit so easily fillip off the testimony of Cassander, as if he taxed
the ignorant for making a Saint of a Thief, Cassan. consult. art. 2.
and no way touched upon the Pope or your Church; for he lays not the blame
upon the people, as the Jesuit here does, but says simply, that Saint Martin
found a place honored in the name of a holy Martyr, to be the sepulcher of a
wicked Robber. Secondly, it is well known that the people cry not up at first a
Saint; or Martyr after his death, but the Priests, who voice miracles upon
them, and keep their Shrines and Relics, and by showing them to the people,
make no less gain, than Demetrius and his fellow Crafts-men did of their
silver Shrines of Diana.

To the ninth. Knight by loosening, or quite removing the fuel of Purgatory
fire, consequently extinguisheth it. If all the parts and circumstances of the
Doctrine of Popish Purgatory are doubtful and uncertain, the whole certainly
can be no Article of Faith: but the Antecedent the Knight proves out of
Bellarmine, Dominicus a Soto, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Gregory the great,
and venerable Bede, let the Jesuit therefore look to the Consequent. The
Church of Rome commands every one upon pain of hellfire, to believe a
temporary purging fire after this life. First, upon what ground, Scripture, or
unanimous consent of Fathers, or Tradition of the Catholic Church? no such
thing. But upon apparitions of dead men, and testimony of Spirits, whether
good Spirits or evil they cannot tell. Next, we demand what souls, and how
long do they contine there? To this they must answer likewise Ignoramus. Soto
thinks that none continues in this purgation ten years. If this be true,
says Bellarmine, No soul needs to stay in purging one hour. Thirdly, the
souls that are supposed to be there, till their sins are purged, where with
are they purged? With fire only; so says Sir Thomas Moore, and proves it out
of Zachary 9.11. Thou have delivered the prisoners out of the place where
there is no water: or with water and fire: so says Gregory in his Dialogues,
lib. 4. Some are purged by fire, and some by bathes: and Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, proves it out of those words of the Psalmist, We have passed through
fire and water. Fourthly, admit they are purged by fire, whether is this fire
material or metaphorical? Ignoramus, We know not, says Bellarmine, lib. 2.
de Purg. cap. 6. Lastly, is there any mittigation of this pain in Purgatory,
or no? They cannot tell this neither. For venerable Bede, hist. Ang. lib. 5.
tells us of the apparition of a Ghost, reporting that There was an infernal
place where souls suffered no pain, where they had a brook running through
it. Neither is it improbable, says Bellarmine, l. 2. de Purg. cap. 7. that
there should be such an honorable prison, which is a most mild and temperate
Purgatory. Yea, but says the Jesuit, Saint Austin is a firm man for
Purgatory, and he will prove it out of that book of Enchiridion, and place
quoted by the Knight. Resolutely spoken, but so falsely, Encharid. ad Laurent. c
69. Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est, et utrum ita
sit quaeri potest et ut inveniri, aut latere possit, nonnullos fideles per
ignem quendam purgaiorium salvari non tamen tales de quibus dictu^ est regnum
Dei non posside bant.
that in this very book, chapter 69, Saint Austine speaking of a purging fire,
and commenting upon the words of Saint Paul, He shall be saved as it were by
fire; adds immediately, It is not unlikely that some such thing may be after
this life: but whether it be so or no, it may be argued; and whether it can be
found, or not found, that some Believers are saved by a purging fire; yet it is
certain, that none of them shall be saved, of whom the Apostle says, they
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And in the same book, chapter 109. he
resolves, that All souls from the day of their death to their resurrection,
abide in expectation what shall become of them, and are reserved in secret
receptacles accordingly as they deserve, either torment or ease. These hidden
Cells or Receptacles wheresoever they are situated in St. Austins judgment, C.
109. Tempus quod inter hominis mortem and ultimam resurrectionem interpositum
est animus abditis receptaculis continet, sicut unaqueque digna est vel requiae
vel arumna.
certain it is, they are not in the Popish Purgatory; for St. Austine places
in these secret Mansions all souls indifferently, good or bad, whereas the
Popish Purgatory is restrained only to those of a middle condition, being
neither exceeding good nor exceeding bad. Again, in St. Austines hidden
repositories, some souls have ease, and some pain, as each deserves: but in
the Romish Purgatory, all souls are in little-ease, being tormented in a flame
little differing from Hell fire, or rather nothing at all, save only in time,
the pains are as grievous but not so durable. Else where St. Austine is most
direct against Purgatory, and wholly for us, as namely, de peceat. meritis de
remissione, l. 1. c. 28. There is no middle or third place, says he, but he
must needs be with the Devil who is not with Christ. And Hypog. l. 5. The
first place the faith of Catholics by divine authority believes to be the
Kingdom of Heaven, the second to be Hell, tertium locum penitus ignoramus, the
third place, we are altogether ignorant of; and in his book de vanit. seculi
cap. 1. Know that when the soul is separated from the body, statim, presently,
it is either placed in Paradise for his good work, or cast headlong into the
bottom of hell for his sins. Neither can the Jesuit evade by saying that
there are two only places where the souls remain finally and eternally, to
wit, Heaven and Hell, but yet that there is a third place where the bodies fry
in purging for a time; for St. Austine speaks of all souls in general both
good and bad, and says that statim, that is, presently upon death, they are
received into Heaven, or thrown into Hell; and therefore stay no time in a
Third place. What then say we to the passage in which the Jesuit so triumphs?
Enchirid. ad Laurenc. c. 110. Neither is it to be denied, that the souls of
the dead are relieved by the piety of their friends living, when the Sacrifice
of our Mediator is offered for them, and Alms given in the Church. We answer,
that where St. Austine is not constant to himself, we are not bound to stand
to his authority, and therefore we appeal from Saint Austine missing his way
in this place, to the same Austine, Nullum auxilium misericordiae potest
preberi a justis defunctorum animabus etiamsi justi praebere velint, quia est
immutabilis divina sententia Qualis quisque moritur talis a Deo judicatur, nec
potest mutari, corrigi, vel minus dimia sententia.
hitting his way elsewhere, namely, l. 2. Quest. Evan. c. 38. There can be no
help of mercy afforded by just men to the souls of the deceased, although the
righteous would never so feign have it so, because the sentence of God is
immutable: and Ep. 80. ad Hesich. such as a man is when he dies, for such he
is judged of God, neither can the sentence of God be changed corrected, or
diminished. As for Mr. Anthony Alcots confession, that Saint Austines opinion
was for purgatory, it makes not for the Jesuit, but against him; for he
says, it was his opinion, not his resolved judgment, and his opinion at one
place and at one time, which after he retracted and resolved the clean
contrary, as Mr. Alcots there in part shows, and Danaeus most fully in his
Comment upon St. Austine his Enchiridian ad Laurentium.

To the tenth. ratione prototypi, in regard of that they represent: whether
properly, or improperly: whether with kissing and embracing, and other civil
complements, as Tharasius the Patriarch of Constantinople teaches, or with
prostration, or corporal submission before Images, as the Jesuit indeavoureth
to prove out of the Acts of the second Council of Nice. Neither is it
certain, and resolved among all Papists, that Images are to be worshipped, but
not as Gods. For some of them deny, that they are at all to be worshipped,
others over-lavish on the contrary, and teach, that they are to be worshipped
as God. De Imag. sanct. l. 2. c. 22.
For though Bellarmine himself approve not the opinion of those Roman
Catholics, who teach that Latria, or divine honor is due to Images, unless
it be improperly, and by accident; yet he confesses that Alexander de Hales,
Aquinas, Cajetanus, Bonaventure, Marsilius, Almaine, Carthusian, Capreolus, and
Henricus teach, that The Images of God are to be worshipped with the same
worship wherewith God himself is worshipped; and what is this less, than to
worship Images as God? As for the Canons and curses of the Council of Nice,
they are but Bruta fulmina, and if the Jesuit be not as senseless as the
Images which he worshippeth, he must needs confess as much. For to speak
nothing of the ridiculous arguments used in that Council, such as these are;
God made Man after his own Image, therefore we may make or worship Images: and
the Angels are to be painted, quia corporei sunt, because they are bodily
substances. What is there spoken in the 115 Psalm, the 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8
verses, against Idols, which may not be applied to your Popish Images? It is
said of them, They are the works of men's hands; are yours the work of Angels,
or Devils? It is said of them, They have mouths and speak not, eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, noses and smell not, hands and handle not, feet and
walk not: do any of your venerable Images made of silver and gold (or rather,
of which you make so much silver and gold of) speak, see, hear, smell, handle
or walk? I conclude therefore in the words of the Psalmist, They that make
these Images are like unto them, and so are all they that defend the worship of
them. For Gregory de Valentia, the Jesuit tells but a sorry tale; for first,
he disparageth his learning in the Greek, saying, that alleging a Text out
of Saint Peter, who wrote in Greek, he followed the Latin translation, never
looking to the original: which argues in him, either gross ignorance in the
Greek, or gross negligence. After he has thus disgraced their noble
Champion, he leaves him in the open field, saying, page 377. Neither do I
allow Valentia his use of the word Simulacrum, nor his explication of Saint
Peter's text, neither this his argument drawn from thence. The truth is,
Gregory de Valentia is unexcusable; De Idolatr. l. 2. Quid attinebat ita
determinate cultus simulacrorum illicitos notare, si omnino nullos simulacrorum
cultus licitos esse censuisset.
for howsoever he distinguishes of Image and Idoll-worship, and intends to
prove no more out of Saint Peter, then that some Image Worship is lawful: yet,
if his collection were good out of Saint Peter, it would prove some
Idoll-worship to be lawful. For Saint Peter's word is, (...), unlawful
Idolatries; and if because Saint Peter brandeth Idolatry with the epithet of
Unlawful, he will infer that therefore some Idolatry is lawful: by the same
reason he might conclude, that some Adultery or Theft were good and
profitable, because the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.21. bids us to have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness. For the distinction of an Image and
an Idol, I have spoken at large heretofore; here only I observe, that the
Jesuit (in saying that Idolum, according to the prime signification of the
word, might be taken more indifferently, because it signifies the seeming
shape or beauty of a thing or person) contradicts himself, and the whole
current of his own Doctors, and strengthens our Arguments against them,
drawn from the prohibition of making or worshipping Idols, that is, the shape
or beauty of any thing or person. Flood, page 337.
The shape or beauty of any thing or person, according to the prime
signification and etymology of the word is an Idol: but all Popish Images are
the shapes of some thing or person, they are all therefore Idols, and the
worshipers of them Idolaters, according to the primitive signification of the
word. The truth is, every Idol is an Image, and every Image an Idol,
according to the first signification of the word: but according to the present
use, an Idol for the most part is taken in the worst sense, and signifies
such an Image only as is idolized, that is made for religious worship, or
rather irreligious, as all Popish Images are: and because they are so, the
places of Scripture which we bring against the worship of Idols, as this of
Saint Peter, are strong and in force against them and their Worshippers. And
this may serve for answer of the fourteenth Paragraph of this tenth Chapter. In
the 15. and 16. following, he does but champe somewhat of that which before he
chewed, and therefore I conclude this Chapter with his own words a little
altered: we find nothing in matter of faith uncertain in the Protestant
Church, nothing certain on the Jesuits side but only this, that he is always
and every where himself, that is a Proteus: whose motto may be that of the
Heathens Goddess, Fortune: constans in levitate sua, constant to his
inconstancy, and true to his false dealing.

Concerning the greater safety and comfort in the Protestant faith then in the
Romish; Spectacles, Chap. 11. a page. 381. usque ad 404.
THE Knight though he talk so much of proving the safety, Catholic Roman
Authors, yet he cannot name that man that says any such thing: for suppose he
find one or two Authors that say some thing different from the common opinion,
does he presently say, the Protestant faith is safe?

Even those points of Protestant religion,

The Protestant religion is not safer then the Roman, Catholics rely upon the
same ground of safety, acknowledging and reverencing the authority of
Scripture, as much, nay much more then Protestants.

It is not safer to adore Christ (as Protestants do) sitting at the right hand
of his Father in Heaven, then to adore the Sacrament: for Christ is as surely
in the Sacrament as in heaven, the same Catholic faith teaching both
verities; and to make you study a little, says he, I may say in some sort,
more sure; for a man that would be contentious, may deny Christ to sit at the
right hand of his Father, because his Father has neither right hand, nor left.

There is no more fafety in the Protestant doctrine of Justification, than the
Roman.

Though some Catholics say, that there is more perfection of the Sacrament,
which consists in the representation in both kinds, than in one; yet there is
the same safety and fruit in one, and in both kinds.

Though the sacrifice of the Mass is more profitable, when the people
comnunicate with the Priest, Knight proves out of the Council of Trent,
Harding and Bellarmine: yet he proves not, that there is any danger in
private Masses, or that it is unlawful for the Priest to say Mass without he
have some to communicate with him, which is the Controversy between Catholics
and Protestants.

Aeneas Sylvius, Cassander, Panormitan are of opinion indeed, that Priests
should have liberty to marry: yet they would not have them marry against the
law standing in force, but they would have the law taken away: which is a far
different Doctrine from that of Protestants. Howsoever, it is safer to follow
the judgment of all other Doctors of the Catholic Church, all other Fathers
and Councels teaching the contrary; of all which, there is abundant proof in
Bellarmine, and which was never contradicted by any, but known wicked men.

Though public Prayers in Latin may not be so profitable to the people,
Aquinas speaks, will not countervaile the tenth part of the inconvenience
which may happen by having public Prayers in a known tongue. The
inconveniences are vanity, curiosity, contempt of Superiors, disputes,
schisms, profanation, and divulgation of secret Mysteries: besides, the very
ignorance of the Latin tongue, and consequently, of all learning which would
follow thereof only in Clergy men, is ten hundred times more harm, than that
fruit in the Laity is good. Cajetan was greatly mistaken, when he expounds
the fourteenth chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corynthians,
of public Prayers in the Church: and he is also mistaken in the very end of
Prayer, which is not edification, or instruction of the people, but the honor
of God immediately. Gabriel Biel speaks not of Prayer in a known tongue, nor
of public Prayers, but only of mental Prayer, and vocal; and gives those
seven reasons which the Knight alleges, to show, that besides mental Prayer,
it is convenient to use vocal.

There is no danger in worshipping Images, Erasmus, Cassander, and Chemnitius,
who teach the contrary, are of none authority.

Neither Bernard, nor Waldensis, Bellarmine, contradict the Doctrine of the
Romish Church in the point of Merit. For Catholics acknowledge with Bernard,
that there is no safe rest or security for a weak soul, but in the wounds of
our Savior; which does not hinder but a man may say, God rewards the good
works of his servants, out of his justice and fidelity, which out of his
mercy he gave them grace to do: and though Waldensis and some other Divines,
approve not of the word of Merit, especially De condigno; yet in the thing it
self, they all agree, to wit, that eternal life is given to men, as the
reward of their good works: which is all that others mean by condign Merit.
The Doctrine of Bellarmine, to wit, that it is most safe to trust wholly in the
Merits of Christ, is as well the Catholic Doctrine, as the Protestants: who
condemn not Protestants for not trusting in their works, or trusting wholly
in Christ; if so be they deny not the necessity and efficacy of good works,
for purchasing grace and glory.

The Hammer.
AS Asia Minor is called by some Geographers Asia Asiae, and the field of
Agrigentum, Sicilia Siciliae, and Attica, Graecia Graeciae, and the Ball or
Apple in the eye, the eye of the eye: so this Chapter of the Knight may be not
unfitly termed via viae, the safest path in his safe way, other Chapters tend
to the proof of his title Via Tuta: but this is full upon it. For here he
proves by many remarkable instances, that our rock is much more sure then
theirs, our very adversaries being judges; his instances are prayers in a
known tongue, communicating in both kinds, partaking of the Sacrament with
the Priest, immediate address to God by Christ, adoring the Creator only,
resolution of our faith upon Gods word, relying wholly upon his Grace and
mercy, and renouncing man's merit. And whose understanding apprehends not,
that it is safest to pray to God with understanding; whose spiritual senses
tell him not that it is more comfortable and profitable to communicate with a
Priest then to look on, and to receive the Sacrament in both kinds, then in
one only; whose reason persuades him not that it is safer to worship God in
spirit, then by an Image; to adore Christ in Heaven, then in a pe^ece of bread;
to expect aid from God, then Saints; to trust in Gods word, then in man's; in
his Grace, then our will; and in Christ's merits, then our own? yet as restie
jades stumble in fair way: so the Jesuit in this fairest rode of the safe way
stumbleth often, and tumbleth also, as the Reader may observe in the several
annotations at his particular slips, or rather downefalls in this Chapter.

To the first. Knight does not conclude out of any one particular, but makes
an induction out of many particulars in this manner. The Protestant faith by
the best learned among Papists in the point of Communion in both kinds, of
Prayer in a known tongue, justification by Faith alone, et sic de ceteris, is
safer then the Roman: ergo, simply and generally it is safer. Though Silurus
his Son could break every Arrow by it self, which his Father gave him, yet he
could not in like manner the bundle or sheafe of Arrows which he put in his
hand, and bid him assay to break them if he could, -- nam vis unita fortior.
Et quae non prosunt singula multa juvant; but the Jesuit has not been able to
break any one of the single Arrows shot by the Knight in the former Sections,
how then will he be able to break the sheafe in this?

To the second. Jesuit, he shows of what spirit he is. The searcher of all
hearts knows that we contradict Romish doctrines, not out of disobedience to
man, but out of obedience to him who commands us to contend for the true
faith: and to reprove and convince all gainesayers. What Papists intentions
are, we take not upon us to judge: their doctrines we put to the test of Gods
word, and find them false and adulterine, and all be it some points of their
belief, considered in themselves, might seem indifferent: yet as they hold
them they are not, because they are not of faith, Romans 14.23.
and what soever is not of faith is sin. Now no point of the Romish Creed as
they hold it, is of that faith the Apostle speaks of, that is, divine faith;
because they ground and finally resolve all their articles not upon Gods word,
but upon the authority of the Pope, Resp ad Archiepis. Spalaten. c. 47.
Firmitas fundamenti ^^ firma licet implicita in aureo hoc fundamento veritatis
adhaesio valebit, ut in Cypriano sic in nobis ad salutem: faenum and stipula
imbecilitas and caries in tecto and contignatione, and explicitae erroris
opinio non valebit, nec in Cypriano, nec in nobis ad per^^tiem.
or Church of Rome, which is but the authority of man; whereas on the contrary
as Doctor Crakent horpe demonstrateth, If any Protestant build hay or stubble
upon the true foundation, he may he saved; because be holds the true
foundation, which is, that every doctrine of faith ought to be built upon
Scripture. If the Jesuit wonder at this conclusion, let him weigh the Authors
reasons, and he will be forced to confess, that the errors, if there be any in
Protestants, in regard they stick close to the true foundation, and implicitly
deny them, cannot in them be damnable, whereas the very true doctrines of faith
in Papists, because they hold them upon a wrong ground and foundation, very
much derogatory to God and his truth, are not so safe.

To the third. With what face can the Jesuit avow this? Prieras before
alleged, and other writers approved by the Church of Rome, mainetaine this
blasphemous assertion, that the authority of the Church is greater then the
anthority of Scripture, and all Papists of note at this day, hold that the
Scripture is but an imperfect and partial rule of faith; all Protestants on
the contrary teach, that it is an entire and perfect rule of faith; Papists
believe the Scripture for the Churches sake, Protestants the Church for the
Scripture sake; Papists resolve all points of faith generally into the Popes
infalibility, or Churches authority, Protestants into the written word of God,
which as Bellarmine himself confesses, De verbo Dei non script. l. 4. c. 11.
contains all things necessary for all men to believe, and is a most certain
and safe rule of beleeveing. Yea but says the Jesuit out of Vincentius
Lerinensis, De verbo Dei l. 1. c. 2.
he that will avoid the deceits and snares of Haeretikes, and remain soundin
the faith, must strengthen his faith two ways, to wit, by the authority of the
divine law, and the tradition of the Catholic Church. This advise of
Vincentius is sound, and good if it be rightly understood, and not in the
Jesuits sense. Vincentius there by tradition of the Catholic Church
understands not unwritten verities, but the Catholic expositions of holy
Scriptures, extant in the writings of the Doctors of the Church in all ages,
and we grant that this Catholic exposition of the Doctors where it can be had,
is of great force to confirm faith, and confound Heretics. Vt Scripturae
ecclesiastice intelligentiae jungatur authoritas.
For the stopping of whose mouth that Father says, and we deny it not, that
there is great need to add to the Scripture the Churches sense or
interpretation, albeit as he there adds, which cutteth the throat of the
Jesuits cause, The Canon of Scripture is perfect, and sufficient of it self
for all things: nay rather, as he corrects himself, Over and above
sufficient; cum sit perfectus scripturae canon sibique adomnia satis superque
sufficiat.

To the fourth. Jesuit would make his Reader study a little, and his Adversary
to muse; Vero nihil verius, certo nihil certius.
but it is indeed, whether he be in his right wits, or no. For first, as
Seneca well resolves, one thing cannot be said truer than another; one truth
in Divinity may be more evident to us than another, but in it self it cannot
be truer or surer. Secondly, admitting there could be degrees of certainty, at
least quoad nos, there can be yet no comparison, in regard of such certainty
between an Article of the Creed assented unto by all Christians, and a
controverted conclusion, maintained only by a late faction in the Western
Church. But the sitting of Christ at the right hand of his Father, is an
Article of the Creed, set down in express words in holy Scripture, Mark
16.19. Luke 24.
consented unto by all Christians in the world; whereas the carnal presence of
Christ in the Sacrament by Tranfubstantiation, is no Article extant in any
Creed, save only that of Pope Pius his coining, in the year of our Lord,
1564. It is neither in words set down in Scripture, as the other Articles are;
neither can it be necssarily enforced or deduced by consequence, as four great
Cardinals of the Roman Church confess, Cameracensis, Cajetan, Roffensis, and
Bellarmine. Neither was this Doctrine of the Roman Church ever assented unto
by the Greek Church, nor by the Latin anciently, or generally, as I showed
before. Thirdly, the Jesuit contradicts himself within eight lines: for
having said in the eighteenth line, Page 384.
that Christ his corporal presence in the Sacrament was more sure, than his
presence in heaven at the right hand of his Father; about seven lines after,
forgetting himself, he says, that We shall find as much to do (mark as
much, not more) in expounding that Article of the Creed, as they do in
expounding the words, This is my Body. Wherein it is well he confesses, that
Papists make much to do in expounding the words, This is my Body, which is
most true; for by the demonstrative Hoc, they understand they know not what.
Neither this Body, nor this Bread, but an Individum vagum, something contained
under the accidents of Bread, which when the Priests says Hoc, it is Bread;
but when he has muttered out an Vm, it is Christ's Body. Likewise by the
Copula est (is) they understand they know not what; either shall be, as soon
as the words are spoken, or is converted unto, or is by Transubstantiation.
Lastly, by Body, they understand such a body as indeed is no body, without the
extension of place, without distinction of Organs, without faculty of sense,
or motion: and will he make this figment so incredible, so impossible, as
sure, nay more sure than the Article of Christ's ascension into heaven, and his
sitting at the right hand of his Father there? Yea, but the Jesuit demands,
Wherein are you more safe than we? if he be not there, we are in danger of
adoring him where he is not; if he be there, then are you, says he, in
danger, by not adoring him where he is. I answer, we are every way safe, and
they both ways in danger: we are safe, because if he be there, we who
worship him there in spirit and truth, not under any corporal shape, are in no
danger at all; because we worship him at his Table, as he requires: if he
be not there, we can be in no danger, for not worshipping him there where he
is not. They are in danger both ways, of Will Worship if he be there; of
Idolatry, if he be not there. Of Will Worship, I say, if he be under the
accidents of Bread and Wine, because they are no where commanded to worship him
under such forms: if he be not there, then are they apparently guilty of
grosser Idolatry, by exhibiting Culium latriae, divine worship to a piece of
Bread.

To the fifth. Jesuit, like an Adder, thrusts out his forked sting, pricking
with one of his forkes, the Knight, for calumniating their Doctrine: with the
other, the Doctrine of the Reformed Church, touching assured hope of salvation,
as matter of vain confidence, and a dangerous precipice of the soul. The
first is easily plucked out; for the Knight charge them with nothing, but
what the Jesuit himself confesses. For if men cooperating to their
justification, merit both grace and glory, they do not ascribe the whole
glory of it to God; but as the Romans, for the victory they gained over the
Cimbri, sacrificed Deo and Mario: so do the Papists at this day, for the
conquest of their ghostly enemies, and their purchase of heaven, burn incense
Deo and Mariae, to Christ and Mary, and attribute their justification and
salvation, partly to Christ's merits, partly to their own; together with the
superabundant satisfaction of the blessed Virgin Mary, and other Saints. The
other forke reaches not home to invenome our most wholesome doctrine,
concerning assured hope of salvation: for though we teach, that a man ought to
be assured that his sins are forgiven him: yet withal we teach, that this
assurance is upon condition of Repentance and Faith. And withal we affirm,
because he stands not by his own strength, but by Gods power, Who works
in him both the will and the doed; he ought not to be high minded, but to
feaxe, and in this fear to work out his salvation. Phil. 2.13.
I mean, in fear: as fear is opposed to carnal security and presumption,
not as it is opposed to religious confidence: and as he must work out his
salvation with this fear, so also with trembling; as trembling is taken for an
awful and filial reverence, not for a servile affrighting. For the trembling
here meant, is not only joined with assured hope, that God will work both the
will and the deed, but also with joy, rejoice unto him with trembling. Psalm.
11.


To the sixth. Jesuit tug hard, yet the Knight holds him fast in Hales,
Vasquez, and Valentia his net. For if it be true that the Sacraments effect
what they represent, it will follow upon the Jesuits own confession, that in
regard the Sacrament is perfecter in both kinds then in one, in regard of
representation, it must needs be more perfect also in the fruit and operation:
and if so, then more safety and comfort in our entire, then in their half
communion.

To the seventh. Bell. de Missa, l. 2. c. 10. Negari non potest quin sit magis
perfecta et legitima, missa ubi co^municantes adsunt qua^ ubi non adsunt.
Harding, art. 1. of private Mass, Where the people co^ nunicate, it is more co^
nendable, and more godly. Council Trent, ses. 22. cap. 6. more fruitful, and
more profitable.
The Jesuit would feign contradict the Knight, but indeed he contradicts
himself. For in granting that which Bellarmine, Harding, and the Council of
Trent extorteth from him, that it is more profitable for the people to
communicate with a Priest at the Mass, then to loake on; he says by
consequent that there is more safety in it: which is the proper point in
controversy in this Chapter. For as that which is unprofitable for the soul,
cannot but be dangerous: so that, which is profitable to the soul cannot but
be safe, nothing is profitable to the soul but that which some way tends
too, and furthereth the salvation thereof: and is not that safer which more
tends to salvation?

To the eight. Aeneas Silvius makes no mention at all of any Law of single
life, De gestis council. Bafil. l. 2. Coss. de caelib. Sacerd. art. 23. Panor.
de cler. conjug. c. Quum olim. Credo pro bono et salute animarum statutum nunc
iri ut non valentes continere possint contrahere.
but simply says, that It were safer for Priests to marry; for that means
many Priests might be saved in married Priesthood, Cass. de caelib. Sacerd.
art. 23. Panor. de cler. conjug. c. Quum olim. Credo pro bono et salute
animarum statutum nunc iri ut non valentes continere possint contrahere.
which now in barren Priesthood are damned. Cassander and Panormitan make
mention of the law, which tieth Priests to single life, and both think that
the abrogation of it would be good and behoovefull to the fowls of many
Priests that those who cannot attain to the first degree of chastity in a
single life, may be permitted to live in the second degree of chaste marriage.
And what is it else that we contend for, but that it may be left free to the
Ministers of the Gospel to marry if they think good? which liberty implies
two things; First, that where there is a law restraining them from marriage,
that law may be abrogated: Secondly, for the future, that no law prohibiting
marriage in the Clergy may be enacted. Yea but says the Jesuit, all the
Doctors, all the Fathers, all the Counsels, and the continual practice of the
Church from the very beginning is against Priests marriage, of all which you
have abundant proof in Bellarmine. I answer, of all this, nay, none of all
this, as you may see in Chemnitius History de celibatu sacerdotum, Iunius, and
Chaumerus their reply to Bellarmine, and most largely and plentifully in Dr.
Hall now Bishop of Exon. his three books against Coffin; entitled, The honor
of the married Clergy. Page 392.
Yea but says the Jesuit in the last place, the law restraining Priests
marriage was never contradicted by any but known wicked men. What a loud and
Stentorian untruth is here uttered by a foul mouthed Jesuit? Was Paphnutius
the confessor, Spiridion the Saint, were all the Fathers of the first general
Council of Nice, together with Pope Pius the second, and the Fathers at the
Synod at Basil, besides infinite others, produced by the Authors above named,
all known wicked men? The Lord rebuke thee thou false tongue.

To the ninth. Jesuit here only troubles the water, that the truth may not be
clearly seen in the bottom; let the water but settle a little, and we shall
presently discern it: for though the terms be different, profitable, and
lawful, as likewise unprofitable and unlawful: yet the question, whether
prayers in an unknown tongue be profitable and safe for the soul, and whether
they be lawful or coincident. For whatsoever is unlawful, is consequently
unprofitable, and whatsoever is unprofitable in divine service is unlawful,
because against the rule of the Apostle, let all things be done to edification;
now in a prayer which a man understands not, how is the understanding
bettered? or as Aquinas speaks, fed by the fruit of refection. As for the
inconveniences that are pretended to come by prayers in the vulgar tongue,
neither the Hebrew nor the Greek Churches, nor all the reformed in the
Christian world find any such: and if there should fall any such, they are not
to be imputed to Gods Holy Ordinances, but to men's abuses. Yea, but says the
Jesuit, the very ignorance of the Latin tongue, and consequently of all
learning that would follow thereon only in Clergy men, is a thousand times
more harm, than the fruit in the Laity is good. Here the Jesuit straineth
very high, but without all show of reason, or shadow of Truth, and against
daily experience: for who knows not, that the Clergy in the reformed
Churches, where Divine Service is in the vulgar tongue, are as ready and expert
(to say no more) in the Latin tongue, as your ordinary Mass Priests. Again,
you are exceedingly overlavish, in saying, that ignorance in Latin in
Clergiy-men, is a thousand times more harm than that fruit is good which the
Laity might reap by the public service in a known tongue. For the Clergy
are but exceeding few, in comparison of the Laity, scarce one for a hundred, I
may say a thousand; and the saving knowledge which the Laity might, and do
reap by the Divine Service, and Sacred Scripture read in a known tongue, is a
thousand times more worth, than the knowledge of the Latin tongue in the
Clergy. Lastly, his consequence, that the ignorance of the Latin tongue would
bring with it the ignorance of all Sacred learning, is most ignorantly absurd.
For who knows not, that the Scriptures themselves (the treasury of all
Sacred learning) were written in Hebrew and Greek. To say nothing of the first
general Councels, and the prime and flower of all the Greek Fathers, to the
knowledge of whom a man may attain without any Latin at all. But because
Latin is your best metal, you undervalue Gold and Silver. For Cardinal
Cajetan, he may for the Jesuit go with Crassus, and gather cockles and pibles
at the shore of Cajeta; for he makes no more account of Allegations out of
this Cardinal, than of Tricae apinaeque aut si quid vilius istis;Me thinks
the Scarlet robes of the learned of all the Roman Cardinals, and Schoolmen
of his time, should produce a like color in the cheeks of this Jesuit, if he
have not lost all tincture of modesty. Does Cajetan sometime nodd? Aliquando
bonus dormitat Homerus?And does the noddie Flood never? Cardinal Cajetan
affirms, that Saint Paul in the fourteenth chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corynthians, speaks of public Prayer; the Jesuit Flood denies it, utri
credemus? Whethers authority will bear down the scales? Cardinal Cajetan
says, that edification is the end of public Prayer; and he has Saint Paul
of his side, prescribing in this chapter, 1 Cor. 14.
that All things be done to edification: but Sus docet Minervam, the Jesuit
Flood instructs the Cardinal better, that the end of Prayer is the honor of
God, as if Subordinata pugnarent, things that are subordinate were contrary;
or as if the edification of the people tended not to the honor of God, or
there might not be several ends of Prayer: the first and chief, the immediate
worship of God; the secondary and less Principle, yet necessary also, the
instruction and edification of the people. For Biels seven reasons, Can. missae
lect. 62.
insisted upon by the Knight, though they were not alleged professedly to
prefer Prayer in a known tongue, before Prayer in an unknown; yet the
reasons there set down, as strongly infer the Knights conclusion, as that
which there Biel intends. The evidence whereof is so clear, that the Jesuit
himself is constrained to confess, Page 401. l. 11.
that Some of his reasons indeed, have no place where the words are not
understood. Those reasons therefore fight for us, and the rest with a little
help, will be brought to do good service against Romish and unintelligible
Prayers; for how can a Prayer whereof never a syllable is understood, Stir up
the mind to inward devotion? which is Biels first reason: Or enlighten the
understanding? which is his second: Or cause the remembrance of things spoken
in the time of Prayer? which is his third: Or keep the thoughts from
wandering? which is his fourth reason: Or cause a more full performance of
duty, both in body and soul? which is the fifth: Or a better redoundance from
the soul to the body, by a vehement affection? which is the sixth: Or serve for
the instruction of our Brethren? which is the last.

To the tenth. Knight needed not here to allege any more authorities against
the peril of Idolatry and Invocation of Saints, because before in the seventh
Section, he had cloyed his Reader with testimonies in this kind; for the worth
of Erasmus and Cassander, Quos rumor alba gemmeus vehit penna;their Epitaphs,
and printed Eulogies before their works, which have kept their fame alive this
hundred years, make good proof to the world, that they are like to flourish
in perpetual memory, after the leaves of a thousand such scribblers as the
Jesuit is, shall be withered. In Chemnitius the Jesuits eyes failed him; for
the Knight in this place, alleges not his words, but the words of S. Austine;
and them, not to prove that we cannot pray to any Saint living or dead: but
according to the title of his whole book, and special Argument of this
chapter, that it is the safest and sweetest way to have immediate address to
our Savior: Tutius, says he, and jucundius loquor ad meum Iesum; I speak
with more safety and delight to my JESUS.

To the eleventh. Knight may well say, Dicite Io Pean and Io bis dicite
Pean:For here twice he has brought his Adversaries to subscribe unto
Justification by Faith alone; and to confirm with his own hand, the title of
the Knights book with advantage. The title is but Via tuta, but the Jesuit
confesses over and above, that the Protestants way, who rely upon Christ's
merits only for salvation, is Via tutissima, The safest way. And if Vasquez
and Bellarmine, and other pleaders for merit by condignitie, mean no otherwise
than the Jesuit interprets them, we shall all soon shake hands; for who ever
denied, that God rewarded our good works? but here, either wittingly or
ignorantly, the Jesuit concealeth the conditions required, to every meritorious
Act, ex condigno. First, that the work be properly ours, and not his, of whom
we pretend to merit. Secondly, that it be opus indebitum, a work to which
otherwise we are not bound. Thirdly, that it be some way profitable and
beneficial to him from whom we expect our reward. Fourthly, that it have
condignity to the reward expected; or as Vasquez speaks, Be worthy of the
reward, and have an equal value of worth to the obtaining thereof. Upon all
these conditions we contest with Papists, and consequently deny any merits of
condignitie; yet freely acknowledge a reward of good works, and this reward to
be due unto us, (but a reward of grace and free bounty) and due to us by his
promise, no way by our deserts.

Concerning the Fathers, whether Protestants or Papists attribute more unto
them; Spectacles, chap. 12. a page 405. usque ad 434.
IT cannot be unknown to any man of learning, Campian's ten reasons, the fifth
of which is of the Fathers.

In the thirteen Instances, Knight will prove, that Bellarmine, and Stapleton,
and Senensis, and Gregory de Valentia, and Sanders, and Ribera, and Canus, and
Salmeron, either elude or reject the Fathers, the Knight deals not squarely.
For, though he quote the words for the most part truly, yet he concealeth
their reasons which they give of their answers. Neither do those Writers
insist only upon those answers to the places objected out of the Fathers, but
add many other unto them, to give the Reader better satisfaction, as will
appear by the particular examination of each passage.

The Hammer.
ALthough in this Chapter the Jesuit lie as open to the lash, as in any of the
former; yet partly because he is like him in the Poet, that was so tawed and
fleade with rods, that there was no skin left on his body for a new stroke to
fetch off: partly because, Page 406, he confesses he cannot tell what to say
to the Knight; but especially, because the Argument of this Chapter is most
fully and accurately handled by Dr. Humphrey, and Dr. Whitaker, in their answer
to Campian his fifth reason, and in a singular Treatise lately set forth by
Laurentius, entitled, Reverentia Ecclesiae Romanae erga sanctos patres. I will
forbear to examine the several Paragraphs in this Chapter, (wherein,
whatsoever is material, is refuted in the answers to the former Sections)
only I will point at some notorious falsities and absurdities, if not to
rectify the Jesuits judgment, yet to disabuse the credulous Reader. First,
he denies not that the Roman Doctors above mentioned, utter those
disgraceful speeches of Saint Austen, Origin, Theodoret, Cyprian, Tertullian,
and the rest, but he adds that they gave other answers to our objections out
of those Fathers. What is that to the purpose, or against the Knight? who
denies not that Popish writers have other shifts and evasions to our arguments
drawn from the testimony of ancient Fathers besides those, which are here set
down in this chapter, which are refuted by Chamierus, Iunius: and for the
better part of them by me in the former Sections: but he produced these
passages only to show the Romanists disrespect and sleightening of the ancient
Fathers, if in any thing they cross their Trent Faith. Secondly, to touch upon
some particulars, how ridiculously and absurdly does the Jesuit speak, Page
417. Epiphanius says in plain manner, that the Image which he saw hang in the
Church at Anablatha, and tare down the vale in which it was drawn, was not
the Image of Christ or any Saint, but the Image of a man, he knew not whom;
which if it had bin Christ's, or any Saints he would have known whose it was,
neither would he have called the Image of Christ or any Saint the Image of a
man. Why I pray you? is not Christ a man? were not Saints men? What should
Epiphanius have said else, who saw there the representation of the feature, and
liniaments of a man, but knew not what man that was? he says, he saw a veil
having on it the Image as if it had been of Christ, or some Saint, for he knew
not whose it was. If he knew not whose it was, for ought he knew it might be
made for the Image of Christ, or any Saint. Upon what ground then does the
Jesuit say, that it was neither the Image of Christ nor of any Saint? P. 423.
Thirdly, he says it is evident that Saint Chrysostom did say Mass every
day; whereas neither in that place quoted by him, neither in any place in all
his works can it be gathered, that he ever said Mass, or administered the
Sacrament without communicants: the Romish Mass is of a far later date, then
the age of Saint Chrysostom. P. 425.
Fourthly, he most shamefully and falsely traduceth the Protestants (whom he
terms the Haeretikes of this age) that they speak generally, very meanly
and contemptibly of the most sacred Virgin. I marvel his heart did not smite
him, when his hand wrote these words so directly against the truth, and his
own conscience. For he cannot be ignorant that King James in his admonition to
all Princes, set forth in Latin, French, and English, and our Church in the
book of Common Prayer, speak most honorably and reverently of that most
Sacred and blessed Virgin, religiously observing the feasts of her
Annuntiation, and Purification, and rehearsing at every Evensong, her
Magnificat. P. 427.
Fifthly, he says that Saint Jerome allows the the book of Judith to be
Canonical Scripture: whereas in the place quoted by him, the preface to Judith
he says only that it is read, or that he had read somewhere, that the Nicene
Synod did reckon the book of Judith among the holy Scriptures, but for
himself he says in that very Preface, that this book is not fit to be
alleged for the confirmation of those things that are in controversy. And in
his Preface to the book of Proverbs, he says expressly, that the book of
Judith is not accounted by the Church for Canonical. Judith and Tobie, P. 430.
and Machabeorum libros legit quidem ecclesia, sed cos inter Canonicas
Scripturas non recipit. Sixthly, he affirms that there is no controversy
between them and us concerning the immaculate conception of our Lady; whereas
both Chemnitius and Reynolds, and many other Protestant writers have
overthrown the ground of their feast of the immaculate conception of our Lady;
and all reformed Churches in general have struck that feast out of the
Calender, and the title of the 15. Article of religion of Christ alone without
sin, shows to the world, that we believe it to be the prerogative of our
blessed Savior, among all the Sons of Adam, that he alone was free from all
original and actual sin. And now Master Flood, since you are taken in so
many and foul untruths in one Chapter; I hope the Reader will not envy you
that Guerdon, which Aristotle bestows upon a lewd and loud Liar, not to be
credited when he speaks the truth.

Concerning Razing of Records and clipping Authors tongues; Spectacles, Chap.
13. a page 435. usque ad 446.
BECAUSE there have been many books published this last age, Catholic faith:
there has been a course taken for the restraint of all such, not only
writings of Haeretikes, but even of Catholics which have any tang of haeresie:
and this kind of care has been ever used in the Catholic Church. So we see
in Scripture it self some that followed curiosities becoming Christians,
confessed their deeds and burnt their books.

Gelasius in the year 490. Knight, or any man else that cries so bitterly
against our Index Expurgatorius, what he can say against it, that he may not
say against this Decree, and Council of Gelasius, and against which we may not
defend our selves by opposing it as a buckler against all their darts?

Since all swarving from the rule of faith is a declining to haeresie, Gelasius
says, has neither spot, nor wrinkle, to prevent the danger that may come by
such books forbidding the use of them.

It were a more dangerous and unnatural part in the Church not to use this
care,

I will not stand particularly to examine every Author, Bertram, whom of all
men living me thinks the Knight should never so much as have named,
considering how much disgrace he has sustained by translating that book, and
ventring his own credit, and the credit of his Church, upon the faith thereof.

Another thing I am to note concerning his quoting the Canon of the Council of
Laodicea, 368. forty three years after the first Council at Nice; whereas it
was celebrated before that Council. Secondly his corruption in the translation
and cutting off the Canon, which is thus; non oportet relicta ecclesia ad
angelos abominandae idolatriae congregationes facere, quicunque autem inventus
fuerit occulte huic idololatriae vacans anathema sit. Now where in this Canon
does the Knight find the word invocation of Angels, which is the thing he
pretends, to be forbidden.

Whereas the Knight objecteth to us the recantation of Henry Buxhorne, 600.
several passages to be spunged and blotted out; which animadversions of his he
wished he could have washed away with his tears and blood, his heart being
smitten, and his eyes open by the mercy of God: I answer, if such matter will
serve the Knights turn he may have enough: neither need I search corners to
find out such obscure fellows, as this Buxhorne; he might bring the Fathers
of the Knights religion: for example, Luther, Calvine, Zuinglius, Beza,
Carolstadius, and who not? for though they might pretend several causes, yet
there was one principal one, which consisted indeed in the smiting of their
hearts with a fiery dart of carnal love, and when they found an Eve to give
them an Apple, then their eyes were opened, and so it proved also with their
friend Buxhorne, as I shall show by a brief story of his life, most
authentically related by that grave and Holy man Oliverius, of the society of
Jesus. Henry Buxhorne, a licentiate of Divinity, etc. It was not the razing
then of evidences that made Buxhorne fall from his faith, but there were
certain Lutheran baits wherewith many of them were catched, which were aurum,
gloria, delitiae, veneres, gold, glory, delights and Venus, of which some are
catched with one, and some with another.

The Hammer.
IN the former Section, the Jesuit showed himself a prevaricatour, but in this
a cowardly runnagate. For to the mangling of authors, and razing out of Records
objected against him, namely, this marginall note out of Stephanus his Bible,
Deus prohibet sculptilia fieri. This Gloss upon Gratian the Priest, cannot say
significatively of the bread, This is my Body, without telling a lie,
Cassanders observation upon the same words, that setting aside the authority
of the Church, they prove not sufficiently Transubstantiation, Cassanders whole
Tract concerning the Communion in both kinds, Vdalricus his Epistle touching
the lawfulness of Priests marriage, Anselmes Treatise concerning the
visitation of the sick, together with diverse passages in Cassander against
merit, in Polydor Virgil against Images, in Langus against Transubstantiation,
in Ferus against the Popes supremacy. The Jesuit answers nothing at all in
particular, but only applies Salves in general, which no way heal the wounds
given by the Knight to the Inquisitors, as the Reader shall see by taking them
off one after another, and viewing the Sores.

To the first. Jesuits instance is wide from the purpose. For those Books were
not burnt by any decree of the Church, much less the Church of Rome, which was
not then in being: but by the owners of them, to testify their unfeined
Repentance; for so we read, Acts 19.19. Many also of them, brought their
Books together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of
them, and found it 50000 pieces of silver. Secondly, these Books which the
owners burnt of their own accord, were Books of such as used curious Arts;
that is, Books of Art-magick, Necromancie, Sorcerie, and the like. Whereas, the
Books which the Romish Inquisitours either mangle or utterly deface are
Christian Treatises, written for the most part by them, that lived and died in
the bosom and peace of the Church of Rome.

To the second. Gelasius which the Jesuit opposes, as a Buckler against all
our darts, is not altogether approved by the present Roman Church; for in
reckoning the Canonical books of Scripture, the Pope there excludes the
book of Baruch, and the second book of the Macchabees, and the book of
Nehemiah, which the present Roman Church receives for Canonical. Secondly,
Gelasius with his Roman Council, freely give their censure of all Theological
books then extant, but they clip not the tongues of any Authors, nor burn
their books. If the Romish Inquisitors had done no more, if they had let the
Records and Evidences remain, and only censured them at their pleasure; we
would not so much have blamed them, for using the freedom of their judgments:
we would only freely have censured their Censures, Lips. Epist. Critica nostra
non effugere (...).
and left all to the judicious and intelligent Readers judgment. An error in
Criticisme is pardonable, but the making away of the evidence of Truth, Advers.
Gentes, l. 3. Intercipere scripta, and publicatam velle submergere lectionem,
non est Deos defendere sed veritatis testificationem timere.
and defacing authentical Records, is a damnable practice, and an undoubted
Argument, both of an evil conscience, and a desperate cause; as Arnobius
lays the Law to the Gentiles.

To the third. Gelasius his testimony of the Roman Church, whereof he was
then Bishop, can be of no great moment. It seems at that time, Rome wanted
good neighbors, that the Pope was feign to blazon his own arms, and guild
his own Diocese; not thinking of the old Proverb, Laus propria sordet in ore.
Howbeit, we grant in Gelasius his time, the Roman Church had not many spots
and wrinkles, for then she was young in comparison; now she is old and
decrepit, and all full of wrinkles: and after the manner of crooked old age,
boweth down, to wit, to rood-lofts, Images, and Pictures. But neither then nor
now, has she any power to forbid the use of any Books through the whole
Church: but only within her own jurisdiction.

To the fourth. Jesuit applies it. For it is not their admonitions to the
Children of their own Church, which we here complain of; but their cutting
out of the tongues of learned Authors, when they witness the truth: not the
censuring their own Writers, but the mangling of some of them, and utterly
abolishing others. Under color of taking away Rats-bane out of the way, they
take away Sugar from their Children; and which is worse, debar them from the
sincere Milk of the Word, I mean, the Scriptures in the vulgar language. Yet
were there Rats-bane, in some of the Writers with whom the Inquisitours have to
deal, they should have only given notice thereof, or prescribed some Antidote
against it, considering that Physicians, and Apothecaries, and Householders
also, make good use of Rats-bane sometimes.

To the fifth. Jesuit does well, not to undertake justifying of the Inquisition,
which he well knows he is not able: only here and there he nibleth at
some Author or other that has fallen into their hands, as Bertram in this
place: whom the Knight long ago rescued, and gave unto him the wings of the
Press to fly abroad; whereby he has received no disgrace, but many thanks
from all that love the Truth in sincerity. For the translation thereof, which
the Jesuit imputes to the Knight, as a great disparagement to him; the truth
is, the Knight translated not Bertram, but published the translation of
another, by re-printing it, and gracing it with a learned and elegant Preface
of his own. Which, I marvel not that the Jesuit kicketh at, because he and
his fellow Jesuits are sore Galled with it. When the Jesuit shall prove any
falsification in the translated Copy, or any error inserted into it, he
shall receive a further answer. Till then, let the brand remain upon the
Roman Index, for damning the original; and upon the Jesuit, for defaming the
true translated Copy of so learned and orthodox a Writer as Bertram was.

To the sixth. Laodicea, and detecting the Inquisitours foul dealing with it,
by turning Angels into Angles, to gain a starting hole for their Idolatry:
the Jesuit by recrimination objecteth to the Knight, error in Chronology, and
corruption of the Council. To the first I answer, that the Primate of Armath,
and other learned Antiquaries have set this Council about the year mentioned
by the Knight; your Binius ingeniously confesses, quo anno celebratum fuit
incertum est; It is uncertain in what year of our Lord this Council was
held; he says, it was celebrated before the Council of Nice, but he brings
no proof of it. If we should grant him that this Council were elder by 40 or
50 years, than the Knight accounts it, it would be more for our advantage,
and against him; since Councels, the more ancient they are, caeteris paribus,
the more authority they carry with them. To the second I answer, that the
translation which the Knight followed, agrees verbatim with the original,
(...): which words, two of the Romish Translators set in Columns one against
the other by Binius, render, as follows. The first thus, Quod non oporteat
Christianos relicta dei ecclesia abire, and Angelos nominare. The other thus,
Quod non oporteat ecclesiam dei relinquere atque Angelos nominare. That is,
that Christians ought not to leave the Church of God, and go their ways, and
name Angels: that is, mention them in our Prayers, or take their names in our
lips, as the Psalmist speaks of Idoll-worshippers; Psalm. 16.4.
Their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take their name in my
lips. And thus Theodoret in his Comment upon the second Chapter of St. Paul to
the Colossians, verse. 18. alleges the Canon of this Council: Because, says
he, they commanded men to worship Angels; Saint Paul enjoyneth on the
contrary, that they should send up Thanksgiving to God the Father by him that
is Christ, and not by the Angels. The Synod of Laodicea also following this
rule (of the Apostle) and desiring to heal that old disease, made a Law, that
they should not pray unto Angels, (...). Here the Jesuit has both the Canon,
and the Report; the Canon of the ancient Council held at Laodicea, thundering
against their Invocation of Angels: and the learned and ancient Father
Theodoret his Report of it.

To the seventh. Jesuit names, were not Fathers of our Religion, but Brethren
only of our profession; neither was their motive for the change of their
Religion carnal love as the Jesuit, like impure Nero, judging others by
himself, conceives; but a voice from Heaven saying unto them, go out of
Babylon my people, Apoc. 18.4.
lest you partake of her Plagues. It is true, those instruments of Gods glory
were married as the Apostles St. Peter and St. Phillip, and many of the chief
Bishops and Pastors in the Primitive Church were, of whom it may be said as
Sozomen spoke of Spiridion that famous Bishop of Cyprus: Eccles. Hist. l. 1.
(...).
they lived in wedlock, and had many children without any disparagement at all
to their Sacred function. As the Rod of Aaron in these brought forth fruit in
Holy Matrimony: so it budded also in others in our Church, who followed
virginal chastity, and lead a single life, as Jewel, Reinolds, Andrews,
Lakes, and many other reverend Prelates and Doctors, who for eminent learning
and examplary life, may compare with any of the Romish Mitred Prelates, or late
Canonized Saints. Neither can they pretend that any Eve gave these an Apple,
whereby their eyes were opened: but on the contrary we can produce many a
Lucretia who have given Apples to their Popes, Lucretia nomine, sed re Thais,
Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus.
whereby their eyes have been blinded, and their reputation for ever blasted.
See Picus Mirandula his oration extant in Fasciculus rerum expetendum and
fugiendum, and Mantuan his Poem.

Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara cinaedis
Servit honorandae Divum Ganymedibus aedes.
As for Olivereus Manareus his Legend of Buxhorne, if the Reader will be
pleased to peruse an apology for this Buxhorne, written to the Chancellor of
Lovan, wherein the true cause is related, for which this licentiate Divine
abandoned the Papacy, he shall find in that treatise printed in the year of
our Lord, 1625, a Rowland for his Oliver, or Oliverius Manareus the Jesuit, to
whose relation as much credit is to be given as to Cocleus his History of
Luther, and Bolsecs of Calvin. The Devil, the grand Calumniator has suborned
in all ages men of prostituted consciences, and corrupt minds and mouths, to
stain with their impure breath, the golden and the silver vessels of the
Sanctuary: but Illi linguarum, nos aurium dominsumus, their tongues are their
own, they may speak what malice dictateth; our ears are our own, and we
will hearken unto, and assent only to what truth confirms. As for their
Lutheran baits, he mentions, aurum, gloria, dilitiae, veneres; gold, glory,
delights and Venus, if these things abound any where, it is in the Roman
Church, where the Pope who pretends himself to be the successor of Peter the
fisher; fisheth with a golden hook, and baits it with fleshly lusts; what so
pompeous and glorious as his Holiness triple Crown, and his Cardinals Hats,
and his Bishops Miters and Croziours; for what sense has not the Romish
Religion baits? for the eyes they have gawdie shows; for the ears, most
melodious music; for the smell, sweetest incense and perfumes; for the taste,
feasts without number; for the touch, whole streets of Curtezans, not only in
Rome it self, but in all the Popes Towns which are commonly known by this
foul Cognizance.

Concerning our adversaries their blasphemous exceptions against the Scripture;
Spectacles, Chap. 14. a page 447. usque ad 463.
THough Catholics hold for most certain, Catholics have offered to try the
matter only by Scripture.

Though Catholics ground many points upon tradition and practice of the
Church:

Though the Pope question not, Scriptures of obscurity and insufficiency: yet
his Apostles and Evangelists have left some things in writing, of which some
are hard even by the judgment of Scripture it self, for so says Saint Peter
of the Epistle of Saint Paul, which says he, the unlearned and unconstant do
abuse as they do other Scriptures, to their own perdition.

If any condemn the Scripture of insufficiency, St. John in saying, that all
things are not written, and St. Paul in willing the Thessalonians to hold the
traditions which they had learned, whether by speech or letter.

Whereas the Knight charge us with ranking the Bible in the first place of
prohibited books: St. Jerome, who did no way admit such free use even of the
Latin Bibles.

It is no such crime to forbid the reading of Scripture to some sort of people,
Genesis, and the beginning and end of Ezekiel were not to be read by the Jews,
till they came to thirties year of age.

A kind of forbidding of reading the Scripture is no derogation,

For Cornelius Agrippa, Knight says, for it is but ask my brother if I be a
thief.

Not to answer the places objected by the Knight, Lindan, Lessius, Turrian, and
Pighius, I say in general, that those things are spoken not of the Scripture,
as it is in it self, that is, consisting of both words and meaning, but of
bare words and letters only, which Haeretikes still do, and ever have abused,
as the Devil himself did to our Savior; and in this sense it is a wood of
thieves.

Our Authors say no more then St. Jerome does in effect; Marcion, Basilides,
and other plagues of Haeretikes have not the Gospel of God, Comment. in 1. ad
Gal.
because they have not the Holy Ghost, without whom it becomes the Gospel of
man which is taught; nor let us think that the Gospel consists in the words
of Scripture, but in the sense; not in the superficies or bark, but in the
pith; not in the leaves of speech, but in the root of reason: so that if the
Knight will say any more of this matter, he must undertake the quarrel against
St. Jerome.

Lessius in particular, Knight most up braideth to us, is far from saying
that the Scripture is uncertain in it self; that is, that the doctrine
thereof is doubtful, but only that our rule will be uncertain, or rather we
uncertain of the rule, because we cannot know the Scripture by it self.

It is not all one to say that Scripture alone is no sufficient Rule, Knight
imagines, that the All-sufficiencie, or containing of all things expressly,
is a necessary point of perfection, he is deceived; for then would it follow,
that the Gospel of Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and other particular Books
should be imperfect, and especially that of Saint John, wherein he says
expressly, that all things are not written.

Were the Scripture perfect in the Knights sense,

No Catholic declineth the trial of Scripture, Tertullian, who says, It is
lost labor to dispute with an Heretic out of Scripture.

Let any man by the effects, him compare the labors of the one in translating
and expounding Scriptures, with the labor of the other, and he shall find the
truth of this matter.

In admitting any trial with Protestants by Scriptures, De praescript. c. 15.
Non esse admittendos haereticos ad ineundam de scripturis provocationem, quos
sine scripturis probamus ad scripturas non pertinere. Vos qui estis? quando and
unde venistis? quid in meo agitis non mei. Quo denique Marcion jure sylva^^
meas caedis
we condescend more to their infirmity than we need, or they can of right
challenge. For we acknowledge that saying of Tertullian most true, that
Heretics are not to be admitted to the Scriptures, to whom the Scripture in no
wise belongs; who are you, when, and whence are you come? What do you in my
ground, you that are not mine? By what right, o Marcion, do thou fell my
wood? By what leave, o Valentine, do thou turn my fountains? By what
authority, o Apelles, do thou remove my bounds? etc. This is Tertullians
discourse and words, where it is but changing the names of Marcion, Valentine,
and Apelles, into Luther, Calvin, and Beza; and it will fit as well, as if it
were made for them.

You must first show your selves owners of the Land,

The Hammer.
Whereas many other things argue, that our Adversaries maintain a desperate
cause: so especially their excepting against the holy Scriptures of God, and
refusing to be tried by them in the points of difference between us and them.
For what was the reason why the Manichees called in question the authority of
the Gospel of Saint Matthew, Aug. l. 28. cont. Faust. cap. 2.
and the Acts of the Apostles? Desperation; because by those writings they were
convinced of blasphemous Error. What was the reason why the Ebionites rejected
all Saint Paul's Epistles? Desperation; Irenaeus, l. 8. cap. 26.
because by them their heresy was most apparently confuted. Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
Cum ex scriptur is arguuntur in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum scripturarum,
quasi non recte habeant, nec sint ex authoritate nec possit ex iis inveniri
veritas ab his, qui ignorunt traditionem. Tertul. praesc. advers. haeret.
What was the reason why the Gnostics and Valentinians disparage the
Scriptures, saying, that They were not of authority, and the truth could not
be found out of them by those who were ignorant of Tradition? Desperation. What
was the cause why Papias, and the Millenaries preferred word of mouth before
Scriptures, and pretended (...), unwritten tradition for many of their fables?
Desperation. What was the reason why the Heretics in Tertullians days refused
to examine their Doctrines by the touchstone of the Scriptures, saying, More
things were required than the Apostles had left in writing, for that either the
Apostles knew not all, or delivered not all to all. In like manner, we can
impute it to nothing else but diffidence, and distrust of their cause; that
Lyndan, Turrian, Lessius, and Pighius speak so disgracefully of holy
Scriptures as they do, terming them dead Characters; a dead and killing
Letter, a shell without a kirnell, a leaden rule, a boot for any foot, a nose
of wax, Sybils Prophesies, Sphinx his riddles, a wood of Thieves, a shop of
Heretics, imperfect, doubtful, obscure, full of perplexities. If they should
bestow the like scandalous Epithets upon the Kings Letters patents, or the
Popes Bulls or Briefes, they would be soon put into the Inquisition, or
brought into some Court of Judicature, and there have either their tongues or
their ears cut, or their foreheads branded: yet the Jesuit is so far from
condemning these blasphemous speeches in his fellow-Jesuits and Romanists, that
he devises excuses for them, and sowes figleaves together, to cover these
their Pudenda: which I will pluck off one after another, in my answer to his
particular exceptions against the Knight.

To the first. Horantius had in undertaking to refute Calvin his Institutions,
as appears by Pilkington his Parallels. If the Scriptures were so firm for
our Adversaries, why are not they as firm for them? why does the Iessuit in the
forefront of this Section, bid, as it were, defiance to them, professing in
plain terms, that The Scripture is not the sole rule of Faith; nor that out
of it alone, all Controversies can be decided. Doubtless, any indifferent
Reader will conceive, that the Scriptures make most for them who stand most for
their authority, and perfection, as all the reformed Divines do, not only
affirming, but also confirming, that the Scripture is not only a most perfect,
but the only infallible rule of faith: Ep. 112. Si divinarum Scripturarum earum
scilicet quae in Ecclesia Cano. nicae nominantur, perspicua firmatur
authoritate, si^e ulla dubitatione credendum est: aliis vero testibus vel
testimoniis quibus aliquid credendum esse suadetur, tibi credere vel non
credere liceat, quantum ei momenti ad faciendam fidem vel habere, vel non
habere perpenderis. Ep. 97 Solis iis Scripturarum libris qui jam Canoniti
appellantur, didici hunc timorem honoremque defer, ut nullum earum authorem
scribendo aliquid errasse firmissime credam. lib. de Not. and Great c. 61. Me in
hujusmodi quorumlibet Scriptis hominum liberum, quia solis Canonicis debeo sine
recusatione consensum, l. 11. c. 5. and Ep. 48.
every article of divine faith must be grounded upon a certain and infallible
ground to us, but there is no certain and infallible ground to us of
supernatural truth but Scripture, as is abundantly proved by Saint Austine; If
any thing be confirmed by perspicuous authority of Canonical Scriptures, we
must without any doubt or haesitation believe it, but to other witnesses or
testimonies, we may give credit as we see cause, and in his 97. Epistle to St.
Jerome, I have learned to yield that honor and reverence only to the
Canonical Scriptures, that I most firmly believe, that no Author of them
could err in any thing he wrote: and in his book de natura and gratia, I
profess my self free in all such writings of men, because I owe absolute
consent without any demurre or staggering only to the Canonical books of
Scripture. To the same purpose he writes against Faustus the Manichee l. 11.
c. 5. and ep. 48. But what need I press St. Austine when the evident letter
of Scripture is for this truth, Titus, 1.2. Romans 3.4. God cannot lie, and let
God be true and every man a lier that is subject to error and falsehood.
Again, the Scriptures are sufficient to instruct us in all points necessary to
salvation: therefore every article of divine faith is evidently grounded upon
Scripture. The Antecedent I thus prove, 2 Timothy 3.15.16. whatsoever is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, in such sort that it is able to make a man wise unto salvation,
and perfect to every good work, is sufficient to instruct in all points of
salvation: but the Scripture is so profitable, that it is able to make wise
unto salvation and perfect to every good work: Ergo, It is sufficient to
instruct in all points necessary to salvation. The major is evident ex
terminis: the minor is the letter of the text; and that the adversary may not
except that this is my collection only, L. 3. Advers. haer. c. 1. Non per
alios dispo sitionem salutis nostrae cognovimus quam per cos per quos
evangelium ad nos pervenit, quod quidem tunc preconiaverunt, postea per Dei
volun tatem nobis in Scripturis tradiderunt fundamentum and columnam fidei
nostrae futuram. Aug. l. 3. cont. Lit. Petil. c. 6. Sive de Chrlsto sive de
ejus ecclesia, sive de quacunque re quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram,
non dicom si nos, nequaquam comparandi ei quid dixit si nos, sed omnino quod
seturus adjecit, si Angelus de Coelo vobis annunciaverit praeterquam quod in
Scripturis Legalibus and Evangelicis accepistis, anathema sit.
I will produce to him impregnable testimonies of the ancient Fathers.
Irenaeus, We have not known by others, the means which God has appointed for
our salvation, then by those by whom the Gospel came unto us, which at the
first the Apostles preached by word of mouth, but afterward by the will of
God, delivered in writing to be the foundation and pillar of our faith. The
second is Saint Austine, Whether concerning Christ, or concerning his Church,
or concerning any thing that pertains to our faith and life, I will not say,
if we but even as he going forward adds, if an Angel from Heaven shall
preach unto you any thing but what you have received in the Scriptures of the
law and the Gospel, accursed be he. Yea but the Jesuit objecteth against us
and these Holy Fathers, that by the Scriptures we cannot prove, which books of
Scripture are Canonical, and which are not. I answer: first, our question
here, is not of the principles of Divinity, but of Theological conclusions.
Now that Scripture is the word of God, and that these books are Canonical
Scriptures, are principles in Divinity, and therefore not to be proved
(according to the rule of the great Philosopher) in the same science: It is
sufficient to make good our Tenet, that the Canonical Scriptures being
presupposed as principles, every conclusion de fide, may be deduced out of
them. Secondly, that such books of Holy Scriptures are Canonical, and the
rest which are known by the name of Apochrypha, are not Canonical, is proved
by arguments and testimonies drawn out of Scripture it self, by Whitaker,
Disputatione de sacra Scriptura, controversia prima; by Reynolds most copiously
in his Censura librorum Apochryphorum. Thirdly, I retorte the Jesuits argument
against himself, when they teach tradition is part of Gods word, how prove
they it to be so? by Scripture, or Tradition? by Scripture they cannot prove,
that unwritten traditions are Gods word: if they prove it by Tradition, then
they beg the point in question, and prove idem per idem.

To the second. Romanists ground some doctrines of their faith upon the letter
of Scripture, but it is that letter which kills, as for example; they ground
their carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, upon those words in the sixth
of St. John; unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of God and drink his
blood, you have no life in you: which words, if you take according to the
letter, this letter kills, says Origin; but it is the spirit says our
Savior, that quickens, the flesh profits nothing, the words which I speak
unto you, they are spirit, and they are life, John, 6.63. He that pierces the
bark, and comes to the sap, runs not from the tree of life, but rather
runs to it: so do we when we leave the bark of the letter upon necessary
occasions, and pierce into the heart, and draw out the sap of the spiritual
meaning. To press the letter of Scripture against the spiritual meaning and
analogy of faith, is not only Jewish but Haereticall. For example, The
Anthropomorphites ground their haeresie upon plain and express words of
Scripture: from which to use the Jesuits own words, All Orthodox Divines are
feign to fly to figurative and tropicall interpretations.

To the third. Peter says not, (...) but (...), not in which Epistles of St.
Paul, but in which points and heads of doctrine many things are hard to be
understood. Secondly, though some points be hard to be understood in
themselves, or are obscurely set down in Scripture, it follows not from
thence, that all things necessary to salvation are not plainly delivered
therein. For, as before I proved out of Saint Austine and Saint Chrysostom,
Among thuse things which are plainly delivered in Scriptures, all such points
are found as contain faith and manners, all things that are necessary are
manifest. Thirdly, those things which are obscurely set down in Saint Paul's
Epistles, may be, and are elsewhere in holy Scriptures more perspicuously
delivered. Lastly, Saint Peter says not, that those things are hard to be
understood simply, and to all men; but to the ignorant and unstable, who wrest
all Scripture to their own destruction. Among which number, the Jesuit must
reckon himself and his associates, before they can fit this text to their
purpose.

To the fourth. John has been discussed before, and cleared; where I showed,
that it makes nothing against, but strongly for the sufficiency of Scripture,
to instruct in all points necessary to salvation. For, though all Christ's
speeches and actions are not registered by the Evangelist, yet as Saint Austine
rightly infers out of the words following, (haec scripta sunt ut credatis
and credentes vitam aeternam habeatis.) 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
electa sunt quae saluti credentium sufficerent: Such things were made choice
of to be written, Ver. 2. And Paul as his manner was, went unto them of
Thessalonica, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.
as might suffice for the salvation of all Believers. Neither is that text of
Saint Paul any whit derogatorie to the perfection of Scriptures: for whatsoever
he means by Tradition (per Sermonem) taught by word of mouth, it is certain
out of the seventeenth of the Acts, that all Saint Paul's speech and discourse
to the Thessaloinans, whereunto the words have reference were out of Scripture.
Secondly, the words themselves, Tenete traditiones quas dedicistis sive per
sermonem, sive per Epistolam; import not that the Apostle delivered diverse
things to them in writing by an Epistle, and without writing, by word of mouth:
but that he preached to them, and taught them the Christian doctrine both
ways, by Letters, and by speech: and that they should have as much care of his
writings, as of those things he spoke to them in presence. Thirdly, admit they
were different things which he spoke to them, and which he wrote: all that
can be from thence inferred, is but this, that all points of saving Doctrine
are not written in this Epistle of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians: which may
be granted without any prejudice to our Tenet. For those things that are not
written in that Epistle, might be, and undoubtedly are written in other of his
Epistles, or other books of holy Scripture.

To the fifth. Jerome is not against the free use of Scripture in the vulgar
tongue, for he himself translated the Scriptures into the vulgar tongue of
the Dalmatians; he dedicates his Commentary upon Scripture to Lay-persons,
yea many of them to women: whom he exhorts, Haec monilia in pectore, haec in
auribus hereant.
to account them as their chief casket of Jewels; let these Jewels hang upon
your necks, and in your ears, Epist. ad Demetriad: wherein he much
commends the Husbandmen about Bethlem, for being so perfect in Scriptures,
that They had the Psalms of David by heart, and sang them as they followed the
Plow. Arator stivam tenens cantat Davidicum melos: he instructs Laeta a
religious Matron, how to bring up her daughter in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and what method to observe in the reading thereof, Progemmis and
serico divinos codices amet, In steed of silks and precious stones, let her
handle the books of holy Scripture: let her first learn the Psalter, etc.
discat primo Psalterium his se Canticis avocet, and in Proverbiis Salomonis
erudiatur ad vitam. In Ecclesiaste consuescat quae mundi sunt calcare. In Job
virtutis and patientiae exempla sectetur. Ad evangelia transeat nunquam
eapositura de manibus, etc. Neither are the words you quote out of him, against
the free use of the Scripture, but against the practice of some forward
persons, who, Lapwing-like, offer to fly with a piece of the shell on their
head, taking upon them to expound holy Scriptures to others, which they
understand not themselves, and to teach that which they never learned, docent
quod nunquam didicorunt.

To the sixth. This practice of the Jews concludes nothing at all, Jesuit
brings against us, makes for us; for they permitted all men before thirty, to
read all other chapters of holy Scriptures, and after thirty, these also.

To the seventh. The honor the Papists do the Scriptures, Quae prae amore
exclusit for as, which out of pure love thrust him out of doors. The greatest
honor we can do Gods holy Oracles, is diligently to read them, attentively
to hear them, humbly to obey them, and daily to search them, as the deeds and
evidences of our salvation; Ioh. 5.39.
according to the Precept of our blessed Savior, Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me. As for the Jesuits reason, drawn from the weakness of the Readers, it is
very weak, and of no force at all. Psalm. 19 7. Prove. 1.4.
First, because the Scriptures were written to give knowledge to the simple,
and wisdom to the unlearned. Secondly, because if this his reason were good,
their Church should prohibit all other books as well as Scriptures, or rather
much more than Scriptures, in regard there are errors in them, but none in
Scriptures: and God has promised a special blessing to those, who in
obedience to his ordinance, diligently read and study the holy Scriptures,
which he has not to those that read other books.

To the eight. Jesuit in the former Section, when he, a Jesuit, produced
Oliverius Manerius a Jesuit, against Henry Buxhorne, Deane of Tyelmond, then
he said in effect, Ask my brother Jesuit if I be a thief, or rather a
slanderer. But it no way fitteth Cornelius Agrippa, and the Knight, the one
being a zealous Protestant, the other a professed Papist, though discovering,
and ingeniously confessing diverse abuses in the Papacy. If he were as the
Jesuit says, a Magician, because he wrote of Art-magicke; what were Pope
Hildebrand and Sylvester, who not only studied, but also practiced the
black-Art, as Benocardinalis, Platina, and others write.

To the ninth. Jesuit will not stand answering every one severally, because he
dare not keep that station for fear of Gunshot. For the answer he gives in
general, it is false and absurd, if not impious: false, because it is
certain, that those similitudes cannot be applied to the letter only, without
the meaning; nor do the Heretics now a days, nor did the Devil himself
allege only the letter and syllables of Scripture, but the meaning also, 2
Pet. 4.16.
though perverting and wresting it to an evil end, and drawing false
conclusions from it. He that calls the Scriptures Sybils Prophecies
blasphemously carpeth at the obscurity of the meaning: and Pighius, who
compared it to a nose of wax, impiously taxes the diversity of senses, and
interpretations which the Scripture is subject unto in it self. Lastly, the
Jesuit takes himself by the nose, in saying, Heretics in all Controversies
run to the letter of the Scriptures, leaving the true sense, and spiritual
meaning: for so do the Romanists apparently, namely, in the Controversy of
Supremacy, Ecce duo gladii; Lo here two swords: therefore the Pope has the
temporal and spiritual Sword at command. Peter, rise up, kill and eat:
therefore the Pope has power to put Princes to death. In the question about
the number of Sacraments, they allege the letter of that text in the vulgar
translation, Hoc est magnum Sacramentum, to prove marriage a Sacrament; whereas
the Apostle in the same place says, that he speaks not of corporal
marriage of a man and his wife: but of the spiritual marriage of Christ and
his Church. Likewise in the Controversy about the real presence, they run to
the letter, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood: though Christ in the same place expounding himself, says, The words
which I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life: the like may be observed in
other Controversies. For answer to all which texts, we tell him out of Saint
Jerome, whom himself quoteth in the next Paragraph; That the Gospel
consists not in the words of Scripture, but in the sense: not in the
supersicies or bark, but in the pith: not in the leaves of speech, but in the
root of reason.

To the tenth. Marcion, who denied, or by consequence, overthrew the truth of
Christ's human nature; as the Papists do in the Sacrament, vailing him under
the outside, or accidents of a round water; and what affinity the Jesuit has
with the rest of the ancient Heretics, the Knight showed him before in his
seventh Section: and if he desire to know more of his pedigree from them, I
refer him to an Appendix to Whitakers answer to Sanders his Demonstration,
page 801. As for the aspersion of old Heresies, which he casts upon us, they
are washed away by Bishop Morton, and Doctor Field, in their Treatises of the
Church, Ad notam sextam. But why he denies that we have the Spirit,
arrogating it only to himself, I see no reason but the pride of his own
spirit, together with the malice of the evil spirit, who suggested unto him
this uncharitable censure of us.

To the eleventh. Light, Psalm. 119. and the nature of a light is, first to
discover it self, and then all things else: therefore Calvin to his fond
question, how know you Scripture to be Scripture? answers acutely by
retortion, how know you the Sun to be the Sun? If he say, by his bright luster
and beams; we say the same of holy Scripture, that it is discerned by its
own light. Which, if the Papists see hot, the fault ought not to be laid upon
the Sunbeames, but upon their Owls eyes.

To the twelfth. teach, the Scripture alone to be an imperfect Rule. We on the
contrary stand for the perfection of Scripture, and constantly and unanimously
defend that not only the whole Scripture is perfect, but that every part also
has its own perfection, but not the perfection of the whole. Because the eyes
have not the perfection of the whole head; or the head, the perfection of the
whole body; a man cannot conclude, that the eye, or the head is imperfect: no
more can the Jesuit conclude that the Gospel of Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, or
Saint John are therefore imperfect, because they contain not in them all
doctrines in particular necessary to salvation. It is sufficient that they
together with the rest, perfectly instruct us in all points of faith: by
themselves they perfectly inform us so far as the Holy Ghost intends, that
we should be informed by each of them in particular, and this is their
perfection, that they have no defect in matter or form, and that they concur
with the rest of the books of Scripture, to the maine end of the Holy Ghost in
committing the word of God in writing, for the infallible and perfect
instruction of the Church, and every faithful soul in all Doctrines needful
to salvation.

To the thirteenth. Protestants have written de Scriptura judice, and they have
warrant our of Scripture so to style it; (the words which I have spoken they
shall judge you) yet in propriety of speech, which especially ought to be used
in stating questions, the Scripture is rather to be termed a rule and law, or
sentence of the judge, then the judge himself: the supreme and infallible
judge of all controversies, we teach to be the Holy Ghost, speaking to us out
of Scriptures, and the subordinate or inferior Judge the consencient authority
of the Catholic Church.

To the fourteenth. Jesuit showed no such thing, nor can show out of
Tertullian, De praescrip advers. haeret. c. 17.
who convinced the greater part of Haeretikes in his time by Scripture, as
appears in his writings. In the place which the Jesuit quoteth, he has no
such words as he alleges out of him: viz. that there is no good to be done
with Haeretikes by Scriptures. He says indeed in that place, that it was but
in vain to confer with a certain kind of Haeretikes by Scriptures alone,
quia ista haeresis non recipit quasdam Scripturas, et si recipit, non recipit
integras et si aliquatenus integras praestat, etc. That is, This haeresie
admits not of certain Scriptures, or not entire, or if in some sort in ire, it
perverts them by divising diverse interpretations. In which words he no way
disparageth the holy Scriptures, or derogateth from their perfection: but
discovers the wicked practice of Haeretikes, and their evasions and
tergiversations, when they are most evidently convinced by Scriptures. Will you
say that if a Bedlam or wilful malefactor either by puffing out the Candle,
or shutting his eyes, or looking another way, will not read or see the
evidence that is brought against him, that therefore the evidence is not able to
convince him?

To the fifteenth. Jesuit, that the Papists have written more upon the
Scriptures then Protestants, it will not from thence follow, that they more
reverence or honor the Scripture: sithence in their very Commentaries upon
Scripture, they derrogate from the authority, sufficiency, and perfection of
them, by refusing to refer all points of faith in controversy to their
decision: by resolving their faith last of all not into them, but into the
Church: by teaching, that they are obscure even in points necessary to
salvation; and that unwritten Traditions are equally to be reverenced with
them. Secondly, compare men with men, and oportunities with oportunities; it
may easily be proved that the Protestants in their preaching, and writings upon
Scripture, have been far more laborious then the Papists. Name me one Papist
who Preached so often, and wrote so accurately upon the Holy Scriptures, as
Calvin. I grant their books exceed in bulk and number, because they have a
hundred to one, and they abound with leisure, and means, having many thousands
maintained in their monasteries, who are not charged as our Divines are, with
care of souls, and perpetual labors in their Pastoral function.

To the sixteenth. mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. It is but changing the
names of Marcion, Valentine and Apelles, into Bellarmine Valentia and Lessius,
or if you will, into John Flood, and it will fit as well as if it were made for
him. How proves he that Papists are in the Church, and Protestants out of it?
He shall never prove but that we have as good title, and much better, to the
Holy Scriptures, the deeds and evidences of our salvation then they.

To the seventeenth. nuncupatory will by word of mouth, and disparaging these
writings, and evidences as uncertain, ambiguus and unperfect, as the Knight
has made good against him in this Section.

Concerning the testomonies of Cardinal Bellarmine; Chapter 15. Spectacles, a
page 464. usque ad 485.
THE testimonies alleged by the Knight out of Cardinal Bellarmine for the
Protestant faith, in the points of Transubstantiation, private Mass, Prayer in
an unknown tongue, Communion in both kinds, the number of Sacraments, the
necessity of good works, and justification by faith alone, have been all
answered in the former Sections, and that which he adds concerning
universality and miracles, makes for the Catholic and against the Protestant
faith.

The Hammer.
THe testimony of an adversary is of great force, Isid. Polus. ep. (...).
especially a learned one, most of all one his deathbed, when he looks every
hour to be summoned before the Judge of all flesh: and therefore we have all
reason to make great dainties of the noble confession of the learnedest of all
our Romish adversaries in the maine point of faith, wherewith he gave up the
ghost: Domine me admittas in numerum sanctorum tuorum, non meriti astimator,
sed veniae largitor. Lord admit me into the number of thy Saints, not weighing
my merits, but pardoning my offenses: this testimony and prayer of his, printed
in his will, the Knight in this Section backeth with another taken out of his
third book Dejustificat. c. 17. Vel habet homo vera merita, vel non habet,
etc. Either a man has true merit, or he has not; if he has not, he is
dangerously deceived, and seduceth himself, whilst he trusts in false
merits; for these are deceitful riches, says Saint Bernard, which rob a man
of the true: but if he has true merits, he loses nothing by this, that he
regards them not, but puts his whole trust in Gods mercy only. This is
not only Forte, but Fulgens telum: to use the words of Quintilian, Not only a
strong, but a beautiful, bright, and shining weapon: wherewith the Knight
gives his Adversary such a deadly wound, that he pants as it were for life,
through all this Section. Much ado he has to say any thing, which yet is as
good as nothing: to wit, that Bellarmine in his first book De Iustificatione,
cap. 1. says, that He will endeavor by five principal Arguments, to
demonstrate that a man is not justified by Faith only. What will the Jesuit
conclude from hence? that the Cardinal contradicts himself? I grant it, and
I take it for a singular Argument and Evidence of Truth on our side, which
enforced this great Cardinal, after he had spent all his strength in
justifying the Romish Tenet concerning justification by works, and the merit
thereof, in the end to undo all that he had done, and conclude fully with the
Knight, that In regard of the uncertainty of a man's own justice, and the
danger of vainglory, it is safest to renounce all man's merit, and to put our
trust only in Gods mercy. Sufficit ad meritum scire, quod non sufficiant
merita. For other passages in this chapter, I shall pass them over with a dry
foot, because there is nothing material in them said in excuse of Bellarmine
his warping from the Romish Religion, which has not been discussed before. As
for such Rotten-stuffe wherewith he pieceth it up in his later Paragraphs,
namely, five, six, seven, and eight; fetched from Romish Broker-shops
concerning the name Catholic, and multitude of Professors, and miracles,
because none of it suits with the title or argument of this Chapter, I will not
defile my hands with it: only I wish the Reader to take notice, that the
Jesuit twice in this Chapter convinced by evidence of Truth, yields the
Knight the Bucklers, acknowledging out of Cardinal Bellarmine, That our
Doctrine is safer than theirs, in two maine points: the one concerning the
Sacrament, the other justification by Faith only. For the first, Linea 28.
Page 465, he is constrained to confess, that though he holds Private
Mass to be lawful; yet, that It is a more perfect; and in a certain sort
more lawful Mass, where there be some to communicate with the Priest: for
then it has both the ends for which it was ordained. Certainly, that which is
more lawful, is safer: our Communion therefore, wherein some of necessity
communicate with the Priest, is safer than their Private Mass by the Jesuits
own confession. For the second, I find, page 471. that, though much against
his will, yet in Terminis, he concurres with Bellarmine, in acknowledging our
Doctrine concerning relying only on Christ's merits, and Gods mercy for
salvation, to be safest: and what else do all Protestants contend for in the
point of Justification by Faith alone; but that all men renounce their own
inherent righteousness, and trust only to Gods mercy in Christ for
Justification and Salvation? If at Christ's dreadful Tribunal, the safest Plea
are Christ his merits applied to us by Faith, I wonder any dare to use any
other? If there be safety, nay most safety, as the Jesuit confesses in this
point of Protestant doctrine, there must needs be truth in it; for there can be
no safety for the soul in a lie.

Concerning Romish Martyrs; Spectacles, Chapter 16. a page 485. usque ad 490.
THE blessed Martyr Edward Campian in his tenth reason, Campian) were ours, and
names some of them, as Telesphorus, Victor, Sixtus, Cornelius, with the
particular points, which they held conformably with us against Protestants.

That these Martyrs are ours, Knight mentions, is plain, because they
professed the same Catholic Faith which we do; which we also prove by the
Faith of their successor Urban the eigth, who, as he holds their seat, so
also their Faith; for Peter's Chair and Faith go together, as the very
Heretic Pelagius confessed to Pope Sozimus, saying to him, Tu qui Petri fidem
and sedem tenes. Not to stand here upon the most effectual and infallible
Prayer of our Savior himself, Oravi pro te Petre ut non deficiat fides tua:
which proof must stand firm till Sir Humphrey can tell us what Pope began to
vary from his predecessors.

For adoration of Images, Knight asks whether any of these three and thirty
were canonized for it: though there be no special mention of any of these
three and thirty, their adoration of Images, yet there is very pregnant
presumption thereof by this, that Pope Sylvester, who was the very next after
the three and thirtieth, and was Pope in time of Constantines conversion, had
the pictures of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, which it is most like, he received
from his Predecessors.

Moreover it is plain, Campian cites, that the Heretics have no other shift,
but to deny the authority of the same Epistles.

That the consecrated Bread depending upon the Priests intention, is the real
Flesh of Christ: Garnet by name, has power to consecrate, is no matter of
Faith; but that in the Sacrament, the matter, form, intentton, and all things
requisite concurring, the Bread and Wine is really and truly converted into
the Body and Blood of Christ: this is a matter of Faith, and this a man is to
die for. Neither makes it any matter whether any man have died for it, or not;
for that is more in the persecutors power, to appoint what point of a man's
Faith he will put him to death for, than in the Martyrs own, who must be
ready to die for all and every one, as well for one as for another.

The Hammer.
IN this Chapter the Knight pulls the garland of Red Roses off from the heads
of all Papists: I mean the Crown of Martyrdom, by three most forcible
arguments, which may thus be reduced into Syllogisticall form.

1. None of those who suffered death for the common Articles of the Christian
Faith, which we all profess: are to be accounted Popish Martyrs. But the 33.
Popes and all the Martyrs in the Primitive Church, suffered death for the
common Articles of faith, which we all profess. Ergo none of them were Popish
Martyrs: neither can they lay any more or better claim to them then we, if so
good.
2. All that may be termed truly Popish Martyrs, must suffer death either for
the profession of the Trent Faith in general, or some special point of it,
wherein they differ from the reformed Churches. But none of the Primitive
Martyrs suffered death for the profession of the Trent Faith in general, or
any point thereof wherein they differ from the belief of the reformed
Churches. Ergo, none of the Primitive Martyrs were Popish.
3. If the Articles of the Romish Creed published by Pope Pius were either
unknown to the Primitive Church, or not then declared to be de fide, none in
those days could suffer Martyrdom for them. But the twelve new Articles of
Pope Pius his Creed were altogether unknown to the Primitive Church, or not
then declared and defined to be de fide, as the Jesuit Page 490. in part
acknowledges. Ergo, none in the Primitive Church could suffer Martyrdom for
them.

What wards the Jesuit has for these blows, we shall see in the examination
of the particular exceptions before mentioned.

To the first. It is as true that those 33. martyred Popes were Martyrs of the
Romish Religion, Campion the Jesuit, who suffered death for Treason against
Queen Elizabeth, was a Martyr. The truth is, that although Campion in his
tenth Reason, search Heaven, and rake Hell also, for witnesses to prove the
truth of the Romish Religion, yet he finds none, as D. Whitaker clearly
demonstrateth in his answer to that tenth reason, and his defense thereof
against Dureus. To let others pass, those 33. Bishops of Rome, the Jesuit
mentions, who now wear Crowns of Martyrdom in Heaven, never ware the Popes
triple Crown on Earth. P. 486. l. 16. I answer that those Martyrs suffered
death not for the points now in controversy with Haeretikes, but for the
profession of Christianity at the hands of the enemies of Christ.
They sat as Bishops of Rome, they sat not as Lords over the whole Church:
neither was the cause of their death any contestation with Princes for
Sovereignty, nor the maintenance of any points now in controversy, as the
Jesuit himself confesses, but the profession of Christianity. They were not
therefore Martyrs of the Roman Church as she is at this present, nor of their
Trent Creed; but of the Catholic Church and the common faith once given to
Saints.

To the second. Jesuits argument drawn from these 33. Bishops of Rome to Pope
Vrbane the eighth fall short at least by 1300. years. If he should thus argue
in the Schools: Pope Vrbane the eighth, in the year of our Lord, 1633. held
the Trent faith, and believed Pope Pius the fourth his Creed: therefore the 33.
Bishops that suffered Martyrdom under the Heathen Emperors within 300. years
after Christ, held the same faith, and subscribed to the same Articles of
Trent; he would be stamped at, and hissed out by all present; for who knows
not that George the Arian immediately succeeded Athanasius the most Orthodox
Bishop, and that all the Arian Bishops in Constantius his time, held the Sees
of those Orthodox Bishops, who in the first Council at Nice condemned that
blasphemous haeresie. In our memory, did not Cardinal Poole a Papist, succeed
Cranmer, a Protestant Bishop and Martyr? again, did not Parker, in Q.
Elizabeth's days, a learned Protestant succeed Cardinal Poole an Arch-papist,
in his Archbishopric of Canterbury? What a wooden Argument then is this, to
infer succession in Doctrine from succession in the same Chair? This
wretched Argument the Jesuit proves as lewdly, by the testimony of Pelagius
the Heretic. This is indeed to Ask his brother if he be a thief, or no: to
ask an Heretic whether your Romish Doctrine be not heretical. Yet so
unfortunate is he in his proof, that even this his only witness, how liable
soever to exception, says nothing for him: Pelagius was not so absurd as to
hold this position, that Peter's Chair and Faith go always together; but only
spoke in a glozing manner thus to Pope Sozimus, Thou hold Peter's Chair and
Faith: and will the Jesuit infer an universal from a particular? Pope
Sozimus held Peter's Chair and Faith: therefore all that hold Peter's Chair,
hold his Faith. What holds these two together? Luke 22.32. Quest. vet. and N.
Test. q. 75. Quid ambigitur pro Petro rogabat and pro Iacobo et Ioha^ne non
rogabat? ut caeteros taceam manifestum est in Petro omnes contineri.
a most strong and effectual Bond, says the Jesuit, namely, Christ's promise
to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. The time will fail
me to declare particularly how many ways this Argument of the Jesuit fails:
first, Christ prayed not here for Peter only, as Saint Austine affirms, What
does any man make question hereof? did Christ pray for Peter, and not for James
and John? To say nothing of the rest, it is manifest, that in Peter all the
rest are contained. This prayer then no more privilegeth the Sea of Rome from
error, than of Jerusalem or of Ephesus, or any other See of the Apostles.
Secondly, Christ prayed not that Peter might not err, who afterward erred,
Gal. 2.14.
and was reproved by Saint Paul, Galathians the second: but that his Faith
might not fail, that is, be overcome in that fearful temptation, in such
sort, that he might not rise again after his fall. Thirdly, Christ's prayer is
for Peter himself in his person, and the Apostles whom Satan winnowed, not for
his See. Fourthly, if this promise any way belonged to his Successors,
certainly no more to those of Rome, than Antiochia; so infirm is this the
Jesuits proof, which yet he says, Must stand firm, till Sir Humphrey can
tell what Pope began to vary from his Predecessors. Agreed: Sir Humphrey
shall presently tell him by name, Liberius the Arrian, Vigilius the Eutychian,
Honorius the Monothelite condemned in three general Councels sixth, seventh,
and eighth; John the three and twenty, deposed in the Council at Constance: as
for other enormous crimes, so for this his damnable heresy, that He denied
the immortality of the soul, and the life to come. To which, after the Jesuit
has replied, instance shall be given in many other Popes, which have been
branded with the note of heresy in like manner.

To the third. three and thirty Popes adored Images because their Predecessor
had the pictures of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Pope Gregory allowed of the
standing of pictures in the Church, Vid. supr.
yet would have them by no means adored: Helena the mother of Constantine had
the wood of Christ's cross, yet adored it not, says Saint Ambrose. If to have
the picture of Saint Peter, or Saint Paul, nay, or of Christ himself, makes a
man an Idolater, or a Papist, then not only all the Lutherans generally, but
very many of the most orthodoxe Divines in our, Sylvester.

To the fourth. Not only Protestants, whom the Jesuit nick-nameth Heretics,
but also Contius, and other Romanists have disparaged these Epistles: and if
the Jesuits nose be not very flat, and stuffed also, he may smell the forgerie
of these Decretals by the barbarism of the style, disagreeing to those times,
Coqueus and others.

To the fifth. If it be no matter of Faith, that this particular Priest
Transubstantiateth the Bread, because no man knows his intention, nor that
particular Priest, Et sic de caeteris: It follows, that it is no matter of
Faith to believe, that any Priest in the Roman Church, by the words of
Consecration, turns the Bread into Christ's Body. As for that, he adds,
that it is no matter whether any ever died for this point in particular; I
answer, it is a matter of great moment: for if Garnet would not take it upon
his salvation, that this Bread he consecrated, immediately before the death,
was turned into Christ's Body; nor any ever would, or did pawn his life for
Transubstantiation: it is evident, that Papists themselves doubt of the
certainty of that Article. On the contrary, we can produce hundreds, nay
thousands, who for denying Transubstantiation, have been put to death, and
have signed the truth of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, concerning the
Sacrament with their blood: and therefore the Doctrine of the Protestants in
this point, is of more credit than the contrary, because it is strengthened
and fortified by a Noble army of Martyrs.

Concerning the Protestants charitable opinion of the salvation of Papists;
Spectacles, Chap. 17. a page 491. usque ad 508.
THE Knights discourse in this Chapter is wholly from his purpose,

The Knights eight instances in the Doctrine of Merits, Communion in both
kinds,

All testimonies from an enemy proceed not from charity, but from truth,
Catholics bring out of learned Protestants, to prove that a man dying in the
Romish Religion, may be saved.

Free Will, Prayer for the Dead, Honoring of Relikes, in one kind, Worshipping
of Images, the Popes Primacy, Auricular Confession, and the like, are all
acknowledged, some by one Protestant, some by another, not to be material
points; so as a man may without peril believe either way: the several authors
are, Perkins, Cartwright, Whitgift, Fulke, Penrie, Somes, Sparks, Reynolds,
Bunnie, and Whitaker.

John Frith, Foxean Martyr, acknowledges, that the matter touching the
substance of the Sacrament binds no man of necessity to salvation or
damnation, whether he believe it or not.

John Huz held the Mass,

Dr. Barrow acknowlegeth the Church of Rome to be the Church of God, Hooker, a
part of the house of God, and limb of the visible Church of Christ; Dr. Somes,
that all learned and reformed Churches, confess that in Popery there is a
Church, a Ministry, and true Christ: Field and Morton, that we are to be
accounted the Church of God, whose words may be seen in the Protestants
Apology, Tract. 1. Sect. 6.

Whereas the Knight says, Papists, and dying Protestants in the principal
foundation of our faith, may find mercy, because they did it ignorantly: where
has the Knight learned this Theology, that a man may be saved in one
Religion, yet so as he must die in another. This is a new conceit never heard
of before, that a man may be saved in a Religion, but so as not to die of it.

To conclude, since Protestant Doctors make no doubt, but we may be saved in
our faith: Knight goes not about to avoid, otherwise then by denying that to
be the opinion of learned Potestants, which being proved to be so manifestly,
the argument still has his force, and the more, because he cannot answer it.

The Hammer.
IN the former Chapters the Knight brandished his sword: but in this he holds
up his Buckler to bear off a blow, wherewith some Professors especially of the
Female Sex, are said to have been wounded to death. For thus they whet their
sword, and shape it on the Protestant anvile: Protestants confess, at least,
many of them, that there may be salvation in the Roman Church; but Papists
absolutely deny that there may be any salvation in our Churches: Fisher
relation of a 3. conference.
therefore it is safer to come to theirs, then to stay in ours; to be where
almost all grant salvation, then where the greatest part of the world deny it.
Hereunto the Knight truly and solidly answers.

First, that our Protestant Tenants are of that nature, that the Papists
themselves cannot pretend with any probability, that there is any danger in
them, but rather in the contrary; as he makes it evident by eight remarkable
instances.

Secondly, that our Religion is not to be accounted the worse, but rather the
better for our charitable opinion of our Adversaries: for true piety is ever
joined with compassionate charity.

Thirdly, Romans 14.4. What have I to do to judge another man's servant, seeing
he stands or falls to his own master.
that though we leave the persons of Papists to their and our judge, not
pronouncing damnation on them, as they do on us: yet we proclaim confidently
to all the world, that their doctrine is not safe.

Fourthly, he distinguishes also the persons of Papists, some are invincibly
ignorant, who are compelled to resign up their own eyesight, and to look
through such Spectacles as their Priests and Pastors have tempered for them;
for these poor souls if they make as good use as they can of the public and
private means afforded them for saving knowledge, and hold fast the Articles of
the Apostles Creed, without opposition to any ground of Christian Religion; and
furthermore have a mind and purpose to obey God, and keep his Commandments,
according to that measure of knowledge and grace which they have received, and
live for outward things in the unity of the Church where they dwell, much may
be said: other live under Princes and States, who as Gods true Watchmen and
Shepherds, desire they should be better informed, and take care, that they may
have means to be instructed in the true saving knowledge of Christ; such
Papists shutting their eyes against Gods light, and persisting in their
ignorance, and saying in effect, We will not the knowledge of thy ways, Job
21.14. go not safely out of the world. How the Jesuit refuteth these answers,
we shall see in the examination of his particular exceptions.

To the first. Knights purpose, which agrees with the title of his whole
Book, Via tuta, The safe Way: this safe way he proves to be the Protestants
way by diverse instances, in which the Papists affirmation is dangerous, but our
Negation cannot but be safe. For example, there is apparent danger in
maintaining the adoration of Images, and the creatures of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament: because it is expressly forbidden under many fearful curses; to
offer Sacrifice, burn Incense, or exhibit any Divine Worship to any save God
only, Psalm. 97.7. Confounded be all they that worship graven Images, and
boast themselves of Idols: but there can be no danger in not Worshipping the
Creature instead of the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Romans 1.25. They are
in danger of a curse that forbid Marriage, and hold it in some persons to be
unlawful and unclean; which Saint Paul calls, The Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. But there can be no danger in not prohibiting Marriage in any,
which is Honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, Heb. 13.4. They are in danger
who equal Traditions with Scripture, because it is written, Cursed be he that
adds or takes away from the words of the Law, or the Gospel, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Apoc. 22.18. There is danger in confidence in our own merits; because, Cursed
is he that puts his trust in man, or makes flesh his arm, Ier. 17.5. but
there can be no danger in not relying upon our own merits; for Blessed are
they that trust in Christ, and him only, Psalm. 2.12. for that the Cardinal
himself confesses to be Tutissimum. There is danger in taking away the Cup
from the Laity, for it is a violation of Christ's institution; for Jesus said
unto them, John 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you: but there can be no danger in not taking
away the Cup from the Laity, but reaching it to them; for Whosoever eats
Christ's flesh, and drinks his blood, has eternal life, verse. 54. There is
danger in keeping the Scriptures from the Laity; for The people perish for want
of knowledge: Hos. 4.6.
and God powers his wrath upon the people that know not his name: Psalm. 79.6.
but there can be no danger in permitting them to Search the Scriptures, for in
them they have eternal life, Ioh. 5.39. and, Blessed are they whose delight is
in the Law of the Lord, and that exercise themselves in that Law both day and
night, Psalm. 1.2. There is danger in praying in an unknown tongue; for they
which do so, Worship they know not what; draw near to God with their lips,
but their hearts is far from him: but there can be no danger in Service in a
known tongue; for the Apostle says, I will pray with the spirit, I will pray
with understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with
understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. It was a curse inflicted upon the builders of
Babel, that they understood not what was spoken: and the gift of tongues has
been ever esteemed a singular blessing conferred upon the Church, whereby the
people of all Nations and Countries understood the Apostles, and their
Successors preaching to them, and praying for them.

To the second. I reply,

Flood.
I presume, his Father had some Apprentise bound not to marry during his
Apprentiship: I would then know of him, whether his Father in that case did
forbid marriage, and teach the Doctrine of Devils.

Answer.
It had been fitter for the Jesuit to be bound Prentise than set to school,
he is so dull and stupid that he makes it all one to forbid a Boy under age
to marry during the time of his Apprentiship, and that under a legal penalty,
without any vow or oath: and to forbid the whole Clergy to marry at all, by
tying them to single life by a vow and solemn oath, whether they have the gift
of continency, or not.

Flood.
Saint Paul says, the gift of Tongues is a sign for Infidels; but Prophecy,
that is, Exhortation or Interpretation, is for the Faithful, or those that
believe already: wherein, I would know what any man can find against Prayer in
the Latin tongue.

Answer.
I will easily help the Jesuits ignorance herein: Prayer in the Latin tongue,
when it is not understood, is Prayer in a Strange tongue, which the Apostle
here implies, No way tends to edification. Nay farther, he proves it to be
a curse out of the Prophet Esaias, 28.11.
to a people to hear a Language which they understand not: and if that people
were accursed, in that they heard a Language which they understood not; our
people in this regard must needs be blessed, who hear in the Church the Word
of God read, and Divine Service said in a Language which they understand.

Flood.
The Catholic Church does draw in several Nations to unity of Language,
making all to speak one and the same Tongue: whereas Heretics in the several
places, by use of other Languages, understand not one the other, and therein
most perfectly resemble the Babel-builders, as well in their diversity of
tongues, as in the diversities of Doctrines.

Answer.
The Jesuit here ignorantly babbleth about Babel, and the builders thereof,
upon whom God sent as a curse, not simply the diversity of Languages which
Acts 2. was given to the Apostles by miracle for a blessing: but confusion of
Languages, whereby it came to pass, that though they all spoke one to another,
yet none understood one the other. This curse cannot be denied to be fallen
upon the Lay People in Popery in the time of their benediction; and hereby the
Roman Church, as by many things else, may be discerned to be Spiritually
Babylon. Now whereas the Jesuit says, that they make all Nations to speak one
and the same tongue, his tongue runs before his wit: for though the Pope by
injoyning Latin Service, make all Nations under the Roman jurisdiction, hear
one and the same tongue in their Service: yet he makes them not to speak it,
nor so much as understand it. Whereas all the Reformed Churches, as they agree
in the unity of their Doctrine against Romish errors and superstitions; so
they also concur in this, that they have all their Liturgies in their Mother
tongue, that all the children of our Churches may hear their heavenly Father
speak unto them in his Word, and they to him in their Prayers in a language
understood.

Flood.
But for that which he says, that he acknowledges universalitie of Nations
and people, not to be a mark of his Church, I cannot but wonder at it; for
what is this, but even in plain terms to confess his Church, not to be the
Church of Christ? Esaias saying, All nations shall flow unto it: and the Prophet
David describing the kingdom of Christ, says, that He shall bear sway from
Sea to Sea: and Daniel describes the kingdom of Christ, Like a mountain
growing from a little stone, and filling the whole Earth: Saint John sees a
Multitude which no man could reckon, of all Nations, and Tribes, and People.

Answer.
We do not say that the Church of England is the Church of Christ, that is,
the whole, or only Church of Christ, but a Church of Christ; or to speak more
properly, a member of the Catholic Church scattered over the face of the the
whole earth. The texts alleged by the Jesuit, are meant of the Catholic or
universal Church, not of a particular; for it implies a kind of
contradiction, that a part should be the whole, and all Nations comprised in
one. Secondly, the Knight speaks not, Page 312. simply of multitudes,
nations, and tongues, when he denies that we have any such in our Church:
but of multitudes, and nations, and tongues that are at the Woman her command
in the Apocalypse: The City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth, Apoc.
17.4, 5, 6, etc.
which sits on seven mountains, and is drunk with the blood of Saints and
Martyrs: of whom it was foretold, that she should ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and go into perdition. These can be no marks of our Church,
as all the world sees: and if they be, as indeed they are most visible and
apparent marks of the Roman Church, let them lay claim to her, and keep her
to themselves, we no way grudge or repine at it. But if the question be, where
it is safer being with the Woman that fled into the wilderness, or this
Queene-regent of the world, we give warning to all that have Care of their
salvation, to come out of Babylon, that they be not partaker of her plagues.

To the third. Truth; for a testimony may proceed from an enemy sometimes
from weakness of judgment, as Tertullian long ago has observed, concluding,
that it is no certain and undoubted Argument of strength and valor to conquer
an Enemy: for many times the victory is gotten, not because the conqueror
was a man of might, and well handled his weapons; Sed quia qui vincebatur
infirmis erat viribus: but because he had the good hap to enter into the lists
with a weak Adversary. Yet, let the Jesuits Observation be general, the
Knight will gain by it; for the greatest part of his book consists of
Testimonies taken from the mouth of learned Romanists: and therefore by this
Rule laid down by the Jesuit, all must be presumed to proceed from evidence of
Truth. For the testimonies which he here alleges out of Protestants against
us, though they have been long ago answered, in the Prostants Apology,
written against Brerely his falsely so called Catholic Apology: yet in the due
place I shall show, that they make nothing for, but rather against the Romish
Church.

To the fourth. Jesuit cannot be ignorant, that the misnamed Catholic Apology
set forth by Brerely, was refuted seven and twenty years ago by a Catholic
Appeal for Protestants; there all these shafts which Brerely takes out of the
Protestant Quivers, are either broken, or their heads so taken off, that they
can do no hurt to any that has his Buckler of Faith on, or his eyes in his
head. To which Appeal I refer the discreet Reader; when the Jesuit shall
quote any of these Authors for any particular point, he shall have a punctual
answer.

To the fifth. Frith was a worthy and glorious Martyr, whose faith may be known
by his books yet extant: wherein he no way approves of Transubstantiation,
but condemns it expressly. Neither does he say that a right belief in the
Sacrament touching the substance thereof is no matter of salvation: but that it
is no matter of salvation to believe after what manner the substance of Christ's
body is in the Sacrament, whether by Consubstantiation, or Transubstantiation
which is most true: for as Doctor Andrews, late Bishop of Winton acutely
observed, Christ said hoc est Corpus meum, non hoc modo est, or fit Corpus
meum, this is my Body, not the bread is after this manner my body.

To the sixth. Constance, cannot be free from haeresie. And whereas the Jesuit
says, that this Martyr in all other points held with Papists, the contrary
appears in his printed books, and by the prayer he made at his death,
mentioned by Cocleus in the history of the Huzzites, wherein he prays to God,
that his soul after his death might be where the soul of Wickliffe is.

To the seventh. Jesuit his allegations out of Barrow, Hooker, Some, Bunnie,
and Covell; Dr. Morton now Bishop of Duresme answers at large in his
Catholic appeal, l. 4. from the first Section to the sixth, where he proves,
that the testimonies themselves, and the reasons annexed to them do show, that
the above cited Protestants yield no more security to the Romish Church, then
they do to any other erroneous Church, wherein there is true baptism and the
the profession of the chief principles of faith. Barrow acknowledges the
Church of Rome to be a Church of God, that is a Church professing Christianity,
in which there may be a possibility of salvation, not an Orthodox or right
believing Church, in which there is certainty of salvation. Hooker says, that
the Church of Rome is a member of the visible Catholic Church, a member, not
the Catholic Church, and no sound member neither, according to that Thesis of
Doctor Reynolds, Romana ecclesia nec est Catholica, nec sanum membrum
Catholicae. Dr. Somes says, as likewise Iunius, Iunius de Eccles. l. sing.
Papatu^ est in Ecclesia seu in papatu est Ecclesia, Papatus tamen non est
Ecclesia.
that in Popery there is a Church, that is, under the Popes dominion Christ
has his Church, or that Popery is in the Church: yet that Popery is not the
Church. Bunnie says, that we are not a several Church from the Papists, that
is, not essentially defferent from it, no more then a sick man differs from
a sound. Covell says, the Church of Rome is a part of the Church of Christ,
but a very unsound part. From all which passages, this only may be concluded
of the Roman Church, as of other erroneous assemblies, that though in regard of
their manifold errors, they must be esteemed sick and unsound Churches; yet in
regard of the being and essence of a Church, they must be acknowledged visible
Churches of Christ. Neither Field nor Morton says, that the Church of Rome is
the Church of God, but a Church of God. Fields words are, Romana ecclesia est
vere ecclesia, non vera ecclesia; is truly a Church, not a true Church: Morton
proves in one whole Section, that the Church of Rome is not properly the
Catholic Church, but a particular Church subject to error. Sect. 6. Protest.
appeal, l. 4. But in this point, in what sense the Protestants call the Church
of Rome a true Church, see a late Treatise set forth by Doctor Hall, the Bishop
of Exton, called the Reconciler; wherein, both he and Bishop Davenet, and
Morton, in their letters affixed thereunto, clear the matter nothing at all I
assure you to your advantage.

To the eight. Ezekiel teaches: C. 18.23.
neither is this any new conceit of the Knight, but the general opinion of all
Protestants, as the Jesuit may read in the Catholic Appeal, l. 4. c. 1. The
Reverend Bishop now mentioned, understanding how that great and honorable
personage in the last Act of her life, renounced all presumption of her own
inherent righteousness, and wholly affianced her soul to Christ in belief to
be justified only by his satisfactory justice, did therefore conceive hope of
her salvation by virtue of that Cordial prescribed by the Holy Apostle, viz.
that where sin abounds, the grace of God does superabound, which the
Apostle has ministered for the comfort of every Christian, who erring by
ignorance, shall in sincere repentance for all his known sins, depart this
mortal life, having the heel or end of his life shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace, not of the new Romish, but of the old Catholic faith,
which is the faith of all Protestants. C. 15. p. 363.
And again, in his book entitled, the Grand Imposture, If you demand why
Protestants have so charitable opinion of some Romanists, you are to
understand, that it is in regard of that, without which they cannot be saved,
that they died in the belief of this Protestant Article of Faith, which is to
be justified by remission of all their sins, through the satisfactory
righteousness of Christ, apprehended by faith, and not by the legal justice
or perfection of inherent righteousness in themselves, as your Council of
Trent has decreed: and this opinion we find verified in the experience of
many Papists, who howsoever in their life time they profess and magnify your
doctrine of perfection of works: yet on their death bed as soon as the least
glimpse of the majesty of Christ's tribunal is revealed unto them, and the
book of their conscience begins to be unclapsed, and so laid open before them
that they cannot but read their sins, which in their lifetime they held as
venial, to be deadly and written in Capital litters: then they take Sanctuary
in the wounds of Christ, from whence flows the Ocean of all expiatory merit
and satisfaction, by which it is impossible but that every faithful penitent
should receive life.

To the ninth. Donatists held as the Papists do, that all men were damned that
were not of their sect; St. Austine de unit eccles. c. 12. and other Catholic
Bishops thought that some of them might be in the state of grace, and that
their Baptism was good, Ergo, it is a safer way to embrace the Donatists
haeresie then the Catholic Faith: or at least send their children to the
Donatists to be baptized, L. 1. De baptis. cont. Donat. c. 3. Esse vero apud
Donatistas baptismum, and illi asserunt and nos concedimus.
because both parties granted that there was true Baptism among the Donatists,
whereas the Donatists denied that there was any true Baptism among the
Catholics; or this, the Indian Priests teach, that it is unlawful to take
bread from the hand of a Christian; the Christians teach that it is lawful to
take bread from an Indian: therefore it is safer to take bread from an Indian
then from a Christian, or have fellowship with an Infidel Indian then with a
charitable Christian, because a Christian has a better opinion of the
Infidel, then the Infidel has of him: as Protestants have a more charitable
opinion of Papists, then Papists have of them. When the Jesuit is sober let him
think how to give an answer to Bishop Morton his instance, whereby he shows
the invalidity of this mad argument of Jesuits, A mad man thinks other men to
be beasts, a sober man confesses that a mad man is a man and no beast: is a
mad man therefore in the right or in the better case then the sober man,
because the sober man judges better of the mad man, then the mad man does of
the sober?

Concerning the confession of all sides for the safety of the Protestant
Religion; Spectacles, Chapter 18. a page 509. usque ad finem.
THAT the ground of safety which the Knight thinks he takes from Catholics,
part stands single by themselves in opinion: for I would know what Church is
that wherein there be two sides to agree or disagree? or what Church that is,
that does not stand single in opinion by it self, if it be a Church of a
different faith (as we speak here of a Church?) A Church must have unity, it
being a company of men, all professing the same faith and Religion, therefore
it is plain there is no sense in this principle of his.

I would ask him whether the Protestants do not stand single as well as we,

By the Knights argument, Knights Protestant faith: for Arius may say, he
agrees with us Catholics in all things, save only in the Divinity of the
second Person of Trinity, whom he acknowledges with us to be an Holy Man: and
that we stand single by our selves in the assertion of his Divinity. Macedonius
may say the same of the Holy Ghost: Nestorius of the plurality of persons in
Christ: Eutyches of the singularity of Natures: Sergius Pyrrus, and the
Monoth^lites of the unity of will in Christ: Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion, and
almost all haeretikes in their several haeresies, may say as the Knight does,
of the points controverted, that we stand single by our selves in them: and so
it is the safer way to believe only that wherein they and we agree; nay, the
Jews may make the same argument thus, That they agree with us, that there is
one God Creator of heaven and earth, and that the old Testament is Canonical
Scripture; for the rest we stand single: and the Turk may say that he
agrees with us, that Christ was an holy man, and a Prophet; for the rest we
stand single: and therefore he is in the safer way.

What can the Knight say for defense of his Argument? Knights Argument; and
thereby a man may see what a good guide he is, and how safe a way he goes: and
whether the saying of Solomon be not truly verified of his Safe Way; Prove.
14.12.
There is a way which seems to a man straight, and the end of it leads to
death, and consequently to hell: for what other is the end of Heresy,
Judaisme, and Turcisme? whereto the Knights rule does lead all such as will be
ruled thereby.

The Hammer.
SEmper ego auditor tantum nunquam ne reponane? Hitherto the Knight held up his
Buckler, and stood upon his own defense: but here he sets upon his
Adversary, closes with him, wresteth his own Sword out of his hand, and
therewith gives him as many wounds as Julius Caesar received in the Senate.
For, besides the 12 Articles of Pope Pius the fourth his Creed, in all which,
the Papists stand single, he inffanceth in eleven points more, wherein the
Papists agree with us in our affirmative positions, but they alone maintain
their affirmative addition; whereupon he condemns the Jesuit as Christ does
the Evil Servant in the Gospel, out of his own mouth thus:

That Religion is less safe, in which the Professors stands single, than that
in which the parties, other ways dissident, agree.

But in all or most of the affirmative points of Popish Religion, they stand
single; but in all such positive points of the reformed Faith, not only
Papists, but in a manner all Christians of the world concur with us.

Therefore the Popish Religion, by the Jesuits own rule, is less safe.

To illustrate this by a few instances, the positive points of our Doctrine are
chiefly these: 1. That the three Creeds; the Apostles, the Nicene, and that of
Athanasius are to be received upon pain of damnation. 2. That religious
worship is due to God. 3. That God is to be called upon. 4. That Christ is head
of the Church. 5. That he is our Mediator and Advocate. 6. That he was
conceived without sin. 7. That we are saved by his merits and satisfaction.
8. That the Scripture is a rule of Faith. 9. That there are two and twenty
Canonical Books of the old Testament. 10. That the originals in the Greek and
Hebrew are authentical. 11. That there are two Sacraments of the new
Testament, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. 12. That Children of the Faithful
are to be christened. 13. That in Baptism, water is necessarily to be used.
14. That Christ is truly present at his Supper; and that the worthy Receiver is
by faith made spiritually partaker of the true and real body and blood of
Christ. 15. That the Sacrament may be administered in both kinds. 16. That the
Images of Christ and his Saints may serve for Ornaments and Memorials, and that
there is a lawful historical use of them. 17. That Peter had a Primacie of
Order among the Apostles. 18. That there are two places for souls departed,
Heaven and Hell. 19. That there are three holy Orders in the Church, Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons. 20. That Confession to a Priest, in case the Conscience
be troubled with any grievous Sin, is profitable and behoovefull.


To all these points, and many more like unto these, the Papists assent; but in
all their additions they stand single, as namely: 1. That a fourth Creed made
by Pius the fourth, is likewise to be received under pain of damnation. 2.
That religious worship is due to Saints. 3. That Saints and Angels are to be
called upon. 4. That the Pope is the visible head of the Church. 5. That Saints
are our Mediators and Advocates. 6. That the Virgin Mary also was conceived
without sin. 7. That we are justified and saved in part by our own Merits,
and superabundant satisfactions of Saints. 8. That Tradition is a rule of Faith
as well as Scripture. 9. That besides those two and twenty, there are other
Books of the old Testament, to wit, Tobit, Judith, Baruch, The Wisdom of
Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, and the Maccabees, to be admitted into the number of
Canonical Scriptures. 10. That the vulgar Latin translation of the Scripture
is most pure and authentical. 11. That besides Baptism and the Lords Supper,
there are five other Sacraments; Confirmation, Order, Penance, Matrimony, and
Extreme Unction. 12. That Galleys and Bells may, and ought to be christened. 13.
That besides Water; Cream, Salt, and Spittle are to be used in Baptism. 14.
That Christ is present in the Sacrament by Transubstantiation, and that his
body and blood is not only received spiritually by Faith, but also carnally by
the mouth. 15. That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper may lawfully be
administered to the Laity in one kind only. 16. That besides an historical,
there is a religious use of Images; and that they are to be worshipped. 17.
That Peter had not only a Primacie of Order, but a power also, and
jurisdiction over the Apostles. 18. That besides Heaven and Hell, there is a
third place of abode for souls, to wit, Purgatory; and a fourth also, termed
Limbus infantum. 19. That besides those three holy Orders of Bishops, Prists,
and Deacons, there are others, as namely, Exorcists, Acolyts, etc. 20. That
confession of every known Sin to a Priest, is necessary.


Now because Negatives are not properly Articles of Faith, but Positives or
Affirmatives; it appears evidently, that the Faith of the reformed Churches
is assented to by Papists themselves, and all Christians in the world, and
therefore is most certain and safe by the confession on all sides: whereas the
Popish additions, wherein we stand only upon the Negative, and they are to
make good the Affirmative, are assented to by none but themselves; and
therefore by the Jesuits rule, are weak, doubtful, and less safe. This is
Vulcaneum telum et argumentum palmarium, the main and principal argument
whereby the Knight demonstrateth the title of his Book; and he is so
confident of it, that if that be to be accounted the safer way, wherein
different parties agree both in one, as the Jesuit laid it down in the former
chapter, he will join issue with all Papists in the world in this very point:
and if in this he make not good the title of his Book, that we are therefore
in the safer way, because they agree in the principal and Positive points of
Religion with our Doctrine; he will reconcile himself to the Roman Church,
and creep upon all four to his Holiness for a Pardon. At this the Jesuit is
so mad, that he fometh at the mouth, and raveth, saying, Page 512.
That to creep upon all four is a very fit gate for men so devoid of reason,
as to make such Discourses, and to use such malicious insinuations, as if men
used to creep upon all four to the Pope, Parce sepulto
Parce pias scelerare manus:
be not so inhumane and barbarous, in tearing the fame of the dead; there is no
cause at all given of such rage and fury. The Knight does herein no way
blaspheme, or falsely traduce Dominum deum Papam; for those that ordinarily
kiss the Popes toe, unless his Holiness be the more courteous to hold up his
foot the higher, must needs be near creeping on all four. To say nothing of
Dandalus King of Creete and Cyprus who was upon all four, and that under the
Table before the Popes Holiness, as Jewel in his Apology, and the defense
thereof undeniably proves out of good Authors against Mr. Harding; yet the
Knight in this place charge not the Pope with any such imperious demand of
Luciferian pride: but only professes what penance he would willingly enjoyne
himself, if he should abuse the Reader, and not make good the Title of his
book by the argument above propounded; against which, what the Jesuit here
particularly Articleth and objecteth, I will now consider.

To the first. Jesuit would make seem so ridiculous, are related by the Knight,
as their own words not ours, as any may perceive by the Preface to them,
therefore say they, and by this that they are written in a lesser Character,
and is it not senseless in the Jesuit, and most ridiculous to laugh at
himself, and put his own nonsense upon the Knight, who taking the Jesuits
words as he found them, scorning to nible at syllables, interpreted the Jesuits
words at the best, and taking his meaning, joins issue with him upon the point
in this manner. In a Church professing Christianity, where the Scriptures of
the old and new Testament are received, and the two Sacraments instituted, by
Christ administered, suppose we there to be two sorts of Professors, either
publicly allowed as in France, or at least tolerated, as in other Kingdoms,
both these entituling themselves to be members of the pure Orthodox Church, and
neither of them having been particularly condemned in any general Council,
received through the Christian world; the problem then is, whether of these
two, that party is not in the safer way, who holds no positive Article of
faith, to which both parties (besides all other Christians) give not their
assent unto: then the other who maintains twelve Articles of faith at least,
wherein they themselves stand single, and are forsaken by all Christians, not
only of the reformed Churches, in England, France, Germany, Denmark,
Swethland, Norway, Poland, Transylvania, but also in the Eastern, and Greek
Churches dispersed through the large Dominions of the Turk in Europe, Asia,
and Africa. But thus it stands between us and Papists, all the positive
Articles which we hold necessary to salvation, they themselves, and all other
Christian Churches in the world assent unto: whereunto the Church of Rome has
added many other positive Articles in joining all under pain of damnation to
believe them; in all which additions, she stands alone by her self:
therefore it is safer to adhere to the doctrine and faith of the reformed
churches, then the Pope his new Trent Creed. The Jesuits exceptions against
this argument are very idle, and all his instances in Turks, Jews, and
Haeretikes, nothing to the purpose: for the unbeleeving Jews and Turks never
were, nor yet are members of the Catholic Christian Church: the Arians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, and Marcionites have been long ago excluded out of
the true Church of Christ, and their Haeresies are by name condemned in ancient
general Counsels approved by the whole Christian world. These therefore come
not within the verge of the Knights proposition, which is restrained to
Christian Churches, and such whose Tenets have not in particular as yet been
cried down, and censured as erroneous in any oecumenicall Council: among
such, doubtless those are in the safer way, who hold nothing for an Article of
faith necessary to salvation, which is not clearly deduced out of Holy
Scripture, and assented unto, even by the opposite part, whose testimony, says
the Jesuit, Page 498. must needs proceed from evidence of truth.

To the second. Jesuit has received answer already to the former of these
demands, where I showed by twenty instances that we stand not single as they
do, by affirming what they deny, and denying what they affirm: for the most,
if not all the affirmative Articles of our Creed, are firmed and subscribed by
Papists themselves, whereas their additionalls to them are firmed by none but
themselves: and therefore herein our cause has a great advantage on theirs.
For if their belief be true, our belief in all the affirmative Articles
thereof must needs be so; but not on the contrary, because they have many
affirmative Articles which we give no credit unto. To his second demand I
answer, that though a multitude of Professors is no perpetual and infallible
mark of the true Church: Luke 12.32. Matthew. 7.13. Apoc. 13.17. Apoc. 20.2.
Apoc 1^.4. The woman arrayed in purple and scarlet, called The Whore of
Babylon, had a cup of gold in her hand, etc. Apoc. 13.3. All the world
wondered, and followed the Beast. and ver. 8. All that dwell upon the earth
shall worship him, whose names are not written in the Book of Life.
for Christ's flock is but a little flock in comparison, and broad is the way
that leads to death and destruction; and though it is true that in the latter
and worser ages of the Church, especially after the year 666. which is the
number of the name of the Beast, and much more after the thousandth year
wherein Satan was let loose, the Romish Church was much more visible to the eye
of the world then the Protestant, as it is prophesied in the Apocalypse the 16.
6. that the false and malignant Church should be far more glorious and
pompous then the true Spouse of Christ: yet in the first and best ages of the
Church, our adversaries have not so much as one single witness, who can be
proved to have given testimony to their Trent faith, and since the happy
reformation began by Martin Luther in King Henry the eights days, the better
part of Europe is fallen from the Pope; add we to them all those, who in Asia
and Africa profess the Christian faith, and yet acknowledge not the Pope, nor
subscribe to the Trent faith: and it will appear we have near a thousand for
one in the Catholic visible Church scattered far and wide over the face of the
earth, as may be seen in the Mapps set forth in a book printed the last
year, and entitled Christianographie, or the Description of the multitude and
sundry sorts of Christians in the World, not subject to the Pope, with their
unity, and how they agree with the Protestants in the principal points of
difference between them and the Church of Rome.

To the third. Jesuit remember that it is his own, and that he confesses as
much in the first words of this Chapter, which are these, The substance of this
Section is contained in the title, and it is nothing but to turn the Catholic
argument, mentioned in the former Section the other way for the Protestant
side. The argument then is a Catholic argument of their own, and if it make
for Haeretikes, Jews, and Turks, as he says it does, the blame and shame
thereof must light upon the Jesuits, that first framed it, and not upon the
Knight who retorteth it only upon them: for thus it mooveth upon their
Axletree, that wherein Professors of different religions both agree, is safer
to believe then that wherein they stand single, but Jews and Christians agree
in the belief of the old Testament; Christians and Turks agree in the truth
of Christ's humane nature, in other points the Christians are single, therefore
the belief of a Jew or a Turk is safer then the belief of a Christian. The
conclusion is here false and blasphemous, the minor or assumption is evidently
true, and confessed on all sides: the fault therefore must needs be in the major
or ground of this argument, but the major or ground is your own, as will
appear by reducing the Jesuits Argument, propounded in the former Section,
into form: That Church wherein parties of a different Religion, as Papists and
Protestants agree, is a safer way than that wherein one party stand single. But
Papists and Protestants both agree, that salvation may be had in the Romish
Church; but the Protestants stand single, in that they say, salvation may be
had in the Protestant Church: therefore it is safer living and dying in the
Papists Church than in the Protetestant. In this Syllogism, the Knight and all
Protestants, though they answer to the Assumption by distinguishing, as is
expressed in the former chapter: yet they simply and absolutely deny the Major,
which is not universally true, nor at all necessary. Secondly, Dato and non
concesso: that the Major is true, the Knight nimbly turns the mouth of the
Papists own Canon, to batter their own walls, thus: That position, say you,
in which both Papists and Protestants agree, is safer than that wherein one
party stands single: but in the eleven Points mentioned by the Knight,
Papists and Protestants agree: in the twelve Articles coined by Pope Pius the
fourth, the Papists stand single; therefore the Protestant Faith is the safer.

To the fourth. Jesuit to conclude other men's sight from his own blindness:
because he sees not how the Knight can avoid the instances in Jews,
Heretics, and Turks, whereby he goes about to disable the Knight his
retorted Argument; therefore will he infer, that any man may see that the
Knight is no good guide. For pity let some fit the Jesuit with a pair of
Spectacles, that he may better see the Knight his way, and his own wanderings.
How far the Romish Religion is distant from Heresy, Iudaisme, and Turcisme, or
rather trencheth upon all three; See P: Croy his book of Conformities, and
Sutcliffe his Turco papismus.
Jews and Turks are out of the Christian Church, hold not all Positive Articles
necessary to salvation, and therefore they come not in the Knights way at all;
nor has he to do with them in this Argument, which proceeds from professed
Christians, and not open enemies to the Faith. For the Knight from his heart
detesteth all paths leading to any of those dangerous precipices; and
chaulketh to all men Viam vere tutam, certam, rectam and regiam; a fair and
Safe Way, and the very Kings Highway to his Palace, wherein we have Christ
and his Apostles for our Leaders; the holy Spirit for our Guide; the blessed
Angels for our Convoy; the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church for our
fellow Travelers through the whole, and the best learned of the Roman Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops, and Schoolmen to bear us company the greater part of our
way. Wherefore, I doubt not, but that the indifferent peruser of the Knights
Book, and the Jesuits Answer, and my Reply unto it; will break out into the
Apostles exclamation, and say to this Romish Sorcerer, Acts 3.13.
or rather if he will so, false Spectacle-maker, Flood: O full of all
subtlety and mischief, thou child of the devil, will thou not cease to
pervert the right way of the LORD?

FINIS.
Laus DEO sine fine.

