THE RESOLUTION OF Sr Marmaduke Langdale Concerning the relieving of The Lord
Goring. The Lord of Loughborough. The Lord Capel. Sir Charles Lucas, and the
rest of the Officers and Soldiers
NOW Blocked up in the Town of Colchester, by the Lord General FAIRFAX. And
their further proceedings touching Major General Lambert; agreed upon by a
Council of War, and assented to by most of the Colonels and Officers in the
Northern Army.

Likewise the Lord Goring's Letter to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and his further
Resolution and proceedings thereupon.

LONDON, Printed for G.N. MDCXLVIII.

THE RESOLVTION OF Sir Marmaduke Langdale, concerning the Lord Generals
blocking up of the town of Colchester.
Honored Sir,
SIr Marmaduke Langdale having received Letters from the Lord Goring,
intimating their unfortunate success in their late. Engagement with the
Kentishmen, and how they had crossed the River of Thames, thereby to carry on
their Design with more safety, and prevent the sudden falling on of the Lord
General with b^ army, resolved not to engage with his army against Major Genesis
Lambert, but to keep them in a complete and entire Body, for their future
preservation, and present increasing; and thereupon summoned in most of his
Colonels, Lieutenant-colonels, Majors, and Captains, who presently called a
Council of War, at which it was resolved to retreat toward Carlisle, which
they did accordingly, but in their Retreat, some of their Rear-guard who lay
plundering up and down the country, had quarters provided for them by a party
of Major General Lamberts Horse, who fell upon them near Braugham castle, and
took diverse prisoners, with great store of good pillage which they had taken
from diverse well affected of the country.

Divisions and distractions increase daily in their army, especially amongst
the Superiors and Officers, who have continual disputations upon several
differences, some being desirous to have a strong party of Horse and Dragoones
sent Southward for the relief of the Lord Goring and his army; others declaring
against i^, saying, That they had rather keep one Body in a defensive posture,
then to hazard both, which indeed was the expression of Sir Marmaduke himself,
who stands much against the dividing of his Army, and will by no means assent
to those Propositions for the sending of a party into the South, but has
resolved to oppose the proceedings thereof, and to keep his Army in the North,
until such time that the additionall Forces from Scotland are joined with him.

He has had several invitations (as we hear) from Sir Charles Lucas, to send
Sir Philip Stapleton with a party of Horse and Dragoons to their assistance,
but would not assent thereto.

As also, a Letter from the Lord Goring and General Hastings to the same
effect: wherein they intimated their Desires to have some additionall Forces
sent down unto them for the better and more secure mannaging of the greatwork
in hand, declaring That if it pleased God to give them victory in the South,
they need not fear the day in the North; but all could not prevail for he had
fixed his resolution to the contrary; and therefore called a Council of War,
to consider what should be done for their greatest advantage and safety, and
after some disputation thereupon, it was resolved by the major part, that no
Forces should be sent Southward, until such time that the additionall Forces
were come in unto them from Scotland, together with some Arms and Ammunition,
but it is hoped that he will come short of his expectation.

We have seized on two Castles in the North, which was in the possession of
Langdale and his party, we pursed him through the greatest part of Westmerland,
until he came within 12. miles of Carlisle, where they received a strong
Allarum, and barracado'd up their Gates.

The Major General is now in Penreth, and his Army quartered in the towns
adjacent, ^^nsisting of about 3000. Horse and Foot. Col. Dodding, Col. Booth,
and the rest of the Lancashire Forces are expected to join with us very
suddenly, and I hope they will be here seasonably.

The happy tidings of reducing Kent, and the ill success of Goring in Essex,
has quite broke the hearts of the Eneny here, who are fearful that the Lord
General will advance with a great strength toward them, which causes diverse
to dissert the service. Sir, I am

Your devoted Servant, M. Simcock.
From the Headquarters near Penreth, 16. Junij 1648.

SIR,
HIs Excellency the Lord General has sent a party round about on Suffolk side
of the city, which have made good Mersey Island, and taken some prize of the
enemies, which was carrying away by water: We have also another party on the
other side of the water, near the Heath which is the harbor, or Key, to which
the shipping comes, and is not half musket shot over for at least a mile from
the town: there is at the Key two or three ships, which ly so low on the Water,
that they cannot much annoy us. We have also made good the bridge on Norwich
Road, and are drawing a line round about the City, the Subu^bs being already in
our possession: those which come out to us, do certainly affirm, that about
sixty of the enemy were buried in St. Margarets Church yard that night which we
fought with them, and many others elsewhere besides those they left behind
them, which they got not again into the City. Sir William Campion (once
Governor of Bostol house for the King) is dead, and Major Eyes, whole loss
they much lament.

Col. Baxters Reg. was far engaged with the enemy, and quitted themselves with
great valor: we lost in all a Major, and one or two captains, and some other
officers, besides common soldiers: the L. Goring, the L. Loughorough, Sir
Charles Lucas and several other eminent commanders are said to be still
remaining in the town: they have taken Mr. VVigmores Wagon horses, and
several others, and mounted men upon them; but since that night they have been
very qu^et in the city, and not offered to salley forth: those within do
intimate that they would have conditions, especially the Horse which are very
desirous to depart. A Trumpeter was sent out of the town with a message to the
Lord General, and his Excellency pities the sadcondition of many imminent and
harmless souls in the city. The Lord General has hereupon sent Letters to the
Parliament this morning, to acquaint them with the affairs here, and within a
day or two I shall be able to communicate more unto you, and the rest of our
friends, from hence, I remain

Your affectionate friend. T. N.
From the Headquarters near Colchester June 19. 1648.

The L. Genesis sent a Letter to the L. Goring, and others in the town in these
words, viz.

Sir, I understand you have in custody Sir W. Masham, a Parl. man and some
other Gent. prisoners, I desire you to permit this bearer, to see in what
condition they are, what necessaries they want, that care may be taken for
supplying of them, I have about 500 prisoners of yours, if you have any of my
soldiers prisoners, I desire to know the number and quality of them and shall
send as many in exchange which shall be performd by me.

Tho; Fairfax,
17. of June 1648.

To which answer was returned in these words,

My Lord I desire you will by the trumpeter send up a List of all those Gen^.
Officers, and soldiers of our party, and under our command, that are now
prisoners in your Army, we shall upon the like occasion, show the same respect
to you, and we desire the Trumpeter may speak with the best of quality of our
prisoners to let them know our endevvours for their enlargement we have
detayned your Trumpeter longer by reason of our hou?ely motion and action my
Lord we rest.

Your servants Norwich. Arthur Capell. Loughborough. Charles Lucas.

17. June 1648.

SIR,
SInce my last here has been some action: On Friday night last a party of the
Enemies Horse made a salley out of the town, thinking to make an escape away,
but being discovered by one of our Scouts, he presently rode up to the
Horse-guard, and gave notice thereof to the Commander in chief, who immediately
mounted three Troops, and left two upon the guard to maintain that passage, and
advanced toward the Enemy, who meeting with them, our Frontiers fired, and the
rest of the Body charged in amongst them, and after a short dispute the Enemy
retreated and in agreat disorder made toward the town, but our men persued
them even to the very gates* doing some execution, and took diverse prisoners,
with very little loss. Our men are very vigilant, and keeps provisions from
going to them, the town is much straightued thereof, which causes a most
doleful and heavy cry amongst the Inhabitants.

Lexton 18. Junij 1648.

FINIS.

