A Landscape: OR A BRIEF PROSPECTIVE OF ENGLISH EPISCOPACY, Drawn by three
skillful hands; in PARLIAMENT: Anno 1641.

Say not then, What is the cause that the former days were better than these,
for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.

Eccles. 7.10. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles?

Matthew. 7.16. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, among wheat, with
a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

Proverbs 27.27. Cursed be the Man before the Lord, that builds up the walls of
this City Jericho.

Josh. 26.6. For if I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my
self a Transgressor.

Galat. 2.18. Printed in the Year MDCLX.

To the Ingenuous, and Judicious READER.
THou have here put into thy hands three SPEECHES. The First bears in its from
the Name of the Learned and Renowned Author The Lord Viscount FAULKELAND,
whose Name is annexed, because, First he was known to be a Friend to
Episcopacy, and so this very Speech shows him, and therefore His Testimony
is the more Authentic: Secondly, Because he is now dead, and so out of the
reach of Envy and Revenge. But the Names of the other two Gentlemen are
concealed, because they are yet living.

Two Things have moved the publishing of these at this time: First, It is
supposed there are many Hundred Persons of considerable quality in the Nation,
either now entering, or already entered upon the Stage for Action, who were
either unborn, or at least very young, when the Episcopal Controversy was
agitated among us, who are displeased with what the PARLIAMENT and Nation did
against EPISCOPACY, because they only knew what they did, but not why, and
who are favorers of Bishops and that party, as knowing only how much they
suffered, not how much they had offended. For their sakes therefore these
things are published at this time: And Secondly, For the sakes even of the
BISHOPS themselves, that they may be put in remembrance of the Rocks upon which
formerlie they have dashed, and may carefully avoid them, least a worse thing
happen to them.

A SPEECH made to the House of Commons, concerning Episcopacy An. D. 1641.
By the Lord Viscount FAVLKELAND; who was known to be no Presbyterian.
Master SPEAKER,
HE is a great Stranger in Israel, who knows not, that this Kingdom has long
labored under many and great Oppressions, both in Religion and Liberty; and
his acquaintance here is not great, or his ingenuity less, who does not both
know and acknowledge, that a great, if not a principal cause of both these has
been some Bishops, and their Adherents.

Mr. Speaker, A little search will serve to find them to have been the
destruction of Unity, under pretense of Uniformity; to have brought in
Superstition, and scandal, under the Titles of Reverence, and Decency; to have
defiled our Church, by adorning our Churches; to have slackned the strictness
of that Union which was formerly between us, and those of our Religion beyond
the Sea: An Action as unpolitick, as ungodly.

Master Speaker, We shall find them to have Tith'd Mint and Annice, and have
left undone the weightier works of the Law; to have been less eager upon those
who damn our Church, than upon those, who upon weak conscience, and perhaps as
weak reasons (the dislike of some commanded Garment, or some uncommanded
posture) only abstained from it. Nay, it has been more dangerous for men to go
to some neighbors Parish, when they had no Sermon in their own, than to be
obstinate and perpetual Recusants; while Masses have been said in security, a
Conventicle has been a crime; and which is yet more, the conforming to
Ceremonies has been more exacted than the conforming to Christianity; and
whilst men for Scruples have been undone, for attempts upon Sodomie they have
only been admonished.

Master Speaker, We shall find them to have been like the Hen in Aesop, which
laying every day an egg upon such a proportion of barley, her Mistress
increasing her proportion in hope she would increase her eggs, she grew so fat
upon that addition, that she never laid more: So though at first their
Preaching were the occasion of their preferment, they after made their
Preferment the occasion of their not preaching.

Master Speaker, We shall find them to have resembled another Fable, The Dog
in the manger; to have neither preached themselves, nor employ those that
should, nor suffered those that would: To have brought in Catechizing only to
thrust out Preaching; cried down Lectures by the Name of Factions, either
because their industry in that duty appeared a Reproof to their neglect of it
(not unlike to that we read of him who, in Nero's time, and Tacitus his Story,
was accused, because by his virtue he did appear Exprobare vitia Principis) or
with intention to have brought in darkness, that they might the easier sow
their tares, while it was night, and by that introduction of ignorance,
introduce the better that Religion, which accounts it the Mother of Devotion.

Master Speaker, In this they have abused his Majesty as well as his people;
for when he had with great wisdom (since usually the children of darkness are
wiser in their Generation than the children of light; I may guess, not without
some eye upon the most politic action of the most politic Church) silenced on
both parts those Opinions which have often tormented the Church, and have, and
will always trouble the Schools, they made use of this Declaration to ty up one
side, and let the other loose; whereas they ought either in discretion to have
been equally restrained, or in justice to have been equally tolerated. And it
is observable, that that party to which they gave this License, was that, whose
Doctrine, though it were not contrary to Law, was contrary to Custom, and for
a long while in this Kingdom was no oftener preached than recanted.

The truth is, Master Speaker, That as some ill Ministers in our State first
took away our money from us, and after endeavored to make our money not worth
the taking, by turning it into brass by a kind of Antiphilosophers stone: So
these men used us in the point of Preaching, first depressing it to their
power, and next laboring to make it such, as the harm had not been much, if it
had been depressed; the most frequent Subjects even in the most facred
Auditories, being the Jus divinum of Bishops and Tithes, the sacredness of the
Clergy, the Sacrilege of Impropriations, the demolishing of Puritanisme and
Propriety, the building of the prerogative at Pauis, the introduction of such
Doctrines, as admitting them true, the truth would not recompense the scandal,
or of such as were so far false, that as Sir Thomas Moore says of the
Casuists, Their business was, not to keep men from sinning, but to enform
them, Quam prope ad peccatum sine peccato liceat accedere; so it seemed their
work was to try how much of a Papist might be brought in without Popery, and to
destroy as much as they could of the Gospel, without bringing themselves into
danger of being destroi'd by Law.

Master Speaker, To go yet further, some of them have so industriously labored
to deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspicion, that in
gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least to meet it half way; some
have evidently labored to bring in an English, though not a Roman Popery. I
mean not only the outside and dress of it, but equally absolute, a blind
dependence of the people upon the Clergy, and of the Clergy upon themselves,
and have opposed the Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might settle one beyond
the water. Nay common fame is more than ordinarily false, if none of them have
found a way to reconcile the Opinions of Rome, to the preferments of England;
be so absolutely, directly, and cordially Papist, that it is all that fifteen
hundred pounds a year can do to keep them from confessing it.

Master Speaker, I come now to speak of our Liberties, and considering the
great interest these men have had in our common Master, and considering how
great a good to us they might have made that interest in him, if they would
have used it to have informed him of our general sufferings; and considering
how little of their freedom of Speech at Whitchall, might have saved us a
great deal of the use we have now of it in the Parliament House, their not
doing this alone were occasion enough for us to accuse them, as the betrayers,
though not as the destroyers of our Rights and Liberties. Though I confess, if
they had been only silent in this particular, I had been silent too: But alas,
they whose Ancestors in the darkest times excommunicated the breakers of Magna
Charta; did now by themselves and their Adherents both write, preach, plot, and
act against it, by encouraging Doctor Beale, by preferring Doctor Mannering,
appearing forward for Monopolies, and ship money: and if any were slow and
backward to comply, blasting both them and their preferment, with utmost
expression of their hatred, the title of Puritans.

Master Speaker, We shall find some of them to have labored to exclude both
all persons, and all causes of the Clergy from the ordinary jurisdiction of the
temporal Magistrate, and by hindting Prohibitions (first by apparent power
against the Judges, and after by secret Agreements with them) to have taken
away the only legal bound to their arbitrary power, and made as it were a
conquest upon the common Law of the Land, which is our common Inheritance, and
after made use of that power to turn their brethren out of their Freeholds, for
not doing that which no Law of man required of them to do, and which (in their
opinions) the Law of God required of them not to do. We shall find them in
general to have encouraged all the Clergy to Suits and to have brought all
suits to the Councel-table; that having all power in Ecclesiastical matters,
they labored for equal power in temporal, and to dispose as well of every
Office as of every Benefice, and lost the Clergy much Revenue and much
reverence, (whereof the last is never given when it is so asked) by encouraging
them indiscreetly to exact more of both than was due; so that indeed the gain
of their greatness extended but to few of that Order, though the envy extended
upon all.

We shall find of them to have both kindled and blown the common fire of both
Nations, to have both sent and maintained that Book, of which the Author no
doubt has long since wished with Nero U^iaam nescssim^lueras, and of which
more than one Kingdom has cause to wish, that when he writ that, he had
rather burned a Library, though of the value of ^tol^mu's. We shall find them
to have been the first and principal cause of hear^ach, I will not say of, but
since the pacification at Barwick. We shall s^^le them to have been the almost
sole abettors of my Lord of Sfrafford, whilst h^ was practicing upon another
Kingdom, that manner of Government which he intended to settle in this, where
he committed so many, so mighty, and so manifest ^ies, and Oppressions, as the
like have not been committed by any Governor in any Government since Verres
left Sicily. And after they had called him over from being Deputy of Ireland
to be in a manner Deputy or England, (all things here being governed by a
Junctillo, and that Junctillo governed by him) to have assisted him in the
giving of such Councels, and the persuing of such courses, as it is a hard and
measuring cast, whether they were more unwise, more unjust or more unfortunate;
and which had infallibly been our destruction, if by the Grace of God their
share had not been as small in the subtilty of Serpents, as in the innocence of
doves.

Master Speaker, I have represented no small quantity, and no mean degee of
guilt, and truly I believe, that we shall make no little Complement to those,
and no little apology for those to whom this charge belongs, if we shall lay
the faults of the men upon the Order of the Bishops, upon the Episcopacy. I
wish we may distinguish between those, who have been carried away with the
stream, and those who have been the stream that carried them; between those,
whose proper and natural motion was toward our ruin and destruction, and those
who have been hurled about to it contrary to their natural motion by the force
and swinge of superior orbs; and as I wish, we may distinguish between the more
and less guilty; so I yet more wish, we may distinguish between the guilty and
the innocent.

Master Speaker, I doubt, if we consider, that if not the first Planters, yet
the first Spreaders of Christianity, and the first and chief Defenders of
Christianity against Heresies within, and Paganism without, both with their
Ink, and with their blood; and the main conducers to the resurrection of
Christianity, (at least) here in the Reformation (and we owe the light of the
Gospel we now enjoy to the fire they then endured for it) were all Bishops: and
that even now in the greatest perfection of that Order, there are yet some who
have conduced in nothing to our late innovations, but in their silence; some
who in an unexpected and mighty place and power have expressed an equal
moderation and humility, being neither ambitious before, nor proud after,
either of the Crosiers staff, or white staff: some who have been learned
opposers of Popery, and zealous opposers of Arminianism, between whom and their
inferior Clergy, in frequency of Preaching, has been no distinction, whose
lives are untouched, not only by guilt, but by malice; scarce to be equaled by
those of any condition, or to be excelled by those in any Calendar. I doubt not
I say, but if we consider this, this consideration will bring forth this
Conclusion, That Bishops may be good men, and let us give but good men good
Rules, we shall have both good Governors, and good times.

Master Speaker. I am content to take away all those things from them, which to
any considerable degree of probability may again beget the like mischiefs, if
they be not taken away. If their temporal Titles, power and employment appear
likely to distract them from the care of, or make them look down with contempt
upon their Spiritual duty, and that the two great distance between them, and
those they govern will hinder the free and fit recourse of their Inferiors to
them; and occasion insolence from them to their inferiors. Let that be
considered and cared for, I am sure neither their Lorships, their judging of
Tithes, Wills, and Marriages, no, nor their voices in Parliaments are Jure
divino; and I am as sure, that these Titles, and this power, are not necessary
to their Authority, as appears by the little they have had with us by them, and
the much that others have had without them.

If their revenue shall appear likely to produce the same effects (for it has
been anciently observed, that (Religio peperit divitias, and Filia devoravit
matrem;) Let so much of that, as was in all probability, intended for an
attendant upon their temporal Dignities, wait upon them out of the doors. Let
us only take care to leave them such proportions, as may serve in some good
degree to the dignity of Learning, and the encouragement of Students; and let
us not invert that of Jeroboam, and as he made the meanest of the people
Priests, make the highest of the Priests, the meanest of the people.

If it be feared, that they will again employ some of our Laws, with a
severity beyond the intention of those Laws, against some of their weaker
Brethren; that we may be sure to take away that power, let us take away those
Laws, and let no Ceremonies which any number counts unlawful, and no man
counts necessary (against the Rules of Policy, and S. Paul) be imposed upon
them. Let us consider that part of the Rule they have hitherto gone by, that
is, such Canons of their own making as are not confirmed by Parliament, have
been, or no doubt shortly will be by Parliament taken away, that the other part
of the Rule (such Canons as were here received before the Reformation, and not
contrary to any Law) is too doubtful to be a fit Rule, exacting an exact
knowledge of the Canon Law, of the Common Law, of the Statute Law knowledges,
which those who are thus to govern have not, and it is scarce fit they should
have. Since therefore we are to make new Rules, and shall no doubt make those
new Rules strict Rules; and be infallibly certain of a triennial Parliament, to
see those Rules observed as strictly as they are made, and to increase or
change them upon all occasions, we shall have no reason to fear any innovation
from their tyranny, or to doubt any defect in the discharge of their duty. I am
confident, they will not dare either ordain, suspend, silence, excommunicate,
or deprive, otherwise than we would have them. And if this be believed, I am as
confident, we shall not think it fit to abolish upon a few days debate, an
Order, which has lasted (as appears by Story) in most Churches these Sixteen
hundred years, and in all from Christ to Calvin or in an instant change the
whole face of the Church, like the scene of a Mask.

Master Speaker, I do not believe them to be Jure Divino, nay I believe them
not to be Jure divino; but neither do I believe them to be Injuria humana. I
neither consider them as necessary, nor as unlawful, but as convenient or
inconvenient. But since all great Mutations in Government are dangerous, (even
where what is introduced by that Mutation is such as would have been very
profitable upon a primary foundation) and since the greatest danger of
Mutations is, that all the dangers and inconveniences they may being, are not
to be foreseen, and since no wise man will undergo great danger, but for great
necessity; my Opinion is, That we should not root up this Ancient tree, as dead
as it appears, till we have tried, whether by this or the like lopping of the
branches, the sap which was unable to feed the whole, may not serve to make
what is lest both grow and flourish. And certainly, if we may at once take away
both the inconveniences of Bishops, and the inconvenience of no Bishops, that
is of an almost universal Mutation; this course can only be opposed by those,
who love Mutation for mutations sake.

Master Speaker, To be short (as I have reason to be, after having been so
long,) this Trial may be suddenly made, let us commit as much of the Ministers
Remonstrance, as we have read, that those Heads both of Abuses and Grievances
which are there fully collected, may be marshaled and ordered for our debate;
If upon that Debate it shall appear, that those may be taken away, and yet the
Order stand; we shall not need to commit the London Petition at all, for the
cause of it will be ended: if it shall appear, that the abolition of one cannot
be, but by the destruction of the other, then let us not commit the Land. Pet.
but grant it.

FINIS.
A SPEECH made in the HOUSE of COMMONS; Anno 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
NOw that we are about to brand these Canons in respect of the matter contained
in them, it is the proper time to open the foulness thereof: and though much
of this has been anticipated in the general Debate, yet if any thing has been
omitted, or if any thing may be farther cleared in that kind, it is for the
Service of the House that it should now be done.

Sir, I conceive these Canons do contain sundry matters, which are not only
contrary to the Laws of this Land, but also destructive of the very principal
and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. I shall begin with the first Canon,
wherein the framers of these Canons have assumed unto themselves a Parlamentary
power, and that too in a very high Degree, for they have taken upon them to
define what is the Power of the King, what the Liberty of the Subjects, and
what propriety he has in his goods. If this be not proper to a Parliament, I
know not what is: Nay it is the highest matter that can fall under the
consideration of a Parliament, and such a point as wherein they would have
walked with more tenderness and circumspiction, than these bold Divines have
done. And surely, as this was an act of such Presumption as no Age can
parrallel, so it is of such dangerous consequence as nothing can be more. For
they do not only take upon them to determine matters of this nature, but also
under great Penalties forbid all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Readers in Divinity,
etc. to speak any other ways of them than as they had defined; by which means
having seized upon all the Conduits, whereby knowledge is conveyed unto the
people, how easy would it be for them in time to undermine the Kings
Prerogative, and to suppress the Subjects Liberty, or both.

And now (Sir) I beseech you to consider how they have'd sined this high and
great point: They have dealt with us in matter of Divinity, as the Judges had
done before in matter of Law: They first took upon them to determine a matter
that belonged not to their Judicature, but only to the Parliament, and after by
their judgment they overthrew our propriety; and just so have these Divines
dealt with us, they tell us, That Kings are an Ordinance of God, of Divine
Right, and founded in the Prime Laws of nature, from whence it will follow,
that all other Forms of Government, as Aristocrasies and Democraties, are
wicked Forms of Government contrary to the Ordinance of God, and the Prime
Laws of Nature, which is such new Divinity as I never read in any Book, but in
this new Book of Canons.

Mr. Speaker, We all know, That Kings, and States, and Judges, and all
Magistrates are the Ordinances of God, but (Sir) give me leave to say, they
were the Ordinances of men before they were the Ordinances of God. I know I am
upon a great and high point, but I speak by as great and as high a warrant, if
Saint Peter's chair cannot err (as Saint Peter's Epistles cannot) thus he
teaches us, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as supreme, or to the Governor, at to him that is
sent by him, etc.

(Sir) It is worthy noting, that they are Ordinances of men, but that they are
to be submitted unto for the Lords sake; and truly their Power is as just, and
their Subjects allegiance as due unto them, though we suppose them to be first
ordinances of men, and then ednfirmed and establined by God. Ordinance, as if
we suppose them to be immediate Ordinances of God, and so received by men. But
there was somewhat in it, that these Divines aimed at, I suppose it was this,
If Kings were of Divine Right, as the Office of a Pastor in the Church, or
founded in the prime Laws of Nature, as the power of a Father in a Family;
then it would certainly follow, that they should receive the fashion and manner
of their Government only from the Prescript of Gods Word, or of the Laws of
Nature; and consequently, if there be no Text neither of the Old nor New
Testament, nor yet any Law of Nature, that Kings may not make Laws without
Parliaments, they may make Laws without Parliaments; and if neither in the
Scripture nor in the Law of Nature, Kings be forbidden to lay Taxes or any
kind of Impositions upon their people without consent in Parliament, they may
do it out of Parliament: and that this was their meaning, they express it
after in plain terms, for they say, That Subsidies and Taxes, and all manner
of aides are (due unto Kings by the Law of God, and of Nature. (Sir) if they be
due by the Law of God and of nature, they are due, though there be no Act of
Parliament for them, nay (Sir) if they be due by such a right, a hundred Acts
of Parliament cannot take them away, or make them undue. And (Sir) that they
meant it of Subsidies and Aids taken, without consent in Parliament, is clearly
that addition that they subjoyn unto it, that this does not take away from the
Subject the propriety he has in his goods, for had they spoken of Subsidies
and Aids given by consent in Parliament, this would have been a very ridiculous
addition; for, Who ever made any question, whether the giving Subsidies in
Parliament did take away from the Subject the Propriety he has in his Goods,
whenas it does evidently imply, they have a propriety in their goods? for they
could not give, unless they had something to give: But because that was
alleged as a chief Reason against ship money, and other such illegal Payments
levied upon the people, without their consent in Parliament, that it did
deprive them ^f their right of propriety which they have in their goods; These
Divines would seem to make some Answer thereunto, but in truth their Answer is
nothing else but the bare assertion of a Contradiction, and it is an easy
thing to say a contradiction, but impossible to reconcile it; for certainly if
it be a true Rule (as it is most tru^) Quo meum est, sine consensu meo non
potest sieri alienum; To take my goods without my consent must needs destroy my
propriety. Another thing in this first Canon, wherein they have assumed unto
themselves a Parliamentary Power, is in that they take upon them to define what
is Treason, beside what is determined in the Statute of Treasons They say, To
set up any coactive Independent Power is treasonable both against God and the
King, The Question is not whether it be true they say or no, but whether they
have power to say what is treason, and what not? But now (Sir) that I am upon
this point, I would gladly know what kind of power that is, which is exercised
by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. Coactive certainly it is, all
the Kingdom feels the lash thereof, and it must needs be Independent, if it be
jure Divino, as they hold it, for they do not mean by an Independent power,
such a power as does not depend on God. Besides, if their Power be dependant,
of whom is it dependent? not of the King, for the Law acknowledges no way
whereby Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction can be derived from his Majesty, but by his
Commission under the great Seal, which, as I am informed they have not: I speak
not of the High Commission, but of that Jurisdiction which they exercise in
their Archiepiscopal, Episcopal, Archidiaconal Courts, etc and therefore, if
their own Sentence be just, we know what they are, and what they have
pronounced against themselves. But (Sir) it were worth knowing what they aimed
at in that Independent coactive Power, which they term Popular. I will not
take upon me to unfold their meaning; but we know Doct. Beal had a hand in
making of these Canons, and if we apply his Paraphrase to the Text, it may give
us some clearness. I remember amongst other Notes of his this was one, shat we
did acknowledge the Kings Supremacy, but would join unto him an Assistant,
(viz.) the People, meaning this House, which being the Representative body of
the COMMONS of England, and claiming, as it is so, a share in the Legislative
Power, Doctor Beal calls this, a joining of an Assistant to the King, in whom
solely he places the Power of making Laws, and that it is but of grace, that
he assumeth either the Lords, or Commons for the making of Laws with him. Now
(Sir) The Legislative power is the greatest Power, and therefore coactive; and
it is the Highest power, and therefore Independent; and if every Estate for the
Proportion it has therein, should not have such a power, it should not have it
of right, as founded in the fabric and frame of the policy and Government, but
of Grace, or by Commission, as Doctor Beal affirms. I have done with the
first Canon, only I shall add this, That considering the Principles and
Positions that are laid down therein, and comparing them with a clause toward
the end of the Canon, that in no case imaginable it is lawful for Subjects to
defend themselves, we may judge how far forth these Canons were to prepare
men's minds for the force that was to follow after; if the Accusation against
my Lord of Strafford be laid aright. For the matter it self, I hope there will
never be any need to dispute that Question, and I do believe they had as little
need to have published that position, had it not been upon design. As for the
second Canon, therein also they have assumed to themselves a Parliamentary
power, in taking upon them to appoint Holydaies, whereas the Statute says in
express words, That such days shall be only kept as Holidayes, as are named
in the Statute, and no other; and therefore, though the thing may be bonum, yet
it was not done been, because not ordained by Parliament, notwithstanding what
has been alleged to the contrary: It seems to me to be the appointing of an
Holiday, to set a time apart for Divine Service, and to force men under
penalties to leave their labors, and business, and to be present at it. And
of the same nature is that other clause, in the same Canon, wherein they take
upon them without Parliament, to lay a charge upon the People, enjoining two
Books at least for that day, to be bought at the charge of the Parish, for by
the same right, that they may lay a penny on the Parish without Parliament,
they may lay a pound, or any greater Sum.

As to the Third Canon, I shall pass it over, only the Observation that my
neighbor of the long Robe made upon it, seems unto me so good, as that it is
worth the repeating, That whereas in the Canon against Sectaries, there is an
especial Proviso, that it shall not derogate from any Statute, or Law made
against them, (as if their Canons had any power to disanull an Act of
Parliament,) There is no such Proviso in this Canon against Papists, from
whence it may be probably conjectured, that they might have drawn some color
of exemption, from the penal Laws established against them from this Canon,
because it might seem hard that they should be doubly punished for the same
thing, as we know in the point of absence from the Church; the Law provideth,
that if any man be first punished by the Ordinary, he shall not be punished
again by the Justices.

For the Fourth Canon against Socinianisme, therein also these Canon makers
have assumed to themselves, a Parliamentary power, in determining an Heresy
not determined by Law, which is expressly reserved to the determination of a
Parliament. It is true, they say it is a complication of many heresies
condemned in the four first Councels, but they do not say what those Heresies
are, and it is not possible that Socinianisme should be formally condemned in
those Counsels, for it is sprung up but of late, therefore they have taken
upon them to determine and damn a Heresy, and that so generally, as that it
may be of very dangerous consequence, for condemning Socinianisme for an
Heresy, and not declaring what is Socinianisme, it is left in their breasts
whom they will judge, and call a Socinian. I would not have any thing that I
have said to be interpreted, as if I had spoken it in favor of Socinianisme,
which (if it be such as I apprehend it to be) is indeed a most vile and
damnable Heresy, and therefore the framers of these Canons are the more to
blame in the next Canon against Sectaries, wherein, besides that in the
preamble thereof, they lay it down for a certain ground, which the Holy Synod
knew full well, that other Sects (which they extend not only to Brownists and
Separatists, but also to all persons that for the space of a month do absent
themselves, without a reasonable cause, from their own Parish Churches,) do
equally endeavor the subversion of the Discipline, and Doctrine of the Church
of England with the Papists, although the worst of them do not bear any
proportion in that respect to the Papists; I say, besides that they make them
equal in crime, and punishment, to the Papists, notwithstanding the great
disproportion of their Tenants, there is another passage in this Canon
relative, to that against Socinianisme, which I shall especially offer to your
consideration, and that is this, If a Gentleman coming from beyond Seas should
happen to bring over with him a Book, contrary to the Discipline of the Church
of England, or should give such a Book to his friend, nay, if a man shall but
abett, or maintain an Opinion contrary thereunto, though it were but in
Parliament, if he thought it fit to be altered, by this Canon he is
excommunicate, ipso facto, and lies under the same consideration, and is
liable to the same punishment; as if he had maintained an Opinion against the
Deity of CHRIST, and of the Holy Ghost, and of our Justification by the
satisfaction of Christ.

(Sir) If in these things that are in their own nature indifferent, if in
things disputable, it shall be as heinous to abett or maintain an Opinion, as
in the most horrible and monstrous Heresies that can be imagined, What Liberty
is left to us as Christians? What Liberty is left to us as men?

I proceed to the Sixth Canon, wherein these Canonists have assumed to
themselves a Parliamentary Power, and that in a very high Degree, in that they
have taken upon them to impose new Oaths upon the Kings Subjects. (Sir) under
favor of what has been alleged to the contrary, To impose an Oath, if it be
not an higher power then to make a Law, it is a power of making a Law of a most
high nature, and of higher and farther consequence than any other Law, and I
should much rather choose that the Convocation should have a power to make
Laws, to bind my person, and my Estate, than that they should have a power to
make Oaths to bind my conscience: A Law binds me no longer than till another
Law be made to alter it, but my Oath binds me as long as I live. Again, A Law
binds me either to obedience, or to undergo the penalty inflicted by the Law,
but my Oath binds me absolutely to obedience. And Lastly, A Law binds me no
longer than I am in the Land, or at the farthest, no longer than I am a member
of the State, wherein, and whereby the Law is made, but my Oath once being
taken does bind me in all places, and in all conditions, so long as I live.
Thus much I though good to speak concerning the power of imposing new Oaths:
as to the matter of this new Oath, it is wholly illegal. It is against the Law
of this Land, it is against the Law and Light of Nature, it is against the Law
of GOD, it is against the Laws of this KINGDOM; and that, no obscure Laws,
nor concerning any mean or petty matters. It is against the Law of the Kings
Supremacy, in that it makes Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc.
to be jure Divino, whereas the Law of this Land has annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm, not only all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but also all
Superiority, over the Ecclesiastical STATE, and it is to be derived from him by
Commission under the Great Seal, and consequently it is Jure humane. Again, it
is against the Oath of Supremacy, established by Law point-blanck, for therein
I am sworn, not only to consent unto, but also to assist, and to the uttermost
of my power, to defend all Jurisdictions, Preheminences, etc. annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, of which this is one (and that which immediately
precedeth this Oath in the Statute, and whereunto it does especially relate)
that his Majesty may exercise any Jurisdiction, or Ecclesiastical Government
by his Commission under the Great Seal, directed to such persons as he shall
think meet; so that, if he shall think other Persons meet, than Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. I am sworn in the Oath of Supremacy, not only to assent
thereunto, but to assist, and to the utrermost of my power defend such an
appointment of his Majesty, and in this new Oath I shall swear never to consent
unto such an alteration. In the like manner it is against the Law, and Light of
Nature, that a man should swear to answer, (etc.) to he knows not what. It is
against the Law and Light of Nature, that a man should swear never to consent,
to alter a thing, that in its own nature is alterable, and may prove
inconvenient, and fit to be altered. Lastly, It is against the Law of God: for
whereas there are Three Rules prescribed to him that will swear aright, that he
swear in Judgment, in Truth, and Righteousness: He that shall take this new
Oath, must needs break all these three Rules. He cannot swear in judgment,
because this Oath is so full of ambiguities, that he cannot tell what he swears
unto; not to speak of the unextricable ambiguity of the etc. there is scarce
one word that is not ambiguous in the principal part of the Oath; as first,
what is meant by the Church of England? whether all the Christians in England,
or whether the Clergy only, or only the Archbishops, Bishops, Deans? etc. or
whether the Convocation? or what? In like manner it is as doubtful what is
meant by the Discipline, and what by the Doctrine of the Church of England; for
what some call Superstitious Innovations, if others affirm to be consonance to
the Primitive, and that the purest Reformation in the time of Edward the 6. and
in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and so for the Doctrine of
the Church of England, if all the Positions that of later years have been
challenged by some of our Divines to be Arminian and Popish, and contrary to
the Articles of our Religion, and which on the other side have been asserted
and maintained as consonant to the Doctrine of our Church, and the Articles of
Religion were gathered together, they might make a pretty Volumne; nay, Sancta
Clara will maintain it in despire of the Puritans, That the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, is the Doctrine of the Church of England. Truly it were very
fit that we knew, what were the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, before we swear to it; and then (Sir) give me leave to say, that I
should be very loath to swear to the Discipline, or to the Doctrine and Tenants
of the purest Church in the World, as they are collected by them, farther than
they agree with the Holy Scriptures. Lastly, It is as doubtful what is meant
by the Doctrine and Discipline established, and what by altering and consenting
to alter, whether that is accounted or established, which is established by Act
of Parliament, or whether that also that is established, by Canons,
Injunctions, etc. and whether it shall not extend to that which is published by
our Divines, with the allowance of Authority: and so for consenting to alter,
whether it be only meant that a man shall not be active in altering, or whether
it extend to any consent, and so that a man shall not submit to it, nor accept
of it, being altered by the State. More ambiguities might be shown, but these
are enough to make it clear, that he that shall take this Oath cannot swear in
judgment. Nor can he swear in truth, for it is full of untruths. It is not true
that Discipline is necessary to Salvation It is not true, that Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. are Jure Divino, as they must needs be, if
the Lawmakers ought of right to establish them, as they are established, for
the Lawmakers are not bound as of right, to frame their Laws to any other
than the Laws of God alone. Now, whether Bishops be Jure Divino, we know it is
a Dispute amongst the Papists, and never did any Protestant hold it till of
late years, but that Archbishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. should be Jure
Divino, I do not know, that ever any Christian held it before, and yet he that
takes this Oath must swear it. Lastly, As he that takes this Oath cannot
swear in judgment nor in truth, so neither can he swear in righteousness, for
it is full of unrighteousness, being indeed, as has been well opened, a
Covenant in effect against the King and Kingdom; for if the whole STATE should
find it necessary, to alter the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. a
great part of the Kingdom, especially of the Gentry, (for not only the
Clergy, but all that take degrees in the Universities, are bound to take it)
will be preingaged not to consent to it, or admit of it. Again, it is a great
wrong to those that shall be Parliament men, that their freedom shall be taken
away, being bound up by an Oath, not to consent to the altering of a thing,
which it may be fit and proper for a Parliament to alter. And suppose that for
the present it be no hinderance to the service of God, nor yet burdensome to
the King, and Kingdom, yet if it should prove so hereafter, for a man to be
bound by an Oath never to consent to alter it, may be a great wrong to God in
his service, and to the King and Kingdom in their peace and welfare, and
therefore this Oath cannot be taken in righteousness. For the other Oath, de
parendo juri Ecclesiae, and stando mandatis Ecclesiae, though it make less
noise than the other, yet is it not of lest dangerous consequence. If I
remember well the Story, this was the Oath that the Pope made King John to
take, and when he had sworn stare mandatis Ecclesiae, the Pope commanded him to
resign his Kingdom to him; and truly, be he Gentleman or Nobleman, or
whatever else, when he has once put his neck into this noose, his Ghostly
Fathers may drag him whither they will, for they have the quantity and the
quality of the penance in their own breasts, and if they shall enjoin him to
give any Sum toward the building of a Church, or the adorning of a Choppel, he
must pay it, or if they should enjoin him any servile or base Action (as there
are not wanting Examples of that kind, in the time of Popery) they are sworn
stare mandatis Ecclesiae, and so cannot recede, but must perform it: Nay, I
dare not warrant any man from the rods of Henry the second, or of Raymond of
Tholouze; what has been done may be done, I am fure the power is the same. And
that other Oath also (though more usual in practice, and more confirmed by
these new Canons) which is administered to Churchwardens, would be looked into.
For it is hardly possible for them that take it not to be forsworn, being they
swear to so many particulars, that they cannot mind and to some that they
cannot understand; as, how many Churchwardens are there in England, that
understand what Socinianisme is, in case they be sworn, to present the
Offenders against that Canon, which concerns that matter.

I shall only add a word or two concerning two Canons more, which seem to be
Canons of Reformation:

The First is, concerning Excommunication, to be pronounced only by a Divine,
wherein it is alleged for the Framers of these Canons, that if they have not
more Law on their sides, yet they may seem to have more reason. For my part, as
in all other things, I think they have so mended the matter, that they have
made it far worse; for before that which was found fault with was this, That a
Lay man did that which the grave Divine should have done, and now the grave
Divine must do whatever the Lay man would have done, for the cognoscence of the
Cause, and the power of Judicature is wholly in the Lay man, only the grave
Divine is to be his servant, to execute his Sentences, and has such a kind of
managing the spiritual sword, allowed only unto him, as the Papists in some
cases were wont to afford unto the Civil Magistrate, in respect of the temporal
sword; for, as if the Civil sword by an implicit faith had been pinned to the
Lawn sleeves, they condemned men of Heresy, and then delivered them over to the
Secular Power; but what to do? not to have any cognizance of the cause, nor to
exercise any power of judicature but only to be their Executioners, and to burn
the Heretic whom they had condemned, and so they judged men excommunicate, and
then the Civil Power was to send out Writts, de excommunicato capiendo, against
them: But one said well, that the sword, without Cognizance of the cause, and
judgment, was like Polyphemus without his eye, it became violence and fury, but
being accompanied with the eye of judgment, it is equity and justice: and
surely where the Spiritual or Civil Governor is called upon to strike, he must
be allowed to see and judge whom, and wherefore he strikes, otherwise he will be
able to give but an ill account to God, of the managing of the sword, wherewith
he is instructed.

The other Canon is the Last Canon, against Vexatious Citations, wherein they
seem to have some sense of the great grievance that poor people lie under, by
occasion of Vexatious Citations, and Molestations in Ecclesiastical Courts, and
I verily believe that there is not a greater Oppression in the whole Kingdom
upon the poorer sort of people, than that which proceeds out of these Courts.
But now (Sir) Let us see what provision they have made against it by this
Canon. They say, because great grievances may fall upon people by citations
upon pretense only, of the breach of that law without any presentment, or any
other just ground, that no citations grounded only as aforesaid shall issue
out, except it be under the hand and Seal of the Chancellor, Commissary,
Archdeacon, or other competent Judge, so that, (if there be any sense in these
words) though there be no Presentment at all, nor any other just ground, yet a
citation may issue out, so it be under the hand and Seal of the Chancellor,
Commissary, or other competent Judge, and the party shall not be discharged
without paying his Fees, nor have any relief by this Canon. But suppose the
Citation be not under the hand and Seal of any Competent Judge, and that there
was neither Presentment nor any just grounds for it, shall he then be dismissed
without paying any Fees? no, unless first contrary to the Law of Nature, there
being no Presentment nor just ground of Accusation against him, he shall by his
Oath purge himself of pretended breaches of Law, and then too he shall only
have the Fees of the Court remitted, but shall have no satisfaction for his
troublesome and chargeable journey, and for the loss of his time, and being
drawn away from his Affairs. Nay least they should seem to have been too
liberal of their favor, they add a Proviso in the close of the Canon, that
this grace of theirs shall not extend to any grievous crime, as Schism,
incontinency, misbehaviour in the Church, or obstinate Inconformity. And what
do they call misbehaviour in the Church? It a man do not kneel at the
Confession, or have his hat on when the Lessons are reading. In like manner
what do they call obstinate inconformity? If a man will not think what they
would have him think, If a man will not say what they would have him say, if a
man will not swear what they would have him swear, if a man will not read what
they would have him read, if a man will not preach what they would have him
preach, if a man will not pray what they would have him pray: In short, if a
man will not do whatever they would have him do, then he is an inconformist,
and after that they have duly admonished him, primo, secundo tertio, all in
one breath, then he is contumacious, then he is an obstinate Inconformist.

Now (Sir) my humble Motion is, that in consideration of all the Premises, and
what besides has been well laid open by others; we should proceed to damn
these Canons, not only as contrary to the Laws of the Land, but also as
containing sundry matters, destructive of the right of Parliaments, and of the
fundamental and other principal Laws of this Kiagdome, and otherwise of very
dangerous consequence.

A SPEECH in the House of Commons, at a Committee for the Bill against
Episcopal-Government, Mr Hide sitting in the Chair. June 11, 1641.
Mr. Hide,
THE debate we are now upon is, whether the Government by Archbishops, Bishops,
Chancellors, etc. should be taken away out of the Church and Kingdom of
England: for the right stating whereof, we must remember the Vote which past
yesterday, not only by this Committee, but the House, which was to this effect:
That this Government has been sound by long experience, to be a great
impediment to the perfect Reformation and growth of Religion, and very
prejudicial to the civil State.

So that then the Question will lie thus before us, Whether a Government, which
long experience has set so ill a Character upon, importing danger, not only to
our Religion, but the civil State, should be any longer continued amongst us,
or be utterly abolished? For my own part, I am of the opinion of those, who
conceive that the strength of reason already set down, in the Preamble to this
Bill, by yesterdaies Vote, is a necessary decision of this Question: For one of
the main ends for which Church Government is set up, is to advance and further
the perfect reformation and growth of Religion; which we have already voted,
this Government does contradict; so that it is destructive to the very end for
which it should be, and is most necessary and desirable? in which respect
certainly we have cause enough to lay it aside, not only as useless, in that it
attains not its end, but as dangerous, in that it destroys and contradicts it.

In the second place, we have voted it prejudicial to the civil State, as
having so powerful and ill an influence upon our Laws, the Prerogative of the
King, and Liberties of the Subject, that it is like a spreading leprosy, which
leaves nothing untainted and uninfected which it comes near.

May we not therefore well say of this Government, as our Savior in the fifth
of Matthew speaks of salt (give me leave upon this occasion to make use of
Scripture, as well as others have done in this debate) where it is said that
salt is good; but if the salt has lost its savor, wherewith will you season
it? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under
foot of men: so Church Government, in the general, is good, and that which is
necessary, and which we all desire; but when any particular form of it has
once lost its savor, by being destructive to its own ends, for which it is set
up (as by our Vote already pasted we say this has) then furely, Sir, we have
no more to do but to cast it out, and endeavor, the best we can, to provide
our selves a better.

But to this it has been said, that the Government now in question, may be so
amended and reformed, that it needs not be quite pulled down or abolished;
because it is conceived, it has no original sin or evil in it: or if it have,
it is said, regeneration will take that away.

Unto which I answer, I do consent that we should do with this Government as we
are done by in regeneration, in which all old things are to pass away, and all
things are to become new, and this we must do, if we desire a persect
reformation, and growth of our Religion, or good to our civil state. For the
whole Fabric of this building is so rotten and corrupt, from the very
foundation of it to the top, that if we pull it not down now, it will fall
about the cars of all those that endeavor it, within a very few years.

The universal rottenness or corruption of this government, will most evidently
appear by a disquisition into these ensuing particulars.

First, Let us consider in what soil this root grows: Is it not in the Popes
Paradise? do not one and the same principles and grounds maintain the Papacy or
universal Bishop, as do our Diocesan or Metropolitan Bishops? All those
authorities which have been brought us out of the Fathers and antiquity, will
they not as well, if not better support the Popedom, as the order of our
Bishops? So like wise all these arguments for its agreeableness to Monarchy,
and cure of Schism, do they not much more strongly hold for the acknowledgment
of the Pope, than for our Bishops? and yet have Monarchies been ever a whit the
more absolute for the Popes universal Monarchy? or their Kingdoms less subject
to schisms and seditions? whatsoever other Kingdoms have been, I am sure our
Histories can tell us, this Kingdom has not: and therefore we have cast him
off long since, as he is forteign, though we have not been without one in our
own bowels. For the difference between a Metropolitan, or Diocesan, or
universal Bishop, is not of kinds, but of degrees: and a Metropolitan or
Diocesan Bishop is as ill able to perform the duty of a Pastor to his Diocese
or Province, as the universal Bishop is able to do it to the whole world: for
the one cannot do but by Deputies, and no more can the other; and therefore
since we all confess the grounds upon which the Papacy stands are rotten, how
can we deny but these that maintain our Bishops are so too, since they are one
and the same.

In the second place, let us consider by what hand this root of Episcopacy was
planted, and how it came into the Church.

It is no difficult matter to find this out, for is not the very spirit of this
order, a spirit of pride, exalting it self in the Temple of God, over all that
is called God? First, exalting it self above its fellow-Presbyters, under the
form of a Bishop; then over its fellow Bishops, under the title of Archbisnops,
and so still mounting over those of its own profession, till it come to be
Pope, and then it sticks not to tread upon the necks of Princes, Kings and
Emperors, and trample them under its feet. Also thus you may trace it from its
first rise, and discern by what spirit this order came into the Church, and by
what door, even by the backdoor of pride and ambition, not by Christ Jesus. It
is not a plant which Gods right hand has planted, but is full of rottenness
and corruption; that mystery of iniquity which has wrought thus long, and so
fit to be plucked up, and removed out of the way.

Thirdly, Let us consider the very nature and quality of this tree, or root in
its self, whether it be good or corrupt in its own nature; we all know where it
is said, A good tree cannot bring forth corrupt fruit, nor a corrupt tree good
fruit: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? By its fruit
therefore we shall be sure to know it; and according as the fruits of the
Government have been amongst us, either in Church or Common wealth, so let it
stand, or fall with us.

In the Church.
1. AS it self came in by the back door into the Church, and was brought in by
the spirit of Antichrist, so it self has been the backdoor and inlet of all
superstition and corruption into the worship and doctrine of this Church, and
the means of hastening us back again to Rome. For proof of this, I appeal to
all our knowledges in late years past, the memory whereof is so fresh, I need
eater into no particulars.

A second fruit of this Government in the Church, has been the displacing of
the most godly and Conscientious Ministers; the vexing, punishing, and
banishing out of the Kingdom, the most religious of all sorts and conditions,
that would not comply with their superstitious inventions and Ceremonies; in
one word, the turning the edge and power of their Government against the very
life and power of Godliness; and the favor and protect on of it unto, all
profane, scandalous and superstitious persons that would uphold their party.
Thousands of examples might be given of this, if it were not most notorious.

A third fruit has been Schism and Fractions within our selves, and alienation
from all the reformed Churches abroad.

And lastly, the prodigious monster of the late Canons, whereby they had
designed the whole Nation to a perpetual slavery and bond age to themselves,
and their superstitious Inventions. These are the fruits of the Government in
the Church. Now let us consider these in the Civil State: As, 1. The
countenaucing all illegal Projects and proceedings, by teaching in their
Pulpits the lawfulness of an arbitrary Power. 2. The overthrowing all process
at Common Law, that reflected never so little upon their Courts. 3. The
kindling a War between these two Nations, and blowing up the flame, as much as
in them lay, by their Councels, Canons and Subsidles they granted to that end.
4. The plots, practices and combinations during this Parliament, in all which
they seem to have been interested more or less. Thus have they not contented
themselves with encroachments upon our spiritual privileges, but have envied
us our civil freedom, desiring to make us grind in their mill, as the
Philistims did Sampson, and to put out both our eyes. O let us be avenged of
these Philistims for our two eyes. If then the tree be to be known by its
fruits, I hope you see by this time plainly the nature and quality of this tree.

In the last place, give me leave for a close of all to present to your
consideration the mischiefs, which the continuance of this Government does
threaten us with, if by the wisdom of this Committee they be not prevented. 1.
The danger our Religion must ever be in, so long as it is in the hands of such
Governors, as can stand firmly in nothing more than its ruin; and whose
affinity with the Popish Hieratchy makes them more confident of the Papists,
than the Professors of the reformed Religion, for their safety and subsistence.
2. The unhappy condition our civil State is in, whilst the Bishops have vete in
the Lords House, being there as so many obstructions, in our body Politic, to
all good and wholesome Laws tending to salvation. 3. The improbability of settling
any firm or durable peace, so long as the cause of the war yet continues, and
the bellows that blow up this flame. 4. And that which I will assure you goes
nearest my heart, is the check which we seem to give to divine Providence, if
we do not at this time pull down this Government. For has not this Parl. been
called, continued, preserved and secured by the immediate finger of God, as it
were for this work? had we not else been swallowed up in many inevitable
dangers, by the practices and designs of these men and their party? has not
God left them to themselves, as well in these things, as in the evil
administration of their Government, that he might lay them open unto us, and
lead us as it were, by the hand, from the finding them to be the causes of our
evil, to discern that their rooting up must be our only cure? Let us not then
halt any longer between two opinions, but with one heart and resolution give
glory to God, in complying with his providence, and with the good safety and
peace of this Church and State, which is by passing this Bill we are now upon.

FINIS.

