Loveday's LETTERS Domestic and Foreign. TO SEVERAL PERSONS, Occasionally
distributed in SUBJECTS Philosophical, Historical and Moral,

By R. LOVEDAY Gent. the late Translator of the three first parts of Cleopatra.

Optimae sunt Literae quae in lucem prodeunt, prosunt and penetrant.

Cassan. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill,
1659.

portrait of Robert Loveday, fl. 1655 (?) Lucid amant

Pour Relever

Would know whose Face this Figure represents;
He was the Muses Darling, in whose Tents
He lived and did: And on whose Shrine was writ
Here lies the paragon of Art and wit:
Whose Actions Louday: whose laureat lines
Gave Copies to the Romances of these times.


For my Friend Mr. A. L.
SIR,
I Received yours, desiring my advice for the publishing of your Brothers
Letters. Truly Sir, I should be very ungrateful to him, unkind to my self, and
injurious to others, if I should dissuade you from offering those to the
public, which in the communication may be pleasurable to all. Many of them
being written to my self, and the rest (as I suppose) to his correspondents,
it is possible that in some of them the freedom of his Pen, and Interest with the
person to whom he writ, might in some places make his expressions not so
compact, or so clear, as the critical Peruser expects. But doubtless he knew
what he writ at the time when he writ, but was not obliged to circumscribe his
fancy, either to his own continuing, or the Readers transitory understanding:
yet meeting with one endued with a reasonable kindness and temper, he will find
nothing but what may be interpreted without any Interpreters. I remember there
were some other passages in some of them, concerning the Transactions of that
age wherein he writ: subjects too subtle for a private Pen, I wish them rather
expunged then exposed; for (besides the danger of treading upon the heels of
truth) there is State, that connection between the secrets and acts of State,
that we (as private persons) cannot, ought not, to censure one, unless we knew
the other. There are so many necessary mists cast before our eyes, so many
umbrages before the light, that it were more safe for us to draw our Curtains,
and take a nap, then to search about (as Diogenes with his Lanthorn and Candle)
to find out truth.

We are so partial in our Interests and self-concernments, either of mind or
body, or both, that mostly we account those things neither good, rational nor
commodious, which do not concur in all circumstances with our entire judgment,
or individual advantage.

I wish I had leisure to peruse the whole Packet, before you sent them to the
public; but in earnest, Sir, I cannot spare so much time from my Intrustments.
It is my desire therefore that you will advise with such friends as have an
affection to his repute; and if they be of my acquaintance, tell them (as an
encouragement to their expense of time) my opinion is (so far as I retain the
memory of them, and I believe the rest are suitable) that they are very choice
descants, Theological, Ethicall, facetious and solid. The volatile part
showing the art of the Chemist, as the fixed matter: there is something to
please all Tempers, masculine and feminine, martial and civil, curiall and
rural, satyrick and amorous: and I doubt not but if he had lived the
completing of his Translation of Cleopatra, or Loves Masterpiece, I know not
whether he would have done greater right to France or England, by making French
English, or English French: the accomplishments of his Pen therein were so
clear and genuine, as if his private had consulted with the public Genius of
both Nations: however, I dare say, by accustoming his Pen to these, and things
of an higher nature, he would have proved an English Balzack.

I confess I wish we were restated in our primitive Innocence, when all our
actions were naked, and yet not ashamed; and when our thoughts were imparted
either by an universal Character, or the harmless Hieroglyphick of a Dove or a
Lamb; but now how are we involved in the perplexities of our scribbling! So that
well may the word Litera be etymologiz'd Litis era, the Epoche, or beginning
of all contentions; we began modestly with the bark and rind of Trees, till the
following ages having thus destroyed their shady Groves, tore the skins from
harmless sheep, that their impure Volumes might be countenanc't by those
innocent Velumes; and not contented to deprive these creatures of their entire
sepultures, they have perverted their bodies to gluttony, and their skins to
impostures; and the latter Age has even robbed the poor of their rags,
torturing them with Mills and other Engines, till in paper they are made
Legatives to most of our humane affairs; and no sooner are they fitted with the
color of innocence, white, but compounds of poisons, Vitriol, Gall, and
Vinegar (emblemes of commotion) do again die them with the sad and sable
tincture, which occasions so much disorder and unquiet to the World.

And now at last we seem distracted with the number and weight of devices, so
that an Index Expurgatorius has been practiced by the learned, and more
fiercely executed (without distinction) by the inrodes of the ignorant.

Yet Seneca's and Cicero's Epistles have escaped, may Loveday's have the same
success and estimate; and then after-ages will not blame me for encouraging
you to their exposure, especially if they please to read and imitate his
leisurable employment.

I shall only add this (being diverted by some other approaches) that I well
knew your Brother valiant, faithful, and discreetly industrious in all the
concernments of body and mind. I was his Friend, and am

May 14. 1657. Yours, J. PETTUS.

To his Honored Cousins, Mr. William Crow of London, and Mr. Antho. Loveday of
Cheston.
Honored Cousins,
YOu being the top-branches of those two Families from whence the deceased
Author of these Epistles had his descent, and thereby having a genuine
propriety in them, it were unnatural, by way of Dedication, to put them under
the umbrage and protection of any other. He had many Testimonies of your
affection whilst living, and I know you retain his memory not unsuitable: they
therefore encounter the Eye of the ingenuous Reader, under the patronage and
conduct of your names. Accept the tender of them as a pledge of my real
affection; and if ever Providence smile me into a capacity of dressing my power
in a more becoming attire, I shall be ready to approve my self,

Cousin, Your most humble Servant.
Nephew, Your real affectionate Uncle, ANTHO. LOVEDAY.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THese Epistles are ralli'd into a body, and exposed to public view, in the
divulging whereof, neither could the instancy of the Authors friends, though
their estimate had an high influence over me; nor a reliance on my own opinion,
fearing lest it might appear too partial through my near relation to the
Author, act so strongly on me, as to acquiesce to the importunity of their
desires; so tender was I of his honor in edition of his labors, till such
time, as by the perusal of persons of unquestioned judgment they were returned
to my hand, highly approved. And of these, no inducement more impressive nor
efficaciously persuasive, then the encouragement of a person, whose judicious
pen has sufficiently discovered his abilities to the world: by expressing him,
without any other additional delineature, the master of a rich Fancy: being
generally known to be not only an approved Professor, but a constant Advancer
of all humane and divine learning: singularly versed in both: and whose
affectionate intimacy to this Author, as it highly obliged him in his life; so
have his judicious lines conduced no less to the perpetuating of his memory
after his death. This may appear in the very first Letter, which this person of
honor was pleased to address to me: wherein he has returned with a modest
candor the opinion he retained touching this ingenious: Author whose blameless
repute, and fair deportment in the whole progress of hislife, mannagement of
his affections, and current of his actions superseded all censure.

The Author indeed, had a resolution, if God had lent him life, and enlarged
his hours in a parallel line to the apparent progression of his raising hopes,
"to have seen these, as they were by him occasionally composed, so methodically
disposed and completed: and to bestow a meriting addition on his Pen, in such
manner polished and refined, as they might have clearly discovered the precious
quality of that Mine, and purity of his Mind from whence they derived their
extraction. As for his Pen, give me leave to return that opinion of it, which
all men who with recollected thoughts have seriously read him, ingeniously
retained of it: his Style was such as it knew how to present State without
affectation; render a modest censure without bitterness, and close the period
of his Discourse with incomparable sweetness. Neither were his parts only
deserving, his education and descent held an equipage to those Native
imbellishments. To the surviving reputation whereof I shall give you this
account; He was well descended, his education was in the University of
Cambridge, where in his greenest years he did not shake off the yoke of
discipline, and devote himself to the soft blandishments of sensuality, but was
sedulous to his study, and it is like had achieved some suitable preferment,
had not martial times occurred, no friend to Science, and disturbed his
studies; this made him run the same fortune with others, who lived to study:
were driven to study to live; for as that pure Italian Wit Petrarch sometimes
said Mars his Armory, and Minerva's Meniey, run so much upon divisions, as they
seldom cloze in a graceful harmony. And thus his determinations were forced to
a hait, but his active soul moved in the Sphere of Virtue, and in those cloudy
days was pregnant in something that still witnessed that Virtue was his
Mistress, and many ingenious Pieces fell from his Pen, which hereafter may see
the World, and deserve thy perusal (if clear Fancies may suit with the
constitution of cloudy times.) He had acquired to himself the Italian and
French Languages, out of the last his Version of Cleopatra which he called
Hymen's Praeludia, the first three Parts are extant, and gained applause: how
his Letters will arride thy liking, I know not, do as thou shall find them. So
I take my leave, Farewell.

A. L.

Upon Mr. ROBERT LOVEDAY's Effigies.
LOVEDAY, thy feature here by FATHORN drawn,
Though it display his Masterpiece of Art,
It cannot represent the smallest grain
Of those clear rays of thy diviner part,
The Royal fancies of thy loyal heart;
For those transcend the Pencil, and must be
No Objects of the Eye but Memory.
Upon the Emblem.
THe Widowed Turtle leaves the flowery Grove
To solemnize the Obits of his Love:
Love day he may; but in a secret cave
He spends each minute on his Spouses Grave.
And when the Sun his glorious course has run,
He adds this Note -- O must Love lie alone!
Since Turtles tears such Obsequies do make,
We should be Niobees all for thy Love-sake.
For Fame averrs, nere any di'd so young
In love more richly stored, in hopes more strong.
The Emble me explained.
LOok on the radiant splendour of that Sun;
Look on that Turtle in her Ebon-cave;
Whose amorous thread of life wov'n up and spun,
Look how her Spouse bedews his Widdow'd grave:
And in these Modells you his Emblem have,
The Turtle of his Bodi's gone to Earth,
The Turtle of his Soul to her first Birth.
Nor must these two divided long remain,
"Eternity shall cement them again.
Where these Two Turtles with Angelick wings
Shall live, and love, and laud the King of Kings.
Upon the death of his ingenious and much bemoaned friend, Mr. ROBERT LOVEDAY.
COuld pregnant Fancy, Goodness, or prompt pen
Have here procured thee residence with men,
Thou had enjoyed it; But Time held it fit
With Immortality to perfect it:
"The Law of Nature must give way to Grace,
"And Grace to Glory, shown thee face to face?
If this advantage over-strip not the rest,
I shall appeal to those who loved thee best.
But Heaven and Earth are of a different Clime,
So must we hold Eternity and Time.
He who has God, has all: he cannot want,
Though Pilgrim here, there an Inhabitant.
Such is thy glorious state; Dignum laud virum, Musa vetat mori, Caelo beat.
-- Hor.
being rankt with those
Whom though we lose they gain by what we lose.
LOVEDAY thy Name did to the World display
That all thy Tota dies opus extat amans! mirabitur aetas Si mento juvenis men's
foret ista senis. Afran.
Day was Love, thy Love all day.
Both which so jointly in their Center meet
As they have made Eternity their seat.
Never did downy chin more sage produce,
Nor in his youth nurse a maturer Muse.
None more entirely dear unto his own,
Nor higher famed where He was lesser known;
Whereof his Cleopatra witness gives,
In which, though dead, his rate Translation lives.
NOr shall you find in these Perswasives less
Then what his rich Romances did express,
In his perusal he approves them such
Whose Brain can judge, or he has read too much.
R. B.

LOVEDAY's LETTERS.
LETTER I. To Sir I. P.
Sir,
IF I sin in troubling you with fruitless lines, call it rather the weakness of
my judgment then the error of my love, which is in too perfect health to lie
speechless. The thanks I ow you, I confess, are disparaged by my feeble
expressions; but could you read their more secret character, you should find
them dressed in a more becoming attire. To tell you my best wishes are Pages to
your happy success (I hope) were to Tautologize, to your knowledge, at least
belief; and though it be no forlorn hope, it shall march in the front of my
Prayers. For your disposal of me, though I totally relinquish my self to your
discreet commands, yet my humble and earnest desires rather aim at the service
of Sir T.B. then the greater man; however I will call my self your Creature,
and resolve to be of that shape you will fashion me: In the mean time I shall
importune Heaven to furnish me with so happy a power as may render me in some
acceptable service, Sir, Not only your faithful, but

Your grateful Servant, R.L.

LETTER II. To Sir. I. P.
Sir,
IF the importunity of your affairs will consent to a digression, look upon the
tender of his true service that was always yours: If my Heart thought my Pen
fit to be trusted with those Wishes that concern you, I should be more ample;
but it needs not, for I am confident you can read them at this distance. To put
you in mind of my desires were not to deserve their effects, since I believe
the intermitted Truce you take with greater employments, is nobly spent in a
courteous parley with your friends; more petty occasions would trouble you, I
will therefore bind up my true service in these few lines, and rest

Yours R. L.

LETTER III. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Had not failed you last Week, if a sudden command from those whose breath
can blow me any way, had not arrested my pen, and imposed a less pleasing
employment; for there is no delight I can spare with more regret, then these
occasions of sending you my naked thoughts, for Interest is now adored with
such specious idolatry, that it renders even common converse dangerous: So the
honest soul that courts good company, must find it in his own thoughts; to the
stock of which your amity contributes no petty sum: and when the vacancy of
employment releases me to these harmless recreations, I endeavor to drop those
heavy-moulded cares that smell of earth, and fall a pruning the wings of some
lively thoughts; that play like nimble flies in the serenity of an unclouded
mind; and amidst the variety of those tasks I impose upon them, the principal
are dispatched to invite Content to come and dwell in the Valley of my humble
Fortunes, and sport it self upon those banks that are happily purpled with
their own violets. Protected thus with a little, methinks I am proud that I
have not enough to set the Covetous a desiring, nor the Ambitious a scrambling.
Sometime I strive to build Reason as high a Tribunal as my thoughts can rear,
at the Bar of which I labor to accuse my own miscarriages; and had I power to
reform, as well as censure them, what could affront my felicity? Sometimes I
revise my readings in men, and fall a setting the best Slips my observation can
cull from others Gardens; but I confess few of them grow. Sometimes I prick at
the footsteps that books have lately left in my memory; which I find a very
weak Conservatory, and keeps my best observations but as people use to keep
choice Posies, fresh for a day or two, and then let them fade and die. Then
perhaps I roll my thoughts upon Eternity, and that helps me to deride the folly
of those blind Wretches that so hotly scramble for sublunary trifles; but
withal, pity their miserable mistake that run away from the true blessings
while they pursue the false ones. It Is sport to consider how Fortune (or rather
Providence) builds up these creatures (like Scaffolds for a show) with an
intent to pull them down again. Sometimes I am so weak to let my fancy ramble
after Poetic raptures; but in these I only suffer her to air her wings, and
so come home again. With these agreeable diversions I often send my thoughts a
gadding, chiefly to deceive melancholy, which of late has been much
incroaching; for my capital trouble increases, and has got a giddiness to
assist it. I have not yet taken the Physic, and now resolve to defer it till I
arrive in the Country, which will be about a fortnight hence. If these
afflictions can set me the right way to Heaven, especially as it is now
perplexed with so many oblique, devious paths of Error and Heresy, I shall
hug them heartily. I should excuse this unravelling my Contemplations in such a
ruffled manner, but I use curiosity to those that have a less share of my
affection then your self, etc.

Your entirely affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER IV. To Mr. W.
My dearest Friend,
THIS happy night I received your last Letter, which how I took, I wish some
good thing above Man would tell you, for I cannot. Only this, the delights and
joys which are dandled by the World were base and drossie to what that brought
me, which is only less pure then those that make the Angels clap their wings.
It has given me a happy, but a hard task; It Is to let an Ocean through a Quill,
for it is the same difficulty for my Pen to express what my heart means you.
Methinks I would feign say something to you that is not ordinary; but I can
find no words that I do not suspect too faint to fit my affection: only this,
I do not love you the common way, nor with such a kindness as does usually
blaze with the fresh resentment of a benefit, and learn to cool and dye
again, unless it be renewed with the same repeated fuel: but I have an
affection for you that is of the same piece with my soul, as immortal and
undecaying as it self, and will go along with it to the other world, and need
not be ashamed even there to own its object. The busy waves that roll betwixt
us cannot keep me from you; for it is with you I spend my gladdest hours. When I
set my thoughts to cast up the account of my large possessions in you, I deride
the poor rich ones of this Age, and say, Sure if they knew the right way they
would leave the pursuit of their glorious follies, and learn to get a virtuous
friend. But pardon my transport. Present me cordially to your excellent friend;
and entreat him to write me in the number of his faithful servants, for I
cannot be less to him that is so to you: tell him I will allow him the better
room in your breast, so he not grudge me a harbor there; to be expelled which,
would gall my heart strings. No perplexities assault it but what you help to
beat off; no vexations pierce it to which a reflection upon my interest in you
does not prove a Dictamnum, and ejects those arrows be sure then you be
precious to your self, and regard your health, that you may still be so to those
that love you; and then you must be so. But I fear I grow tedious, though I
have not spoke half what I would fain say; but the rest shall be referred to my
next. Well then, conceive I embrace you at this distance, for all but my clay
does. May you arrive at so happy a condition that you may pity your enemies,
and enjoy that serenity of soul that may make you so skillful in virtue; and be
assured, that bate but heaven, and there is nothing so dear as your self to him
that is

Sir, Absolutely yours, R. L.

LETTER V. To Mr. R. C.
Dear Robin,
IF variety of new acquaintance (and more deserving,) has not conspired with
the busy fingers of Time to deface my memory, there will not be much toil in
the task to provoke thee to revive our friendly intercourse; to which thou art
challenged by one whose heart has kept the impresse thou left'st upon it as
fresh and as able to bid defiance to decay, as when our contract was first
sealed. Ah Robin! whither is fled the beauty of those days that so often saw us
feed our felicity with the mutual charesses of our spotless amity? when the
soft whispers of an evening Zephyrus summoned us to those innocent incounters
in Silvanus grove, where so often we unbuttond our souls, and talked our naked
thoughts, as if the golden Age had got new birth in our bosoms. Sure Heaven
was pleased with that lovely undrest visage of our heedlesse simplicity. Do
remember how the pretty little feathered minstrels, came and gave us three or
four of natures choicest Lessons? and then how we hung together? and have many
loath adues it took to part us, though the next day we were to meet again? How
Fortune has used thee since our last long Farewell I know not; to me her
indifferent behavior neither swelled my hopes to an opinion that ever she
intends to make me her darling, nor frowned them to the near neighbor hood of
cold despair, etc.

R. L.

LETTER VI. To his Nephew. A. L.
Dear Cousin,
I Had long since paid the debt of my promise, had Fame furnished me with
ought but false coin: she is grown a new-fashion'd jugler, puts tricks upon
us with a deceptio auditus, various reports here like Canons receive their
birth and funeral in the air, and are often shorterliv'd; some voyc'd like
Trumpets spread a shrill presage of war; others, like the soft warbling of the
amorous Lute, perfume the air with the aromatic tidings of repeated peace:
and thus our erroneous souls weakly pay a credulous homage to the alternate
dominion of our own hopes and fears. Rumor is a cheating lottery, from which
for one prize of a truth we draw a thousand blanks of falsehood I could make
this paper look big with the swelling pride of such news as would be music to
your ears; but lest the tune should prove Syrenicall, I am loath to deceive you
into false joys. That which has most credit with me, except the K. etc. --
Thus I have given you probabillties, befriended, though not defended, by the
most prudent opinions I could encounter with. Could I give you the truth
stripped of all partiality and disguises, she were worth the owning; but her
running through so many relations makes her change attire every step, and
sometimes lose her self. But in this assertion be assured she wears her own
face, without a mask, that I am, Sir, etc.

LETTER VII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Am now about to change the Scene; and I fear it will be a long time before I
shall date my Letters again from London, a place I once esteemed above all the
earth could show me; but my liking is almost drowned in those scarlet streams
have lately stained it. I may now be said to be retiring from a crowd to an
hermitage: for (though it is like I shall mingle with much people) I shall
notwithstanding be alone; since it is not the eye, but the mind and the
affections that create society; like Tantalus, that stood up to the mouth in
water, yet could not drink. But the arms of amity are long enough to reach a
true friend at the greatest distance; for though there be a larger piece of
earth getting between our heavier parts, yet those that have the stamp of
immortality need confess no other limits than what bound the Universe. Thus
sometimes my pen, sometimes my thoughts shall visit you, and fancy an
intertainment suitable to the love that carries them. If Nature had not planted
a mutual affection in our greenest years, and taught it to swim (like a fish
in its proper Element) in the Crimson sap we borrowed from the same fruitful
stock, I think I should have bidden fair for your friendship with much
industry, and, like a slip that fetched his Pedigree from some excellent root,
set it with much diligence in my triangular Garden. But no more. As I was
revising some scriblings, with an intent to pack each in his proper place
before my parting, I lighted on these Rhymes, made about the time I first put
on chains, and upon that subject. I had thrown them by with such a neglect as
I use when I treat with such trifles, that when I re-met with them they had
been so lost to my memory, that they proved as new to my self as they will be
to you. I do not send them with a thought they deserve your reading, but only
to let you see that when I am weary of better employment, I have not forgot to
dally with the Pinkes in Apollo's Garden. I wish all accidents, events, humors,
and dispositions may conspire to make this your meeting pleasant and
delightful. If my fancy could carry my earthy part as nimbly as her self, I
think I should help to feather some glad hours among you. But it is not wisdom
to desire what we cannot have. You see I have much ado to keep within the
bounds of my paper. Farewell dear brother, and continue to love

Your own R. L.

TO serve! what is that? let me consider; stay,
What comes it to to lease my self away?
What right have I resigned? pray let me see,
What is it to let away my liberty?
Dull purblind souls, that have so little wit
To value naught but when we part with it!
It Is to unown my self, it is to disclaim
My will, my head, my hands, all that I am;
To sell my right in Nature, that would have
None of her freeborn creatures to turn slave;
To bow, to cringe, to stoop, and to be still
Pliant and supple to another will;
With cheap tame patience quietly to stand,
And watch the arrival of some proud command,
That sets my heels awork, or else my hand.
Thus having basely set my self to sale,
Time is my Keeper, and each place my Jaile:
The slaves of the same trade are at Argiers,
Only my chain will further reach than theirs.
But hold proud thoughts, the wretch deserves his woe,
That fancies fetters when they are not so;
Show me the man can boast so free a state,
That is not to some power subordinate:
What is he that has uncontrol'd intents?
Seas have their shores, and Kings their Parlaments:
This harmony that smites does chiefly flow
From these two fertile words called High and Low.
Were it a sin to serve, did it bewray
A feeble mind put into mingled clay,
I Would throw my fetters at my niggard fate,
And scorn to eat or live at such a rate:
But there is no slavery but in vice, a soul
That can but check his passion, can control
His loose desires, can temper and set right
The straggling footsteps of his Appetite;
Rather than life with base dishonor save,
Can make a brave retreat into a grave,
Is free, although he helps to fill the rank,
And tugs with tanned companions at the Bank.
Farewell then sordid Sloth, go barren Ease,
Morning long sleeps adue, go try to please
Voluptuous souls, go dwell upon those eyes
Can lend kind looks to virtues enemies.
Hail Learning, parent of desert, to thee
My new-rouz'd soul repaires; sweet Industry,
Those sweaty drops set on thy ruddie brow,
Like virtues gems come and receive my vow,
Never to forsake thee more, never to be
Sick of thy pleasing sprightly company:
Thou my best Mistress art, and I will be
When I am most alone yet still with thee.
On dear Companion then, let us make no stay,
Where reputations Taper leads the way.
I Will owe no blush then as a debt to shame,
Because that I no Independent am.
LETTER VIII. To his brother, Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Was always loath to suffer breach of word to keep company with the rest of
my crimes, if indispensable necessity did not force the guilt. And indeed we
should hate false promises for his sake that first hatched them; deceit of this
kind intrap'd man's primitive innocence, and made him leave that large Legacy of
imperfection to his unhappy heirs. But to swell this to the usual stature of
my tedious Letters, I must imitate those Citizens of the world called younger
brothers, that are often forced to range far from home to enlarge their narrow
fortunes. And since I have casually chopped upon this Simile, I think the
relation of this kind may prove less unpleasant, than the word, I should
otherwise design to black this Paper. It is the Story of the great Cardinal
Mazarini, that sits now at the stern of the French affairs. He is by birth a
Scicilian, by extraction scarce a Gentleman; his education so mean as might
have wrote man before he could write: but being in Natures debt for a handsome
face, a stout heart, and a stirring spirit, he no sooner knew that Scicily was
not all the World, but his active thoughts were got above his poor condition,
and made him resolve to dwell no longer with his domestic penury: and now
being come into Italy, his good fortune conducted him to the casual encounter
of a Dutch Knight, to whose service his debonair behavior soon preferred him.
This German was well skilled in the vices of his Nation, which he committed
with such cunning as (though he drank and played very deep) yet his skill in the
one maintained his debauch in the other. This was a lesson which the young
Scicilian deemed worth his learning; and having curiously observed how his
Master shak'd his Elbow, began to practice his Art upon his own Companions; in
which he thrived so well, as daily improving his skill with his stock, he began
to foster forward hopes, which were well befriended by some affairs that
called his Master to Rome; where taking occasion to step into better company,
and still following his faculty at play, it was not long before he had hoarded
a thousand Crowns; then good Luck (the Dam of Ambition) began to hatch some
aspiring thoughts, which first showed themselves in a request to his Master,
thus; since Providence had lately thought fit to mend his fortunes, he would
vouchsafe to do as much to his condition, and to entertain him in the quality
of a Gentleman; to deserve which he promised to maintain himself
proportionably, without expecting any addition to his allowance. This granted,
he presently commences Gallant, and begins to practice such generous qualities
as are usually paid with reputation and profit: his good clothes and complete
shape first admitted him, and his pleasant conversation indeared him to the
best society, and still his play supported him in it. At length his Master
takes his leave of Rome, and therefore he of his Master; telling him that he
could not forsake that place which he hoped was cut out to be the forge of his
fortunes; and being now grown intimate with some Gentlemen that attended the
Cardinal who steered the helm of the Papal Interest, he found means to be made
known unto him, and proffered his service, with a behavior so handsomely
composed, as at the same time it got him both admission and affection. The
Cardinal, after some trial of his temper and perusal of his disposition, was
well pleased with the discovery of a piercing wit, woven with a clear judgment
and an active Genius, with a capacity apt to receive such impressions as are
not usually stamped in every brain; he was always very careful to fill up
those intervals which his business and play had left vacant, with study of
State-affaires; in which he prospered with so much felicity, that after his
Cardinal had worn him a year or two at his ear, and distilled his State-Maximes
into his fertile soul, he thought fit to breathe the Theory he had given him in
some action that might let the World take notice of his pregnant abilities: he
was therefore sent Coadjutor to a Nuntio who was then dispached to one of the
Princes in Italy, and during that employment he enjoined his Creature to give
him a Weekly account of their transactions; which he did with so much vivacity
of apprehension and gravity of judgment, that the Cardinal began to couple
admiration with affection; and (as if Fate had combined with Nature and Fortune
to advance him) the Nuntio's sudden death lets fall the whole weight of the
business upon his shoulders, which he supported with such a strength of soul,
managed with such dexterous solidity, and accounted for all to his Cardinal
with such a winning industry, as he wrought it with his Holiness to declare him
Nuntio. And now as his preferment had made him more conspicuous, so his brave
heart used the advantage of that new height to distribute longer rays with a
more lively luster. But to contract the Story; his Commission expired, and the
affairs that begot it happily concluded, he returns to Rome; where he receives
(besides a general grand repute) the dear caresses of his Cardinal, and the
plausive benedictions of S. Peter's Successor. About this time the Cardinal
Richelieu had gotten so much glory by making his Master Lewis XIII. of a weak
man a mighty Prince, as he grew formidable to all Christendom, and contracted
suspicion and envy from Rome it self: this made the standing Conclave to
resolve upon the dispatch of some able instrument, to countermine his
dangerous, and give a check to the carriere of his prodigious successes. This
resolved, they generally concurred in the choice of Mazarini, as the fittest
headpiece to give their fears death in the others destruction. To fit him for
this great employment, the Pope gives him a Cardinals Hat, and sends him into
France with a large Legantine Commission; where being arrived, and (like his
politic self) first complying with that grand Fox, the better to get a Clue to
his Labyrinth, began to screw himself into Intelligence; but when he came to
sound his plots, and perceive he could find no bottom, he began to look from
the top of his enterprise as people do from Precipices, with a frighted eye;
and now finding the design not only not feasible, but very dangerous, (the
other never using to take a less vengeance then ruin for such darings) and
then considering that his retreat to Rome would neither be honorable nor safe,
without attempting something: he at last resolves to declare himself
Richelieu's Creature, and (to win the more confidence) unrips the bosom of all
Romes designs against him. This made the other take him to his breast,
acquainted him with the secret contrivance of all his Dedalian policies, and
when he left the World declared him his Successor; and he is now the great
Cardinal that umpires (almost all Christendom,) and now shines in the Gallique
Court with so proud a pomp. But I have made my Story too wordish; if time would
have consented, I think I should have pared much of that away which you will
find superfluous: but take this rude hasty draught for the present, and expect
the next to be better polished by

Your really affectionate Brother to command, R.L.

LETTER IX. To Mr. K.
Sir,
AFter the wearing out of a tedious year in the dull Country, where I met with
nothing that had delight enough to charm the account of my hours, I am gotten
again into the precinct of this unwieldy City; which I find so emptied of all
those I call my friends and acquaintance, as if I had slept with Endymion, and
waked again in another Age; among the best of which methinks I do not
sufficiently resent the miss of you, unless I tell you so. For you shall do me
but right to believe that it is not in the power of new faces, fresh
acquaintance, long absence, with the rest of those ingredients whereof others
have composed Oblivion, to raze out those friends from my remembrance, that not
a rash, blind, imprudent choice, but a rational election has fastened to it.
Of you I have had an experience that made me desirous to get my self the title
of your friend, and it must not be the crime of my will, if I do not keep it:
and I am the more eager to assert it, because I am confident it has a mutual
relation betwixt us. I pray let a line or two from you show that you confess my
claim is just, and inform me how the Pulse of your body and affairs beat in
these ill-tempered times. Let it tell me too what you know of honest W.A. when
you heard from him, how he thrives in his Mercantile affairs, and by what
means I may send him a line. For my self, I still like a Mill-horse repeat my
steps in the same Circle; and I am contented with a mean shelter in this stormy
Age, for I left aiming at preferment ever since it was put out of honesties
reach; and as I cannot take that upon base terms, so I must not give up my
resolution of living to my friends, and therefore of being perfectly

Yours R. L.

LETTER X. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
IF employment from them (to whom my thin fortunes have made obedience a debt)
had not countermanded my intents, my Pen had not held its peace last week, nor
I been forced to set an excuse on the forehead of this. Your pleasing relish of
my last minds me of such Palates as prefer some course dish they love well,
before exquisite dainties; thus has affection taught your opinion (like the
Philosophers Stone) to turn my viler metal into gold. But enough of this, lest
Modesty should appear Design, and I seem of that number that would improve
their praises by rejecting them, and (like cunning Merchants) send their goods
away that they may return with increase. Indeed I should belly my disposition,
and wrong my desires, if I confessed not that they are levelled at the good
opinion of all; but most my affection, if I should not say it chiefly aimed at
yours. For from the object at which Love shoots most Ardour, a reflection of the
same Rays is, most passionately desired; but though I can let these into my
soul with much delight, yet the inward resentment of my feeble deserts must not
suffer them to kindle the tickling vanity of self-love. Reputation is the
Mother of all beautiful actions; it is the Taper that leads the way to all that
is called Desert; where that is misprised, virtue is benumbed, and Reason it
self falls asleep: but it is not lawfully gained by such merits as make a noise
on purpose to be heard; they bid fairest for it that manage a bashful skill,
and (as I have seen you cut faces on a Cherry-stone) show much artifice in a
narrow Continent, that will not brag of a broad appearance. The commodities you
exchange for my trifles, have a better estimation here then with you; for I
must tell you my heart thrives by this pleasing traffic, and grows rich with
true delight. I am now taking the Physic the Doctor sent me (for our journey
is still delaied;) of the operation I shall put my account in the next. My
malady still continues a cruel foe to my fortunes, and in spite of all
rational opposition does too often gall me with vexation, and reproves Content
when it grows too forward* by this you may conclude how I would value the man
whose skill could ease my mind of so heavy a manacle. If you see the Doctor
before your next, I pray let him know that the neezing-powder I take
constantly, but have much ado to persuade it to make me neeze once at a time.
If I see their means fail, I am resolved to try another judgment; but that to
you only. I have no more time left than what will permit me to tell you that I
am and ever will be

Yours in the purest and most unreserv'd affection to command, R. L.

LETTER XI. To Mr. H.
Sir,
SUffer these few words without a blot of Complement, to mind you of those
Hospitable Courtesies you conferred on one whose chief glory is that he hates
ingratitude; for which take my true thanks in the same simple habit that my
heart has dressed them in, and be confident you have purchased a heart that will
resign the resentment of my happiness in such a friend to no other power than
what at last will deprive it of all resentment. This will be made good to you,
when you shall examine a riper experience of me; in the mean time peruse this
enclosed, and satisfy those friendly longings that spoke you skillful in
goodness, that set so just a value on so virtuous a man. I am assured if he
had remembered the likelihood of my happiness to enjoy your converse, your name
had been set there fastened to a kind remembrance; however I know you will
assist my gladness in applauding his health; from whom what I shall receive in
the future I shall communicate to you, though I hide it from all the world
beside: whether to keep it till I come, or seal it up and send it back by this
bearer, is left to your choice. Present my hearty service to sweet Mrs. H. and
promise your self, that though you have many more deserving, you have not a
more cordial friend than

R. L.

LETTER XII. To his Brother A. L.
Loving Brother,
THat we both entered the worlds Theater from the same door, is not enough to
prove us friends; too many (like Cadmus backward brood) not scrupling to crack
the chain of Nature, this Iron age has shown us: But it is the kindred of our
unbegotten souls is called friendship, when their effluxive beams (by the
sweet constraint of assimulation) meet, embrace, and weave themselves (like
Ariadne's Crown) into a Constellation. Such a mutual contexture betwixt us has
pulled the knot of Nature straiter, and rendered the Union incapable of
dissolution or mutation; which is as great an Heresy in amity as that lately
broached of the souls mortality, since love strikes the greatest stroke in
intellectual faculties. But (as you say) that jewel should not be beholden to
words for its estimation, it is best then to keep it in the Cabinets of our
souls, till we can set it in our actions: Neernesse of consanguinity is not
justly coercive to friendship. When I am with my Lord (which I hope I shall be
very shortly) I shall perfect you a more full account of my own affairs than I
am now able: in the mean you may confidently believe that I am

Your entirely affectionate Brother to command till death. R. L.
There is good news stirring, but you must content your self with the
generality, till particularizing grow less dangerous.



LETTER XIII. To his Uncle Mr. W.L.
Sir,
LEst I should run the hazard of being lost to your thoughts, be pleased to
know from this paper that you have still a Nephew who has not forgot what he
owes you, nor suffered new objects and interests to untye him from those
respects, which besides the near relation of blood, the powerful hand of amity
has fastened: so I have often received from my Brothers pen the account of your
happy and healthful condition both in body and mind; and believe it, Sir, you
have not a friend has outgladded me for your well-being, nor outwish'd me for
the continuance. Instead of a better token I have sem you a dull translation
out of the French Tongue, I gained in those empty spaces of time which were
left by those that command me at my own disposal: if affection can help you to
over-see the blemishes, and teach you to excuse what your judgment should
condemn, perhaps it may help you to feather a few tedious hours, when the
fish have no appetite. I still repine at my ill fortune, that would not let me
enjoy you while I was in the Country: For Sir, though I ever chiefly loved you
for your own sake, yet I blush not to confess that I mingled my interest in
what relates to your society, which was ever so fruitful of delight and
complacency, as it might excuse the greatest longer. Well Sir, that nothing may
have power to discompose, to storm or cloud the serenity of your days, your
quiet contentment; that you may enjoy a constant Spring of happiness in this
Winter of your Age, and want nothing but Want it self, shall never be left out
of the Prayers and wishes of, Dear Uncle,

Yours, etc. R. L.

LETTER XIV. To his Aunt.
Dear Aunt,
IT requires so much unworthiness to make me forget your obliging favors,
that while the sin looks so ugly I shall always loath it: Though like Tenants
that enjoy rich Leases from a Masters bounty, the value of my acknowledgment
does not exceed their yearly Pepper corns* Such a trivial payment as that I
have sent you by this bearer, and do humby deprecate the crime of my sloth,
that it kissed your hands no sooner. It is the wild fruit of such hours as I set
aside to my own delight, and never intended it should be distasted by any other
palate than mine own; but the importunity of some judicious friends reversed
that resolution, and crowded it upon the Theater of the world, where it is like
to act its part so poorly, as I have more reason to fear a hiss than hope a
clap. But could you lend your Candor to all my Readers, at least the errors
would be but smiled at, and I should have no worse censure than young learners
to write may expect; who at first are not much blamed though they make their
letters crooked. Well, Dear Aunt pardon this, call it what you please, to him
that thought it fitter to send you the errors, than keep back the
acknowledgement of

Your most affectionate Nephew, and most humble Servant, R. L.

LETTER XV. To my Brother A. L.
Loving Brother,
YOurs arrived at my hands, and was welcome, because it put some doubts to
flight that you had farweld Barningham. I am glad of my High- Suffolk friends
welfare, and joy'd at their kindness that was so busy with my remembrance;
for which I must yet content my self here to give the tacit exchange of an
affection as sterling as theirs. My Lords longer residence than I distrusted at
his Father in Laws has yet kept us asunder, that house being stuffed too full
already to entertain any more; but he is now upon his departure thence, and I
upon the brink of settling with him: when I know my own condition, I must not
suffer you to be ignorant of it. I have much cause to thank you for the
enclosed lines; and as much to admire the unconstrained purity of Mr. B's
vein, that has made Ovids tears to run here in so smooth a channel; he is
likely to redeem him from the unskilful injuries of other Translators that
abused his sorrow with such a blubbered Paraphrase. It Is said Translations (like
liquors poured from one vessel into another) lose some of their vital spirits,
and are rendered dead and flat to the gust of understanding. I shall not
flatter to say this has confuted the instance, and made Naso complain as
movingly, as handsomely, in English as he did in his Latian language. But I
ought to beg his pardon for the disparagement of my weak praises, and yours for
my tediousness, which at this time shall sin no further; and I hope I shall not
stand in need of words to persuade you that I am

Your inviolably affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER XVI. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Have but a share in my own condition till you have it wholly in account;
there being so much of my self resident with you, that the part of it which is
here goes but halves with you in every action of weight or moment. I am now at
Nottingham perfectly settled with my Lord C. My employment is something too
great for an unseasoned servant, and would discourage a new beginner, if I did
not supply the defects of my experience with an active pliant resolution. I
attend him in his chamber, and usher his Lady, write his Letters, and whatever
else that unbeseems not his command or my obedience. My wages are little enough
to make present subsistence circumscribe my gains: but I think I have already a
greater allowance of his love then his money; however, I shall make the least
serve to keep me afloat without the assistance of my own bladders. And now
since the careless hand of Fortune has ranged me with strangers that I have not
yet begun to read over, I can value it at no lower rate then my best recreation
to give you the exact story of my actions and employment, by piecemeal, as I
tear it from my outworn time; which jewel I have used too long like Aesops
Cock, and am resolved to set an higher value on an hour then formerly of a day.
Thus having raised the price of my minutes, I begin sharply to censure the
slight of your proffered aid in the knowledge of Simples, for I think I shall
bend my studies that way. I have hestowed some of my later hours on the French
Tongue, which I have already half gained, and fear not to bring my attempts to
a sudden perfection, it being familiarly spoken by the best sort of this
family. That gained, the Italian will be but a short stride for my intended
industry, and both will be serviceable (if I meet an occasion) for my intended
travel.

Thus you see by this time it is even an inconvenience to be beloved by me, since
the ardor of that affection makes you liable to the tedious torment of my
impertinent Pen: and yet I think if my paper were longer I should not so soon
shorren your trouble, and I am far from mending my fault; that you are like
(notwithstanding my remote removal) to be still haunted with these frequent
vexations. You cannot oblige me more then to be punctual in rescription, which
will never fail to bring a welcome delight to

Your really affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER XVII. To his Brother Mr. W.
Sir,
IT is none of my worst Reasons why I am glad of my return to London, that
Letters may walk between me and my friends with less hazard; and it is one of
my best, that thereby I may contract amity with your deserving self: which if
you think fit to give me under your hand, I shall be careful to bid it welcome,
and return such a cordial exchange, as may teach us the way to know, before we
see one another, and make acquaintance precede interview. Be entreated that
your reply may tell me how my Sister does, how her great belly becomes her, and
when she is like to increase the number of young sinners. I dare not promise,
but if it be possible, I will come time enough to taste of the Gossips Cup, if
we do not make too sudden a retreat into the Country. You will oblige me, to
speak my service to my Cousin W. of Laurenset, my Cousin H. with the rest that
know me. Pray tell my Cousin R. alias my Sweetheart, that I am still her
servant. And believe it Sir, I can never quit my desires to appear

Your faithful Servant and Brother in Law, R. L.

LETTER XVIII. To his Brother A. L.
Loving Brother,
WHat you almost called my neglect, I have now repaired, and (like some
over-provident Caution^sts) who finding their bodies prone to one disease, do
sometimes Antidote themselves into a contrary malady,) instead of appeasing, if
I have not cloyed your appetite, good enough. If I were sure none none of mine
perished by the way, it were seasonable to return you your own words, and tell
you this is the third sent since any received: But letters are travelers, and
do often dye in a voyage. I could almost consent to resign my being for a
month, that I might be with you but a week, to show you what kind of Oar it is
I tug at; with some other apprehensions that I could be content to ease my mind
of. Man is often beholding to his sufferings for the calling in of such virtues
as otherwise perhaps would never be of his acquaintance; and indeed we should
not mu^^y against those pains that send us a seeking for such excellent
remedies. Affliction is like a deep mine that will afford pure gold if we dig
for it; and calamity (well handled) does polish with rugged usage, and even
pinch the soul into perfection. By that time the Spring will have done strowing
her flowers, I shall be able to tell you whether my hopes of a cure do fade or
flourish: But however Providence deals with me, I hope this trivial world
has not charm enough to give me repining by the hand of despair to enjoy them
longer; all my fear is that my errant Condition will not suffer me to fit still
long enough to let my Physic settle. I intend to close this Springs course
with opening an Issue in my Arm on the contrary side by way of revulsion. Did
but my health smile upon my designs, you should soon view my employment in a
fairer Character: Till then my soul must write with a bad pen upon blotted
paper; and you know how ill tools will shame the Artificer. When I reflect
upon my weak hopes of recovery, I am sometimes ready to deride my own
endeavors, and often urged to manumit industry, and entertain supinity, till
victorious Reason sets the slaves their task again. And indeed Desert is never
so much her self, as when she shuts her eyes upon the reward, and thinks it
recompense enough to be her self I think we may go safely so far as to call
that a mercenary piety that is merely and abstractedly so, because Heaven is
got by the bargain. It Is true, I know morality has not enough to pay that
purchase, but sure (if well applied) it goes a great way in the account. But
whither am I wandered? if my staggering discourse does not well keep the path,
conceive that the feet must sometimes tread irregular steps that are directed
by an infirm head. If I presumed less upon you, I would have sent you my
thoughts ranked in a better method. These enclosed you can best direct where
they are intended: I pray do my due respects to those you think my friends; and
to your self and interesti believe it I am as zealously devoted as you can wish

Your perfectly affectionate brother to command, R. L.

LETTER XIX. To his Brother A. L.
Dear Brother,
GIve me leave to begin my Letter with what I shall never make an end of, so
long as I can hold a pen in my hand, or a heart in my breast: I mean my
thanks for those bewitching proofs of an entire Love, which you lately made
me receive with such a beauteous variety both of expression and performance.
All I am able to say to it, is, that I am passionately desirous you would
apprehend me as I am, and then you would never check your heart for being too
lavish of affection. I had no sooner rent my self from you (for I found it
required some violence to reinforce my resolution to part) but I fared like one
newly waked from a delightful dream, and found himself despoiled of all the
joys which he borrowed from the flattery of fancy. This made Melancholy my
companion to London, in spite of all the facetious rousings of my merry Major.
On Friday night we lay at Woodford, and reached home on Saturday Morning, where
(before I would put my neck into the collar again) we dipped some choice
healths, but especially yours, in the best Laurentian Liquour; and so I took
my leave of him and Sack. Well, I am now returned again to my Oar; and though
I row against wind and tide of preferment, yet it pleases me that my employment
raises no storms in my Conscience: I pray God I may keep it calm till Heaven
thinks fit to set me ashore in the safest Harbor. I cannot want such thoughts
as these so long as I carry my remembrancer about me of what I must be, my
malady; which I confess I should bear with less anxiety, did I not fear it
will knock me o'th head before I dye, (you know my meaning,) and make me
survive my self. But Gods will be done. If the Doctor has considered of any
thing he deemes fit to commend to my observation, I shall gladly receive it; I
shall strive in my next to render him, if it be possible, a more perfect
account of his Sons goods. I dare not satisfy your desires concerning the
grand affairs, nor indeed can I justly; there is so much fallacy in Fame, that
Reports are born and stifled the same hour, etc. I was in good hopes we should
have gone for Nottingham; but I think the old woman is about a little business
that will quite spoil that design, I mean, dying. Well, my dear Brother, no
more but this, you shall be happy in all that your wishes can dictate, if the
prayers may prevail of

Your ever affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER XX. To Mr. H.
Sir,
I Have yours, wherein you have proved your self a double deserver; first, in
showing friendly kindness in doing courtesies, and then a rare modesty in
disclaiming their acknowledgment: a disposition seldom known in such an age as
this, that can content it self rather to merit thanks then receive them. But
you must be less complemental to be believed unskilful in complement; and
though my weakness that way make me quit the lists to you, yet I strive to
over-match you as much in right down reality.

This contemptible Town can brag of no commodity, but is chiefly barren of
Intelligence, as if Fame thought it not worthy of a report till it grows stale
with the rest of the Kingdom; and so we are served like the lowest rank of
mortals with naught but her fragments, etc.

I have something unwillingly obeyed your commands in enclosing this Epistle,
it being the first I ever enterprised in this kind; which makes me advise you
to distrust it as well as my self, and not think it a fit forehead for your
Book, till a more artificial hand has filled up its native wrinkles, and it has
past the Correction and test of some sterling judgment, such an one as Mr. W.
would reward the pains of an earnest entreaty.

Yours R. L.

LETTER XXI. To Doctor B.
Dear Doctor,
I Perceive by yours that I have a just quarrel to the Carriers carelessness,
who (like an unskilful Archer) shot my Letter beyond the mark, and made it stay
his leisure to bring it back again: and indeed the reception you have given it
is like the entertainment of a friend, whose long absence has helped to indear
the meeting, and deck the welcome; I am only sorry it had no better Title to
what you have given it, which is a Character that I can own with as little
justice as I had either merit or confidence to ask it. But Sir, if these be not
only breathings of ingenuity, and rather sallies of your fancy then opinion,
it is fit they should awake my endeavors to be what your friendly apprehension
has fashon'd me; which your amity has done, not without some disadvantage to
your judgment. But though I fall short in every other proportion you guess me
at, in affection, with all the requisites of a true friend, you shall ever find
me good measure, etc. Be as happy as I wish my self, and believe me ever, dear
Doctor, perfectly and entirely

Yours R. L.

LETTER XXII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
OPportunities have here but slender foretops; I use them therefore here as
passengers that wait for a wind, and unfurle my papersayles, when their gale
is most promising: Thus though my affection does not sympathize with the aires
inclemencies, and pays neither fainting tribute to the frying Dog star, nor
shuddering to the Northern Bear; yet it is now fore'd to make a leg to Fortune
for these occasions, and let fall its words as the Plowman does his seed, not
at his own choice, but when the season invites.

My last two Letters vexed you with the tedious description of my malady; and
this has charge to tell you, that I hope I shall give you no more such
penances; The cure of it being now undertaken by a man in this Country, whose
fortunate skill has triumphed over strange Diseases; which has got him the
acclamations of his patients, and the envy of his own tribe. His story is this;
he was born well (being the great Dr. B's Nephew, most of whose receipts he
has;) but bred meanly, first bound Prentice to a Shoemaker in Nottingham, from
whom he ran away most ingeniously, and returned some years after a professed
Physician: how far he fetched his Art, or whether most beholding for it to
books or men, I know not, (and in it himself is resolutely silent;) but almost
miraculous success in the Calling made him quickly known and famous. Presently
after these sad times burst forth, in which it was his fortune to side with the
weaker party. There are many (not unhandsome) stories told of his behavior
while the sword was unsheathed; among the rest this, which I had from his own
mouth. He having command in a Garrison near, did often give some ungentle
visits to his Townsmen at Nottingham, and was for almost a year (though a
Physician) their continual Ague; at length in a skirmish near Darby it was his
fortune to be made Prisoner, and thence was straightly guarded toward
Nottingham, where they intended to give him no worse reward than a hanging for
his former courtesies. By the way he invites his Conductors (being sixteen
Troupers) to a Crowns-worth of Ale, which he privately seasoned with such a
sovereign ingredient, that it suddenly cast them all in a profound sleep;
which done, he at pleasure rifles their pockets, and takes from them about 200.
l. two Case of Pistols, and two of their best Horses, pays the reckoning,
leaves them 13. d. ob. and returns merrily to his own Garrison. Since the war
his fame is grown much louder, and his steps where ere he goes waited on by
multitudes. I cannot hear that he undertakes any in whose cure he fails; he
refuses to look on Urines, and only observes the wrist when the right hand is
gripped, never failing to discover the nature, cause and seat of the malady,
which he undertakes or rejects, as he finds it either feasible or desperate. I
am now his Patient; and though I yet can brag of little amendment by what I
have taken, yet his confidence bids me hope well: he has let me blood under the
Tongue, and cut a vein in my ear asunder; and I am now taking of Powders,
Electuaries and Purges. The charge I find will be very great, but I am resolved
to buy off this plague at any rate, though I pinch for it all my life after.

I lately received a Letter from my dear Mr. W. then at Antwerp, which because
it gives a hopeful dawning of some transmarine employment, I have sent you the
Copy of it, and (to silence other likelihoods) I suppose this winter will
determinate my stay in this family; but before that time I doubt not to
exchange many such as these with you. In the mean time be sure you believe
that my heart loves you, for it is truth it self, and it shall clearly appear
if ever Providence smiles upon

Your entirely affectionate brother to command for ever R. L.

My dear friend,
All the good of Heaven and Earth attend you; you will easily believe my
affection, if you remember my industry to have enjoyed you before I left the
Kingdom: and truly I call it my great unhappiness that I could not meet an
opportunity till now to tell you I must be yours for ever. Had I known how to
have sent, I had done it sooner; but your Letter which directed me to you was
in my trunk at London, and I received it but a few days since. Well then, take
me as much yours as you can desire, and assure your self I study your good
next my own, and if God bless me in the world, I shall quickly make it
evident. In the mean, know I am ordered for France, where I have good
assurance of some suitable employment; when I come there you shall know it, and
somewhat more of me than this hasty messenger will permit at present. Pray
therefore write to Mr. K. that he will receive and pay for my Letters that come
to you by the French Post. I cannot desire to hear from you where I am,
because my stay in these parts are uncertain: Though I must tell you truly, I
was never better pleased with any place in my life, yet you are wanting to make
me happy. I am suffered to say no more, only what I daily say to my self;
Live piously and virtuously, and all that is good must needs betide you: then be
to me as I am, dear friend,

Your own entirely R. W.
POSTSCRIPT.
Brother,
To another this might argue me of levity to send you things of such cheap
moment, and so much unconcerning your self; but there is so little complement
in him, and so much love in you, that as I know the one cannot dissemble, so
the other cannot but bid that welcome that may suite with his interest that so
truly loves: But bating you two, I am reserved to all the world beside. I stay
my writing to my Sister J. till I can know whether she shall have the place or
not. I fear the worst. Farewell.



LETTER XXIII. To his Brother Mr. F. W.
Sir,
I Received and resented your kind invitation, for which you will do me but
right to fancy me truly thankful. I shall take it kindly of my occasions when
they will give me leave to obey your summons; and will bring a heart along with
me that will only think it self unhappy that it must begin so late to know
you. I should injure my parcel of reason to give a faint applause to my
Sisters choice, since sounder judgments have spoke it happy, and your own hand
confirmed it so. I do not dote upon my own weakness so much as to think my
opinion would have quit the cost of asking; only I could have wished my
presence had enabled me to vote with the rest, though it had been only to show
I am not backward in the approbation of desert. My request is but reasonable,
that you will suffer me to know you better, and even at this distance to
improve our acquaintance. It Is but an easy task for your Pen, and will engage
mine to be responsal. I am afraid you have taken my Character from my friends
to my disadvantage; I know they would speakno ill, and therefore am jealous
have done it too well for me to make good. Pray present me most affectionately
to your bedfellow, and tell her I am glad to hear that her want of health is
only like to make work for the Midwife. My service to that Cousin of mine to
whose fair report I am so much obliged, and to the rest that know me; and for
your self, you may safely believe that I am truly desirous to appear,

Sir, Really yours both in Love and Service, R. L.

LETTER XXIV. To Mr. C. S.
Sir,
IF my expectations of kissing your hands my self had not been deluded, my Pen
had rendered you what I know of the Person yours is directed to; of whom all
the account I can give you may read in this enclosed paper; which after you
have perused, I entreat you will seal up, and deliver to Mr. H. to be sent back
in one of his: you will perceive by it that I must receive another before I can
obey your commands in directing and dispatching yours, which I expect daily.
Sir, I thought it my engagement to kiss your hands with these blots, to
undeceive your expectations, lest you should think long for an answer of what
cannot yet be sent. I hope you will easily believe me sorry that I can serve
you no better, nor sooner in this; and may be confident that I shall be glad of
any power that may prove me, what I really am,

Sir, Your most humble and most faithful Servant, R. L.

LETTER XXV. To Mr. H.
KNowing how highly I value your society, you cannot choose but think me much
displeased with those casual impediments that kept us so long asunder; but
repining never made Fortune less peevish: but since you are there, give me
leave to husband the incommodity of your absence, by entreating such
courtesies, as, could we change places, I should with much alacrity perform for
your self. My first request then is, that if you latch any news that may prove
a Cordial to our dying hopes, you will not grudge to send it me, as a friendly
aid that may help to put some sad thoughts to flight. My next is the
prosecution of a former desire, that you would inquire of M. or any other
Bookseller that is likely to inform you, if there be any new French Book of an
indifferent volume that is worth the Translating, and not enterterprised by any
other; if there be, let me desire you would send it me down, with Cotgraves
Dictionary of the last Edition: and for what you disburse, I shall appoint you
where you shall receive it at London, with some quantity besides, which I shall
desire you to send me. You may well think me unable for such an undertaking;
but my worst success will bestow a trebble benefit, because I shall make it
serve to beguile melancholy, check idleness, and better my knowledge in the
Language: for the book, I am indifferent whether it be Romance, Essay,
Treatise, History or Divinity, so it be worth the rendering in our language. You
may either send them by G. F. who lies at -- and comes nearest to Haughton, or
by B. that comes to Nottingham, and lies at the etc. -- or by your own
Lincolnshire-Carrier. Let me beg to hear from you by your next most pregnant
opportunity, and I shall be industrious to let you see you have not sown these
favors in a barren Soil, by conferring them upon one that will ever be
studious to love and serve you,

R. L.

LETTER XXVI. To his Brother Mr. A.L.
Dear Brother,
I Cannot step so far out of the way, as not to find out a path to you;
distance having only power to render me remote to my friend in my
circumscriptive part, while the unconfined, without toyling with the method of
motion, or passing through a succession of places, can be with you in a moment:
and indeed we carry that about us that confutes the custom of painting Angels
with wings, when we consider how suddenly our thoughts are charioted (without
the penetration of a medium) to the farthest parts of the World, by the help of
that faculty which doubtless is near akin to their Angelical natures; since
though a wing be the nimblest instrument of motion, yet it confesses an order
of it, which those Divine Intelligences are never task'd to. But why these
Metaphysics in a Letter? will be your secret objection; to which I have not
room enough to give any other answer, than that I had rather say nothing to
purpose than nothing at all. We are now in a Town where most of the people get
their bread by their water, I mean the Bath; and those that never knew how to
govern themselves, are yet guides to others: of a City it is doubtless the
prettiest of England, in a double construction, as it is little, and handsome.
I have been something curious to inform my self of its Original; but the best
account I could get does afford but poor satisfaction: the soberest have only
told me my own Conjectures, that the irruption of these hot Springs, which
certainly borrow their warmth in their passage through a sulphurous mineral,
was the cause of building this City; but in the conveyance of particulars to
posterity, as the time, founders, with other circumstances, Tradition has been
very unfaithful, in suffering the truth to be swallowed by a fable which goes
very current among the common people, and talks of a King called Bladud, that
being a great Necromancer (I know not for what reason) caused by the power of
his Art these waters to be boiled underground into such an immense quantity,
as has served to parboile all those that have since resorted hither to wash
off their Diseases. I have had but little time to try the virtue of it, being
forced to wait upon my Lords humor of perusing all the Towns and Houses of
remarke round about it; yet I have been already in it five times, and sound so
little virtue in those steepings, as though I have used the hot Pumpe,
according to Dr. B's. prescriptions, for my head, yet I find it has rather done
me harm than good, and half discouraged my further trial. I find my self
daily more subject to your Splenitive malady, which since I used the Bath has
made it self known to me with more than an usual vigor: Besides, I think I
have gotten the Stone to boot. If all these produce but the fruits of a Divine
Correction, I may think my self happy in my sufferings. In my perusal of the
Cathedral here (a structure that is rather handsome than magnificent, and
claims as little admiration as contempt) I met with an old Inscription upon
the wall, which at first startled me; the words were these: The Trees going to
choose their King,
Said be to us thou Oliver King.


But upon inquiry I learned from a person that had read the ancient Records,
this Inscription was made in Honor of one Oliver King, Abbot of a Monastery,
that laid the foundation of this Minster; the Rebus is allusive to a passage in
Judges, where the Trees convented to choose them a King, and pitched first upon
the Olive, though at last the Bramble carried it. So this pitiful piece of
wit was set up as a grateful memorial of that Abbot's piety.

We are going from hence into Devonshire, and thence into Cornwall, and are
like to make it Michaelmas before we revisit London. But wherever I go I will
never go from my resolution of being, dear Brother,

Your really affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER XXVII. To his Sister F. CONCERNING PRAYER.
Dear Sister,
I Remember your frequent solicites gained a promise from me to compose you a
Prayer; for which though the sense of my own insufficiency might justly dig a
grave in oblivion, yet I have rather chose to deserve a censure for the bad
performance, than the total forfeiture. Prayer is the Golden Chain that ties
Heaven and Earth together; it is the pure Elementall flame whose property is to
ascend upwards, with which the soul, like the Phoenix, sets her nest afire, and
even expires in the midst of all those kindled odours; it is a key that opens
Heavens gates, and locks Hells. It is an Engine that, if rightly planted and
levelled, breaks a passage through all Earthly opposition to the Throne of
mercy. It is the chief weapon used in our spiritual warfare; nor do we stand
to it so stiffly in any combat with our common enemy, as when humble Devotion
and tender Zeal makes us shorter by the whole length of the legs. Thus we
ascend by stooping; thus we conquer by submission. It Is the best Physic for a
sickly soul, and penitent tears a sovereign diet-drink for a diseased
conscience. But you always loved it too well to need an encouragement from my
weak description; yet because I know you are not apt to take any advice ill
that flows from so true an affection as mine, I will venture to give you these
few short observations before you enter upon this duty; Allow your self some
time to consider the importance of this weighty affair, and try to fly as high
in apprehension of the Divine wisdom, power, majesty, mercy, etc. as the weak
wings of your contemplation will suffer you; these thoughts will furnish: you
with such awe and reverence as is requisite in such addresses, and help you to
shut out all vain and idle imaginations that especially at those times flock
to the disturbance of Devotion. Covet not to stay long upon the duty till
Devotion faints, and your fervor cooles: I am confident it is a more heinous sin
than the mistaken world is aware of, to bring a cold careless heart to these
duties; and as I must condemn those that dare approach the Divinity with such
confused stuff as their proud ignorance huddles up in extemporall haste, so I
do not commend them that only tie their Tongues to one prayer, and think that
no words can find the way to Heaven but those they got by heart in their
childhood. Variety is the mother of delight; and why the soul may not not fancy
a blessed pleasure in often appearing to her God in the change of devour
raiment, I know not: Customary use changes even the most troublesome employment
into delight. Oh could we bring Divine affairs to that happy habit, how much
of Heaven should we taste even on Earth!

R. L.

LETTER XXVIII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
When my thoughts tell me that success does not always suit with a rational
expectation, and future events often falsify the promises of a present
appearance, I am forced to feed such incertainties (in reference to your
malady) as usually flow from the doubtful combat betwixt Hope and Fear,
wherein Love discharges both the active and passive part. From this you may
judge how glad I would be that the news of your perfect recovery would make
peace between them; which pray, as you value my quiet, keep no longer from my
knowledge. There is a tenderness that waits upon unvarnish'd amity, which
perhaps of some Stoicall souls will get no other Title than imperfection: and
yet methinks here we cannot love well without it; for though it be not a part,
at least it is a fruit of friendship, and as requisite as softness and
delicacy in a feminine Composure; For if I must go with my friends half in all
his joys and griefs, I cannot give better proof that I have my stake in the
latter, than by such an Evidence. Give me leave then to tell you, that at
present you cannot do me a greater Courtesy (if health has empowered you) than
to cure me of those troubles that are the offspring of yours. When I found my
Lords danger so hopefully over-blown, I wished my self again at Holt, and half
fell out with my Condition, that at the same time called me several ways by
the name of Servant and Brother. Yet I did not carry away all my self at our
parting; for, believe it, my better part has hovered constantly about you, and
you had the unseen assistance of my earnest addresses to the best Physician.
But it is more than time to consider I am tedious; let me once more conjure you
to give no advantage to your Disease by any inward disturbance; and continue to
love him who will live and dye, dear Brother, unchangeably

Yours to serve you, R.L.
POSTSCRIPT.
I shall be in London about three weeks hence. Present me tenderly to my
Sisters F. and J. and tell my Sister J. that I have conferred with Physicians
about her Scurvy, and they all conclude that there is nothing so sovereign for
it as Aqua Limacum, of which she may have the receipt in the new London-
Dispensatory. Farewell. I pray let me hear suddenly from you.



To Mr. W. LETTER XXIX.
Sir,
THe doubt that my first Letter might miss the way to your hands has made me
venture to send you this second trouble, conceiving it a less sin to be too
obsequious than neglectfull: and indeed your kindness would win the name of
Charity in vouchsafing a mutual correspondence: for though I be very civilly
used from the very top to the toe of this whole Family, yet in this throng I am
forced to find out solitude; none here being made of better clay than will
render them fit vessels for houshold-affaires; and I confess I would be glad
to overtake other qualities in him I fasten on with a stronger tie than the
ordinary slipping knots of faint acquaintance. This makes me often put my self to
the pain of thinking how much happiness I lost at a clap by being plucked
from your society; and these thoughts leave me a kind of a Carcass till my
soul comes home again, which (if it were visible) you might often see busily
hovering about your self, still panting after those delights which, alas! she
has lost in her divorce from you; but it is in your power to restore me part of
them. I will venture no news, lest I weary you with the relation of what you
know. I must only say, this stupendous victory of late has much lessened my
infidelity concerning your judicious opinion of future events; and there wants
but the unmasqueing of your Parties resolutions to make me their perfect
convert. I am most resolutely bent to follow your discreet advice in the Study
of Physic, and therefore desire you will please to know of Dr. R. what books
are fittest to begin withal, for I am desirous to observe as much method as I
can; the exact account of which I beg you will please to receive at my hands,
and I hope you will not withhold the continuance of your friendly counsel from
him that truly loves and honors you

R. L.

LETTER XXX. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Am never unfurnished of a double welcome for your Letters; the first, as
they come from your person, the other from your Pen; as they are cordially
meant, and skilfully writ: and thus both my love and liking are your Prisoners,
and have long since rejected the liberty of being otherwise, as the harder
bondage of the two. That which we call happiness (I mean restrained to
sublunaries) is something proportioned to such desires as are uppermost, and
therefore indefinite, because it always takes a several shape from every
sngle inclination; all aiming at, though few or none hitting, that sovereign
good, Contentment. One hunts his happiness in riches, another climbes for it
by ambition, a third thinks it swims upon the top of voluptuary fruition, the
fourth places it in knowledge; and in fine, so long as mankind dwells on this
side of the Moon, every one carries his witch about him. For my part, a true
friend is my Indies; and I relish more felicity in being well thought of by a
virtuous person, than in enjoying all that the others court with so much
eagerness and ardour: And I hug this disposition with more indulgence,
because passions of this nature are ever friends with Reason, and give no blush
in their Colors. And thus I have given you my heart transcribed. It poses me
to express my gladness for the fair hopes of my Sister J's. recovery; but
the height of it might have been taken in my fears of meeting ill news, which
made me so much a Coward as I could hardly forbear shaking when I opened your
Letter: I pray speak me to her in the best Language of affection, and tell her
I hardly endured the cruelty of my occasions, that would not let me see her in
her danger. This Problematicall fever has swept many of my acquaintance away
in these parts: Death never gave shorter warning of his approach; therefore we
had need stand upon a careful guard of preparation, that when he arrests he
may not surprise. I pray present me very affectionately to my Sister F. I shall
take occasion next week to write to both. Report speaks the fractures in
France to be cemented again, and the Condean ^^rty well satisfied by the
Cardinals retreat out of the French Confines; and it is said they are upon a
treaty with Spain. But the Hogens I confess are angered into more animosity
against us than ever I thought they would have been guilty of: They have lately
imprisoned their last Ambassador, Mijn Here PAW, seized his goods, and pulled
down his House at the Hague, for promulging his inclinations to peace, and
exceeding his Commission by charging Van Trump not to strike a blow till he
received further order; by which means our East-Indian ships and Virginian
Fleet escaped his fingers. I have sent you their Declaration enclosed, which
came out but yesterday, and is sold very privately. My malady continues still
in the same condition, so soon as I take off the plaster it rankles again. I
pray ask my Sister F. if my Aunt H. does not take it unkindly that I sent her
not a book; and where my Cousin A. L. now resides, and whether her Father in Law
and she be accorded. But I roll like an unruly flood over all banks and
bounds: Dear Brother,

Eternally yours R.L.

LETTER XXXI. To Mr. W.
Sir,
I Cannot grant my self leave to go out of this Country, without leaving a
hearty Farewell with you; for should I go away speechless, it would show your
mistake in misplacing your courtesies, and my unworthiness to keep back their
acknowledgement; I beseech you, Sir, then understand me truly sensible of them,
and believe me desirous to obey some command from you that may speak me so. We
set forward toward London on Monday next; what the journey signifies, how to
be contrived, whether we shall six there, or (like Noah's Dove) find no safe
footing till we return again to Haughton, or Nottingham Arc, I cannot say,
for I think they that fill my Sails with the breath of their commands are yet
unresolved: But I know my Lady loves the place so well, that it will take her
more time to be weary of it than we are all aware of. Well, if you can instruct
me how to serve you there, do it; and be confident that neither an unwilling
heart, nor a tardy hand, shall disprove my words, that must ever call my self

Sir, Your true friend and faithful Servant, R. L.
POSTSCRIPT.
I pray distribute my love and service where you think they are due to those
that know Mrs. R. Mr. G. etc.



LETTER XXXII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
JUstice enjoynes my confession that you have made me amends for your silence,
and pai'd me my Arrears in gross which I expected in particulars; for though
your Letters cannot come often enough to lessen their welcome, yet you know
rarity heightens the price of things, and winds up the delight to a taller
degree than when it goes and comes in a less stature at several parcells.
Conclude not from this that I desire you should write but seldom; for believe
it, I never had recreation nor business that out-priz'd the pleasant care I
always took to keep our quills in play, and thus to prune the feathers, and
stir the pinions of our amity. Let not the conceit of an Hectic get any credit
with you; for it is the custom of these Diseases to lie long a gasping before
they dye, and like Candles new burnt out leave some heat in the socket: But I
hope in a short time to see your fears over-blown by a perfectrestauration;
and now you will taste your health with such a relish as half-starv'd men do
Feasts, or the hopeless inhabitant of a Dungeon his unexpected liberty. But
(which deserves both my praise and imitation) I am much taken with the grateful
use you have made of Heavens bounty in relation to your deliverance; for since
the largest heart is too narrow to set a just value upon such favors, sure
those that devoutly endeavor to bid the best price are best accepted. There
are many requisites in Christianity, whose constant use does sweetly set us the
way to the New Jerusalem; but thanksgiving (when currantly pai'd) does even
place us in the very suburbs of Heaven; by it we only take out that lesson
here whose repetition will be both our business and happiness to all
Eternity. Last night with yours I received those rude Draughts which you had
from my unskilful hand; but (rude as they are) they are like to do me service
in my present undertaking. Wise men tell us (Religion unconcerned) it is
weakness to repent those engagements which we cannot retract with a safe
reputation: else I would tell you, that if my bargain were now to make, my
Letters should still have slept in your hands, and perhaps I should never have
waked that danger that now threatens my credit with the stings of some just
Criticismes; but the die is cast (and what ever I lose by it) I am resolved to
play out the game. I came just now from Sir J. P. who asked very kindly for
you; he looks with a kind aspect upon me; and if my hopes deceive me not in
some Courtesies he has power to do me, I may chance to pass by all the great
ones that know me, and direct my Dedication to him. But of this more when I
know further. I hope it will prove no task to persuade you that I shall be
perfectly glad to see you here in London; and indeed, if your interest where
you are be not more considerable than your pen confesses, I can think it no
better than a block to your preferment. In the mean time, while I am here, if
I have a capacity to serve you, you cannot disoblige me more than to be sparing
of your Commands. I have not, nor never will have any thing that is not yours;
nay, my self is not mine own if you have need of me; and though these words be
not necessary to persuade what you formerly believed, yet repetitions in Love
are only not absurd. Major W. returns you his most affectionate respects; we
never meet (which is very often) without celebrating your remembrance and
health. When you write, which cannot be too often, direct your Letters for me
at one Mr. M's. House living in Shandois-street in Covent Garden, (for there we
now lodge) right over against the Black-Rod. Well, Dear Brother, it is time to
come to a full point; I am

Eternally yours R. L.

LETTER XXXIII. To his Sister Mrs. F.
My Dearest Sister,
It Is now too late to express the passion I felt for what I hope you have
recovered; only this, if a large part of what you suffered had been put upon
my score, I think I should have picked out delight in the affliction, because I
endured it; for you will give me leave to be glad of your sufferings, not
because they were so, but since Providence did ordain them yours, because they
were no greater. My Brother told me that the Disease was not likely to handle
you so rudely as it usually does others; and I was willing to believe him
because I wished it so. It is fit you should believe that I am not only
contented to wish you happy, but would be glad I could make you so by something
else beside words: But providence thinks it fit that I should still be unable
to serve the friends I love, and therefore defers my preferment, by prolonging
my unfortunate and costly malady. Well, the best of it is, I have seen too much
of the world to dote upon it, and when I leave it nothing shall trouble me so
much as that I could not serve my friends so well as I loved them; in which
number you hold the fore most rank in his affections that is

Your really affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER XXXIV. To his Brother Maj. W.
Dear Brother,
THough to speak my self in your debt be not to pay the least scruple, unless
thanks go current, yet I cannot but acknowledge the fresh expressions of your
friendship; nor repeat my engagement to your last kind entertainment and
conduct, without calling my Stars penurious in allowing me no other power of
requital than a few cheap words: But, so, you may credit it, that if ever
occasion shows me how to shape it in better Characters, I shall not be loath to
wipe out the score. In the mean time, all I have to ask at your hands, is, to
construe me right, and believe my meaning quadrate to my words, and nothing but
want of power denies my actions the same proportion. I burn to hear how my
poor Brother does, which I desire to receive from your pen as exactly as
possible. I have endeavored to find a convenience for our literal exchange by
Lin, but as yet cannot reach any that I dare trust to: therefore pray send your
Letters by London, and direct them to my Shoemaker in Holborn. Present my
entire Love to my Sister, to honest Mr. B. P. Don etc. cordially; and belive it
you shall incur no error to style me

Sir, Your most affectionate Brother and Servant R. L.

LETTER XXXV. To Mr. G.
Dear Sir,
THat I had not a line or two from your hand by Mr D. I suppose was rather
mischance than intention: that I eagerly expected it may be credited from my
frequent importunities, from which I know not how you will defend your self, so
long as I tenebrize it here in this blind corner; where I almost live like a
fly in winter, and only play in the Sunshine when I communicate with such
friends as your self. But he tells me a sad story of J. W's. sickness; which,
believe it, does affect me as feelingly as can be required from an unbiased
friendship. Let me conjure you to tell by the next how I may measure my
unhappiness by his danger: I was ever entirely his from the cradle of our
acquaintance; but his last condescension to fetch me to my sick Brother makes
my apprehension too big for my expression. I pray do me the favor to receive
all such Letters as shall be directed to me through your hands; for he that did
me the same courtesy I hear is lately dead of the new fever. I should blush
to give you these troubles, if your Commission had not emboldned me; but if I
do not requite, I shall not forget to acknowledge. Present me heartily to
honest C. W. Mr. L. and promise your self a true friend in

R. L.

LETTER XXXVI. To his Brother A. L.
Dear Brother.
I Need not tell you I am now in Lincolneshire, for I suppose you will easily
read it in my literal intermission. Thus to be out of the way is to be remote;
since now the motion of our Letters must be more than semicircular, and they
travel as people do in Wales, round about the hill, because they cannot cross
it in Diameter. When I parted with the Major at London, I confess I engaged to
give you and him a meeting at Holt; but since our arrival here it has pleased
God to strike my Lord and Lady, one with a fever, the other with a Tertian
Ague, which in all probability will resolve into the New Disease; which
extremely rages in these parts, and murders abundance of people: my Lord of
Lincolnes only Brother dyed of it last week. This enforces a suspension of my
purpose, and bids me content my self to send you my embraces at this distance.

In this same voyage to the Grave, which we call Life, our condition is so
frail and floating, as we are naught else but living lumps of incertainty and
irresolution; so easy it is for Fortune (or rather Providence) to unravel our
strongestwoven designs, and unhinge our most serious intentions; that like the
withered leaves of Autumn, we are the game of every blast, and our health the
prey of every sickly vapor. But now Dear Brother how do you? have you yet
escaped the fangs of this new-spawn'd malady? Pray tender your health very
carefully: for my part, I should deem my self in great danger in this
standing-pool of Air where we live, if the hole in my arm were not my friend,
in giving several passeports to infection and contagious vapors, which so long
as nature has power to thrust out at that Sally-port, my danger is not great. I
pray let me know if my sister Janes health be yet perfected, and how therest of
my friends hold out against the batteries of a putrified Climate. Present me,
as is due, to all that know me; preserve me in your Affections, Wishes and
Prayers; and believe it, your happiness shall be always mentioned in his
addresses to heaven that is, Dear Brother,

Your own indelibly, R. L.
POSTSCRIPT.
Pray let me hear from you as soon as you can. Excuse my blots, for I wrote it
in haste in my Ladies chamber, from whom I do not stir.



LETTER XXXVII. To his Brother Mr. A.L.
Dear Brother,
YOu have subdued me so entirely, and tied the knot so strait that binds me to
you, that there is as much impossibility to undo it, as ingratitude to cut it:
so as, like the mistaken husbandman that tills an unfruitful Soil, you must
expect to receive a lean crop, not because the earth is unthankful, but unable.
After I had sent my last, I received one of your Letters that played the Truant
by the way, with some pieces of the broken Glass, which appeared like the
disjoined staves of a wrackt Vessel thrown ashore by the Tide; the Pills came
safe, which I since took at twice (loath to take proofs of so much kindness, as
sinners do the gifts of heaven, not to use them, but abuse them.) You give me
more hope then I dare accept, in reference to that check to all the delight I
can either taste or fancy, bating some divine Idea's, that by a speculative
transfiguring my desires lift me above all those inconsiderable toys that the
World ranges under the smiles and frowns of Fortune: but from thence, alas, the
weight of my own weakness weighs me down again, and I return (like an
inconvertible thief) to the same Prison from whence punishment so lately freed
me. But we cannot be more then men, till we be stripped of our clay, and put on
something in its stead that poses our apprehensions, and is best described by
negatives.

I must make one among the admirers of your excellent fancy, that could retain
the impression of a face that time might have wiped out without an almost just
trespass of memory: but you were born to these advantages, and do but
methodically imbellish those qualities in single and singular performances that
nature gave you in lump and substance. The old woman my last mentioned is with
much ado gotten over the threshold of the other World, and has bequeathed her
Corpse to a Nottingham-Grave; whither I believe we shall wait upon them about a
fortnight hence, but it is yet an incertainty. What ever the Major resolves,
there must be more then appearance that shall make me forsake my interest here,
though poor and contemptible: I know the story of Aesops dog, that let fall the
flesh to catch the shadow; and you the Moral. The Clock has struck twelve, and
my eyelids grow unruly, therefore take it not ill if I give a dull Farewell,
and abruptly call my self, Dear Brother,

Yours eternally, R. L.

LETTER XXXVIII. To Mr. W.
My dear friend,
YOu had sooner seen a reply to your last, had we not still shifted places like
feathers in the winds, and too much motion staid my hand. I am sorry my last
gave so hard a task to your belief, but am glad it provoked you to breathe your
fancy so merrily. I should lavish words to retort your ingenious glances; only
this, if you disliked the extravagancies in it, suffer excess of joy to excuse
it, which often like other passions breaks out disorderly. Well my dear friend,
let it suffice, there was not a fyllable that was not meant before it was said,
and meant because deserved. But since you do not like such Transports, I shall
learn to talk soberer, though never to love you with less ardor. All women
have yet appeared so indifferent, as the whole Sex was never able to give me a
passion, much less such an one: what the old woman that Fate has marked for
mine will do I know not; I think I shall honor her venerable wrinkles, and
reverence her spectacles; but she must have better linings then that Sex use to
wear within, before I can love her like such a friend. Another flood of rheum
has lately confuted my opinion of a cure, and made me recant my brags; but I do
not despair suddenly to make it find another channel. I pray let your next tell
me whether Mr. S. does yet mention the token to you; for if you permit, I can
tell how to hint it without reflecting upon you. I am much afflicted, and
upbraid the shortness of my chains, when I find I cannot serve you as I would,
and do wrangle with every accessory to our stay in this dull Country; but all
alas to little purpose, for our return to London is both uncertain and
unlikely. Our friends in Norfolk and Suffolk I hope are well, only my sister
Fenner is now sick of the Smallpox; but in my next I will be able to render
you a more particular account of yours, which I shall receive from my Brother.
If you would write to any there, it is but venturing a request to M. H. to
deliver it to the Norfolk-Post, and take their answers from him to send to you.
The man is honest and friendly, and I know loves you enough to do much more: I
have excused you to him. My Lord returns your respects with much affection, and
I think has much love for you. Good Sir, resalute your friend from his unknown
servant with much respect, and tell him I shall gladly do any thing that may
deserve his love. But I shall grow too talkative; I have no more to say but to
beg you will still understand me, as I must ever be, my dear friend,

Yours eternally, R. L.

LETTER XXXIX. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
IT were superfluous to repeat how little the treachery of new objects, fresh
acquaintance, long absence, change of place, etc. is able to do in quenching
that affection which I shall keep alive with the same care that Vest als did
their sacred flame. This you have often had under my hand and seal; and you may
be confident it will never be forfeited. We are again settled at Nottingham,
where the advantage of a larger leisure to write is checked by the scarcity of
opportunities; but rarity does raise the price of delight, we set a trivial
esteem upon joys that come at a low rate, but indulge those we sweat for: and
thus we shall entertain our Letters like our selves when we meet seldom,
nothing so much endearing the personal interview of friends, as when some large
portion of time has crept betwixt them. As we came down, one of Fortunes
spightful tricks (of which, I thank her, to me she has always been very
liberal) made me lose the taste of a pleasant journey, which was thus; The day
of our setting our appointed, I consented to the earnest solicites of my dear
Mr. W. (then in the Country) to let him know it; caused by a desire of his to
meet me at S. Albans, where we had decreed to shorten a night together with
such mutual solace as would have suffered its hours to pass by untold: in hope
of this he came little less then forty miles on purpose; which trouble he
would needs undertake in lieu of some petty services I was happy to do him in
his absence; but upon the brink of our taking leave a Whimsey predominated, and
we must needs go another way by Alesbury; which though I opposed as far as I
durst, was carried against me, and my hopes of so much delight were sacrificed
to an inconvenience; for we went ten miles about for a worse way, lost a
Gentleman and a Footman that were sent the other, and my virtuous friend
(after two nights stay) returned with abused expectations: I never took a
peevish chance with less patience. My Malady still continues to afflict me; I
pray let the Doctor know with what little success I have observed his
prescriptions, and if he can bethink himself of any other course that may prove
more effectual I shall gladly use it: I see purging will not do it, and the
powder never made me sneeze to purpose. Pray tell him I have a strange conceit
that some Chemical application should effect it. You will much oblige me to
propound it to as many skills as you shall converse with, and to send me their
several judgments at your best convenience, while I strive to do as much where
I am. I would not dare to give you this trouble, if I were not confident that
you loved

Your own R. L.
POSTSCRIPT.
If I could but shift this unhappy trouble, I would not yet doubt to add
figures to the ciphers of my thin fortunes.



LETTER XL. To his Nephew Mr. A. L.
Dear Cousin,
I Cannot always content my self to shut up a speechless affection in my
breast, since that amity that wants a tongue may justly be suspected to want a
heart, and lie benumbed like a Snake in Winter; for though Memory and Fancy may
possibly combine to keep Idea's and Images undefaced by the hand of time, yet
where action is and exercise wanting, there is no more then possibility of
life; and that friendship that can always lie still, does at best but hide it
self, and makes as as little harmony as an unstrung Instrument. Lest ours that
grew up with our greenest years should fade, and fall insensibly into such a
trance, suffer these blots to rouse it, and invite your pen to contribute a
preservative that may keep it fresh and vigorous. With this Paper you shall
receive a rude draught of mine by a French Original, which I drew at idle
hours when my Genius was neither prompt nor propitious to better studies.
Cousin, your acceptance will more then requite it; and if you chance to have
patience enough to read it over, it is all you will get by it. I pray present my
hearty service to my Brother and Sister P. and distribute my respective salutes
among those friends where you think they are due: and to your self, take as
faithful an affection as I am capable of cherishing, or you of desiring from

Your really affectionate kinsman to serve you, R. L.

LETTER XLI. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
MY designs of coming over have been so often diverted by unexpected commands
and accidental emergencies, as I fear my promises have almost lost their
credit. But if you knew the vehemency of my longing to see you and the rest of
my friends, you would pity my impatience (the froward child of so many
delays.) Divines tell us this life is a Pilgrimage; and if ever any people
made it good in both senses I think it is our restless family: The Sun in his
annual progress through his 12. Celestial Innes does not oftener change his
Quarters. Ever since I knew them I have been nothing but a guest, and must of
necessity learn to be a wise man if ever I intend to be at home so long as I
am with them. About two months since I had appointed my day to set out, when a
sudden resolution for a Yorkshire-visit to my Lord F. his house (retired
thither to a private life since he ungenerall'd himself) turned my horse head
the contrary way. From thence, after a tedious stay, with much ado we returned
to Haughton, and from thence are arrived at London, (a journey I scarce knew of
12. hours before I took it.) I am the more particular in my gests, lest you
should put my silence upon the account of neglect. I had resolved again the
last Monday to begin my motion Eastward, and my foot was almost in the
stirrup, when meeting with Holt-Post, he informed me that my Brother W. would
be in Town this week; and upon those grounds I deferred my journey till he
returns home-ward about a fortnight hence, if the sad increase of my malady
(which I much suspect) does not arrest me here; I daily feel it incroach upon
me, etc. (Whatever Heaven has designed it for I am resolved to welcome.) But of
this more when I see you, if it will give me leave. Pardon these perfunctory
blots to my present indisposition, and be confident I will cease to be, when I
am not, dear Brother, inviolably

Yours to love and serve you R. L.

LETTER XLII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Wish my Pen were not so indebted to your opinion, as to despair of having
right to that Character you have ever given it: but what you call a Garden is
little better than a wilderness, and the thorns and nettles which it plants
are only Roses in the deceived eyes of affection. Thus the yellow sands of
Tagus first came by their Gold, not because Midas did indeed there wash off his
wish, but because Midas and his wish too were made on purpose to raise the
Rivers credit by the partial ingenuity of its Countrymen. Nay, Tiber it self
(but a brook to our Thames) would have made his visits to the Ocean with no
more noise than his own streams make, if it had not taken Rome in its way, and
glided by the walks of her clear-witted Poets. True Love is wilfully blind to
the imperfections of its object; and if the scars be not too broad she turns
away her head till her hands hide them in black patches; imitating the great
Architect upon the Chaos, forcing beauty from deformity it self. But to quit
Metaphor, I re-thank you you for the vigilance of your active endeavors in
behalf of my recovery; if ever Providence intends me health (which I have too
much cause to doubt) I think I shall owe it to your industry; and indeed there
is none to whom I would more willingly consent to be indebted, nor more gladly
find a power to requite, than your self: but I confess where there is such true
amity these terms are superfluous. I shall gladly receive any thing from the
Doctor that may have reference to my cure; but I am afraid I shall find some
difficulty to be a circumspect observer of his prescriptions; for we are here
rather a crowd than a family, and are rather quartered like an Army than
lodged, few chambers deserving better titles than huts. But I hope we shall
shortly march away; however if I receive ought that may carry any pretense to a
remedy, I shall struggle hard both for time and place to take it as I ought. I
thank you for the History of your High- Suffolk-journey: I shall take some
order to lay the storm of my Sister P's. unkindnesse, if the weak magic of
my pen can do it; for if there be any Art in it, you know it is black. For what
concerns the Recognizance, I shall say nothing till your progression teach me
both how to speak and do. I made no question but to be as big as my word when
my last talked of your two sticks coming down; but having since met with the
Majors Masculine wife, She tells me that it will be Michalemas before she makes
any more; but she has promised that the patience of your expectation shall be
then rewarded with the Masterpiece of her art. Honest J. is ready to beat his
wife that she forces his promise to so slothful a performance; he salutes you
cordially, and seems always to be thirsty when he drinks your health. But it is
time to hold my Tongue. Dear Brother, I am, and will continue unfeignedly

Yours in all that power and will can manifest, R. L.

LETTER XLIII. To Sir I. P.
Sir,
I Received your Letter of April 5. which proved a sovereign cure to the
suspicion which hung like a disease upon my heart; no corner of which did ever
yet harbor thought or wish concerning you, but what ever indevoured to indear
it self to your future happiness. And though Fortune has not smiled upon my
longing for employments, by bestowing success on your kind endeavors, yet I
have taught my soul as gratefully to relish the real intention, as if its
greedy desires had been feasted with the effectual execution. I confess my
hopes took a sad fall in Sir T. B. but I had rather be content with the
misfortune then that it should procure you discontent with the man. Sir, I find
it fit to acquaint you that it is now my resolution to break the chains of that
unthrifty liberty that has all this time led my wandering steps from the path of
employment; to which, (rather then sacrifice any more of the precious
offspring of Time to the idol of Idleness) it is my vow to lure my soaring
desires to a more humble flight; and since their wings are too weak in a
foreign shore to make prudential Experience their Quarry, Humility shall train
them to stoop at a domestic prey: the means of which (so it be not base or
dishonest) I shall want pride enough to disdain. Nor did I ever want jealousy
that the unskilful weakness of my worthless parts would render me an unfit
Pilot to be imbarqued at first in the managing of a Secretaries place; and my
now becalmed thoughts relish it as a prevention of some disgrace by the kind
Providence, that my feeble sailings might have betrayed me to. In sum, not only
the covet of my own desires, but the promises of some friends have encouraged
me to be at London at Easter Term, where I expect (if I am not wide) to hit
some happy opportunity of employment; to further which, I hope you will
vouchsafe him your testimony that always was, and ever will be

Your faithful servant, R. L.

LETTER XLIV. To his Sister Mrs. F.
My Dearest Sister,
It Is now too late to express the passion I felt for what you have now
recovered, and give me leave to be glad of your sufferings, not because they
were so, but (since the Providence did ordain them yours) because they were no
greater. My Brother told me the disease was not likely to handle you rudely; as
it usually does others; and therefore I hope that cruel enemy to a good face
has not left the footsteps of his tyranny upon yours. It is fit you should
believe that I am not only contented to wish you happy, but would be glad I
could make you so, by something else besides words; but Providence thinks it
fit that I should still be unable to serve the friends I love, and therefore
defers my Preferment by prolonging my unfortunate malady. But the best is, I
have seen too much of the World to dote upon it. You are grown very sparing of
your Ink and Paper; if you understand my affection as it is, you cannot deny it
the content of letting me sometimes know that you do so: I should take it
kindly to know where you are, and how you do, with other circumstances, such as
may be expected by so perfect a well-wisher; there is so little alteration in
my condition, that it deserves not mention. Let me know how your pretty boy
does, and how he thrives in his learning. Salute all my friends you meet with
my hearty love and service, and be confident you shall never have cause to
doubt that I will ever be less then I truly am

Your real Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER XLV. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
TO give your Letter a meeting was business enough to invite me this day to
London, whence the scarcity of time does force me to toss you my answers with
the same dexterous speed that a Tennis-Player does a Ball, that else would die
on his side unrequited. If sometimes then I send you my thoughts undrest, blame
the haste that posts them away in such a ruffled manner. I am glad you
incountred so much pleasure in going your usual rounds, and perused the kind
intertainment of so many friends, to whom I ought to conclude my self engaged,
that they cannot suffer my disappearing from their sight to deprive me of a
harbor in their thoughts. But I am sorry I can show no desert to make my title
good to so much courtesy.

I see you have discovered that the place I am in gives me no cause to be
lavish in its commendations, but I despair not to make your hopes prophetic in
a happier change; in the mean time till fortune clears up her brow, and sets a
better face on my affairs, I am resolved to improve my slender stock of
discretion in the industrious purchase of commodious friends, and the provident
husbanding of opportunities to drive on my more hopeful designs, till the
maturity of which, I will neither blame nor forsake the employment I am in. But
whatsoever burden my shoulders shrink under, in spite of Fortune I will be
happy in your felicity, which be assured is wished as little subject to decay
as Immortality it self by

Your inviolably affectionate Brother, R. L.

LETTER XLVI. To Mr. H.
Sir,
I Know your affairs make you but a Tenant to your own time, which it seems
you rent at a troublesome dunning your rent-men: it is no wonder then if such a
throng of occasions should crowd such trifles as my self out of your memory;
but you found not my name in your books, and so made no account of me. Yet now
I think of it, I had best say no more, lest by accusing you. I should condemn
my self, who it seems am guilty of the same crime, viz. silence. I acquainted
my Lord and Lady with your Apology concerning the rent, and they seem
satisfied; if your Valentine be offended with any, it is with me, for presenting
her thanks no sooner; and she will gladly double them if you can make your word
good of my Lords coming down so soon, for she is half impatient till she be out
of this warm Sun into Gods blessing. S. D. tells me you are shortly for the
Low Countries; I hope your ship is richly laden, and will help you to bear a
broader sail; it can be no loss to you to let a friend now and then take a
commodity off your hands, for you know what you shall get by the bargain. But
of this when we meet; which I believe will be to morrow, for so S. will have
it. In the interim I call my self happy that I am, Sir,

Perfectly yours R. L.

LETTER XLVII. To Mr. W. G.
Sir,
SUffer our friendship to give a little employment to my idle pen; and that,
commission to tell you that I am not wavering enough to let absence write it in
a wave: and methinks they that cannot talk at a distance without the help of
business, do rather usurp then use amity; and like the Persons in an Interlude,
always act what they are not. The frequent exchange of thoughts, next the
touchstone of adversity, is one of the clearest trials of it. Physicians
conclude an Eucrasis in the body, when every faculty plies its own function,
and takes the height of the distemper, as they observe them either let their
Oars lie still, or row the wrong way; and sure that friendship cannot choose
but languish that lies long speechless. But I hold a Candle to the Sun, and I
fear do but show what a Pedigree my Quill comes of; but it is well meant, and so
I hope it is taken. I like Virgils Story of Nisus and Eurialus, and methinks it
deserves the credit of imitation; for though a fiction, the Poet intended it
rather to instruct, then deceive; and meant it as Xenophon did his Cyrus,
rather to show what should be, then what was. Present me cordially to our
Esculapian friend, tell him I shall be glad to hear that his skill gets an
improvement of ability by sick bodies, and his Fortunes sovereign Cordials from
sound Purses. I pray mention my real respects to honest Discendam, etc. tell
him I could wish every man a good fellow for his sake, drink till they be
illustrious, and raise the price of Malt.

R. L.

LETTER XLVIII. To his Brother A. L.
Dear Brother,
MY ignorance of the cause of it gave me some trouble for your silence, not
knowing what construction to give it, unless that you had not yet quitted
Norfolk, detained there by the importunity of Sir J. P. or some others; but
lately meeting with J. W. he showed me your Letter dated from Barningham, which
mentioned some more Physic you had since sent me. what Fate crossed it I know
not, but I never received it, or ought else from your hands, since you had mine
in Norfolk. I think there is a conspiracy of chances that traverse the cure of
this unlucky malady, and use my hopes like notorious offenders, that are only
kept alive for their greater torment; yet I cannot but confess the rigor of it
to be something abated, since the fontanel in my arm rather ran then issued.
There is more Rhetoric in my meaning then my words, and like a Plant in
Winter, whose beauty and virtue are retired to the life in the root; I would,
but cannot, thank you sufficiently for your unwearied solicitations of Mr. --
in my behalf ^: but I am now so espoused to incertainty in relation to our stay
in London, expecting daily when the Exit of an old woman that dies by drops,
should give us warning to quit our City-Theatre, to attend her Corpse to her
Countrey-Grave, as it makes me desirous you would respite the sending of any
more physic, till I know when and where I shall have opportunity to take it,
and you know such things unless done exactly are better not begun. Since I
wrote some of this I received your Letter, which clears all my doubts of your
silence. Your Letter to the Major found him all in tears for the death of one
of the best sisters-in-law, I think, in England; she died of an Imposthume; and
Jack, not without much cause, is very sensible of his loss. I spied a request
of yours, etc. If you can instruct me how to supply your desires in ought else
here, I shall take it very ill if you do not freely command, Dear Brother,

Your ever obliged and truly affectionate Brother, R. L.

LETTER XLIX. To Mr. H.
Sir,
I Received your pregnant Epistle, and entertained it with as kind a resentment
as a heart when it finds it self obliged does usually feel. But as I receive
your love with the fruits of it (your news) as becomes a friend that hates
ingratitude, so I cannot own your high-flown unmerited praises without
indangering my whole stock of modesty; nor can take them with a better title
then some rich ones of this age do the goods and lands of others, for which
their best evidence is that they are too strong for the right owners. In
another, that I had known practiced in the smooth sin of dissembling, I had
called it complement; but your known goodness forces a better title, and I
will only say that you beheld my poor deserts through the glass of affection,
which deceived you; like those that magnify objects, and represent their forms
much more large and fair then indeed they are. Sir, in that sense I understand
you, and return (in plain and undrest terms) the thanks of a friendly heart
that is resolved not to die in the debt of affection. I am sorry your hopes
took so sad a fall in their aims at improvement in your Seraphick Science; but
we that wear chains must look for no larger liberty then their length will
afford us, unless we break them. I hear you are preparing for Nottingham, where
we shall infallibly help to increase your family, and I hope join our forces in
a friendly association to combat with the difficulties of a tedious winter.
Sir, this last favor of yours gives me presumption to enlarge my engagement by
a request, that you will please (if time will permit you) to go to one Mr. K.
etc. I would not presume to give you this trouble, if I were not confident in
your friendship, and cordially desirous of an opportunity wherein I may prove
my self as I truly am

Yours, R. L.

LETTER L. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Am now the more eager to redouble my hold on these occasions, because they
have sately kept their foretops so long out of my reach; and though I was never
less able then now to talk to purpose, yet (next to my main design, which is to
let you see that oblivion cannot entrap affection) methinks I would fain rally
the retreated spirits of my crest-fallen fancy, that with this long taking
breath have almost lost it: garments wear out by being not worn; Ingenuity and
judgment (like the amphibious Otter) may inhabit the opposite Elements of ease
and industry yet if they stay too long in either, the first plucks insensibly
the feathers from their wings to make a pillow for sloth, and the other (if the
bow be not sometimes unbent) does often give them the cramp with too much
stretching, and sometimes a crack to boot, which proves hard you know to
solder. The only art is to enchase and gently checquer employment with
recreation, that they may rule like City-Magistrates by election, and so
deliver up the Mace to one another by turns; only I would have the solidest
govern longest. But pardon these weak sallies; for should I force my pen to
keep the road, and not sometimes range into extravagancy, it would tire you and
it self too with often treading in the Print of its own footsteps. And
therefore I will tell you that I lighted upon my brother W. by an unexpected
kindness of fortune, and featherd some hearty hours in his company diping your
health in the noblest liquor; and upon Saturday my brother W. vouchsafed to
find out my abode, and gave me a welcome account of your well being. I perceive
already you were not mistaken in his character, and have seen enough to give a
fresh applause to my sisters good fortune. I think his brother (very desirous
of, and well deserving your acquaintance) and my self (if nothing thwarts our
resolutions) are like to see him safe at home, and you by the way, especially
if you be not there before us. I should hug this voyage with the expectation of
much delight among friends, if the sense of this miserable malady did not
render me half-asham'd to invade any company. I shall never leave this old
trick of tiring your patience with my Country tales: however with all my
faults, my dear brother, I am

Perfectly yours as far as the sinews of an unbiassed affection can stretch,
R.L.

LETTER LI. To Mr. R. C.
Dear Robin,
I Hope thou know me too well to censure any thing but my weakness in my
Pseudoprophesie; for the failing of which, I cannot suffer you to over-match my
sorrows. I should give thee reasons why I apprehended those hopes which are now
martyred, but they are not fit to be trusted with this Paper, and would new
gall thy griefs to see there was a likelihood of being happy: and now though
the common calamity may challenge a constant tribute of resentment from me, yet
let me tell thee Robin that Divinity does not allow our eyes to be always
dropping over a remediless evil, nor can it sure be angry if we do not suffer
one wide-mouthed woe to swallow all our joys. I confess that is properly Misery
which Oblivion cannot intomb; but heaven gives no griefs which may not admit of
intermission: then for us to divert our speculation upon such objects as may
contribute an innocent refreshment, cannot be unlawful; and though Fortune
should spend her whole artillery of mischiefs upon me, yet still possessing thy
friendship, in spite of all her malice I would sometimes be happy; for even
while my Pen thus talks unto thee, methinks I have a truce with misfortune.
It Is not only the fruits, but the end of wisdom to keep fair weather in the
soul; all that is called happiness without that is but a handsome Impostor.
Vexations were the Vultures that fed upon poor Prometheus liver; let us then
try to escape our afflictions at present, and trust Providence for a full
realease hereafter. To put this in practice, I give my fancy leave to range and
turn over her world of objects, and (that she may cull content from something)
I bid her mark the industrious Be visiting every flower that may help to send
her singing home with laden thighs. I bid her ransake Historical Records of
former ages, and please her self when she finds an exemplary punishment tread
upon the heels of unjust ambitions: I bid her help me to hug mine own
innocence, and to be glad I did not part with it to grow by such considerable
means. But I enjoin her as her best recreation to visit thee, and gently inform
me, at least by an affectionate presumption, how kind an intertainment thou
allowest the memory of

Thine intirest friend, R. L.

LETTER LII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
Engagement, Obligation, Requital, etc. are but Crutches for a decrepit
friendship that cannot stand upon its own legs; such course hungry flames
hasten to their snuff, unless they be fedwith the kitchen stuff of
Complement, while ours scorning such gross material fuel, are their own
continual nourishment, and shine with such legitimate and unborrowed luster, as
difference themselves from the bastard light of the other Comets, by wearing
beams that the malice of Fortune, Reputation, Calamity, etc. can neither
quench nor dim.

I am now beginning to be beholden to Custom, that mother of Facility, for
rendering my demeanor suitable to my employment, which at the first made me the
resemblance of an unweigh'd Colt, or an unbyassed Bowl, so that now I begin to
wear my fetters with as much ease as if they were Bracelets. Nothing can come
from you that shall not bid it self welcome; but your precepts that way will
find an extraordinary entertainment. I fear the product of these uncivil wars
will prove your Chaucer as much Prophet as Poet; but as it is not in our power
to stay the hand that scourges us, so it is not in our knowledge how soon the
Surgery of Heaven will drop balm into our wounds. I thank you for your
account of our County; but were the reasons fit to be trusted with this Paper,
I would tell you why I do now as much dislike the calm as I formerly condemned
the storm. I could let you know the particulars of the Kentish affairs, whose
number, discipline, resolution, etc. have rendered them formidable to the
Parliament, Army, and City; but I presume you have them from a better hand.
There is an old acquaintance of yours in Town which some call Mrs. E. F. and
though she presents her kind respects to you, yet she cannot conceal that she
takes your long silence something unkindly; three or four lines to her while
she is here (which will be a fortnight) will mend the fault. Want of time and
paper releases you from further trouble, and gives you the farewell of

Your really affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER LIII. To Mr. H.
Sir,
YOur last parcel of Paper I received, not without admiring your skill in
contraction, that could put so exact a Letter in the bounds of a Note.
Methought it appeared like a fruitful spot of earth, whose fertility made
amends for its narrow Continent. Your silence had been better excused with any
Plea, then the want of complement, for that is a commodity I never had any use
for: it is a faint sickly friendship that is fed with such weak nourishment; and
excuse me if I say I should make but an ill bargain to exchange my strong
well-woven reality for such slim sleasie stuff. It is a Lesson only fit to be
learned in the infancy of acquaintance, and absolutely necessary to be
forgotten in the progress: it is the crime of my mistake if ours be not marched
far beyond it, and it must not be my fault if ever we sound a retreat. I could
wish propitious Fame would put you to the charge of more paper, and tell you
such things, as would ask to be expressed in your paler Ink; but we must
patiently wait Divine leisure. I thank you for your domestic intelligence. I
pray in your next let me know exactly how the Treaty succeeds. We have nothing
here deserves the telling, and I have said all when I have subscribed my self

Sir, Your affectionate servant, R. L.

LETTER LIVE. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
SInce I ascribe your last weeks silence rather to accident then design, I
cannot justly take that advantage to say nothing; but especially since my
sudden removal to a more remote place is like to heighten the price of these
opportunities, I must have leave to cherish this, and like the parting of a
pair of Lovers, to hug it with a tedious tenderness. For since necessity has
made another my owner, I must bow my will to her proud injunctions, and suffer
her quietly to strip it of that happy power that gave me the propriety of
intention and determination: thus letting go the hold I had in my disposal, I
must now like a Cock-boat suffer my self to be towed by another sail; or like
an inferior spring or wheel, obey the impulsion of a greater. My Lady C. is
already in Nottinghamshire, whither I am to attend my Lord the next week; how
long our stay will be I know not, but I fear too tedious, unless the bonny Scot
drive us back to London, which I am very loath to part with, because I look upon
it as the forge of my better fortunes: this journey is like to afford more
pleasure then profit, and to prove a true resemblance of my present employment.
But I thought it more fit to stay the stomach of my hungry fortunes with this
bit, then to suffer them to famish in the vain expectation of a plenteous
feast. If I had not learned the trick to be at home every where, this journey
would have put me to some trouble; for I am to begin my acquaintance with every
creature in that family, and to part with another, that if I be not mine own
flatterer, do both know and love me. While I am there I shall be industrious to
give you the true visage of my own particular affairs, and sometimes a touch of
the general. In the mean time that your happiness may hold a perfect proportion
with your wishes, is the zealous desire of

Your entirely affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER LV. To Mr. I. E.
Sir,
ENmity has domineered so long, that amity is almost grown out of countenance
and fashion; yet to this dear commodity I am indeared by a double reason; first
because she was never more refined by persecution then now, Vice having this
good property, that the injuries it does its opposite Virtue often prove her
tiremaids, and set her off with more lovely luster; but she is chiefly
beholding to your virtues for the height of my esteem, the acquaintance with
which I would not sell for a more gaudy jewel, to lose or forfeit which, by
neglect, were worse then for a Schoolboy to lose his lesson; or an Artificer
to sell his tools: this through the glass of your modesty may appear like
flattery, but if brought to the touchstone of your worth, it will appear
truths naked metal, undisguised in the Alchimy of Dissimulation. For news,
that which is bad has lately got so much unhappy truth of its side, that I may
well say its good news that there is no news at all. I do here wait upon
employment, like him that is sick of the contagion of Love, upon a froward
Mistress; and she has yet used me like that handsome Idol, vouchsafes a kiss at
this, and gives me a frown at the next interview, though I stake my liberty
against her kindness; yet if my blind enemy has stored up no unexpected spite,
I am now near her embraces. But I think I can miss a fortune with as much
patience as ever I did, and while such as you, and L -- Family affords me to
enjoy your innocent, though chargeable tranquillity, she cannot rob me of all
my happiness. I desire not only my own profit, but the Ages, when I wish those
judicious and learned Animadversions of yours were born to the World, as well
as those that stand in the deserving rank of your intimate friends: by that
means I might hope for a review. But I cloy your patience in this Festival time
with the course ill-cookt fare that my Pen affords, while I hold a solemn Feast
in my breast, garnished with the choice delicates of those thoughts, that I am
and ever will be

Yours, R. L.

LETTER LVI. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
THough I believe you are in my debt for many Letters, yet because you do not
use to be so slow a Play Master of such obligations, I am willing to suspect
that Fortune has used them as she often does Travelers that undertake long and
dangerous voyages, saluting their sails with contrary winds, that either
affront their intentions with a forced delay, or wreck them and their desires
together: however I shall continue to shoot one shaft after another, till I
find you have found some of them. By this undaunted perseverance you may guess
how well I esteem what comes from you; and I shall not need other Rhetoric
then what lives in your own breast to set your Pen awork; if you fancy as much
delight in the task as I do, to give it the title of Pain will be to miscall
it. We live in a Town, the description of which shall serve to swell this
Letter to the ordinary bulk. First, it is seated upon a firm Rock, which makes
most of the meanest inhabitants to live like Troglodites, or Conies, under
ground, and are only obliged to the Pickax and Matock for their Mansion. It is
beset with such a variety of Natures blessings, as I know not whether it
affords more satisfaction to the eye that hunts for profitable objects, or that
which gads after delightful ones. On the one side it is overlooked by Hills of
such a stature, as will require some pain to climb, but double requite it when
you are up; as if Nature had wisely contrived a little difficulty in the
purchase, on purpose to indear the possession: their proud brows are fanned
with such a delicious Air, as if it be true that Cameleons receive no other
food, here they might have a continual feast; here the eye may dally with a
sweet variety of prospect, and is hardly persuaded to be weary, because so much
diversity does refresh and renew the pleasure; there you have a full view of
the flowery fruitful Meads that (crescent-wise in a rich bravery) court this
sweet situation with semicircular embraces: the feet of it are washed by the
silver- Trent, which seems to murmr as he passes by that he is forced to swim
away from the society of so many beauties. If you send your Optics further,
they are entertained with goodly houses, fair Churches, shady Groves, and with
a Castle the same that was entered from a vault by King Edward III. when he
ravished Mortimer from his mother arms, that (standing upon a tall firm rock)
seems to bid defiance to time, and scorns to take his ruin the ordinary way by
having his heels tript up by a fundamental decay. I have dwelt the longer upon
these my silent companions, because they are the best society I converse with;
for consider how the newfound world (where the earth was lined with Gold) was
peopled, and you have my meaning; only here is the difference, they were new
people to their discoverers, and simple, these are of the new Edition and
crafty: Only I am very happy in an old Italian Gentleman that serves my Lady
Dowager, one of the best Linguists in England; under his tuition I am now a
serious student of the French Tongue, and have almost gained a general
Theorical knowledge in the Language; within some few weeks I shall proceed to
Italian, which will be much an easier task: you may make a silent question,
what profit I expect to reap from a few varied fruitless words; but when I have
gained them I shall easily solve that doubt, and let you know how I will make
it give larger scope to my narrow condition here, or else transplant my self
where I may thrive better. My trouble still continues, and is like to do while
I am here; for this town affords none that profess the Esculapian art, but
only one old dull thing, who when I tried him in some discourse, could quote
nothing but Schola Salerni, and made me a very dexterous discove^^y of his own
insufficiency. If you have spoken with the reverend Doctor since about it, I
pray ^et me know his opinion of it without disguise, for if it be incurable, I
shall try to make the best use of my own despair, and force a satisfaction from
reason, since I can have it from naught else. I pray ask him if he thinks
letting blood in the temples would not be good, or whether an issue in my neck
would not infallibly check the course of the humor; but I confess I am scarce
willing to try that, till I see all the rest fail: if you can prevail with him,
let me entreat you to get a receipt of the neezing Powder, and enclose it in
yours; for though I do not hope a cure from it, yet it may stay the increase of
the humor till I take some stronger medicine. If your affairs shall call you
to Norwich, or if you can send directions to my sister F. to do it, I would
gladly have the opinion of Dr. B. from whose advice I fancy most hope of all. I
would not be unwilling to give him a fee; for if a cure be to be bought, I
would not stick to pay for it with all I can make, rather then go without it.
Well, Brother excuse this trouble, and be confident that if ever you have
occasion to call my love to the trial, either to serve your desires, or
designs, or both, you shall clearly find that I am no less then totally

Yours in unfeigned affection, R. L.

LETTER LVII. To Mr. A.
Worthy Sir,
SUffer this paper to return your salutes with an affection unmixt and immortal
as the soul from whence it springs, to which your own worth has given you a
most unquestioned title. It has been still my custom to ask leave of Reason and
Experience before I profess my self a friend: Sir, they have both voted you
into my breast, and I wish I could as easily imitate your deserts, as love
them. When you know me better you will find I am unapt to say these things and
not mean them; and may be confident you have purchased a heart that will resign
the resentment of happiness in such a friend to no other power then what at
last will deprive it of all resentment. I confess I have done so little to
make this good, as your thanks might well have stayed at home till more desert
had invited them. What you call a favor in my transmission of Letters, is a
perfect nothing, and a single remembrance over-values it; but since you will
needs make it a courtesy, I will confess it, on condition you will give me
leave to prescribe the recompense, which is, that you would believe me to be,
as I truly am

Yours, R. L.

LETTER LVIII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Have a better title to integrity then ingenuity; and the robes which you
with an over-partial affection term neat and handsome, are rather taken from
the wardrobe of my heart then my brain. Indeed I find more cause to affect my
own rude honest plainness, then by endeavoring bravery only labor to be
suspected. Your apprehension strayed when you understood me so sudden a
proficient in the science of serving; I lay claim to no such promptitude of
parts to learn my lesson so soon as I have taken it out; my only intent in my
last was to let you know that I had shak'd off those daunting aguish
perturbations that use to affect weak minds when they are dazeled with an
unwonted presence: for in the first trial of my restraint, I fared not unlike a
bird that formerly had ranged the large field of Air with a careless and
wanton, unchecked wing, newly taught to know the narrow limits of a cage, where
it will ask the documents of some time to instruct that little creature to
forget her liberty, and reassume the alacrity of her former chirping; so I was
a while to seek with what behavior to personate my captivity, but custom has
given me confidence, and I hope discretion will keep off insolence. I have not
only received, but eaten your instructions; and am resolved (by rendering them
the nourishment of my future demeanor) to show the proof of their good
digestion: but yet both my deserts and hopes are of too humble a growth to fear
the artillery of envy.

I delivered your Letter to my sister F. who engaged my Pen to return her
thanks and respects. I dare not venture to give you any news this week, it is so
unsafe and uncertain; only this of sad consequence, that my Lord is fallen
dangerously sick of the Small Pox. Mr. W. presents his service to you, to whom
I am deeply obliged. I have no more to say, but that I am

Your really affectionate and desirous Brother to serve you, R. L.

LETTER LIX. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Can think of no other interpretation for your silence but that you keep it
to punish the mischance of some of my latest letters, and so I am made a
sufferer for Fortunes fault: if so, let this deprecate my imputation of
neglect; and did I not conceive that some of yours have met with the same
misfortune, I should severely examine my self how I have deserved to be
forgotten. However you resent your endeavors that way, I shall not injure
judgment to indulge affection, if I say that I never read any thing with more
delight then your lines, and so often as I receive them, in spite of all my
melancholy and the cause of it, they remember me that I am happy. If I were not
still like a ship that has lost her anchor, and can therefore take no course
but what she is driven to by the imperious winds, I had long since landed in
Suffolk, and there unladed my breast into your ear: but though my longings be
still green and vigorous, my opportunities, like vegetals that die to revive
again, are faded with the season; but they will bud with the eldest children of
the Spring, and I am resolved shall be gathered at their first appearance. The
main cause is, my Lady suddenly expects to increase the world by one more at
least; and though I can never be less useful then in those feminine tumults,
yet great ones love at such solemn troubles to have their servants presence
signify they have such pertinents; and thus I must stay to piece up formality,
and the important affair of being at home will be gravely dispatched in making
a show that I am so. I have nothing to acquaint you with but what you already
know, etc. This is the third since I received any from your self; but I
adventured to send them by some wool-men that came out of Lincolnshire to your
parts; but if this miscarry too, which goes the same way, I will never trust
men more whose wits go a wool-gathering: the inch of time that is allowed me to
scrible this, makes me commit as many errors as there are lines, and make as
many blots as words, for I send this by my Ladies Bailiff into Lincolnshire,
who is always in haste; and by plain force have rent this time from my other
pressing occasions, thus to sin over my good will: do but pardon this, and the
next week you shall have amends by the Post. When you see our Holt-friends, I
pray mention my affectionate respects to them all; tell me brother W. he shall
do me right to believe me less exceptious then I have been represented; and
believe it I am, and ever will be

Yours perfectly to love and serve you, R. L.

LETTER LX. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
YOu had not mist a Letter the last week, if my Messenger had not mist the time
of its delivery, so it fell short of the Post, and returned to my hands when I
thought it at B. And indeed Fortune here seemed to withstand its passage with
discretion; not deeming it fit that pieces of such deformity should escape
unstifled in their birth, to shame their parents: but Fortune has no skill in
friendship, and knows not that imperfections are more easily pardoned, then
Neglect, at the Bar of Love; I have therefore sent it, though the same thing
that will vindicate, must accuse me: resembling Physicians medicines in such
ill-brew'd constitutions as mine; the same thing that corrects the intemperate
heat of the Liver, increases the unnatural cold of the stomach; and indeed the
extreme opposition in temper between these two parts, I take to be the original
of my miserable trouble, of which this enclosed does give a more particular
information: and when you present my apprehensions of it to the Doctor, I pray
let him know what I have understood of his son.

He had, by the affability of his carriage, the solidity of his parts, and the
success of his skill, purchased a high esteem with the best; besides the good
will of all that knew him, having done many cures there, by relation, that
might have proved problematical to the most greyheaded experience. When an
unfortunate curiosity got into the head of young Mr. Bendish, eldest son to the
Ambassador, to take a voyage to the Holy Land, and particularly to
Hierusaelem, to see the Holy-Sepulchre, with other relics and repositories
that Time has not yet quite effaced there; the fathers opinion of his prudence,
made him join his authority with the sons amity, and his own curiosity, to make
him a companion in this voyage. So they set out from Galata in February 1649.
traveled by land to Smyrna, and there went aboard the Talent, which was bound
for Lighorn, which young Bendish resolved to take in his way, with design to
see a sister of his married there to an English Merchant, and so take his way
by Scanderon; but passing by Porto Longone, which since the French had it, has
been the Dunkirk of Italy, much about the time that the news arrived there of
the fatal blow was given to Monarchy in England, their ship was assaulted by
diverse French men of war, who then took all English, without distinction, for
enemies; and maintaining a desperate fight with them for some hours, at last an
unfortunate bullet from the enemy happened into their Gun-room, and fired the
Ship; the heat of the fight would not allow them leisure to hinder it till it
was past hope of extinguishing. Mr. Bendish leapt overboard, and swam to the
side of one of the enemies Ships; but they barbarously cut off one of his
hands, that had laid hold of the Ships side to climb the Deck, and so sent him
to feed fishes: poor Mr. R. staid in the Ship, and in all probability perished
by the more furious Element; only one Gentleman, called Mr. L. escaped, which
after the recepit of many wounds, had quarter given him, and was carried to
Porto Longone; where the danger of his life being past, he was forced to buy
his liberty, and returning to Lighorn made this relation, the same man is now
in Genua. Mr. R. left behind him at Galata, in the custody of his man one T. M.
two chests full of rich drugs, many silver instruments, besides wearing apparel
and linen, it is said he left a sum of money besides, but of how much, or with
whom, is uncertain: only this M. is now reputed worth three or four hundred
pound, though before this in but a poor condition, he now serves the
Ambassador. Mr. R. left a Shapet of Turkey-Carpets and Hangings, which in all
probability he designed for England, at Lighorn.

And now to set aside all those fatherless Stories that fly abroad, as of the
loss of all our Armies, Infantry, and Carriages, with the Generals being taken
prisoner, etc. the truest and most modest intelligence tells us, that our Army
being at Pinkland-hills, which is westward beyond Edinburgh about eight miles,
had notice that the Scots Army was risen, and upon their march toward
Sterling; which made us presently rise with ours, and with all expedition
endeavor to prevent that retreat: the truth is, we did outmarch them, but it is
more then probable they suffered us to do it by design, for they have since
taken our station upon Pinkland-hills, so as our Army is now got into such a
straight, as they must either fight upon local disadvantages, or endure the
extremities of much want in that penurious Country, before they can reach
their shipping. The last Post but one said the Armies were drawn up in Battalia
in view of each other; but we are not yet suffered to know they have fought,
though I am confident there has been a signal battle, which gives the
Malignants high hopes, because our Grandees do think fit to conceal the event
of it. Letters from Holland speak very partially on the Scots side, and talk of
a great victory they have lately gotten; Believe what you please of it, for my
part I am something incredulous, because we make no more haste with our
supplies thither. We lately seized upon eight ships laden with Merchandise
belonging to the Hollander, which has given occasion to the States Ambassador
to complain of it to the House, and call it in very disobliging terms a breach
of League, but we hear not yet of a restitution. The Spanish Ambassador made a
passionate complaint to the House of the interception of his Packet and
breaking open his Letters last Week; but he had good words given him, and a
promise it should no more be so; only it is thought the sparing of Mr. Ashcombs
murderers has made us a little angry, and jealous that the Spaniard professes
more friendship then he means. There is a Letter intercepted, from the Prince
of Orange to the Scots King, which assures him he has gained his desires upon
the refractory Dutchmen, and in a short time will be able to send him the
succors of men and money which he promised, leaving the time and place to his
appointment: Report says he has 14000. men, whereof 2000. German Horse, ready
to be shipped, upon what design none knows: It seems they are raised by
contribution from the King of Danemark, Queen of Sweden, the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, Landgrave of Hessen, with other German Princes. The Scots King
has lately made Inchequin Generalissimo of his Forces in Ireland; who with his
Army, made considerable by the addition of the Garrison-forces of Dungannon,
Carlow and Waterford, is now in Connaught, and promises himself a successeful
Winter. It seems he was glad to be rid of those Garrisons, by reason of the
plague which rages there, even to the depopulation of whole Towns; and appears
by a most pitiful Declaration set out by General Ireton, which invites not
only his own party, but all Christian Nations, and the very Papists
themselves, to join in a humiliation to God for the cessation of his judgments
upon them.

This being my last that I am like to write from London, I have ventured to be
the more tedious, and the rather because my short allowance of time has hardly
suffered me to make it sense; but you know lame things are objects of charity,
and pity my present indisposition that assisted my precipitate haste to make it
so. I dare not say more, lest the Posts departure make me say nothing, and so
spoil this Paper-riddle that brings you the elder Sister in the belly of the
youngest. Dear Brother fare well.

Eternally yours, R. L.

LETTER LXI. To Mr. S.
Monsieur,
YOurs I received, and entertained with better welcome then can be expressed by
a faint affection. You confess obligations that are not due, and so run the
hazard of being suspected complemental; but I must allow the privilege that
ingenuity challenges, and suffer your fancy to create desert for me, that it
may show how handsomely it can acknowledge. Experience, the best Mistress, does
daily show how to manage my umbragieux with more dexterity; only his uncouth
pronunciation makes me sometimes put the bridle on his tail, and he kicks me
for the mistake. The Matstre de Hostell still keeps his state with the better
sort of petticoats, and we our station with the inferior cattle; which only
serves to show you how much I can suffer for my own interest. I am not sorry to
hear that you spur your Jade when he kicks, but you ride him with so much
skill, that it were presumption to offer counsel. By this time you may think it
fit that I should send you your own excuse for bald writing, being fitly
applied to my scribbling, besides the faults committed in my English-French,
which if you will pardon, I will one day travel into your Country on purpose
to fetch you better French. Present my Baise les mains to all our friends, etc.
Sarah writes to you, your friends here salute you; and I kiss your hands that am

Monsieur, Yours, R.L.

LETTER LXII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
AT last with much ado we are grown Citizens again, where since we lighted, we
have scarce had time to prune our feathers; only my haste has snatched up this
piece of a wing to tell you I received yours of the first of April, with a
resentment raised to a fit height to measure with the tall strong affection
that indicted it. I was about to say there was not a word in it but deserved a
several welcome; but at the instant I threw my eye upon some praises which I
dare not intertain; and if your love had but trusted your judgment, you had
left them out. Distance deceives with both extremes, by presenting objects to
the eye too little, to the apprehension too big: we no sooner begin to fancy
any thing that is not with us, but we presently mend all its disproportions,
and shut our eyes upon every blemish: this imperfection is almost as old as
mankind, and few breasts can boast they never harbored it. I have grumbled at
my Stars for placing some things beyond my reach, which I apprehended would
make me happy, and yet I have seen them possessed by those that were quickly
weary, and little less then displeased at what I overvalued. But I straggle.
This Town is so metamorphos'd by this last Edict since I left it, that bating
my dead Companions, there is scarce any thing that I can know with safety.
Certainly there is a mighty storm arising, but where, when, or how it will
spend its fury, I dare not name. Error has humbled my Reason, and unbusied my
reaches at futurity to a quiet resignation to the great Disposer. I cannot say
my malady is more remiss then it was, and have little reason to hope it ever
will be; but for that I told you my resolution, which has since lost no
spirits. My trivial employments have not suffered me yet to struggle withit
this Spring, but I am now about it. I sent you a Letter by Mr. B. which I
believe you have answered; he had carried it with him into Lincolnshire,
thinking to find me there, for we set upon this journey on a sudden, etc. Let
these blots be pardoned. Let me hear from you by the next. Forgive my blind
haste, and call me

Yours eternally, R. L.

LETTER LXIII. To his Sister Mrs. F.
My dear Sister,
I Had newly taken my Pen to send you a salute when I was interrupted by a
Porter that brought (with some Bands and Cuffes from my sister Jane) your kind
token; and it pleased me that the same hour which puts me deeper in your score
should be a witness of my acknowledgment. Believe it I wish my thanks were as
restorative as they are cordial; but take them as they are, and if it be
possible to apprehend me more yours then you have done, do it; for it is
impossible to be more then I am. I should be glad I might say these things to
your ear as well as your eye; but London finds me too much business to grant
me yet so much happiness; my condition still keeps the same countenance, and I
am treated with the old indifferency. I am not insensible that I here waste my
best days without improvement of my fortunes, but was contented to be no
bigger ever since Preferment was put out of Honesties reach. My old trouble
still vexes me, and I am again in Physic for it; it has cost me much money,
and I think at last it will cost me my life, for the distillation has given me
a Cough with a bad presage. Heavens Will be done.

I pray speak my service to my Cousin W. my Cousin H. with the rest that know
me. Let my Sweetheart know I am still her servant. And if I may serve you in
any thing here, my dear Sister, command

Thy entirely affectionate Brother, R. L.

LETTER LXIV. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Received yours, and cannot conceal the delight I taste in these delicious
repetitions of your entire affection; the true resentment of which when I
consent to part with, I desire I might lose that and all my happiness
together. I am glad your pen tells me that you like this way of escaping
sorrow; it is not only the fruits but the end of wisdom, to keep fair weather in
the soul; and I am sure Divinity does not bid our eyes be always melting over
a remediless evil; it is not fit we should suffer one widemouth'd Woe to swallow
all our joys; and for my part I am resolved to be never so miserable, as not
to have power to reap an innocent refreshment from the sense of what I possess
in you: and be assured, that all the power I have to make this good is already
in your possession. Methinks Man is not unfitly resembled to a stream, whose
employment it is, to travel from its Source to the Ocean; the obstructions that
affront its passage are the vexations we stumble at, which we use like Brooks,
utter a murmuring complaint at the first encounter, and so pass by; but the
deepest Currents swim past, and say nothing. Yesterday I received more Physic
with instructions from the Doctor, which I fear (besides the disswasions of the
weather) that the continued agitations of my employment here will not permit me
to take till I arrive in the Country of Nottinghamshire, which will be about a
fortnight or three Weeks hence; where I hope to find leisure enough, not only
to observe his directions with a specious care, but also to refasten my self to
my studies; from which, the continued importunity of my London-imployment has
kept me so long loosened. I shall there have time to improve my Physical
endeavors, and to thrive I hope in my French and Italian; which I intend to
set upon with the more industry, because I know not how soon I may meet with an
opportunity to travel, for my allowance here is too small, etc. In the mean
time the best recreation my fancy has, is to visit you, and to bring me word
(at least by an affectionate presumption) how kind an intertainment you allow
the memory of

Your entirely loving Brother to command, R. L.
POSTSCRIPT.
I pray let your next make me happy in the knowledge of your designs; to which
if I may be serviceable, no man shall be so happy as my self.

He that cruciates himself because Fortune is mischievous, clashes with wisdom.



LETTER LXV. To Sir. I. P.
Sir,
I Received your Lines, that came happily to confute some doubts that I was
lost to your memory: but indeed I could not expect in reason a gentler
punishment for the crime of my ill-woven words then your silence; all I can say
for my self, it was a sin of ignorance that provoked it, and your clear
judgment no doubt found it so, though your goodness allows it a better title.
Sir, you have heretofore vouchsafed some propriety in me, and I wish I could
find the way to so much desert as might persuade you, not only to own, but
challenge that interest from these desires. I but show boldness to let you know
that I still continue in the same condition of a servant to my Lord C. without
any sensible alteration, either to better or worse: indeed if preferment were
still the reward of desert, I might blush to want it; but as it is now rated,
though it were laid at my foot, I think I should rather choose to tread upon it,
then stoop to take it up. My chains are not so short here, but that they give
me Elbow-room enough to lead a studious life; though I confess the fruits I
have gathered from them, have been rather pleasant, then lasting. I have spent
some industry upon languages, which has not altogether been unsuccesseful,
especially the Italian and French; from the latter I have translated some
pieces that I am encouraged to publish, but my more serious endeavors (for I
call the other but my recreations) have been bent at the study of Physic, how
prosperously, I am not fit to judge; and though they befriend me no further, I
shall think they have done me some service in staving off idleness. But I
should ask pardon for these impertinencies. I beseech you Sir present me humbly
to your noble Lady, and believe me desirous to appear, what in heart I ever was,

Sir, Your most humble and faithful servant, R. L.

LETTER LXVI. To Mr. W.
Worthy Sir,
I Received yours with the enclosed, and the pound of powder, and with them a
perfect confirmation of the opinion I ever cherished of your reality. I wish I
could as justly applaud my deserts as my fortune, for the gaining of such a
friend; but though I fall short that way, at least I shall be careful not to
lose him by ingratitude. You have given me so clear an encouragement to put
more figures to my debt, as I have got the confidence to crave an increase of
my obligation, and to desire you to find some vacant hour to deliver this
enclosed to my excellent friend Sir J. upon the receipt of it he will, etc. What
you laid out for the powder, or what other charge you have been at in my
behalf, either for sending Porters, paying for Letters, going by water, or
ought else, I desire, nay I conjure you, you would take out of it, and to send
me the rest, either to be paid to Mr. D. in Lincolnshire, or by one C. a
Nottingham-Carrier that lies, etc. I am not so hasty of it, but that you may
keep it till you have a fair opportunity. Sir, for what you have done already,
and what you will do, give me leave to mention my hearty thanks, with my
resolution never to appear insensible of these favors that bind me, Sir,

Your faithful friend and servant, R. L.

LETTER LXVII. To Mrs. L.
Sweet Mrs. L.
BEsides the civilities I had from you, which claim an ample acknowledgment, I
remember I tied my self by promise to kiss your fair hands with a few lines,
though all their errand be only to tender you the unfeigned service of the
sender, and to mention his wishes for the accomplishment of yours; if the
effects of which might but hold a proportion with your deserts, you would be
sufficiently happy. I know you are Mistress of goodness enough to pardon the
flow payment of my word, and it shall encourage me to amend it with future
diligence. You will much oblige to honor me with a line or two, and let me
know how the state stands in your Family, and when we are like to bid you
welcome into the Country. One request more and I have done; put me into the
number of those that you count your most faithful friends, for indeed I am, and
ever will be so, etc.

R. L.

LETTER LXVIII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I See you will make me an usurper against my will, by laying desert enough to
my charge, to dazzle the Eyes of Pretense, and even stagger the stoutest
undertaking resolution. I confess I cannot keep off some wishes to be what you
would make me; and if I could arm as much power as desire, it is possible I
might endanger the Fort you say I am Master of; and I am contented to dislike
my own weakness that I am not so: but I have too much Earth about me to fit my
self for such a flight, that with dull inticement is still seducing me
downwards to its own Element, and hangs like a huge Plummet upon my pinions,
when they are stretching at such a pitch: sure some pale phlegmatic
constellation threw a melancholy look upon my Nativity, and gave my Soul these
blunt ill-temper'd tools to work with: methinks I cannot behold the timely
advantages of other Constitutions, and not upbraid my own. But certainly it is
not amiss in some things to be unhappy, for if wants do not engender despair,
they must needs be fruitful. Wisdom is a Coy Dame to all the World, but most
inflexible to the Courtship of Fortunes Darlings; and it is one of the best
reasons why that blind Wenches smiles are dangerous, because it is so hard a
task to taste her kindness, and not surfeit; and indeed not to overvalue those
ingredients with which common opinion compounds her false felicity, is the way
to purchase the true one.

If I were able to show you events as Astolfo's Logistilla showed the race of
the House of Este before their Conception, I would not hide them from you,
though I kept the rest of the World in ignorance; but it is long since I left off
the pretenses to Delphick divination, and resolved to shut the eyes of my
Reason, ever since she looked through so false a Perspective. Certainly they
that are now in the Saddle do sit very sure, and while they keep their feet in
the stirrups of strength and vigilance, though they may receive a rude shock,
it will be hard to unhorse them. I should be glad if you could keep your
shelter till the Clouds clear up; but whenever you leave it, you have parts
that will make room for you in the World, wherever you direct your steps; and
I shall never take a temporal favor more gratefully of Providence, than a
capacity to serve you in such a design, or any other. I am now suffered to say
no more but what I must ever say, that I am, and must ever be

Principally yours, R. L.

LETTER LXIX. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
THough I had a confidence in your affection, that can never be tempted to be
less, yet methinks I should not do right to your last, if I did not confess
that it set my apprehension to work upon your perfect friendship: things may be
incapable of addition that are not of agitation: there are some generous
liquors that never give so clear a proof that they have spirits, as when motion
calls them to their active task; so these dear repetitions of professed amity
from you, though they cannot make me love you better, they wake it into a
better appearing, and teach me to take a more exact account of my self, of the
right you have in me; and these (if you dare believe me) are my pleasantest
recreations, since love (the parent and framer of delight) predominates in the
employment. If this world be well scanned, there is nothing valuable in it but
a true Friend: Community is not only the hinge of the Universe, but the signet
of every single delight; for were it possible to domineere over the whole Earth
(packed into an entire Monarchy) and to be Master of all that wears the stamp
of sublunary happiness, yet if the possessor be not allowed to latch his own
felicity (at the rebound from others approbation) he will but brood his
tiresome pleasures as an Usurer does his Gold, only own, not use them; and all
his Joys (like Witches banquets) will only seem and serve to cheat the
appetite with a few false promises of sweetness. It were easy to prove, that,
since communication coins our earthly delight, that there it comes nearest to
perfection, where it receives a Copy of it self. By this it is fit you should
guess how happy I deem my self in your kind invitation, which is backed with
abundance of such tempting Arguments as Love and Reason, when they are joined
in Commission, do use to urge; and believe it they are received as the
legitimate issue of your entire affection: what resentments such use to produce
in a breast that has no harbor for ingratitude, cannot pose your apprehension;
by that fancy the influence they must have in me, and therein read my
thankfulness. But the quality of my employment here is such, as I know it
cannot yet consent to make me so happy. I have now almost destroyed a years
time in this scurvy Country, since we last wandered from London, etc. You may
find out many reasons to induce you to accept my Couzin C's invitation of your
Company into Lincolnshire; I shall not need to mention my wishes to see you
there, nor tell you how happy you will make me in such a meeting, for the
repetition is needless: if you come while I am on this side London, I will
enjoy you in spite of all my Fetters; but make as much have as you can, for
this morning my Lord told me we should set out for London in the beginning of
May. Your Picture I received, and am sorry I have no token to return you, that
may deliver a visible Message of my gratitude; it is applauded of all that see
it, only your Pencil has left out some gray hairs that the Epilogue of his
misfortunes had planted on his visage. I have enclosed the translation of a mad
fantastic Dream, which is the fruit of my first Enterprise upon the French
Tongue; I met it in a Romance called Francion, and it pleased me so well, as I
was easily enticed to spoil it thus into English. I was tempted to make the
whole Book speak the same Dialect, but could not consent to lose so much time
as the work would have demanded. Read it over, laugh at it, and return it again
when I come to London; and now I have almost tired my Pen and your patience, it
is time to subscribe my self, as I ever must be,

Your truly affectionate Brother to Command, R. L.

LETTER LXX. To Mr. L.
Sir,
I Received yours, and delivered those enclosed to my two Lords; the younger has
in this returned a reply. Sir, the report of Mr. W. and others, has given you
so fair a character, as I shall deem my self happy to enlarge your acquaintance
in my Lords house, and increase the number of your servants. Mr. W. if not
lately removed, is still at Antwerp; we do now and then exchange a line or two,
though many miscarry. If you will venture yours in mine, I shall do my best to
make it reach his hands, for he has right to much more service then I can do
him; we say nothing to one another, but what we care not if it be construed by
the way. If Mr. B. once Fellow of Christ's, be in those parts, I pray speak my
service to him. Sir, if I may serve you here in ought else, I desire your
instructions that am

Sir, Your most humble servant, R. L.

LETTER LXXI. To Mr. W.
My dearest Friend,
IF the sky had been clear, and the passage free, your satisfaction had not
been so long deferred. The Letters mentioned are irrecoverably lost: whether
any busy hand, or prying eye be guilty of their interception I know not; but
though I am confident there was nothing in them that could find work for a
jealous construction, yet better judgments concur with my opinion to lose
them quietly. What you would say to the other two, if you think fit, speak it
to me only, and if I do not get your desires effected, the defect will only
be found in my power. You are saluted with much kindness by the Gentleman, and
entreated to let him know by your next to me, whether you received a Bill of
Exchange of 5 l. which was sent in Compensation of the charges you expended in
your visits to the Prisoner; if it miscarried, as he fears, signify so much,
and you shall receive another enclosed in my next. Methinks you are very tardy
in showing me how I may serve you. I must never suffer any to love better; and
if you can think, as it is, my trustiness equivalent, spare not to command

Your own for ever, R. L.

LETTER LXXII. To his Brother Mr. F. W.
Sir,
THe mistake that begot what you call your trouble, is become mine, and I am
much afflicted for being presented to you in an exceptious character by the
misapprehension of another; and should be more if it were no error. Indeed
Sir, I have severely examined my self for the words I let fall that might
provoke this gloss; and my memory can acknowledge none but those: When your
brother asked me when I would write to you, I told him you were already in my
score for a Letter, and till you had leisure to reply to that, I thought my
silence might be well taken. If these words will bearsuch a Comment as
displeasure, etc. I am sorry I did not understand them, and do beg the charity
of your belief that I did not mean them as they are taken. I have been taught
to prize your good thoughts at a higher value then to forfeit them with such a
frantic piece of arrogance, which would render me as weak an understander of
your worth, as a deserver of your friendship. I was in good hope when we left
London, if a sudden occasion had not prevented, to pay you my personal thanks
for your kind invitation; but we rather dwelt then visited by the way at my
Lords of Lincolnes and Westmerlands, so as we are but newly arrived at
Nottingham, where my Commanders have found me such employment as will scarce
dispense with my absence on this side Christmas; and when I come, though I must
bring that along with me that will give me a better title to your contempt then
admiration, yet I make my self happy with the hopes of an opportunity to assure
you that I am not the same which misinterpretation had made, but will ever be
industrious to appear,

Sir, A true respecter of your worth, and an earnest desirer of your amity, R.
L.

LETTER LXXIII. To my Sister F.
Dear Sister,
BY this time you have accused my absence and silence of much unkindness, and I
stand condemned by your judgment for a forgetful promise breaker; and indeed
did the reins lie loose upon my neck, I should deserve the censure. I confess
the receipt of a Letter from you that overflowed with Love; and, if I have not
lost all my credit with you, be confident I met it with as high a tide of
affection. I should have returned a Paper to tell you so, but that I cherisht
some forward hopes to do the message with more content to us both in person.
When yours came we every day talked of leaving London, though our stay was
prolonged from day to day, above six weeks after; and when we did, we consumed
as much time in coming down: and thus my ardent desires to see my friends were
dallied into torment; and I brookt the delay so much the worse, because I I had
still a likelihood in gaze: but now I am forced to wait with an extended
patience for a remoter opportunity; for the Lady that I wait upon has got a
belly so big, as till that swelling falls, and the thing be made a Christian,
it is impossible I should break away. I confess, Dear Sister, I have been so
often forced to deceive your expectations, as you may think I rather make then
suffer these delays; but be assured they have been as unwelcome unto me as
your self: and if it be a property of love to desire the presence of the thing
beloved, I may claim the restoration of your good opinion, for none is more
desirous to see you, then, Dear Sister,

Your perfectly affectionate Brother to serve you, R. L.

LETTER LXXIV. To his Sister J.
Dear Sister,
I Have no other way to express my self to thee but the old one, which is, that
I am still thy Brother as well in love as blood. I have contracted nothing from
my acquaintance in three years absence that can deface the remembrance of thee
and thy deserts; for though the world preaches that doctrine, it must ever find
me unapt to learn the Lesson: and believe it, however you apprehend my
condition, I have no inticements here that may help to excuse the forgetting of
my friends and kindred; it is so little impaired or amended, as I must desire
you to understand it where it was, only in one respect rather worse by the
help of my maladie's increase; how the Divine hand intends to use me by that
means, I am uncertain, but will learn to welcome the worst. And now dear
Sister, I will give thee back thine own frequent expressions; I do impatiently
long to see thee and the rest of mine, and cannot fancy the world has a delight
that exceeds the pleasure I shall then reap; and what ever you think, I have
often fallen out with my narrow fortunes that have thus transplanted me. Well,
I will set no more times of my coming, lest I be forced as formerly to falsify
against my will; but when least expected, it is probable I may surprise a
welcome, and be restored the happiness of appearing what I must ever profess my
self, Dear Sister,

Thine own, R. L.

LETTER LXXV. To his Brother Major W.
Dear Brother,
YOurs came very welcome to my hands, for it brought me a present that I have
laid up in my breast, I mean the confirmation of your amity; and now it is no
more a guest, but a dweller; no longer has a single Lodging, but commands the
Mansion, and shall do till time demolishes the Fabric: in requital I represent
you with a Copy of it self, or another of the same, and entreat you to keep it
with as fair an allowance of credit, as I shall make it, or at least would have
it deserve: and I hope nothing but a summons for one of us to leave the world
shall persuade us to draw stakes But I cannot pocket your praises without
despoyling my self of a parcel of modesty that I must not spare. I would tell
you they are more due to their Author, but that I hate flattery so heartily, as
I scarce dare speak the full truth, lest I seem to design it; in the mean time
pray take them back, and keep them for me till I have learned to deserve them.
But now after all this, I could almost consent to chide you for representing me
to your Brother in so unbecoming a character, that has made him charge me in
his Letter with taking offense, unkindness, etc. at his silence, of which he
has almost made it an entire deprecation: indeed I was not willing to be
apprehended so exceptious, and thus before I am seen to be known by a solecisme
in good manners, was not convenient; and considering how much his worth
outweighes me, I ought to have stayed his leisure of writing with less
impatience than you have made him sancy: But I apprehend your generous clear
ingenuity in it, and that stops my mouth. I pray you give your Pen leave to
make me acquainted how it is now employed, with what kind of gale Fortune
kisses your Sails, whether you intend still to anchor there, or to hoyst for
another Port; and what time you will take to air your ingenuity in Norfolk:
these Queries are not the children of a bare Curiosity, but of such an
affection as must ever render me, dear Brother,

Yours in all requisites of a Friend and Servant, R. L.

LETTER LXXVI. To Mr. W.
My Dear Friend,
YOur last indearing lines I perused with as much delight as ever love
engendered; I found things there not only worth the reading, but the using; and,
which is not ordinary, gathered beauty and medicine from the same stalk: I will
not be ashamed to confess I have received much assistance from it; for it was
capable to charm the most unquiet thoughts, and to assure the most unsettled and
irresolute spirit. By this you may judge it came welcome, though not to welcome
me home; for my Norfolk-journey is yet to take, and I think must be per force
deferred till the Spring, and so I shall be welcomed with Nose-gayes: the reason
is, besides the inclemency of the season, my Lady, etc. I hope my last that
gave a particular account to your desires, got safe to your hands; I pray let
your next tell me whether Mr. K. has done any thing in what I intimated
concerning the young Gentleman, etc.

Your own, R. L.

LETTER LXXVII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Am glad to see you are so well armed against your Domestic Enemies, and can
pull out the stings of vexation so dexterously: it is a Science that comprizes
the whole art of living happily; and he that has perfectly learned it is rich
in despite of the frowns, and without an obligation to the fawnes of Fortune.
Discontent is the Gout of the mind, and so much the harder to be cured because
it is hereditary, and as old as succession in posterity; but if we often repair
to the great Physician, he is always able, and for the most part willing, to
ease us: though it springs from the wombs of various causes, that are
themselves complex'd in the concupiscible and irascible faculties; yet most
commonly it proceeds from a surfeit of unsatisfied desires, which run madding
after that they cannot have; or if sometimes they chance to overtake it,
commonly they are as much tired with the fruition, as before perplexed with the
defect; and like Huntsmen, reap more delight in the game than the Quarrie. But
I draw faces with a blunt Coal. We are suddenly resolved to morrow without fail
to begin our Journey to the Bath, and so from thence almost to the Lands end
Westward; which precipitate resolution does almost put me to my wits end,
having so little elbow-roome of time for preparation: this makes me that I can
yet say nothing to the latter part of your Letter; and when my leisure is
largest, my poor abilities will not let me say much to purpose, however I shall
stretch them to an equal contribution in that charitable design. My
multiplicity of business does you a kindness, and shortens your trouble, by
enforcing me to subscribe my self, Dear Brother,

Yours in the very abstract and spirits of affection, R. L.

LETTER LXXVIII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Am advised by many reasons to copy your content for my nearer approches, but
none so powerful as what you alleged; for, believe it, I study nothing with
more circumspection and delight, than to preserve the perfect heat and health
of our friendship from those cold Diseases that use to ruin others. I am proud
of my friends affection, though not their praises: yet I could wish (though
only to save the credit of their Judgments) that the one were as due as the
other. Pray return my service to Mr. S. when you see him next, and tell him I
am much in his debt for being preserved in his thoughts. I could never be at
quiet with a Bookseller, till I promised to make him ready the second part of
Hymen's Praeludia against the next Term; but my short allowance of time will
enforce me to huddle it up in such have, as if I got any credit by the first, I
have much reason to fear the second will forfeit it: he offered to be at the
charge of cutting my own face for the Frontispiece; but I rejected his offer,
resolving the World should have no cause to smile at the vanity in putting my
Picture to a paltry Translation; but finding him still eager to put a gay
before his Book, I designed him this, which is now a cutting, -- upon an Altar
dedicated to Love, diverse hearts transfixed with Arrows and Darts are to lie
broyling upon the Coals; and upon one of the steps of it Hymen is represented
in the habit of a high Priest, with a Miter on his head, a Censer in one hand,
and a Taper in the other, holding it in a posture as if he were going to light
it at the Altar; when Cupid is to come behind him, and pull him by the
saffron-sleeve, with these words proceeding from his mouth, Nondum peracta sunt
praeludia, as much as to say, It Is not time to light your Marriage Taper, for the
wooings are not past: which alludes to the unfinished Story, as well by the
Author as the Translator. I should gladly have been obliged to you for the
Draught, not ignorant what advantages the Cut would have borrowed from your
hand, which it now must want; but our scarcity of time could not permit it to
stay for so much perfection, and so he that graves it has drawn it, though
methinks but unskilfully, etc. If I alter not my intentions, I think I shall
dedicate my Book to my Lord C. J. W. is gone to one Sir A. C. in
Cambridge-shire, near New Market, and made me half a promise to visit you at
Barningham before his return. By this time I have tired you most unmercifully
with my tedious stuff; but you have learned to pardon, by often enduring these
tricks from, Dear Brother,

Your really affectionate Brother, R. L.

LETTER LXXIX. To Mr. R. C.
Dear Robin,
THe now silent Nightingale does not with so much ardor wish for the flowery
month that gives an harmonious Tongue to his sorrows to deplore Tereus
cruelty, as my soul labors with the throws of the same desire that thy
expectation pants with; for thy love to me, it is celebrated by every thought
my heart wears about it with a firm belief, the weakest of which was never
spotted with the least suspicion: and for my affection to thee, though the
defense is needless where there is neither accusation nor jealousy, yet I dare
defy the Witchcraft of Time, the stupifying charms of Absence, the frailty of
mine own memory, and all other Promethean accessaries to forgetfulness, to
steal away a spark of that fire of love which thy virtues kindled; and Heaven
(to which then pure love nothing can be more acceptable) has refined to one
Elemental substance which is neither capable of decay nor change. And though we
owe little to Fortune, for suing an unkind divorce betwixt us, yet the
influence of her malice had no operation but upon our earthly parts; when those
more noble disdaining to owe a circumscription to her coy wayward power, I mean
our souls ordinary Messengers, have winged with love after, and mutually
visited by a secret sympathy our intelligentiall faculties; and sometimes laden
with wishes and prayers for one another happiness, have met in the Aethereall
journey to Heaven, and there congratulated the reciprocation of each others
affection.

I have now gained an unhappy liberty by the loss of a dear Mother, and the
cold unbribed hand of Death has cancelled that obligation of duty which I did
owe, and to my power paid her. The World will therefore shortly be my large
home, and the enjoying thy Company my delightfullest repose; and till we shall
again complete our contract, I shall truly rest

Thy most affectionate, but unsatisfied Friend, R. L.

LETTER LXXX. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
HAd not my employment made me a just excuse, my saying nothing would have been
more criminal then bad language; neglect in friendship being less pardonable
than injury, because it is harder to bring up coldness to a just temper, than to
bring down anger; a fever being much easier to cure than a Lethargy. At my
return to London (for I have been all this time in the Country) I found no
less then three of your obliging Letters together, in which I read such an
excess of affection, and that so pure and so near approaching to perfection, as
if I did not find something in mine own breast of the same stamp and
impression, I should give you the prize of friendship from all men yet that
ever strugled for it. It Is not a bare speculation of things in their causes and
effects, nor a notionall penetration into the Pedigree of every single Essence
can render a man wise, without an Apprentiship of use and practice: so to be
able to define friendship, to know her just basis and true Center, her
constitution, temper, object and end, will not all make a true friend, unless
that knowledge (after a fit choice) can make its way through the affections,
into such proofs as either necessity or occasion shall dictate; that you have
both the contemplative and the active part, has appeared, not only to my
opinion, but experience; and will never want a place in my memory, and shall
always be a task for my Industry both to pattern and requite. I am most
sensibly afflicted at my poor Sister J's. Fever; and though I even fear to
know how it stands with her, yet I pray put me out of my pain as soon as
possible: in the mean time I shall not fail to solicit Heaven in her behalf,
which is the best assistance I can lend her. My Lords only Son and Heir is
newly arrested with the same malady, which I believe will make us remove for
Lincolnshire next week. I pray present my hearty thanks to the Doctor for
bestowing his Receipt upon me; this day I intend, God willing, to make it. Let
your next tell me whether my Nephew Anthony spoke of a Letter I sent him, with
a Book, wherein was enclosed another to my Uncle. This Fever is grown almost
Epidemicall in the Country, and the small Pox here, etc. Well, my dear
Brother, I am

Yours, and will be so, in all places, times, qualities, conditions, etc. R. L.

LETTER LXXXI. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Am resolved to keep our intercourse alive, though scarcity of subject, and
barrenness of ingenuity allow it but course fare with friendship: it is
Terme-time all the year, and when it grows weary of sealing alternate Writs,
it becomes a burden to it self; like a sickly stomach, perverting that into
humor which should convert into Chylus. My cloud that our last parting
exhaled, is not yet dispel'd; which for the same thing does both accuse and
excuse me, indicating the imbecility of Reason, and strength of Love; but
necessity is the daughter of Fate, and her Laws as indispensable. I confess,
resolution drawn from reason cannot fortify my soul so strongly, but sometimes
the battery of this malady makes a breach wide enough for anguish to enter; but
since I cannot overthrow it by encounter, I am resolved to evade it by
diversion, and no more to invenom my wound by handling it, etc. I do
passionately wish far more power, that I might increase my happiness by it in
serving you: but I fall short in every thing but affection, which makes, and
will preserve me

Eternally yours, R. L.

LETTER LXXXII. To Doctor B.
Dear Doctor,
I perceive by an hint in Mr. H. his last, that the Carrier has been the
miscarrier of two Letters that were levelled at your hands, and seduced by his
neglect to an irregular motion; if Chance ever yet conducts them to their
Center, they will tell you the same that this has Commission to say, though
perhaps in another dress; like several Structures, that express variety of
shape and contrivance, though they derive their pedigre from the same Quarry
and Architect. And now D. D. I am sorry I was never so great a favorite of
Fortune or Nature, as to raise any just pretense to the tribute you speak of;
all that I dare claim is but the due to such a friendship as you have
charactered, and drawn so lively, as it would bring the most unapt soul in love
with the love that feeds it. In the mean time I can give no precedence to those
wishes of yours that would cut off the large distance betwixt us, since I have
some of the same mould and making of an equal ardor; but since necessity votes
them down, do but send H. to London as often as I shall L. to H. and we need not
court a dispensation of her severe Laws for a meeting. Pray mention my due
respects to your virtuous Bedfellow Mr. H. honest C. B. and the rest that know
me; and do him the right (cujus pectori nunquam decedat amicitia vespere
surgente, nec rapidum fugiente salum) to let him keep the same place in your
affections that will ever continue, Dear Doctor,

Immortally yours, R. L.

LETTER LXXXIII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
MY last weeks failing was not because I did not write; but I think my woman
was drunk that usually calls for my Letters, and so let the last lie like a
dead Commodity in my hands, resembling some insects here, that are born, live
and die to no purpose. I shall not have room enough in this to raise a bank
against the overflow of your unmerited praises, and confute the height of your
esteem as I ought: but it shall be my task to make the best use of them, and
make that my mark which you have made my Quarry; for since they are not
Essences, as your good opinion would have them, it is but fit I should keep them
by me here as Idea's for imitation. I know not the constitution of your
Interests where you are, and therefore cannot judge whether they be healthful
or sickly; only I know your ingenuity is so well tempered with Judgment, as
you need no assistance at the forge of your own fortunes; all then I have to do
in relation to that, is to wish all your hopes prophets, and your fears
impostors. I know not what to say to the Bark you spoke of, because I am
ignorant how she is built, and therefore can give no opinion whether she be
worth the manning: but it is yours and not mine that must either keep you ashore,
or set you aboard; in the mean time methinks her Lading is not inconsiderable,
especially being to be coupled with your industry. I delivered your Letter to
Mr. M. W. who resents your well-exprest affection very kindly, and desired me
to give it you so with his service. I need not say more of my virtuous Friend
Mr. W. than you find, or at least may apprehend, by judging what he is by what
he says; and believe it he is no dissembler. There was nothing but my have in
fault that I did not acquaint you with the contents of my Sister J's. Letter,
and therefore you might have spared that excuse for breaking up her answer;
there is nothing in it but you are equally concerned in with my self; and were
your Interest less, I never had cause to think a secret less safe in your
breast than mine. I hope I need not conjure you by all that here is dear
betwixt us, to strain your endeavors in J's behalf, who has deserved so well
of us all: her other Friends that approve Mr. B's Propositions may perhaps look
no further then the Bark; but I know you will not content your self with
likelyhoods and appearances, without a subtle and solid penetration into true
beings and realities; and I shall never doubt that metal that comes with
approbation from your touchstone, etc. My Messenger stays for my Letter,
which posts me to a period. Dear Brother,

Ever yours with all my heart and soul, R. L.

LETTER LXXXIV. To his Brother Mr. F. W.
Dear Brother,
THough you owe me for a Letter, yet I am so much in your debt for things of
greater value, as I cannot be unwilling to lessen the engagement, though such
petty payments are like to wipe out but little of the score. I have ventured to
send you by this bearer the misshapen issue of my idle hours, hatched at such
sittings when my wanton Genius was too lazy to follow the pursuit of more
serious studies. I confess it has some deformities which I am not guilty of, I
mean gross faults escaped in the Press, which you will easily find and amend,
if you lose so much time as to read it over; but if you think it unworthy, you
are of my mind, and may bestow it on some that does not exact from himself so
weighty an account of his hours. I have no more to say but what I must ever
say,

Your really affectionate Brother to serve you, R. L.

LETTER LXXXV. To Mr. R. W.
SIR,
I cannot suffer the Fate of my former Letters to discourage me into silence;
for if but one scapes Ship-wreck, it will do the business of the rest, and tell
you all that they treated of (though with less variety) which is, that I am
perfectly yours: and till you find out some command that may engage my pen to
some other discourse, I must still only talk upon the same subject. You know I
was never prone to meddle with news; but now it is forbidden with a penalty, I
hug my aversion. The other day I casually met this enclosed page in a Pamphlet,
and though it was directed to a Gentleman I know not, yet being dated from A.
and subscribed with R. W. I guessed your acquaintance Mr. -- the Author; if you
have interest enough in him to wish him well, let him see it for his future
caution; if I be mistaken, I hope the error will find an easy pardon. I have
not yet been long enough in London to give you account of your Eastern friends,
I hope my next will do it. I must still repeat my desires, that you will use me
while I am here; for I must ever be

Entirely yours, R. L.

LETTER LXXXVI. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Should be as unwilling to be overpriz'd as undervalu'd, since every man is
obliged to preserve as strict a guard of modesty as courage. There are some
species of virtue (according to Moralists) though they all aim at the same
mark, and agree in their end, yet in their operation are so vastly discrepant
(not to say contrarious) as they are scarce compatible in the same subject: and
thus (unless the economy of our selves be very cautiously managed) to con one
virtue thoroughly, is to forget another; nor can there be an higher proof of
wisdom, nor is man ever so exact a Microcosme, as when, in imitation of the
Elements, opposite qualities are equally mingled to a just temperament, and so
tame themselves to a perfect harmony. But to return to yours; had the
Frontispiece of it been drawn by another Pen, it would have been constu'd
Complement; but from you I give it the usual reception, and only believe
(though the expressions much overtop me) Love guided your hand when you set
down those mistakes. To judge aright is a task so difficult, as they that come
nearest (bating things demonstrative) may be rather said to fancy, then attain
it; especially every man being subject (at least sometimes) either to opinion,
passion, or partiality, great enemies to a clear Judgment: but I show the
weakness of mine, by tiring you with these unnecessaries. This week contributes
little satisfaction to your appetite of news, etc. But I outrun the
Constable: Dear Brother,

Unconfinably yours to serve you, R. L.

LETTER LXXXVII. To Mr. E.
Good Landlord,
I Received a Letter from our Friend, enclosed in one of Mr. H's. by which I
perceive he found it unsafe to abide in a place so unworthy of his residence:
it is a sad world that your treacherous Ocean should only rage with such storms
as threaten wrack to none but the virtuous and deserving; but you had the
advantage of me, and had a taste of his society, which I pine for, but love you
not so ill to grudge it: he tells me you are suddenly to remove to Bristow,
which renders me (though sensible of my own loss, in the discontinuance of our
friendly intercourse) truly glad for the advancement of your condition, I never
found it a difficult task to make my own interest do homage to my friends
felicity; which if you purchase, I shall taste the fruit of my own well-wishes.
For my Trunk, I desire you would use the means to send it down to my Landlords
in Holborn, I will write to him to pay for the carriage. My true love and
respects to my good Landlady, and Mrs. B. with the rest, and if ever my
affairs carry me near Bristol, you shall see you are not forgotten by

Your true friend, R. L.

LETTER LXXXVIII. To Mr. W.
Sir,
THough this shall run the hazard of missing the way to your hands, yet I
cannot content my self only to remember you, without endeavoring to tell you
so. I received yours dated the fifteenth, the last of May; which pained me with
no little regret that Mr. R. finds his affairs in so bad a condition, and my
judgment of them so erroneous. I have not yet left admiring the last rare proof
of your affection, nor reproching Fortunes spite that would not let me tell you
how tenderly I resented it. I am not friends with our fruitless residence here,
when I consider how I might serve you at London, and I blush to think how
little I have performed to deserve your ingenious acknowledgments; but my
remote abode does now increase my despair of mending those faults. I am not
able to tell you how well I love you; for I have it better expressed within
then I am able to utter: but of this be assured, I would not be master of all
my other wishes, on condition not to render them serviceable to yours, whose
joys and griefs shall be infeparably twisted with those of

Your unalterable friend, and faithful servant, R. L.

LETTER LXXXIX. To Mr. H.
Sir,
I Am sorry for the first impediment your pen acknowledges, viz. the want of
good news: for the second, you must give me leave to imitate yours, and play
with it, for even my own imperfections do delight me when they make you merry.
Your profession of a ragged garb is but a modest disguise of your inward
bravery: and thus you go backward in your own esteem, that you may take the
farther leap into others; thus being over-lavish in my commendations, you are
too much a niggard in denying your own abilities. Mrs. B. is nothing so much
beholding to your pleasant humor as my self, for it has created her an
unworthy servant, and made me a very deserving Mistress before I thought of it;
but I believe distance and absence will conspire to continue it still a jest,
as sure you meant it; however Sir, notwithstanding you forbid it, I must renew
the profession of my engagements to you, and do but wish for so much power as
may make you find that the reality which you suspect the complement of

Your truly affectionate friend and servant, R. L.

LETTER XC. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
WHat you are pleased to miscall extravagancies of your Pen, are better
construed by him that receives them, who never reads these welcome repetitions
and confirmations of your amity, but (referred to that) he boldly concludes
himself happy in spite of all the affronts of Fortune, and defects of Nature;
by this you may guess how deeply you may oblige me in being still so
extravagant. You had not been last Week unsaluted, if an accidental emergency
had not snatched my Pen out of my hand, and alarmed my obedience to an
indispensable employment (imposed by the commands of those I serve) which
swallowed all the time that offered the opportunity. I hope my sister J.
received my last Weeks Letter, which had layen three or four days by me ready
written, or else she had missed as well as you. I am contented she should think
me willing to the matrimonial bargain she has made, and am sorry my enforced
absence has rendered me incapable of disposing my endeavors to serve a person I
love so dearly, in an affair of so much importance; though since you
condescended to accept the Province of treating and concluding in her behalf,
my confidence in your caution and prudence tells me, that all other assistants
would be superfluous and supernumerary. I am extremely melancholi'd at your
dilated resolutions of seeing London; and the rather so, because I fear we
shall spend the two following Terms in the Country, and so miss the happiness
of your society. I have not yet received so much as a tittle from the Lord C.
when I do you are sure to have a sudden account. You will oblige Mr. W. to
inquire of his friends present condition and welfare. I have here enclosed his
little token to you, the stone may boast a very ancient pedigree between his
birth and his present being; the face was intended for one of the Roman
Emperors, but whether the hand was happy that engraved it, is best referred to
your judgment. Let me entreat you to pay my respects as they are due to all my
friends you shall encounter in your voyage, especially at L. hall. If I may
have the opportunity of writing once more before you set forward, I will venture
to trouble you with a book or two to L. and my Nephew. When you next see Mr. P.
pray return him my respects proportioned to his civilities. I have much sorrow
for my poor sister W. and as much wonder at her husbands silence, from whom I
have not received a line this half year. Present me very kindly to my Cousin W.
and tell him since he liked the first part so well, if I knew how to send it,
he should have the second. But I have made no conscience of tiring your
patience: Pardon all my faults, and believe me, Dear Brother,

Your own to honor, love, and serve you, R. L.

LETTER XCI. To his Cousin A. L.
Dear Cousin,
It Is time to recover my credit, that I doubt almost languishes in your esteem
through the slow performance of my promise. But sure you have goodness enough
to make the interpretation gentle, and I hope faith enough to believe what I
profess, without a spot of complement, that I am to you all that you can desire
in affection, though less then what I passionately wish to be in the proofs of
it: would my occasions have allowed time enough, I should have ventured fair
for the best of Titles, I mean, a Peacemaker between you and your
Father-in-law; but that was denied by the severity of my affairs, requiring
more time then I was master of; and indeed treaties of that nature are better
let alone then not perfected. I know not how your Mother interprets my
forbearance of an expected visit, but I fear unkindly; though indeed only
these considerations, and not any coldness of affection to her would hase it
so. Well, if you want any thing that London affords within the reach of my poor
power, I am here to serve you; for take my word I desire nothing with more
ardour then to appear as I am, Sweet Cousin,

Your truly affectionate Uncle and servant, R. L.

LETTER XCII. To Mr. G.
Dear Sir,
I Am once more grown into a condition to claim your promise of correspondency,
and shorten the distance betwixt us, by a literal intercourse. Upon Saturday
night we reached the Bath; and as if the Heavens intended to inure us by degrees
to what we went for, we were bathed by the way by an almost continued rain;
thus against our wills imitating natures method in the conduct of her
masterpiece, Man, to his perfect growth; first she teaches him to creep, then
go, and so forward: so we began with drops, and are now succeeded to Fountains,
but whether those will (like Bethsaida's Poole) cure our Diseases, is yet an
Embryo in the womb of Time, when their own resolutions are better known to
themselves, perhaps like the nature of weighty things they may descend to me,
however to give you my guess, I think we are traveled to the West like a
Winters Sun, where our stay will take up more then our voyage; and to make the
Simile run upon more wheels, all the days I stay here, will be as tedious as
so many long nights without sleep. Present me cordially to my Brother, and tell
him, if I thought I should not lose my labor, he should not receive them thus
by a glance, but by a level point-blanck from my pen. You may assure
Polycarpus, I have no more leaves to take, unless he will give me leave to wish
his wit may never shrink in the wearing, nor his mirth in the wetting, so long
as he has use for them. If you can, let me feel how the great pulse beats, and
preserve me in your belief, as I am, Sir J.

Your most affectionate Friend, R. L.

LETTER XCIII. To Mr. G.
Dear Sir,
I Had sooner given you a receipt for your last, if the motion of my head would
have given my hands the liberty; for since our arrival here, my Lord and I,
like Don Quixot and his Sancho, have done nothing but seek adventures, visiting
all the Towns of remark, and enchanted Castles we could hear of, as if we
intended to give the World a more exact Geography of the place, and mend
Cambdens Map of the County: only we have charged no Windmills yet, nor any
thing else but his purse. We are now issuing out upon a second enterprise upon
Bristol, but I think we shall quickly finish that adventure, unless we meet
with some distressed Damsels. The I's and No's you speak of, put them and
their power all together, I think spell nothing but I nose. I would fain live
to see the day that the sweet singer may have cause given him to set his Psalms
to the Tune of Lachryme, first hang up his Harp and then himself, for an
imitable example to the whole Congregation in the Chapel: methinks the Members
falling out about the reckoning upon the marriage day of their new authority
expounds the Fable of the Lapithes or Centaurs; make you the construction. We
are now in a Town where most of the people get their bread by their water, I
mean, the Bath; and to strengthen the Paradox, those that never knew how to
govern themselves are yet guides to others. Of a City it is doubtless the
prettiest of England, in a double sense, as it is little and handsome. Most of
the inhabitants live the life of fishes in Summer, and Flies in Winter, for
then they have nothing else to do but sleep in their crannies. He that comes of
the best house of the B -- is come to Bath, and we drank your health yesterday.
Present me as is due to all: but it is time to make an end, and call my self,
Dear Sir,

Yours perfectly to his power, R. L.

LETTER XCIV. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Am very glad your Ague has once more taken his leave, in a double respect,
because it has released you at present, and (in all likelihood) of future
trouble, at least removed them to a remote distance; it being the property of
those concussive maladies, (resembling a friends reproof, or a Parents
correction) to trouble the body into amendment, and pinch health into a greater
purity: and indeed methinks the turns of health and sickness, like the
vicissitudes of joy and grief, while they overflow not their banks, are not
only tolerable, but sometimes necessary; no Halcion-day so pleasant, as that
which succeedes the precedence of a lowering morning. Your decoction no doubt
was very safe, and the admixture of Diagridium and Sal Absynthii not improper;
but believe it, this constant taking away the bran by an artificial Sive, does
but tie the hands of Nature, which if let loose and at liberty, no doubt would
do it better her self: health hastened by a Physical assistance is like fruits
ripened by artificial glasses, which are neither so fair to the eye, grateful
to the taste, nor so lasting as those that stay the leisure of time for a
genuine maturity, and I am confident that a good Diet, moderate Exercise, and a
merry heart, are the most sovereign Remedies you can take to perfect your
recovery. My Brother W. came hither on Thursday last, and parted hence for
Oxford on Tuesday; his Brother the Major keeps him company in the Journey, he
excused it, that he did not visit you by the way, and is resolved to mend his
fault in his return, which I believe will be about Tuesday next; I think we
sent your Ague to flight by drinking your health. I pretend not to any
confidence, or indeed belief of what my last told you in reference to news,
but rather take it as the child of some single conjectures, that are ever
limming likelihoods of what they would have, and conceiting themselves into
their pristine happiness; yet I will not swear that all is Apocrypha. I am
acquainted with a Welsh Prophet here, one E. which seldom dreams without a
Revelation, or sleeps without a Vision as he calls them, who tells the world
of a sudden return of Monarchy to its old bias, and has been so saucy to
petition our grand Council to bring home Charles Stuart to his English Throne,
and threatens their disobedience with an utter destruction; yet this man has
not only escaped hitherto with impunity, but they say is privately cajold by
some Stars of magnitude; it is true, his former predictions have been strangely
credited with events, as the death of the King, the lifting the Lords Essex and
Fairfax successively to the Generals place, the downfall of Presbytery, and
dissolution of this Parliament, which he hit to half an hour: but I suppose
you have seen most of this in his Books: if you have them not, I will send you
them next week bound in one: for my part I read them for naught but sport, but
he is not half so much laughed at as he was at first. I did intend to put out
my Letters next term, but I see I shall be hindered by a sudden resolution my
Lord and Lady have lately taken, to make a Journey to the Bath, and so from
thence into Devonshire and Cornwall, to visit two Sisters of my Lords, which
are there richly married. Present me duly to all my Friends, and preserve me in
your affection as I do you, that am (dear Brother,)

Indispensibly unreservedly Yours R. L.

LETTER XCVII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
IF this ample interval and vast intermission that has insensibly crept between
our last correspondency, had not on my part been constrained by the invincible
and indispensable laws of Necessity, I should affix an Apology to the forehead
of my Letter for neglect, and torment my head to excuse the offense of my
heart; since he that can take commission from his own sloth, to let fall the
thread of a friendly intercourse, betrays a labascency and a languor in his
amicable resentments, and is no better then the shell of a friend, that would
be thought to hide what he has not. I am now freshly returned from the
English-Scythia, viz. Cornwall, which entertained us as the land of Canaan did
the Israelites, with all that plenteous variety which was complext in the
general terms of milk and honey, etc. But really I found as little
correspondency betwixt them and London, or any of the Eastern parts, as if they
had been as well of another Nation as Language; and venturing some Letters
twice or thrice in vain by a lame Post, in which Packets still something to
you, and finding they all fell short of the marks they aimed at, I sat down
half angered into an obstinate resolution of adventuring to say to more to my
friends till I could do it with greater assurance; which made some of my
intimate acquaintance in London to conclude me dead or sick; and their
conjectures were not altogether so wide as I could have wished them; for I
scarce enjoyd one well day in ten Weeks absence. At my arrival I met the
deplorable news of my dear sister W's death, which has afflicted me beyond
expression, as well in reference to my loss in her, as to the poor boys she
has left destitute of a discreet and induigent Mother. I pray let me know by
the next missive without fall how the condition of our family is stated, in
relation to the health and affairs of those persons that compose it, especially
yourself, who ever led the van to the whole World in my wishes, etc. I have now
nothing more to speak, but my desire that you would pardon my haste, with the
faults it commits, since my time is too penurious to allow me a present
circumspection. Expect an amends in my next, and continue me still in your
thoughts, as I am, Dear Brother,

Sincerely, solemnly, unreservedly yours to serve you, R. L.

LETTER XCVI. To his Aunt H.
Honored Aunt,
SHould I suffer Oblivion as well as my self, to swallow your last excellent
entertainment, besides the proof of my own ingratitude, I should silently
accuse your goodness for misplacing it self upon a subject so unworthy; give my
Pen then leave to return you what I can, my true thanks, since what I would is
beyond the reach of my power. I should willingly give you fewer words, could I
make my deeds Rhetorical; for though acknowledgement seems the cheapest kind
of requital, yet could I find out the other way, I should ease my self of many
passionate wishes that have yet been lost upon mine own inabilities; but I dare
go no further in this subject, lest circumspection to speak all the truth,
should make all look like Complement. I was lately importuned by a friend of
mine, to give him my opinion, whether H. would not be a fit place to set up an
Academy for the breeding of young Gentry, in all such qualities as pass in the
opinion of the world for Ornaments: he professes to teach the French, Italian
and Spanish Tongues, Mathematics, the use of the Globe, besides Latin and
Greek, and I am confident will prove no Mountebank in any thing he undertakes,
for I dare speak him one of the most complete Gentlemen of this age; but I
suspended my opinion of the design, till I knew yours, by which if approved I
shall render mine with the more confidence, because I know your Judgment so
little acquainted with error, as it seldom misses to miss of it. Dear Aunt, if
you vouchsafe to give me in a line or two how you relish it, he shall steer
his course accordingly, and I shall range it among those favors that have made
me your desperate debtor, but, dear Aunt,

Your most humble and faithful Servant, R. L.

LETTER XCVII. To his Brother Mr. F. W.
Dear Brother,
BEsides the desert of your kind expressions, which called to a slow hand for a
reply, I am hinted by the news of my Sisters safe delivery, to wish you as
much joy in your young Son, as if the present hopes in him were already
ripened to their future perfection, and expectation were changed into
assurance. I know not whether you should more skill in the diminution of your
own, or extolling my deserts, in the first act put on the face of modesty, in
the second of kindness; and fighting with such Weapons, she cannot choose but
triumph. I dare not enter the lists that way; but if an honest heart that
speaks plainly, and means well, that takes care to preserve its own simplicity
from such mixtures as will harm it, I have it for you, and will keep it so.
Present my dear respects to my Sister, and tell her, I wish you may make her
Mother to a numerous offspring, on condition they may all prove as so many
accessaries to the Parents happiness: by that time this is like to reach your
hands, perchance the guests and gossips may be assembled at the Christning, to
each of which, if I know them, I beseech you Sir present me as is due: I cannot
choose but mention honest Mr. H. Mr. B. Mr. D. etc. So often as your Pen gives me
a taste of your welfare, I relish much happiness; for Sir, believe it, you
cannot lose any confidence upon my affection, that desires to appear to you,

All that is requisite in perfect Amity and Service, R. L.

LETTER XCVIII. For Mr. J. E.
SIR,
I Received your last, with your thanks for those blots, whose ill contrivance
may rather summon my own blushes than your acknowledgement: all the disposal I
will challenge in the noble proffer of your heart, is still to reserve him a
harbor there, who is never so angry with his stars unkindness, as when he
considers he can pay down no greater earnest of desert for these favors than a
few cheap words. Sir, I know no greater encouragement to any endeavor than
obedience to your Commands; for which the employment it self would be an ample
recompense, and I should reap a plenteous Harvest in the very tillage. I know
you are all thirsty of happy news; but this week affords not a drop to quench
it: you have not deserved to be cheated with hopes for realities, nor do I
think it fit to send you Conjectures for Positives. The strongest encounter
with our fears is given by the etc. what that may produce, I leave to the
steadier balance of your Judgment. Our expectations have been so often, like
the early blessings of a forward Spring, been betrayed to the tyranny of a
following Frost, that I am resolved mine shall bud no more till the uneclipsed
Sun shall chase keen winter before his victorious rays, etc.

R. L.

LETTER XCIX. To Mr. R. W.
My dearest Friend,
I Received those lovely Copies of a virtuous and knowing soul in the last
lines, with such a gladness, as none but you that had power to create it can
fancy: this Paper will not hold the description, and therefore think it but the
result of an affection, so simply pure, as has long since left off the capacity
of growth and decay, and then you have it. You do well to say we cannot be
divided; for the remotest corner of the Earth cannot hide you from me, and even
at such times when I know not where you are I visit you: you have put such
sweetness, and yet so much gravity in your words, as I know not whether I am
more ravished or instructed, and have much ado to escape self-love, because I
am so loved, though I do more then like the Character of dispositions,
observation of national propensions, and proper distempers; your tracing the
footsteps, skilful reading upon the decayed skeletons of Antiquity, with the
rich imbroidery of a clear judgment upon all; yet when such a Be flies among
Flowers, I cannot wonder if she carries home store of Honey; when so active a
fancy incounters such apt materials to frame Idea's, it is not strange if she
brings rich ladings to the understanding. But above all, my dear Friend, I must
remember to thank you for those sweet and candid insinuations of Piety and
Virtue, which with a cunning affection you gently communicate, by presupposing
that I have them already; and thus your skill and kindness combine to
interweave delight and profit, and conspire my happiness. Well, could I but
take my visible Example where I had my Precept, the Lesson would be less
difficult, and I sooner shaped to your mind; for though I strive to love as
perfectly as possible, yet I dare not think my self qualified enough to deserve
such a Friend, etc.

Eternally yours, R. L.

LETTER C. To --
Madam,
I Cannot pocket your excellent lines, without expressing my own unhappiness in
aspiring to what I should only have been contented to admire: had I but gazed,
and then given over, the impression had not gone so deep, and I might have
outworn the wound; but it was too hard a task to begin to understand you, and
not suffer Love to undo me with ambition. Had my eyes only betrayed me, and
your face and feature tied on my chains, I might have trusted time and absence
for a Cure, and read for it in the variety of other cheeks that are white and
red; but it is your diviner part has charmed me, that Soul of virtue and
discretion that guided your Pen took me prisoner: nor can I hope a release from
Reason, since Reason it self is a fellow-captive with the rest. I confess I am
staggered as well as you in my resolution of seeing of you no more, and fory I
did not except visits, when I forswore addresses; but it is in your power to
interpret the Oath with that condition; and though more reviewes cannot mend
the sculpture of your Image in my heart, nor a perpetuity of absence deface it,
yet I could willingly (before the wind carries me away) take encouragement from
you once to see the dear cause of my unpittied sufferings; which you may safely
grant, because I reinforce my promise to let alone that subject that so much
offends you, and torments your servant. I should now endeavor to confute the
modest injury you have done your own deserts, and tell you how your striving to
extinguish increased the ardour, that you vainly bestow the title of Candor
and Sincerity upon the same thing you scorn, or at least misprize: besides, I
should gratefully mention the cruel charity of your wishes, that would have no
thought of your self disquiet me, which you know is impossible; but this would
be to answer your Letter, and coldly to dispute, which my present transport
will not allow: well, though you have raced it out, I must ever fasten the
Epithet of loving to the title of

Your eternal Servant, R. L.

LETTER CI. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
YOur last undated Letter I received last night, and perused the well-woven
variety in it with so clear a delight, as it resembled the Suns victorious
glory in a Cloudy morning, dispelling the mists of melancholy which has lately
got a trick to sit something heavy on my dull spirit; but I am resolved to
rowse it: how Sir J. has digested my mistake, and the stupid effects of it, I
know not, nor do I much disturb my thoughts about it, for he has parted with
much of his Candor, if he does not resent true affection in it, (though ill
expressed.) It is not in my power to overvalue your last kindness, such cordial
condescensions in a true Friend being (like the greatest number in Arithmetic)
impossible to be expressed; and had my will a power adequate, you would soon see
the requital would much furmount the acknowledgement. I suppose my last (if it
escaped the danger of so long a Journey) told you, that I am now a Patient to
one Mr. D. whose Physic I still daily take, (though yet with little apparent
success;) but he is confident, and therefore I do not despair; however if you
have a Recipe from Dr. B. of some sovereign lotium, it will be gratefully
welcome. I am invective against cruel Interest, and do upbraid my narrow
condition that will not suffer me to meet you at Norwich, (so much love being
the inviter, and would fain be the Guest) but my Chain is not long enough to
reach so far, and (till opportunity grows ripe) I am losh to break it: I
will therefore content my self to wish your meeting happily divided betwixt
success and delight.

I cannot disapprove the Character of the Gentleman, and not be Cynical; only I
could have wished (for my Sisters sake) that his mind had not held most of his
Treasure; but it seems, affection makes her willing to accept of an Utopian
Jointure. The joys are confessed more purely genuine that wait at those Nuptials
where Love makes the match, and not Interest; but this age is swayed with such
a blind injustice, that it even forces a by as upon the most prudent virtue.
Indeed I always observed in her a discreet foreseeing Providence, while she
stood at the stern of her own Cockboat. In which, (if he does match her as well
as in affection) no doubt but the bigger bark of their Family will be well
Piloted, and so by a joint Industry their stock daily increased. I do
exceedingly applaud the solidity of your caution, in making sure of that sum;
but if I were able to advise better (as I am not) it would be fruitless, since
you know with resolution all counsel is incompatible. This day I wrote to my
Sister J. and enclosed it in one to my Sister F. wherein I do (not without much
regret) acquaint her with my unfortunate failing in her behalf, though I
stirred in it with as much dexterity both of mind and body as was possible;
but the main cause of our failing was, that I knew not the opportunity soon
enough. I am not now in so good a condition to serve my Cousin C. as I was when
my Lord of Lincoln resided at Tattershall, within four miles of his Uncle; for
now he is come to Sempringham, much more remote, where I think he will winter;
so as I do much upbraid my own negligent omission to see him before I came from
thence to Haughton, though I was fooled into it by a promise of my Ladies, to
return thither in ten days, though we have already worn out the tedious Age of
six weeks in this unfrequented Cave: nor do I look for a sudden deliverance
from this solitary confinement; but indeed it is not much unsuitable with my
present disposition, which can relish nothing delightful, till I get rid of
this deplorable trouble; but when we return into Lincolnshire, it shall go hard
if I break not prison for one day to see the old Midas, and then I shall not
forget to urge what you hinted concerning the etc. Excuse the extravagancy of
these inconsequent diversions, and expect method when health bequeaths me a
more fixed temper; but you should never be thus assaulted with the sallies of
these petty discontents, if you were not perfectly confided in, and peculiarly
loved, by

Your most faithfully affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER CII. To Mr. J. P.
Dear Jack,
I Am sorry thou could not carry health out of Town; but here is never a shop
that sells that Commodity. I hope it waited in the Country, to welcome thee
home; for if well-wishes may make thee well, I have redeemed it for thee, and
thou art restored to its possession. My pawned promise is redeemed by this
enclosed, which though it be too plain to be precious, I would be loath to
forfeit it to a Friend. I prithee entreat sweet Mrs. Mary and thy self, not to
spoil these course lines with expectation. My have has done it too much
already, they being the deformed issue of a few minutes stolen from my serious
occasions; but if my mistake did not miss your directions, I have not shot
much wide of the design. My belief has been so often abused with news, that I
am resolved not to adventure the cheating of thee with some such unwilling
falsehood. Let me enjoin the happiness in my behalf to kiss Mr. M 's. fair
hand, and lay the presentation of my service at her foot, and let her know that
if the dull performance of this first has not discouraged her bounty in
bestowing further commands, I question not but to give her a better taste of my
zeal to serve her. In the mean time, honest Jack, if it requires it, I commit
thy peccant body to belly-racking discipline of thy gilded Pills, but thy mind
and senses to the sovereign cordial of her precious society and rest.

Thy cordial friend to serve thee, R. L.

LETTER CIII. To Mr. W.
My dearest friend,
WE are at last got loose from our Western entertainment, and delivered from
the punishment of an importunate kindness, which was always in travel, and
every day delivered of an overflow; but I hope we have escaped all the danger (
viz. of surfets) for which we ought to keep a solemn thanksgiving, and are
safely arrived at London, which we shall only make a baiting-place by the way
into Lincolnshire, and there spend the remains of the Summer. At my return to
London I met a pair of your Letters that had long stayed my coming, I flew to
their perusal with a greediness as great as ever was the child of a teeming
impatience, and found that in them which at the same time sated and justified
my longing. I was truly glad to hear my friend had so happily pleased my Lady
L. in his Factorship, which was confirmed by a Letter I received from her out
of the Country, (for they left London upon the brink of our arrival) which
commanded me to return you with her thanks by Bill of exchange as a gratuity
for your prudent care in her behalf, and a request from my Lord that you would
(if possible) procure him some more Italian songs. I have enclosed this Bill
from your friend Mr. B. whereof I desire you will signify the receipt with as
much expedition as possible, and direct your letters again to -- for I shall be
out of Town till Michaelmas. But now my dearest friend, I know not which way to
turn my Pen, nor how to shape an answer to those praises you lavish upon a toy
that I cannot own without some blushes; which was the only reason it was kept
so long from your knowledge, for fear it should get me a deserved chiding from
your severe affection, for laying out my time with so much improvidence and
ill-husbandry: nor do I traffic with that stale piece of modest policy for an
improvement of reputation, because I disavow it, like a cunning Angler, drawing
away the Bait that the Fish may follow it more greedily; for really I speak my
thoughts without a dress, when I tell you that I have much wondered how it
comes by the credit it carries in the World, and that so many judicious palats
should gust a piece so insipid; however it is, I cannot content the importunity
of some of my best qualified friends without I go on with this story, and I
think there will be another part out at Michaelmas Term, if I come time enough
to London to oversee the Press, etc.

R. L.

LETTER CIV. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
YOur advertisement of the happy Error came too late to intercept the abortive
issue which my Crest-fallen Muse miscarried with: but I was never more glad of
being abused, and am friends with Fame for the deceit, since it is like to cost
me no more then a laughing at. But reports of this nature shall henceforth
only play fast and loose with my ear (as Juglers do with the eye) and claim no
credit till backed by apparent certainty. Your imagination cannot fancy a more
grateful heart then mine, made so by your last courtesy, a trouble which none
but so perfect a friend as your self would have undertaken; and though I know
you are none of those that can put their courtesies to use, and so become
kindest to themselves in being kind to others, yet I shall never judge my self
truly happy till I be able to return yours with interest. I would gladly find
Doctor B. not mistaken in the situation of my malady, and I hope my experience
will hereafter assure me, as now my observation begins to persuade, that there
is no flaw in his judgment. I have a strong fancy that I shall reap much
benefit by those lotions he speaks of, and therefore when you go next to
Norwich let me entreat you to take a note of the ingredients from his dictates,
for I conceive no time of the year unseasonable to take that kind of Physic.
It Is possible Mr. R's directions, as one well skilled in such medicinals, may
prove available, though I intend not to straggle the breadth of a hair from
what Doctor B. prescribes. We are now retired from my Lord of Lincolns to a
house of my Lord of Clares in Nottinghamshire, where a Hermit is not more alone
then I, this Country affording nothing fit to converse with but dumb
companions, as pleasing walks in Gardens, Groves, by Rivers, etc. of which it
is not unfruitful; that had I Adams innocence and knowledge, my present
condition would resemble his before Eve was created. I have lately not without
much regret lost my French and Italian Tutor, who is parted from my Eady D. I
am unfeignedly glad to hear of the health of my sisters, and that they manage
their deserts with so discreet a providence to improve reputation. If you find
Hymen is like to light an auspicious torch, and the true-loves knot be worth
the tying, I shall not give a faint applause to the change of my sister K's
condition; I shall be glad to hear in your next that she draws in a happy yoke;
they shall have my hearty wishes that their sweet bondage may know no other
fetters then what are woven by the soft hand of virtuous unfading Love: might I
hope the happiness to meet you at London, nothing would be able to out-glad me;
but I do more than fear that we are to consume this winter in these parts,
unless a new kindled War do send us packing, and then I am sure that
unsanctified City must prove our Sanctuary: that which makes it too probable
is, that my Lord of C. is coming down thence with his whole Family, to increase
ours here. I pray present my humble service to my Cousin H. C. and tell him,
that if I can serve him in ought with his Uncle, who lives within five miles of
my Lord of L. Castle, at T. (which we shall often visit) he shall not find my
endeavors tardy; I have not yet seen him, but intend at our next going: it is
reported there, that the other H. C. is grown a great favorite; but if report
says true, he is like to plague their expectations with a most unconscionable
long life, as if Time had forsworn to swallow his humidum radicale, to whom he
yet has denied the homage of either stooping or drooping; I intend to send him
a pot of red Dear, which they say will be welcome. I pray present my
affectionate respects to my Sisters, and tell my Sister J. that I am now in
chase of a place for her, which if obtained will pay for all her patience; it is
to serve the Lady A. W. and I intend to engage no worse Soliciter then my own
Lady her Cousin Jerman; but I am afraid it is promised already, and therefore let
her not hope too much; only if such a thing should happen, 'twere fit I had
notice where a Messenger should find her; for I intend to send one on purpose.
But I grow intolerable: pardon this rout of words, and call me as I truly am,

Your own for ever, R. L.

LETTER CV. To Mr. R.
Sir,
MY short allowance of time will only suffer me to tell you, that I am (what
your friendly Courtesies have made me) truly yours, and will be ready to appear
so, when any of your Commands shall direct me how. In the mean time, take my
hearty thanks for the trouble you have undertaken. It was a request of that
nature as (without the aid of much Candor) you must needs have construed
Presumption; but your ingenuity has helped you to give it a better
interpretation: be assured I will strictly require of my self such endeavors
as may learn to deserve these favors. So if you please to let me know your
clear opinion of this man's intentions, I shall steer my course accordingly;
and (if you find it requisite) come to Nottingham my self, and get him arrested
before Occasion shows her bald pate. I beseech you Sir return my Love and
Service where they are due to my Friends you have with you. Pardon my rude
have, and do me the right to believe me

Eternally yours, R. L.

LETTER CVI. To Signior G.
SIR,
I Understood by a late Letter of Mr. H. and since by your last to Mr. H. that
you had sent diverse Letters to me; which if so, I cannot do less then wonder
at the strange contrivance of Fortune, in not suffering so much as a single
line to arrive at my hands since I saw you; when none of those that weekly
travel between me and my remoter Friends ever met with the same fate. Indeed I
was glad to hear that Signior G. was yet among the living; for I judged nothing
but Death could have struck him so dumb. I understood your desires, and the
reasons of them by Mr. H. to receive your Seamozzi, which I presently
communicated to your vale Milner, and prevailed so well by persuasion, as you
will receive it by this Carrier. I am sorry my Lady D. does not accept your
present; I suppose Mr. H. will render you a larger account of it. In the mean,
I shall (using the Books carefully) read over your Translation with the
Original, and so keep them till your reply to this directs a further
disposal. Have will now let me say no more, than that I am

Your constant Friend still ready to serve you, R. L.

LETTER CVII. To Mr. A.
SIR,
AN unexpected Command for Lincolnshire with my Lord beguiles me of the
happiness to kiss your hands. Before your Suff. Journey takes advantage of my
deferred writing, and forces me to say nothing to my Brother by you, to mend
this unintended default, you may much oblige me to summon him by a Messenger to
B. while you are there, I know his affection will carry him further at any time
to hear of me; where if you please to give him an account of what you know of
me and my condition, you will put me much in your debt: tell him I will write
by the next Carrier, but desire him not to expect my coming over till I tell
him I will come. I pray let him know I received his last with the Picture in
it. Sir, may the success of your journey compare with your wishes. Present me
kindly to all you meet that know me. Forgive the haste that made these blots;
and be confident I am

Your faithful friend and servant, R. L.

LETTER CVIII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
MY last had not been followed at such a distance, if the sudden news of a
Lincolnshire-journey had not arrested my Pen in the very act. My condition
scatters uncertainty among the broken parcels of my time; and I must be no less
then a Prophet to foretell how I shall spend the next hour; my firmest purposes
being still curbed with a conditional bridle. Thus I utter the larger part of
my endeavors, as an instrument does sound, that only talks over the
instructions of an imperious hand. Yet I cannot say that any new restraint does
raise the price of my leisure: but the continuance of my trouble, which I now
suspect will keep me company to the threshold of the other World (in spite of
all the aid of reason) does often untune and discompose my soul, that (though I
should blush to say so) it even faints my industry, slacks my carriere, and
makes me halt after such designs, which otherwise I think I should pursue with
vigor. But I take it as a fatherly correction sent with commission to set me
the way to Heaven, and so I hope I shall use it. We are now more then two years
older since we last shak'd hands; which (when I look back upon at a lump)
methinks (in reference to my self) looks as if woven into a Chaos. From some I
have incountred affronts that have struck fire in my breast; from other (sweet
ingenious spirits) I have been fanned with a gentle gale of serene affection;
such humerous waves have flowed round my Bark, as (at the same hour) have
mildly kissed my keel, and spit foam at my top-sayl: and for earth, I am a double
debtour to the constitution of my body, and my fortunes, that my Chaos has been
plentifully furnished with that melancholy element. It cannot pose your
conjecture to conceive how tenderly I would hug an occasion that might revive
me the delight of so dear a society; for (if I deem aright) you may easily cut
out such an imagination by the pattern of your own heart. But if I gain my
health, I taste what others call pleasure with a feverish palate; I am
therefore loath to appear among the friends I love so well, till I can bid adieu
to a dull humor that now predominates, and my soul may have elbowroom enough
(at least) to render my company not tedious. If Providence does intend me so
dear a Present, sure this succeeding Spring must bring it, and then I shall
venture to ask my first leave to play, etc. I do much applaud the disgust the
creature made you; I know you have a soul that loathes to sin so slavishly
(though tempted with fairer hopes then any can court you that way:) it is the
badge of a worthy heart that can rather endure to appear less, then to be less
worthy; and it is a rare disposition that will not suffer it self to be cheapened
in such an age as this. But (though virtue sometimes sets a long day) her pay
is current and sterling, all the rest false coin.

My Lady has newly got another swelling in the belly, which I believe about
five months hence will make us hoise fail for London (for there they apprehend
is the safest unlading for such fraights;) if I may meet you there you will
give me more happiness then I have relisht since I last saw you: And be
confident your person and parts will find a more easy task in the purchase of
preferment, then mine have done (in so many respects their inferior;) and if
you can safely manage the interest is still left you to make it last till then,
it cannot be amiss. In the mean time you shall do me but right to promise your
self the clearest advice, attended by the most active diligence, and ready
endeavors that may be performed by the soul and body of

Yours while he is his own, R. L.

LETTER CIX. To Mrs. F.
Honored Aunt,
THe debt due to your obliging goodness I can better confess then satisfy; and
till Providence enrich me with serviceable power to pay the whole sum, I must
beg you will receive the interest of true thanks, a coin (though often
counterfeit) has here the stamp of a true heart; in the Mine of which your kind
engagements have dug for such metal, and though it be not precious, it is
beyond the power of an Ordinance to make it no current pay; for Heaven it self
received it, and if the impress be not forged, returns an acquittance. I
promised you news, but its scarcity bids me crave a longer day for the payment,
only this, The Scots, etc. You have the abridgement of what this Week
produced: if I may use my poor power any other way to serve you, let me beg you
will continue your favors in commanding

Yours, R. L.

LETTER CX. To my Brother Mr. A. W.
SIR,
YOurs of the third of this Current was brought to my hands by your Brother,
and now mine; a Gentleman so happily accomplished with what is brave and
ingenious, as I am justly proud of his acquaintance, and must therefore render
a just acknowledgement to you that gave it me. So you may safely believe there
is nothing in me that swayes with so great a power as affection to my friends;
and therefore my remote abode spoyld the taste of other recreations, because it
made that almost speechless. I hold my self much advantaged by the consent you
have given to let me know you, and will gladly stir any endeavors that may
show me the way to so much desert: what you are pleased to say of your self
could not be excused, if your own modesty were not the Criminal; and whatsoever
that forbids, I see there was no error in those that spoke you, since one that
has best reason to know you has confirmed the Character. It will be none of my
fault if I do not help you to entertain your Gossips; but I dare not venture a
positive promise, lest something that has more power over me then my self
should infringe it; but let me entreat to be thought as thankful, as if I had
already tasted all that your Courtesy intends me. Good Sir, speak me deeply
affectionate to my Sister, say as much in my behalf to my Sister F. and believe
me

Perfectly yours in all that I can serve you, R. L.

LETTER CXI. To his Sister C. L.
Dear Sister,
I Have had too much proof of thy disposition, to doubt its integrity, and I
hope thou have known me too long to suspect my affection: let us then in spite
of all mistakes mutually maintain such a plain-dealing love as may well reject
the gay discredit of a Complement. But now though I find my head and hand too
weak to cope with your ingenious Champion, yet lest no resistance should render
her victory inglorious, these few words in answer, that I perceive she did not
well understand, or at least willingly misconstrued my meaning, the better to
introduce her own ingenious reproofs; and first I perceive she was pleased to
understand some words (only merrily intended) in a serious sense, the better to
let me feel how sharp the weapon of her wit is like to cut, when it has a just
provocation. Secondly, I must take leave to say, I know not well what she
means by impoverishing Fortune of glittering toys, etc. however, I am
resolved to do her the service, rather to impute the fault to the weak
eyesight of my own understanding, than lay any erroneous mistake to her
charge. For the desire which your own hand expressed on the top, I am sorry my
power is yet unable to promise any pregnant hope of its effect: only this, you
may confidently assure your self, I shall providently improve all means and
opportunities that may give you a strong belief of the most unfeigned affection
of

Your truly loving Brother, R. L.

LETTER CXII. To his Brother Mr. A.L.
Loving Brother,
YOur last kind one met me at Nottingham, whither my Lords recovery, (if I may
call it so, for I fear it is but an intermission) has returned us; where in
spite of all my fair hopes, and eager wishes, we are like to resettle. If this
comes directly to your hands, (which because of your intentions for H. I am
jealous of) I pray let it speak me as I have still desired to be understood,
and will ever stretch the sinews of Industry to continue the opinion. You tell
me of two potent enemies you have to struggle with, viz. Malice and Envy;
indeed they are two of the most angry Wasps that Satan lets fly; but where they
meet with integrity, (of which I know you are not unfurnished) they may seem to
sting, but there rises no blister; and thus their emissive venom, like the
foreseen Basiliske, (which for ought I know may be no more then an Emblem of
them) will fatally recoyl upon themselves: for the cause of it, because you
think fit to bind it up in clouds, I will not strive to unwrap it; only I
shall love my own conjectures well, if event applauds them, that it portends
you some conjugal preferment. I am sorry C. T. grows so lavish of his
reputation to go in danger of a Warrant, because he does things unwarrantable:
I pray God he does not buy wit so dear, that he will have nothing left to make
any other purchase; if I knew how to direct my Letter I would write to him, but
will forbear advice, till I grow more able to give good Counsel, or at least he
more willing to receive it. I could wish poor N. S. had managed his Merchandise
with more providence than to be shipwrecked in a Dungeon; and it is much to be
feared, since he could boast of the ignominy: that the Sunshine of his new
fortune will but light him to such another Farm, and so leave him in it: but I
desire my Augury may get no credit by the event; and indeed I should be chary
in unripping others imperfections, till I have fewer to mend of mine own; no
doubt they are deformed in others eyes, could they be so in mine, I were happy.
I thank you for the hopes you give me of a Cure when I come over, which I
believe will now be shortly, I am resolved to consult Dr. B. about it; but
custom has taught me to fear the worst. I pray let me know how long you intend
to stay in N. that when I come, I may certainly know where to find you; for if
you be not there, I shall unwillingly go so far out of my way as by B. H.
being full as near; but I talk too confidently for one that has not yet asked
leave, and may perchance be denied it. I am sorry your trouble has still such a
spleen at your side; a solid constant virtue disheartens malice, and disarms
envy, and could rival your own gladness, if the gold you spoke of, with a
Matrimonial Plaster, could remove the Lead from thence; but I applaud your
resolution of content, with what you have, and will endeavor to write after
the Copy. In the mean time, I cannot better requite your wishes, than by paying
of you in your own Coin, which (if it be possible) is done with interest by

Your cordially affectionate Brother, passionately desirous to serve yon, R. L.

LETTER CXIII. To Mr. W.
SIR,
I Received yours, and in it much more than was due, by way of acknowledgement,
in reference to your Son. You are pleased to call that a Couttesie, which was a
debt, and indeed not paid at the full; for I must ever confess, that I owe much
more to your preceding Civilities. I find your Son endued with all those
qualities that may frame him a fair fortune, and a high repute, both by natural
and acquisite parts, which are more than likely to render you a happy Father;
his apprehension is clear and quicksighted, his memory strong and retentive,
his fancy dexterous and lively, and these auspicious signs may well be
construed into hopes of a wellbuilt Judgment, which is the noblest faculty of
man. I perceive his industry in his studies is elaborate, and his observation
always ready to cull Honey from every Flower; in short, I think he will no way
deceive your expectation, unless it be in going beyond it. Sir, I deemed this
account due by obligation from, Sir,

Your faithful Friend and humble Servant, R. L.

LETTER CXIV. To Mr. C.
Sir,
GIve this Paper leave to present my acknowledgment of your last civilities at
Tatshal, and my resolution of taking the hint to serve you from any opportunity
that shall becken me to it. It has pleased God to visit my Lord and Lady, one
with a Fever, the other with a Tertian Ague; but as yet neither expresses any
violence, and therefore persuades no fear of danger. The remembrance of your
conditional promise to give them a Sermon next Sunday made me deem it fit to
send you this notice, that you might preserve your performance for a fit time;
unless you will convert your intentions to the charity of a visit. I should be
glad to hear Mrs. C. had shaken off her shaker. As my promise tied me, I have
sent her the Polonian Story, which perhaps may feather some tedious hours; when
she has done with that, C. is at her service, or at least shall be at a Weeks
warning. I pray Sir speak me much her servant, and conclude me

Yours as far as the wishes and power can reach of R. L.

LETTER CXV. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
THe three Letters you mention I confess I received; and if we had not still
been shifting places, like feathers in the wind, my silence would want excuse,
and in plain English be translated sloth; for I was forced to take an unwelcom
Paradox from the hands of Necessity, for too much motion stayed my hand. Since
we lost the sight of London, I have dated all my Letters not where I dwelt, but
where I was; but now I hope we shall sit still and breath a while, so my dumb
Pen will come to its speech again.

I am deep in your debt for abundance of loving expressions, and want words to
tell you how tenderly I entertained them; the task is too big to let you see
how dear you are to me: do me but the Courtesy to fancy an affection, pure,
unbiassed, unreserved, that scorns limits, loathes change, and is only less
excellent than that which makes the Angels clap their wings, and you have a
draught of mine; to describe which in particular were to let an Ocean through a
quill. I am sorry you are fastened to Mr. B. with Gossomere-tyings; but though
those Cobwebs were Cables, I believe you might find a more commodious harbor
to let fall your Anchor in. If you think it fit, let your next a little more
unmask your engagements, and show me how your inclinations stand, and whether
you can draw off upon a sudden warning. My friend on the other side the Sea has
not yet accepted employment, (this Age looks too much asquint on true desert,)
he still redoubles his kind expressions upon me, and so far as he is mine he
shall be yours. I pray if you can learn, let your next tell me how his
Norfolk-friends do; for he desires to know. I am not yet likely to draw my neck
out of the Collar; but when I do, I shall loath to invite yours intoit: without
flattery, your person and parts do deserve better, and must have it. If this
wretched malady did not still haunt me, I should not long trifle away my hours
in a dull and barren servitude. I am now my own Physician and Patient; from my
own prescription I have taken a Vomit, a Purge, a Collution, a Dentifrice, etc.
if these fail, the hopes of a Cure will sicken, and I shall only comfort my
self in the calamities of a short life with eternity. Sorrow and joy chastis'd
one another in my breast, at the news of my Sister F's gentle misery. I will
not wrong your apprehensions to give you the reasons, I hope by this time she
is perfectly recovered, and will congratulate it shortly in a few lines to her.
I pray present me affectionately to my kind Sister J. and tell her I was not
master of so much time to write to her this opportunity; for I am forced to
blot you out these words I send you in exceeding have. Let me beg your
furtherance in my Physical Studies: I would gladly entreat permission to
transcribe your Book; but it is an unfit request to venture it so long and
dangerous a voyage: only this let me crave, that in your next I may receive
the Copies of three or four of your most virtuous diet-drinkes, especially Dr.
Butler's; and the receipt of your rare Balsom, with a little quantity of it, if
you have any made. I am happy in my Friends welfare, proud of their love, and
wish I had worth enough to make it appear they have not displaced their
affection. I will make amends for my last long ebb with a future overflow.
Salute all that know me with becoming respects proportioned to them; and now
give me leave to close all with such words as I must make till death close my
eyes: I am

Your truly affectionate Brother to serve you till death, R. L.

LETTER CXVI. To Mr. J. E.
Sir,
I Am not wise enough to plot an excuse to defend my silence from your censure,
unless it be, that I made a conscience to call you from your better employments
to lose time upon my trifles; but since I thought better of it, I found it
fitter to choose the less sin of the two, and rather venture a reproof for
importunity, then a mulct for ingratitude. Believe it Sir, I mean it no
complement in professing my self much in your debt; but you always ranged your
self in that small number of mankind that sow their favors without
expectation of a crop, and place their delight rather in planting courtesies,
then gathering their fruits. I beseech you Sir, mention me to my Cousin E. as I
am a grateful resenter of their last excellent entertainment, and a passionate
desirer to appear so, when either they or I can find a fit occasion: let my
she-Cousin know that I did lately find means to serve her in the business we
discoursed of, as will come a cure for the greatest calamity either of body or
mind. But our great ones are so overflown with this springtide of success, as
they have not leisure to mind the bubling of little Brooks. I would fain say
something else if I were sure I could only speak to your apprehension, etc. M.
W. kisses your hands with much respect, and desires the liberty (since London
will not afford any of the same) to make your books speak English before he
returns them. I beseech you Sir; present my baise mains to that incomparable
Lady my Cousin E's. Lady, not forgetting the terrestrial Cherubins, and take my
word Sir, to you I will endeavor to be all that is requisite in

A faithful friend and servant, R. L.

LETTER CXVII.
Dearest Sister,
THough silence be sometimes a sign, yet it is not a proof of forgetfulness; I
am sure in me it has signified no greater offense, then what a large absence
from London (in such places whence it was almost an impossibility to convey a
Letter to H.) has enforced me to commit; and therefore if my affection has got
a blemish in your thoughts, pray restore it to its former credit and beauty,
for really I have ever kept it fair in mine, and will always take care to
preserve it so. There is so little change in my condition that refers to my
present interest in this Family, as it is not worth my account; only I live
and that is all, for my allowance is so short, that if my own industry did not
draw in additions some other ways, I should find it a hard task to subsist. In
requital of this, pray let your Pen tell me how, and to what degree, your self
injoyes your health and content; how my Cousin L. thrives in his studies, and
to what employment and profession his inclinations are bent with the greatest
ardour; and if I can find my self in a capacity, either by advice or assistance
(though I want them both my self) to serve you or him in the choice of a
Calling, procuring a Master, or ought else that may help me to express how
cordially I am yours, you need not scruple to command it from,

Dear Sister, Your own in all that a sincere affection can promise and perform,
R. L.

LETTER CXVIII. To his Brother Mr. F. W.
Sir,
To say nothing after the receipt of so much kindness can no way be excused but
by the utter shipwreck of my memory; be pleased therefore to believe that I
resented your friendly entertainment as I ought, and do passionately wish I
could requite it so; however accept the acknowledgment of it from a heart that
means as much as the most puissant gratitude can act. I beseech you Sir, speak
abundance of affection from me to my dear Sister your bedfellow; tell her I do
not suffer my self to forget how much her indearings are aforehand with me, nor
will ever consent to slip any endeavors that may show me the way to overtake
them: tell her I shall earnestly pray for a safe unlading of her freight, and
wish, if I may use Erasmus his expression, Ut non majori molestia elabatur,
quam illapsum est. My Brothertraveller and I made it Saturday-night before we
reached London, as I doubt not but his enclosed specifies; but if you find the
date old, impose the fault upon me; for accidentally meeting Mr. T. and gaining
his promise to deliver this, I was rather willing to trust a safe though slow
convenience, then a speedy hazard. I pray present me cordially to honest Mr. H.
Mr. B. Mr. D. and their Wives. I shall only add this; be as happy as your
hearts can wish, especially in one another; and take my word, I shall always
be forward to prove my self, Sir,

Your really affectionate Brother and servant, R. L.

LETTER CXIX.
Dear Brother,
I Am glad you have shak'd off your shaker, and begin to wear your health,
which before you put on as people do new boots, for a trial how they will fit,
and so put it off again; Pardon the course resemblance, for to him I mean so
well I ever thought I might speak any thing: but I hope you are now recovered
with advantage, and are grown so securely well by your conquest in this second
encounter, as your victory is signal, and will disable your foe from
reinforcing. In the mean time I must not forget to commend the aim of your
pious reflections at the right mark; all the joys and griefs, pains and
pleasures, falls and risings that start from those under causes we encounter
here, should all lay their heads in the lap of Providence, and he that does not
teach his thoughts, desires etc. the way to that center, does but shelter a
troup of dangerous straglers, that may be more then suspected to drag him the
wrong way. Though I think the World was never worse for true desert to traffic
in, yet I know you are so well furnished with what few can dislike, as I hope it
will cost you no tedious trial to get a prop, if not an improvement, for your
Fortunes. The vacant place which I refused to fill up in my Lord of D. service,
I hear is re-suppli'd by the same man that left it, etc. If I were able to show
you future events like the Magicians glass, and strip all the high designs of
their present disguise, believe it you should be admitted to the naked vision;
but wiser men then I do but rove with uncertain guesses, and make good the
Italian Proverb, -- A Case troppo alte non si pigtia mira;
-- It Is hard to take a true aim at things too high.
Let me conjure you to be as exact and circumspect in I's behalf as is
possible; I know you are most able to penetrate and scan the business, have
studied the man, with his estate and disposition, and can tell best how to sift
the conditions of his kindred, and discover how their propensions stand in
reference to the match; for believe it, this may pass for a Maxim, She must
never long think to preserve her husbands affection that has only his of all
the kindred: yet pray do not construe this my unwillingness to vote it, for
what you deem fit shall never want my approbation. I pray deliver my respects
as they are due to all my friends you encounter in your progress; and tell my
Nephew, if you see him, that he owes me a Letter. At your return tell me how my
Uncle does, virtuous L. and my brother P's Family. I have no room to enlarge
your trouble, only this; not only a good voyage to you, but all the
requisites that conduce to your perfect happiness shall ever be comprised in
the wishes and prayers of,

Dear Brother, Your own to love and serve you, R. L.

LETTER CXX. To --
Sir,
IF I could grow studious in the illiberal science of ingratitude, the lesson
of forgetting your courtesies would pose me, when every glance on my present
condition must needs undo my endeavors with the unresistible thoughts of him
that gave it being. But you have always tasted more delight in performing
courtesies, then in receiving their acknowledgment; to which I have been so
frequent a witness, that I have even feared to give you the full proportion of
my gratitude, lest it should provoke your modesty to understand it complement.
What construction it will make of these words I know not, but they are only a
rude draught of what I carry in the Center of my breast, an artless copy in
black and white of what is there far better drawn in vermilion characters. But
I do but unskilfully repeat what I hope you knew before. Time has not lent me
experience enough in my present employment to let you know whether I shall be
able to satisfy the expectations of them that command me; but as far as I have
yet read in my L's. disposition, I have seen nothing that can discourage my
endeavor of pleasing. A few words will hold the news we have here, etc. and I
shall conclude with what has the same duration with my life, that I am

Your affectionate servant, R. L.

LETTER CXXI. To Sir J. P.
SIR,
GIve these blots leave to mind you of a servant that does often recount to
himself how much you have formerly obliged him; the remembrance of which
compells me to tell you I must be ever yours; nor shall I ever consent to be
wavering enough to write them in a wave. If I had not laid out some wishes in
vain, my Pen had wanted this task, and I had done my becoming respects in
person; but so long as I bow to the commands of others, I am like those that
swim in stream non eunt fed foruntur; and like a Cock-boat must content my self
to stand still while the Ship I am chained to is at an Anchor. Some failings in
designs for preferment have deluded my expectations, and detained me in the
Lord C's service; but I hope I shall not long repeat my steps in the same
circle, where I content my self to spend my time with as much studious
providence as I can Sir, if I did not often retreat into my own heart, and find
how much it honors you, I would not thus importune you: but methinks I am told
by the perfect integrity it pays you, that it becomes me to presume you still
wish well to

Your faithful servant, R. L.

LETTER CXXII. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
I Shall not offend truth to tell you that I thirsted for your Ink with all
that ardor and impatience which are usually the troublesome Companions of
perfect amity, when she is rent from her object by the double divorce of time
and distance: and though few delights tickle so pleasingly as those that get
credit by absenting themselves, and after an advantageous intermission return
fresh and unhandled to the senses; yet true friendship has a constant and equal
gust of delight, is never tired nor cloyed with fruition; and indeed, if it can
be rightly stated in its perfection here, may be called the elder Sister of
Angel-like happiness, Love being one of the fairest plumes that deck the Crest
of divine Beatitude. But enough. If my last told you I was well, I must give
this Commission to unsay it, etc. But I am bound to suffer all without
repugnance or repining, since whenever the Divinity corrects with the greatest
severity, we ought to take alarums from those stripes, not only to give the
onset, but persevere to the overthrow of all that stands in our way to eternal
felicity. I am very glad to see so many repeated confirmations of my Sister
J's. happiness in a Husband; in which my affection goes a large Interest, and
if my wish can get her a Lease of it for her life, she shall not want it. I
should be fearful to say any thing to my Sister F. though I were far more
able then I am to advise, because I neither know the man, nor his disposition,
how qualified or inclined; but admit them all proportioned to her desires, for
my part I should be hardly drawn to acknowledge it could much mend her
condition, which, if I mistake not, was very happy, if she has but a true taste
to relish it: when I return to London, which will be about Michaelmas, I shall
endeavor to do her desires in reference to her Son; but am now upon the brink
of our going into Lincolnshire. I am so full of business as I am not master of
an hours leisure; and therefore if you find any nonsense here, impute it to
the constraint of my precipitation: we must set out upon Monday next. When you
write, (which I desire may be often) direct your Letters to Mr. G. the P. in
Ivy-Lane, and by him they will be infallibly sent me, and my answers returned;
in which I promise to be constant and circumspect. Well, dear Brother, I have
now no time to say more; in my next I intend to be more spacious in the account
of my own Condition, which in relation to those I serve does grow Hectical, and
unlikely to continue; and verily, should I stay much longer with them, the
non-competency of their allowance would undo me: therefore I intend to look out
for some other employment at my next return to London. Dear Brother, pardon my
abrupt Farewell, and call me your possession,

Your own, R. L.

LETTER CXXIII. To Mr. J. E.
SIR,
ON Monday last at once I received both your Letters, which like people of the
same noble Parentage kept company; and I crave that their coming that day late
to my hands may be called my excuse for not returning an answer. This is a
better opportunity to tell you, Sir, that your modesty in expressing yours, and
the Families worth, turns your artificial Pen into a Pencil, to which, if it
were possible, your shadows would add excellence. I must beg you would take a
ruder draught of my heart, which is, that I truly honor you; and what wants in
that of art, is made good in reality. I am still an Archer at Fortunes marks,
and the other day narrowly mist the white of preferment: the best of it is, I
have many strings to my Bow, and the Proverb says, The blind man sometimes
hits a Crow; but, ad januam virtutis excubant labor and sudor; and that is the
hubbe I aim at, I must ever scorn to physic my weak estate with gilded venom.
In the mean time, my breast leaves a swarm of well-wishes to you, and the Honey
they gather is your happiness. Sir, to you, if I could, I would not clip the
wings of my hearty expressions with Complement, lest, like the new-voted-down
money, they should not pass for current. I will still wear the impresse your
obliging goodness has stamped upon me, and when I prove false coin, let me be
punished in not being received for, Sir,

Your most faithful Servant, R. L.

LETTER CXXIV. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Dear Brother,
YOu have so over-done your acknowledgement of what a silent acceptance had
more then requited, as I can do no less then condemn you of a loving error.
The eyes of Judgment are never dimmed with such Catarrhes as when affection
shapes the Object to their Optics; and, like our dear sins, hide their
ugliness in the maskarade of delight, profit, or whatever else is the fittest
engine to undermine our frailty. If the trifle I sent you had not been spoiled
before, your expectation had done it to purpose; and, like Esops laboring
Mountain, would have brought it to bed of a Mouse. But I will trace this talk
no farther, lest too modest a flight from my friends approvement should give
suspicion of an ambush to surprise more, and palpably seem to act an Angler,
who often draws away the bait, that the Fish may follow it the more greedily. I
am glad you wear out your Pencils so fast to your own advantage, which, however
you shadow, your deserts cannot choose but add fresh beauties to your
reputation. I forgot to mention your quere about my Lord W. in your Cousins
Letter, who had buried it so long in his pocket before I received it, as it had
put on the discolored Livery of time, and proved its Resurrection, by wearing
the dust of its Grave about it. But to the purpose; that Lord is so far from
Collonizing, as himself is newly transplanted from the Barbados (where he was
Governor) by the Parliament forces, and is now coming home against his will,
to refix himself in his native soil; and this is so generally known, as a
Diurnall of two months old will tell you the Story. Major W. is much your
Servant; we seldom meet but we sacrifice a glass to your health; and if there
be the thing Philosophers call intelligence of spirits, you fare the better for
it. By that time you have read mine through his Book will be with you, and come
like the second Course to a Dinner, which always consists of the most delicate
fare. I send you this by my Mr. C's. man, who looks upon me as if he were
scarce my Cater-cousin, for you know what; but in such cases I am partly good
at carelessness. But I have said too much, unless I could have said it better;
and it is high time to subscribe my self, Dear Brother,

Devoutly yours, R. L.

LETTER CXXV. To Mr. W.
Worthy Sir,
IN the forehead of your kind Letter I am charged with what I was never guilty
of, viz. Scholarship; but should be of too much ingratitude, should I forbear
to show you how kindly I relish these obliging Civilities, the remembering of
which I must not part with, till I utterly lose the faculty it self of
remembering. Let me beg then that you will fancy me as I truly am, perfectly
yours; and suffer me to tell you without suspecting Complement, that it is no
light groundless affection, but a clear experience of what I saw was deserving
made me love you; for I acknowledge much affection in your resenting what you
call my sufferings; but it is my weakness if they be so; for believe it Sir, if
the Peacock stirs any passion in me, it is laughter, which is the Daughter of
contempt. I may find a time hereafter to show some scorn to be so treated; but
that must sleep in my bosom till opportunity wakes it. In the mean time, I am
more pleased that there are some which conceive me in love, then offended at
the weak pride of others that contrived the comical indignity. Sir, I am sorry
that I can do no more than acknowledge your favors, and blush that my defeated
expectations have continued you still my Creditor; but at our meeting that
score will be wiped off without fail, and if my wishes were not too weak, my
actions, as well as words, should style me

Your faithful Friend and Servant, R. L.

LETTER CXXVI. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
IT has not been the least of my discontents, that I have been forced to let
you want the content your last Letter mentions in the receipt of some of mine;
but this let me entreat, that you will never suffer your conjecture to deal so
unkindly with me, as to impute a literal intermission to a flaw in affection.
If you knew how much my strict employment does instruct me to say for my self,
you would grant I need not confess a neglect; and if you saw how well you are
seated in my breast, your knowledge would suppress your doubts of my Integrity,
and leave them no possibility of a new insurrection. The 100. Epistles did not
speak all my heart meant you. It is only in visible effects that my affection
will endure improvement, in my intentions it cannot; but as it can only that
way appear to be more, so be confident it shall never find any way to be less:
but time is now too precious with me, to instruct you further in what you know.
I received a brace of loving Letters from my new Brother and his Bedfellow;
their expressions, like themselves, lay lovingly in a sheet together, only in
this a little preposterous, that he lay undermost; indeed the man does offer
friendship so handsomely, that I should show my self ill seen in civility not to
accept it. I perceive (though you confess your self subject to the Palsy) your
judgment was not levelled at his desert with an unsteady hand; the Character
you have given him, with what he has spoke himself, has helped me to a longing
to be known his Friend as well as his Brother: but this will ask time, and
perhaps more merit then I am master of. I am glad you do not yet let go your
hold where you are; and though the wide miss of some former aims may
discredit my judgment, yet he that has but a twilight of Reason may perceive
the Cloud not far off that is like to make us more foul weather; (and while
the Tempest lasts) safe shelters are precious. If you knew how glad your
Letters make me, and were less guilty of that rare fault of undervaluing your
own Commodities, you would see less cause to confess the exchange gainful: but
(as truth ingages me) I must needs commend the beauty that breaks out into your
literal expressions with a daily increase of luster. I find you have thriving
thoughts, (and though in men it always holds not) yet sure in those the height
of the quality may be taken from the handsomness of the vesture: if you go on
thus, your Pen will plant Rhetorical Flowers, as skilfully as your Pencil
paints others; and this word Paint leads me to lay hold of half a promise which
your last makes to send me the K's face in a Letter: let me first acknowledge
some eager desires of my own to possess it, and then inform you that I have a
design to let some great ones see what you are able to do, and so make you
known to them before they know you. I will shortly tell my Sister F. how glad I
am of her recovery: present me dearly to honest J. and I pray take some
occasion to let my Aunt H. know that I do passionately desire so to serve her
as may speak her good opinion not misplaced. I am now about to struggle hardest
with my malady, but I am almost forbidden to hope a perfect Cure by a rational
Physician in these parts; but I hope I shall obtain so much power over my self,
as to resign my wishes and will to his that is the Fountain of power. I snatch
this time of writing this from some occasions that would hardly permit it:
therefore impute these blotted faults to that mother of blemishes, called
Haste. Expect another better polished at my nearest opportunity, and suffer me
abruptly to subscribe my self

Your perfectly affectionate Brother desirous to serve you, R. L.

LETTER CXXVII. To his Cousin A. L.
Dear Cousin,
THough my silence since the receipt of yours may have done me some ill offices
in your opinion, yet you may safely believe without incurring the danger of an
error, that coldness of affection had no hand in the seeming sloth of my Pen:
the truth is, I had a double persuasion to stay my hand, as well to wait this
occasion of my Lady P. going down, that I might promise my self some security
of delivering mine into your hands, as returning an account of those endeavors
you hinted in yours, that referred to the removal of that unkind Law-quarrel
betwixt your Sister and Father in Law, by a mediated peace: really, dear
Cousin, I am sorry to find my self in no capacity to experiment my affection to
both the parties, by rendering my self an instrument of so happy a Compremise
and accord, nor is it want of will or wishes that I am not so; but after some
attempts that way, I find your Sister has so entirely resigned that business to
the conduct and management of a discreet person, that has now (as he tells her)
driven it very near a happy period, as she cannot safely let fall, or suspend
her legal prosecution, without running the danger of losing so powerful an
assistant; and therefore I could wish that you, and the rest that cannot look
upon her actions at this distance but through the Prospective of another
report, would not use her too severely in your thoughts, till the last scene be
acted; for I am confident she has so fair a stock of piety and discretion, as
will take off the imputation of disobedience to her good Mother, and unkindness
to your self, and the rest of her friends. But I have touched that string too
much, unless I were able to speak to the purpose with more satisfaction. I
should be glad to hear your resolution stand firm of visiting London this
Easter-terme; yet I could wish your choice would direct you to begin your
Journey betimes in the Term, because I fear I shall be snatched out of Town
before it be half elapsed. Since affection helped you to relish the first so
well, I have sent you the second part of Cleopatra, for which you will pay too
much if you take the pains to read it; but, dear Cousin, accept it from him
that will ever be studious to start better occasions to appear what I am and
ever will be,

Your most affectionate Uncle, R. L.

LETTER CXXVIII. To my Brother Mr. F. W.
Loving Brother,
IF I were not skilled in the ingenuity of your nature, I should fear your
construction of my silence; but you have done so much your self in defense of
that, as I hope I need not despair of pardon. I shall not pose your belief, if
I tell you that your last Letter, like Xenophon of his Cyrus, rather spoke me
as I should be then as I am: and thus I am beholding to your goodness for
difguising precepts in the shape of praises; from whence I may take as fair a
warning as the Dunce did that was commended into scholarship; thus you have
gently given me a copy to draw by, and I cannot err in my choice, either in
making your words or your self my original. If you meant it not thus, your
affection deceived your judgment, and helped it to pass by disproportions and
deformities, which it could never have overseen, unless by looking with her
optics; and I am contented to dislike my own want of worth, because it cannot
render your opinion justifiable. I wish I could as easily obey as I do
gratefully resent your kind summons to Holt: But we are shortly going to six
nearer you in Lincolnshire, and then it is not unlikely but I may find an
occasion to slip my collar for a day or two, for no man tastes more happiness
in the enjoyment of his friends, then, Sir,

Your really affectionate Brother and servant, R. L.

LETTER CXXIX. To his Sister J.
My dearest Sister,
SUffer this to requite the sweet expressions of thy last, with such, as if
they fall short of an equal kindness, it is not the fault of the heart that
means, but the head that indites them, and be confident thou art still as dear
unto me as thy wishes can fancy me; and (to speak it better) as thy own
language has made my self to thee. I do pattern thy own resentments in thy own
behalf, that thou can not yet recover thy health; but Providence has made us
parallels in affliction as well as in affection, and I fear borrowed from the
same unfortunate cause, etc. though the effect be different; for my malady
still haunts me like a Familiar, and spoils my familiarity with all the world
beside: if this Spring restores my health, as I am resolved to struggle hard
for it, I shall soon let thee see that my longing to see thee, and my friends
about thee, is as passionate as thine, but I am loath to come till I bring my
self along with me; and though my affairs here be none of the weightiest, yet,
I thank those that contrive them, they are urgent. I am not idle, though yet
unsuccesful in thy behalf. In the mean time, freely enjoy thine own, and let
what thou have help thee to hug thy self; and be sure thou shall be happy, if
it lie in his power to make thee so, that is

Thine for ever, R. L.

LETTER CXXX.
Loving Brother,
WHile I was most happy in the converse of the most ingenious and communicable
spirits, I would have called your silence unkind, but now I sojourn in a Land
of strangers, it cannot be called less than uncharitable; for though I am very
civilly used from the top to the toe of this numerous Family, yet in this
throng I am forced to find out solitude, none here being made of better Clay
than will render them fit instruments for Houshold-affaires; and I confess I
would be glad to overtake other qualities in him I fasten on with a stronger
tie than the ordinary slipping knots of faint acquaintance.

I remember in your last (since which you have had three from me) you desired
news; then there was none stirring that deserved your knowledge, and now we
are gotten so far out of Fames way, that (bating the Northern occurrences)
she brings us nothing before it be stale with the rest of the Kingdom. This
stupendous Victory of C. against the perfidious Scots, has made our Town of
Nottingham an entire Gaol. Indeed the delight I formerly took in writing news
to my Friends has lost much of its former reputation with me; my most liquid
discoveries, as I thought, of undoubted truths have so often been confu^ed, that
I would not have my Friends take it ill, if henceforth I prevent the censure of
a weak judgment, by forbearing to give them any more uncertain hopes and
fears by such relations. My simplicity suffered me a long time to be cheated
with that general error that gulls the whole heard of vulgar understandings; I
weighed appearances in the common balance, my Imagination took the print of
things from my outward senses, and I judged the constitution of affairs by
their false complexion: But at length, perceiving how wide I shot at events,
and what amazing effects started from unobserved causes, I found not only my
inconsiderable self, but many that made a brighter show, and a greater noise in
the World with their quality and parts, had been caught in the same nooze, and
were still liable to the same abuse at last. I resolved to try whether I could
learn to see without that Glass that had so often falsifi'd the Object; at
length, by the illustration of some clear Judgments, (whose acquaintance I won
by inches) I arrived at this glimmering:

There is a certain sort of active men, grown main actors upon one Stage, that
only appear in their perfect shape to one another, to the World a homely
outside hides an outlandish lining. Their Education has stored them with
Principles of excellent Learning, a Taper they always keep in a dark Lanthorn,
and either show or hide it, as the season of opportunity, the nature of
affairs, and the inclination of Persons with whom they treat do either prompt
or prohibit. They are the most exact Students of men, the nimblest diverse into
dispositions, the happiest in insinuation, and the cunningest in compliance
with all humors under Heaven. In fine, they appear to every inclination in the
same shape the predominant humor delights in; and with a provident policy and
dexterous contrivance, not only make the virtues, but even the vices of their
active acquaintance serviceable to their main design: no doubt they were
furnished with better reasons than you are like to have of me why they waved the
Kings party, and adhered to this; such as the short arms of my conjecture could
fathom are these: First, they knew a Parliament so universally desired as this
could not choose but be strong in popular reputation, especially having indear'd
it self to them by that excellent beginning of removing unjust pressures from
the shoulders of the suffering subject, by finding out abuses, and abusers of
the Government, and by promising that same costly word of Reformation both in
Church and State. Secondly, They knew they could hope for no Harvest of their
endeavors, till they had sown pleasing and plausible insinuations in the ears
of the inferior rank: the Royalists they knew were no fit Soil to entertain
this seed; they of the lower Region being incapable of, and repugnant to any
apprehension that at first gaze did not appear a visible aid to the cause that
unsheathed their Swords; besides their too free and open hearts, their careless
and (indeed) dissolute carriage, rendered them unfit to be trusted with any
notion that demanded silence; and on those of eminent degree they had as little
hope to fasten their designs, for besides that they hated any thing that but
smelt of their best bait Innovation, they wanted unanimity, (the main Pillar
that should prop such undertakings) for the study of advancing peculiar
interest, feeding the insatiate appetite of private ambition, indiscreet
competition for priority, quarrels, and hunting profit and pleasure with too
hot a sent, were the sad causes of that unfortunate parties undoing, and the
reasons why these subtle Engeneers found them unfit instruments to advantage
their obstruse intentions. Thirdly, On the other side, they met with materials
aptly disposed to take that Impresse they thought fit cunningly to leave upon
the soft wax of their tender consciences; they were furnished with ready
Mathematics, to take the height and latitude of these spirits, which were as
fit to carry on their design, as a general discontent with the Government that
was uppermost, a vehement desire of Innovation, the repair of ruinous fortunes,
and the loud fame of a glorious victory (inscribed with Religion and liberty)
could make them. Fourthly, They had the inexhaustible Treasure of the Kingdom
at command, which they could renew at pleasure with the indispensible edict of
an Ordinance: with this unresistible Engine they battered their enemies
fidelity, bargained for their strong holds, and even bought those victories
that have cost the World so much astonishment; nothing being so injurious to
the Kings substantial rights as his own Pictures.

To display the cunning these creatures used in spreading their nets, to give
you a plat of the intricate and oblique Path they trod to their designs, with
what outward vehemence they at first declaimed against what they really aimed
at; how, like cunning Hawks at the first whistling off, they seemed to fly from
the Game they intended to fly at; lastly, what Religion they intend to usher in
by the toleration of tender Consciences, why they lately crept into the shape
and outward Profession of Levellers, etc. I should make a volume of a Letter;
and what follows does ask a more ingenious and judicious Pen to delineate.

I thought it not unfit to give you this rude draught of my observation and
informations; you have here certainties and conjectures blended. I would not
have ventured them abroad in this ruffled undrest fashion, but that I hope you
will only look upon them with the eye of affection, and so lay them by;
however show not their imperfections to any critical or censorious eye, for it
was hudled up in have, and wants the beauty of method and Language.

I am now about to give an eager onset to the study of Physic, in which I
conceive by this time you have more than a taste: you cannot do me a more
acceptable kindness than to vouchsafe your instructions, and impart your
collections unto me; and I presume you make no question but that they will
safely be returned, with the interest of true thanks from

Your truly affectionate, but now sleepy Brother, R. L.

LETTER CXXXI. To --
SIR,
IF reality needed an artificial dress, I would strive to put the
acknowledgement of your last favor in the best attire I could cull from
Rhetoricks Wardrobe: but the true affection of a Friend is not so light a
Huswife, to jet it in gaudy borrowed attire, such as the times politicians
strive to cloth her Counterseits with: I use no fiction when I say I love and
honor you; no supple flattery, when in plain terms I thank you; and of both I
hope you are so well assured, as I do but injure your goodness to repeat them.
That I trouble you with these blots, pardon it; and be pleased to think, I had
rather merit the guilt of importunity then neglect: had I thought my personal
appearance could have been serviceable to you, I had gladly taken my
Pen-imployment upon my self. I am loath that any slighted opportunity should
accuse me of neglect to him I owe so much to. I could pursue this subject with
such delight as, non sic virginibus flores, non frugibus imbres; but I fear I
have ranged too far, and my Pen has already too well shown from what wing it
derives its pedigree. I shall not therefore farther tempt your patience, but
humbly subscribe my self, Sir,

Your most faithful Servant, R. L.

LETTER CXXXII.
Loving Brother,
I Must take my self off with the old excuse for my last weeks failing, viz.
employment; and preventions of this nature must be digested, since the weak
brain of my estate will not suffer me to be my own man. I am sorry for the
miscariage of your Colors; if you desire to have any more, let your next tell
me so, and I shall take a securer course for the conveyance. For these petty
services, I would not have you disparage our friendship so much as to name
them: it is fit we should resign such Ceremonies to those cold-hearted Creatures
that love to sell their kindnesses, and have a balance to weigh before they
deliver them. Nor let the flame of our amity be of an ethereal nature, always
true to an equality of heat and measure. Methinks the Poets should have meant
such a fire as this for that which Promotheus stole from Heaven; and they that
have virtue enough to stay it from evaporation may carry it thither again;
while the other is kept alive with the course fuel of commodity, and as that
flows or ebbs, so does it blaze or languish, till at last it swounds away in a
socket. But I have talked so much upon this subject, and so often, that I doubt
my repetitions may purchase me the account of a Confider. And now to sprinkle a
little news; on Saturday last the fortunate and victorious Governor of
Ireland, invited with as much Rhetorical importunity as the high opinion of his
fortune and valor, joined with the suspicion of appearing dangers could
indite, was conducted into London with a specious solemnity, and there had a
loud welcome roared him by the comfort of Guns, Drums, and Voices; from the
City he received a Present of about 2000 l. value, delivered with abundance of
creeping thanks for his faithful gallantry. On Monday following, with a
numerous train of creatures and admirers, he entered the House of Commons,
where the Speaker welcomed him with a speech that tendered the thanks of the
House, imbroider'd with lofty Praises, a rehearsal of his most signal services
done both here and beyond the channel, mingled with the relation of his
Pedigree; whereto he added, how much his Discretion, Fidelity, Religion, Policy
and Fortitude, had innobled the sleeping ashes of his famous ancestors; and
closed with the cause of his invitation, told him that he had no sooner named
what he had already done, but by the universal desire of the House he was to
proffer him occasion of improving his own merit with their gratitude; telling
him that he had received Letters from their Low-Countrey-Agent that assured him
of the certain agreement 'twixt the King of Scotland and his subjects; that
there was nothing wanting but a wind to waft him thither, and in all
probability being once seated there, he would not long sit still contented with
that Crown; and concluded with the choice the House had made of him to command
their Army Northward: who returned his high resentment of their favors in a
short modest speech, wherein he strived to extenuate his services, and to
express his resolutions to spend his dearest blood in the service of his
Country. This is all that time will grant me leave, but only that I am, and
ever must be, cordially,

Yours to love and serve you, R. L.

LETTER CXXXIII. To Mr. W.
SIR,
I Am well satisfied concerning your love, by your last missive, which withal
brought me the acceptable account of your health and best prosperity. Whether
this will find you out or no, is very uncertain; yet, to exercise my affection,
and to quiet my heart, I took up a resolution to write, though the Letter
perish in the midst of the Alps. That long intercourse this way between us
has begotten in me both fears and hopes; which yet are not liable to
exception, because they flow from that limpid spring which was never mudded
with self-interest. I prized you for your virtues, and that sympathetical
temper which I discerned in you, beyond which I had no eye; and yet I am secure
in all my applications. But what does my friend in those remoter Countries thus
long? why must Belgia and Italy have so much of you, and England so little?
what curiosities do you search for? what actions do you design? and what
improvements do you attend? I will not believe you like him in the Poet,
Securus quo pes ferat -- and that you do ex tempore vivere. I have heard that a
woman has been defined -- Ens Ovismatum; but this is not applicable to a wise
man, who paceth the World with judgment, and asks upon every remove -- Cui bono
-- Not that I desire to enter into your Cabinet at this distance, for I know
you are arrived at that of the old Roman Courtier -- Gli pensieri stretti and
il viso suotto. You can English it better then I; notwithstanding I wish my
self sometimes better acquainted with the project, that I may serve you better.
I am buffeted with the whispers of men, that Thames has swallowed Tyber, and
that my English friend is Roman all over. Will you credit me? this I deem a
witty suggestion of an enemy, which I can answer without you; yet to raze this
to the foundation, I call for your help. It cannot be that we should vary here,
when in those highest concernments we have been always one -- Et quoad rem, and
quoad modum; but enough of this. Your friends are yet alive both here and
elsewhere; but the Orb of Learning has lost of late stars of the first
magnitude, Dr. Collins and Dr. Cumber; the former had his Apotheosis a year
since, the later is commemorated this day. Thus things and persons die, but the
Lord abides for ever; to him let us direct our thoughts and services, and by
his revealed truth alone let us measure our best way to eternity -- which you
pray that I may find. If I hear no more from you, yet know that you live in my
heart and prayers, and that the varieties of Providence cannot alienate from you

Your own, R. L.

LETTER CXXXIV.
Dear Brother,
SInce you are pleased to call that your delight, which with a safe conscience
you might have named your trouble, I mean my tedious lines; I will learn of
affection to make it mine, by a continued supply of that weekly satisfaction.
Since thus, though debarred of a personal interview, our nobler parts that
evidence our immortality, meet, converse, and exchange the dear entertainment
of mutual embraces. I am beholding to your loving error as well as the
World's, for setting my toy at so high a rate: But now for the hard words you
speak of, I know they have made work for some of those Cato's of Language this
Age has hatched, which came with a like intent to the perusal of books, as
Balaam did to view the Army of Israel, on purpose to give them ill language;
and I would fain know of those Censors, if preceding Ages, by a like design,
had not providently inoculated some of the fairest Cions of foreign fruits
upon our English stock, whether our barbarous Tongue would ever have been
comprehensive of such rich and rational expressions, or grown up to that
strength and beauty it now possesses: nor does my judgment deal less severely
then theirs with such rumbling fustian words, big with naught but wind, that
some affect; this were to humor Midas opinion, that preferred Pan's Pipe
before Apollo's Harp, because it made more noise. The word Raillery you
returned me for interpretation, signifies a kind of jesting, scoffing
dissimulation, and is now grown here so common with the better sort, as there
are few of the meaner that are not able to construe it; which makes me wonder
by what mischance it should escape the knowledge of that living Library of
Languages Mr. F. to whom I pray return my service; but he must allow me the
Liberty to think he knows too little of the French to rank it justly with the
rest of his Languages: but enough of that. And I now eagerly wish your proposal
were improved to a resolution of seeing London next Term, since I am more then
half assured we shall not turn our backs upon it till that be expired, and then
whether we shall steer our course Westward or Northward, is not yet concluded
in the thoughts of those that sit at the helm. But I am sorry I cannot wind you
up to any forward expectation in what refers to my Lord R. for I daily perceive
the fruits of my endeavors that way do rather wither then ripen; and I am glad
you are struck in with so friendly a man mender. If you have not taken an oath
of secrecy, I should gladly welcome the participation of those rare Recipe's
you speak of. Major W. is overjoyed at your promise to see London; he says he
hopes to deprecate your censure for neglecting to give you his thanks for your
kind token (which he is very proud of) under his hand. I cannot yet learn by my
inquiry that my Lord W. has any such design for a Plantation as you speak of.
But I have made no conscience of your patience: Dear Brother farewell.

Your own entirely, sincerely, religiously, R. L.

LETTER CXXXV. To Mr. W.
My dearest Friend,
THis should not have contracted an answer to two Letters, if the waiting a
return of some others from Lincolnshire had not retarded my hand; but I know
not how to construe their silence, and cannot tell whether I may call it sloth
or design; however, my hopes are yet big enough to make my judgment
charitable, and till we see more so I would have yours. By this time you have
found out the reason of my hopes to see you on this side the channel, and the
event that defeated them; wherein you have liberty to deride my pur-blind
judgment, that has so much ado to see her, much more to see into the nature
of such affairs; I never could make so strong a Party of Reason, as might keep
out the invasion of over-forward expectations: it is the hardest humane Lesson to
learn to judge aright; which granted, a light reflection upon my weak capacity
will soon get my Pardon, with a promise of endeavor to leave out my Errata's
in the next Impression. And now, my dearest Friend, accept as many thanks, and
as real ones as ever came from a true heart, for jogging my drowsy soul with
those excellent Memento's of virtue and piety; it shows your Friendship has
chosen the best basis, and you desire to cast mine in the same mold: well, my
dear Friend, though the Scholar be very unapt, he loves his Master well, and
especially because he gives such Lessons. I long for that same meeting you
speak of with more impatience than I can well justify, since we must wait
Providence with a total resignation, or else we cannot say that Fat, etc.
Indeed I would fain knock off my bolts here, but would do it so that I might
not afterward repent it. I am still here like a wild Beast in a Gaol, who
though he walks up and down in it all the day, yet at night he is got no
further than where he was in the morning. I am glad with all my soul to find you
the first proposer of L's affairs: I see you are confirmed; and could you read
my heart at this distance, you would see I do not waver; but while here I must
be enslaved, and at least in exterior subjecting self to that same Video
meliora proboque etc. I am as sick of this World as ever poor passenger was of
a storm at Sea, and would bless the hand that could set me ashore, where I
might learn to look upon the vanities of it in their full proportion, and so
despise them. -- I have no cause to boast my health, and the less, because my
disposition comes in such disguise as poses my self and all the World beside. I
am sorry for the loss you dread so passionately; but whatever happens, say but
that same Fiat voluntas, etc. heartily, and all will be well again. I will
never release that promise you have made me, to let me hear from you wherever
you go; for none has more interest in your happiness or misfortunes, than, my
dearest Friend,

Your own for ever R. L.

LETTER CXXXVI. To his Sister F.
Dear Sister,
THough since my Pen last saluted you there has not past a day wherein you have
not found work for my memory, and been concerned in my well-wishes, yet lest
you should give silence the name of neglect (an error familiar with tender
affections.) I am content to think it business enough for a Letter to repeat
what I have so often made the only business of my Pen, and tell you that I
truly love you: this from a stranger perhaps would ask more than a single proof
to be believed not Complement, but from a Brother that has so often showed you
his heart I know you cannot sin so much as to doubt it; and let me say this, to
the commendation of our honest-hearted Family, that though we are below others
in the rich gifts of Fortune and Nature, yet for perfect integrity, unmixt with
what they call politic ends, and sincere spotless affection one to another, we
are not excelled by any that ever yet my observation meddled with; and since it
traded with variety of humors and dispositions, it has not been altogether
pur-blind. If there needed arguments to keep this affectionate temper from a
cold decay, I would strain hard for such as should restore us the beauty of
this lovely loving inclination; but I know there is little want of such
restoratives in you, and I borrow a confidence from experience that bids me say
as much for all the rest: well then, let us still cherish this mutual affection
that makes our souls as near akin as our bodies; for by loving one another, it is
the way to purchase his favor who is Love it self. If there were any
alteration in my condition since you received my last Letter, I should be ready
to let you know it, as one that has no little Interest in me; but while I am
here, my endeavors do but labor like a mil-horse, still repeating their steps
in a circle, always going round, but not a foot forward in the path of
preferment. I am now once more in a course of Physic for my malady, and in
hope it will struggle successfully with it: but I am like to buy these desires
so dear, that to recover my health will sicken my purse; but of the two, it is a
Disease less grievous. I pray present my much affectionate service to my
excellent Aunt H. her good Mother, with the rest of the Family: salute the rest
of my Friends with love or service, as they are due; and to your self, Dear
Sister, take the heart of

Your affectionate Brother R. L.

LETTER CXXXVII. To his Sister J.
Dear Sister,
I Have long forborne to write, out of an hopeful expectation to find thee such
news as might claim a just welcome; but now I am forced to say, that my failing
in thy behalf is added to the rest of my own misfortunes. I suppose my Brother
acquainted thee with my hopes to prefer thee to the Lady A. W. a Lady in whose
praise I will be silent, lest I should too much vex thee with the miss of so
much happiness; and it was a narrow miss, for I procured a Letter from my Lady
to her in thy commendations so soon as I heard her Gentlewoman was to part from
her; upon which the motion was entertained willingly, only (she replied) that
she had entreated her Aunt the Lady W. then at London, to procure her one
there, but she would immediately write her word that she was provided; which
she had no sooner done, but she received news that her Aunt had already agreed
with a Gentlewoman, which was then coming down, and in honor could not be
refused. Thus have my unfortunate endeavors born thee no other fruit than
false hopes indeed; this failing does the more afflict me, because I know the
value of what is mist; though we should besides have lived most of this Winter
together in a house, a thing so passionately desired of us both: but we must
not repine too much at cross events, lest in it we upbraid Providence; the
younger Sister does yet take none, but when she does thou art sure to have it.
Mr. W. in whom I reposed most hopes to effect thy desires, is now out of the
Kingdom; besides, our residing in this barren Country will much disable my
industry in thy behalf. I shall conclude with such advice as I believe thy
discreet goodness does daily practice, be still the same thou ever were, of a
sweet virtuous winning carriage, ready to pleasure all, loath to offend any, and
thou will engage even Incivility it self to use thee civilly, and Inconstancy
to love thee constantly: keep still the complexion of Lillies in thy innocence,
and of Roses in thy modesty; for if once sullied, the water is hardly purchased
that will restore its whiteness: thy disposition was always intimate with
virtue; endeavor daily to improve the amity, and trust Heaven with the rest,
whose blessings, though they be long a coming, will richly pay thy patience:
lose not a grain of that pleasant temper which makes thy company so much
courted; for there is nothing so happy here, as those calm souls that can make
unforced smiles shine through a harmless jollity. But thou art born to too rich
a goodness to need the charity of my weak advice: but give me my Present back
again, and I will take it kindly; and be sure you love me truly, or else you
will die much in the debt of

Your truly affectionate Brother, R. L.

LETTER CXXXVIII. To his Sister K. L.
Dear Sister,
HAd I met with any thing that might justly have deserved thy a^quaintance, my
hand could not have been so slothful to withhold thee from that knowledge: but
concerning my self, though my endeavors have not proved altogether fruitless,
yet I cannot say their success has answered my wishes; but be assured, if kind
Providence favor my designs, I will own no good fortune but what you shall
claim a share in. I shall be suddenly called by my affairs to Yarmouth, and if
I see you not before my return, it shall be the unkindness of my urgent
occasions, not my own neglect. To conclude, if ever Fortune be disposed to
smile upon me, I shall not debar my Friends of its reflection, in the number
of which thy active affection has deserved a place in the former rank; and in
that persuasion I remain

Thy constant affectionate Brother, R. L.

LETTER CXXXIX.
Dear Brother,
THough my present employment be something pressing and importunate, yet it
cannot dissuade a reply to you with all the Arguments that Business ca^ urge;
for to hold my peace because time will not allow my fancy elbow-room, is to be
confuted in Friendship, and non-plust in the proofs of affection. I confess I
love a little to be posed in these Lessons, to inure my Faculties as well to
violent as gentle Exercise, and teach my Pen to run races as well as walk
gravely. Promptitude in dispatch, when it keeps a fit distance to
precipitation, often commits a happy rape upon preferment, and takes Reputation
by surprizal; while that serious exactness that weighes and poyses every hair
and grain, does but clamber to that which the other flies at; and I think the
maxim is equally fitted to this and Fowling, the first aim is best. But I
should call back and unsay these words, because I have hastily shot so wide
from the purpose; yet to you I dare draw my thoughts with bold strokes. I thank
you for your last enclosed, though my intentions of printing my Letters be
deferred till Trinity, if not till Michaelmas Term, by the late interposition
of some Commands that have engaged my Quill, etc. Whoever of my friends you
encounter in your Journey, pray give them my respects in a due proportion. You
seem to hint some design of your own by the way that may prove advantageous; I
shall be happy to hear it disclosed, because by that time I suppose it will be
succesfully effected; for I perceive you are master of that old prudential
maxim, Neve to reveal a design, whilst it is in a capacity of failing. I
cannot choose but applaud your happy blending of the Christian and Politician;
which gives you a buckler of caution to defend your self, but not a revenging
weapon to return blow for blow. If you see my Sister F. before your return,
present me to her with much affection. The Major sends you his affectionate
respects, and bids me mind you of a promise to send him some Pictures upon
Muscovy-glasses. I told you at first I was in have, but have confuted my self
by the tedious progress; but you know how to pardon all faults of this nature

To your entirely affectionate Brother to command, R. L.

LETTER CXL. To W. A. Esquire
SIR,
MY last did but pay the obligation of my word; so your million of thanks are
ill laid out for what you might challenge as yours: yet I love the reward,
though no due, so dearly, as I should embrace the power with much indulgence,
and use it with as much Industry in your service, that might help to deserve
them. It was assurance enough of my safety, that it had a harbor in all your
well wishes; for which my stupid weakness cannot find a better present
requital, than really to wish they may effectually recoyl upon your selves, in
which you shall but reap the fruit your fair deserts have planted, etc. I dare
boldly affirm, you may promise your self as much safety here, as in any part of
the Kingdom. In the mean time, if I may be instructed how to serve you here, be
assured, I will find out a no mean delight in the employment. I pray present my
most humble service to that gallant Family, those fragrant buds of beauty in
particular, whose happy society is armor of proof against melancholy, and adds
wings to times feathered offspring: to each of which, I think it will prove no
unwelcom Office to you, to reduplicate the old token; but lest my trifles
should prove the trial of your patience, I will put a period to them; but never
to my resolution, to remain,

Yours, R. L.

LETTER CXLI.
My dear Brother,
I Can scarce credit it, that you have quitted Holt, (though the Post tells me
so) since so many of mine dispatched to Berningham have not been able to rowse
you to an answer, yet I have always found you so forward in repaying these
literal debts at your day, as I begin to suspect, that my two last which were
sent to welcome you home, came to congratulate your recovery, either perished or
loiter'd too long by the way, which has induced me to shoot this shaft after
the rest, and hazard the solescisme of a repetition to tell you again, that I
have celebrated your return to health, with as perfect a gladness as the
dearest and clearest amity ever yet brought forth. But now let me beg you will
hold me no longer in a painful suspense, nor defraud my longing to see your
perfect recovery confirmed by your own hand; for believe it, my wishes have
deserved that satisfaction, and indeed have laid out themselves for your
welfare, with a zeal so industrious, as if it had not only been my Interest,
but propriety, and mine own vital thread been inseparably twisted with yours:
for my self, I can neither say I have bin sick ^or very well, since I saw you,
but rather in that ^ame mingled condition, compounded of health and sickness;
but a customary experience has so familiariz'd me with that valetudinary
temper, that a little patience serves to man the Works against all those faint
Batteries. We are here in London, where I think we shall fasten for most part
of this ensuing Summer. I still tread the old Circle, without any visible
improvement or impairing, and would be glad to understand upon what legs your
affairs walk in reference to your Interest at B. I am earnestly provoked by
some of my friends to print a volume of Letters, to which at last I have
consented, though not without much distrust of the worlds approvement; however,
I cannot lose what I never had, I mean much reputation. I remember your Pen
once told me, you had preserved all such fragments as fell from mine by way of
Letters to your self; I never prized them so high, as to reserve their Copies,
yet in this design I suppose they may do me some service, though I intend not
to print the fourth part of what is there expressed. I pray do me the favor
therefore with your most expedite convenience to seal them all up carefully,
and direct them to me at one Mr. G's. in -- for that is now the Rendezvous of
my Letters, since my Landlords death in Holborn. Well, dear Brother, pardon
this have that crowds forth my words in a misshapen form, because they could not
stay for a mature conception, indeed much dreading Mr. A. should be gone
without my Letter; but I will requite your patience in my next, and now hastily
subscribe, Dear Brother,

Your own cordially, R. L.

LETTER CXLII. To Mr. E. A.
Dear Ned,
TO speak the full excuse of my silence were to give you a list of my
Countrey-adventures, and to describe the chains of my leisure link by link. But
that there may be room enough for something else, take it thus in contract; Our
Family was scarce settled in the Country before it caught the headache, and
began to grow dizzy by the sickness of my Lord and Lady, who still languish of
this new Disease, that has almost engrossed all the business of Fate, and kills
by Monopoly: if you saw what epidemick havoc it makes in these parts, you
would think every Parish changed into a great Hospital, and every person the
Physicians feesimple, either in possession or reversion; for my self, I have
been all this time in an Emblematick battle, where some are still dropping
round about me, though my self be yet shotfree: whether I shall pass the Pikes
safely is beyond the reach of my knowledge for Diseases, especially of this
nature, give so little warning as the arrow is in us before we know the bow is
bent; but among so many Patients at last, I have found leisure to be the agent
of my own affection, and an opportunity to tell you, that it should be your
fault, if our revived amity do ever relapse into another Lethargy. And now dear
N. how do thou? have thou yet unsheathed thy Family of the Chamber? I would
fain hear thou art crowned King of Elisium, and the honest souls of thy
acquaintance like good subjects, conglomerate to pay their homage, and drink
allegiance. I could wish to die to this dull Country, that I might be enrolled
one of thy Guests of good Fellowship; for we have none but such clods here in
the shape of men, as by a forced imitation to hold up Converse. I am in danger
to go out of my wits for want of exercise, yet never incur the aspersion of
madness, but a weekly Dialogue which your Pen may prove a Sovereign
preservation against such stupid contagion; but it is time to leave prating.
Present me cordially to virtuous Mrs. A. kindly to Mr. N. and to your self,
take me entirely, Sir,

Your own, R. L.

LETTER CXLIII. To his Brother Major W.
Dear Brother,
IF like a slow paymaster I have too often adjourned the performance of my
promise, call it not coldness of respect or affection, for of those to you I
can never be guilty; but if I do not give you a sound reason for my silence,
think it comes from a sick head, and let that satisfy; for ever since I entered
this dull and unwholsom Country, that daily puts on the morning wascot of a
fog, I have been such an useless thing to my self and others, as if I had left
my soul behind me at London, and only lived at the charge of my sensitive
faculty; and I have suffered such an amphibious interthing betwixt health and
sickness, as it has posed me to christen it. I have had such a languishing pain
in the head, ever since my arrival, with such a drowsiness to boot, as if the
Heavens had mingled poppy with their dew, and shed it upon this Climate; and I
have slept like a Snake in winter to that excess, as nothing but a Lethargy
which I half feared could out do it; but quantus quantus sum, I am still yours
at the same height and vigor of affection, as when the double discovery of
your excellent qualities and inclinations to love me, first finished the
fabric of our friendship, and took me in your toils; and though there may be
allowed an Infancy, and a pubescency in friendship, yet when once it has
climbed by degrees to the full stature, none but bastard affections can grow
old and show their wrinkles, as the scars of time or accident, since that
friendship that is not ever equal, uniform and constant, was never so; but you
shall ever find it invulnerable from him that will cease to be himself, if not

Yours in service and true friendship, R. L.

LETTER CXLIV. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
NOthing but impossibility could have forced me to intermit my weekly salute;
for the last week we consumed at my Lord of Westmerlands in Kent, where my Lady
suffered her resolutions of a short stay to be overcome by the importunities of
a gentile entertainment: my affection has as great a quarrel to the narrowness
of my expressions as yours, and does even upbraid my Pen with the disgraces
that its ill guidance puts upon it; but it is well I am not able to draw it in
its full dimensions, lest the abundance should discredit the reality, and even
pose your belief into suspicion with the incredible quantity. But upon better
thoughts, I could be angry with my self for suffering such words to get loose
from my Pen, and could willingly punish them with a great blot, if I had time
to write new ones; for I am confident you do match me too well with the same
materials to doubt its purity, and we never wonder at any thing that we can
pattern in our selves: your flint is a true Emblem of perfect friendship,
which in the bosom carries fire ready to start forth at the summons of
occasion: how soon I would obey such an alarm to serve you, I hope you will
find proved in my future endeavors; but I have not skill enough to add beauty
to that which never had a blemish. My old Cough, with a great cold to boot, do
constrain me at this time to be bad Company, which you may easily perceive by
the languor of my style: this Cough I find has lately fed upon my flesh, and
carried away enough from the poor store I had to make me doubt a Consumption;
but whatsoever the hand of Heaven sends me I shall endeavor to bid welcome. I
pray let us not fail in our intercourse while we are so near. My present
indisposition, with some have beside, will let me say no more, but that I am
and ever will be,

Your own to love and serve you, R. L.

LETTER CXLV. To Mr. J. G.
Houest Mr. J.
I Acknowledge the receipt of yours, with a Diurnal, Proverbs, and Tobacco,
besides many other preceding civilities and courtesies; which believe it have
rendered me perfectly yours. You may safely take my word, this is really meant
and will be as cordially confirmed when any occasion shall becken me to it. We
are arrivd at our Country habitation, where, in a double sense we may be said
to be out of the lines of communication: we dwell at large, and people it, as
our forefathers colloniz'd the World in its Nonage; Melancholy, that they
wanted partners in their vast possessions: and thus like the Children of
Israel, we are come out of Egypt into the Wilderness, only we have the
fleshpots still, and therefore none of the Manna. This Country is so barren
of good company, though fruitful of all things else, that even tired out with
solitude I am forced sometimes to make shift with the Parson of the Parish, and
he more then half a Presbyterian, you will say that is a hard case for one that
has been used to Mr. G's company. But I confess these defects are not ill
supplied by my dumb society. Besides Books, we have good Horses, handsome
Walks, pleasing Groves, which represent variety of objects, and they Idaea's
enough to make Fancy a good companion, and Thoughts my recreation. By the help
of them I often remove London into the Country, and enjoy the friends I left
behind as well as fancy can present them, in the foremost rank of which Mr. G.
is placed. Pray render me very kindly to Captain Wh. and tell him when I see
the Major, I shall not forget to speak his desires. Mention me kindly to honest
P. Mr. A. and the rest that know me, and to your self, take me as I must ever be

Your real friend, R. L.

LETTER CXLVI. To Major W.
Dear Brother,
I Shall not need strain a sinew in my invention to frame an excuse for
deluding your expectations of me at Holt: for as if we had left London on
purpose to come and take up diseases in the Country, and Pandora had staid the
second opening of her box till our coming: our Family has been so infested
with that they call the New-disease, which like the Elements blended in the
Chaos, is but an accumulation of all other maladies, as they have made me a
Prisoner, though not yet a Patient, and disabled me to point at the time when I
may be in case to be as good as my word. This disease is of late grown more
cruel then ordinary, and become the Messenger of Fate to many Persons of
quality, amongst which it has murdered Mr. R. F. your old acquaintance, but I
hope it will use my Lord and Lady more gently, who are both sick of it at this
present. And now my dear Brother, since I cannot see you, let me beg this
satisfaction from your Pen, to let me know how your self and the rest of my
friends enjoy your selves, and health, both in community and particular, how
the air, company, and entertainment of Holt arrides your liking, and how much
of the Winter you design upon that Climate; when and how long the Cardinal was
with you, from whom I have not received a syllable since our parting. Let yours
give me the condition of my friends in reference to this Epidemick Malady,
among whom pray distribute my affectionate respects. Speak me cordially to my
Brother and Sister W. Sister F. etc. and to your self promise all that is due
to a perfect friend from, Dear Brother,

Eternally your own to dispose of, R. L.

LETTER CXLVII.
SIR,
I Must not give you cause to suspect I can forget you by the neglect of so
fair an opportunity to kiss your hands with a Letter; but I confess I had rather
(if there were no Remora) have taken my Pens employment upon my self: how often
have I wished for a Mercurial Caducaeus to insomniate the Argus-eyes of jealous
people, that I might safely steal a visit, and with it the enjoyment of your
happy society? till when I shall account my self but a slave to that piece of
liberty I now am Master of, since its narrow limits shut out a large share of
my highly-valued happiness. The malice of the times extends beyond the
suspensation of estates, to the separation of friends, yet they cannot be truly
said to be absent, whose freeborn souls (not enslaved to the bodies restraint)
can hold a mutual commerce and an intelligential converse one with another; nor
can I so much distrust Providence, as to suspect this corporal sequestration
can prove an utter privation. My deceiving fancy sometimes in a slumber strives
to make me believe I am at L. yet in the dream it self I suspect it is but a
dream. I could wish, methinks, that Plato's year were no fiction, so the
revolution might be speedy, and we again happily revise and live in the
Sunshine of our former Halcion days, Sed jam deserunt ut omnia Mortalium
assolent. --

I cannot dart my thoughts so eagerly upon other things as to lose a
restraining power of calling them home to the memory of my friends, and they
are best employed in absence when they help to draw themselves in white and
black. I am not of that Philosophers opinion who affirmed Silena could not
hurt, for too much is a disease in love, and helps to intomb friendship in the
dark Grove of Oblivion, when the dumb Language of a Pen can, like the Phaenix,
remove it from its own ashes, and keep it strong and healthful, etc. --

By the World those are accounted the only Cowards, which dare not do that
which is ill; which concludes no such solecism in policy, as the entire
friendship twixt tongue and heart. Honesty is grown ridiculous, Integrity
scofft at, and amity it self never found so few friends. Those intentions are
contemptibly thought mean, and shallow; with whose virtuous rectitude,
Meandrous falsehood is inconsistent; the Worlds erroneous Estimation has married
Virtue to Caution, Justice to Self-injury, Religion to a Scarcrow, Honesty to
Self-deceit, Faith to Folly, for the execution of particular ends, Vice
filtches Virtues apparel, though her want of skill in wearing them often
discovers her imposturous deformities, whilst thus Reasons eye is put out, or
at least blinded; the souls mortality forgotten, and the Almighty rejected, and
eternity disrespected, this Pigmy statur'd life, is the only Idol we wickedly
adore, the oblations to which are the many horrid Acheloon shapes, our
serpentine wills and actions are transformed to still, to reserve and increase
our Cornucopia, what long-breathed flatteries perfumed with fictious Rhetoric,
we ventilate the warmth of great men's favors, in the Sunshine of whose smiles
we play like flies, buzzing forth our own shames and virtues injuries.

R. L.

LETTER CXLVIII. To Mr. W.
My dearest Friend,
I Lately received your last of the sixteenth of November, for though our
Letters glide nimbly when they are once aboard, yet they do but crawl by land,
and contrary to natural violent motions, do make least haste when they are
nearest their journeys end, and I have nothing to say to your overprizing my
barren endeavors in your behalf, and undervaling your own, but only to
entreat you to call to your own knowledge for the true definition of perfect
amity, and that will tell you I am the indebted person, and the occasions you
have given me to serve. You have instructed me to set so many steps toward my
own happiness. But now, my dear friend, I would I could find it fit to leave
the rest out, and if I had not cause to love you for discretion as well as
goodness, I confess I should leave you to know this accident from some other
Quill; but I know you are skilful in all the dictates of wisdom, and can
balance mortal accidents without oppressing the scale with too much passion:
this gives me more confidence to tell you I received a late Letter from my
Brother, whom I engaged to send me an account of your friends, which tells me
that your father fell sick upon the sixteenth of September of a Flux, and left
the World the tenth of October; and now I conjure you by all those clear proofs
of your prudent temper, and (to speak something for my own ends as well as
yours) by my interest in you, to preserve us both from the injuries of an
over-sad resentment: you have all the reason that I can urge, and much more,
why you should not abandon your self to an immoderate sorrow, and therefore I
will throw no more drops into your Ocean, only this, do not chew the Pill that
will work better if you swallow it, etc. Your Sister seemed much to bewail your
absence at such a time, and desired my Brother, who presents his affectionate
service to you, to use some means to let you know this, and entreat you would
entertain no prejudicial conceit of her self or her Husband. Let me entreat you
to answer this as soon as you can, and tell me what I may do further to serve
you: if you love your self and me, let not sadness shrink your spirits, but let
us reserve our selves for that same happy meeting you speak of. I confess I do
more than suspect a Consumption, and if that be designed to fetch me from this
World, I think I shall go without reluctance; for I have already received
enough of the Divine hand to make me admire his bounty: but I have fair hopes
of a recovery. Well, my dear Friend, you know how to be happy in spite of this
World; and that you would be so, is the earnest entreaty of

Yours Eternally, R. L.

LETTER CXLIX. To his Brother Mr. A. L.
Loving Brother,
I Think Providence has given a larger Commission to Fortune than formerly; for
I confess I was nipt with the same Passion you complain of, viz. the unkindness
of Oblivion: now I see 'twas caused by the straggling of our Letters; mine were
sent by W. out of Lincolnshire, and because they promised a faithful care in
their deliverance, I thought it a better way for expedition, than to send them
about by London; but it seems Haste brought forth her blind child Error.
Yours, after my expectations had lost many longings (as if they had stayed for
one another company) came almost all together; and that is my Landlords fault,
for which I shall school him: but we have as little cause to lay the injuries
of Chance to one another charge, as to quarrel with a River, because some
adventitious Dam forbids the freedom of its course. If there be a possibility
to raise such pure and unmixt desires from our souls, as will not be daubed
with the clay they are confined to, I have such to ask and claim your
Friendship; and thus in spite of all our Leaden frailty, we may take a taste of
Heaven, and relish the joys we cry up with such impotent expressions in that
one word perfect amity. I do now begin to be so unweildy to my self, and I
doubt so troublesome to others, (though they express not so much) that I borrow
reasons from my Capital infirmities, to excuse those you may account the
Disease of my mind, etc. But if this trouble be designed to fetch me from this
World, I think I shall go without reluctance. I am still here (in relation to
my dependency) like an unskilful Passenger at Sea, that knows not how long to
promise himself a calm, nor when to expect a storm. If I may vant to have
pleased in any thing, it is my fidelity, which amounts to no more than You have
done as becomes you. I am glad I was not born to stand at the Stern of an
ample fortune, (to favor my self the best I can) I should have abused the
Divine bounty, and perhaps employed it chiefly in paying dearer for my sins
than I have done. I have received enough to make me admire the goodness of him
that gave it me; and indeed, did not his grace help me to contrary thoughts,
'twere enough to make me an unequal Arbiter of mine own imperfections: to act
such conceptions as these, is a business to which we should sacrifice no cold
endeavors, and we live to no purpose, unless in this life we learn to bid it
adieu handsomely. Doing well is the only requisite mark of man's Industry; and he
that aims at any other mistakes that for a white which is but a spot: there
are so many examples of such as angle here for happiness (and sometimes with
ruin to boot) as methinks to observe, should be enough to take heed how many
mount Fortunes ladder, and break the staves as they go up, so as they have no
way to come down but by a Precipice; many shoot wide, and perhaps hit most
happiness by missing what they fancied for it. I could mention more mistakers:
but to close it, there is no man studies the other life better than he that
studies this enough to despise it. It is not my desire to be understood skilful
in this Science; for I am bound to confess my self subject to most wicked
reluctations; and there pass few hours that are not witnesses not only to
stumblings, but gross falls from my best resolutions: but I want your pardon.
I thank you for the account of my Friends, which I desire you would renew, as
you are hinted by any extraordinary accidents. I have this day wrote the sad
news to Mr. W. but I confess left out some of the Circumstances, lest he
should chew the bitter Pill too much that he ought to swallow. I have presented
you to him, as you ordered and mentioned your endeavors for his satisfaction.
I have been so often called away while I was writing this, as it is no wonder if
my words sit not handsomely upon my meaning, when I am forced to make so many
seames. I pray present me to those friends that oblige me with remembrance in a
grateful garb; and believe it, for it is truth it self, you are first in the
soul of

Your affectionate and most desirous Brother to serve you, R. L.

LETTER CL. To Mr. W.
Dear Friend,
YOur last I received, which by the date I perceive has halted by the way like
some of his Predecessors: but it had not half done its message to my eyes,
before I confessed an ample amends for the loitering; and if there be a word that
may speak more then welcome, conceive it uttered, for indeed it is meant. I see
you have made use of that which has made you always happy, to sustain the
shock of what might have staggered a resolution less fortified with prudence;
and I wish my power were as great as my desire, to copy that and the rest: so
long as you compound and apply these sovereign medicines of piety and
discretion, it is impossible your better part should grow sickly, etc. I
enclosed the Note to your Sister in a Letter to my Brother, and obliged him to
be very careful in sending it, and to show her the way to return you an answer
of it to my hands. If no weighty impediment intervenes, I intend to visit my
Eastern friends about the beginning of April; therefore I pray prepare your
commands. And now, my dear friend, I find my health tendered by your with such
an overflowing of affection, as it has taught me to wish it with the more
ardour, because I may possible encounter with occasions that may render me able
to show how highly I relish such an indearing kindness. But pardon me, it is more
then I can do, when I write to you, not to be guilty of too many words, so loath
I am to come to an end; but my comfort is, you know me for what I am,

Yours to perpetuity, R. L.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following, with others, are printed for Nath.
Brook, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotions.
THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
Ancient Fathers, in Answer to Dr. Van 's Lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesensale Esquire, Octavo. 2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio. 3. The
Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from the
Laity at the Lords Table, by D Featly, D. D. Quarto. 4. The Quakers Cause at
second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets. 5. Re-assertion of Grace:
Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the Gospel: a reply to Mr. An^hony
Burghess Vindiciae L^gis, and to Mr. Ruthford, by Robert Town. 6. Anabaptists
anatomized and silenced: or a Dispute with Mr. Tombs, by Mr. J. Grag; where all
may receive clear satisfaction in that Controversy. The best extant, Octavo.
7. The Zealous Magistrate; a Sermon by T. Threscot, Quarto. 8. Britannia
Rediviva. A Sermon before the Judges, Aug. 1648. by J. Shaw Minister of Hull.
9. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March 24. by J. Shaw. 10.
Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or Man, in
several Sermons; by J. Webster, Quarto. 11. Isreal's Redemption, or, the
Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on Earth; by R. Matton. 12. The
Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneness; or, a more hopeful way to
Grace and Salvation; by R. Young. Octavo. 13. A Bridle for the Times, tending
to still the murmuring, to settle the wavering, to stay the wandering, and to
strengthen the fainting: by J. Brinsl^y of Yarmouth. 14. The sum of Practical
Divinity: or, the grounds of Religion in a Catechistical way, by Mr.
Christopher Love late Minister of the Gospel, an useful piece. 15. Heaven and
Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, their Governments are
turned and changed, by J. Davis Minister in Dover, admirably useful, and
seriously to be considered in these times. 16. The Treasure of the Soul;
wherein we are taught, by dying to sin, to attain to the perfect love of God.
17. A Treatise of Contention, fit for these sad and troublesome times, by J.
Hall Bishop of Norwich 18. Select thoughts; or, Choice helps for a pious
spirit, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus: by J. Hall. Bishop of
Norwich. 19. The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is
added, Songs in the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions: by J. Hall Bishop
of Nerwich. 20. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed Soul from the
depth of everlasting darkness: by T. Fetisplace.
Admirable, and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy, and Chiromancy.
21. Magic and Astrology vindicated by H. Warren. 22. Lux veritatis, Judicial
Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted; by W. Remsey, Gent. 23.
Cornelius Agrippa his Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy; Magical
Elements of Peter de Abona, the nature of spirits: made English by R. Turner.
24. Paracelsus Occult Philosophy, of the mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchimy. 25. An Astrological Discourse with Mathematical Demonstrations;
proving the influence of the Planets, and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies:
by Sir Christ Heyden Knight. 26. All Mr. Lillies Astrological Treatises
collected into one Volume. 27. Catastrophe Magnatum: an Ephemerides for the
Year 1652. by N. Culpeper. 28. Teratologia; or, a Discovery of Gods Wonders,
manifested by bloody Rain, and Waters; by J. S. 29. Chyromancy; or the A^t of
divining by the Lines engraven in the hand of Man by Dame Nature, in 198.
Genitures; with a Learned Discourse of the Soul of the World: by G. Wharton,
Esquire. 30. The Admired Piece of Physiognomy, and Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the
Symmetrical Proportions, and Signal Moles of the Body, the Interpretation of
Dreams; to which is added the Art of Memory, illustrated with Figures: by R.
Sanders, in Folio. 31. The no less exquisite then admirable Work, Theatrum
Chymicum Britannicum; containing several Poetical Pieces of our English
Philosophers, who have written the Hermetick Mysteries in their own ancient
Language; faithfully collected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by
the indefatigable industry of Elias Ashmole Esquire illustrated with Figures.
Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts, or Mechanics.
32. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; Or Geometry
of Regulars, practically proposed, after a new and most expeditious manner,
together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of Mensural Comparison, and in the
Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Dimension, but also of Gravity or
Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with useful experiments
of Measures and Weights, observations on Gauging, useful for those that are
practiced in the Art Metricall; by T. Wybard. 33. Tectonicon, showing the exact
measuring of all manner of Land, Squares, Timber, Stone, Steeples, Pillars,
Globes; as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule, etc. fit to be known
by all Surveyers, Land-meters, Joyners, Carpenters, and Masons: by L. Diggs.
34. The unparalled Work for ease and expedition, entitled, The exact
Surveyor: or, the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all
manner of Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champian, Plain, Wood-lands or
Mountains, by the Plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any
Land, to Protect, Reduce or Divide the same, as also to take the Plot or Cart,
to make a Map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other
Eminent Surveyors Method; a book excellently useful for those that sell,
purchase, or are otherwise employed about Buildings; by J. Air. 35. The golden
Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals; the Theory and
Practice united in Sympathetical Proportions betwixt Lines and Numbers, in
their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure, Magnitude, and
Affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations, and confirmed
with variety of Examples in every Species; made compendious and easy for
Merchants, Citizens, Seamen. Accomptants, etc. by Th. Wilsford Corrector of
the last Edition of Record. 36. Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it
has been proved by many hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by
them practiced and acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest
method; the meanest capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours
practice, may attain to a perfection in this Art; by J. Rich Author and Teacher
thereof, dwelling in Swithins Lane, in London. 37. Milk for Children; a plain
and easy Method teaching to read and write, useful for Schools and Families,
by J. Thomas, D. D. 38. The Painting of the Ancients; the History of the
beginning, progress, and consummating of the practice of that noble Art of
Painting, by F. Junius.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chyrurgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
39. Culpeper's Semiatica Uranica, his Astrological judgment of Diseases from
the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out
the cause, change, and end of the disease; also whether the sick be likely to
live or die, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected, according
to the judgment of Hippocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpepers censure of Urines. 40. Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his Wife for
the public good, being the choicest and most profitable of those secrets in
Physic and Chyrurgery, which whilst he lived, were locked up in his breast,
and resolved never to he published till after his death. 41. The Yorkshire
Spaw: or, the virtue and use of that water in curing of desperate diseases,
with directions and rules necessary to be considered by all that repair
thither. 42. The Art of Simpling: an Introduction to the knowledge of gathering
of Plants, wherein the definitions, divisions, places, descriptions,
differences, names, virtues, times of gathering, temperatures of them are
compendiously discoursed of: also a discovery of the Lesser World, by W. Coals.
43. Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs, and
Flowers, with their several original names, the Places where they grow, their
descriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing; as also
their several signatures, anatomical appropriations, and particular physical
virtues; with necessary Observations on the Seasons of planting and gathering
of our English Plants. A Work admirable useful for Apothecaries, Chyrurgions,
and other Ingenuous persons, who may in this Herbal find comprised all the
English Physical Simples, that Gerards or Parkinson, in their two voluminous
Herbals have discoursed of, even so, as to be on emergent occasions their own
Physicians, the ingredients being to be had in their own fields and gardens;
Published for the general good, by W. Coals, M. D. 44. The Queens Closet
opened: incomparable Secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery, Preserving, Candying, and
Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the most experienced persons of
our times; many whereof were honored with her own practice.
Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Romances, and Poetry.
45. Times Treasury, or Academy, for the accomplishment of the English Gentry
in Arguments of Discourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior, etc. all summed up in
Characters of Honor, by R Brathwait Esquire. 46. Oedipus, or the Resolver of
the secrets of Love, and other natural Problems, by way of Question and Answer.
47. The Tears of the Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel
proceedings of the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica,
Mexico, Peru, and other places of the West Indies; in which to the life are
discovered the tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so
successfully managed against them. 48. The Illustrious Shepherdess. The
Imperious Brother: written originally in Spanish by that incomparable wit, Don
John Perez de Montalbans; translated at the requests of the Marchioness of
Dorchester, and the Countess of Stafford, by E. P. 49. The History of the
Golden Ass, as also the Loves of Cupid and his Mistress Psyche: by L. Apulius,
translated into English. 50. The Unfortunate Mother: a Tragedy by T. N. 51. The
Rebellion: a Tragedy by T. Rawlins. 52. The Tragedy of Messalina the insatiate
Roman Empress: by N. Richards. 53. The floating Island: a Trage-Comedy, acted
before the King by the Students of Christs-Church in Oxon; by that renowned
Wit, W. Strode; the songs were set by Mr. H. Laws. 54. Harvey's Divine Poems,
the History of Balaam, of Jonah, and of St. John the Evangelist. 55. Fons
Lachrymarum, or, a Fountain of tears; the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah
in Verse, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas: by J. Quarles. 56. Nocturnal
Lucubrations, with other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs; by R. Chamberlain.
Poetical, with several other accurately ingenious Treatises, lately Printed.
57. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus: or a sure Guide to those
admirable Accomplishment: that complete the English Gentry in the most
acceptable Qualifications of Discourse or Writing. An Art of Logic, accurate
Complements, Fancies, Devices, and Experiments, Poems, Poetical Fictions, and
Al a mode Letters: by J. C. 58. Wit and Drollery; with other Jovial Poems: by
Sir J.M. M.L. M.S. W.D. 59. Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment; a new Spring of
Drollery: Jovial Fancies, etc. 60. The Admirable ingenious Satyr against
Hypocrites. 61. The Conveyancer of Light, or the Complete Clerk, and Scriveners
Guide; being an exact draught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use, as
they were penned, and perfected by diverse Learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and
great Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern: whereunto is added a Concordance
from King Richard the 3. to this present. 62. Themis Aurea, The Laws of the
Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; in which, the occult Secrets of their
Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by Count Mayerus, and now
Englishd, by T. H. 63. The Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand; a
Prophetical Treatise. 64. Medicina Magica tamen Physica; Magical but Natural
Physic: containing the general Cures of Infirmities and Diseases belonging to
the Bodies of Men, as also to other animals and domestic Creatures, by way of
Transplantation: with a Description of the most excellent Cordial out of Gold:
by Sam. Boulton of Salop. 65. J. Tradiscan's Rarities, published by himself. 66.
The proceedings of the High Court of Justice against the late King Charles,
with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648. 67.
The perfect Cook: a right Method in the Art of Cookery, whether for Pastry, or
all other manner of Al a mode Kickshaws; with the most refined ways of
dressing flesh, fowl, or making of the most poinant Sawces, whether after the
French, or English manner, with fifty five ways of dressing of Eggs, by M. M.
68. The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice: the Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgions Closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a correction of most Dispensatories now extant: with a Judicious
Censure of their defects, and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and
Compounds: with the Symptoms of Diseases: as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France.
69. Cabinet of Jewels, Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury, etc. in eight
excellent Sermons: with an Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel:
with the expediency of Marriage in public Assemblies, by J. Crag. Minister of
the Gospel. 70. Natures Secrets: or the admirable and wonderful History of the
generation of Meteors; describing the Temperatures of the Elements, the
heights, magnitudes, and influences of Stars, the causes of Comets,
Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical Diseases, and Prodigies of precedent times:
with presages of the weather, and descriptions of the weather-glasse: by T.
Wilsford. 71. The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence; or the Arts of Wooing and
Complementing; as they are managed in the Spring-Garden, Hide-Park, the New
Exchange, and other eminent places: A work, in which are drawn to the life the
Deportments of the most accomplished Persons: the Mode of their Courtly
entertainments, Treatment of their Ladies at Balls, their accustomed Sports,
Drolls and Fancies, the Witchcrasts of their persuasive Language, in their
Approaches, or other more Secret Dispatches, etc. by E. P. 72. He^mont
disguised: or, the vulgar errors of emperical and unskilful Practicers of
Physic confuted: more especially as they concern the Cures of Fevers, the
Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases, by way of Dialogue, in which the
chief rarities of Physic are admirably discoursed of, by J. T.
Books very lately Printed, and in the Press now Printing.
1. THe Scales of Commerce and Trade: by T. Wilsford. 2. Geometry demonstrated
by Lines and Numbers: from thence, Astronomy, Cosmography, and Navigation
proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and Spherical Triangles, by T.
Wilsford. 3. The English Annals, from the Invasion made by Julius Caesar to
these times, by T. Wilsford. 4. The Fool transformed: A Comedy. 5. The History
of Lewis the eleventh King of France: a Trage-Comedy. 6. The Chaste woman
against her will; a Comedy. 7. The Tooth-drawer, a Comedy. 8. Honor in the
end, a Comedy. 9. Tell-tale, a Comedy. 10. The History of Don Quixot, or the
Knight of the ill-favored face; a Comedy. 11. The fair Spanish Captive, a
Trage-Comedy. 12. Sir Kenelm Digby, and other persons of Honor, their rare and
incomparable secrets of Physic, Chyrurgery, Cookery, Pteserving, Conserving,
Candying, distilling of Waters, extraction of Oils, compounding of the
costliest Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions and select Experiments, as
they offered themselves to their Observations: whether here, or in foreign
Countries. 13. The Saints Tombstone: or, the Remains of the blessed. A plain
Narrative of some remarkable Passages, in the holy Life, and happy Death of
Mrs. Dorothy Shaw, Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston
upon Hull, collected by her dearest Friends, especially for her sorrowful
Husband, and six Daughters consolation and imitation. 14. The so long expected
Work, the New World of English Words, or, a general Dictionary, containing the
Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect Interpretations of the proper
signification of hard English words throughout the Arts and Sciences, Liberal,
or Mechanic; as also other subjects that are useful, or appertain to the
Language of our Nation: to which is added the signification of Proper Names,
Mythology, and Poetical Fictions, Historical Relations, Geographical
Descriptions of the Countries and Cities of the World: especially of these
three Nations, wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles, and other most me
morable Passages are mentioned: by E. P. 15. A learned Commentary on Psalm the
fifteenth, by that Reverend and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Cartwright,
Minister of the Gospel in York: to which is prefixed a brief account to the
Authors life, and of his Work, by R. Bolton. 16. The way to Bliss, in three
Books, being a learned Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, made public by
Elias Ashmole Esquire. 17. Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly
published, by Sir John Mennis, Mr. Smith and others. 18. The Modern Assurancer,
the Clerks Directory, containing the Practick Part of the Law, in the exact
Forms and Draughrs of all manner of Presidents for Bargains and Sales, Grants,
Feoffments, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants, Jointures, Indentures, etc.
And all other Instruments and Assurances now in use, by John Hern. 19. Naps
upon Parnassus. A sleepy Muse nipt and pincht, though not awakened. Such
voluntary and Jovial Copies of Verses as were lately received from some of the
WITS of the Universities, in a Frolic: dedicated to Gondibert's Mistress, by
Captain Jones and others, etc. 20. The complete Midwife's Practice, in the high
and weighty Concernments of Mankind: the second Edition corrected and
enlarged, with a full Supply of such most useful and admirable Secrets which
Mr. Nicholas Culpepper in his brief Treatise, and other English Writers in the
Art of Midwifry, have hitherto wilfully passed by, kept close to themselves, or
wholly omitted: by T. Chamberlain, M. P. 21. America Painted to the Life, the
History of the Conquest, and first Original undertakings of the advancement of
the Plantations in those Parts: with an exquisite Map, by F. Gorges, Esquire.
22. Culpeper's School of Physic, or the Experimental Practice of the whole
Art; so reduced, either into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the
freeborn Students of the three Kingdoms, may in this Method, find perfect
ways for the operation of such Medicines, so astrologically and Physically
prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent Judges of the Cures of
their Patients, by N. C. 23. Blagrave's admirable Ephemerides for the Year
1659. 24. History and Policy Reviewed in the Heroic transactions of his most
Serene Highness, Oliver late Lord Protector, declaring his steps to Princely
Perfection, drawn in lively Parallels to the Ascents of the great Patriarch
Moses to the height of 30 degrees of Honor, by H. D. Esquire. 25. J. Cleaveland
Revived: Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine Incomparable
Pieces never before published. 26. England's Worthies, Select Lives of the most
eminent Persons of the three Nations from Constantine the Great, to these
times; by W. Winstanly. 27. Loveday's Letters Domestic and Foreign, to several
Persons occasionally distributed in Subjects Historical, Political, and
Philosophical: by Robert Loveday, the late admired Translator of the three
first parts of the Renowned Romance Cleopatra. 28. The History of the Life and
Death of his most Serene Highness, Oliver, late Lord Protector. Wherein, from
his Cradle to his Tomb, are impartially transmitted to Posterity, the most
weighty Transactions, foreign or Domestique, that have happened in his Time,
either in Matters of Law, Proceedings in Parliaments, or others Affairs in
Church or State, by S. Carrington. 29. The right Lozenges publicly sold by
Edmund Buckworth in St. Katherines Court, for Coughs and Consumption of the
Lungs, etc. are to be had at Nath. Brook's and John Grismond's in Ivy-lane, and
at no other place.
FINIS.

