THE King of Terrors METAMORPHOSIS. OR, DEATH Transformed into SLEEP.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Nicoll, Daughter to that
Worthy, eminently Pious, and Charitable Citizen of London, Mr. John Walter
Deceased, and late Wife of Mr. William Nicoll of London Draper.

By Thomas Lie Rector of Alhal. Lumbard-street, London.

Isai. 26.19. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust.

Mark 5.39. The Damsel is not dead, but sleeps.

John 11.12. Lord if he sleep, he shall do well.

Nox Exitus est, sed Transitus.

Cypr. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Hen. Cripps, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Popes-head-Alley, 1660.

To his Dearly Respected Friend Mr. William Nicoll.
Dear Sir,
It has pleased the Lord, of late to do with you, as of old with his eminent
Servant Ezekiel viz To take away from you the Ezekiel. 24.16.
desire and delight of your eyes Your dear, dearest Wife, your self in another
skin, the the other Anime dividium med.
half of your soul, is gone down to the Chambers of darkness. When I consider,
the closeness of your Relation, the dearness of your Affection, I cannot but
grant, the deprivation of such a Wife, to be a sharp dispensation; a bitter cup
indeed; But yet it has this to sweeten it, that it is handed out by a wise,
sovereign, gracious Father; a God, that does, and will do, what he pleases, and
none can stay his hand, or say unto Him, Dan. 4.35.
what do Thou. And, Sir, give me leave to tell you, I do not, dare not, look
on you, as such a piece of presumptuous clay, as dares give check to your great
Potter. You are none of those proud and impatient Worms, that will turn again,
when a God treads either on you or yours, No, but rather, you have learnt good
old Eli's Epiphonema, 1 Samuel 3.38.
It is the Lord; or which is more, with Job, not only to submit unto, but even
to Job. 1.21
bless A taking as well as a giving God. It were easy to expatiate. But then,
the Gate would be too wide for the City. As therefore the Voice to Austin,
Toll and Lege, so I to you, Read, Consider; and in Gods strength endeavor so
to improve the Truths herein contained, that it may appear to your Conscience,
that you have not so much lost, as parted, only for a time, with the dearly
beloved of your soul: and that the time is coming, yea hastening, when you shall
happily meet again, and for ever repose your selves in that center of Bliss,
the bosom of Christ; yea, and so meet, as never to part more.

Alh. Lumbard-street, October. 29. 1660. Your Affectionate Friend and Pastor,
THO. LIE.

To His much Esteemed and Worthy Friend, Mrs. ALICE WALTER.
Worthy and Christian Friend.
THis Sermon, which was lately preached to your Ear, is now, at the request and
importunity of some Friends, humbly presented to your Eye. I hope by this time,
your prudence, faith, patience, have well digested your late just sorrows: and
that the tender of these Notes will not cause your Wounds to bleed afresh: They
were first intended, and are now offered, as a Lenitive, not Corrosive; to
allay, not aggravate, your Griefs.

It Is true, the All-wise Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, has thought it fit to
deprive you (at least for a while) of such eminent enjoyments, as but few
Mothers in our Israel are blessed with. A prudent, faithful, affectionate, pious,
charitable Husband: Another Enoch, for of a truth, he walked with God: One that
was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame; whom not only the lips of the hungry,
but the loins of the naked, did bless; a man rich in faith, rich in good works.
And two daughters the one, credibly reported, the other known, to me to be so
humble, obedient, modest, discreet, devout, that she fully proved her self, the
genuine Issue of so precious a Father: a Branch worthy such a Stock: These are
now taken from you, whereof the one was your self divided, the others, your
self multiplied. such strokes, when they come single, cannot but sharply
afflict us, but when double, treble, are apt deeply to astonish us. And here
methinks, your condition bespeaks us, as once Job his Friends, Job 19.21. Have
pity upon me, have pity upon me, Oye my Friends, for the Hand of God has
touched me. We do, we cannot, but pity you; and how freely could we sit down
and mingle tears and sighs with you, weep till we could weep no more, but that
my Text must be remembered, which strictly forbids, both you and us, immoderate
mourning for those that are fallen asleep in Jesus; and certainly, without the
least strain of charity, we may so conclude concerning your late Relations:
they are not dead, but sleep in Jesus: and if so, why may not you reply with
Austin concerning Monica, what cause have I to over-grieve for a mother -- an
husband, daughters, of whose happiness I am and justly may be so well assured.
I need not ask you, whether you loved them: And could you love them, and not
wish they might be perfectly happy? And could they be perfectly happy and not
die? and are they dead, and do you, can you, dare you, think them less than
perfectly happy? True, your loss is great, but their gain is greater. oh grieve
not so much at your loss, as rejoice at their gain. If you do, and your tears
exceed your joys, you will by these bewray a love indeed, but it is of your self
more than them. Go then, Christian Friend, and since you cannot here enjoy
their persons, imitate their graces: live more and more like them, since you
cannot, as yet, live with them: and let this cause you to love and long for
Heaven so much the more, because so much of your self, even more than half, is
there already. Which that you may, as it is the serious advice, so it shall be
the ardent prayer, of

The Servant of your Faith, and Helper of your Joy. THO. LIE.

THE King of Terrors METAMORPHOSIS.
1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14. 13. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others, which
have no hope.

14. For if we believe, that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also
which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with Him.


OUR Apostles drift in these words is to prefs his Thessalonians to mother ation
of sorrow for those of theirs, Scopt.
that were dead in Christ. Grief, (like her sister Passions, being too too apt
to pass its bounds, and overflow its chanel) transports the Thessalonians into
a great indecency. Whilst they wept as Men, they had almost forgot to act as
Christians; The flood of their tears, had as it were drowned the anchor of
their hopes. For a stop and Bay to this uncomely, unchristian Deluge, our
Apostle here lets down this holy Floud-gate, in the words of the Text: But I
would not have you, etc.

In which words, we have a Christian duty gravely proposed, Division.
and strongly pressed.

1. A Duty proposed, i. e. a mean, a temper, moderation in mourning for the
dead. Sorrow for the dead, they might, nay, they ought? Paul prohibits not, but
allows, yea elsewhere commands to mourn: But then it must be in measure, not
immoderately. Greive, as men, they may and ought; but then as christian men.
Not as men without Contristamur and nos in nostiorum mortibus, necessitate
amittendi, sed cum sperecipi endi. Aug.
hope. Grace destroys not Nature, but rectifies. it. Religion does not
extirpate affections, but only orders and moderates them.

2. The Arguments by which this Duty is pressed. And these are taken

1. Ab Inhonesto. Such an immoderate mourning for the dead would speak the
Thessalonians, if not grossly Ignorant, at least deeply insensible and forgetful
of the happy condition of the Saints departed. I would not have you Velim vos
scire. Trem. Sir. and AEth. ver sis.
ignorant.Or, I would have you know; q. d. did you indeed clearly know, firmly
believe, or seriously remember and consider, what you have been taught, nay,
and have professed, viz. the thrice happy estate of Believers after this life,
you would not, could not, so intemperately bemoan their seeming-losse, whilst
you seriously recollect their real gain.

2. Ab Indecore. Such an immoderate sorrow rather becomes an hopeless Heathen,
then an hopeful Thessalonian: Sorrow not even as others that have no hope Q. d.
The Heathens indeed, wring their hands, beat their breasts, sigh to the
breaking of their loins, bedew, nay furrow their cheeks with tears at the
Funerals of their Relations; and all this because they have no hope of their
Resurrection to a new and better life. They suppose, they have taken their
ultimum vale of their departed Friends, bid them an eternal adieu, that they
are utterly extinct, lost and gone, (...), that they shall never see, or enjoy
them more, and so no wonder, if they Lugetur mortuus quem gehenna suscipit,
quem Tartarus devorat.
mourn, and that immoderately. But for you, whose dearest Relations souls are
by Angels transported into the highest Heavens, and there installed free
Denizons of those glorious Mansions; nay more, even lodged and reposed in the
bosom of our Lord Jesus; for such as you, to mourn immoderately, and that for
such as these, it would argue an heathenish despair swayed more in your
breasts, then a Christian hope.

3. A qualitate Mortis; Concerning them which are asleep in Jesus.

Q. d. And what is this you take so much to heart? Is it that you call their
death? Alas you are quite mistaken, their departure hence is not so properly to
be termed a death, as,

1. A sleep. What you mistake for a Serpent, is indeed but a Rod. Their death
is no more but a sleep, a sweet, silent, refreshing sleep. The Damsel is not
dead, but Mark 5.32.
sleeps. As our natural sleep is a breathing Emblem of death, so our temporal
death is nothing else but a fair resemblance of sleep. The one is a shorter
death, the other a longer sleep. And will you, can you grieve immoderately,
when you see your dearest Friends, when weary, laid down to rest, and gone to
sleep?

2. A sleep in Jesus. (...) (...) Hellenism. Enallage proposuionis: ut and 1 Timothy 2.15. Romans 4.11. Spanhem.
(...). Believers at their death fall asleep in Christ. Death it self dissolves
not that real, spiritual, closest union, between Christ and true Believers: No
more then sleep does that between soul and body. Being truly ingrafted into
Christ, they have saithfully persevered to the end in the profession and
practice of the faith, have not left him in life, and therefore Christ will not
forsake them in death: They then sleep in Christ. And will you grieve
immoderately to see a Child sweetly fallen asleep in his Fathers arms?

4. A Certitudine Resurrectionis. This their death is a sleep indeed, but not a
perpetual, everlasting sleep. It Is not a sleep of eternal death. No. But these
that sleep now, shall certainly awaks and arise from the dead, and Christ shall
give them life. Christ their head being risen, is the exemplar, pattern,
pledge, and will be the cause of their resurrection. True, Christ is gone a far
journey, but he will come again, and all these.

That sleep in Christ will God bring with Him. Having thus Anatomized the
whole, I shall only single out one of the parts, and make that, which Paul uses
as his third Argument to back his Exhortation, the Basis of my present
Meditations; and it is this,

Observation.
A true Believers temporal Death is a sweet and silent sleep in Jesus Christ.
This truth I shall explain, confirm, improve.

For Explication.
What is it that sleeps in a Believers death?

Sol. 1. Negatively. Not his Soul. As the soul cannot Mat. 10.28.
die, so it does not sleep, i. e. after its dissolution from the body, it lies
not still without any motion or operation; True indeed, such acts of the soul
as are merely Organical, i. e. such as the soul cannot exert but by the help of
the body, as seeing, hearing, tasting, etc. these indeed do, and must needs
cease. But then there are other acts, which are inorganical and immaterial,
which the soul can put forth of it self, without the least commerce with or
asistance from the body. These cease not. As appears;

1. By the Light of Nature. Natures dim eyes have been clear enough to see
this truth. Hence the Platonists resemble the souls being and acting after
death, to the distinct being of the Wagoner after the Coach is broken. To the
swimming out of the Mariner when the Ship is wrackt To the creeping out of the
Snail when the shell is crushed.

2. By the Light of Reason. What hinders me to conclude the being, the quick
and lively acting of the soul (that pure, immaterial, and immortal substance)
in the Air, in the Heaven, or elsewhere, as well as in the compass of my body?
Why should not that soul, that existed without the body before it was created,
inspired, infused, as well exist and act after the union of it with the body is
dissolved?

3. By daily, constant Experience. Do we not find and feel the soul, even
whilst in the body, to have its motions, passions, tempers, quite different
from, and independent on the body? Is not the soul often cheerful, when that is
in pain? Does not the soul often sing, when the body sighs? Have not
innumerable Martyrs triumphed in the midst of flames and tortures? Does not
holy Baynam tell the Papists, that his flames were no more to him then a bed of
Down or Roses? Again, in the deepest and deadest sleep, when sleep with its
strongest cords has most strongly bound up all our senses, has not the soul its
nimble workings, and most rational Corpore quiescente, anima non dormit, itn
etiam anima post mortem. somnus sensus tantum excteriores occupat non animam.
discourses then? To say nothing of divine Raptures and Ecstasies, when the body
is as it were laid by as useless and uninstrumental to the soul; as appears in
paul 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. when Paul's soul had an ear to hear such words as his
body could not find a tongue to express: And in John, Rev. 1.16. In a word, in
sickness, yea in death it self, when the soul walks in the very valley and
shadow of death, in the very act and article of its dissolution, what a fresh
vigor does the soul many times put on? How does this divine flame blaze in the
very socket? How does it crect and rouse it self, and plainly tells us, that it
means not to fall with the body, but only to leave it, as an Inhabitant a
ruinous house, till it be repaired? as a Musician to lay aside his Lute, whose
strings are cracked, till it be new strung.

4. By the Light of Scripture. The souls which were under the Altar were not
asleep, though their bodies were; for they cried with a loud voice, etc. Rev:
6.9, 10. In death, the body, that handsome Pile of dust, returns to the carth
as it was, but the spirit, the soul, Ista Divinae aurae particula, returns unto
God who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. and to the spirits of just men made perfect,
Heb. 12.23. Had the soul of the penitent Thief slept, how could it have been
truly said to have been with Christ in Paradise, Luke 23.43. With Christ in
Paradise, i. e, in the highest Empyrean Heavens, Acts 3.21. beholding his face
in light and glory, John 17.24. Had Paul but dreamt of the souls sleep, he
would never have groaned so earnestly to be clothed upon with his house from
heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, 4. Nor to have had the union of his soul and body
dissolved, and the communion with God which he then enjoyed, interrupted at
least, if not broken off, had he not been sure, that immediately on that
dissolution, he should be with Christ, Phil. 1.21, 23.

Thus Negatively. The soul sleeps not.

2. Affirmatively. The body sleeps, Matthew. 27.52. Or, if you will, the state of
a Believers death much resembles that of sleep: which leads me to the second
thing I promised: viz.

2. Confirmation.
Now I shall prove this point, generally and particularly.

1. More generally. Sleep is the image of death, and death is more then the
image of sleep. Lighten mine eyes least I sleep the sleep of death, (...) i. e.
Least I sleep Death.
i. e. least I die, Psalm. 13.3. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, John 11.11. Our
Savior interprets his own words; Lazarus is dead, v. 14. Many are sickly among
you, and many sleep, i. e. are dead, 1 Cor. 11.30. An usual phrase among the
Hebrews for being dead, was this, They slept with their Fathers, 1 King. 11.43.
2 King. 20.21. Luke retains the Hebrew form, and tells us, that Stephen and
David gave up the ghost and fell asleep, Acts 7.60. and 3.36.

And hence it is that the Saints graves are called their beds: They shall rest
in their beds, Isai. 57.2. When a Believer dies, he is but gone to bed; gone
down from a bed of ivory to a bed of earth; from a pillow of down, to a pillow
of dust.

Hence also both the Greeks and Latins style the places where the dead are
laid up and buried, i (...) Dormitoria.
sleeping places:

Thus more generally. But

2. More particularly. By spreading before you the Analogy, proportion,
resemblance, parallel, that is between sleep and death. A Believers death runs
parallel to sleep, in its Antecedent, Concomitant, Consequents.

1. In its Antecedet; or that which usually goes before sleep, and that is
Vestium Depositio. When a man goes to sleep, he usually Somnum capiens vestes
exuit. 1 (...)
uncloaths, dismantles, disrobes himself. In like manner Peter calls his death,
1 a putting off of his tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.14. Paul styles it a dissolution of
our earthly house of this tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1. An uncloathing: (...) v. 4.
When a Believer dies, he lays aside, not only the garment spotted with, but
even that which is made of flesh. Thus Jubentius and Maximinus -- We are ready
to lay off the last garment the flesh.

2. In its Concomitant; Or that which accompanies and attends on sleep: and
that is, Quictis tranquilitas, Sweet (...). Orph. de somn. Tuque O domitor
somne, malorun, requies c^ nimi. Sen. Her. sur.
Rest and Repose. When a man goes to his sleep, we say he goes to his rest. So
Job 3.13. Now should I have lien still and been quiet; Now should I have slept,
I should have been at rest. It Is true, rest is more then sleep; Sometimes a man
sleeps, when he does not rest, but is troubled in his sleep; But when rest is
joined with sleep, this is perfect sleep.

In death a Believer enjoys a perfect rest: A state wherein Believers lie
quietly in their beds of earth, and have not so much as one waking moment, or
distracting dream. Here indeed, those Doves, find no rest for the soles of
their feet; but no sooner are they lodged in the Ark of death, but they are at
rest. They shall Isa. 57.2.
rest in their beds. Now there is a five-fold rest which a Believer enjoyes in
and by his temporal death: From labor, from trouble, from infirmities, from
sin, and from temptations.

1. From labor and toil. No working in the Grave: There the servant is free
from his master, The poor Israelite from his Egyptian Task-master. No tale of
bricks demanded there. There the weary with labor is at rest, Job 3.17, 19.
This life is the day of the Saints working. They, as well as their Master, must
work while it is day. Death is the night of the Saints resting. When the Sun of
our Life arises, we go forth to our labor until the evening of death, Psalm.
104.23. and no longer, for then, they that die in the Lord rest from their
labors, Rev. 14.13. This life is a continual motion; death a perpetual rest.
Our life is a stormy passage, a tempestuous Sea-voyage, death brings us to a
peaceable Port.

2. From troubles, miseries, calamities: And these either public or private.

1. Public and National. No wars, famine, pestilence, no bloody battles, no
garments rould in blood, no sodding of the Babe, to satisfy the hunger of the
Mother, in the Grave. If a Cloud of blood hover over a Nation; If an Angel on a
red Horse be ready to mount and march through a Kingdom; If commission be
given to the Sword to eat flesh and to drink blood; the death of a Believer
houses him before the storm. Josiah dies in peace, and sees not all the evil
which God will bring on Jerusalem, 2 King. 22.20. The Righteous man is taken
from the evil to come, Isai. 57.1. A Believers grave is nothing else but one of
Gods privy Chambers, where he is hid from the indignation to come, Isai. 26, 20.

2. Private and Personal. No trouble, no oppression, no persecution, no racks,
no strappado's in the Grave, The voice of the oppressor is not heard there,
Job 3.18, This life indeed is a cloudy, blustering passage to Gods Jonahs, but
death is that Whale, which does not so properly swallow them up, as carry and
convergh them, it is indeed, both their Ship and Pilot, to conduct them safe to
shore. Poor Saints, here, they are usually the worlds Gally-slaves: this lower
Orb is to them, but a larger kind of Tunis of Argier, but they are manumitted
there. Their death ransomes them. Here they are at the foot of every bloody
Bonner, Gardener, Nero, Trajan, Dioclesian, Julian: but death sets them out of
gunshot. The rod is taken off their backs, and a palm put into their hands,
Rev. 7.9, 14. There Peter no more fears the Cross, Paul the Axe, James the
Sword, Isaiah the Saw, Elijah Jezebel, the noble Army of Martyrs, the
Cole-house, Dungeon, Halter, Faggot, Flames. Hence Cyprian when dying, God be
thanked for this Jail-delivery: And I. Buisson Now shall I have a double
Jail-delivery, one out of my sinful flesh, another out of my loathsome dungeon.

3. From all bod^ly Hic quot venae tot morbi.
weakness, infirmities, pains, griefs, passions, Diu vivere nihil aliud est,
quam diu torqueri. Aug.
miseries. By reason of these, Saints, whilst here, are subject to panting
hearts, moistened eyes, blubbered cheeks: Here usually ashes are their bread,
and tears their drink. Here the Saints life is usually so miserable, that it is
an observation of Hierom, and the resolution of an ancient Christus non
ploravit Lazarum mortuum, sed ad hujus vitae arumnas ploraevit resuscitandum
Council. Tolet. 3.
Council, concerning Jesus his weeping over Lazarus, John 11.31. That it was
not so much a grief for Lazarus his death, as the consideration of his Christus
non ploravit Lazarum mortuum, sed ad hujus vitae arumnas ploraevit
resuscitandum Council. Tolet. 3.
raising again to a miserable life, that drew those tears from our Saviors
eyes.

But now, Death wipes every tear from a Believers eye, Rev. 7.17. sorrow and
sighing do then fly away, Rev. 21.4. Death is the great Catholicon, panacea,
salve for all sores; the real and lasting cure of all the Saints diseases,
maladies, infirmities. So that good man Laverock comforted his fellow Martyr
John ap Rice: Come, says he, be of good comfort Brother; for my Lord of London
is our good Physician; He will soon cure thee of thy blindness, and me of my
lameness, this day.

4. From sin: He that is dead, is freed from sin, Romans 6.7. From their own sin,
and from the sins of others.

1. From their own sin; and that both as to its guilt and silth.

1. From the guilt: I mean the sense and apprehension of guilt. Poor Believers,
whilst here, many times lie under the stabs and throws of a wounded Con^cience:
their souls stricken through with Gods venomous Arrows, and made as it were
dizy with the wine of astonishment. As they are forced to lie down in sorrow,
so they fear they shall rise up in Flames; This was the case of Heman, Asaph,
etc. Many, very many of the children of Light, whilst here, walk in such
darkness, Isa. 50.10. But now Death delivers them from this midnight darkness,
brings them into the face and presence, sets them under the beams of the Sun of
righteousness, which shall never more be clouded; Not a wrinkle more now for
ever to be seen on Gods face, not the least frown on Gods forehead, Every score
quite blotted out, every debt cancelled, and they no less fully, the freely
acquitted and discharged, Jeremiah, 31.34.

2. From the raging power; yea, from the polluting, pestring presence of sin.
Poor Saints here labor under the intolerable burden of a corrupt heart, and
sinful life. How was Paul pressed, oppressed, with that weight, that mountain, the
law of his members warring against the law of his mind. This makes him cry out
likea forlorn Caitif, (...) O wretched man that I am, Rom: 7.24. Paul that
could rejoice in tribulation, could not but mourn under corruption; This was
that made the good man cry out, Libera me a malo; hoc est, a me ipso, Domine.
This made holy Bradford bewail himself, as the living Christians of old, when
tied to dead carcasses.

But now when once death comes, it soon knocks off these shackles: takes off
these weights, that so easily beset us. As the Martyrs formerly cheered
themselves against the rage of their bloody persecutors. Oh brethren, said
they, our persecuters are sending of us thither, where we shall never offend
God more. Death spares not one Agag alive. Every Canaanite slain. Every
Egyptian drowned. Those corruptions they have seen to day, they shall see them
no more for ever. Death presents them without spot or wrinkles, Ephesians. 5.27.
Totally frees them not only from the power, but presence of sin. The end of
their living, is nothing less then the end and period of their sinning.

2. From the sins, and corruptions of others. Here the sinfulness and pollution
of the times and places, wherein Saints live, ( specially of persons nearly
related to them,) makes their lives grievous, and is as it were a Coloquintida
in the pot of their sweetest comforts. Lots righteous soul vexed with the
Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.8. Rebeccah weary of her life, because of the daughters of
Heth, Genesis 27.46. Woe is me, says David, that I must dwell in Mesech, Psalm.
120.5. Oh that I could leave my people, says weeping Jeremy, Jer. 9.2. But
now, it is not the least part of our happiness by death, that it brings us
there, where there are no ill neighbors. There shall enter in nothing that
defiles into those holy Mansions, Rev. 21.27. Corrupt flesh and blood shall
not, cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: 1 Cor. 15.50.

5. From temptations, Satan's winnowings, buffetings, solicitations to sin.
Here, ever and anon a messenger sent from Satan to buffet Saints, 2 Cor. 12.7.
Anakims to fight them, Midianitish women to allure them, Satan going about like
a roaring Lion seeking whom, and how he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. Here Gods
Adam's never without an Eve and a Serpent. In this Egypt Christ's Joseph's
always dogged with the suggestions of a Potiphars wife. But now the death of
Saints Brings them into that heavenly Paradise, where there is no Serpent. The
great Dragon, the Accuser and Tempter of the Brethren is cast down thence, and
never to be admitted more, Rev. 12.9.16. Here the Saints always wrestling, not
only with flesh and blood, but principalities, and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in nigh places, Ephesians. 6.12. Here, though they ate never totally
overcome, yet are they stoutly charged and assaulted: and though it is the
Saints honor to conquer, yet is it their trouble to conflict: yea, but now
death puts the Saints into such a condition, that they are not only without a
foil, but without fighting too.

Thus in respect of its concomitant, Rest, the death of Saints may well be
resembled to sleep.

3. In its Consequents: which are two: Excitationis facilitas: and Virium
reparatio.

1. Excitationis facilitas. Awaking or rising from sleep. Natural sleep is not
perpetual: we sleep and awake again: Psalm. 3.5. I laid me down and slept, I
awaked. So that though the body lies for a time in the grave, yet it shall
awake and rise again. Many, i. e. all of them that sleep in the dust shall
awake: Dan. 12.2. Psalm. 17.15, Isai. 26.19. John 5.28. Job 19.26, 27. Hos.
13.14. Rev. 10.13. A time coming when the loud Trump shall awaken the sleeping
ashes, and those old friends, soul and body, meet and embrace, and never part
more.

2. Virium reparatio, renovatio, restitutio. The body, that was sown in
weakness, shall be raised in power. It was sown a natural body: it shall be
raised a spiritual body; endowed with impassibility, subtilty, agility,
clarity. It is sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15.42,
43, 44. It shall be like unto Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3.21. shining forth
and sparkling like the Sun in its midday-glory, Matthew. 13.43.

And thus we have dispatched the parallel betwixt a Believers death and sleep.
The third thing promised, was the Application and Improvement of the whole; to
which we now address our selves.

3. Application.
By way of Information, Exhortation, Dehortation, Consolation.

Information of our Judgments in four Corollaries.

1. If a Believers death be a sleep, then that Aphorism of the wise Man
appears to be a great truth, Eccles. 7.1. The day of death is better then the
day of ones birth. Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward, Job 7.5.
Sparks have a principle in themselves, by which they ascend, they need no
directing, they fly upward naturally. So it is a natural course for man, as soon
as he is born, to verge to sorrow. Our birth is nothing else but a lanching
forth into a deep Ocean of sin and sorrow, an intrat to act our parts in a
Scene of iniquity and misery: Yea, but now a Believers death is his happy Exit
and Epilogue; his calm Rev. 14.13.
Port, and safe Harbor, after all his tollings and tempests. Of this truth,
that Mirror of her Sex, the Lady Jane Gray, discovers a clear conviction, who,
being requested by the Lieutenant of the Tower to write her Symbol in his book,
before her beheading, wrote thus: Let the glassy condition of this life never
deceive thee: there is a time to be born, and a time to die, but the day of
death is better then the day of birth.

2. If a Believers death, etc. Hence learn, The infinite power, wisdom and
goodness of God, in that he is able and willing to turn the worst of evils,
into so great a good: out of the deadliest poison to make the most sovereign
Antidote: to turn a Moses Serpent into a Rod, and with that Rod to work
wonders: to fetch honey and sweetness out of the carcass of a Lion: nay, to
turn the Eater into meat, Death into sleep; to make that, which in it self is
the greatest loss, to become so great a Gain, Phil. 1.23. to render the King of
Terrors, Job 18.14. most amiable, yea most useful: to make that so sweet a
blessing, which was threatened, as the saddest curse: to turn an Esau's malice
into courtesy and salutes, his intended stabs into tears and kisses. Verily
this is the Lords doing, and it ought to be mavelous in our eyes.

3. If a Believers death, etc. Hence see, the vast difference between an
Unbeliever and a Believer in their death. Death to an unbeliever is Poena
peccati; so threatened, Genesis 2.17. so inflicted, Romans 5.12. Their end is
destruction, Phil. 3.19. Death comes fiercely to them, pulls them by the
threat, like a grim Sergeant, arrests and summons them to hell, where after ten
hundred thousand years scorching and yelling in flames, their pain is never the
nearer to its period. No time gives them hope of abating; yea time has nothing
to do with this eternity; where they shall be ever dying, but never die: where
Devils, who were here ready to tempt them, when graceless, to sin, are as ready
to pursue them, now damned, with torments. It Is true, their bodies sleep indeed
for a while, but it is as Sampson in Dalilahs lap, ready to be given up as a
prey to the Philistines: as Sisera in Jaels Tent, the hammer and nail ready to
be set to the Temples: or as Peter slept between his cruel Keepers: bound they
are and locked up in their graves, as in a strait and loathsome prison, a
doleful, disconsolate dungeon, where they lie reserved in the chains of
darkness, until the judgment of the great day, Jud. 6.7.

But now the death of a Believer is quite another thing. To them it is instar
dulcis somni. Death comes mildly and sweetly to the m, like an humble Page,
with a courteous invitation to a feast of glory, and proffers its service to
lead and conduct them to it: Be not afraid, says death, though my countenance
be stern, my hand is soft, though my pangs seem grievous, yet the rest I bring
is sweet. To others I am death, to you only a sleep, and such a sleep as God
gives his Beloved, Psalm. 127.2. That which is a Grave to others, is a Bed to
you, Isai. 57.2. where your bodies shall lie, as Christ did in his grave, with
a guard of Angels, John 20.12. Believers are delivered from the sting, though
not from the stroke of death: If death be a Serpent, to Saints it is a Serpent
without a sting: it has left its sting and teeth and all in the sides of
Christ. Hence it is that we hear the Apostle sounding out his Io triumph, and
find him treading on the neck of his vanquished enemy, playing on the hole of
this Aspe, and with an holy kind of Sarcasm, flouting at it: Oh death where is
thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

Thus we see a vast difference; the unbeliever dies howling; the Believer
singing: the one takes death for a gulf of sorrow, the other for a port of
safety. The one sighs because stripped for a scourging, the other sings, because
he lays off his clothes to go to bed and sleep after his toil.

4. If a Believers death be a sleep in Jesus: Hence conclude, That even death
it self dissolves not the strict union that is between Christ and a Believer.
Aug. de Civ. Dei.
All the faithful, though dead, are yet the living members of Christ Jesus. As
in Christ's death his soul and body, though severed each from other, remained
united to the Deity; so in death, Believers souls and bodies still remain
united unto Christ, Romans 8.38, 39. Though Abraham, Isaeac, Jacob die, yet God
is still their God, Matthew. 21.31, 32. The Relation of God to them, is as strong
when dead, as when living. Though dead to men, yet they were not dead to God.
Sleep, though it chains up the senses for a time, yet it dissolves not the
union between soul and body; Nor does the sleep of the Spouse break the
marriage knot, between her and her Bridegroom: the union that is betwixt Christ
and Believers out-lives death. Death indeed may and does triumph over the
natural union betwixt body and soul, but cannot in the least either dissolve,
or weaken the mystical union betwixt the soul and Christ. Let Believers live,
and they live, from, for, and in Christ: and let them die, they do but sleep in
him. Thus for Information.

Exhortation.

Is a Believers death no more then a sleep? Then Believers,

1. Be not afraid of death. Your death, Believers, is a sleep, a sweet sleep,
Eccles. 5.12. and should the laboring man be afraid of a sweet sleep? No, but
rather resolve with David, though you walk in the valley of the shadow of
death, yet there to fear no evil, Psalm. 27.3. I dissuade not from a natural,
or from a spiritual fear of death. The one is allowed, the other necessary. He
is no man that does not fear death. Beside the pain, Nature must needs shrink
at the thought of parting; and he acts not the Christian that does not so fear
death, as to mind and prepare for its certain, and yet most uncertain Onset. I
only dissuade from that base, cold, cowardly, carnal fear of death, which makes
the whole life, nothing else but a living death, which Furer est ne moriare,
mori.
kills men daily, because they must once die, and keeps them under perpetual
slavery and bondage, Heb. 2.15. To drive this Nail home I would only offer
these few Considerations.

1. Such a slavish fear, better becomes a Pharaoh and his Magicians, then
Israclites and Believers. It Is no wonder to see their courage fall, when once
the cry of death is in their Houses, Exodus 12.29, 30. This Basilisk may well
affright those Enchanters and Mountebanks: But a Moses, an Israelite indeed,
may take it by the tail, handle it, and turn it into an harmless wand, yea
into a rod, budding with glory and immortality.

It Is true, the Dar. 5.15, 6.
Caldean Tyrants face may look pale and grisly, stam'd with the color and fear
of death: Those hands, which not long since lifted up his massy Goblets in
scorn and desiance of the God of Israel, may well hang down, when death writes
him a letter of summons, to appear that night, before a most strict and supreme
Tribunal. I do not wonder at Lewis the eleventh his strait charge to his
servants, when once they saw him sick, never once to name that bitter word
Death in his ear. Well may these fear Death, that know him but as a Pursuivant
sent from Hell. But that is not your case Believers.

2. Consider: How cheerfully have Gods people, your fellow soldiers, looked
death in the face. Paul so far from fearing, that he earnestly pants and
longs after a dissolution, Phil. 1.28. How sweetly does good old Simeon chant
out his Swan-like song; his Dom ns nunc dimittis? Luke 2.29. How familiarly
does holy Moses hear of his end: it is no more betwixt God and Moses, but go up
to Mount Nebo and die, Deuteronomy. 32.50. Had he been invited to a feast, it could
not have been in a more sweet compellation. No otherwise then to other
Prophets, Go up and eat, or sleep. It has been no harsh news to Gods Children,
to hear of their departure. To them death has lost its horror through
Acquaintance. That face, which at first seemed ill-favored, by often viewing
is grown out of dislike. Saints that have had such entire conversation with
God, are not afraid to go to him. Hence that of Ambrose: I have not so lived,
that I am ashamed to live longer, nor yet fear I death, because I have a good
Lord: And that of Hilarion to his soul: Egredere, Anima, egredere: Get thee out
my soul, away, thou have seventy years served Christ, and art thou now afraid
of death?

3. Whilst there lurks in the breast this slavish fear of death, the least
piece of this leaven is enough to sour the whole lump of all our joys and
comforts. The least dram of this Coloquintida will mar the relish of all our
sweets, and make us cry out, there is death, death, death, in the pot. This
little fly, will soon taint, our whole box of Ointment. On these and such like
Acceunts Believers may be strongly armed against the uncomely, slavish fear of
death. But that is not all. This truth calls yet for a more raised and noble
temper; screws up Believers to an higher Cue. Viz.

2. Is your death, Believers, a sleep, so sweet a sleep, it is not enough for
you not to fear, it becomes you to be willing to die, to desire to be
dissolved, Phil. 1.23. To groan earnestly to be uncloathed, that you may go to
rest, 2 Cor. 5.1, 4. Let it not be said of you that you are dragged and haled
to your graves, as of the foolish rich man, Luke 12.20. x '(...): vehementius
ab invito flagito Causab.
This night, thy soul shall be taken from thee. Go not as a Swine, but as a
Lamb, to the slaughter. Resign thy soul without a forcible entry, Be a
Voluntier in death. Be not pressed to it. Death, which is the Atheists fear,
should be the Christians desire. Yet here observe, this desire of death must
not spring from a pet or passion, merely out of a taedium of living; as a sick
man desires to change his bed, merely out of weariness of, and coffeehouse
with his present condition. Death may not, must not be desired, out of
impatience under, or distrust of Gods Providence, Job 3.3.7.15. Jer. 20.74.
Jon. 4.3. No nor yet to avoid the labor and duty of our callings. To be weary
of living on such accounts, argues not Christianity, or a more raised frame,
but pride, peevishness, cowardliness, slug gishness of spirit.

But, (this grand condition always understood, viz. with submission to the
will of God) it hugely becomes a Christian, considering the weight of his sins
here, and of his glory hereafter, that death delivers from the one, and ushers
into the other, with Phil. 1.23.
Paul, to desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

And that on a double account.

1. There is nothing here, that can invite or defer our stay. Alas what is
there here but darkness of ignorance, distempers of passions, complaints of
estates, fears and sense of evil, hopes and doubts of good, ambitious rackings,
covetous toylings, envious underminings, restless desires, all vanity and
vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.1. many worlds of discontent in one. Why then
should we linger and han ker after a continuance in this Baca of tears, and
not desire rather to enter into our Rest? Show me a man that ever truly knew,
what life was, and was loath to leave it, and i will in him show thee, a prisoner,
that blesles himself in his fetters, a slave that likes his chains and gally.

2. There is all that in a Believers death, that may tempt and inflame his
desires. It Is that to a Believer, which a night of rest is to the weary
Labourer, 2 port to the weather-beaten Mariner, freedom to the fetter-gal'd
Prisoner, the marriage-day to the loving Spouse, the day of coronation to the
king. Why then should not a Saint conclude with Vid Bressius: Oh that my soul
had the wings of a Dove, to fly and make have to that mountain of God, and
Paradise of eternal pleasures: Or with that aged Father in Austin, who when his
friends, endeavoring to comfort him on his bed of sickness, told him, they
hoped he should recover, answered: If I shall not die at all, well: but if
ever, why not now? Oh then, Believers, pant after an holy and an happy
dismission: never cease tutoring and screwing up your souls, till, in Gods
strength you can resolve, that if you might die to day, you would not choose to
live till to morrow. Never think your souls in an hail condition, so long as
you are 10th, to think of dying. Take this only comfort, from the prolonging of
your days, not that you live long, but that you are in a sphere of doing your
own and others souls more good, and bringing your God more glory.

And because the quelling of the slavish fear of death, and rendering of a
Believer willing to depart, is a business of such grand concernment, give me
leave to prescribe a direction or two: viz.

1. If ever you desire, that death should not be your fear, but gain, and so
desirable: be sure to make Christ your life. This was Paul's method, Phil. 1.21,
23. He that would sleep in Jesus, must live to him. Labor to be acted by the
Spirit of Christ, and the immediate fruits thereof, viz. faith, love, filial
fear, as thy principle, Romans 8.14. Gal. 2.20. steer by Christ's word, as your
Compass, your Rule, Canon, Gal. 6.16. Level at Christ's glory, as your highest
end, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Our life, as it gives way to death, so it must make way for it. As the tree
falls, so it still lies: and as it stands, so usually it falls. If ever we hope
to sleep sweetly in death, we must walk fruitfully in life. It Is the sleep of a
laboring man that is sweet, Eccles. 5.12. To live holily is the only way to
die happily. Mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of that man
is peace, Psalm. 37.37.

2. Fix your eyes on the death of Christ. Christ by his death has wholly
routed, yea conquered death. Christ precious body lying in the grave has
sweetly perfumed that house of corruption. Christ by his death has cut off all
deaths succors. Whereas death borrowed its sting from sin, its strength from
the law, and curle of God, Christ has disarmed them all of their destroying,
killing power, 1 Cor. 15.56. So that now, as he falsely, thou may say truly,
the bitterness of death is past.

3. Act and exert Faith to the uttermost. Quartan Agues are not so much the
shame of physic, as the fear of death is of all natural skill and valor. This
is Faiths proper evil, Faith alone professes this cure, undertakes it, and
performs it thoroughly.

Faith is that, that can turn fears into hopes, sighs into songs, tremblings
into exultings. Faith singles out this Giant as her chief prize, and grapples
with him, not as a match, but as a vanquished underling, sets her foot on the
neck of this King of Terrors. Faith concludes, that a Christ has taken all the
poison out of the cup of death, and made it an wholesome potion of immortality to
his people: so that now their death, is nothing else but the funeral of all
their sins, cares, and sorrows, and the Resurrection of their true joys and
comforts.

3. Is a Believers death a sleep? Be exhorted to that high and Honorable duty,
of serving your generation before you fall asleep. So did holy David, Acts
13.36. write after his Copy.

4. Is a Believers death no more then a sleep? Adore and bless the infinite
mercy and goodness of the Lord Jesus, who by his death has quite plucked out
the sting of death, and soaltered both its name and nature. That which was
once, a grim death, is now to you nothing more then a sweet sleep.

5. Is a Believers death a sleep? Oh then prepare for death. Sleep steals, and
creeps upon us unawares, so does death. To day therefore, while it is called to
day. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth, Prove. 27.1. Thou will repent to morrow! But what if this night thy soul
should be taken from thee? Luke 12.20. Have thou not heard of fishes taken in
an evil net, and of birds that are caught in a snare? so are the sons of man
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. To
this end

1. Live in a constant and serious Gaena Damitiani sunebris, Et; AEgytiorum
Sceletus inter pocula.
meditation of approaching death. This was that which Meses so earnestly plies
the Throne of Grace for. Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to number our days, that we
may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Plato's Philosophy in this was true Divinity,
The whole sum of a wise man's life is the commentation on his death. Not every
sleet and stitting flash, but a frequent, deep, and sixed Contemplation. This
was that, which saved the soul of the young Prodigal, who for several days, an
hour together, sixth his eyes and thoughts on the ring with a deaths-head, given
him by a friend on that condition. Ortelius reports of some people, that they
thought this duty so necessary, that they used the bones of dead men, instead
of money: that death might be continually in their eye. Those sunera Pacuri are
of remark in story. He was used every night to be carried to his chamber, as to
his Sie ordinandus est dies omnis tanqua vitam consum met, Seu.
grave: and the word at the close of the solemnity was (...).

2. Look not on death at a distance; as that that shall come certainly, but as
that, that may comesuddenly. Look on every day as thy last. Do not as those,
that have set days of truce and peace, in which they hang up their Arms a
rusting, and do not watch their beacons. But rather as those, that live in
perpetual hazard of war, and of the enemies inroad. Have all things in daily
readiness for service, at half an hours warning, on the least alarm. Stand as
it were sentinel; with musket loaded, match lighted, piece cockt, ready to
discharge. Live not one hour in insidelity, or impenitency. Dare not to sleep a
minute, who can tell, but then the Bridegroom may come and take thee, as he did
the foolish Virgins, napping, Matthew. 25.5, 6, 13. Thy Lord comes, not only in a
day, but in an hour thou think not of, therefore watch always, Matthew. 24.44,
50.

Dehortation. Is a Believers death only a sleep? Then mourn not immoderately
for them that are fallen asleep in Jesus. Remember, I beseech you, you near
Relations of our now deceased Friend, mourn not immoderately, she is fallen
asleep in Jesus. This is our Aposiles great drist in the Text, to dissuade his
Thessalonians from immoderate grief for their dead Relations, and that on this
account, because they were only fallen asleep in Christ.

It is indeed an indispensable duty, to be really affected with, and afflicted
for, the death of holy men; who knows no what lamentations were taken up for
good old Jacob, Genesis 50.16. for holy Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.33. for precious,
hopeful Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25. Who has not heard of Elisha's Epitaph, my
father, my father, the Horsemen of Israel, and the Chariots thereof, 2 King.
13.14. Nurse Deborah buried under Allon-Bacuth, an oak of weeping, Genesis 35.8.
and charitable Dorcas covered with tears, as she covered others with clothes.
Act. 9.39. Tears for the dead are their just (...). dofunelorum justa.
dues. If ever grief be seasonable, it becomes a funeral.

Grieve then we may, and must, but not immoderately; our sorrow must have its
just check, and due temper, and that on these accounts.

1. Such an immoderate grief, would give too great an occasion to the Gentiles
to traduce us. When they see us bewail those as utterly lost, whom we profess
to live with God. Spei nostra, ac fidei prevaricatores sumus. Simulata, ficta,
fucata videnter esse, quae dicimus. Cypr.

2. Such an immoderate grief is contrary to the example of our holy
predecessors. Saints that have gone before us have set us bounds to their
sorrows. So did Abraham for his dearest Sarah, Intimated by a small Caph in
Libcothah.
Geu. 23.2, 4. So did Josoph and his brethren for their father Jacob. True,
they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation, but then it lasted but ten
days, Genesis 50.10. Though the Egyptians indeed mourned for him seventy days,
v. 3. Not that the Israelites were less kind, but more Christian-like in their
sorrows. And David too, though a man as it were made up of strong affections,
sets limits to his griefs, 2 Samuel 12.23, 24. Though in Absolom's case he forgot
himself. Which yet Non orbarium doluit sed quia noverat in quas panas, impia,
adultero and parricidalis anima raperetur. Aug.
Austin endeavors to excuse.

3. Such an immoderate grief is direclly contrary to Gods Revealed-will. The
Israelites might not cut themselves, not make any baldness between their eyes
for the dead. Both, testimonies of the Heathens immoderate sorrow, Deuteronomy. 14.1.
and our Savior intimates his dislike of the Jewish Minstrels, which were used
for the increase of sorrow, at funerals, Matt. 9.23, 24. as knowing that, in
that case, our affections needed not so much a spur, as a bridle.

4. Such an immoderate grief is thwart and contrary to the blessed estate and
condition of Saints departed. Is it fit to grieve immoderately for those that
are preferred hence to heaven? Suppose them, whilst here, as well as earth
could make them, what is earth to heaven, gold to glory, the enjoyment of the
whole creation, to the fruition of a Creator? Why then should we blubber our
cheeks, and say of them as Jacob of Joseph, They are devoured, when as they are
gone to be Lords in Egypt. Non Lugendus qui moritur, sed desiderandus, Tert.
Saints departed, are fitter objects for our desires, to be with them, then of
our sorrows, for being for a while deprived of them. Too deep a Non accipiendoe
sunt hic airae vestes quando illi ibi instrumenta alba jam sumpserum. Cypr.
black becomes not us below, while we consider, that they walk in whites above.
If it was our joy to see them sanctified, it should be our triumph to know them
saved.

Lastly, by way of Consolation. How does this Doctrine drop like the dew, or
rather like an Honeycomb. You hear, Believers, that your death is a sleep.
Nothing more. Hold up therefore your hands that hang down, strengthen the
feeble knees. Remember,

1. Your death is a sleep. Whilst here you are very apt to complain of many a
vexing day, of many a restless night. O know there is a time shortly coming,
when you shall lie down quietly in your beds of earth, and not be disturbed in
the least, either with one waking moment or distracting dream. When once the
curtains of darkness are drawn about you, you shall never open your eyes more
till the morning of Eternity dawn, and break forth in luster on you. Behold, to
your everlasting comfott, death it self is even embalmed to you, and clothed in
such soft language, that you may scent a perfume, and discover a beauty in it,
and it is no more a death, but a sleep only to you.

2. It Is a sleep, that is accompanied with rest and quietness: An undisturbed
Rest. A port, an haven of Rest, and how welcome should that be to a sea-sick
weather-beaten Seaman? How dessrable, how acceptable should death be to a soul
long tossed in the waves of this world, sick of its own sinful imaginations, and
tired with external temptations. Here alas, there is no Palace so high, or
Tower so strong, that can keep diseases and infirmities from your bodies,
cares, fears, temptations from your souls: yea but your death puts you into
such a Citadel, whose walls are so many cubits high, that no Senacherib can
shoot an arrow into it; its strong gates and bars exclude all enemies, all
annoyances. None from without can storm it, none from within can betray it.
It Is such a Castle as affords a perfect tranquillity to all within it, Rev.
14.13.

3. It Is a sleep in Jesus: To whom departed Saints are still united; and whilst
Christ your Head is above water, you need not fear a drowning. When you depart
hence from your Friends Arms, you do but ascend to your Saviors more close
embraces. No sooner shall your souls lay down the clay of your body, but they
shall be seated under his Altar, Rev. 6.9. Under his special protection, which
is such a perfect Sanctuary, as no Avenger of blood, can there either arrest,
or disturb you.

4. It Is a sleep, and that in Jesus, and therefore you shall and must rise
again. If Christ the head be risen, the body shall not always sleep. It Is the
Apostles grand comfort in the Text, and his Argument, 1 Cor. 15.20. These
bodies of yours in death, are not lost, but laid up only, Job 19.26, 27. and as
man lies down in weakness, sleeps and rises up in strength, like a Giant
refresht with wine. So a Believer, like a grain of corn, dies indeed, but it is
that he may spring up in more luster, beauty, fruitfulness. John 12.24 As by
sleep our bodies are refresht, so by death our bodies shall be resin'd. These
bodies of yours, which are laid down in corruption, shall be raised in glory.
That skin which is now wrinkled, shall one day shine; this dust shall be
glorious, this base and vile body shall be transformed and made conformable to
that glorious Standard, viz. Christ's Body. These course materials, this lump of
red earth, shall be laid to mellow in the earth, till it be fit to be made more
then a China-dish, even a vessel fit for the great Masters use, a Cabinet fit
to receive a glorified soul. Think not therefore much to loose a little
vermilion red, a mixture only of phlegm and sanguine, for this, you shall gain a
radiant and resplendent luster; in comparison whereof, the most accomplished
beauty on earth would look but like a mere deformity. Death will not so much
consume, as calcine your bodies: sever the dross from the silver, the ore from
the gold, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. when you fall, it shall not be said of you as of
him. Died Abner as a fool? or as a Beast? No, but as a Combustus senex tumule
procedit adultus, consumens dat membera rogus.
Phoenix, out of whose very ashes there springs another more lively and
vigorous. Wherefore comfort one another with these words,

And be not ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, etc.

FINIS.

