THE DECLARATION OF Sir MARMADVKE LANGDALE KNIGHT, Colonel-General:

AND Of the Gentlemen, and other loyal Subjects now in Action for His
Majesty's Service in the Northern Parts.

Printed in the Year 1648.

THE DECLARATION OF Sir Marmaduke Langdale Knight, Golonel-Generall;
And of the Gentlemen, and other Loyal Subjects now in action for His
Majesty's Service in the Northern parts.
WHereas we are entered into this present Engagement, that our real intentions
may not be mis-judged, but the integrity and candor of them may be apparent to
the whole Kingdom, we have thought it necessary to publish this Declaration,
together with the reasons and grounds of our present Actions, and what we only
aim at and expect from our endeavors herein. And first we shall begin with the
true Motives that have put us upon this War; which are, That after the Forces
raised by his Majesty's Commissions were disbanded, and the Scotch Army quietly
marched away into their own Kingdom, and when it might justly have been
expected that the two Houses of Parliament should have proceeded according to
their many Declarations toward settling Religion, and a sound and wel-grounded
Peace, restoring the King's Majesty to his Throne, just Rights, and his full
freedom, and to the glory and splendour of his royal Ancestors; that the Queen
and Prince might have been invited to return, and all Armies disbanded, the
people eased of Excise, Free Quarter, and all intolerable burdens and
pressures: Contrary to their expectations, the Schismatical Army under the
Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax first refused to disband, seized on the Person of
his Majesty against his will, carried him up and down, until he was forced to
fly for his life, and since that time his sacred Person has been barbarously
and tyranously imprisoned, and such Bills and Propositions offered unto him, as
would pull down the glory of the Crown, and leave the Subjects so ashamed as
will render us a Nation servile, and scorn of the world; and to these
Propositions the Kingdom of Scotland were so far from giving their consent,
that before the sending of them they made their Protestation against them:
which this whole Kingdom has reason to look upon as an action that manifested
their eminent Loyalty toward his Majesty, and that had right regard to the
happiness and peace of this Kingdom. His Majesty is, and long has been a
close prisoner, and inhumanely denied that freedom which is allowed to most
notorious Murderers and Malefactors, the comfort of his Royal Consort and
Children; and without the assistance of his loyal Subjects, destitute of any
hope of enlargement or relief; and certainly it should inflame our Loyalties
herein, knowing what mean respects, nay barbarous violence has been offered to
his sacred Person by the Governor of the Isle of Wight; and yet we hear not
that he has had any check for it, but must believe we are well dealt with that
he has not received public thanks for it. And doubtless these men have dealt
the same measure to the whole Kingdom, there being neither Justice nor Law
found amongst us; but all our lives and estates being in the Arbitrary power of
such Judicatures and Committees as have palpably intended the improving of
their fortunes and lives, by unlawful power to tyranize over us. And that
which they have most-pretended to be a Noli me tangere, Privilege of
Parliament, they have so much abased and suffered to be violated, as no time or
story of the Nation can parallel.

Having thus briefly laid down these our unsupportable sufferings, which are
known to be apparently true, and much more numerous then here we express them;
we shall now offer what may be Remedies to these great evils; and what may
re-instate us in that happiness and glory that we have formerly enjoyed, and
for which we declare that we are entered into this present Engagement.

1. That his Majesty may be restored to this Ancient Royal Rights. 2. That we
may enjoy a free Parliament, to settle all differences in Church and
Commonwealth. 3. That all Armies may be disbanded, the people eased of Excise,
Free Quarter, and all other burdens and pressures. 4. That the known Laws of
the Land may freely flourish amongst us, which are the only security of the
Subjects Propriety. 5. That the Union betwixt the Kingdoms of England and
Scotland may be preserved according to the Act of Pacification.
These are the things which we shall purfue, and for this end we desire the
assistance of all our fellow Subjects: And we profess that we shall make no
distinction of persons, in relation to the former differences betwixt the King
and the two Houses, but shall cordially and cheerfully embrace their joining
with us in the prosecution of these ends, and shall endeavor the payment of
all such Arrears as are due to all such Officers and Soldiers on either side
as shall join with us; and an Act of Oblivion for all acts done since the
beginning of the Parliament to all parties.

Lastly, We shall give just satisfaction to all our Fellow Subjects, that we
take not up arms without the Authority of Law; for we have derived all our
Commissions from his Highness the Prince of Wales, etc. And we shall manifest
to all the world, that all our actions shall aim at the Peace and Happiness of
this miserable distracted Kingdom; and that in prosecution of this War we shall
severely punish all under our Command that shall use any plunder, or offer any
violence to those that give us their assistance for so pious and just a work.
And we hope, that possessing our selves of the Towns of Barwick and Carlisle
will be thought very just and necessary, when we do upon great cercertainty and
assurance let the Kingdom know, that if our Forces had not surprised those
Towns at that instant of time, they would have been immediately possessed by
those that are the troublers of the Kingdoms Peace and Happiness.

FINIS.

