Glowworm. Cicindula.
P. They live about hedges, in April, May, and June. M. Their meat is not much
observed. N. (...). Noctiluca. Nitedula. Noctuvigila.
Glow worm. Card. Schrod. T. They have an anodyne virtue. Some use them against
the stone, so Rod. Cast. made into troches with gumm dragant and a little oil
of almonds. The D. is scrup. 2. Aldrov. Some use the juice thereof to wright in
the night, with the gall of a Dog, and rotten wood of a willow. Weck. Their
water serves to catch fish with. Reisch. They shine by reason of their innate
light; for being cold, their igneous parts gather about the parts of digestion.
Jonst. They are generated of dew. And shine under the wing.

Gnat. Culex.
P. They live in fenny, and moist places, almost every where. M. They live upon
wine, things acid, and sweet. N. (...). Gall. Mouscheron. It. Zanzara.
Gnat. Aldrov. T. V. They serve as meat for the Crocodile, Spider, birds and
fishes. They may be driven away by anointing with wormwood and oil, or juice,
of cumin seed, manna thuris, vinegar, or the fume of fleabane. St. Katharines
flower, cypress; calamint, rue, juniper wood, sulphur, or bdellium. Jonst.
They are generated of putrified matter. They smell well and love light.

Gras-hopper. Cicada.
P. They live almost every where in hot countries. M. Of dew, and leaves of
trees. N. (...). Gall. Cigale. Ital. Cicala.
Gras-hopper. Aldrov. T. Is of a very hot temper. V. Boter. Those of the
occidental Indies eat them. V. Athen. The Ancients did eat them to open the
veins. Rond. They are to be eaten whole tosted, to help the bladder, and
difficulty of urin. Gal. Used dry they help the colic with pepper. So Schrod.
The ashes help the stone. They are begotten of putrefaction, love men, and live
not long. Their description is needless.

H.
Hornet. Crabro.
P. They live in hollow trees, and holes, etc. M. Of great flies. Grapes,
flesh, and fruit. N. (...). Craber. Gall. Froilon. Ital. Calauron.
HOrnet. Aldrov. T. V. The water of their decoction or distillation, if touched
on the skinn, makes the place so swell, that there seems to be the dropsy or
some great poison meddled with; yet without pain. The remedy is triacle drunk,
so Mizald. the same is used by some whores to counterfeit a great belly; and by
beggars to gain money by; so of that of Wasps. Their stingings are to be cured
by taking triacle inwardly, and mithridate, applying outwardly Cows dung and
savory, and fasting spittle. Plin. Or rue, bays, watermint, salt with vinegar,
and sealed and armenian earth. Their description is needless. Jonst. They
arise out of the harder part of Horse flesh, as Wasps out of the softer, and as
Bees. They love Wasps, hate Flies, and follow their leader, which is biggest.
They sting worst about the dog days, and signify foul weather, when flying
often into their holes in the evening.

K.
Kind. Gryllus.
P. They live in old chimney corners, where they make a noise. M. Of panick,
ripe corn, and appels, etc. N. (...). Acheta. Gall. Crignon. It. H. Grillo.
Cricket.
KInd. Scalig. T. They are of the same nature as Cantharides, V. rubbed on,
they help the roughness of the jaws, and tonsills; their excrements with oil
help purrid ulcers and the holy fire alone. Schrod. Their powder is said to
provoke urine, and strengthen the sight, and the juice helps the tonsills.
Jonst. Some use them to cause sleep. They may be driven away by water in which
vitriol has been. They help purulent ears. Applied They help the parotides.
In water they help the stone and dysury. Hung about the neck they help
quartans. They fly abroad in July and August and the female is the greatest.

L.
Leech. Hirudo.
P. They live chiefly in muddy places, in ditches and lakes. M. Of blood, and
putrid matter. N. (...). Heb. Aluka. Sanguisuga. It. Sanguettola.
LEech. Gadald. T. V. Before they are used, they are to be kept in water, and
the place is to be rubbed with nitre, clay, or to be scarrified, and anointed
with blood. They being first put into warm and clean water, and then cleansed,
using tepid oil, that the parts may not be cold, and if they are to be
fastened to the hands, or feet, they are to be thrust into the water in which
they are; and if there are but few to be used, their tails are to be cut off
with a pair of cisers, for then they draw blood, till salt, nitre, or ashes to
be cast upon their mouths, afterward a cupping glass is to be applied to
draw out the poison, else the part is to be fome^ted with sponges: And if the
parts shall water after, manna, cumin, or meal may be sprinkled on them,
applying wool afterward with a little oil; and if the blood shall continue
still to issue out, apply lint or spiders webbs with vinegar: Or burnt galls,
or a new spung with tar, binding on a paper moistened in vinegar; but in the
long parts, ligature may serve. Here note that leeches draw not from deep
parts, but the uppermost: And they are to be used in such bodies that fear the
incisions of scarrifications, or in such parts, in which cupping glasses cannot
be used, by reason of their smalnesse, gibbosity, or inequality: And leeches
are to be taken away, when we think they have drawn half the quantity that is
to be taken away, and the rest is to be let pass, and the part after is to be
fomented and warmed, and the flux to be stopped by things astringent and
emplastick. They may be applied by a reed also, and removed by hot oil put
upon their mouths, they are useful against subcuraneous diseases, as ringworms,
etc. And in the remission of diseases, symptoms, pain, grief, swellings and
heat, that the matter may not be more attracted, sometimes they may be applied
to such parts as will not bear bloodletting. Albuc. The best are those in
sweet waters, not redd, the great headded, black, green; such causing
apostumes, faintings, fluxes of blood, fevers, laxity, and evil ulcers: Those
also are bad, that live in ill waters, black, dirty, or stinking; but the best
live where Froggs do, having two lines of the color of arsnick, round, liver
colored, and like the Mouse tail, red bellied, and green backed, if from
running waters: In Germany they prefer the greater, greenish, and black
spotted, Avic. They are to be kept a day before use, having what was in the^
squeezed out, and having a little blood then given to the^; then they are to be
taken in a sponge to wipe off their viscosity, and to be put into clear water,
being stung with a nettle, to cause them to vomit. They may be made to fasten,
by milk, and to fall off by aloes, or vinegar: and by vinegar and salt, they
may be made to vomit their blood, and then the parts are to be fomented with
warm water: And after the place may be stopped by lime, ashes, bole armoniack
or aloes. They may be applied to most veins, as in venomous bitings,
gangreens, ringworms, vices of the skinn, to the foremost and hinder part of
the head in lethargies, in the melancholic epilepsy to the spleen, influxions
and pains of the head to the parts behind the ears, and coronal future, in
madness behind the ears, in rhewms of the eyes to the forehead, Alex. Ben.
and to the gums in the toothach, Trot. to red places in the face. Cael. Aurel.
To the neck and throat in the quinsey, to the liver, in the hardness thereof,
and dropsy: To the spleen for its griefs, to the loins for the satyriasis, to
the hemorrhoids in the melancholy, putrid fevers, head-griefes, dyspepsy,
transpiration hindered, in continual fevers; and they then may be stopped with
the white of an egg and hares furre, to the ankles for the menses and
inflammation, so for the gout. Marcel. Aet. Their ashes are a psilothron, and
if putrified in black wine they make the hair black. Their powder given
causes mutation of feathers. If swallowed they cause a rejection of thin
blood. Diosc. If they stick to the mouth of the ventricle they may be removed
by drinking of brine, the leaves of laserwort, or beets, with vinegar, or snow
water with oxycrate, nitre gargled with water, or shoomakers black with
vinegar: Or cold water held in the mouth with meal of lupines, with purges,
also salt, and Sea water. Gal. Or garlic, onions, leekes, dittander, green
nep, vinegar with butter; birth-wort with salt, and the suffumigation of the
wall Louse, so Florent. glasses of water applied to the mouth, the meal of gum
dragant ashes, or wormwood blowed in, or with instruments. If in the nostrils
use errhines and purgers, the same serve for brutes, especially rue with
vinegar. Absyrtus used hot oil with wine. The Crocodile uses the bird
Trochilus. Rond. The leech of the Sea boiled in old oil helps the pains of
the ears, with that of almonds or chamomile it helps the pain of the
hemorrhoids, in wine it helps wounds of the nerves, it helps convulsions, and
the alopecia burnt with vinegar: Jonst. They are generated of putrid matter,
and they appear in May; when they fasten on the body they leave not off, till
they are full, except pulled to pieces. They move by the tail and mouth. If
put into a cane they go out backwards, and through a very narrow passage.

Locust. Locusta.
P. They live in Russia, Syria, and Italy. M. Of herbs, corn, and flowers. N.
(...). Arab. Gierat. (...) Diosc.
Locust. Aldrov. T. Many did use them for food. V. Diosc. Their suffumigation
helps the difficulty of urine, especially in Women, so Plin. and Avic. The same
helps the hemorrhoids, their dung helps the panus and morphew, their feet help
warts, Plin. and the leprosy with Goats dung, and expel the stone. Avic.
Twelve grains of their eggs, with a little dry myrtle, drunk, help the dropsy.
Rhas. Given without legs in wine they help against all venomous bitings.
Diosc. That without wings drunk in wine, helps the bitings of Scorpions; some
say, that worn about the neck, they help quartans. Gaudent. Mer. And if they
swim in wine they show its not adulterated, so Gras-hoppers. Jonst. They ware
eaten formerly, by the Ethiopians, Africans, Syrians, Persians, Arabians, and
Lybians, and now in the East and West Indies, as also by John the Baptist.
Albert. As for the description, their head is like a horses, and they have six
feet, they are generated of putrefaction in a dry time, and by coiture. Their
fume is an amulet.

Louse. Pediculus.
P. Their place is sufficiently known, to every one. M. They live of flesh and
blood, and the like. N. (...). Pedunculus. Gall. Poulx. Hisp. Peojo.
Louse. Schrod. T. V. They are eaten by rusticks to help the jaundise, and
atrophy; put into the meatus they provoke urine, provoking the expulsive
faculty. Some put them into the eyes, to eat off wefts. Jonst. If breeding in
the heads of those that have been long sick, they prognosticate health. They
are begotten of hot and moist matter, especially pituitous blood; for the
bilious and melancholic kills them, so gall applied; and chiefly about the
emunctories they are produced. They often arise from the eating of basil,
chestnuts, figgs, radishes, parsley, dates, and fume of the wood of aloes. The
remedies against them, Diosc. are garlic boiled with organy, or coriander,
Plin. So the seeds of staphic agria, mustard, garlic with vinegar and nitre,
and radish oil, using them outwardly: So the slough of Serpents, seed of
tamarisks, and water of radish leaves, inwardly. Also barbery leaves, and
quicksilver and oil of roses, worn on a girdly about the belly.

M.
Moth. Blatta.
P. They live almost every where, chiefly in mills. M. Of cloth, and books,
etc. N. (...). Ital. Platella. Tinea. Hisp. Polilla. Gall. Teigne.
MOth. Gal. T. They may be the substitutes of the Buprestis. V. In oil they
help the ears. The soft boiled in oil help warts. Those living about mills,
having their heads pulled off, help the leprosy. Diosc. Those in bake houses,
stamped with oil help the pains of the ears. The stinking sort with
pisselaeum, help uncurable ulcers, botches, also eating ulcers, scabs and
whitlows: Diod. Also the jaundise, and orthopnoea with rosin, and honey;
applied they draw things out that are fixed in the body. They may be gathered
together by moth-mullen. They may be kept from bee-hives by sharp sumes, and
setting a candle near them in the evening: they may be kept from books, they
being irrigated with sharp alum, or nitre. garments are defended from them by
lavender flowers, or rosemary, mints, wormwoood, staechas, and watergermander,
Jonst. also by oil of spike. They help against deafeness and pain of the
ears: With old wine, honey, pomegranat pills, apples, tar, and onion juice.

O.
Oxeflie. Tabanus.
P. About waters, in the Indies, etc. and high ways. M. Of humors in the
water, and blood. N. (...). Musca caballina. Asilus.
OXeflie. T. V. Pliny says that the worms of which they are generated worn
help against fevers, and they were used for the same purpose by the Magitians.
Jonst. As for their description, their body is long, divided chiefly into
three parts, they are of a blackish color, with six black feet, in other
things they are like the Cynomyia.

P.
Pismire. Formica.
P. Almost every where, in England and other places. M. Of fruits, seeds, and
Serpents. N. (...). Murmos. Frugilegae. Gall. Formie. Hisp. Hormiga.
PIsmire. Aldrov. T. In some places in the Indies they eat them with pepper;
but they are rather to be abominated in this respect. V. Plin. The greater and
winged stamped with a little salt, help the psora, leprosy, and red pimples.
Some say that five drunk help all bitings of field Spiders. Those that have
wings taken in oil of elder, and applied to the genital, cause strength in
venery; the same are used in the Book of secrets attributed to Gallen. Plin.
Bears eat them against the hurts of Mandrakes, and nauseousnesse. Plin. Their
eggs help dullness of hearing: Stamped with flies they make black the eyebrows.
Rubbed on the cheeks of Boys, they keep them from roughness. Arnold. Vil.
unc. 2. of their eggs, with the juice of henbane, and batt's blood cradicate
hair, if used twice or thrice in a day. Nightingals use them as physic, when
they are sick. Plin. The ant-hils applied help botches, and gouts, etc. Schrod.
The best are those that live under resiniferous trees. T. They are hot, dry and
cause venery. V. Their acid smell does much cherish the vital spirits. Their
hills heat and dry, and strengthen the nerves: therefore they help the palsy,
hysterical passions, and the cachexy. The oil of their infusion causes
coiture: the liquour made of them in an oven, is a good ophthalmick remedy,
helping the suffusion of the eyes. They generate pustuls by biting, and their
eggs drunk cause flatulency and pain of the belly. They may be driven away by
bitumen, sulphur, and tithymal; so Jonst. The destilled water of them causes
vomiting, Gesn. and helps fevers. A bath made of them expels the stone.
Brunfels. applied with salt, eggs, and axunge, laying a cloth betwixt they help
the sciatica, Marcel. they help the itch; Albert. and dissipate flatulencies.
Non. They help corns and tumors. Their description is needless. They
generate in the winter, bringing forth little worms, which turn inte eggs,
which then bring forth in spring; when old they grow winged, and live not long
after it. they live like a common wealth, and get corn, which they dry, and
bite at both ends, that it grow not. They ware stones by their assiduity, and
make beaten paths; and bury their dead, damm out water, and help one an other
in the drawing of their burdens, Aet. The greater lead, and the lesser
evaginate the corn, if dirty they cleanse themselves before they enter into
their places. They teach the young to labor, the idle they expel, and when
they carry in their grain it is a sign of soul weather. They cast up the
earth over their doors, that the water may not enter in. They have three cells,
in one they live, breed in the second and bury there, and keep corn in the
third.

S.
Scolopender. Scolopendra.
P. Their habitation is, in the bodies of trees. M. They live about the trunks
of trees. N. (...). Porcus lutosus. Multipeda.
SColopender. Aldrov. T. V. Their poison causes putrefaction. Diosc. The
symptoms after their biting is bluenesse about the wound, putrefaction, and
there is an itch over all the body. The remedy is salt finely powdered, with
vinegar, or wild rue applied. The place is to be fomented with brine, drinking
birthwort in wine, wild time, or wild rue; also the seed and flowers of
asphodil drunk in wine, Plin. Also the leaves of horsmint drach. 2. being drunk
in wine, and mints, maiden hair, wild pennyroyall with salt, wild cumin,
vinegar drunk, childrens urine, salt drunk in vinegar, the ashes of the Sea
Crabb, and barley meal; but some of the Ancients prefer ashes kneaded with
vinegar, and penny royal, rue, and mints, drunk in wine. Jonst. Boiled in oil
they take away hair. Their bitings are to be scarified. Muff. They differ as
to their description, from the Gally-worm; as the Lobster from the Crevise.

Scorpion. Scorpio.
P. In Germany, Helvetia, Italy, and the Canary Islands. M. Of earth, herbs,
lizards, aspes, and moths. N. (...). Scorpius. Satocollos Pandect. Hepa.
Scorpion. T. V. Gal. Being roasted and eaten with bread they break the stone in
the bladder. Plin. So the ashes, gr. 6. being taken with the syrup of roots,
so the water injected by a Catheter, with the seed of Macedonian stoneparsly,
with the tecolite, or stones of Crabs, so Card. Mes. So the oil used to the
reins and privy parts, some add the oil of bitter almonds, or round
birthwort, gentian, galingal, and bark of the roots of capers. Sylv. It Is used
in remedies against poison; and with spices it opens, incideth, makes thin,
cleanses, and breaks open, and breaks the stone specifically. Varig. Some
by the unction of the oil have been freed from quotidian fevers. That of
Matthiolus, used to the pulsatile veins, as in the temples, hands, feet, and
region of the heart, repeted thrice in an hour, frees from all poisons, within
the body, that corrode not, also from the bitings of Vipers, aspes, or any
venomous beasts, also it cures and preserves from the plague: It kills all
inward worms, and helps all pains of flatulency, or cold, especially of the
ventricle, the confection of Damascen, also breaks the stone. Gal. The
Scorpion helps those that are bitten by the Viper. Plin. Stamped they help the
poison of the Stellion. Stamped and taken with mulse, they help the jaundice,
also often applied with rose vinegar they help the gout, and inflammations.
Aldrovand reports also other uses hereof, which are superstitious. Schrod.
They provoke urine; their infusion in oil of bitter almonds, drunk, helps the
colic and stone: The compounded of Mesue, helps the pains of the reins
also, venomous bitings, paroxysmes in fevers used to the back, and helps
pains of the ears. Pon. Their sanguine oil, mightily helps nephritick pains
used outwardly. So, Kief. Jonst. As for their description, they are of a
soutish color, oval form, with little eyes, eight feet, and two arms. They
touch only the pilous parts. When they go they go tra^sversly. They love the
shade, they sting not if not trod on, they seem friends by their head, when
they strike with their tail; and in Aethiopia those that tread on their
excrements, have exulcerated feet. Their poison is very troublesome, and is
worst at midde day and in summer, and its counted incurable after the eating of
basil. The symptoms are inflammation, hardness, redness, and pain of the
part, inequal temper, sweat, trembling, swellings in the groin, flatulency of
the belly, and distorsion of the face, etc. The remedies are wormwood,
sowthernwood drunk in wine, amomum, bishopsweed, aniseed, garlic, birth wort,
asphodil, assa foetida, atriplex, blites, marigold, calamint, centaury, ground
ivy, coloquintida, cyperus, galbanum, barley and flowerdeluce: Balsam, myrtle,
rose, bramble, bays, frankincense and vine. Man's spittle and urine, mummy,
river-froggs, and themselves stamped and applied with salt, line-seed, and
marsh mallows. Also Bezoar, their oil, triacle, Diaphantus, 's antidote, and
Scorpiaca, and Ardoinus his remedies. They are driven away by brimstone.

Seepadde. Stella marina.
P. They live in the shore of Aquitania, and Italy, etc. M. Their meat is
shell-fishes. N. (...). Sidus marinum.
Seepadde. Bell. T. Those of four, six, and twelve rades are edible, having a
red or luteous flesh in their arms. V. Hipp. The black drunk with cabbage in
odorate wine, helps the strangling of the womb. Applied they help the wounds of
the Sea-Dragon, and Scorpions, also against all poisons, drunk, by biting, or
blow, being drunk in broth. Veget. The fume helps against pestilent diseases,
so Myrepsus uses them with other things. Turnebus uses them as a psilothron
with scolopenders, nettles, and nitre. Rond. With restharrow it helps the
rupture of the peritonaeum, so Jonst. As for the description, they void their
excrements by their mouth, and have a hard skin: they wander about the Sea as
the polypus, and they presently digest their meat, being of a fiery nature.

Silk-worme. Bombax.
P. They are in the Indies, and other places. M. Of mylberry and elm leaves.
N. (...). Vermis laniferus, Schrod. Ser.
Silk-worme. Aldrov. T. They feed birds fatt, and make fields fertile: the
German soldiers did sometimes fry and eat them. The silk is temperate, and
strengthens the heart, therefore it is used in the diamoschum, confection of
alchermes, and cordial powders when crude: Serap. It Is to be cut into small
parts with a pair of scizers, then tosted at the fire. Hal. Or its to be baked
in an oven. Vincent. If burnt it mundifieth wounds, strengthens, and and
cleanses the teeth with salt; in wounds of the head applied to the dura matter,
it strengthens the brain, and preventeth putrefaction, especialy the dyed.
Schrod. Silk-wormes, dried, powdered, and put on the crown of the head help the
vertigo and convulsion: in garments its hot and dry in the first degree, and
strengthens all the spirits. That died with Kermes, stopps bleeding, dries
wounds, and is used to the erysipelas.

Snaile. Cochlea.
P. They are to be had, almost every where. M. They feed upon fruits and herbs,
etc. N. (...). Gall. Limacon. It. Limago. Limax.
Snailes. Schrod. T. Cool, incrassate, consolidate, lenify, and agree to the
nerves and lungs. V. Therefore they are often used inwardly against the cough,
phthisick, spitting of blood, and other affections of the lungs, also against
heat of the liver, and colic pains. Used outwardly they ripen and break the
anthrax. Applied alone or with the gall of a Bull, they consolidate wounds,
especially of the nerves; and they cure ulcers, chiefly of the legs. They
ease podagrick inflammations, and the belly of the hydropical, and they make
the hernious hydrocele to fall; applied to the forehead they help the
hemorrhage. Their spume helps fistula's. Their shells powdered help the stone,
and dry and consolidate clefts in the hands. Their fatt swimming on broth when
cold, helps redness of the eyes, and pains; and applied to the forehead with
the white of an egg, it stopps defluxions to the eyes. Their salivous mucus
which they vomit out when pricked, is emplastick, therefore it gleweth, and
intercepts defluxions to the eyes in frontalls. Their water distilled in May or
October, helps such as are atrophick, it strengthening the liver: used outwardly
it serves as a fucus for the face. Their ashes dry, incrassat, and help chaps
and roughness. S. Closs. Their liquour with salt helps pains of the gout, and
helps warts after scarrification. The best are those that live in open places.

Spanish-flies. Cantharides
P. They live in Italy, Germany, and other places. M. Of ashes, roses, wild
olives, corn, etc. N. (...). Musca Hispanica. Gall. Cantharide. Hisp Cubillo.
Spanish-flies. Aldrov. T. They have a caustic and burning faculty, hot and
dry in the fourth degree. V. Used inwardly to provoke urine, gr. 3. or 4. may
suffice with such remedies as may correct their poison, and outwardly with such
things as may mitigate their acrimony. H. They are not to be given to those
that have incurable diseases; or a scirrhus of the bowels. Those that are hot
bear the use of them worse, than those that are cold: and the weak than the
strong. Some cast away the feet, and head, others the head and body.
Hippocrates rejected the head, feet, and wings, using them in a potion against
the dropsy, sc. 3. in water; but Galen used them whole, some count their wings
alexitery. If taken whole they draw out heat, ulcerate and corrode. They are
used to maturate and open ulcers. Their powder with Goats blood, or mastick
taken in wine helps swellings of the body, used fasting; Diosc. And the dropsy,
so applied also. Their powder made by adustion, with the gum of cherry trees,
to make it more wholesome, is used in diuretic electuaries, and apozems.
Applied to the arm and shoulders, they strongly provoke urine. Plin. Applied
to tetters with the juice of grapes of the wild vine, and fatt of a sheep or
Goat, they cure the same: Applied with tar they help the alopecia, the skinn
being prepared with nitre, and they not being suffered to ulcerate deep,
applying the heads of Mice with their galls, and dung, with hellebore and
pepper. Galen also uses them in his fifth book de comp. med. secundum loc.
for the same purpose, and the leprosy. Plin. Used with the wild vine they help
warts, and draw out things fixed in the body with barley meal. Gal. Used in
cerots and plasters they draw off scabbed nails, Plin. They help the gout.
They are now used in phoenigms in like diseases and pains of the joints, and
humors sticking in parts, which cannot be resolved by emollients, attenuants,
discutients, or attrahents: being finely beaten and applied, or made into a
cerot: Or one part thereof, with three of stamped mustard seed, and six of the
pulp of figgs, and sharp leven: Blisters also may be drawn, with black soap,
and common salt. an. made into a plaster, which being opened, and some fart or
lenient remedy applied, the exulceration will not be dried, till all the humor
is drawn out of the part affected; thus may humors be drawn out, that are
deeply settled in the body, and great pains eased. They also help white
pustuls of the face applied with vinegar, the itch, wild scabb, and running
sores, also cancers boiled with oil to the thickness of honey, it then
mollifying, ripening and opening ulcers. Hippocrates used them to eat flesh in
ulcers. They provoke urine and the menses, therefore he used them in many
diseases of Women that arised from obstructions, as to open the womb, cause
conception, in the strangling of the womb, pains, mother, secundine, and other
inward griefs, as the jaundice, etc. l. de not. Mul. de steril. de morb. mul.
de intern. aff. Gal. Stamped and drunk with the root of the white vine, they
kill worms, Matthew. Taken they help bitings of a mad Dog. Mizaldus says that
wrapped up in spiders webbs and worn, they help quartans. Ruel. They cause
venery, and drunk they help against the Salamander. Bapt. Port. Three or four
drunk help those that are bitten by the Phalangium. They help corns in the
feet. Their harms may be seen in Parey, l. 20. c. 28. C. The best are those
that have luteous lines in their wings: Fatt, little, broad, and pilous: Found
amongst corn. They may be killed by drowning in vinegar, and then kept in a
pot. They serve as meat to Vipers. Schrod. They are corrosive, and therefore
they are used in vesicatory plasters. They are very hurtful to the bladder,
in so much that used outwardly they exulcerate it. They are used by some to
destroy the foetus and as a philtron. Galen used their wings and feet as an
antidote against their poison; but now the wings; feet, and heads are thrown
away, and the body only used. Their oil drawn by the spirit of wine is
lithontriptick. Jonst. They are to be used very warily in physic; they are
poysonsome if taken in a great quantity, and cause pain in the bowels from
the mouth to the privities; they exulcerate the bladder, and inflame the next
parts: they cause pissing of blood and flesh, often the diarrhaea, dysentery,
syncope, and alienation of mind, and in the mouth the taste of pitch is
perceived. The remedy is milk of Women, Goats, or Cows, taken every hour, and
clysters with fatt broth, and emollient oiles, oil of lillies, and almonds
fresh, taken in a sorbile egg, oil of dropwort, and purslain. Also oil of
quinces, vinegar of squills, earth of Samos and the Armenian, triacle and
mithridate with things that refrigerate, resist erosion, and ease pain, with
vomiting. Aldrov. They also cause nauseousnesse, and the vertigo, and ill taste
in the mouth, by reason of vaporous humors in the stomach and liver adust by
intense heat, and so the right side is most troubled. The remedy after
vomiting is oil, or the decoction of the head of a Goat, Hogg, or Lamb, boiled
with line seed; also fatt broths largly taken, using the proritation of the
finger after it: And clysters of milk: Also crude and fresh butter. Diosc.
Clysters of rice, barley, mallows, lineseed, fenigreek, or roots of marsh
mallows, taking nitre with hydromel: Wine with pine kernels, seeds of
cucumbers, mulse, or Goose fatt. Cells. Alheale with milk, or galbanum Matthew.
The seed of fleabane, quinces, and mallows. The syrrupe of water lilly-flowers,
and violets: Also of poppies, lettuce, purslain, the juice of cucumbers, the
cremor of the seed of lettuce, poppies, cucumbers and citruls, with the water
of violets, and winter cherries, purslain, oil of white poppies. Baths of
marshmallows and gourds. And for the dysentery fatt broths, oil omphacine,
roses, with plantain water in clysters. For inflamed parts, barley meal with
mulse at last: Eating the flesh of Hens, Kids, Pigs, that are fatt, with
lineseed, and drinking must: And using the Electuary of Matthiolus and
Dioscorides, Merul. They may be driven away by the fume of Cows dung and
galbanum. Their description is needless, they are bred of humidity by
exsiccation on leaves, of ashes, or the white rose, etc. They generate worms,
and smell like tar.

Spider. Araneus.
P. They live, almost every where, in corners, etc. M. Of flies, wasps,
horseflies, and oxflies, etc. N. (...). Audax.
Spider. Diosc. The least kind called Lycos, applied with linen to the temples
or forehead helps tertian fevers. So Aeg. Some use it with leather against
quartains. Boiled in oil of roses and put into the ears it helps quartans. So
Plin. The long and white having slender feet, if stamped in old oil olive,
help white spots in the eyes; so with oil, or used alone in wool, or with
saffron. Plin. That called Lycos helps spitting of blood. Some count that those
carried in a box cause foecundity. Pliny uses the cobwebs of the fly spiders
to cure the epiphora. Gal. Their webbs help cutaneous wounds and ulcers, as
upon cutts by knives; but the white and pure does constipate and cool: put
upon fresh wounds it keeps them from sa^ies and cleanses fresh spotts.
Diosc. Plin. It helps inflammation, mixed with certain unguents and applied to
the temples it helps fevers. Avic. Dropped into the ear with oil, it helps its
pain. Remedies wrapped up therein and applied to the region of the heart and
stomach, help tertians and tremblings of the heart. Being put upon a broken
head with oil and vinegar it goes not off till the wound be healed, so Seren.
Some say that cantharides wrapped up in their webbs and worn by one that has a
quartain help it. Aetius makes a Cerot thereof. Some of the Indians eat
spiders to cause vomiting. Schrod. Spiders used to the pulses and temples help
febrile paroxysmes and quartans. The webb binds, conglutinats, is vulnerary,
stopps bleeding, prevents inflammation and helps febrile motions, used inwardly
and outwardly. Their oil both simple, and compound is used in the
antifebritick plaster. Jonst. A cerot made of them used to the navil helps the
suffocation of the womb, rubbed on without the head and feet they help the
Condylomata. The webb helps hemorrhages and fluxes. Its used in ointments
against creeping ulcers. Their description is needless. Theophrast. They are
hurtful to vines: their bitings cause an erection of the genital, so Ponzet.
the poison easily penetrating though terrene, and so moving flatulent humors,
which carried to the inferior parts cause the same. The field Spiders eaten or
drunk do inequally affect the whole body by heat, cold, horror, and itching,
inflaming it, causing it to swell, disturbing it, and much troubling the
brain, whence follows a distention of the nerves, trembling, and diabetes,
Arab. Their poison is cold and dry. Those that are hurt by the Asterius,
presently rage, the head is heavy with sleep, and there is a relaxation of the
nerves and ligaments. The Caeruleous causes a pain of heart, deep sleep and
vomiting of a webby matter. The Dysdery cause swelling in the wound by pain,
so the Myrmecion: Also stammering and want of breath. The Tarantula, causes
singing, laughing, talking, sleeping, waking, vomiting, dancing, sweating,
trembling, fears, and phrensies, etc. according to various tempers. Aet. All
bitings of field spiders are to be cured by constant baths, the decoction of
the bituminous trefoile and oil, fomentation with sponges in vinegar, and the
remedies of Dioscorides: And Pliny against spiders. The seed of tamarisk, sc.
drach. 1. with black berries drunk with honey, organy stamped in white wine,
and smallage: bay berries taken in wine, chaste tree applied, rue, saffron with
posca, flowerdeluce, vervain, Sen-green, Spider-wort, castoreum with mulse, the
Mullet fish eaten or applied. Lees of wine applied. The juice of ivy roots
drunk in vinegar, and bawm, so Lul. sc. its wine. Cells. Garlic, rue and oil
applied, or a plaster of flies. Also triacle andmithridate. Against the
Phalangia, or Tarantula, some use music; others take round birth-wort,
mithridate an. unc. 2. of sealed earth, unc. sem. of the flies that feed upon
helmet-flower 22, and of the juice of citrons q. s. M. Jonst. The description
is needless, they are engendered of aereal seeds, corrupted and putrified. They
hate the Stellion, Lizard, and Serpents, and spin in foul weather, out of
their excrements: and feel easily.

T.
Tike. Ricinus.
P. They are almost every where, upon cattle. M. Of the blood of Cows, sheep,
and goats, etc. N. (...). Reduvius. (...).
TIke. Schrod. Plin. T. Those of dogs are a psilothron, and help the holy
fire, Amat. Lus. and their blood helps ringworms. Seren. It helps inveterate
wounds. So Aldrov. Jonst. Used to the loins of a Woman, it hinders venery.
Dogs may be preserved from them, their ears being anointed with the oil of
walnuts, or bitter almonds, or they being washed with wine, vinegar, cumin, and
salt water. So Aldrov. Some use the rosin of cedar, or the decoction of the
roots of mandrakes. Also tar and Hoggs liquour, or the black chamaeleon. As
for their description it is needless.

W.
Wall-louse. Cimex.
P. They live in beds, walls, and books, and the like. M. They feed upon
putrified humors. N. (...). Gall. Punaise. Ital. Cimice.
WAll-louse. Plin. T. V. They are good against the bitings of Serpents,
especially asps, also against all poisons, and strokes. Dioscorides uses them
ridiculously against quartans. Their smell helps the womb. Drunk with wine and
vinegar they drive away horsleeches, they provoke urine applied, with salt and
Woman's milk they help the eyes, and the ears with honey and oil of roses.
Given in water they are said to help the lethargy. Some put them alive into the
genital to provoke venery. Marcel. Their powder helps all seavers, Seren. and
the hemorrhage. Schrod 3. stamped and drunk expel the foetus and secundine.
Jonst. Taken with the blood of a Tortise they help bitings of Serpents, and
their suffumigation helps the epilepsy from the womb Gesn. Taken with garlic,
or an egg for three days, they help tertians: and their ashes injected break
the stone, Gesn. twelve taken, by four at once each day in the morning with
wine help the colic. They may be expeld by tar and gall, and killed by
sulphur.

Wasp. Vespa.
P. They live in rough places, and bushes, and the like. M. They live upon
flesh, apples, pares, plums, and honey. N. (...). Gall. Vespe. Hisp. Abispa.
Wasp. Vrsin. T. V. They help against quartans. Their destilled water causes
tumors without pain, Mizald. so that of hornets, but the remedy is triacle
drunk or applied, therefore it is used by bauds to counterfeit impregnation, so
Aldrov. their poison is hotter than that of Bees, therefore their puncture is
worse, and has worse yet like Symptoms. The anointing with oil preserves
from them. Their sting if in, is to be drawn out, as with ashes, oil, and
leven, using garden mallows, bay leaves applied, savory, watermint, salt with
Calves fat, bawme, marshmallows, rue With honey, salt, vinegar, and pitch, And
Cows dung applied, the leaves of mandrake with barley meal, water lentils with
butter, bole armoniack, snow, camphire with rosewater, iron, and triacle.
Jonst. As for the description it is needless, they live one year, and fly
circularly. They are eaten by Swallows, Oules, and Foxes, which kill them
striking their tails against trees.

Wood-worme. Teredo.
P. They live chiefly in the oak, and breed there. M. They feed upon wood. N.
(...). Heb. Hasch. Gall. Teigne.
Wood-worme. Aldrov. T. V. All tree-worms help all ulcers, and noma's burnt,
with an equal weight of anise-seed, and applied with oil. Marcel. Used with a
cloth they kill worms in the head, as also cankers burnt. The red worms help
exulcerated and broken ears.

Worm. Lumbricus.
P. They live almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of the fatt juice of the
earth, etc. N. (...). the intestine.
Worm. Plin. T. The ashes of earth worms with oil preserve hair from
hoarinesse, being in a mean. They help the jaundise, sc. the terrene drunk in
vinegar mulse with myrrh, so Plin. Avic. Ros. Anglic. so drach. 1. of the
powder taken dry, with claryfied whey, or endivy water. If drunk they help
fluxes in wounds of the stomach, stamped with oil they help corns, with
vinegar they help the holy fire, so Mizald. Apollon. Boiled in oil they help
pains of the ears. Serenus mixeth Goose grease therewith to help obtuse
hearing. With old oil and wax they cicatrize putrid ulcers. Stamped and
applied they help all wounds, especially of the nerves, Holler also mixeth the^
with things for the same purpose. Their ashes glue broken bones, Plin. and draw
out bones. Diosc. With Goose grease they help grieved ears, and boiled with
oil they may be dropped into the contrary ear with honey, against the
toothache; they are good also against the bitings of Serpents and Scorpions.
Plin. The terrene drunk with sod wine break the stone. The ashes in three
days help the gout, others use them with the cerot and oil of roses, or with
vinegar and honey, they helping inflammations and pains. Plin. Used to the
neck and shoulders, they hinder the pain of the nerves. Drunk in sod wine they
expel the secundine: The same applied alone concoct the suppuration of the
duggs. They also open and cicatrize. Anointed they cause milk in nurses
breasts. Mercurialis makes them into a confection for the same purpose. Drunk
they are diuretic. Their oil helps the pains of the joints and nerves, the
same gleweth the nerves of the intestines. The Indians use them in unguents
against burnings. They serve as food for some fourefooted beasts, birds and
fishes. Schrod. Those of the earth are very diuretic, and diaphoretick,
anodyne, discutient, emollient, reserant, galactogenetick, traumatick, and
neurotick. They are used in the apoplexy, spasme, and other affections of the
nerves and muscles, in the jaundise, dropsy, worms of children, and the
colic, specifically in the scorbutic arthritis used both inwardly and
outwardly: The first way percolated, etc. the other alive or dead. The ashes
put into the teeth help their pain, applied with meal they help the gout. The
water helps the dropsy: the oil provokes urine, and sweat with radish water.
The worms of the bowels are generated of crudities, and powdered kill worms.
They are killed by bitter waters, etc. so Jonst. As also by aloes, diascordium,
Bears-foot, Mercurius dulcis, Mac. garlic, wormwood, coralline, rue, agarick,
turbith, bezoar, ivory, Hearts horn, coral, brimstone, vitriol, limmons,
mintwater, spirit of Hearts horn, sulphur and vitriol, syrup of wormwood,
barberries, rhubarb, oil of wormwood, unguentum de artanita, etc.

ANTHROPOLOGIA, etc. Of Man. etc.
P. The place is needless to be mentioned, etc. M. So the meat or diet, it
also being known. N. (...). Heb. Adam. Vir.
MAn. Schrod. T. Is hot and moist: V. The liquour distilled from the hairs,
applied with honey, causes the hair to grow. The powder drunk helps the
jaundise, applied with sheeps fatt it helps luxate members, also it stops the
hemorrhage in wounds. Some use the hair against quartans with an egg. The
nails cause vomiting, the powder or infusion being taken. Bound to the navil
they help dropsies, there are diverse other ridiculous uses thereof. The spittle
of a fasting Man helps the poison some bitings of Serpents, and madd Dogs,
etc. The filth of the ears taken in drink helps the colic: outwardly it
helps the wounds of Scorpions, gleweth wounds, and helps the fissures, and
chaps of the skinn. The sweat helps schrophula's, if it be mixed with the herb
and root of mullen, and wrapped up in a lease, and warmed in the ashes. Women's
milk cools, lenifieth, maturateth, and helps redness of the eyes: So the
distilled water vitriolated, and helps inflammations. The butter is a very good
ophthalmick remedy. The menstruall blood, zenith juvenculae dried and taken
inwardly, helps the stone, and epilepsy: outwardly it helps the pains of the
gout, applied with Cows fatt. It is also counted good in the plague, sc. a
linen cloth moistened in vinegar, or rose water, and impregnated therewith
being applied to the apostumes, or carbuncles: It quenches the erysipelas, and
cleanses pustules of the face. The secundine, or navil of the Infant, much
helps the swellings of the throat, being calcined and taken in the water of
sowthernwood daily, in quantity unc. 3. and that the moon decreasing: it helps
the epilepsy, hinders philtron's, drives out the mola and foetus, and kills
living creatures, in man, though not naturally engendered. Hartm. It helps
maternal moles, and the colic used as an amulet. The urine, heateth, dries,
resolves, cleanses, discusseth, mundifieth, and resists putrefaction:
Therefore it is of chief use inwardly, in the obstruction of the liver,
spleen, gall, dropsy, jaundise, and to preserve from the plague; also the urine
of the Husband is said to facilitate, the difficult birth of the Wife, it being
drunk: Used outwardly it dries the itch, resolves tumors, mundifyeth wounds,
though poysonsome, prevents gangreens, looseneth the belly in clysters, mixed
with nitre helps dandriffe in the head, and used to the pulses helps fevers;
that of a boy dropped into the ears helps their exulcerations, dropped in it
helps the redness of the eyes, used in lotions it helps tremblings of the
joints, in gargarismes it helps the tumors of the uvula. Applied with ashes it
helps the pains of the spleen. The volatile spirit or salt of boys urine is
excellent against the stone, being drunk in a convenient liquour, but it
stinketh mightily. It Is very good for the ceruleous tincture of the Emerald; it
being a menstruum for the same with the phlegm. Libavius rectifieth it, and
uses it in the gout, asthma, and stone, being injected into the bladder with a
syringe, it being first impregnated by lithontripticks. The fiery spirit, or
salt, serves to draw vitriols out of metals, and chiefly out of Luna, and
gold, if further prepared. The spirit thereof by putrefaction is an excellent
anodyne in pains, being applied with a convenient liquour: it opens also
tartareous obstructions of the bowels and mesentere, so it is of great use in
the scurvy, hypochondriack melancholy, cachexie, and yellow and black jaundise.
it breaks the stone of the reins and bladder, and eases pains arising
thence. The same salt if dissolved in the spirit of vitriol, and again
destilled in sand yields a liquour excellent against the epilepsy, the same
well purified serves as a chrysolyticon. Quercetan de sig. rer. does at the
same time draw forth an ophthalmick phlegma, secondly an antipodagrick remedy:
And thirdly a glacial spirit by the Retort, which he much commends for the
opening of obstructions of the liver and spleen, to provoke urine, and dissolve
the stone, as also to extinguish inflammations and gangreens. The magistery of
urine, is more strong, and incideth the tartar of the body, expelling it by
sweat, urine, and the belly: it cures many diseases thence arising; or
however eases them, sc. the atrophy, etc. also it preserves from the pains
of the stone, being taken every month before the new of the moon, the D. is
gr. 7. to 10. in a convenient liquour. The daily use thereof may be continued
for some time together. The oleum ludi, or of the tartareous matter that
sticks to the chamber pot, is excellent against the stone: The D. is scrup.
1. Man's dung, mollifieth, maturats, and is anodyne, therefore it is of great
use to mitigate pains being applied, to maturate pestilential biles, against
the phlegmon of the throat, or quinsy, sc. being dried, stamped, and applied
with honey, as also to help inflammations in wounds: Also some use it inwardly
in the quinsey being burnt and drunk, and in fevers to drive away the
paroxismes taken in the same way. The D. is drach. 2. The powder of that of an
Infant taken diverse days does eradicate the epilepsy. The destilled water
helps the haw in the eye and other passions of the annate tunicle sc. 1. or 2.
dropps being dropped in, it causes a good color in the face, lengthens the
hair, cures corrosive ulcers, and fistula's, and remooveth cicatrizes of the
hands: Used inwardly it helps the epilepsy, and dropsy, drives out the stone
of the reins and bladder, and helps the bitings of a mad Dog and poysonsome
beasts. Poter. The oil helps the tinea of the head, exulcerated erysipelas,
tetters, and ringworms applied, it eases the gout, and mortifyeth the cancer.
Libav. inwardly it helps the jaundise. Agric. The occidental civet is nothing
else but man's dung, made sweet by the mediation of digestion. The sperme is
used by some to make magnetic mummy of, to serve as a philtron: And by
Paracelsus to make his homunculus of. The blood drunk fresh and hot helps the
epilepsy, using motion after it, and swift running, till there be an eruption
of sweat: drunk fresh or powdered it stops hemorrhages, and used outwardly it
helps eruptions of the blood, and chiefly of the nostrils, sc. the ashes being
put in, or applied fresh to the forehead; but if some drink it, it causes
fierceness, and sometimes the epilepsy. Hartm. The blood of Childbirth helps
the volatick scabb being applied often with the secundine. The destilled water
is made with the oil, it helps in the phthisis and dryness unc. 1. being
drunk, or if rubbed on the parts. It cleanses and heals fistula's, and
cools burnings: That destilled with Woman's milk also helps sports in the
skinn. The destilled oil is good to eradicate the epilepsy, scrup. sem. being
taken every day for a month together, beeginning from the new moon, and
afterward in each new moon, once, scrup. 1. through the year: it helps the
palsy, apoplexy, exulceration of the lungs and pleuresy, so Beg. Libav.
Syntag. The rectified oil is excellent to strengthen sick persons. The
antipodagrick balsame is excellent in the gout, being used every day twice or
thrice for six days together; also it stops swellings, and helps pains and
redness, so also that of the blood of a Goat or Stag. The antepileptick spirit
helps the epilepsy, palsy, and asthma, etc. The alexitery mummy of life is
excellent to cure carbuncles, the D. is drach. sem. in the water of cinnamon,
drunk fasting in the morning, so Fab. in chirurg. he also uses the arcanum of
man's blood in his Myrothecium. The stone dissolveth the tartar or stone in all
parts, and expels it, so it helps all obstructions. The D. of the powder is
drach. 1. the D. of the liquour of the salt is gr. 6. to 10. of the essence or
elyxir gr. 5. to 10. The membranye which girdeth the head of some children when
young, is good against the colic. Mummy resolves coagulated blood drach 2.
being taken, purges the head, helps prickings of the spleen, the cough,
inflation of the body, obstructions of the menses, and other uterine
affections, used outwardly it consolidateth wounds. The Arabian is a thick
substance sweating out of dead bodies, embalmed with aloes, myrrh, and
balsame, and the Egyptian with pisasphalt, the factitious kind of which is
made of bitumen mixed with pitch, which some sell in steed of mummy. Some make
it of dead bodies, torrified by the sun under sand. That of the later use is
made of the dead body of a red man, (having thinner blood and better flesh)
whole, fresh, unspotted, of 24. years old, dying by a violent death, and not
by a disease, the musculous parts being cut in pieces, and strewed with myrrh,
and a little aloes, afterward macerating it in the spirit of wine, after
hanging it up 6. or 10. hours, and doing the like again, leaving the pieces
at length to dry in a dry air and shadowy place, then will it be like flesh
hardened in the smoke without stinking, so Crol. but the best is the first and
last. The tincture or extract of mummy of Quercetane, is alexipharmick, and
much resists putrefaction, also it helps diseases of the breasts, the asthma,
and phthisis, etc. The remaining feces are anodyne. The tincture or extract of
Crollius helps poisons and contagions, it helps the pestilence, as a
prophylactick scrup. 1. and drach. 1. or 1. sem. for curation, against poisons
it may be taken with the oil of sweet almonds to cause vomiting. Tentz. in
med. diastat. The alcolisate tincture or elyxir of mumy, is excellent against
the plague, etc. Querc. Spagir. mumiated oil olive has all the properties of
natural balsame, and helps poysonsom and pestilential affections. Querc. The
tincture or exalted oil of mumy is counted of such a vivifiek quality, that
there is no particle into which it does not penetrate, no ulcer, nor
corruption, which it does not cure. gr. 4. or 5. being taken with a convenient
decoction twice in a day, for a certain time. The aqua divina is of a very
magnetic virtue. The skinn worn about the belly helps difficult parturition,
and hysterical affections, also blastings, and contractions of the joints,
gloves thereof being worn. The fatt strengthens, discusseth, eases pain,
helps contractions, and the hardness of cicatrices, and fills holes after the
small pox. Used with spirit of vitriol it is very penetrating. Man's bones dry,
discuss, bind, and stop all fluxes, therefore they are profitable in catarrhs,
fluxes of the menses, dysenteries, lienteries, and ease pains of the joints;
some use them with purgers. Hartman says that the teeth of dead men pulled out
and often applied bring out rotten teeth of the truth of which may be
suspected.) The oil of the bones by distillation discusseth, and is anodyne,
so an excellent antipodagrick remedy. The marrow of the bones helps contracted
members. The scull helps diseases of the head, sc. the epilepsy, and is used in
many antepileptick compositions: Especially the os triquetrum of the temples.
The D. of the magistery of the cranium is scrup. 1. or drach. sem. Brendel. The
compounded magistery, or essentificated spirit thereof is antepileptick, and
exceeds ordinary remedies therein. The D. of the oil is gr. 4. to 6. The
extract or tincture of the cranium, being digested and perfectly depurated, is
excellent against the epilepsy. The D. is scrup. sem. to scrup. 1. with its own
distilled water. So Querc. Pharm. Rest. The extract or Galreda of Theophrastus
is used in the quantity of g. 5. or 6. every day. The Moss growing upon the
scull that is exposed to the air is very astringent, and of great use in
hemorrhages, sc. of the nostrils, being put in; some say it does the like held
in the hand, that also is very binding that grows upon other bones: It Is used
in the weapon salve. The spirit of man's brain called aqua aurea, is an
excellent antepileptick, the D. is scrup. 1. to scrup. 4. so Hartm. in Pract,
or that of the Elke, so the oil, and mightily comforts the brain. The extract
of Man's gall, with the spirit of wine, dropped into the ear mightily helps
deasenesse. The heart dried and taken helps the epilepsy. Thus of the medicinal
use of the several parts of man's body: As for his description, it may be seen
in the several Books of Anatomy, the Sum of which is as follows.

I. Herein may be considered, the general external division of the whole body.
sc. into venters and limbs.
The venters are the inferior, or abdomen; the middle, or thorax; or the
supreme, which is the head, and

1. This is externaly divided into that part which is hairy, called the scull,
the parts of which are the crown, hinderpart, forepart, and the temples: Or
that which is without hair, which is the face, the parts of which are the
forehead with its wrinkles; the eyebrows, with their glabella; the nose, with
its ridg, nostrils, pillar, wings, globe, and vibrissi; the eyes with their
lids, greater and lesser angles, cavity and subcavity, hall, iris with its
colors black, gray, yellow, and white; cheeks with the upper jaw; lips;
mouth; teeth incisors canine or molar with their gumms and alveols; chin with
its hair; ears, with their aurickle its superior and inferior part, helix
and anthelix, cavity, two eminencies, and auditory passage; together with the
neck, with its anterior part, containing the node and throat, and hinder part,
with the shoulders and armpits.

2. The external parts of the thorax, which is the middle venture, with its
anterior part the breast, sternon, duggs, niples, areol; and posterior, which
is the back, shoulderblades, and spine; and the sides with their intercostals.

3. The External parts of the lower venture or belly, with its anteriour part,
containing the supreme region, middle or umbilical, and inferior, with the ilia
and pu^es, with the site of the pares; and posteriour with the loins, buttocks
and fissure.

4. The external parts serving to generation, sc. in Man, the scrotum,
fistulary nerve, glans, prepuce, frenum, and urethra; in woman, the lips of the
matrice, great fissure, nymphs, clitoris, external bone of the womb,
myrtle-like caruncles, and hymen. As for the limbs, may be considered:

5. The parts contained in the hand, with the shoulders, elbow, lines,
eminences, carpus, metacarpus, fingers sc. the thumb, little finger, index,
middle, and anulary with their nodes and nails.

6. The parts contained in the foot, with the thigh, femen, hip, perinaeum,
shank, calf, knee, rotule, hamme, ankles, heel, fleshy parts, and toes.

7. The figure and bigness of the body, with the difference according to age,
sex, countries of which the Danes and Germans are great, but the English,
Scotts, French, and Spaniards are short for the most part, the Italians and
Grecians of a middle stature, and the Venetians tall; and lastly according to
diseases.

8. The figure and bigness of the head, which ought to be spherical, but
longish, with a little depression about the temples, and having four equal
lines: The first of which is the line of the face, reaching from the bottom of
the chin to the top of the forehead; the second is that of the hinder part of
the head, from the crown to the first vertebra of the neck; the third is that
of the forehead, going from one of the temples to the other; the fourth is from
the bottom of the ear (in which place are the mamillary processes,) reaching
to the higher part of the sinciput: Which lines if not equal, there is not a
just and natural constitution, the head otherwise being long, short, broad,
acuminate or round; for if of these lines, that which belongs to the face, be
longest, the head is said to be long; if shorter, it is said to be so also. If
the line of the forehead be longer, the head will be broad: If that of the
hinder part, it will be acuminate: But if all are equal it will be round and
natural; if all are unequal or some of them and most, there will arise thence
that form of the head which is called phoxos, and these forms are caused by
reason of the countries, diet, or other accidents, sc. by binding, compression,
and many other ways by the nurse, in infancy, and therefore they are carefully
to be made choice of, sc. those of understanding; that know what deformities
may be occasioned by ligature and swathing, as also such as are robust and
healthy, their milk otherwise communicating a morbose quality to the infant.
And they differ according to countries, the Muscovites are flat, theirs of
Antwerp round, and of Brussels. The Genuense and Belgic high and acuminated,
by reason of tying, and the Germans broad lying upon the back, as also
according to diet, which if thin makes it longer; The neck ought to be of
answerable longitude, latitude and circumference if proportionable: sc. In
longitude, in the anteriour part from the chin to the jugulum four inches: In
the posteriour part from the bottom of the occiput to the first vertebra of
the breast, three, but the lateral parts from the bottom of the ear to the
top of the shoulder seven inches; the diameter four inches, and the
circumference a foot: And those that have a strong neck are also robust; and as
are the vertebra's of the neck, so are those of the thorax, loins and os
sacrum; so that if they are great, all the rest of the bones are so also,
except there be somewhat monstrose, so that the rest of the parts follow the
proportion of the head and neck, if proportionable.

9. The figure and magnitude of the thorax, which should be oval, and not too
much straightned in children, it occasioning consumptions and distillations
etc. As for the duggs they should be mean, (but those that have little are
usually sterile,) and niples red, for if pale the womb is amiss.

10. The proportion of the lower belly, which should have the navil for its
ce^ter, with the cause of mutatio^ of proportion, note if great, its bad in
Women, hindering conception, if little it shows wisdom, if hollow envy, if
round sobriety, if long voracity and sloth, if prominent sleep and stupidity,
and if the navil sticks out salacity: The pudends also are to be observed in
their proportion, that the probability of sterility and foecundity may appear,
therefore in men that are adult when distended it is 6. inches in longitude and
4. in periphery, if of greatest proportion, it does more distend and is least
apt for venery, and if lesser, its more foecund and strong, drawing forth the
feminine sperme by titillation, the longest causes suffocation by relaxing the
ligaments, and so is not so fit where prolification is intended except the
correlate sex be answerable: In women, the proportion may be conjectured from
the mouth, lips, eyes, duggs, and chinn, which if lesser promise greater
delectation, (therefore bands use art and astringent pessaries for that
purpose) but parturition then is difficult and more dangerous: But if the Women
are thick and fatt, having great duggs and large bellies, their pudends also
are large, but otherwise if the duggs, mouth, and lips are little, and chin
sharp.

11. The natural proportion of the joints, as the hands and feet, which ought
to be equal, and those that have them long, have usually a laxe body, and
therefore purging physic is carefully to be administed unto them.

II. The bones are to be considered.
1. As to their nature use and differences, according to temperament, figure,
meatus, superficies, magnitude, number, site, sense, and time of generation:
and as to its definition, it is a simple part of the body, the most hard and
dry of all, made for the strength of other parts.

2. The parts of bones: As the epiphysis or appendix, apophysis or process,
acute or spherical, with their cavities profund or superficial.

3. Their structure and conjunction, by coalescency; as by symphysis; without a
medium or with it by synchondrosis syssarcosis syndesmosis syntenosis and
synymensis; or by articulation, as by diarthrosis, with enarthrosis arthrodia
and ginglimus; synarthrosis by future harmony and gomphosis; or neither by
enarthrosis arthrodia and ginglimus, together with the ligament and articular
humor.

4. Their nourishment by blood.

5. The principle and original, sc. the back bone.

6. Their division and number, sc. of the scull, 24. in those that are adult,
of which some are proper, as that of the forehead, two of the forepart, one in
the hinderpart, and three in each care, sc. mallius incus and stapes; the
common are the cuneiforme and spongious: The jaws, sc. the upper besides these
two, has six that are propper on each side, the lower has but one, but teeth
in both sc. sixteen, of which four are incisory, two canine, and ten molar in
the adult: The breast as to its anterior part has two clavicles and the os
pectoris, the lateral have twelve ribbs on each side, the posterior part has
two shoulders and twelve vertebra's; to which the neck is joined having seven,
and the os hyoides, which for the most part has eleven bones: The lower belly,
in the forepart has the two ossa pubis, at the sides ossa ilium and
coxendicis, behind toward the reins five vertebra's, six bones of the os
sacrum, and four of the coccyx: The limbs are divided into the hands and feet,
and the hand into the shoulder, cubit, and extremity; the shoulder has but one
bone, the cubit two sc. the radius and ulna; and the hand it self the carpus
metacarpus and fingers, the first of which has eight bones in double order,
the 2d four, the fingers three, so 15. in all: The foot is divided into foemur
having one bone; the tibia having two sc. tibia and fibula; and the foot
extreme, which has tarsus having seven, metatarsus five, and toes 14. hereto
belong the twelve sesamoids and patella: In brief the head has 59. The thorax
61. The lower venture 21. The hand 42. So the foot. sc. each, and the whole body
309.

7. The cranium and futures of the head, and as to the first note its
substance, thickness, figure, superficies, and lamina's: and futures common
and proper, those are five; these are either true, as the coronal, lambdiform,
or sagittal; or mendose of which there are five pair.

8. The proper bones of the head, as the os frontis with its figure, connection,
substance, number, cavern, holes and processes: The ossa verticis, with their
number sc. two, connection and superficies: The os occipitis, with its figure,
number, substance and superficies, and five foramina: The ossa temporum, with
their figure, connection, substance, two sinus, five foramina, and four
processes.

9. The three little bones serving for hearing, as the malleus, with its two
processes; the incus with its head and two legs; and stapes with its little
head and basis.

10. The cuneiform bone, with its connection, substance, two internal and
external processes, four sinus, and seven foramina: As also the cribriforme
bone, with its four parts, and fourefold use.

11. The os jugale, with its two parts, situation, and use.

12. The bones of the face, or two jaws: As the substance of the uppermost,
connection and nine proper futures; with its six pair of bones: In the lower,
note its mobility, hardness, thickness, figure, two processes, and foramina,
three asperities, and cavities or holes for teeth.

13. The teeth, with their articulation, substance, figure, cavities, vessels,
superficies, magnitude, number sc. 32. of the incisors, canine and molars as
above, with their use.

14. The os hyoides, with 11. parts, with its connection and use.

15. The clavicles, with their figure, number two, connection, substance and use.

16. The sternon or os pectoris, with its three bones, substance, figure,
ensiforme cartilage, and use.

17. The scapulae, with their figure, back, cavity, three sides, basis and
costae, three angles, connection, substance, 3 processes cervix spina and
ancoriformis, and threefold use.

18. The spina dorsi, with its vertebra's, and their head, three kinds of
process, propper and common foramen, and connection.

19. The vertebra's of the neck, with their number seven, five communities, and
what is propper, sc. of the first, a taberculum, and sinus, processes, spina
and foramina; of the second, the body, and precesses, the four next are almost
like, and the seventh the biggest.

20. The twelve vertebrae of the thorax, with their five communi^^s and two
proprieties: Also the five vertebra's of the loins with their three
communities.

21. The os sacrum, with its five parts, foramina and processes.

22. The os coccygis, with its 5. parts, substance, and connection.

23. The ribbs with their number, sc. 12. division, the seven first being
legitimate, the five lowest spurious, and substance, cartilages, connection,
figure, magnitude and two uses.

24. The os innominatu^ consisting of os ilium, coxendicis and pubis, and note
in the first, the spina, costa, gibbosity, and connection; in the second, the
acetable, appendix, and two tuberculum's; in the third the foramen, pelvis
(which is greater in Women, and laxed in parturition.) and use.

25. The os humeri, with its substance, figure, superior appendix and its
superinternal and superexternal head; also the inferior appendix with the
trochlea, sinus, capitulum, tubercula, and foramina.

26. The cubitus, with the ulna and its communities and what is proper, sc. its
gibbosity, and signiforme and lateral sinus, and styliforme process: As also
the radius, with its superior capitulum and inferior tuberculum, lateral
sinus, connection, and long ligament.

27. The bones of the hand it self, with its parts, sc. the carpus and the
figure and connection; the metacarpus, with its substance, figure and
appendices; the fingers with their three bones, substance, figure, magnitude,
and appendices; as also the sesamoids, in the internodes, the substance,
figure, number twelve, connection and use.

28. The os foemoris, with its substance, figure, connection; superior appendix
with the two rotators; sinus, four impressions, and rough line; and the
inferior appendix, with its two heads and sinus, and foramina: As also the
patella, with its use, substance, and connection.

29. The two bones of the tibia, with its superior appendix, two sinus,
tuberculum, cartilage, lateral capitulum, anterior tuberculum, three lines, sc.
the spina internal and external and three sides; also the inferior appendix,
with its double sinus: And the fibula, with its superior and inferior
appendix, exterior ankle, and three lines.

30. The bones of the foot it self, as the talus with its figure and six
sides, the os calcis, os naviculare with its convexity and situation, with the
four bones of the tarsus, their form and connection, sc. the cubiforme, and
cunciforme greater lesser, and mean; also the metatarsus with it is substance,
magnitude, appendices, and connection: And the toes with their substance, three
internodes in each, and sesamoid bones, in number and situation as in the hands.

31. The nails, with their nature, as betwixt a cartilage and bone, and
augmented in longitude, profundity, latitude, and (...) having veins,
arteries, nerves, sense, substance, magnitude, figure, number, connection,
color, and use, as is manifest.

III. The cartilages and ligaments are to be observed,
1. As to their nature, use, and differences, by temperament, age, sex,
figure, magnitude, superficies, number, situation, seat, connection, and mode:
and as for its definition, it is a part of our body, simple, hard, and dry, but
flexible, for the secure stability of the softer parts, and avoiding of the
violence of harder things extrinsically accident.

2. The cartilages of the upper venture, or head, sc. of the eye lids, nose, and
auricle.

3. Those of the middle venture; of the larynx, the thiroide with its figure
fissure and processes, the cricoide with its situation use figure and spina,
the arytaenoides with their connection number and processes, with the figure and
use of the epiglottis and fistula; and enfiforme cartilage: And that of the
lower belly, being only one.

4. The ligaments, with their nature, threfold use; and differences, from
temperament, age, sex, figure, magnitude, number, and situation.

5. The ligaments of the head, with those of the vertebrae, nether chapp,
hyoide bone and tongue. Also of the thorax and loins, with the vertebra's,
ribbs, and sternon: And of the lower venture, sc. of the os ilium, sacrum,
coxendicis and pubis.

6. The ligaments of the hand, sc. of the scapulae with their use: And of the
humerus, cubitus, carpus, radius, metacarpus, and the anulary.

7. The ligaments of the leg, sc. of the foemur 2. knee 6. of the tibia and
fibula two, with the talus 3. of the talus and bones of the foot 5. of the
lower foot as in the hands, and four annulary.

IV. The muscles are to be considered.
And 1. Their nature and action, or fourefold motion, and as for its
definition, it is an organick part of the body, destinated to voluntary
contraction toward its beginning, for the motion of the part, into which it is
inserted, and to which it does belong.

2. The parts thereof, sc. dissimilar three, the head venture and tail; or
similar 7. sc. a vein artery nerve flesh rendon membran and fatt.

3. The differences of muscles, sc. of the first classis from the whole body,
in substance figure magnitude number and situatio^; of the second classis from
dissimilar parts in the substance of the head figure magnitude and situation;
in the substance of the belly figure magnitude and number; in the substance of
the end figure magnitude number and site; of the third classis from similar
parts, from the tendons figure magnitude and number also from the flesh,
nerves, arteries, veins and fatt.

4. Their use and action, as flectents or extendents, adducent or abducent,
levators or depressors, and also as circumagents.

5. The muscles of the forehead, or rather eye brows, sc. the frontale
attollent: Of the eye lids, sc. in the upper the attollent aperient, and
depressing superior claudent; in the inferior the attollent inferior
claudent: Of the eye, moveing it directly, sc. the attollent, depriment,
adducent, abducent, or obliquely, sc. the exterior and interior circumagent:
Of the nostrils, the two aperient abducent, and two adducent constringent: Of
the cheeks, the quadrate detrahent and contrahent: Of the lips, the first
pair attollent, the second abducent, the third depriment, the fourth
constringent: Of the nether jaw, the first pair attollent temporal, the second
depriment biventer, the third drawing to the sides, the fourth abducent
prerygoide, the fifth adducent: Of the ears, in some the first pair attollent,
the second depriment, the third adducent, the fourth abducent, moving the
inward part; and the outward and inward moving the inward:

6. Of the tongue, the first pair, stringent and dilatant linguale; the second
exerent, geneogloss; the third retrahent hypsilogloss; the fourth attollent,
mylogloss; the fifth depriment, ceratogloss; the sixth obliquely trahent on
each side, called stylogloss: Of the os hyoides, moveing it directly, the first
pair, attollent, geniohyoide; the second depriment, sternohyoide; or
obliquely, the third obliquely attollent; styloceratohyoide, the fourth
obliquely detrahent, called coracohyoide: Of the fances, the first pair
dilatant, sphaenopharyngaeum; and second, dilatant; the constringent are the
first pair called oesophagiaeum, the second cephalopharyngaeum, the third
stylopharyngaeum: Of the larynx, which is dilated, when its thyroide cartilage
is extended by the first pair thereof, called sternothyroide, the second
cricothyroide antic; and bended by the hyothyroides, and so is compressed: It Is
shut and opened, when the arytaenoide is bended directly by the first pair,
called thyroarytaenoide, and obliquely by the second, arytaenoide; or extended
by the first pair crycoarytaenoide postic directly, or obliquely by the second
crycoarytaen oide lateral:

7. Of the head, which is bended by the flectent mastoide pair, directly; or
lateraly if one be contracted; it is extended by the extenders, the first pair
of which is called the triangular or splenium, the second trigeminated or
complex, the third the recti majores, the fourth recti minores; and it is turned
about, by the first pair of the circumagents, called the superior oblique,
and second called the inferior: Of the neck, which is bended by the first
pair of the flectents, called the long; or the second triangular; and is
extended by the first pair of the extendent, or transverse, and second spinate.

8. Of the thorax, which is moved primarily, by its proper muscles, of which
some do dilate it in respiration, as if free, the diaphragma only contracting
it self; if coact, the diaphragma and external intercostals; others contract
it in respiration, as if free, the diaphragma only relaxed; if coact, the
diaphragma and internal intercostals; it is extended by the first pair of the
extenders, called dorsi longissimi, the second semispinate, the third
sacrolumbu^; it is be^ded directly by the direct muscles of the abdomen, and
obliquely by the oblique ascendents; and it is turned about by the two
transverse muscles of the abdomen; it is moved secondarily, by the motion of the
loins, and so it is bended by the bender of the loins, called the quadrate,
and extended by the extensor, called sacer:

9. The subclave:

10. Those of the lower belly, and first of the abdomen, compressing it in the
lateral part, sc. the oblique descendents, oblique ascendents, and transverse;
in the anteriour part, the direct; in the inferior part, the pyramidale:

11. Of the loins, which are bended by the quadrate flexor, and extended by
the tensor sacer:

12. Of the testicles, which are elevated by the two cremasters; of the
bladder, which is shut by the sphincter; of the anus, which is shut by the
sphincter, and elevated by the two levatores; of the genital, of which, some
erect it, sc. the collateral, called erectors; others draw the urethra, called
the interior muscles: Thus of the muscles of the three venters. Now follow
those of the limbs:

13. Of the scapula, which is variously moved by the first pair, called
cucullare, the second is attollent, the third draws backwards called the
rhomboide, the fourth forewards and upwards, sc. the lesser serrate, the fifth
forewards and downwards, and is called the greater serrate pair of muscles:

14. Of the humerus, the adducent or pectoral, the attollent or deltoide, the
abducent or broadest, and the depriment or round by which it is moved; it is
turned about, toward the external parts, by the first of the circumagents, or
superior superscapulary, and the second called the inferior; and toward the
inward parts by the third of the circumagents or subscapulary muscle:

15 Of the cubitus, which is bended by the first of the flectents or biceps,
and second or brachiaeus; and extended by the first of the extendents gemellus
or greater, and the second or lesser:

16. Of the radius, which is pronated by the first of the pronators or
quadrare, and second or teres; and supinated by the first of the supinators, or
long, or second and short:

17. Of the carpus, which is bended by the interior flectent, cubiteus, and
exterior radieus; and extended by the interior extendent, cubiteus, and
exterior, radieus:

18. Of the skin of the hand, sc. the palmar muscle, and quadrate musculous
flesh:

19. Of the benders of the fingers, sc. one flexor of the third and second
internodium; and four of the first, called lumbricales; and of the thumb, sc.
two flexors of the first internodum, three of the second, and one of the third:

20. Of the extenders of the fingers, sc. of the second and third internodium
the first and second extender, of the first the eight inteross muscles; of the
thumb, the first and second extenders:

21. Of the oblique moovers of the fingers, toward the sides, sc. of the four
fingers the inteross muscles, of the index the abductor, so of the least
finger; of the thumb, the adducent and abducent. Thus of the first of the limbs
called manus, now follows that called crus, with its parts:

22. Of the foemur which is obliquely extended by the first extender called
glutaeus major; and second called glutaeus medius; and directly by the third
extender called glutaeus minor; it is bended directly by the first flectent
psoas, and second internal Iliac; and obliquely by the third flectent triceps,
and fourth called livid; its turned about, upwards, by the first circumagent,
called the pyriforme, inwards by the external obturator or 2d. circumagent,
outward by the 3d. circumagent or internal obturator, and backwards by the
fourth circumagent called qaudrigeminus:

23. Of the tibia, which is bended by the first called the fasciale or
fartorius, the 2d. gracile, the 3d. seminervous, the 4th. semimembrauous, the
fifth biceps; it is extended by the first called the membranous, the second
rectus, the third the vaste external, the fourth the vaste internal; and it is
moved obliquely by the suppopliteus.

24. Of the tarsus, or foot, which is extended by the first extensor called the
external gasterocnemius, and second or internal; it is bended by the first
flectent called tibiaeus anticus, and second peronaeus secundus; and it is
obliquely moved toward the sides, to the inward by the first or adducent
called tibiaeus posticus, to the outward by the second or abducent called
peronaeus primus.

25. Of the skinn of the sole of the foot, sc. the plantare muscle:

26. Of the benders of the toes, sc. of the third internodium the perforant, of
the second the perforate, of the first the four lumbricales; of the great toe
the flexor.

27. Of the extenders of the toes, sc. of the third internodium, its tensor, so
of the second, and of the first the inteross muscles; and of the great toe, the
tensor:

28. Of the oblique movers of the toes, sidewards, as the interosse muscles,
and abducent of the little toe; of the great toe, the abducent.

V. The veins are to be observed,
1. As to their nature action and use, and they are membranose vessels, simple,
having three kinds of fibers, fibrose and thick blood, which they concoct and
carry for the nutrition of the whole body and its parts (as some say) and are
without sense; their figure, magnitude, number, site, valves and glandules also
are to be taken notice of: And the chief veins are the umbilical, arteriose,
vena portae and cava:

2. The differences of veins, from substance, magnitude, figure, site,
connection and use.

3. Their principle of original, which they have not from any part, they being
first.

4. The vena partae and cava, with their differences, in substance, magnitude,
connection and anastomoses:

5. The division of the vena portae into its radix, trunk with the cystick and
gastrick surculus, and two rami, first the splenick, from the upper part of
which arises the coronary and gastrick; from the lower the epiplois dextra and
postica, with the vas breve gastroepiplois sinistra, and internal hemorrhoidal,
2dly the mesenterick with its right and left part, and propagines the
gastroepiplois sinistra, and intestinal, with the fourefold use of the vena
portae:

6. The ascendent trunk of the vena cava, the propagines of which are the
phrenick, coronarie, and azygos; as also its division into two subclavii, the
propagines of whose inferior part are the superior intercostal, mammarie,
mediastin, and cervical, of the superior part the internal jugularie, and
external with its ramus profundus having three others entering the head, and the
cutaneus going to the face, and the muscula superior or cervical; also the
division of the axillary into the cephalic and basilick, being divided before
entrance into the arm into the internal and external scapulary, and the
basilick into the thoracick superior and inferior:

7. The axillary vein distributed through the arm, it being divided into the
cephalic with its middle interior and exterior ramus, and the basilick, with
its profund and subcutanious ramus, and this interior or exterior; yet in
most persons there is not the same distribution of veins:

8. The descendent trunk of the vena cava, or inferior, with its four
propagines before division, sc. the adipose, emulgents, spermatick and lumbars;
and its division into the iliack, with the muscula lumbalis and sacra propago;
and the propagines of the interior iliack before its egresse from the
peritonaeum; sc. the glutaea, and hypogastrick from which is the external
hemorrhoidal and cystick vein; as also the propagines of the exterior iliack
before it, sc. the epigastrick, pudend and inferior muscula:

9. The propagines of the exterior ramus of the iliack disseminated through
the crus, sc. the four propagines of the crural trunk before division, sc. the
saphaena with its four propagines, and the ischia, muscula and poplitea; as
also the division of the trunk into the interior and exterior ramus; the
umbilical and arteriose vein also are to be observed:

10. The definition of the blood, which according to some is a red humor,
homogenious in aspect, begotten of meat and drink, and elaborated by the bowels
and vessels, and flowing through the veins and arteries of sanguineous
animals, for the ultimate aliment, and preservation of life in all parts.

11. The reason why Man has so much blood, sc. it conducing much to prudence.

12. The heterogeniousnesse of the blood and its parts, sc. in those that are
well, the serum, red liquour, and sanguineous fibers; but more in the sick, so
for such intemperate contrary meats are best:

13. The differences of the blood, from quantity, quality, consistence, place,
and mixtures:

VI. The arteries are to be considered, and their distribution,
1. As to their nature action and use, and they are hollow vessels, consisting
of a double membrane, and endued with distension and contraction, that the
thinner and more spirituous blood may be carried from the heart, to preserve
life in all parts; as also their differences from magnitude, progress; site,
and connection:

2. The ascendent trunk of the great artery, or superior to the head, with its
division into the subclaves, from the inferior part of which arises the
superior intercostale; and from the superior the verte brale mammarie, and
muscula; with the axillary artery, from the inferior part of which before it
passes to the arm, arise the internal scapulary, superior thoracick and
inferior; and from the higher part, the external scapulary; and the carotides,
with the exterior ramus, or of the face; and interior or encephalick, with
its greater and lesser ramus:

3. The division of the axillary artery in the arm, into the exterior or
radieus, and interior or cubiteus:

4. The descendent trunk of the great artery, and its propagation through the
middle and lower venture, sc. the eight intercostals, two phrenicae, one
caeliack, with its right ramus, and its propagines from the higher part, sc.
the pylorick and two cystick gemellae, and from the lower the epiplois dextra,
intestinal, and gastroepiplois dextra; and the left ramus, called the splenick
artery, with its propagines from the upper part the gastrick, and epiplois
sinistra in the inferior, with the use of the right ramus, and six fold use of
the left; also the mesenterica superior, two emulgents with their use, two
spermaticks, mesenterica inferior and its two uses, the lumbares, with the
arteriae sacrae, and propagines of the iliack arteries, sc. of the interior or
lesser, the muscula and hypogastrica, and arteria umbilicalis; of the exterior
or greater, the epigastrica and pudenda:

5. The propagines of the exterior iliack ramus in the crus, sc. the
propagines of the crural trunk before divided, the exterior crural muscula and
internal, poplitea and sural; yet there is not always the same propagation of
arteries, but differ as the veins:

6. The ^ena arterialis and arteria venalis, with the original, insertion,
distribution and use.

VII. The nerves are to be observed,
1. As to their nature and action, and they are white vessels, consisting of a
double membrane, fit for all intension, in which a certain white and medullary
substance is contained, and they carry from the brain, from which they arise,
an animal spirit, serving for the sense, and voluntary motion of each part;
with their differences, from substance, figure, cavity, magnitude, and original
so some arise immediately from the brain: Of which there are seven conjugations
or pair, and as to their use, Optica prima; oculos movet altera; tertia
gustat; Quartaque, quinta audit; vaga sexta est; septima linguae; others are
profluent, from the spinal marrow, sc. 30. pair, seven of the cervical marrow,
twelve of the dorsal, five of the loins, and six of the marrow of the os
sacrum:

2. The nerves of the brain, sc. the first pair, called optic, with their
original, progress, insertion, use and foramina, they arise from the beginning
of the marrow; the second pair from the inward part thereof with its four
rami and use; the third pair from the lower and posteriour part, with its use,
and four rami; the fourth pair from the posteriour marrow through the foramen
of the cuneiform bone, with its three rami; the fifth from the oblongate marrow
of the brain, near the conjunction of the cerebellum, with the harder and
softer portion; the sixth a little more toward the inferior and posteriour
part, with its lesser nerve, and greater with its propagines, and those of the
exterior ramus of the right nerve, sc. five and three of the interior; or the
exterior ramus of the left nerve, sc. six, and of the interior three; the
seventh in the lowest part of the cranium; and some add an eighth pair
constituting the olfactory nerves:

3. The proper nerves of the spinall marrow, and first of the vertebra's of the
neck, sc. the first pair, with its first and second beginning betwixt the os
occipitis and first vertebra of the neck; the second pair betwixt the first
and second vertebra with its priour and posteriour beginning; the third pair,
betwixt the second and third vertebra, with its anteriour ramus having four
propagines, and the posteriour; the fourth, betwixt the third and fourth
vertebra, with its anteriour ramus having three propagines, and posteriour; the
fifth betwixt the fourth and fifth vertebra, with its anterior ramus having
four propagines, and the posteriour; the sixth under the fifth vertebra, with
its anterior ramus and propagines and the posteriour; the seventh betwixt the
sixth and seventh vertebra with its anteriour and posteriour ramus:

4. The nerves of the marrow of the vertebra's of the thorax, all which are
bifid, and the greater ramus is forewards, the first pair of which is from the
common foramen of the seventh vertebra of the neck, and first of the thorax,
with its anteriour ramus, and posteriour or lesser; the second pair is betwixt
the first and second vertebra of the thorax with its anteriour and posteriour
ramus, the ten other paires whereof have the like original and distribution:

5. The nerves of the marrow of the vertebra's of the loins, the first pair
of which is betwixt the last vertebra of the thorax and first of the Loins,
with its anteriour and posteriour ramus, and the other four as before, with
their anteriour and posteriour ramus:

6. The nerves of the marrow of the os sacrum, as the first pair, betwixt the
last lumbar vertebra, and first of the os sacrum with its anteriour and
posteriour ramus, so of the other five pair:

7. The nerves distributed throughout the arms, sc. the first, and second with
its three propagines, and external and internal ramus, the third and fourth
with its three propagines, and internal and external ramus; as also the fifth
and sixth nerve arising from the retiforme plexus; and fifth, sixth, and
seventh pair of nerves coming from the marrow of the neck, and first and
second from the thorax:

8. The nerves of the crura, which are four pair, arising from the three
inferior conjugia of the loins, and four superior of the os sacrum, and
passing through the common foramina of the vertebra's, make a greater retiforme
plexus, than in the arms; and the first and third is thin going to the
foemour, the second thicker to the tibia, the fourth thickest, and reaches to
the toes.

VIII. The lower belly is to be considered.
1. The skin with its figure and substance, and its cuticle, with its
substance, cause, sc. viscous vapors, and connection, with its three fold use,
next to it is the true skin, which differs from thickness, color, by
temperament, country, sex, age, and disease, and from temperament, superficies,
pores, motion, connection, hairs, arteries and nerves, with its private and
public action, and use, and hairs arising from the fuliginous vapors of the
third concoction.

2. The fatt, which is an oleous humor of the body, elevated by moderate
heat, and concrete about the colder and thicker parts, to the generation
whereof are necessary large vessels, thick membrans, and moderate heat; its
use is general or particular:

3. The carnose membrane under the fat, with its use, sc. by its frigidity to
condense the vapors elevated from the blood and so cherish the heat of the
inward parts.

4. The peritonaeum, or inner rimme of the belly, with its figure, superficies,
substance, connection, rice, duplication, foramina, two processes, vessels, and
use, sc. to hinder the dissipation of heat, and keep the bowels in their
places.

5. The situation both natural and preternaturall of all the intralls in the
lower belly; sc. of the liver, if natural, in the right hypochondrium; if not
natural it is by lying down, sitting, walking, or breathing; and
preternaturall when too great; of the spleen, if natural, in the left
hypochondrium; if not natural, by sitting, breathing, or lying down; if
preternaturall by laxation of the ligaments, or tumors; of the ventricle, if
natural in the middle, with its orifice called the stomach toward the left
hypochondrium, and the inferior or pilorus toward the right, and its fundus
in the middle, the site of which if not natural is by lying, standing and
sitting, and repletion; if preternaturall, by wounds; of the pancreas, or sweet
bread, which changes not its natural place, but is adnate to the fundus of
the ventricle, duodenum intestinum and vena portae, and if swollen, it presses
the side of the ventricle and hinders concoction; of the duodenum, which ever
also keeps its place, and arises from the pylorus; of the jejunum intestinum,
umbilical, and ilium in the ilia, if not natural; by repletion, retention of
the breath and noise, plenitude of the womb, by sitting or standing, running,
leaping, riding, and supine decubiture; if preternaturall, by flatulent
distensions, laxation of the mesentery, the dropsy, hernia, and volvulus; of
the caecum in the right ilium, and scarce naturally changes its place; and
preternaturall by falling down; of the colon, in the right ilium, lying upon
the right kidney; if not natural, by fullness of the stomach, emptiness,
walking and sitting, and gravidity; if preternaturall, in the colic; of the
omentum, under the peritonaeum, immediately in the forepart; if not natural by
repletion, inanition, sitting, running, riding, lying, and fatness, and so in
women it pressing the womb hinders conception; if preternaturall, by
flatulency and wounds; of the bladder, in the cavity of the hypogastrium; if
not natural, by repletion; of the womb, in the same cavity of the
hypogastrium, betwixt the bladder and rectum intestinum; if not natural, in
gravidity; if preternaturall, by obstructions, and laxation of the ligaments.

6. The omentum or kell as to its substance, magnitude, connection, two
membranes original, and vessels, sc. veins, arteries and nerves, and three
uses.

7. The oesophagus, or gullet, with its original and progress, substance,
veins, arteries, nerves, glandules, use and action.

8. The ventricle, with its figure, situation, magnitude, connection, substance,
two orifices, veins, arteries, nerves, progress of the vessels, and action,
sc. chylosis.

9. The intestines, as to their situation, connection, beginning, figure,
magnitude, substance, veins, arteries, nerves, fat, mucous substance, number,
and differences, by site, magnitude, vessels, office and substance; so some
are slender, sc. the first called duodenum arising from the pylorus of 12.
inches; the second, or jejunum under the colon, with its veins and arteries
meatus biliarius and longitude, sc. twelve hands and three fingers; the third
or ilium under the navill, and is twenty one hands in length; others are
thicker, joined to the ilium intestinum, of which the first is called caecum,
and is ever empty in those that are well its end being shut, the second is
called the colon, retarding the excrements, and arises from the ilium and
caecum, with its longitude sc. nine hands, and cells, ligament, veins,
arteries, nerves from the sixth conjugation, so its of exact sense, and valve;
the third is called rectum, or the straight gutt arising from the colon, with
its magnitude lesser than the colon, in longitude one spann, and its substance,
tunicles, and veins; also the action of the intestines sc. coction, digestion,
and expulsion.

10. The mesentery, joining together the intestines, with its division,
magnitude, substance, two membrans, meseraick veins, two arteries, nerves,
glandules, connection, rise, sc. from the ligaments of the vertebra's of the
loins, fatt, and use, sc. to keep them from rupture:

11. The pancreas, which is the greatest glandule of three or four
fingers-long situated in the left part, nigh the spleen, having the stomach
above and membranes of the peritoneum below, in the middle the splenick vein,
left ramus of the caeliack artery, nerves of the sixth pair tending to the
ventricle and duodenum, and meatus biliarius which it holds up, it has also a
thin membrane arising from the peritoneum, in which it is suspended and
invested, its use is, to keep the stomach when distended that it be not hurt
by the hardness of the vertebra's, and hinder rupture of the vessels, as the
other glandules, and as some, it is excretory:

12. The liver with its situation in the right hypochondriu^, connection to the
diaphragma with its unequal part, and to the mesentery with the other, figure,
protuberances, two sinus, fissure, magnitude, number, substance, veins, sc.
the propagines of the cava in the unequal part, and porta in the other,
arteries, two nerves, action, sc. to help the concoction of chyle attracted by
the mesaraick veins from the intestines, and brought to the roots of the porta
into the hollow part:

13. The gall, situated in the hollow part of the liver with its connection,
magnitude, figure, substance, two veins, two arteries, nerve, and dissimilar
parts; sc. the bottom, neck, and meatus biliarii, sc. the cystick and hepatick
and its use sc. to attract choler, cause incision, stimulate, and hinder
putrefaction:

14. The spleen, situated in the left hypochondrium, over against the liver;
but somewhat lower under the spurious ribbs, with its number, connection, sc. in
its upper part to the diaphragma, in the lower to the external membrane of the
left kidny, in the flat part to the upper part of the omentum, in the unequal to
the back, also its magnitude, figure, superficies exterior toward the ribbs
called gibbous, and interior and concavous toward the ventricle, substance,
membrane, color, veins from the splenick ramus, arteries from the left ramus
of the caeliack, nerves from the ramus of the sixth pair, action, sc. to help
sanguification, and concoct thick humors:

15. The kidneys, with their number, sc. two situated a little under the liver
and spleen in the loins behind the intestines and ventricle, and the left is
highest and least, also their connection, figure, and exterior parts; sc. the
membrane external and internal, fatt, two glandules with their figure substance
vessels and use, ureters with their substance, original, progress, exterior
and interior membrane, insertion and magnitude, veins, sc. two adepose, and
two emulgent with their valves, two arteries, and two nerves; also their
interior parts, with their color, substance, insertion of the emulgents,
pelvis or infundibulum, and tubuli of the ureters, also the papilar caruncles
with their action figure magnitude canaliculus and situation, as for the use of
the kidneys they are to draw, separate, and transcolate whotever is serous and
aqueous in the vessels, both veins and arteries:

16. The bladder, which is situated outwardly, sc. in the hypogastrium, in the
cavity called the pelvis, and its connection in the inferior part to the rectum
intestinum, to the os pubis in its superior, and navil in the fundus, with its
figure which is oval, membrane sc. the first common, and second proper,
foramina, sphincter muscle, veins and hypogastrick arteries, and nerves:

17. The genitals in men, and first the parts serving to the generation of
sperm, as the preparing vessels, or veins and arteries so called, with their
original process and insertion; the parastates, arising from the plexus of the
preparing vessels, lying upon the testicles, with their insertion, substance,
fibers, and membrane; the testicles joined unto them, with their substance,
parts sc. the head and fundus, magnitude, cremaster muscle, the tunicles, sc.
common, the bursa scroti and erythroid, or proper, as the vaginal and
albugineous, also the vessels, sc. veins, arteries, and nerve; the deferent
vessels are next, with their substance, original from the parastats in the
inferior part, and progress with their seminal vesicles having an oleaginous
humor; the prostatae are seminal glandules situated betwixt the neck of the
bladder and rectum intestinum, in the midst of which is the urethra:

18. The parts virile for excretion of sperm, sc. the penis, with its
situation, at the root of the os pubis, figure, longitude, sc. of a span long
when erected, and its parts are external, sc. the cuticle skin and carnose
membran; the internal are the two nervous bodies, septum pellucidum, urethra or
urinary fistul arising from the neck of the bladder, with its three foramina,
and substance of a double membrane, the two collateral muscles, and two
inferior, the cutaneous and deeper vessels; and glans, with its sense,
substance, foramen, prepuce and frenum, with the action and use, note the
parastates generate sperme in and by themselves, and the testicles secundarily
help the coction of the same, the emission of which does chiefly titillate the
urethra, principally the part betwixt the prostates, and the glans in action,
chiefly about the corona:

19. The genitals in women, and first the pudend, with the pubes, mons veneris,
great fissure, lips, wings, clitoris consisting of three bodies with a glans,
and the foramen of the bladder under the clitoris, in which are four caruncles
called the myrtiforme, which in virgins are joined together by the membran
called hymen, and flos, after which under the foramen of the bladder, is a
rugous fissure, called the mouth of the neck or outward orifice, with the two
caeca foramina:

20. The womb, or matrix, with its neck, its situation in the pelvis betwixt
the bladder and rectum intestinum, consisting of two membrans, with its
wrinkles and connection; also the mouth of the womb or inward orifice of the
neck, betwixt the neck and sundus, with its figure, constriction and apertion;
and the fundus of the womb or matrix, and its magnitude, sc. in virgins about
the bigness of a walnut, connection, two superior ligaments, and inferior,
substance, two membrans, cotyledons, horns, cavity, future, vessels, sc. two
veins arising from the preparants and hypogastrick ramus, two arteries also,
and nerves, the first from the sixth conjugation of the brain, and others from
the os sacrum:

21. The testicles, and their differences from the virile, in situation,
substance, figure, number of the tunicles, and magnitude; also their preparing
vessels, deferent, and vas caecum or tuba Fallopiana:

22. The action and use of each part:

23. The difference in their parts when great, or not so, sc. swelling of the
pudend, abbreviation of the neck opening of the inward mouth of the womb,
distension of the womb, situation in the middle, substance and tunicles thicker
and softer, preparant vessels larger, and the inferior ligaments are six times
thicker.

Hereto belongs the foetus,
with its formation, and 1. the division, into parts common, and proper
external and internal;

2. the external proper or secundine, containing the foetus;

3. the placenta, being the radix of the foetus, by which it takes nourishment
from the mother, and the cotyledons;

4. the membrans involving the foetus, and first the chorion, being a thick
white membrane, serving to cover the foetus, and bind the ends of the umbilical
vessels, and contain the urine;

5. the allantoid, under it, which is a most thin, white, and soft membrane,
having small veins and arteries, and betwixt the chorion an amnion, joined
with the urachus, and preserving the urine of the foetus, separated from sweat;

6. the amnion, of a light white soft thin, translucent substance, with small
and little veins and arteries, and compassing in the foetus, and connate to
the chorion, defending the foetus, and receiving the water or sweat of the
foetus;

7. the use of the sweat contained in the amnion, sc. to prevent weight to the
acetabula, and help the turning of the head toward the mouth of the womb in
parturition, and to facilitate it as to the membrans, and for irrigation of
other parts;

8. the sordes of the skinn, being the third and last excrement, glutinous and
thick, serving to defend the skinn from acrimony, and hinder the dissipation
of the vital spirits, and stop the pores that the ichorous blood may not issue
out;

9. the navil, or umbilical vessels, with their black spotts, longitude sc. 3.
spannes, and a finger thick, beginning from the placenta and so folded about
till it reach the middle part of the abdomen, and serves for the nutrition of
the foetus, the length helps to motion, and better furthereth the egresse in
the birth, and it is placed in the midst that not by equilibrium, the head being
heaviest, the foetus might have the head foremost in the time of birth,
otherwise the birth not being natural;

10. the cutting of the navil, which is to be done after the egresse of the
infant, and expulsion of the secundine, by sternutatories, compression of the
mouth and nostrils, pressing the abdomen with the left hand, and with the right
drawing the secundine with the navil, gently, but if the foetus be weak or
sick the navil is presently to be cut four fingers from the abdomen, with a
knife or cisers after strong ligature, applying cotton, and wrapping the rest
up in linen clothes;

11. the internal proper parts, and first the four umbilical vessels, arising
from the chorion, by the navil, and inserted into the internal parts of the
belly, sc. the umbilical vein, two arteries carrying vital spirits, and
urachus carrying the urine from the bladder into the allantoid;

12. the structure of the vessels in the thorax in the foetus, sc. then the
vena cava being joined with the venal artery, and the great artery with the
arterial vein;

13. the internal excrements of the foetus, sc. solid and liquid, expurgation
of the head, etc. and their use sc. to keep the intestines from growing
together, and they are presently evacuated after birth, much phlegm coming
from the head, and many bilious excrements flowing to the intestines; or else
they are to suck the mother;

14. the common parts, internal and external, both simple or compound;

15. the skin, which in the foetus is more laxe, red, and thin, for evacuation
of excrements, but then they are subject to gallings, which may be cured by
linseed oil and linen clothes;

16. the teats;

17. the eyes;

18. the other internal compounded parts, in them the principal parts being
great, the lungs are red and ponderous, the reins glandulous, and bladder
greater than the ventricle, and the caecum intestinum greater than in the
adult:

19. The bones, in the head they are laxe, two bones in the forehead, that of
the hinder part is fourefold, those of the temples divided, the auditory meatus
is cartilagineous and the ethmoid, the sphoenoid is fourefould, there are three
futures in the pallat, the nether jaw double, they are without teeth, which are
generated after out of little bladders, containing a mucous matter, which is
gradually hardened, and first in the upper part, the matter in them being more
proritated by the niples, therefore diverse hang coral about the neck for them
to bite, after it they are to be weined; their hyoid bone is carrilagineous,
the vertebra's are compound, and without the spina, the scapulae are
cartilagineous, the sternon has many bones, the limbs are without appendices,
and all their bones are imperfect, and the os innominatu^ is 3 fold, yet then
the femal is more perfect; but both are to be swathed, and not suffered to go
till pulsation may not be felt in the crown, and they can stand without
swadlebands, and hold by the hand, in the cradle they are to lie upon the back:

20. The time of birth, which is various, according to debility and strength:

IX. The middle venture is to be considered,
and 1. Its common coverings, with its situation from the neck to the
diaphragma, figure which is ovale, substance partly bony, partly fleshy, parts
continent or contained, those are proper; or common, sc. the cuticle, skin,
fatt and carnose membran; the proper are the duggs, muscles, membrans, bones,
cartilages; the contained are the heart with the pericardiu^, and lungs with
the rough artery:

2. The duggs, of both sexes, they are situated upon the pectoral adducent
muscle, and are glandulous in Women, with lactifer veins from the axillary
ramus and subclaves, and mammary arteries, from the subclave rami, and nerves
from the fourth intercostal, with fatt, in the middle is the niple, and its use
is manifest:

3. The pleura or membrane girding the ribbs, of a hard white and thinn
substance, double but thickest inwards, and has twelve veins on each side,
the two uppermost from the higher intercostal ramus, the other from the vena
sine pari, also twelve arteries, and twelve nerves, also its figure various,
superficies, magnitude, foramina, upwards, to the vena cava, great artery,
gullet, rough artery, and nerves of the fixth pair, downwards one for the
hollow vein, the second for the gullet, the third for the great artery, and
its original, sc. from the meninges of the brain investing the spinal marrow,
its use is to cover and bind:

4. The mediastinum, or membrans seperating the cavity of the thorax, its
substance softer than the pleura, superficies, magnitude, sc. from the jugulum
to the diaphragma and vertebras to the bone of the thorax, with veins and
arteries from the Mammaries and sine pari, stomachick nerves, and use, sc. to
divide the right cavity of the thorax from the left, suspend the pericardium,
and keep the vessels in order.

5. The pericardium or membrane compassing in the heart, having a thick
substance, pyramidale figure, with its differences from quantity and color,
and use of the pericardium, sc. to keep the heart in its natural place, and
its water to refrigerate humect lubrifie and defend the heart.

6. The heart and its external parts, with its situation, sc. of the basis in
the midst and the point a little on the left hand, and forewards below the left
teat, its figure is pyramidal, the superficies smooth, also its magnitude,
substance, fibers, color, action, and connection, sc. by the pericardium
upwards to the mediastinum, downwards to the diaphragma, as for the parts, they
are dissimilar, sc. the basis and point, or similars external, as the fat,
integent membran, vessels- sc. the coronarie vein with its valve arising from
the ascendent trunk of the cava, and coronarie artery, and nerves from the
6th. conjugation of the brain, also the 2. auriculae, with their figure
pyramidal, superficies inequal, substance nervous, situation the right before
the vena cava, and the left the venal artery and is lesser harder and sharper,
and they are contracted when the heart is dilated.

7. The internal parts of the heart, sc. the ventricles, with their number sc.
the right and left; and differ in magnitude, the right being biggest having
grossest blood, being semicircular, on the side of the heart, and having
thicker flesh, and they are divided by the septu^ cordis, their inward
superficies is inequall with caruncles, they also have four vessels about the
basis of the heart, sc. two veins terminated in the right ventricle, sc. the
cave, and arterial, and two arteries in the left sc. the aorta and venose, at
the mouth of these vessels are eleaven membranes or valves, of which some are
trisulc or tricuspid, others semilunar or sigmiforme.

8. The action and use of the heart, and its parts, sc. pulsation, the parts of
which are dilatation, and contraction by the motion of the point from the
basis, with the intermediate rest internal and external by fibers, the pulse
is thought by some to be caused by the fervor of the blood, and its use is
common, sc. of constriction and dilatation, and the blood is driven out of the
heart, to hinder putrefaction, nourish the parts, and vivificate, and requires
influent and insite heat, the proper and private use thereof, is to serve it
self by inspiration and exspiration: hereto belongs the motion of the blood,
which arises from aliment, humected by the liquour of the stomach, which
quickly makes it become spongious, and then it is incided by the acid humor,
which some think comes from the spleen into the stomach, and turns it into a
cremor, or chyle, which is then distributed into the intestines, (where it is
of a cineritions color) the stomach pressing it forth, by the constriction of
its fibers, which opens the pylorus; but it remains not long in the
intestines, but is driven forewards by the constriction of the transverse
fibers, and so stopped below, and is pressed and attracted through the rugouse
tunicle of the intestine as a colatory, to the lacteal veins where it is
white, from the duodenum, (and not through the meseraick veins.) The^ it is
mixed with the blood in the mesenterick ramus, vena porta in the liver, and
vena cava, and thence into the right ventricle of the heart, and so into the
arterial vein; and according to some, it is first by the constriction of the
auricles of the heart, which then propel the blood contained into the
ventricles of the heart; with which they being filled, the heart is dilated;
after which this contracting the ventricles, causes pulse; by which it
protrudeth the blood driven in, into the arteries; out of the left ventricle
into the aorta, out of the right into the pneumonick, called vena arteriosa;
whence by and by it is carried through the lungs into the pneumonick vein
called arteria venosa; hence into the left ventricle, and from hence it is
driven into the aorta, and whole body by the rami thereof: The blood thus
impelled into the habit of the body, passes out of the arteries by anastomoses
into the veins again having valves, and so returns into the vena cava, and
from this into the right auricle of the heart, then into the right ventricle;
and so goes the same circle, as before, and that continually, and so fast,
that some affirm the whole mass of blood passes round thus in half an
hour, therefore this motion is called the circulation of the blood more
particularly; the blood passes through the spermatick arteries to the
testicles; by the veins from the testicles, to the left emulgent, or vena cava
on the right: By the mesenterick arteries to the intestines; by the veins to
the mesenterick ramus; by the caeliack arteries to the spleen; by the splenick
ramus of the vena porta to the liver: By the rami of the caeliack artery, which
answer the following veins, to the ventricle and omentum; by the gastrick and
epiploick veins to the splenick ramus: The short vessels arteriose and venose,
ramuli of the caeliack artery, and splenick vein, in the middle betwixt the
ventricle and spleen, are divided into two branches, of which one goes to the
ventricle, the other to the spleen: By this branch of the artery it passes to
the spleen, by the other to the ventricle; by the venose branches to the trunk
of the vas breve, from the ventricle and spleen: By the emulgent arteries to
the reins; by the emulgent veins to the vena cava: By the coronal artery of
the heart into the vein; from the coronal vein of the heart into the vena
cava: By the intercostal arteries into the pleura; from the pleura by the
veins into the azygos, and thence into the vena cava. In the head by the
carotid and cervical arteries to the four sinus of the brain, and thence by
the jugulars to the heart. Furthermore, besides what has been already said of
the chyle, and blood, note, that according to the latest Anatomists, the chyle,
successively chylified, passes from the stomach and gutts, into the common
receptacle at the root of the mesentery, through the lacteal veins terminating
in glandules, and arising from the gutts or glandules of the abdomen, into
which the former exonerate themselves; and the chylifer ductus are propagated
from the grand receptacle, to the subclavian branches of the vena cava near
the external jugular veins, and so with the blood by the ascendent trunck of
the cava, it is carried to the heart as aforesaid, and it is sanguified by the
vital spirit; but then adequately nourishes not the nerves, fibrous and
membranous parts: and it is percolated through the liver, so separated from
choler, and subtilised by respiration, which is caused by the diaphragme,
which also with the motion of the brain and nerves moves the nutritive juice,
(which is like the white of an egg) through the nerves of the sixth
conjugation, having commerce with all the rest, into the brain and spinal
marrow, and that slowly, after it has been elaborated by the nutritive
glandules of the mesentery, three lumbares, and thymus or glandule in the
thorax, near the ductus lacteus thoracicus, in bruits called the sweetbread,
which separate it from the less alimentary parts of the chyle: There are also
two other classes of glandules, the first excretory avoiding some superfluous
matter brought into them by the nerves, sc. the testicles, prostats, seminal
vesicles, papps, and maxillare glandules; the second reductory, serving to the
secretion of a humor, and reduction of it into the veins, as the renale,
those nere the fundament, and oesophagus, the parotid, axillary, and inguinal
glandules, etc. having an acrimonious humor from the nerves: The Lympheducts
also yield a thin insipid whitish liquour, serving as a vehicle for the
nutritious juice, and its thinner part to prevent the coagulation of the blood,
and promote its mi^^tion, and they have this liquour from the nerves and
arteries. The vessels themselves are whitish, running close upon the veins,
having a thin membranous substance, round figure, of the magnitude of a small
quill, with sundry valves; some of them accompany the larger veins in the
limbs, others those in the abdomen; especially the vena portae, iliacal, and
those disseminated upon the testicles, these arise from the liver, gall, or
capsula communis, and the other from those parts. Those in the abdomen are
terminated in the grand receptacle of the chyle, passing with it through the
lacteae thoracicae into the subclavian vein, and those above the diaphragme,
or those arising from the limbs, are inserted into the external jugular veins,
but their streams all meet in the heart. As for their situation and
progress, in the arms, they ascend with the brachiale vein to the axillary
vein, having a valve there; and from the thighs, they clime up with the crural
and iliacal veins to the mesentery, where, with the small branches of the vena
portae, they are terminated; those issuing from the liver or bladder of the
gall, do also descend with the vena portae to the middle glandule of the
mesentery and are terminated therein; those entering the capsula communis of the
vena portae, follow the distribution of the same.

9. The union of the vessels of the heart in the foetus, which after is
altered, sc. the great artery with the arterial vein, umbilical arteries, and
urachus:

10. The lungs and their rough artery, with the right and left part, with their
dissecant line, lobes, figure, magnitude, connection, sc. upwards by the rough
artery to the neck and back, forewards to the sternon, backwards to the
vertebra's by the mediastinum, the substance, membran, vessels, veins, from
the arterial vein coming from the right ventricle of the heart, and arteries
from the venose artery out of the left; also the rough artery, with its head
and fistula, the larynx, and veins from the external jugular, arteries from
the greater ramus carotidis, nerves recurrent from the sixth conjugation of the
brain, two pair of glanduls, the first tonsils, and 2d. at the bottom of the
larynx, membrane exterior and interior, cartilages, trunck of the fistula,
and division, and action of the lungs respiration, to preserve heat and expel
vapors, its parts are inspiration and exspiration.

X. The upper venture is to be observed,
1. The hairs, and four common integuments, which are containing parts, and
proper, sc. the pericranium, muscles and bones of the external, and two
membrans inwards, the parts contained are the brain and cerebellum; but first
the hairs with their substance, three parts, situation, vertex, figure
quadrangular, magnitude, and matter sc. blood, so if the brain be hot, there is
much, little if cold, thin if dry, and thick if humid; also the difference from
magnitude, figure, color, and quantity, with its primary use, sc. to defend
the skinn, and secundary to defend the brain; also the cuticle and skinn, with
the veins from the external jugular, and arteries from the exterior ramus
carotidis, fatt, and carnose membran.

2. The pericranium, compassing in the bones of the head, its substance,
number, thickness, sense, connection, and consent with the hard membrane.

3. The two membrans girding the brain, or meninges, with their substance,
figure, magnitude, number two, sc. the crasse membran, with its situation,
connection, superficies internal, and external, foramina, two processes, four
sinus, trunck and vessels; and the thin membran immediately covering the brain.

4. The brain, with its substance, magnitude, figure, superficies, division
into the brain cerebel and beginning of the spinal marrow; but differs from the
cerebel, being softer, whiter, bigger, round, and full of cavities; as for the
brain, from the falciform process it is divided into the right and left part,
with the cortex and marrow, also the anteriour ventricles, membran girding the
ventricles, choroid plexus, fornix, the third ventricle, with its anteriour and
posteriour meatus, infundibulum or pelvis, pituitary glandule, rete mirabile or
retiforme plexus, pineal glandule, testicles, nates, and meatus; the fourth
ventricle is placed betwixt the inferior part of the cerebellum, and superior
spinal marrow.

5. The cerebel and its parts, it being the hinder part of the brain, with its
substance, magnitude, form, color, parts lateral anteriour and posteriour,
globes, processes, and sinus.

6. The spinal marrow, arising from the fourth ventricle of the brain, and is
somewhat harder, its membran, figure, filaments, and nerves.

7. The new way of dissecting the brain, sc. by taking it whole out of the
skull, and so beginning at the basis.

8. The action and use of the brain, sc. to refrigerate the heart, as some say,
and yield animal spirits to the nerves.

9. The internal eye, with its muscles, fatt. vessels, sc. veins from the
jugulars, arteries from the carotides, and nerves optic, and motory, tunicles,
sc. the dura, cornea, uvea, with the pupil, retiforme, ad^ate, innominated,
crystalline and vitreous, the humors are three, sc. the aqueous, crystalline,
and vitreous.

10. The inward ear, in the os petrosum, with its three caverns, the first
tympanum, the second the labyrinth, the third cochlea, membrans, three little
bones malleus incus and stapes, two muscles, nerve, and action.

11. The inward part of the nose, sc. the cribrose bone toward the brain, and
mamillary processes.

12. The instruments of tasting, sc. the tunicle of the tongue, and from the
fourth and seventh conjugation of encephalick nerves; and of feeling, sc. the
flesh that is soft, and that has nervous fibers. Thus of the description of
man's body, Somatologie; now follows Nosologie, or his several diseases, and
these are,

I. Universal, sc. Fevers,
and according to the common definition thereof, a fever is a hot distemper of
the whole body, which arises from heat preternaturally accended in the heart,
and by the mediation of the spirits and blood is diffused through the veins
and arteries into the whole body, and hurts the natural actions by the
co^bination of symptoms, sc. thirst, hickets, vomiting, fluxes, dryness,
blackness and asperity of the tongue, lipothymie and syncope, the dyspnoea,
headache, watching, epileptick convulsions, etc. it is caused by motion,
putrefaction, contact of hot things, pycnosis or constriction of the pores, and
admixture of hot things: And differs by intension and remission, gentleness
and violence, hexis and schesis, and as primarie and symptomatick, etc. It Is
cured by refrigeration and humectation.

Fevers are, 1. not putrid: 1. The ephemera, which is occasioned by the
incending of the vital spirits, and lasts one day, it is caused by what ever
too much heateth them; it is cured by a refrigerating and humecting diet, of
easy concoction and good juice, as the flesh of kids, veale with vinegar and
cooling herbs, drinking barley water and small beer: If it lasts more days,
stronger remedies are to be used. 2. The synocha simple; which is without
putrefaction, caused by the effervescencie of the spirits and more thin blood,
without remission, and lasting three four or more days; its cured by
phlebotomy, and the drinking of cold water, with a thin and small diet, to
refrigerate and humect, sc. ptisan, small beer and things acid.

2. Putrid, which is caused by hot vapors elevated by the putrefaction of
humors, which preternaturally torrify the heart; it is cured by phlebotomy,
vomitories, coction, purgation and preperation of the humors by things
appropriate, acetose, aperient and corroborative, by sudorificks and
diuretics, and diet, sc. prisans, oxymel, emulsions, chickens, and veale with
things acid. These fevers are, 1. continent. 1. The synocha putrid, which is
caused by blood putrified in the vena cava, afflicting without remission and
intension periodical from the beginning to the end; it is cured by phlebotomy,
purgation, alterants with things acetose, and a thin diet, sc. barley water,
and chickens broth altered by refrigerating herbs.

2. The causus, or burning fever, which is continual, caused by the
putrefaction of blood in the greater vessels, and continually afflicts with
great thirst and heat; it is cured by venefection, purgation, vomitories,
alteration, corroboration, mitigation of symptoms, and diet as before.

2. Periodick continual, and it is caused, by excrementitious humors
putrefying in the veins, that are betwixt the great and capillary, remitting
by certain periods without intermission; it is cured, as its species:

1. The primary continual: 1. The Tertian continual, which is caused by bilious
blood purrifying in the propagines of the vena cava, continually troubling, but
most on the third day; it is cured, by phlebotomy, remedies alterant preparant
and cathartick, whey, diuretics, sudorificks, topics, diet cooling and
humecting, sc. ptisan, chickens, and things acid: If it be spurious, the cure
is according to the type and complication.

2. Quotidian continual, which is caused, by a pituitous humor putrefying in
the propagines of the vena cava, having exacerbations every day; it is cured by
laxants, concocters and alterers, purgers, diuretics, cardiacks, an
attenuating inciding and abstersive diet, chickens, kids flesh and mutton,
aromaticks and capers, with ptisan. The epiala is cured as other putrids: and
the syncopal by laxation concoction and thin diet.

3. Quartan continual, which is caused by melancholic blood putrefying in the
propagines of the vena cava, the heat of which does always remain, but is
intended in the fourth day; it is cured by phlebotomy, preparation and coction,
diuretics and sudorificks, and diet cooling.

2. Symptomatick continual, which is caused by other diseases; and cease,
they being removed, and it is typhoid from vapors, or lypyrias in which the
inward parts are hot, and the outward cold; or gentle; it is cured, according to
its cause, as from obstruction, and corruption of parts, etc. if it be a
lypyrias it arises from an inward inflammation attracting the blood from the
outward parts.

3. Intermittent, which is caused, by vapors, arising from humors in the
mesaraick veins, by putrefaction, and after emitted into the vena cava;
invading by certain periods, and ceasing by excretion; it is cured by purgers,
alterers, sudorificks, and topics. It is, 1. Tertian intermittent, which is
caused, by excrementitious choler putrefying in the mesaraick veins;
afflicting the third day, with rigor, which heat and other symptoms follow;
it is cured by purgation, vomitories, venesection, preparers and concocters,
appropriats, things acid, diuretics, sudorisicks, roborants, topics, things
hindering paroxismes, and a cool moistning diet, as ptisans, and other diet of
good juice and easy concoction: if it be a notha, the diet must be more
copious, it being longer. 2. Quotidian intermittent, which is caused by phlegm
putrified in the mesaraick veins, and invadeth every day; it is cured, by
clysters, vomits, preparers, purgers, sudorificks, and strengthners. 3. Quartan
intermittent, which is caused by a melancholic humor in the mesaraick veins,
and afflicts the fourth day; its cured by purgers, venesection, preparation
and concoction, vomits, opening of the haemorrhoids, sudorificks, specificks,
humecting and attenuating diet, as sorbile eggs, chickens, goats flesh, veale,
partridges, saxatile fishes, sweet almonds, prunes, ptisan, apples, rapes,
drinking white wine, or beer well defecated, with herbs. 4. Semitertian, which
is caused by a continual quotidian, and intermittent tertian, afflicting
continually, but the third day with rigor; it is cured by mixed remedies
respecting both, purgers, venesection, preparation, cold and moist diet; Also
the compounded fevers are subintrant, coalterne, or communicant, confuse or
implicit, with a double and triple tertian and quartan, and double quotidian;
and they are cured almost as the simple.

3. Hectic, which is caused by heat so possessing the parts of the body; that
though it be chearished by no cause yet it remains, and continually
afflicts; and it is with a tabes or without it, also it has three degrees,
the first when the rorid humidity is consumed and dried, the second when the
carnose and adipose, the third when the fibrous, is exsiccated; it is cured, by
things that humect and cool, as Juleps and emulsions, baths of sweet water,
and milk tepid, inunctions, and topics that cool applied to the heart liver
and reins, cold and moist diet, of good juice and easy of concoction, not
soon dissipated, sc. ptisans, new eggs, chickens, kids flesh, fishes, almonds,
the greater cold seeds, milk of women, asses, goats, and cows, snailes,
restorative broths, collises, amygdalats, barley water with prunes liquorise and
a little cinamo^, and cold water in the beginning if complicate the causes are
to be observed.

4. Fevers malignant, which are caused, by somewhat that has an occult
quality and venomous, causing symptoms that are more troublesome than
ordinary, yet not killing many, or suddenly; and they are cured, by clysters,
sudorificks, venesection if need, and lenients, as also vomitories,
vesicatories on the arms and legs, alterants, preparants, diuretics,
epithems, diet of good juice and easy concoction, small drink, decoction of
hearts horn with spirit of vitriol, q. s. pulp of tamarinds, barberries and
citron-seeds infused in common water.

As, 1. The small-pocks, in particular, which are pustules, caused in the top
of the skinn, and parts in proportion answering it, by reason of a peculiar
effervescency and ebullition of the blood, from the expulsive faculty, with a
continual fever; they are cured, by clysters, venesection in the adult,
expulsives, refrigerants (according to Gallenists and modern writers) and
defensives; the eyes by plantain and cuphrage water, with a little camphire and
saffron; the nostrils by a nodule of saunders and camphire with rose vinegar;
the throat by diamoron, decoction of plantain with barley, and honey of roses;
the lungs by the lohoch of poppy, tussilage, syrup of jujubes and violets; the
intestines by the syrup of quinces, myrtles, rob of ribes and plantain and
sorrel water; and to the pustules some use the rosate unguent and white
camphorate, and a moderately cooling, and astringent diet, small beer,
hordeate water chalybiated, with the citron juice, and ribes: The symptoms are
removed according to their nature.

2. The measells, which are little swellings, red, breaking out in the skinn,
with a continual fever, caused by the expulsive faculty, and a peculiar
ebullition of the blood; they are cured as the small pocks, hereto belong the
crystals, tubercles, rubeols, and rossals.

3. The spotted fever, which is caused by malignancy, in which certain spots,
like flea-bitings of diverse colors, but chiefly red do appear in the skin,
from the thinner part of a putrid humor, expelled by the expulsive faculty;
and is cured, by lenients, phlebotomy in the beginning, sudorificks,
vesicatories, and corroborants, as the confection of alchermes, using the
rosate ointment to the heart, temples and pulse, with triacle and the juice of
citron.

4. The Hungarick fever, which is continual, malignant and contagious, caused
by corruption of the humors, with a great quantity thereof about the ventricle
and first passages, and is joined with a great pain of the head; it is cured,
by clysters, lenients, vomitories, phlebotomy if need, alexipharmicks, topics,
fumals, and diet as in the malign.

5. The hydropyretos, or English sweating fever, caused, by a humid and
poysonsome constitution of the air, adverse to the spirits and heart, with a
peculiar influx of the stars; it is cured by sudorificks, sc. the acetose
water, scabious, and sealed earth, using citron juice to corroborate.

6. The spasmatick malignant fever, which is thought to be caused, by
pestilent, ichorous, and malignant vapors troublesome to the nerves, which
arise from evil diet; it is cured by taking away the vicious and venenate
matter, and strengthening the nerves, by inunction of the oil of castor, fox
and worms, etc. on the spine, with Sp. V. sage, rue, etc. after purgation.

7. The malignant fever with a cough and catarrhe, epidemick, which is caused,
as it is thought by a humid constitution of the precedent year, and long
continuance of the australe wind; it is cured, by alexipharmicks and
appropriate remedies.

5. Fevers pestilential, which are continual putrid, caused, by the air and
contagion, destroying most, whom it does infect, having heat and putrefaction
from a deletery and venenate force of a contagious seminary, and afflicts
with greater symptoms, than the malignant, as also with buboes, and
carbuncles; it is cured by alexipharmicks, as the theriack water, bezoardick
syrup, liberant species, mithridar, diascordium, etc. purgation by the
pestilential pills, de tribus, with flowers of sulphur, syrup of rhubarb,
phlebotomy, diet without excrements and vicious humors, new eggs, fishes,
beer small, temperance, fontanels, suffumigations, pomanders, liniments for
the nostrils, balsams, vinegers, powders, fumale candles, sweet waters,
troches, sacculs, amulets, theriacks, sudorificks, venefection in the beginning
if plethorick, bezoardicks, camphorats, vomitories, vesicatories, alterants,
preparants, things acid, diuretics, topics, etc. as in the malignant: If it
exceed it is turned into the plague, which is a venenouse disease of the heart,
caused, by a venenate and contagious matter, hurting all the actions of the
heart suddenly and lethaly, with a complication of all kinds of symptoms,
arising from the air, ill diet, venifice, imagination, fear, and contagion;
it is cured as aforesaid, and chiefly by sudorificks, phlebotomy, purgation,
vomitories, vesicatories, preparants, diuretics, and diet as in the malignant:
As for the symptoms of fevers, sc. the headache, watching, sleepiness,
raging, epileptick convulsions, haemorrages, coughs, dryness of the tongue,
thirst, hickets, pain of the heart, and vomiting, flux of the belly, lypothymy
and syncope, etc. see after in their places. Thus of the universal disease:
internal of the body: Now follow the particular: II. Particular, with their
symptoms: and they are.

I. The diseases of the head.
1. The diste^per of the head without matter, it is caused, by external causes,
hot, cold, moist, or dry, causing it to decline from its natural temper; and
it is cured, if hot, by alteratives, emulsions, juleps, epithems, irrigations,
embrocations, oxyrrhodines, oiles, liniments, unguents, cataplasmes, cerots,
plasters, saceuls, powders, odorats, gargarismes, and cooling diet, barley
water etc. with evacuation: If cold, by evacuation and alteration by hot
cephalicks, clarets, mulse, decoctions, hydromel, distilled waters and spirits,
oiles, tinctures, syrups, conserves, condites, confections, powders, boles,
electuaries, rotules, morsules, and troches; and outwardly by epithems,
fomentations, embrocations and lotions, oiles, balsames, unguents, liniments,
emplasters, cerots, facculs, pouders, cucupha's, sinegmes, troches, fumale
candles, noduls, masticatories, phoenigms, and diet seasoned with sage,
rosemary, marjerom, hysop, spices, etc. so if humid, by alteration and drying
diet, and a little drink, using the decoction of guajacum, and drying simples,
and the contrary remedies as before: So if dry, by humectation and a humid
diet, sc. fatt broth, forbile eggs, chickens, veale, boiled flesh rather than
roasted, barley water with liquorice, and syrup of violets, much sleep, living
near rivers, and shunning venery, labors, and using other contraries as in
the rest: If complicate it is to be cured accordingly: They are known by the
pulse, sleep, leanenesse, and ingenuity, etc.

2. The distemper of the head with matter, which is caused, by things internal
and external, sc. humors and vapors, causing it to decline from its due
temper; it is cured, as the former, by evacuation, by errhines, sternutatories,
apophlegmatismes, cauteries, setons, topics, etc. and correction of the
distemper, and pills: If by consent, from the stomach, intestines, spleen,
reins, lungs, womb, external parts, or heart, it is cured accordingly, by
revulsives, intercipients, repellents, as oxyrrhodines, etc. the place is known
by the site of the parts and pain: If flatulent by discussers, averters,
revulsion, expulsion and evacuation, avoiding flatulent diet: If from blood, by
phlebotomy, repellents, intercipients, diet cold and dry, hordeats, saxatile
fishes, prunes, quinces, etc. if from choler, by venesection, preparants,
purgation, evacuation, clysters, vomitories, diuretics, and cooling and
moistening diet, using barley water or small beer, cold water and long sleep:
If from phlegm, by preparers, appropriate purgers, evacuants, sc. errhines,
gargarismes, masticatories, topics, cauteries, corroborants, hot and dry diet,
little, of easy concoction, roasted, with aromaticks, exercise, moderate sleep,
air hot and dry, wine, and frictions, etc. if from a serouse humor, by
evacuation, by purgation, phlebotomy, sudorificks, diuretics, and correctives,
by masticatories, apophlegmatismes, and vesicatories, with a drying air and
diet, henns, partridges, etc. if from melancholy, by preparers, purgers,
corroborants, a letificant, and hot and moist diet, sc. new eggs, the flesh of
young creatures, especially cockrels, kids flesh, ptisan, borrage, sweet
apples, long sleep, etc. if from atra bilis, by preparants, purgers, topic
alterants, venefection, leeches, cold and moist diet, saxatile fishes, barley
water, whey with epithyme, and sleep long, avoiding things of gross juice.

3. The vices of the animal spirits, which are caused, by heat, coldness,
thickness, impurity, darkness, paucity, agitation and motion; and are cured,
according to the cause, and by ungue^ts, and corroborants, sc. the confectio^
of alchermes, the water of Matthiolus and carfuncle, and a fit diet, etc.

4. The diseases of composition, and first of figure, which are caused in the
womb, by reason of ill matter or error of the formative faculty; after birth,
by the nurse, by ligature or compression, etc. and are cured, by compression
and ligature.

5. The straightness of the passages of the brain, which is caused, by
obstruction or compression; and it is cured, if from vapors, by intercipients,
repellents, revellents, and discutients: If from fumes suffocating; by
discutients, as aqua vitae with triacle, vomiting with oxymel, sternutatories,
the balsam of rue, revulsions and frictions: If from phlegm; by evacuants,
revulsives, discussers and heaters: If from compression; by elevation: if of
the sutures; by discussers.

6. The diseases in number, and they are worms, which are caused, by the
corruption of malignant humors; and are cured, by errhines, sternutatories,
with scolecobroticks, the juice and fume of tobaco taken, and plasters.

7. The commotion of the brain, which is caused, by external and violent
causes, which moove it out of its natural place; it is cured, by revulsion of
the blood, repulsion, evacuation, and discussion by pigeons etc. and the
depression of the cranium is cured by the cephalic cerat, etc.

8. The contusion of the head, which is caused by percussion, or falls etc.
it is cured, by repellents and astringents, using oil of roses, and the white
of an egg, with rose water, vinegar and tow, afterward by austere wine with
chamomill flowers, the alabaster ointment, a thin diet, and Vigoes cerot de
minio, diapalma, Gal. and the barbarum plaster. etc.

9. The wounds of the head without hurt of the cranium membrans and brain,
which if caused, without contusion of the outward parts; it is cured, by the
white of an egg, the ointment of cerusse, alabaster, rosate, and Galens
refrigerant: If with contusion of the outward parts; by defensives, oil of
roses, turpentine, honey of roses, diapalma, and the bettony plaster, etc.

10. The solute unity of the cranium without wound of the meninges and brain,
which is caused by fissure, contusion, depression, session, and contra fissure
from evident and violent causes; which are known by symptoms, condition of the
blow, subject, sight, specillum, or ink mixed with a plaster, which applied
will remain black there, etc. it is cured, by phlebotomy, purgation, section,
with defensives, detersives, sarcoticks, and epuloticks, as diapalma, etc.

11. The fracture of the craniu^, with hurt of the meninges and brain, which is
caused by outward violence; and is cured, by ischaimes, anodynes, sc. oil of
roses, universals, the betony plaster, cathereticks etc. vulnerary potions,
and thin diet, ptisans, quinces, and things like in substance, etc.

12. The fungus of the brain, which is caused by vicious humors slowing to the
part; it is cured, by evacuation, revulsion, dryers, cathereticks, excision, and
ligature by silk.

13. The rottenness of the skull, which is caused by the erosion of sharp
humors; and is cured, by seperating the corrupted bone from that which is
sound, by medicaments or the hand, or use the betony plaster; etc.

14. The inflammation of the brain, which is a tumor of the same, caused by
blood effused out of the vessels, into the spaces of the part, and putrefying
there, by reason of things too much heating; it is cured, by venesection,
purgation, cupping glasses, discutients, revulsives, derivation, interception,
and thin and cooling diet, as ptisans, emulsions, juleps, and sleep.

15. The hydrocephal, which is a tumor of the head, caused, by a collection of
a serous humor, in some part of the members constituting the head; it is cured,
by evacuants, heaters, and dryers, with correctors, etc.

Now follow, the symptoms of the brain,and 1. Those of the sensus communis.
1. The want of sleep, which is caused, by a continual influx of the spirits;
into the organs, preternaturally troubling the common sense, and those
external; it is cured, by the remotion of objects, inviting the sense to one
that is pleasant, and tempering hot, dry and sharp vapors, sc. by hypnoticks
internal and external; if from vapors deficient, use ptisan, sorbile eggs,
amygdalats, lettuce or violet water; so if from heat and dryness; if from hot
dry and sharp vapors, by evacuation, refrigerants, sc. barley water, emulsions
and opiats; if from cold and dryness, by things hot and odoriferous; if from
pain, straightness of the breast, and objects of enteriour senses, by
narcoticks, anodynes, lenients, and remotion of objects, etc. if from
affections of the mind, by correction thereof, and evacuation, etc.

2. The coma somnolent, or cataphora, which is a deep sleep, and is caused by
a torpidity of the common sense, and hinderance of the diffusion of the animal
spirits to the senses, that it cannot know the objects received from them, or
judge thereof; it is cured, by alterants, evacuation, discussers, revulsion, and
restoratives, with oxyrrhodines, acid things, suffumigations, apophlegmatismes,
errhines, ptarmicks, hot topics, rue balsam, friction, and fit diet.

3. The dreaming immoderately, which is caused, by impure vapors, sad and
melancholy, arising copiously from meats of the same nature, infecting and
exagitating the animal spirits, or distempers of the brain; it is cured, by
abstaining from meat bad and flatulent, and taking it in too great a quantity,
by venesection, purgation, pepticks, cold water, alterants, discutients; and
stomach plasters, etc. in children.

2. The symptoms of the imagination, sc.
the Vertigo, which is caused, by an inordinate and circular motion of the
animal spirit in the fore part of the brain, which causes a false imagination
of conversion and circumgyration; it is cured, by discussion, venesection,
revulsion, diet without flatulency, diacydoniats, pepticks, and moderation,
etc. if by essence, by evacuation, discussers and roborants; if from consent,
by preparation, evacuation, revulsion, interception, discutients, roborants; if
from the liver, spleen, womb, or whole body, according to the mittent and
recipient part, by phlebotomy, catharticks, revulsion and roborants; if from
the narrowness of the pores of the brain, as before; if from the agitation of
the spirits from evident causes, by quiet, and sleep, and frictions of the
extreme parts.

3. The symptoms of imagination, and ratiocination hurt,
1. The memory hurt, which is caused by things, hurting the siccity of the
brain, joined with moderate heat, which is necessary thereto, and so making
the animal spirits, either too torpid, or mobile, and so causing imminution or
abolition; it is cured by contraries, evacuation, instauration, excitation,
alterants, roborants, internal and external hot cephalicks, diet hot and dry,
and of thin substance, with aromaticks, easily concocted and not vaporous, and
according to the cause.

2. The delirium, which is a depravation of the phantasy and ratiocination,
caused, from the oblation of an inconvenient and absurd phantasme; it is cured,
by alterants, revulsives, repellers, intercipients, and discutients,
venesection, refrigerants, astringents, vesicatories, hypnoticks, the alabaster
ointment, and pigeons applied; the paraphrenitis, caused by the inflammation of
the diaphragme is cured, by averters and repellers; Ebriety, is helped by
vomit, things acid, prunes, quinces, butter milk, lettuce, cabbage,
oxyrrhodines, and sleep.

3. The phrensy, which is a perpetual madness, caused, by the inflammation of
the membrans of the brain, and afflicts with a continual fever; it is cured,
by phlebotomy, hypnoticks, oxyrrhodines, revulsion, coolers, clysters,
epithems, diuretics, and diet, as in the inflammation of the brain.

4. Melancholy, which is a madness, caused by a melancholic phantasme, with
which, the patient, sticks upon one cogitation, without raging and a fever,
and with sadness and fear; it is cured, by the generation, of thin, clear,
and subtle blood, ceasing from perturbation, reduction to the contrary, diet
thin, easily concocted, and not flatulent, sc. chickens, partridges, flesh of
kids, lambs, veale, saxatile fishes, sorbile eggs, borrage, almonds, etc. if
essential to the brain, by alteration, evacuants, discutients, roborants,
corrigents, and diet as before; if from love sickness, by society, mirth,
spermosbesticks, rue, porcelain, mints, camphire, sugar of Saturn, and thin
diet; if from philtrons, by alexipharmicks and vomitories; if by consent of the
heart and whole body, by preparation, evacuation, revulsion, alterants, and
roborants, phlebotomy, and diet as aforesaid; if hypochondriacal, by lenients,
vomitories, preparants, attenuants, aperients, purgers, chalybiats, topics,
roborants, and diet as aforesaid; if from the womb, by phlebotomie, preparants,
purgers, alterants, specificks, confortants, topics, fontanels, and humecters;
if errabund, by alteration, evacuation, roborants, humecters, and correction;
if attonit, as the rest, but by stronger remedies.

5. The mania, which is a long emotion of the mind, with boldness and
fierceness, without a fever, caused, by a fiery fervor and heat of the
spirits; it is cured, by phlebotomie, preparation, purgation, aversion,
repulsion, alteration, mutation, roborants, hypnoticks, specificks, topics,
cauteries, lotions, and frictions; if from the womb, by spermosbesticks,
refrigerants, society, sleep, diet as before, and the rose julep, etc.

6. The rabies, which is a madness, caused, by some peculiar poison engendered
in some creature, and communicated to the patient, with a great hatred to all
liquids, especially water, and it is called hydrophobie; it is cured, by
interception, extraction, ligature, scarrification, cupping glasses,
attrahents, amputation, cauteries, venesection, purgation, preparation,
alexipharmicks, sudorificks, and diet, of rams, crevises, chestnuts, cabbage,
walnuts, garlic, onions, radishes, and succory, etc.

7. The tarantats, which are caused, by bitings, and are cured by antidots,
attrahents, cupping glasses, vesicatories, the Q E. of rosemary, and music,
etc.

4. The symptoms of more of the internal senses.
1. The coma vigilant, which is an exstatick drowsiness, and propension to
sleep, and impotency thereunto, caused, by narcotick vapors, causing sleep,
and troubling the mind; it is cured, as the lethargy and phrensy, by phlebotomy,
revulsion, oxyrrhodines, clysters, preparants, evacuants, discutients,
roborants, inunctions and fomentations.

2. Somnambulants, whose distemper is caused, by humors yielding narcotick
vapors, moving the locomotive faculty, they are cared, by castigation,
increpation, purgation, corroborants, and diet of good juice, not flatulent,
supper small, and sleep not soon after meals.

3 The lethargy, which is an inexpleble propensio^ to sleep, with a gentle
fever, oblivion, and torpor, caused by pituitous blood putrefying in the
posteriour sinus of the brain; it is cured, by clysters, revulsion,
venesection, cupping glasses, scarrification, leeches, ligatures, frictions,
suppositories, purgations, vomitories, repellers, prevention of sleep,
ptarmicks, fumes, preparation by castor, diuretics, sudorificks;
apophlegmatismes, masticatories, vesicatories, synapismes, roborants and
sulphur lunae, diet thin little and attenuating, altered with hysop etc. ptisan
with cinnamon, diet with vinegar and cephalic herbs, afterward meat of good
juice and easy concoction, oxymel, and hydromel, etc.

5. The symptoms of animal motion,
1. Lassitude, and it is an unaptnesse with grief, for animal motion, which
ought to be done by nature, caused by things loading and wearying the muscles,
and it is spontaneous, exsiecative, ulcerose, tensive, phlegmonode, and of
gracility; if it is spontaneous, cured, by discutients, phlebotomy, purgatio^
and thin diet; by purgatio^ in the ulcerose, phlebotomy in the tensive, and
both in the phlegmonode; if from labor, by rest, sleep, frictions, baths,
venesection and purgation if need.

2. Pandiculation, which is an unusual extension of the muscles of the whole
body, caused by vapors in those parts, if in the temporal and masticatory,
they cause oscitation; if excessive, it is to be cured, as lassitude.

3. Inquietude, which is a various turning of the body, and members, caused, by
matter molesting the sentient parts; it is cured, by correctors, roborants, etc.
and is stomachick, inflammatory or febrile.

4. Rigor, which is a vibration of the muscles of the whole body, joined with
refrigeration and a certain pain, caused, by something molesting, suddenly
vellicating the sentient parts in the body, and irriting the expulsive faculty;
hereunto belongs horror; it is cured, if great, by anointing with oil of
rue, chamomile, bays, castor, pepper, triacle and mithridate, etc.

5. Trembling; which is a depravation of voluntary motion, by reason of which
the part elevated cannot be kept in its place, and it is caused, by the
debility, of the motive faculty; it is cured, if from the absumption and
dissolution of spirits, by analepticks, moderate sleep, and wine, etc. if from
cold and moisture hurting the nerves, by evacuants, alterants, roborants,
discutients, cephalicks, topics, and baths; if malignant, venenate, and
narcotick, by alexipharmicks, and roborants, neuroticks, and fit diet.

6. The impotency of motion, which is caused, by too much refrigeration of the
muscles, exsiccation, hard tumors, too much extension of the tendons, solution
of continuity, vicious conformation of bones, their luxation and fractures, and
vices of the ligaments and cartilages; it is cured, if from cold, by the
degrees of heat, and hot unguents; if from dryness, by humectants,
calefacients, roborants, baths, fomentations, and frictions; if from scirrhus's
or vices of the nerves, as that by exsiccation, by emollients; and fractures,
as the rest.

7. The palsy, which is a voluntary abolition of motion in the parts, without
the hurt of reason, caused by the vices of the nerves, by reason of the defect
of animal spirits; it is cured; if from phlegm, by lenients, vomitories,
preparants, arthriticks, purgers, errhines, apophlegmatismes, gargarismes,
sudorificks, roborants, theriacks, specificks, topics, frictions,
cupping-glasses, rubificants, oiles, unguents, balsams, suffumigations, baths,
cauteries, diet hot and attenuating, with aromaticks, of good juice and roasted,
wild pigeons, turtles, vipers, almonds, bread with carrawaies fennel and
aniseed, mustard, capers, chemical salts, hydromel, hot cephalicks, and
moderate sleep; if from a thin humor, the colic, and scurvy, by less hot
remedies, evacuants, discutients, roborants, clysters, abstergents, phlebotomy,
catharticks with humecters, and friction, etc. if from evident causes, by
clysters, venesection, discutients and astringents, etc.

8. The spasme, or convulsion, which is an involuntary, perpetual, and painful
retraction of the muscles, toward their beginning, caused by the abbreviation
of the nervous parts, which rigor, and depravation of the figure follows,
from a vellicant matter, or rendent disease; it is cured, if by cold, by
heaters; if by heat or dryness, by the contrary; if by repletion, by
evacuants, and corrigents, discutients, and clysters; if primary by phlebotomy,
cupping glasses, purgation, revulsion by clysters, frictions, topics, baths,
castoreum, diet as in the palsy, attenuant inciding with guajacum; if by
consent, by vomit, if from the stomach, etc. according to the cause, as in the
epilepsy and palsy; if statulent, by clysters, discutients, theriacks,
bayberries, etc.

6. The symptoms hurting the inward senses, ratiocination and motion, together
with the outward.
1. The Incubus, which is an interception of motion, chiefly of respiration,
and the voice, with a false dream of some heavy thing lying upon the breast,
and suffocating, caused, by free penetration of the spirits hindered, the
passages to the nerves being obstructed, and chiefly in the hinder part of the
brain; it is cured by discutients, evacuants, prohibents, vellication,
revulsion, phlebotomy if need, clysters, frictions, incision, abstersives,
errhines, apophlegmatismes, roborants. C. alkermes, dianthos, pleres
archonticon, sacculs, balsams, diacydoniats, and hot and dry diet without
vapors, thin and attenuating, of easy concoction and distribution, moderate,
with hyssop, and borrage, small drink, with carminatives and cinnamon.

2. The catalepsy, or catochus, which is a sudden taking of all the senses,
motion, and mind, caused by a fixative vapor, and causing the patients to
remain rigid, in that state in which they were taken, with their eyes open and
immovable, neither perceiving, seeing, or hearing, yet with respiration and
pulse; it is cured, by retrahents, discutients, evacuants, hot and moistening
cephalicks, antepilepticks, and antihypnoticks, phlebotomy if need, clysters;
preparants, topics, inunctions, and diet as in the distemper with a
melancholic humor, avoiding vinegar, that the congelant and figent strength
in the vapor or humor be not increased.

3. The epilepsy, which is a cessation of the animal and principal actions,
with a convulsive motion of the whole body, caused, by a sharp matter,
troublesome to the brain by a peculiar strength, vellicating the beginning of
the nerves, contracting them, and irriting to expulsion, it is called also,
puerile, herculean, commitial, lunatic, divine, sontick, and caduce; it is
cured, by averters, ligatures, antepileptick rotuls, laudanum opiats, essence
of castor, balsams, revellers, discussers, dissipants, phlebotomy, preparation,
purgation, sudorificks, errhines, apophlegmatismes, gargarismes, setons,
cauteries, sontanels, appropriate roborant cephalicks, noise in the paroxisme,
lenients, resolvents, unguents, frictions, suppositories, clysters, use rue to
the nostrils etc. triacle mithridate and diacastoreum to the palate, to the
ears and coronal future a sacculus or cerot of hot cephalicks, fumes of
galbanum, assa foetida, sternutatories, cordial epithems, a sacculus of rue
castoreu^ mustard feed etc. put betwixt the teeth: after, by particular
remedies after the universal, as aforesaid, and diet of good juice, easy
concoction, not gross or flatulent, but wild pigeons, swallows etc. with
hyssop, sage, marjerom, rosemary, and nutmeg, etc. beer without much hopps,
hydromel, decoction of guajacum, moderate sleep, lenients, and moderation;
it is thought to be cured, if the patient fall not, at the fume of myrrh,
hyssop, etc. if idiopathetick, it is cured as before, by phlebotomy if need,
setons, cauteries, issues, frictions; if by consent, as before, respecting the
part, or by phlebotomy, purgation, antepilepticks, actual cautery in the part,
revulsion, interception, frictions, and ligature; if from the ventricle, by
vomitories, purgation, and roborants; if from worms, by scolecobrotick
antepilepticks; if from the womb, by hysteric antepilepticks, foetid things
applied to the nostrils, and sweet to the womb, sternutatories, cupping
glasses, discutients, universal evacuations, and antepileptick emmenonagogicks,
roborants, theriacks, and specificks; if from external parts, by intercipients,
phlebotomy, purgation, scarrification, cupping glasses, discutients, cauteries,
and vessicatories; if uncertain, by frequent purgation, antepilepticks,
cauteries, fontanels, and roborants; if in infants, as before, and remedies
given to the nurses, antepilepticks, catharticks, and roborants; if from
consent of the ventricle, by dissolvers, corrigents, and stethicks; if weaned,
as before, abstaining from flesh, especially if fat, and which stuffeth the
head with vapors.

4. The carus, which is a deep sleep with hurt of sense and motion,
respiration excepted, and of imagination, caused, by the motion of the animal
spirits hindered; it is cured, if from phlegm or a narcotick vapor, by
universals, revulsions, by frictions, suppositories, sharp clysters, errhines,
apophlegmatismes, and acetose fumes; if with a fever, or worms, by averters,
roborants, and specificks; if from poison, by vomitories, alexipharmicks,
antihypnoticks, and in others according to the cause; if from the fume of
coals, or vapor of must, by exportation into the free air, giving the spirit
of wine, with triacle; theriack water, with apoplecticks, epilepticks, castor,
and rue vinegar, vomitories, sternutatories, frictions, clysters, and
analepticks.

5. The apoplexy, which is a sudden abolition of all the animal functions,
respiration only remaining, though for some space hindered, caused, by reason
of the narrowness and stoppage of the passages, chiefly about the basis of
the brain, through which the animal spirits are derived to the members, by
phlegm, blood, percussion, vapors and narcotick spirits, and wounds, etc.
it is cured, by frictions, clysters, erection, squeesing of the nostrils,
moderate shaking of the body, ligature of the extremes, apoplecticks, rue
balsam, castorium, cupping-glasses, suppositories, and phlebotomy if need; if
from phlegm, by phlebotomy if need, cupping-glasses, clysters, purgation,
vomitories, cauteries, particular evacuations of the head, inunctions of the
tongue and pallat, theriacks, finapismes, errhines, ptarmicks, roborants,
apoplecticks, gargarismes, saccules, epithems, phoenigms, spagyricals, and
attenuating diet, hot cephalicks, and antiparalyticks; if from blood, by
venesection, scarrification, cupping-glasses, clysters, revulsions, purgation,
and particular evacuants; if from narcotick vapors, by revulsion, evacuants,
apoplectick balsams as in the pituitose, sternutatories, and diet as then; if
from ebriety, by vomit, emulsions, hordeat water and things acid; if from
external and violent causes, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, repellers, diet
thin and cooling etc. preservation from it, is by imminution of blood,
preparation, alteration, purgation, moderate exercise, not sleeping presently
after meals, or drinking then, or using aqua vitae, if sanguine; if
pituitouse, by evacuants, roborants, hot cephalicks, apoplectick balsams,
aromaticks, pepticks, purgers, errhines, and gargarismes; if vaporose, by
abstinence, preparants, evacuants, discutients, roborants, avertents, and
friction.

7. The symptoms of excrets, sc.
The catarrhe, which is the defluxion of an excrementitious humor, from the
head unto the subject parts, caused by the coction of the brain hurt, from a
distemper, or too much repletion, irritating the expulsive faculty; it is cured,
if pituitous, by preparation, evacuation, aversion, correction, phlebotomy,
particular evacuation by errhines, apophlegmatismes, gargarismes,
masticatories, exsiccants, and hot cephalicks, with the conserve of roses,
lotions and plasters, fumes, powders, and odorates; if hot, by lenients,
venesection, preparants, refrigerants, astringents, purgers, dryers, roborants,
cerots, etc. if flowing violently, by averters, revulsives, diversion by
clysters, lotion, friction, ligature, cupping-glasses, setons, cauteries,
intercipients, incrassants, astringents, laudan opiats, gargarismes, rotuls,
fumes, odorats, powders, and sacculs; if suffocative, by revulsion, derivation,
sharp clysters, frictions, venesection, cupping-glasses, purgers, astringent
gargarismes, intercipients, temporal topics of tacamabaca, etc. phoenigmes,
vesicatories, coronal cerots, and antiasthmaticks if gross, astringent
roborants if thin, issues, purgers, stomachicks, hepaticks, moderate diet, not
hard, sharp, or vaporous, supper small, cydoniats, and moderate sleep, etc.
and if the excrements of the brain are retained, by errhines, apophlegmatismes,
resolvers, discutients, and sternutatories.

8. The Symptoms of the sense of feeling,
1. Stupidity, and torpor, which is caused by the defect of the animal spirits
destinated to the sense and motion of any part, and is chiefly in them as
membranous and nervous; it is cured as the palsy; but with less strong
remedies, sc. by universal evacuations, and particular, by the decoction of
sage, rosemary, spirit of wine, and castor, etc. apoplecticks, and paralyticks.

2. Pain, which is a trouble, caused, by the solution of continuity, in the
sentient part, chiefly the membrans, it is either gravative in the parenchyma,
punctory in the membrans, acute, mordacious, pulsatory in the arteries, profund
nigh the bones, and tensive in the membrans, skin, and glandules; it is cured,
by anodynes, narcoticks, and hypnoticks; if in the head, by the remedies
aforesaid, so, if by distemper also; if from the heat of the sun, by
refrigerants, and discutients; if from falls, or percussion, by phlebotomy,
clysters, discutients, and resolvents; if from ebriety, by evacuation,
repulsion, alteration, oxyrrhodines, refrigerants, hordeats, and cydoniats; if
from worms, as aforesaid; if a Cephalaea; and hemicrania, that is a long and
troublesome pain, with great paroxismes, but easily suscitated, troubling the
whole brain, head, or its greatest part, especially the membrans; and the
second troubles one half of the brain; it is cured as the cephalalgy, by
universal and particular evacuations, revulsions, topics, cephalicks,
cauteries, the decoction of guajacum, china, sarsaparilla and sassafras, and
diet as in the distempers of the head with specificks.

II. The diseases of the eyes,
1. Those of the eyelids,
1. The emphysema or inflation thereof, which is a swelling, caused by external
causes, or internal, sc. hot humors, aquose, and serose; if from the first; as
waspes, etc. it is cured by extraction, resolvents, theriacks, and anodynes; if
from the last, by fomentations, and appropriats, and such things as cure the
disease from which it is.

2. The trachoma, which is an asperity of the inward part of the eyelids, with
redness and itching, and sometimes with pustules, or tubercles, like millet
seeds, caused, by a sharp and salt humor; and it is with density, ficose,
callous, or scabby; it is cured, by evacuation, aversion, topic emollients,
alterants, temperants, abstergents and exsiccants, rosats, friction,
antipsoricks, and diet not sharp, salt, or vaporous, and temperate air.

3. The hydatis, which is an increase of an unctuous substance, in the upper
eyelid, chiefly in the morning, caused, by a serous humor, got betwixt the
membrans; it is cured, by fasting spittle, decoctions, diachylon, and manual
operation.

4. Warts, which are caused, and cured, as others, by powder of savin, etc.

5. The hordeol, which grows in the upper eyelid, and is like a barley
corn, caused, by a pituitous and gross humor mixed with blood; it is cured, by
universals, by fomenting with hens fat, fasting spitle, oil of eggs, etc.

6. The chalasion, or grando, which is a round, translucid, moveable
tuberculum, caused, by a hard lapidescent matter; and is cured, by emollients,
discutients, and section; so also the lithiasis is cured.

7. Nodes, and excrescencies, caused by humors; and are cured, by emollients,
resolvents, discutients, and section.

8. The cancer, which is caused as the rest, and so cured, by evacuation,
universals, particulars, and section.

9. Inversion, and contraction, which is caused by the increase of flesh; and
is cured, by purgation, washing with roch alum, and section; if from ill curing
of a wound or ulcer, by liniments; if from resolution, by removing symptoms,
and emollients if from contraction; if of the superior eyelid, it is called
lagophthalmy, arising from evil conformation, etc. and is helped by objects,
fomentations, emollients, and section.

10. Their coalescency, or sticking together, which is caused by ulcers, and is
cured by section; if from a pituitous and viscid matter, by purgation,
vesicatories, averters, and lotion with rose water, or oil of roses.

2. Those of the cilia.
1. The phthiriasis, which is caused by the want of washing, ill diet, sordes,
and contagion, causing lice; it is cured, by washing with seawater, the
decoction of beete, aloes and honey.

2. The phalangosis, when the hairs are not seen, except the eyelids are
lifted up, caused, by pituitous humors loading them, or exsiccation of the
cartilage; it is cured, by universal evacuation, fomentation, and section, etc.

3. The trichiasis, when hairs grow under the natural, and prick the eye,
caused, by humors, flowing to the extremities of the eyelids, by reason of
tumors or deligation; it is cured, by evulsion, corrosion, and section.

4. The madarosis, or falling off of the hairs, caused, by vicious and sharp
humors flowing to the roots, often after malignant fevers; it is cured, after
purgation, by unguents.

5. The softness thereof, caused, by a pituitous humor, seizing on the
cartilage of the eyelids, and roots; it is cured, by evacuation, vesicatories,
corroborants, and gum arabic, etc.

6. Ptillosis, having also thickness, callosity, and redness of the lids,
caused, by adust blood, salt phlegm, choler, or melancholy, or mixture
hereof; it is cured, by evacuation, humectation, emollition, corrigents, and
capillaries. Note also, the wounds of the eyelids are cured by the white of an
egg, and rose water, diapalma, and lac virginis, etc. the blackness thereof
by contusion and percussion, by the camphorate white ointment, etc. and their
combustion, by mucilages, etc. The symptoms thereof, sc. the difficulty of
apertion and shutting, caused by a thick, viscous, and drying humor; is cured,
by universals, fomentations, rosate oil, and mucilages: If instability, which
is caused by flatulency, or convulsion, and refrigeration; it is cured, V. P. by
evacuation of the head, roborants, and topics: If things fallen into the eye,
they are got out by doubling one lid over the other, and blowing the nostrils,
by injecting fair water with sugar, hydromel, or milk, retention of the breath
till the eyes water, sternutatories, cotton and turpentine, instruments, and
the white of an egg if corrosive.

3. Those of the annate tunicle, or conjunctive.
1. The ophthalmy, which is an inflammation thereof, caused, by sharp blood,
distending its veins; it is cured, by venesection, preparants, catharticks,
diversion, derivation, revulsion, particular evacuations, errhines, topics,
temporal repellents and astringents, anodynes, emulsions, sarcocol, and tuttie,
etc. if from cold and thick humors, by universal and particular purgation,
diversion, phlebotomy, friction, ligature, cupping-glasses, resolvents,
lenients, and diet that is not vaporose, sharp, or filling the head, salt or
aromatical; in the choletick, by the decoction of barley, hydromel in thick
humors, and things acid, sleep, and moderation; if a taraxis, or perturbation,
if from heat, by camphorats, milk, the white of an egg and rose water; if
from cold by thin wine; if from wind, fumes or dust, by water, milk, rose water
and saffron, and sleep; if from a blow or chance, by phlebotomy, anodynes,
repellers, woman's milk, rose water, and the white of an egg, etc. if a
chemosis, the white swelling above the black, and the eyelids being as it were
inverted, by stronger remedies, phlebotomy, purgation, scarrification,
cupping-glasses, setons, and cauteries, etc. if a dry lipitude, caused by a
drying salt and nitrous humor, as the rest, by appropriats, temperants,
alterants, evacuants, revulsion, derivation, and topics, with emollients,
butter and oil, etc.

2. The pterygion or unguis, which is a nervose membran, fibrous, and whitish,
arising from the angles of the eyes, especially the greater, and sticking hard
to the aduate, sometimes reaching the cornea, and covering the apple of the
eye, caused by blood, mixed with thick and tough humors, intercuraneous; it is
cured, V. P. by revulsion, by vesicatories, extergents, alcohol of egg shells,
fomentations, fieffs, anodynes, section, defensives, and diet thin and
inciding, not vaporose, etc.

3. The pannus, which is red, somewhat like a pannicle, caused, by the
exuberancy of blood, in the exterior veins of the eyes; it is cured, by
universals, topics, abstersives and dryers, by the marcasite and sarcocol,
etc. as also by section and diet, as before.

4. Those of the cornea,
1. The thickness thereof, caused by corrugation and exsiccation; it is cured,
V. P. the head and body being evacuated, by the juice of celandine and spirit
of wine, dropped in, and tartar of malmesey.

2. The leucoma, which is a white spot, making the cornea so thick, that there
cannot be a passing forth of the visible spirits, caused, by a cicatrice,
phlegm, or inequality; it is cured, by emollients, abstergents, or also
chromaticks, sc. the juice of the punick apple, etc.

3. The pustules of the cornea, and adnare, which are common to both, caused,
by a thin, sharp, and serous humor, elevating the tunicles; they are cured, by
universal evacuants, and revulsions, as in lippitude, gentle discutients,
astringents, resolvents, and diet as aforesaid, etc.

4. The ulcers of the cornea, and adnate, caused, by things external or
internal, affluent, or congest; they are cured, V. P. by temporals and
frontals, and the precedent ophthalmicks, exsiccants, sieffs, emollients,
maturants, astringents, glutinants, decubiture on the other side in the
beginning, and diet as before.

5. The cancer of the cornea, which is caused, by an atrabilary humor; it is
cured, or mitigated, by palliatives, catharticks, corrigents, and extirpation,
etc.

6. The wounds of the cornea etc. which are caused, by extrinsicals, etc. and
are cured, by phlebotomy, purgation, alterants, refrigerants, repellers,
detersives, sieffs, exsiccants, and cicatrizants, etc.

7. The rupture of the cornea, which is caused, by externals, or internals, as
the afflux of humors, or blood, the veins being opened; it is cured V. P. by
astringents, fomentations, etc.

8. The hyposphagme, or contusion, being a red or livid spot, caused by blood
flowing out of the veins opened, by reason of internal or external violence;
it is cured, V. P. by discutients, and astringents, etc.

9. The pain of the eyes, which is caused, by the solution of its continuity,
by humors, or external causes; it is cured, according to its cause; by
evacuation, diversion, anodynes, sc. the white of an egg with rose water, a
sweet apple with sugar, woman's milk, and opiats, etc.

10. The hypopyon, which is caused, by purulency betwixt the tunicles; it is
cured, by evacuants, V. P. collyries, gentle discutients, and resolvents, etc.

5. Those of the uvea.
1. The proptosis thereof, or its falling down, which is caused, when there is
a solution of the unity of the cornea, by wounds or ulcers; it is cured, by
astringents without asperity, and manual operation.

2. The platycoria, or dilatation of the pupil, toward the circle of the iris,
which is caused, by the tension of the uvea, from internal or external causes;
it is cured, if from humidity, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, leeches,
purgation, frictions, resolvers, and gentle astringents; if from flatulency, by
discutients and astringents; if from dryness, by humecters, sc. milk, etc. if
from strokes, by the plaster of bean meal, pigeons blood, myrrh,
phlebotomy, derivation, repulsion, and roborants.

3. The myosis, or narrowness of the pupil, when too little, which is caused,
by the contraction of the uvea; it is cured, if from humidity, V. P. by
exsiccants; if from defect of the aqueous humor, by humecters, etc.

4. The h^pochyma, or suffusion, which is an obstruction of the pupil, caused,
by a humor in that part of the eye, hindering vision; it is cured, by
phlebotomy if need, preparants, evacuants, ophthalmicks with guajacum, lixives,
revulsion by cupping glasses, vesicatories, setons, topics, discutients,
fumes, extersives, fomentations, chirurgy, and thin diet, diacydoniats, and
moderation; if a notha, it is usually from the stomach, and it is cured by
evacuants and roborants.

6. Those of the aranea, sc.
thickness, caused by the afflux of humors; it is cured, V. P. by attenuants,
ophthalmicks, etc.

7. Those of the angular flesh; and
1. The aegilops, which is a tubercle, betwixt the greater angle of the eye,
and root of the nose, caused by blood flowing thither from the adjacent veins;
it is cured, by venesection, purgation, apocrousticks, discutients, apertion if
need, abstersives if fistulous, sarcoticks, and cicatrizants, and section in
the anchilops, and thin and cooling diet.

2. The encanthis, which is an excrescency in the greater angle of the eye,
caused, by the afflux of blood, and humors thereto; it is cured, V. P. by
cathereticks, aegyptiack, section, and cauteries.

3. The rhyas, which is, diminution of the lachrymal flesh, in the greater
angle of the eye, caused, by the defect of aliment, corrosion, or incision;
it is cured, by instauration, sarcoticks, and consolidants.

4. The itching of the lachrymale caruncle, which is caused, by the afflux of
matter; it is cured, by frigid and humid topics, oil of roses and violets,
phlebotomy and purgation if need, and collyries.

8. Those of the humors of the eyes.
1. The aqueous, and it is thickness thereof, caused, by the admistion of
gross humors or vapors; it is cured, as suffusions; if effusion, by the
rupture of the cornea, by surgery, and diet of good juice; if there be
imminution, by heat, dryness, evacuation, and dissease, it is cured by meat of
good juice, and generating much blood, and humecting fomentations; if by
obscurity and alienation of color, by evacuants, according to the peccant
humor.

2. The cristalline, sc. the glaucoma, which is caused, by exsiccation,
occasioned by age, or some other exsiccant drying cause, so that things seem as
if seen through a cloud, causing whiteness about the ball, it is not cured,
easily; if too thin, it is helped by the contrary; if the site be changed,
upwards or downwards, all things seem double; if to the sides, all things
seem so; if toward the center things are seen near; if beyond the center,
they are to be held close; and if toward the pupil, further off.

3. The vitreous, and they are augmentation, when the spirits are obtunded;
diminution, causing winking; or thickness thereof, caused by the permistion of
humors, or some other substance, and is cured, hardly.

9. Those of the optic nerves, sc.
obstruction, caused, by pituitous humors and blood, etc. it is cured by
evacuation, phlebotomy, vesicatories, setons, and discutient lotions; their
convulsion is dangerous, and deep wounds incurable.

10. Those of the optic spirits, sc.
thickness thereof, caused, by the comixture of thick and troublesome vapors;
also too much agitation, and defect thereof; they are cured, by ophthalmicks
and oxydercicks, nutmeg, the electuary humaim, and Occo's species etc.
according to the cause.

11. Those of the muscles mooving the eyes, sc.
the paralysis, or resolution thereof, caused as the palsy, and is cured, by
cephalic evacuants, and things consuming the pituitous humor, and the blood
of a turtle dropped in: If there be a convulsion, it is to be cured by relaxants
and humectants etc. if instability, it is hardly helped, so its wounds.

12. Diseases troubling the wholl eye.
1. The defect thereof, which if caused, cannot be cured, but the deformity may
be helped by one that is factitious, as may be seen in Paraeus.

2. The atrophy of the eye, when all the parts thereof are diminished, which is
caused, by too much evacuation or exsiccation, by weeping, sharp humors,
watching, fevers, and obstruction; it is cured by humecters, and woman's milk,
etc.

3. The ecpiesma, or falling out thereof, which is caused, by external
violence, resolution of the muscles and nerves, wounds of the annate tunicle,
or tumors; it is cured, V. P. by reposition, ligature, cupping-glasses in the
neck, repellents, roborants, and defensives; if from resolution, by
apophlegmatismes, odorates, astringents, and section if need, with traumaticks.

4. Strabisme, which is when the ball declineth from the middle, so that more
white appears in one part of the eye, than in the other, therefore such look
on one side, and it is caused by conformation, custom, or convulsion and
resolution of the muscles; it is cured in infants by putting somewhat before the
eyes, with a hole in it, in the opposite part, and placing the light on the
other side that the infant may turn his eyes that way: If it be from a spasme
or resolution, it is so to be cured.

13. The symptoms troubling the eyes.
1. Blindness and debility of sight, which is caused, by the vice of the
brain, not yielding spirits, or of the animal spirits, not being lucid, thin,
or many, or of the optic nerves, humors, and tunicles; it is cured, if
curable, by cephalic purgers, masticatories, gargarismes, apophlegmatismes,
vesicatories, and cauteries, etc. oxyderkicks, topic roborants, sapphir water,
and other ophthalmicks.

2. The depravation of sight, as duplication of the species, caused, by an
unlike position of the eye: Also things seem inverse, by reason of the
mutation of the site of the crystalline humor; and of an other color, when
the cornea or aqueous humor is tinged; false visions are from the vice of the
aqueous humor, inquinated by vapors or humors; light appearing before the
eyes, is by the reflex of the animal spirits, when the waterish humor is
condensed above the crystalline. Things seem perforate if there be a little
suffusion in the center of the ball; they are cured, according to the cause, as
aforesaid.

3. The vices of the excrets of the eyes, sc. the lema, or copious sordes
issuing out of the eyes, chiefly in the night, and time of sleep, which glue
together the eyelids, as it were, caused, by the afflux of humors, incrassate;
they are cured, by evacuation of the body, averters, abstersives, and
convenient topics, rose and eyebright water, etc. The ephiphora, which is an
impetus of a thin humor, made into the eyes, either cold and aquose, hot,
sharp, or salt, from the brain to the annate tunicle, and chiefly to the
angles, causing involuntary weeping; is cured by phlebotomy, purgation,
revulsio^, discutients, robora^ts, exsiccants, astringents, cauteries,
vesicatories, the white of an egg in the hot with a linen cloth, and austere
wine in the cold; if the tears are bloody, use venesection in the foot,
emmenonagogicks, astringents, alterants, catharticks, and fontanels in the
arms and legs.

III. The diseases and symptoms of the ears.
1. The distemper of the ears, cold, hot, and often cold and moist, caused by
humors, etc. it is cured, if from cold, by heaters, liquours, vapors, and hot
oiles; if from heat, by tepid refrigerants, oiles, purgers, topics, and
discutients; if from humors, by purging after preparants, apophlegmatismes,
gargarismes, errhines, and lixives.

2. The inflammation of the ears, which is caused, by thin and bilious blood,
issuing out of the small veins of the brain, into the membrans of the ears;
it is cured by revulsion, by venesection of the cephalic vein,
cupping-glasses, frictions, purgation, repellers, anodynes, refrigerants,
discutients, suppurants, abstersives, and dryers, etc.

3. The ulcers of the ears, which are caused, by things causing purulency, or
corroding by acrimony; they are cured, by detersives, restoration, and
consolidation: If old, by aegyptiaacum, the excrescencies with alum, etc. if
fistulous, by white hellebore with honey; if stinking, by aegyptiacum, and
honey, etc. if sordid, with burnt alum, etc. if from the head, V.P. by
evacuation, diverters, gargarismes, apophlegmatismes, errhins, sternutatories,
and roborants.

4. Worms in the ears, etc. which are caused, by corruption; and are cured,
or killed, by brimstone, wormwood, white hellebore, castoreum, and mercurius
dulcis put in: water etc. is drawn out, by putting in oil of bitter almonds,
and a syring.

5. Wounds of the ears, which are caused, by things external, and are cured,
by future, dryers and binders, etc.

The symptoms of the ears, are.
1. The sounding and ringing of the ears, which is, a preternatural sound
therein perceived in the instrument of hearing, and cavity of the os petrosum,
caused by vapors shut in, and-moving there, and it is idiopathetick or
sympathetick from external causes, or internal, a pituitous or bilious humor,
sordes, or impostumes; it is cured, if from heat by refrigerants and humecters,
and opiats if need; if from a thick and viscous humor, V. P. by attenuants,
and discutients, castor, onions, fume of vinegar, oil of bitter almonds, and
sternutatories; if by consent, it is so cured: The diet is to be suitable, with
carminatives, diamoschum, and frictions: Hereto belongs the pa^acousis, the
hearing being confused, which is caused, by wounds not well cleansed or
consolidated, by fevers sending vapors thither, or without a fever, from
other parts.

2. Deafness, which is caused by diseases of the brain, vice of the auditory
nerve, animal spirit not generated or impure, defect of congenit air, vices of
the auditory passage, tympanum, three bones in the ear, and chiefly, from a
pituitous humor; and it is then cured, by phlebotomy if need, preparants,
purgers, apophlegmatismes, gargarismes, errhines, dryers, discutients,
masticatories, topics, distilled oiles, galls, etc. if from choler, by
purgers, oiles, phlebotomy, topics used tepid, roborants, and lying on the
other side, and using fit diet.

3. The pain of the ears, which is caused, by things distending the membrans
vesting the cavity of the ear, and of exquisite sense; it is cured, if from
flatulency, by expurgation, and discutient topics, else with anodynes,
narcoticks, opiats, concocters, and resolvers, etc.

4. The preternatural excrements and flux thereof, which is caused, by a humid
and impure brain; and is cured, by purgation, sudorificks, vesicatories,
issues, and dryers; if a flux of blood, it is cured by astringents and roborants.

IV. The diseases and symptoms of the nostrils,
1. The ulcers of the nostrils, which are caused by contusions, falls, wounds,
and acrimony of salt phlegm, etc. they are cured, by venesection, purgation,
cupping-glasses, averters, dryers, roborants, detersives, consolidants; if they
are old and putrid, stinking and filthy, they are called ozoenae, arising from
sharp malignant humors, and are cured, by mixed remedies, dryers, repellers,
astringents, and discutients, detersives, consolidants, after universals,
gargarismes, masticatories, and sternutatories; if corrosive, by the aegyptiack
and cerusse unguent, the decoction of guajacum, and diet without sharp and
bilious juice, avoiding calefacient causes.

2. The cancer of the nostrils, which is caused, by the ulcers thereof; and
cured, V. P. by mitigants, and liquour of arsnick, etc.

3. The polypus, which is a carnose excrescency in the nostrils, hanging by
certain little roots, and sometimes out of the nostrils, or descending by the
pallat, caused, by thick and viscid humors, chiefly phlegm mixed with blood;
it is cured, after universal evacuation of the body as in all affections of the
head, by roborants, dryers, astringent frontals, cucupha's, section,
defensives, cauteries, discutients, escaroticks, etc. as in the ozaena,
attenuant discutient and drying topics, corrosives, aegyptiack with a turund
of gentian root, and palliatives, etc. if it be hard and painful without a
certain figure, it is called sarcoma, and is near the nostrils or pallat.

4. The narrowness of the nostrils, which is caused, by compression,
constipation, or obstruction; it is cured, if from catarrhes, by evacuation,
attenuants, aperients, castor with vinegar, errhines, and odorats, etc.

5. The wounds of the nostrils, which are caused, as others, and so cured, with
fistules, etc.

The symptoms of the nostrils are.
1. Smelling hurt, the abolition of which is caused, by the distemper of the
brain, or processes of the olfactory nerves, the same are the causes of
imminution, the depravation is from putrid vapors; it is cured, if from
distempers, by contraries; if from a cold and thick humor, by preparation,
evacuation, apophlegmatismes, gargarismes, errhines, and ptarmicks, sinapismes,
etc.

2. The stinck of the nostrils, which is caused, by a putrid vapor; it is
cured, if from putrid humors, V. P. by revulsions, by errhines, abstersives,
odorats, wine with myrrh, etc. myrtine oil etc. if from the polypus, ozaena,
or ventricle, it is to be cured accordingly.

3. The haemorrhage of the nostrils, is an immoderate excretion of blood, by
the veins of the nose divided, rarefied, or opened, preternaturally, and is
caused, by whatsoever occasioneth the same, by anastomosis, diaeresis, or
diapedesis, it is cured, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, ligatures, frictions,
application of cold water, purgation, coolers, opiats, cerats, astringents
internal and external, crocus martis with plantain water, sperniol, frontals,
epithems, glutinants, frankincense, aloes, and the white of an egg with hares
furre, specificks, causticks, alum, etc. and diet cool and binding, thin,
little, with rest, the feet of animals, they being glutinous, hordeats,
amygdalats, and emulsions, avoiding things that increase heat, sharpen,
attenuate, and make the blood fluxile.

4. Sternutation, or sneezing, which is an expulsion of flatuous spirits, and
sharp vapors, offending the brain, violent and involuntary, through the
nostrils; and is caused, by things external, or internal, sc. humors and
vapors; it is cured, by evacuants, butter, milk, oil, the white of an egg,
washing with cold water, ligature, friction, revulsion, retention of the
breath, etc.

5. The coryza, which is a defluxion of the humors of the brain and
excrements, crude and thin, like water, to the nostrils, together with much
sneezing, caused, by a hot or cold distemper of the brain; it is cured, by
universals, and diet as in the catarrhe, the fume of rose vinegar taken, and
marjerom water attracted; if cold, by the fume of frankincense; if sharp, by
pomatum. etc.

V. The diseases and symptoms of the tongue.
1. The asperity and roughness of the tongue, which is caused, by hot sharp
and putrid vapors, drying and burning the tongue; it is cured, by remotion of
the causes, by cooling waters, diamoron, hordeats, and things acid, etc.

2. The tumor of the tongue, which is caused, by things external, or internal,
sc. the afflux of hot matter, cold, poysonsome, or putrid and cancrous; it is
cured, by averters, evacuants, repellers, discutients, and suppurants; if
pituitous, by oxymel, spitting often; if with inflammation, as aforesaid; if
venenous with the decoction of plantaine and honey of roses; if stony, by
emollition and section; if ulcerous, as other ulcers.

3. The wounds of the tongue, which are caused by violence, and cured, by
lohochs, liniments of the syrup of dried roses, and colate rasate honey, and
gargarismes, etc.

4. The ranula under the tongue, which is a tumor in form like a frog, and is
caused by a soft flesh under it, upon which the tongue lies and to which it is
tied, as it were by a band, and arises from a viscid and pituitouse blood
flowing thither; it is cured, by universals, phlebotomy, diversion, purgation,
lotions made of inciders and resolvers, salt, organy, etc. apertion, and mulse
gargled, etc.

5. The ancylosis, or tongue-tiednesse, caused, by the vinculum; it is cured, by
cutting the same with a pair of cisers or sharp knife, washing the mouth after
with posca, after which sprinkle on manna thuris, or use rosate honey, etc.

6. The taste hurt, the imminution of which is caused, by the refrigeration of
its nerves from the third conjugation of the brain, and emollition of the same,
obstruction, or ill conformation; it is depraved by external causes, or
internal, sc. humors and vapors; it is cured, if from hot humors, by
evacuation, vinegar gargled, and juice of limons; if from cold, by preparation,
evacuation, gargarismes of hysop, liquorice, honey, and robs; if from pustules,
ulcers, or consent, according to the cause.

7. The motion of the tongue hurt, which is caused, by the affection of the
nerves of the seventh pair of the brain, by the vinculum, tumors, ebriety,
concussion, and worms; it is taken away by conformation, and obstruction etc.
it is depraved by humidity, and ficcity, etc. it is cured, if from the palsy, by
universals, cupping-glasses, scarrification, diversions by clysters, frictions,
and ligatures; if from a cold pituitous matter, by preparation, purgation, and
other diversions, lotions, gargarismes, apophlegmatismes, castor with oxymel of
squils, etc. inunctio^s with nard oil, phoenigmes, and cauteries; if from
convulsion, by antispasmaticks in the neck; if by the vinculum, by section; if
by tumors, as before; if stammering or aphony, as aforesaid.

VI. The diseases and symptoms of the lips.
1. Their tumors, which are caused, by inflammation, etc. and are cured, if
from stingings, etc. by the decoction of marshmallows with vinegar, or milk,
and triacle; if from inflammation, as others; if hard, by-section; if from
cancers, as the rest; and the rest according to their causes.

2. Fissures, or chaps, which are solutions of the continuity of the lips,
caused, by too much dryness and tension; and are cured, if from outward cold,
by pomatum, oil of wax and fatts, etc. if from heat and dryness, by the
juice of sempervive, and goose grease, rosewater, mucilages, and humectation
with mastick, etc.

3. Ulcers of the lips, which are caused, by sharp, bilious, and serous
humors; they are cured, V. P. by the rosate unguent, and liniment of litharg,
and the fume of the seeds of henbane, shunning sharp and salt meats, spices,
and much talk; if cancers, they are cured as others.

4. Their wounds, which are caused, by violence, etc. and are cured, by future,
glutinants, and honey of roses, and syrup of dried roses inwardly; if flesh be
wanting, by digerents, incarnants, and consolidants, etc. if hare lips, by
excoriation, conjunction, and future, with unguents and plasters, etc. if
curt, it is to be cured by insertion.

5. Their trembling, which may be caused, by cold, anger, debility of the
nerves, vellicant humors, and worms, etc. as also perversion of the lips,
caused by the affection of the nerves of the third conjugation, and fevers:
And bleeding thereof, caused by sharp, serous and salt humors: and blewnesse,
caused by cold, etc. all which are cured according to their causes.

VII. The diseases and symptoms of the face, etc.
1. The apertion of the mouth, hurt, which is caused, by wounds of the nerves
in the neck, and tumors about the juncture, etc. it is cured by remotion of the
causes.

2. Oscitation, which is a vehement distention of the mouth, caused, by
vapors, collected in the spaces of the muscles of the lower jaw, and cheeks,
inclining them to excretion, it is cured, by exclusion, discussion of vapors,
and revulsion by wine drunk with water, eating of acorus, and long spiration.

3. The distortion of the mouth, which is a distention of the same, caused, by
the affection of the muscles of the face, or nerves of the third and fifth
conjugation, or those which descend from the first vertebra's of the neck, from
convulsion or resolution, and it is called spasmus cynicus, if both sides are
affected; it is cured, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, ligature, frictions,
sinapismes, phoenigms, dropaces, errhines, apophlegmatismes, gargarismes,
masticatories, resolvers, roborants, castor, the martiat unguent, oil of
castor, vapors, exsiccant lotions, the flesh of wild beasts, as hares, foxes,
staggs, goats, etc. boiled and applied to the parts affected and the head, and
inward remedies as in the palsy and convulsion, and diet as in them, looking
on the deformity and altering it by care, as also playing upon a pipe, etc. the
exercise reducing the parts.

4. The ptyalisme, or often spitting, involuntary, caused, by too great a
quantity of spittle, from humors distilling, a humid ventricle, intestines,
breast, and lungs, and mercurials, etc. it is cured, by exsiccants; if from a
catarrhe, as catarrhes; if from the ventricle by phlegmagogons, exficcants,
aloeticks, diagalanga, diatrion piperion, vomitories and fasting; if from the
spleen or lungs, it is cured accordingly, and by drying and strengthening the
tonsils, and astringents: If there be a salivous defect, which is caused by
the dryness of the brain, ventricle, tongue, and tonsils, etc. it is cured, by
humecters; etc. according to the cause.

VIII. The diseases and symptoms of the teeth,
1. The corrosion and rottenness thereof; which is a diminution of their
magnitude, caused; by things corroding; so that they break, and fall out by
pieces, and sometimes causing fistula's; it is cured, by exsiccants, as bay
berries, etc. things hindering putrefaction, as brimstone, camphire, liniments,
mastick, frankincense, wiping, alum, and cauteries, use myrrh if they stinck,
and aloes if worm eaten, and if need evulsion, etc.

2. Mobility and looseness, which is caused, by blows, falls, ill juice,
humidity, and defect of aliment; it is cured, if from violence by astringents,
so if from defect of aliment; and by dryers if from humidity, as alum and
austere wine, waters, and powders; if from erosion of the gumms, by such things
as restore them, strengthen and bind them; if wanting, it may be helped by the
factitious; their sordes are remooved, by washing and cleansing them; and their
blackness, by dentifrices.

The symptoms of the teeth, are.
1. The odontalgy, which is a sad sense of the teeth, caused by the solution of
their continuity, by humors, or distempers, in the membrans, nerves, or body
of the teeth; it is cured, if from plethory, by phlebotomy, scarrification,
cupping-glasses, derivation, and revulsion, by frictions, ligature, lotions,
vesicatories, flammula applied to the hand, astringents, roborants, erthines,
temporals of tacamahaca and mastick, etc. discutients, and stupefacients; if
the matter be hot, vinegar, rose and plantain water, oil of vitriol, and the
alabaster ointment; if cold, by burnt alum and salt, camphire, chemical oiles,
tobaco, laudanum opiats, philonium, washing after with the decoction of
rosemary, etc. and extraction if need, after preparation with the milk of
tithymal, etc. and fit diet, abstaining from sweet things, acerb, and very
acid, hard and very hot or cold; it is prevented by theriack salt, astringent
lotions, and dentifrices: In the dentition of infants, use, rarefacients and
emollients, the brains of young creatures and birds, butter with line seed,
and that of marshmallows, and section if need.

2. The stupidity thereof, which is caused, by acid sapours altering the temper
of the teeth, vapors, and imagination; it is cured, by purselane eaten, bitter
almonds, salt, new bread, licorice, walnuts, fresh cheese, and lotions, etc.
it is algor, if from cold, is helped by the hot roasted yolk of an egg eaten,
hiera, treacle, and bayberries; if hot by camphire and purselane.

3. The gnashing of the teeth, which is caused, by an imbecility of the muscles
of the jaw, from cold, worms, or vapors; it is cured, according to the cause.

4. The blackness, etc. of the teeth, which is caused, by vicious humors,
vapors, eating of sweet things, and black, etc. it is cured, by dentifrices,
abstersives, odorats, alum water, rosate honey with spirit of vitriol, juice of
limmons, washing, oil of sulphur, etc. and their bleeding, is helped by
astringents, etc.

IX. The affections of the gumms,
1. Their excrescencie, which is caused, by serous vicious and corrupted blood
flowing copiously thither, and laxity; it is cured, by repressers, and
astringents, alum water, burnt salt, myrrh, etc.

2. Their bleeding, which is caused, by sharpness of the blood; and is cured,
as laxity.

3. The consumption of the gumms, which is caused, by an ill and sharp humor
flowing to them, and corroding the same; it is cured by sarcoticks, powders, and
liniments, etc.

4. The parulis, which is an inflammation thereof, so prominent at the roots of
the teeth, both inwards and outward, that the next parts are distended, hot,
and red, caused, by thin blood, or other humors; it is cured, as other
inflammations, by phlebotomy, gargarismes of plantain water, diamoron, rob of
barbarries, discutients, resolvents, and apertion if need, lotions, and dryers,
etc. if ulcerose, by exsiccants, astringents, gargarismes, and those that are
stronger if fistulous, by the green water, so in the epulis, or caruncle, and
section.

X. The affections of the jaws,
1. Their luxation, which is a depulsion of the same, either in one part or
both to the fore part, but seldom caused, it is cured, by reposition,
emollients and laxants if long, after by astringents with the white of an egg,
and swathing.

2. Their immobility, which is caused, by luxation, fracture, and distillation,
etc. it is cured, according to its cause.

XI. The vices of the mouth.
1. The inflammation thereof, which is caused, by blood, and hot and bilious
humors, etc. it is cured, as other inflammations, by phlebotomy, purgation,
refrigerants, repellers, astringents, discutients, whey, the decoction of
plantain, diamoron, maturation if need, figgs, and honey, etc.

2. The aphthae, which are certain fiery exulcerations, in the upper
superficies of the mouth, caused, by sharp meats, bad humors and vapors;
they are cured, by astringents, repellers, discutients, maturants if need; by
extersives if sordid, stronger astringents, and escharoticks, stronger or
weaker according to the patient: For if in infants, from sharp or salt milk, by
cydoniats, purselane, diamoron, and astringent syrups; if pituitous, by
astringent discutients, frankincense, mastick, etc. and rosat honey if livid;
if adult, they are to be stronger, with phlebotomy, evacuation, stomaticks
astringent and drying, diamoron, alum, spirit of vitriol, mucilages, and
saccharate water; if putrid as ulcers, by the green water, alum, aegyptiacum
with rosate honey, and plantain water, quinces, lettuce, and cold dier,
avoiding things sharp, salt, or acid.

3. The corruption of the bone of the pallat, which is caused by wounds or
corrosive humors; it is to be cured by abste^sives and dryers, and helped by a
golden plate, if need.

4. The stink of the mouth, which is a stinking of the breath, caused, by a
foetid vapor, passing out thereof by reason of meat, excrements of the
intestines, faetid humors, and worms; it is cured, by odorats, nutmeg, myrrh,
musk, pills, troches, and rosate honey; if from the stomach, by evacuants,
corrigents, roborants, aloephangin pills, aromaticks, diacydoniats and
dianisum; if from worms etc. according, to the cause.

XII. The affections of the uvula.
1. The laxation thereof, which is when it swells preternaturally without
inflammation, and is extended, which is caused, by a humor, chiefly
phlegmatic, sent to it from the brain; it is cured, as its inflammation, by
venesection, cupping-glasses after purgation, diversions, evacuations, by
errhines, consumers of phlegm, and correctors of cold and moist distempers,
astringent and repelling topics in the beginning, afterward, by dissolvers
and dryers, plantain and rose water, oxycrat and viniger, diamoron,
gargarismes, the conserve of roses vitriolated, powders, long pepper with alum,
bole and myrrh, coronal plasters, a hard hot egg with frankincense and
ginger so used, etc. and if need, by extersives and consolidants.

2. The inflammation of the same, and exulceration, that is a swelling thereof,
caused, by bilious blood flowing in, with redness, heat, pain, danger of
suffocation, and sometimes with a fever; it is cured, as other inflammations,
by venesection, cupping-glasses, scarrification, diversions by clysters,
frictions, ligatures, evacuation, repelling topics, gargarismes, powders,
diamoron, plantain water, rob de ribes etc. discutients, anodynes, milk,
ptisans, emollients if need, and maturation, section, extersives, and
exsiccants, mulse water, and rosate honey, the green water if exulcerated,
aegyptiack, section if need, and diet as in other inflammations, with the juice
of quinces, etc. abstaining from talking etc.

XIII. The affection of the tonsils. sc.
Their inflammation, which is a swelling of the same, caused, by the afflux of
humors; it is cured, as other inflammations, by astringent gargarismes in the
beginning; phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, friction, clysters, lenients, repelling
topics, astringents, oil of sweet almonds, melilot plasters, suppurants if
need, emollients and resolvers if hard, album graecum if ulcerose, milk, and
exsiccants, etc. abstaining from things that may cause a flux of humors, etc.

II. The diseases of the middle venture.
I. The disease of the gullet, sc.
the quinsey, which is a stopping of the upper parts of the throat, through
which the meat, drink, and breath passes, causing a difficulty of breathing
and swallowing, caused, by inflammation, luxation, or defluxion; it is cured, by
phlebotomy, scarrification, cupping-glasses, purgation, sharp clysters,
repellers, gargarismes of diamoron, dianucum, the myrtine syrup, and plantaine
water, etc. by derivation, digesters, discutients, mucilages, exsiccants,
resolvers, plasters of swallows nests and melilot, etc. suppurants if need,
album graecum, apertion, detersives, consolidants of bole and myrrh, etc.
specificks, laryngotomy, and thin diet, sc. ptisan, broth, sorbile eggs,
prunes, lettuce, the four greater cold seeds, barley water with surup of
violets, small drink and temperance.

II. The diseases of the throat.
1. Strumes, or scrofuls, which are tumors in the glandules, caused, by tough
phlegm, shut up in its proper membran; they are cured, by evacuation,
discussion, maturation, section, purgation, dryers, scrophularia, powders,
emollient resolving topics, suppurants, apertion, mundificants, the apostles
ointment, or de apio and cicatrizants, section, and septicks.

2. The bronchocele, which is a tumor in the throat, extuberant in the large
space, caused, by flatulency, and joined with tension, from violent motion,
etc. it is cured, by astringents, and the plaster against ruptures, inward
astringents and dryers, as the powder of burnt alum, etc. discutients, etc. as
in strumes: If hydropical it is to be cured by incision.

III. The diseases of the rough artery.
And, 1. The diseases of distemper, which are caused, by the air, meat and
drink, and humors, etc. these are cured, by the contrary, sc. by evacuating
matter that is troublesome; if hot by syrup of violets, etc. if cold by syrup
of hysop, etc. if humid by diacalaminth, etc. if dry, by syrup of licorice, and
emulsions, etc. if it be with matter, it is to be cured as catarrhes.

2. Asperity, which is a defect of natural smoothness, caused, by things
immoderately corrosive, salt, sharp, acid, humors, vapors, much talking, etc.
it is cured, by lenients, and levigants, and things emplastick, syrup of
liquorice, jujubs, diacodium, etc. arteriacks, lenients, abstersives, dryers,
discussers and sublingual troches, etc.

3. Straightness of the rough artery; caused, by compression, inflammations,
tumors, and obstructions; it is cured, by remotion of causes, inciders,
attenuants, extersives, and knocking on the back if by externals.

4. Wounds and ulcers thereof, those are caused by violence, these by sharp,
salt, and poison some humors; the first are cured by conjunction, and
conglutination, by diacodium, and diatragacanth, and lohochs, etc. The ulcers,
are cured by detersives and dryers, and cicatrizants, etc.

IV. The diseases of the lungs.
1. The distemper of the same, which is a deflexion thereof from the natural
temper to that which is preternatural, caused, by things external and internal,
sc. potions, and humors, etc. it is cured, if from heat, by refrigerants, as
syrup of violets, etc. epithems, barley water, refrigerating herbs, and
temperance; if cold, by corrigents, syrup of hysop, hot oiles, mulse, and well
seasoned flesh; if humidity by corrigents, dryers, decoction of guajacum, salt
and sulphurous baths, aromaticks, suffumigations, aromatic wine, dry diet,
mountain birds, exercise, and talking: etc. If dryness, by violets, melons,
tepid water, barley water, emulsions, sorbile eggs, veale, saxatile fishes,
chickens, shelfish, milk, sleep, and quiet.

2. The peripneumony, or inflammation of the lungs, caused by the effusion of
blood, into the substance thereof, with a narrowness of the breast, difficulty
of breathing, acute fever, and coughing; it is cured, as other inflammations,
by averters, evacuation, maturants, resolvers, discussers, phlebotomy,
cupping-glasses, scarrification, ligature, clysters, lenients, pectoral
decoctions, expectorants, inciders, topics as in the pleurisy, plasters,
fomentations, inunctions, extenuating diet, ptisan with honey, after defluxion
ceasing, fat broths, hydromel, oxymel, or hydrosaccharate, etc.

3. The straightness thereof, which is an interception of the vessels, caused
by obstruction, compression, or exsiccation, occasioning a cough oppression and
difficulty of respiration; it is cured, if from a cold and thick humor, by
preparers, inciders, detersives, evacuants, violet troches, medicate wines,
revulsives, derivation, vomit, clysters, diuretics, humecters, oxymel,
liquorice, turpentine, lohochs, inunctions, liniments, exsiccants, absorbents,
syrup of tobaco, pectoral waters, rotuls, fumes, diet with hysop, melicrat, and
mulse with thoracicks; if from flatulency, by discutients with pectorals; if
from tubercles, by attenuants and dryers, mithridat, and chemical salts; if
from the stone, by wood lice and honey; if from blood, by stoppers and oxymel;
if from dryness, by almond milk, and syrup of violets, etc.

4. The apertion thereof, when the vessels that ought to be shut are opened,
caused, by anastomosis, diapedesis, rexis, and diabrosis; it is cured, by
phlebotomy, purgation, scarrification, revulsion, leeches, frictions,
ligatures, corrigents, dissolvers, oxycrat, oxymel, mumy, sperma ceti,
consolidants, astringents, emplasticks, glutinants, lambatives, sealed troches,
powders, myrtine oil, frankincense, and mastick; if from catarrhs, by
diaspermaton, cerot of thapsia, the hematire with bole and syrup of purselain,
diet thin astringent and emplastick, ptisan, conserve of roses, hogs flesh,
milk, soft cheese, lettuce, purselain, hordeate water with sugar to cleanse,
and chalybeat to glue, almond milk, and rest.

5. Stones. etc. which are caused by thick humors, dried and hardened there;
they are cured as the asthma; if caruncles by lohoch sanum and flowers of
brimstone, etc.

6. The tubercles of the lungs, which are caused by the afflux or congestion of
matter; they are cured, by evacuation and agglutination as in their ulcers: The
cure of its ^r^ps^, see in that of the breast afterward.

7. The coalescency thereof to the side, by viscid phlegm chiefly, or
external causes; it is cured, by preparers, evacuants, concocters, lenients,
dryers, baths, laxants, concussion, ptisan, and surgery.

8. The wounds of the lungs, which are caused by violence, and cured, by
sistents, evacuants, glutinants, phlebotomy, astringents and emplasticks,
coolers topics, bole, mastick, powders, vulnerary potions, diaspermaton,
lohochs, section if need, thin diet, astringent, and emplastick, ptisan,
quinces, and rest. etc.

9. The phthisick, or ulcer of the lungs, which is an exulceration of the same,
by which the whole body is extenuated, and wastes away, caused, by a sharp
corroding matter, with a gentle fever, cough, and bloody and purulent
spitting; it is cured by evacuation, by gentle purgers, clysters, averters,
detersives, saccharate water, turpentine, glutinants, the conserve of roses,
myrtine syrup, lohochs, syrups, sulphur, fumes of frankincense, odorats,
topics, colleticks, epuloticks, analepticks, refrigerants, h^mecters,
amygdalats, antifebriticks, milk, Haly's powder, baths, diet of good juice, of
easy concoction and much nourishment, abstersive, glutinative, and
consolidating, broths, hordears, snailes, mulse water with honey for
abstersion, and barley water with sugar of roses as glutinative.

V. The diseases of the breast.
1. The inflammation of the mediastin, which for the most part is caused, by
bilious blood, and as the peripneumony, and is almost so cured, by evacuants,
revulsives, repellers, phlebotomy, topic repriments, sc oil of violets tepid,
and cold if erysipelatode, with milk, mucilages, alterants, expectorants, the
decoction of barley, liquorice and jujubes, discutients, oil of chamomile,
section if need, and diet as in the peripneumony and pleurisy.

2. The tumor of the diaphragme, which if hot, is caused by hot and bilious
blood; it is cured, as inflammations, by emollient and cooling clysters,
phlebotomy, topics, oil of roses, epithems, revulsives, repellers, and
hypnoticks, etc. If cold, from a thin and crude matter, by prepares, evacuants,
corrigents, V. P. discutients, emollients, fatts, oiles, melilot plasters,
sacculs, inward digerents and discutients, of hyssop, sarsaparilla and
pectorals, attenuating diet, of good juice, easy concoction, and lenient.

3. The wounds of the diaphragme, which are ca^s^, by violence; they are cured,
as those of the lungs and med^astin

4. The pleurisy, which is an inflammation of the pleura, and adjacent muscles,
caused, by the influx of a hot humor, with a pricking pain in the side,
cough, difficult respiration, acute continual fever, and a hard, unequal, and
frequent pulse; it is cured, by venefection, fomentation, cupping glasses,
purgation, alterants, specificks, expectorants, incrassants, inciders if need,
lohochs, anodynes, resolvers, sudorificks, chamomel water, etc. topics, oil
of violets, dialthaea, mucilages, hypnoticks, syrup of poppies, maturants,
rupture, by sternutatories, vomits, bechicks, detersives, as the pectoral
decoction, consolidants, sc. the conserve of roses, chalybeat milk, section,
diuretics, clysters, thin diet, melicrat, ptisan, and emulsions; after use
eggs and fishes, drinking barley water, oxymel, and the pectoral decoction,
etc. avoiding things cold, acid, salt, exasperating and astringent, etc.

5. The wounds of the breast, which are caused, by violence, and if not
penetrating, they are cured, as other wounds, by ischaimon's, ligature,
digestives, turpentine, and oil of chamomil and roses about it, after use the
barbarum plaster, basilicon, or diapalma: If penetrating, by things stopping
bleeding, prohibents, evacuants, phlebotomy, purgation, consolidants, tents
with digestives, attenuants and inciders if need, melicrat, and hot topics,
etc. diet thin, hordeats, almonds, and rest.

6. The fistula's of the breast, which are caused as the rest, and cured, by
tents, externals of hydromel, or mulse, etc. injections, exsiccant unguents,
glutinants, and vulnerary potions, etc.

7. The empyema, which is a constipation of the cavity of the breast, caused by
a copious purulent matter, occasioning a difficulty of respiration, with a
cough, and virulent spitting; it is cured, by maturation, if it may not be
hindered, by noise, and sternutation to cause rupture, by evacuants,
abstersives, and consolidants, ptyalismes, expectorants, inciders, attenuants,
humecters, diuretics, clysters, section and ustion if need, evacuants,
discutients, fomentations, diet dry, attenuant, and abstersive, ptisan with
honey, broths, and hydromel, etc.

8. The dropsy of the breast, which is caused, by the descent of a serous
matter, or collection there, the nutritive viscera being scirrhous, etc. it is
cured, by evacuation, prevention, purgers, of gialap, etc. diuretics,
apertion, cauteries, fontanels, and diet, as in the dropsy.

9. The luxation of the vertebra's of the back, and gibbosity, caused by causes
external and internal; it is cured, by restitution, plasters, inunctions of
roborants and consolidants, and surgery, putting the hands behind the back,
etc.

10. The fracture of the spine and wounds of the spinal marrow, which are
caused, by causes external, and cured, by cataplasmes, etc. as in the wounds of
the brain.

11. The dorsale tabes, which is caused, by too much venery, too much blood
oppressing the insite heat of the spinal marrow, exsiccation of the passages,
and distillations; it is cured, by fluid decoctions, purgers, fomentations,
frictions, inunctions, baths, inciding and attenuating diet, and moderation
etc. asses milk, and soft meat.

12. The worms of the back, which are caused, by a viscous matter, in the
capillary veins, shut under the skin, and turned into worms by reason of
transpiration hindered; they are cured, or removed by sudatory baths, and
frictions with bread and honey, using a razer after it when they have put forth
their heads, etc.

13. The luxation of the ribbs, which is caused, by violence, above, below, or
inwards; it is cured, by restitution, if upwards by suspension and compression;
if downwards, by prone incurvation, and compression; if inwards by attrahent
plasters, and if with inflammation, by the ireat diachylon.

14. The fracture of the ribbs, which is caused, by violence; and cured, by
conjunction, colleticks, averters, and attrahent plasters, ligature, diet
thin, and rest, etc.

15. The falling of the mucronate cartilage, which is caused, by external
violence, distillations, and humors, etc. it is cured, by elevation,
evacuation, inferior ligature, compression, and turning the head downwards
with concussion, cupping-glasses, humectants, exsiccating strengtheners,
roborants, astringents, and cerots, etc.

VI. The symptoms of the lungs and breast.
1. The vices of respiration, which are caused, by distempers of the lungs,
straightness of the breast, defect of animal spirit, hurt of the thoracick
muscles and diaphragme, pain, wounds of the lungs, inflammation, moving
muscles, luxation and fracture of the ribbs and vertebra's, muscles of the
abdomen hurt, narrowness of the nostrils or mouth, obstruction of the larynx
and rough artery, use changed, and vice of the air, etc. they are cured,
according to the cause.

2. The asthma and orthopnoea, that is a frequent, thick and anhelose
respiration, caused, by a great obstruction of the lungs, by viscid and serous
humors, and tubercles, etc. it is cured, in the paroxysme, by frictions,
ligatures, suppositories, clysters, venesection, if need, purgers, discutient
topics, and laxants, internal lenients, attenuants, detergents, and
expectorants, mithridate, oxymel, millepedes, thin diet, and ptisan with
saffron; out of the paroxisme, by phlebotomy, preparers, evacuants, inciders,
abstersives, humecters, cock broth, syrup of tobacco, helleborate oxymel,
attenuants, inciding and detersive lohochs, with repetition and mutation, syrup
of elecampane with oil of sulphur, diabutyrum, rotuls, external emollients and
discussers, attenuants, actual cauteries, dryers, powders, and the decoction of
guajacum; if from a serous humor, by evacuants, and sudorificks; if from
tubercles stones or dryness, as in the diseases of the breast; hot and
attenuating diet in the first, fumes, hysop, saffron, almonds and other
pectorals, mellicrat, decoction of gua^acum, moderate sleep with the head
elevated, walking before meat, f^ictions, much exercise, and motion, etc

3. Suffocation or strangulation, which is caused, when the air necessary for
the ventilation of the heat of the heart, is not attracted, and the fumes are
not sent forth, by reason of obstructions, or tumors, etc. it is cured, as
aforesaid, and if from hanging, by vinegar with pepper, aromaticks with wine,
wrapping wool wet in hot irine oil about the neck, epileptick waters, aqua
vitae, etc. if recoverable; if from vapors, or fumes, by the same, as also
things to be used in the straightness of the brain etc. if by water, by
hanging up by the heels, causing vomit by putting the finger into the mouth,
the decoction of barley, or chamomil, mulse, aqua vitae, and fumes, etc. if
from poysonsome toadstooles, by vomitories, with the salt of vitriol and
oxymel, etc.

4. The vice of the voice and speech, which is caused, the beginning of the
nerves being affected, and vocal instruments, or matter deficient, humectation,
resolution, contusion, incision; hoarsenesse from asperity, obtusenesse from
viscid matter, trembling from imbecility, so abruptness, slownesse from
humors passing into the spinal marrow, and thoracick nerves, if clangose from
siccity; so speech also, and stutting and stammering from humidity; they are
cured, according to the cause, and hoarsnesse, if from a catarrhe, by remotion,
lenients, intercipients, and arteriacks; if cold by calefacients, dryers, and
lenients; if thick, by inciders, abstersives, lenients, levigants, lohoch
sanum, and de pino, syrup de erysimo, and oxymel of squils; if hot and thin, by
incrassants, lenients, lohochs of poppy, syrup of violets, and diacodium, etc.
if from external heating and drying causes, by lenients and refrigerants, and
lohoch of poppies etc. if from great intension of the voice by arteriacks,
syrup of licorice, dryers, and discutients, if from cold by calefacients and
extersives if need.

5. The cough, which is a vehement, frequent, and sounding efflation of much
breath, first attracted by the lungs, caused, by a contraction of the lungs,
and breast, that what is troublesome to the respiratory organs, may be
expelled, sc. cold air, humors, vapors, or matter, etc. it is cured, if from
asperity, by lenients and levigants, syrup of jujubs, poppies, and the laudan
opiat, etc. if from distemper, if hot, by syrup of licorice, and coolers; if
cold, by that of hyssop, and inunctions; if from catarrhs, by evacuants,
averters, derivation, and intercipients, arteriacks, bechicks, pectoral syrups,
and decoctions, etc. if from a hot thin, and sharp matter, V.P. by evacuants,
revellers, intercipients, stoppers, refrigerants, incrassants, lenients,
concocters, digesters, preparants, diacodiated conserve of roses, etc. white
bechick troches, syrups, lohochs, opiats, and liniments, etc. if from phlegm,
V. P. by hot attenuants, inciders, abstersives, hot pectorals, syrup of hysop,
oxymel of squils, lohoch sanum, etc. in children by dryers, detersives,
diasulphur, pectoral powders, and roborants; if from matter contained in the
breast, etc. according to the causes as aforesaid, using hot diet if cold, with
aromaticks, and hot pectorals, and mulse; butter, oil of sweet almonds etc. if
dry; things sweet, lenient and dilatant if a catarrhe; ptisan, emulsions and
milk if hot, without a fever; hydromel, and bread with the seed of fennel and
aniseed.

6. The pain of the breast, which is caused by humors and flatulency, sent by
the veins and arteries, etc. it is cured, by remotion of the cause, by
anodynes, fomentations, decoctions, after venesection and purgation, etc.
discussion, suppuration if need, and scarrification with universals.

7. The haemoptysis, which is a rejection of blood, with a cough, out of the
parts belonging to respiration, without an inflammation of the same, caused, by
solution of continuity by anastomosis, diaeresis, or diapedesis; it is cured, by
revulsion, by phlebotomy, frictions, ligature, and cupping-glasses, corrigents,
temperants, purgers, coolers, dissolvers, averters, astringents, agglutinants,
opiats, syrup of comfrey, powders, clysters, frictions, ptisan, and
diaspermaton, with rest and quiet etc.

VII. The diseases and symptoms of the heart.
1. The diseases of the pericard, which are worms, caused, by putrefaction,
and are cured, or killed by garlic, radish, cresses, tansey, gentian and
myrrh, being humected in water, and used to the mouth of the infant.

2. The distempers of the heart, which, if they are caused, by heat, they are
cured, by refrigerants, cordial waters and syrups, etc. topics, diet, and
purgers if need; if from cold, by calefacients, internal and external; if
moist, by diet, and dryers; if dry, by humecters; if of the whole substance, by
alexipharmicks; if tabid, use the juice of radish.

3. The palpitation of the heart, which is a composit motion thereof, expelling
what is troublesome, attracting what is profitable, and restoring what is
deficient, inordinate, from dilatation and subsidence, caused, by vapors,
humors, tumors, worms, defect of spirit, and hot distempers; it is cured if
from flatulency and vapors, by phlebotomy, apertion of the haemorrhoids,
evacuation by epicrasis, discutients, corroborants, oil of citrons,
electuaries, syrups, epithems, unguents, odorats, and clysters, etc. if from
humors, by phlebotomy, purgers, discutients, internal and external, dryers,
vesicatories, cauteries; and corroborants; if from worms, by evacuants, and
bozoardicks; if from defect of spirits, by reficients and corroborants; if from
heat, by antifebriticks, etc. with suitable diet.

4. The imbecility of strength, which is caused, by the defect of spirits, and
innate heat and humidity primogenit; and is cured, by temperants, cordials,
odorats, and vinegar, odoriferous and restauratory waters, juleps, electuaries,
and analeptick and polytrophick diet, etc.

5. The lypothymy and syncope, or fainting, which is a quick and sudden defect
of all the forces, chiefly, the vital, with a pulse almost abolished, and cold
sweat, caused, by great debility of the heart, vice and defect of the vital
spirits, the rest of which flow from the body, to the center: It Is called also
eclysis, leipopfychy, and asphyxie, etc. it is cured, in the paroxysme, by
conservation and cherishing of the spirits, applying rosewater, vinegar, and
cordials, irrorating the face and temples, epithems, fomentations, sacculs,
inunctions, wine, aqua vitae if cold, frictions, concussion of the body, noise,
and friction of the tongue, if from dissipation by rest, if from defect of
spirits by wine having bread dipped in it; if from corruption of the spirits, by
friction, cupping-glasses, vomitories, purgers, cordials, and alexipharmicks;
If from evacuation, by friction, ligature, cupping-glasses, and stoppers; if
from sweating, by astringents, and irroration with rosewater, using the oil of
roses and quinces to the breast armepits and groin, etc. smelling on cooling
things, and taking syrup of limmons and wood sorrel; if from suffocation, by
frictions, ligatures, and cupping-glasses; if plenitude, by phlebotomy; if from
the quantity of crude juice, by friction, using oil of chamomile after it,
oxymel, and fasting; in fear, by evacuation; out of the paroxysme, by
analepticks, and corroborants; if from pain, by lenients, stupefacients, and
cordials with things respecting the cause; if from a thin matter troubling the
stomach, by aloephangin pills, tamarinds and laxative syrup of roses, contrary
diet, gellies, and broths, with the juice of citrons, etc. according to the
cause.

III. The diseases and symptoms of the lower belly.
I. The diseases of the oesophagus.
1. The distemper thereof, which is a recesse thereof from the natural temper,
to that, which is preternatural, caused by heat, cold, moisture, or dryness;
it is cured, by contraries, as that of the ventricle, if hot, by refrigerants,
as by the syrup of violets, water of purslane, etc. buttermilk, and
refrigerating drinks; if cold, by heaters; if dry, by ptysans, broths, butter,
and oil of sweet almonds; if moist, by heaters and dryers, fumes, and topics.

2. The swelling thereof, which is an excess in magnitude, and caused, as
other tumors, and is so cured, by things pleasant, repelling topics, avoiding
vomitories, except to break abscesses, using phlebotomy if hot, clysters,
lenients, diet of refrigerants, with coolers, resolving topics in the increase
and discutients in the state, using inwardly the lohoch of pine, and syrup of
jujubes, etc. things fat and emplastick if suppurating, and abstersives, so if
cold, with resolvers, and maturants, etc.

3. Straightness, there being an imminution of its meatus, caused, by things
external, tumors, worms, vapors, and luxation it is cured, if from tumors,
as others; if from externals, by vomit, or detrusives, concussion of the back;
coughing, oxymel, oil o^ sweet almonds, fat broths, buttered ale, emollient
and humecting cataplasmes, probes, sponges oleated, and instruments; if
inflammation, by suppurants; if from worms by scolecobroticks; if from
phlegm, by evacuants, scillitick oxymel, and vomit; if from depression of a
vertebra, by restitution.

4. Relaxation, which is caused, by a moist distemper, catarrhs, and vomiting;
and cured, by astringents taken and applied, quinces, peptick powders, sacculs,
liniments and plasters.

5. Wounds thereof, caused, by things dilacerating, and are cured, as those of
other parts, using syrup of dry roses, and the myrtine with bole, and
digestives, etc.

6. Ulcers, which are caused, by sharp humors, and vapors, etc. and are
cured, by abstersives, melicrat, hordeat water with red sugar, mucilages, goats
milk chalybeated, and consolidants, as syrup of dried roses, etc. if by aqua
fortis, by syrup of violets etc. if from poison, by vomitories, mucilages, fat
broths, and lenients.

7. Deglutition hurt, which is caused, by resolution thereof, the faculty being
hurt, by the resolution of the nerves of the sixth and seventh conjugation,
also by defluxion, disease, convulsion, or from parts affected; it is cured if
from resolution by paralyticks used to the neck and spine, mustard with vinegar
taken, and gargarismes; if from other causes it is cured as aforesaid.

8. Things by chance swallowed down, are to be removed by lenients, the
decoction of mallows, oil, fat broths, purges, using things viscid if the
thing be sharp; etc.

II. The diseases of the ventricle.
1. The distempers thereof, which are a preternatural constitution of its
similar parts, in the first qualities, caused, by inward or outward alterants;
they are cured, by venesection, contrary alterants, grateful in smell and
taste, and solid used some time before drinking, and then not drinking what is
tepid, too much relaxing or attenuating, and with astringents, avoiding things
acrimonious, too salt or corrosive, and strong purgers, using coral, the inward
tunicles of the ventricles of henns, and other birds, myrobolans condite,
avoiding great quantities of meat or drink, things ungrateful, lubricants, and
relaxers, and frequent vomiting, etc. if without matter and cold; it is cured by
heaters with broth and humecters, internal and external, flesh of good
nutriment with aromaticks, wormwood wine, oenomel; mulse, shunning cucumers,
barley, cold meats, long sleep and idleness, etc. if hot, it is helped by
inward and outward refrigerants, and cooling meat and drink, of easy
concoction, ptisan, hordeats, things acid without aromaticks, not salt, or
sweet, and cucumers etc. being easily corrupted, but sharp things, using the
hordeat decoction, vitriolated juleps, emulsions, and buttermilk, etc. if
humid, by dryers; without much heat and coldness, external and internal,
mountain birds, roasted flesh, with vinegar and salt, red wine absinthiated, and
exercise. If dry, by humecters, of easy concoction and distribution, internal
and external, aliment of easy concoction, much and good juice, not
excrementitious and humid, ptysan, fresh eggs, fishes, chickens, veale, lamb,
and other soft flesh, almonds, sweet apples, milk, shunning things austere and
astringent, moderate meat and drink, eating thrice in a day, at first; if
complicat, it is cured accordingly; if with matter, it is cured by evacuation,
alterants, preparants, emeticks, mild catharticks, as aloes, agarick,
mechoacan, rubarb, and sena; if with choler, by coolers, humecters, and
cholagogon's, if thin by emeticks, manna, tamarinds and solutive syrups and
aloes and thubarb if thick, etc. hiera, topics, ptysan, things acid, chicken
broth with lettuce, barley water, and small beer; if cold and moist with
phlegm, by heaters, calefacients, and dryers, vomitories, lenients, oxymel if
gross, preparers, alterers, diatrion piperion, diacalaminth, stomach pills,
roborants, aromatic diacydoniats, pepticks, topics, sack, and mulse, etc.

2. Inflation, which is caused, by flatulent matter, and debility of heat,
etc. it is cured, by discussers of flatulency used inwardly and outwardly,
vomitories, purg^^s, preparers if gross, cupping-glasses, castor with oxycrat,
topics, attenuating and discutient diet, meat of good juice, easily
concocted, and little in quantity, long sleep, drink little, and hypocratick
wines, etc.

3. Inflammation, which is caused, by blood, preternaturally shed out of the
veins; it is cured, by venesection, revulsion by cupping-glasses, frictions,
clysters, pulp of tamarinds, whey, repellers internal and external, resolvers,
anodynes, emollients, maturants, rumpents, sternutation, vomit, concussion,
abstersives, hydromel, the hordeat decoction, consolidants, conglutinants, thin
diet, ptisan, chicken broth with lettuce, juice of quinces, things astringent
and cooling at first, and barley water with cinnamon.

4. The oedema, which is caused, by a cold, thick, and pituitous matter, and is
cured, by oil of roses with that of wormwood used, taking syrup of wormwood
and colat rosate honey, inward and outward resolvers, maturants, rupture,
abstersives, and co^solidants.

5 If deglutition of things offensive, they are to be expelled thence, by
lubricants, the decoction of mallows, common oil, fat broths, buttered ale,
purgers, lying on the right side, and walking; if living creatures, by the fume
of tepid milk, or fume of shoe soles, carduus benedictus water, and vomiting
with milk; if generated there of the sperme taken with water, use dittany with
gentian water, and zedoary and citron seed, centory, triacle with spirit of
wine, and alo^ecticks, etc.

6. The wounds of the ventricle, which are caused, by violence, they are cured,
by phlebotomy, clysters, and future if penetrating, with tents, unguents, and
liniments, taking the myrtine syrup, and that of dried roses, troches of sealed
earth, applying the barbarum plaster, eating a thin, and sparing diet, of much
nourishment, easy concoction, and good juice, abstaining from things
acrimonious, and biting.

7. The ulcers thereof, caused by things external, acrimonious, apostumes, and
ruptures of veins, etc. and are cured, by phlebotomy, and lenients, sc. the
syrup of roses solutive, and hiera picra, detersives, dryers, barley, honey,
and saccharate water, mulse, glutinants, and cicatrizants, applying the
plaster de crustapanis, etc. and abstersives with the meat and drink, after
use consolidants and astringents, the juice of quinces, meat of easy
concoction, good juice, and drying, shunning things bitter, acrimonious, salt,
acid, and too sweet and fat, using ptisan, amygdalats, and yolks of eggs, etc.

III. The symptoms of the ventricle.
1. The anorexy, or decay of appetite, which is caused, by the defect of the
sense of sucking, in the superior orifice of the ventricle; it is cured,
according to the cause; if their be no sucking, by removing the cause; if from
humors, by fasting, exercise, friction, v^mit, purgation and aloetieks; if
from rest, by exercise; if from cold and moisture, by heaters and dryers; if by
constipation of the pores, by laxants, baths, and frictions; in obstruction by
aperients; if from the vice of the sentient faculty, according to the cause; if
from the hurt of the nerve of the sixth conjugation, by strengthners of the
brain, using things salt, acid, and sharp, vinegar, and things pleasant; if
from heat and corrupted humors, by correctors, and evacuants, shunning things
laxant, fat, oleous, and unpleasant, using capers, wormwood wine if cold; water
if hot, and meat and drink heating, drying, and attenuating if cold and moist,
sleep not long, and eating with appetite.

2. The loathing of certain meats, which is caused, by idiosyncrasy, custom,
and imagination, etc. it is helped or cured, by customary use by degrees, and
compulsion etc. if from imagination.

3. The boulimos, and dog like appetite, which is a continual and unsatiable
desire of eating, caused, by a vehement sense of suction in the mouth of the
ventricle, joined sometimes with vomiting, sometimes with a diarrhoea, arising
from indigence of aliment, and cold, acid, and austere humors; it is cured, if
from a vellicant humor, by vomit, purgation, using anorecticks, fat, gross,
and oleous, fat broths, narcoticks if need, spirit of wine, triacle,
mithridate, abstaining from things acid and astringent, alterants, preparants,
salviate wine, evacuants, hiera, roborants, bacon, topic densants, and much
sleep. The boulimos, is a great periodick appetite, often ending in
nauscousnesse, with lipothymy and weakness, caused by cold, etc. it is cured,
in the paroxysme by frictions, the smell of bread wet in wine, and vinegar, and
taking thereof, and after, with sorbile eggs, and broths, etc. as in the cold
distemper of the ventricle, and by heating topics.

4. The pica, or depraved appetite, which is an absurd desire, of some
substance liquid or solid, as aliment, besides nature and reason, caused, by a
sad sense of suction, and corruption of the judgment, discerning things fit
and unfit to be eaten, from a bilious excrement, imbibed by the tunicles,
troubling the mouth of the ventricle, by a peculiar propriety of its substance,
it is cured, by evacuation, vomits, preparants, and purgers; if not great, by
venesection below, roborants, and consumers of humors, diamoschum, diambra,
triacle, mithridate, rue, quinces applied with oil of roses, pleasant meats,
capers, bitter-almonds, broths, things acid, strong subastringent wine, in some
measure gratifying those that are great.

5. The appetite of drink lost, which is caused, by a cold and moist temper of
the ventricle, or a sweet cold humor sticking in the orifice of the ventricle,
etc. hindering the sucking thereof, it is cured, if from moisture and coldness,
as appetite so lost; if with madness, obstruction, or distribution hindered,
it is to be observed, and more is to be drunk; as for hydrophoby, it may be seen
above.

6. Polydipsy, or excessive thirst, which is a greater and more frequent desire
of accostomed drinking, by reason of a sad sense of sucking in the mouth of the
ventricle, caused, by the defect of humidity, and alteration of proper
humidity, it is cured, if from a defect of rotid substance, by humecters and
coolers, mucilages, emulsions, prunes, quinces, crystal, coral, rob of ribes,
cold water if need, vinegar if from heat, and oxyerat if with dryness, spirit
of vitriol and nitre, if without it, by acid syrups, lotions, and epithems; if
without a fever, by purgation with hiera, and mastick pills and correctors; if
with a fever, by hypoglottides, collutions, and potions in the declination; if
from heat of the lungs, by air altered with cooling flowers, and violets,
etc. smelled to; if from the dropsy, nitrose and corrupted humors, by
mucilages and fat things, diet cooling and moistening, ptisan if bilious,
shunning things sharp, salt, and bitter; if in the night, by sleep.

7. Symptoms in the retention of meat and drink, which are palpitation,
caused, as the inflation of the ventricle, and cured, so. The convulsion
thereof, which is caused and cured, as the singult, and dry distemper thereof:
Its trembling, caused from quantity of meat, or cold distemper, as aforesaid;
and the convulsion, caused and cured as the bilious distemper, and they are all
cured according to their causes.

8. Chylosis hurt, or the imbecility of the stomach, which is a vice of the
concocting faculty, by reason of which, it concocteth not at all, slowly, or
depravedly, and it is called apepsy, bradypepsy, or dyspepsy and diaphthora, the
two first are caused, by cold chiefly, and the third by heat when the
corruption is nidorous, and cold when acid; it is cured, by remotion of the
cause; if from cold, by heaters and alterers, cinnamon water, and spirit of
mastick; if nidorose, by vomit and purgation, with things acid, and a fit diet,
moderate drinking, sleeping first on the right side, etc.

9. The singult, or hicket, which is a convulsive motion of the stomach,
consisting of the tension and dilatation of the fibers of the superior part,
by which the expulsive faculty being irritated, it tries to expel things
hurtful to the tunicles of the stomach, chiefly of the mouth and oesophagus,
and that with a noise, and vehement contorsion, caused, by an adverse or
vellicant matter; it is cured, by milk, purselane, syrup of violets, and laudan
opiats if vehement; if from cold, by retention of the breath, etc. as in the
cold distemper of the ventricle, cinnamon water, and castor, applying oil of
pepper, and using aromaticks; if from flatulency, by heaters, bayberries,
dianisum, and mithridate etc. if from too much evacuation, by humecters,
coolers, hordeats, emulsions, ptisans, and broths, etc. if from sharp things,
by oil of sweet almonds, and ptysans; if from corrupt meat and repletion, by
vomit or purgation with aloes, and rubarb, with detersives and resolvers; if
from hot and sharp humors, by vomit or purging, with lenients, ptisan, goats
milk, syrup of roses, purslane, emulsions, almond milk, manna, and cerot of
saunders; if from a cold humor, by extenuants, inciders, melicrat, oxymel,
syrups of roots, diatrion piperion, mastick pills, plasters, cupping-glasses,
sternutatories, vociferation, and motion; if from malignant matter, by triacle
water, and sealed earth, etc. if from worms with scolecobroticks, etc. if with
a fever by removing the cause, by vomits, lenients, stupefacients,
alexipharmicks, clysters, ptisans, and emulsions, etc. if from inflammations,
as aforesaid, and diet according to the cause, as in distempers of the stomach.

10. Ructation or belching, which is a depraved motion of the ventricle, caused
from the expulsive faculty excited, by which vapors and fumes from meat not
rightly concocted, are expelled by the mouth; it is cured, by remooving the
cause, as in distempers of the ventricle, altering hot or cold distempers,
evacuating remedies, discussing flatulency, evacuating corrupted humors and
helping mittent parts: Hereto belongs rugitus.

11. Nauseousnesse and vomiting, that is a vain desire to vomit, with
molestation, violence, and anxiety, by which the ventricle, contracting the
inferior parts and dilating the superior, endeavoreth to expel things
troublesome unto it, but by reason of imbecility, paucity, or contumacy of the
matter, it expels nothing out of the mouth, except a thin and waterish
humor; thus also is vomit caused, when matter is expelled; it is cured, by
revulsives, and roborants, by clysters, suppositories, purgers, phoenigmes,
synapismes, hot lotions of the extremes, using the rob of ribes, barberies,
myrtine syrup, and that of dried roses, diacydoniats; fomentations, plasters
of the crust of bread, and stomachick cerots; if the matter be crasse and
viscid, by attenuants with abstersives, mithridate, the conserve of roses
vitriolated, cinnamon water, etc. as in the cold diste^per of the ventricle,
using the aforesaid plaster, cupping glasses used to the bottom of the
stomach, and opiats if need; if from debility by roborants and astringents; if
from the inflammation of the inferior orifice, as the rest; if from
narrowness, by eating and drinking little; if from quantity of meat and drink,
by fasting and sleep, with a vomitory if need; if from humors, by preparers,
and evacuants, using salt broth if sharp; pills if melancholic; antidots if
venenate, etc. according to the cause; if of blood, by phlebotomy, mulse,
oxymel, ribes, syrup of dried roses, and troches of sealed earth, etc. with fit
diet, abstergent and roborant; if there be superfluous vomiting, quinces, roast
meat, and astringent wine etc. using various meats, fat and sweet, if vomiting
be to be caused.

12. The choleric passion, which if humid, and true, is a continual and
immoderate rejection of an ill humor, both upwards and downwards, with a
vehement perturbation and violence; caused, by the expulsive faculty, greatly
irritated, by a sharp and corrupted matter; it is cured, if from meat corrupted
or ill choler, by promovents, temperants, and abstersives; if not excessive,
it is to be committed to nature, else it is to be helped by tepid hordeat water;
if excessive, it is helped by purgation, stoppers, sudorificks, ligature,
frictions, and alterants; if the matter be hot, by diacydoniats, rob of
barberies, and ribes, etc. if not so hot, by the rotate aromatic, using
outwardly refrigerants and astringents, juice of purslane, plantain, plaster
of the crust of bread, etc. anodynes, and narcoticks if need, using sweet
smells, meat of good juice and easy concoction, with coral, crystal, and mace,
ribes, wormwood, and things actually hot; if dry, and notha, or spurious, it is
an excretion of a flatuous spirit upwards and downwards, with an inflation of
the belly, noise, and pain of the loins and sides, caused by fiery heat,
sharp and flatuous aliment, and black choler; it is cured, by eduction,
ablation, discutients, alterants, clysters, lenients, ptysans, and fit diet.

13. The pain and anxiety of the ventricle, with a painful sensation thereof,
caused, by things distending or biting, and so dissolving the continuity
thereof; sc. flatulency, humors, and external causes; it is cured, by
narcoticks and anodynes if need, mucilages, things fat and emplastick,
emulsions, and roborants; if from externals, by vomiting and purging,
roborants, cydoni^ts, robs, conserves, fomentations, and good diet; if from
phlegm, by vomitories, purgers, and heaters; if from flatulency, as the
inflation of the ventricle, by discutient clysters, cupping-glasses, triacle,
alexipharmicks if malignant, averters if sympathetick; if syncoptick sweates,
by inunctions of myrtine oil, and coral; and if from the xyphoid cartilage, as
before, meat of good juice, astringents, austere wine, heaters and dryers if
cold, and rue etc.

14. The heat of the stomach, which is an ebullition of humors therein,
caused, by preternatural heat, so that the heat thereof reaches to the throat,
from sharp and bilious vapors and humors, it is cured by alterants, acid
fruits, chalk, and bole, etc.

15. The preternatural excrets thereof, and it is qualities changed, which are
helped according to the cause.

IV. The diseases of the intestines,
1. The distemper thereof, which is caused, by coldness, heat, moisture, and
dryness; it is cured, by things moderately astringent, potions, and clysters;
if cold, by heaters, wormwood, diatrion pipe^ion, electuary of bay berries,
sacculs, hot oiles, plasters of bay berries, heating clysters, and contrary
diet; if hot, by coolers, purslane, barley, and clysters, etc. if humid, by
dryers, coral, sumach, chalybeats, the myrtine syrup, oil of myrtles,
diaphoenicon plasters, and fit diet; if dry, by humecters, clysters, milk, and
butter, etc. if with matter, by corrigents, lenients, appropriate for each
humor, taken by the mouth or in clysters, before meat, with a sparing and
contrary diet, roborants, averters, frictions, cupping-glasses, repellers,
derivation, sensible and insensible evacuation, etc.

2. The inflammation of the intestines, which is a tumor of the same, caused,
by extravasate blood, flowing thither, and putrefying there; it is cured, by
clysters, phlebotomy, anodynes, refrigerants, inunctions of oil of roses,
austere wine and vinegar, cooling clysters, revulsives, ligatures,
cupping-glasses, lotions, discutients, lenients, plasters of mucilages,
anodynes, and laudan opiat if need; if from the enterocele, by emollient
clysters, cataplasmes, and reposition, so if from an exomphalos, using fat
broth, so also if from contusion, with a thin refrigerating diet, and ptisan,
abstaining from hot things.

3. The narrowness of the intestines, which is caused, by external binders and
dryers, faeces hardened, and inflammation, etc. it is cured, if from things
binding and drying, by humectants and emollients, taken and injected, veale and
kidds flesh boiled, fat broths, oil, milk, and emollient clysters; if from
fasting, by the aforesaid meats, eating a little and often; if from the faeces
hardened, by lenients, and clysters, fat broths, prunes, oil of sweet almonds,
beetes, manna, cassia, cataplasmes, and ointment of marsh mallows, etc. if
from thick phlegm, by sharp clysters, inciders, abstersives and evacuants; if
from shutting of the anus, by section, avoiding the sphincter.

4. The worms therein, which are little animals, preternatural, caused, or
begotten of or by a thick, tough, and viscid humor, having in it a vital
principle in its kind, from a vivid heat, suscitated by putrefaction, hurting
the intestine functions; they are cured, or killed by things bitter, sharp,
salt, and acid, coralline, wormeseed, scordium, vinegar, and spirit of vitriol;
if sharp, by wormwood, and fearn root, etc. if broad, by walnuts, and triacle,
fearn, aloes, agarick, rhubarb, colocynthis, and all by diaturbith,
diasebesten, rhubarb, hearts horn, liniments, clysters, hiera, and mer^. d. etc.
if ascarides, by suppositories, clysters, with scolecobroticks, etc. and diet
of good juice, and easy distribution, and sorrel water if feverish, bread with
lupines and brownish, vinegar, and purselane, etc.

5. The intestinal hernia, or rupture, which is a falling of the intestines out
of their place, caused, by rupture or laxation; it is cured, by reposition after
resupination, with discutients if flatulent, clysters, inunctions, and
anodynes; if the faeces be hardened, by emollients, and section if need,
retention, bands, glurinant topics, astringents, dryers, specificks, bole, the
arietine plaster, fomentations, vulnerary potions, rupturewort, traumaticks,
and magneticks, so also are other ruptures cured.

6. The falling down of the fundament, which is a prominency of the exterior
part of the straight intestine, caused, by straining, irritation, or
resolution; it is cured, by reposition, emollients if need, astringents, red
wine, mastick, galls, and sumach, etc. if from straining, by laxants; if from
acrimony, by alterants as in the tenesmus; if from solution, by consolidants;
if from imbecility, by fumes of frankincense, fomentations, oiles, and standing
on the head, etc.

7. The wounds of the intestines, which are caused by violence; they are cured,
by future, reposition, astringent wine, aloes, frankincense, mastick,
consolidants, conserve of red roses with bole, diacydoniats, clysters,
astringent powders, and mastick drink, etc.

8. The ulcers and sphacelus thereof, of which see more in the dysentery.

9. The diseases of the straight intestine. sc. the inflammation of the anus,
caused, by the effusion of blood; it is cured, by phlebotomy, repellers,
anodynes, discutients, and maturants if need, etc. the condylomata, thymi,
ficus, and cristae, are cured by surgery, squams of brass, and juice of
mullen, and alum, etc. the fisures, or rhagades, are helped if dry, by
humecters; if from vicious humors, by alterants, and lenient evacuants; if the
faeces are hard they are to be mollified with clysters, and topics, V.P. if
humid and virulent, by plantain, barley, alum, and unguents; if ulcers, by
dryers and binders, abstersives, and cleansers, with milk, mulse, aloes, and
the ointment diapompholigos, etc. if fistula's, by washing, with the decoction
of agrimony and alum, V.P. aegyptiacum, siefs, tents, section, astringents, and
cathereticks, etc. as in other ulcers; If galling, by tallow, goose grease,
oil of roses, yolks of eggs, and ointments of litharge or cerusse, etc.

V. The symptoms of the intestines,
1. The iliack passion, which is a great pain, in the smaller intestines,
caused, by a violent solution of continuity, with a swelling of the belly, and
twisting of the same, with such an obstruction thereof, that nothing can
descend, but the humors and excrements, are sometimes violently expelled by
vomit, by reason of the inverse motion of the intestines, from inflammation,
retention of excrements, or exulceration, or flatulency; it is cured, by
suppositories, emollients, humecters, clysters, inunctions, oiles, cataplasmes,
and fat broths, etc. if from inflammation, it is cured as other inward
inflammations; if from tumors and exulceration, it is almost so cured; if from
faeces hardened, by emollition, and evacuation, etc. as in the colic thence,
inunctions, fomentations, cataplasmes, clysters, baths, fat broths, oil of
sweet almonds, and fresh butter, etc. and Hippocrates his bellows.

2. The colic, which is a pain of the colon, caused, by things dissolving
continuity, sc. worms, inflammation, stones, thick and viscid humors, hard
faeces, and flatulency, etc. it is cured, by anodynes and narcoticks if need,
clysters, fomentations, specificks, and fit diet; if from flatulency and
excrements retained, by clysters emollient inciding, abstersive, discutient,
anodyne, oil of sweet almonds taken, and parmacity, the decoction of chamomil,
castor, diacyminum, dianisum, oil of rue, plasters of bayberries, fat broths,
sharp clysters, and, hydrargyrats if need, and Hippocrates his bellows; if from
the stone, by lubricants and expulsives; if from worms, by scolecobroticks; if
from transposition of the intestines, and falling, by reposition, and diet thin
and little; if the humor be cold and thick, with attenuants and discutients,
as garlic, thin wine, and things that are not hard or astringent; if from
worms, by anodyne discutient clysters, and fomentations, taking rhubarb,
benedicta laxativa, and clysters of new milk after it; if from thick and viscid
humors sticking in the tunicles, by attenuant discutient clysters, lenients,
attenuants, purgers, moderate heaters, oiles, fomentations, Agrippa's ointment,
and that of sowbread, sparing and extenuating diet, of good juice and easy
concoction; if from a sharp and scorbutic humor, by drinking cold water,
injecting oil of roses, and chamomile, etc. tamarinds, manna, melicrat, whey,
oil of sweet almonds taken, narcoticks if need, and thin and refrigerating
diet; if from inflammation, as aforesaid.

3. The retention of the belly, which is when there is no dejection of faeces,
or very little, in respect of what was taken inwards, caused, by a small
quantity taken, want of acrimony, and hurt of the faculty; it is cured, by
things lubrifying, sc. butter, and things sharp and nitrous, clysters, whey,
drinking last, aloes, walking barefoot, and coloquintida, etc.

4. The lientery, and coeliack affection, which is too quick an excretion, of
aliments by the belly, in that form, in which they were taken, caused by the
vice of the retentive and expulsive faculty of the ventricle and intestines;
it is cured, by roborants and astringents, diacydoniats, robs, troches of sealed
earth, inunctions, unguents, plasters of the crust of bread, and fomentations;
if caused by the retentive faculty weak, by preparants, syrup of wormwood,
vomitories, mastick, astringents, galingal, theriack salts, oil of wormwood
outwardly, sinapismes, dropaces, meat of easy concoction, good juice, and dry,
and red wine, etc. if from the expulsive faculty irritated, by the syrup of
roses solutive with the decoction of tamarinds, abstersives, dryers, and
astringents, vomitories if need, rhubarb, hordeats, cydoniats, fomentations,
unguents, plasters, refrigerants, little drink, and long sleep, etc. so also
is the coeliack affection helped, differing only in degree from the other, and
is a quick passage, of things eaten and drunk, out of the stomach to the
intestines, by reason of which they pass out like chyle or cremor.

5. The diarrhaea, which is an immoderate, frequent, and long dejection of the
belly, by which the excrementitious and purer humors, stimulating the
expulsive faculty of the stomach and intestines by quantity or quality, do
flow out, without phlegmon, lientery, exulceration, tenesmus, or much sense of
pain, caused, by things irritating or debilitating; it is cured, by evacuants,
revulsives, and stoppers, phlebotomy, purgers, rhubarb, myrobolans, tamarinds,
vomitories, friction, ligature, diuretics, sudorificks, roborants,
astringents, and narcoticks if need; if there be a chylous flux, by aperients,
rotules of diarrhodon abbatis, and diachylon applied, etc. according to the
part affecting; if a toto and with a fever, by alterants and roborants; if
excessive by abstersives, temperants and abstersives, evacuants, and
revulsives, outwardly, by oil of quinces, and stomachick cerots, friction, and
venesection if symptomatick; if colliquative, by refrigerants and humecters,
with astringents, ptisans, cold water, syrup of ribes, purslane and quinces,
buttermilk, clysters, cooling epithems, refrigerating humecting and astringent
meats, hordeats, amygdalats, and coral; if from the whole without a fever, by
lenients, roborants, tamarinds, thubarb, syrup of roses solutive, coral,
oxysaccharats, vomitories, diuretics, and abstersives; if serous, by wormwood
wine, and chalybeat water, applying the plaster of the crust of bread; if from
the ventricle and corrupted meats, by evacuants, roborants, vomitories,
clysters, adstringents, and stomach pills; if from worms, by scolecobroticks;
if from the liver, and a bilious humor, by evacuation with rhubarb, abstersive
clysters, syrup of succory, alterants and astringents, troches of sealed earth
and spodium, astringent epithems, cerot of saunders, and hydroticks, etc. if
from the spleen and melancholy, by venesection, polypody, diacatholicon,
temperants, the byzantine syrup, clysters, astringents, fit diet, aperients,
and scorbuticks if need; if from the womb, by aperients, evacuants,
astringents, and roborants; if from the brain, by preparants, evacuants,
diversion by frictions, ligatures, cupping glasses, errhines, sacculs, not
sleeping soon after meat, roborants, vesicatories, about the first and second
vertebra of the neck, setons, issues in the arms, triacle, decoction of
guajacum, and sudorificks; if in infants breeding teeth, if from phlegm, by
purgers and stomachick cerots; if from corrupted milk, by syrups, anointing the
gumms with butter; if from hypercatharsis and poison taken, by abstersives,
chalybeat milk, ligatures, frictions, fomentations, cupping-glasses, below the
stomach, astringents taken, rob of ribes, opiats if need, clysters,
bezoarticks, and cardiacks etc.

6. The dysentery, which is a frequent bloody and purulent dejection, with
pain of the belly, and exulceration of the intestines, caused, by sharp
corroding matter, peculiarly troubling the intestines; it is cured, by
venesection, purgation by tamarinds, tosted rhubarb, diacarholicon, potions,
boles, syrups, clysters, vomitories, diuretics, sudorificks, alexipharmicks,
mitigants, roborants, anodynes, abstersive clysters, narcoticks, opiats if
need, astringents, emplasticks, conserves of red roses, rob of barberries,
emulsions, electuaries, micleta, rotules, troches of sealed earth, topics,
saccules, insessions, mundificants, sarcoticks, and cicatrizants; if from
purgers, by abstersives, theriacks, and stomachick cerots; vomits if from
poison, fat broth, ptysans, antidots, and cristal, etc. fit diet, meat of easy
concoction, milk, barley water, hydromel, sealed earth, partridges, hens, hares,
conserve of roses, diacydoniats, drinking little, red wine, sleep, and rest.

7. The bloody flux and hepatick, that is caused, by fullness or acrimony and
heat; and is cured, by slender diet, frictions, cupping-glasses, and
venesection, temperants, juice of plantain and troches of sealed earth, etc. if
hepatick, it is caused by the imbecility of the liver, and defect of innate
heat; if legitimate, it is cured by roborants, the liver of geese, ducks,
hepatick herbs with astringents, rubarb, conserve of roses, topics, heating
diet, of good juice and easy concoction, and raisins, etc.

VI. The symptoms of the anus,
which are.

1. The paralysis, which is caused by the affection of the nerve of the sixth
pair, from which the intestines, receive nerves; the same is cured, as that of
other parts: The itching of the anus, is caused by a salt viscid and biting
humor, worms, and ulcers; if with a tenesmus, it is so cured; if from a salt
humor, by evacuants, washing with plantain water a little alum, or juice of
dane-wort; if from faeces, they are to be washed away with the decoction of
mullen; if from worms, by clysters, and terebinthine suppositories; if from
ulcers, by mundificants; The pain of the anus, is helped by washing with milk,
anodynes, and narcoticks if need.

2. The tenesmus, which is a continual cupidity of evacuation by the belly,
with pain, in which nothing or very little is evacuated, caused, by too much
refrigeration, the stone or worms, and bilious pituitous and salt humors;
it is cured, by universal evacuation, abstersion, roborants, lenients,
fomentations, common oil, syrup of poppies, and the laudan opiat if need,
suppositories of fat, and powder of frankincense, abstersives, the decoction of
barley, if bilious; if from hardened faeces, by emollient clysters; if from
worms, by clysters of hiera and wormwood; if from refrigeration, by sacculs
of mints, etc. if by consent, it is so cured.

3. The hemorrhoids, being a flux, and excessive dejection of blood, through
the hemorrhoidal veins, caused, by things irritating the expulsive faculty,
and hurting the retention; they are cured, if swelling, by friction and
anodynes, revulsives, laxants, the rosate and poplar unguent, as also
scrophulary, mullein, sealed earth, laudan opiats if need, derivation, manna,
frankincense, the rupture plaster, the white of an egg, thin and humid diet,
cassia, barley water, and bole, etc. the suppression thereof is helped by
mitigation of pain, and apertion, after universals, and friction, etc.

VII. The diseases of the mesentery.
1. The distemper of the same, which for the most part is hot and dry, caused,
by a like matter, and is cured, by purgers and clysters.

2. The obstruction thereof, which is caused by gross and viscid chyle,
flatulency and humors; it is cured, by moderate aperients, preparanes, purgers,
tartar vitriolat, vomitories, diuretics, and chalybiats.

3. The inflammation, which is a tumor of the same, caused, by humors carried
out with the nutrient blood, into the spaces thereof, or such as is impacted in
the glandules, and putrefying by external heat; it is cured by phlebotomy if
need, moderate refrigerants, lenients, rhubarb, with whey, diuretics,
abstersives, anodynes, thin diet, cooling, abstersive, aperient, ptisans,
emulsions, barley water, and sleep, etc.

4. The tumors, etc. thereof, which are caused, by crude, thick and tartareous
humors; they are cured if turned into abscesses, by cyprus turpentine with
rhubarb exsiccants and consolidants, meat of good juice and easy concoction,
temperate, abstersive, small beer, the decoction of china with licorice, and
asses milk, etc.

5. The pain of the mesentery, which is a troublesome sense thereof, caused,
by a hot and sharp matter, driven into its membrans, with a continual pain of
the belly and loins, by intervals, afflicting chiefly in the autumn, and
sometimes it is distributed into the head and whole body; it is cured, by
clysters, vomitories, drinking oil of sweet almonds with manna, applying oil
of violets and white lillies, etc. and anodynes and narcoticks if need. As for
the diseases of the pancreas, sc. the obstruction and scirrhus thereof, they
are cured, as those of the spleen: And the tumors, situation changed,
putrefaction, and wounds of the omentum, they are cured accordingly.

VIII. The affections of the spleen.
1. The distemper thereof, caused, by things too much heating, cooling,
moistning, or drying; it is cured, by contraries, and helped by things bitter,
nitrous, and having a certain astriction, the hemorrhoids opened, preparants,
pills of tartar, troches of capers, the oil thereof, melilot plasters,
shunning viscid meats, and using thin wine, etc.

2. The obstruction of the same, which is a stoppage thereof, caused by thick
humors; and it is cured, by aperients, attenuants, inciders, evacuants, tartar
vitriolat, caper troches, pills of tartar, vomitories, chalybeats, roborants,
topics, oil of capers, and diet not obstructing or viscid, capers, aniseed,
mustard, and drinking out of tamarisk vessels.

3. The inflation of the spleen, which is an elevation of the same into a
tumor, caused by flatulency, from viscid humors, etc. it is cured, by
evacuation if need, inward and outward discutients, as diacyminum,
diacalaminth, oil of capers and bays, and cupping-glasses.

4. The inflammation of the same, which is a swelling of it, caused by blood,
flowing into the substance thereof; it is cured, by phlebotomy, repellers with
inciders, preparants, evacuants, resolvents, suppurants if need, diachylon,
detersives and consolidants, and fit diet as in other inflammations.

5. The scirrhus thereof, which is a hard tumor of the same, caused, by a
thick glutinous, and hard humor, it is cured, V. P. by emollients, attenuants,
and aperients, things bitter, purgation with sena and mercurius dulcis, etc. as
in its obstruction, troches of capers, chalybeat electuaries, outwardly by
emollients, digerents, the plaster of ammoniacum, and meat of good juice,
attenuating, hysop, capers, and tamarisk wine, etc.

6. The ulcers of the spleen, which are caused, after wounds, not well cured,
they are cured, by expurgation, abstersion, and consolidants, using hydromel if
evacuated by vomit or the belly, with emulsions if by urin, and frankincense
and mastick etc. to consolidate.

7. The wounds thereof, caused, by violence, they are cured, by vulnerary
potions, clysters, and diuretics, if need.

8. The proper actions of the spleen hurt, which are caused by external error,
or diseases, and are so cured.

9. The pain of the spleen, which is caused by the solution of continuity, and
tension of the membran; it is cured, according to the cause, by anodynes and
narcoticks if need.

10. The black jaundise, which is a mutation of the skinn of the whole body
into black, and is caused as the yellow, and it is cured, if from yellow choler
corrupted, as the yellow, with things purging melancholy; if from the vice of
the spleen, by correctors, aperients, evacuants, chalybeats, discutients with
diaphoreticks, laconick baths, and tenches applied to the abdomen, and soles of
the feet.

11. The hypochondriack melancholy, or affection, which is a collection of
vicious humors, in the rami of the vena portae, coeliack artery and
mesenterick, caused, by reason of coction hurt, without putrefaction, and
causing many symptoms, by the emission of vapors, with crudity of the
ventricle, pain, stypticity of the belly, flatulency, anxiety, palpitation of
the heart, pulsation in the left hypochondrium, dryness of the tongue,
difficulty of respiration, and perturbation of the brain, etc. it is cured, by
phlebotomy, opening of the haemorrhoids, lenients, vomitories, preparants,
purgers, sena, and diacatholicon, etc. mallow seed taken, tartar vitriolat,
refrigerants, attenuants, aperients, diuretics, the extract of black
hellebore, chalybeats, wormwood, baths, cephalic averters, dissipants,
frictions, lotions, scarrifications, issues, the confection of alchermes and of
hyacinth, meat of good juice, easy concoction, temperate, and not viscid, lamb,
veale, soft eggs, saxatile fishes, capers, barley, succory, white wine, wormwood
wine, and mean sleep, avoiding passions.

12. The scurvy, which is a cachexy, caused, by a melancholic humor,
corrupted in a peculiar manner, with a debility of the legs, spots, swelling
of the gums, and bloudinesse, looseness of the teeth, and other symptoms;
it is cured, by the hemorrhoids opened, phlebotomy after a clyster, preparants,
tartar vitriolate, purgers, confectio hamech, antiscorbutick pills, powders,
boles, specisicks, sc. scurvy-grasse, cresses, brook lime, decoctions,
potions, waters, electuaries, chalybeats, diuretics, sudorificks, baths,
things roborating the ventricle, liver, spleen, heart, and lungs: as for its
symptoms, they are cured accordingly; sc. difficulty of respiration and
narrowness of the breast, by thoracick antiscorbuticks, fumitory, scurvy
grass, pleres archonticon, and the confection alchermes; if laxity
putrefaction and stink of the gumms, by abstersives, things hindering
putrefaction, astringent, drying, diamoron, oxymel scilliticum, spirit of
vitriol, collutions, waters of the aforesaid herbs, liniments, powders, and
dentifrices; if exulcerations of the jaws, by washing with scurvy-grasse water,
and roborants; if spotts, by resolvers, discutients, and emollients; if pains,
by anodynes with antiscorbuticks, resolvers, and discutients, emollient and
humecting clysters; if an arthritis, with appropriats; if stupidity, trembling,
the palsy and convulsion, by emollients, resolvers, and discussers; if
contraction and rigidity, by emollients, and discutients; if excess of sleep,
by water cresses; if lipothymy, by antisyncopticks with antiscorbuticks; if
stink of breath, by things hindering putrefaction, and antiscorbutick
discutients; if vomiting, by milk; if too much spitting, by avoiding things
sharp and hot; if flux of the belly, by wormwood, diversion by sudorificks,
wormwood wine, syrup of roses solutive and rhubarb, etc. if heat in the night,
by butter milk, with unctions; if fevers, by scorbutic universals, inciders,
and digerents, etc. if hard tumors, by fomentations, emollients, and
discutients; if an erysipelas, by the water of elder flowers etc. in the
dropsy, by inciders, and attenuants, etc. if ulcers, by evacuants, temperants,
scorbuticks, and the tutty ointment, etc. if an atrophy, by the resumptive
ointment, goats milk, red french wine, etc. with antiscorbuticks, avoiding a
melancholic thick and tartareous diet, of hard concoction, and old, using
ptisans, broths, goats milk with scorbuticks, the rosat aromatic, things
acetose in fevers, and rheinish wine, with moderate exercise, sleep, and
watching; its prevented, by observing the same diet, and shunning society with
the affected, and the causes, etc.

IX. The diseases of the liver.
1. The distemper thereof, which is a deflexion of the same, from the natural
temper, caused by things external and internal; and is cured, by the livers of
living creatures, and moderate astringents; if hot, by refrigerants,
phlebotomy, cooling hepaticks, ptisan, limmons, small beer, barley water, and
whey; if cold, by heaters, specificks, meat of good juice, and hypocratick
wine; if moist, by dryers, astringents, diatrion santalon, etc. if dry, by
humectants, emulsions, and marsh mallow ointment, etc. if compound, by composit
remedies; if with matter, by revulsives, repellers, and roborants, evacuants,
alterants, diuretics, epithems, derivation and discutients.

2. The obstruction of the same, which is a straightness of its vessels,
caused, by matter filling their cavity, and hindering the distribution of
aliment; it is cured, by phlebotomy, lenients, preparants, aperients, syrups,
and unguents, etc. according to the cause, and attenuating diet with capers,
etc. if the vessels are opened, they are shut by astringents, ribes, quinces,
troches of sealed earth, and mastick plasters, etc.

3. Inflation, which is caused, by vicine parts, or flatulent meats; it is
cured, by discutients and repellers, diacyminum, discutient fomentations and
oiles, and attenuating diet.

4. Inflammation, which is a hot tumor thereof, caused, by impacted blood,
putrefying in the substance thereof, with a continual fever, gravative pain,
and sense of pain in the right hypochondrium; it is cured, by clysters,
phlebotomy, repellents, discutients, cupping-glasses, lenients, preparants,
evacuants, topics, astringents, roborants, resolvents, diaphoreticks,
maturants if need, rosat honey, hydromel, vomitories if need, and ustion and
incision, thin diet, ptisans, chicken broth, with the four greater cold
seeds, and barley water, etc.

5. The scirrhus of the liver, which is a hard swelling thereof, without pain,
caused by a thick humor impacted in the substance thereof; it is cured, by
preparers and purgers, emollients, inciders, attenuants, and moderate
discutients; if in the flat part, use pills of ammoniacum and rue, with syrup
of eupatorium, chalybeat wine, attenuating diet, shunning things thick and
viscid, using thin drink and capers, etc. hereto belongs the tumor of the
liver, caused by a viscid humor, and crudity, etc. it is cured by aperients,
inciders, purgers, discutients, and almost as aforesaid.

6. The stone of the liver, which is caused and generated, as that in other
parts, and cured, as that of the reins, and scirrhus of the liver. And the
hydatides thereof, caused, by an aquose and serous humor, generated by the
sanguification of the liver hurt, are cured, as the dropsy.

7. The wounds of the liver, which are caused by violence, and cured, by
venesection if need, clysters, rhubarb, astringent and glutinative potions,
troches of spodium, roses, and rhubarb, myrtine syrup with bole, etc. using
outwardly, astringent and glutinative plasters, ointments of bole, mumy and
turpentine, and cataplasmes; so in the contusion of the liver, using
dissolvers, rhubarb, parmacity, mumy, bole, sealed earth with vinegar, with
myrrh and other roborants, thin diet, and glutinative, rice, jujube water, and
sugar of roses, etc.

8. The ulcers of the liver, which are erosions thereof, caused by purulency,
or humors, and are cured, by phlebotomy, catharticks, mundification by a
hordeat ptysan, the decoction of china or sarsaparilla, exsiccants, sc.
scabious, sage, the cyphoid troches, and consolidants.

X. The symptoms of the liver,
which are. 1. The imbecility thereof, which is a hurt of the faculties of the
same, caused, by distempers, sanguification hurt, attraction, or retention,
it is cured, by roborants, livers of living creatures, snailes, raisins, and
contrary hepaticks; if hot, by roses and saunders; if cold, by agrimony, and
wormwood, and rhubarb to strengthen, with diarrhodon abbatis, and juice of
quinces, etc.

2. The cachexy, which is a diffusion of the whole body into an aquose and
tumid softness by reason of the vice of nutrition, caused, by pituitous, crude
and serous blood, from impure aliment, and vessels; it is cured, by phlebotomy
if need, purgation, vomitories, roborants, and laxants, troches of wormwood,
rhubarb, and lacca, dialacca, and diacurcuma, etc. cachectick powders,
chalybeats, cauteries, cachectick pills, hot and dry air, diet thin, drying,
of good juice, and easy concoction, attenuants, and abstinence, avoiding things
cold, thick, and aquose, and long sleep, keeping the belly open.

3. The dropsy, which is a tumor of the body, or part thereof, preternatural,
caused by a collection of an aquose and serous humor, or flatulency, from a
cold distemper of the liver, extinction, dissolution, or dissipation; it is
cured, by lenients, and remedies continued and varied, sometimes abstaining
from them.

4. The ascites, which is a distension of the abdomen, caused, by an aquose,
serous and salt humor, shed into the capacity of the abdomen, by reason of the
vice of the liver, spleen, and reins, with a swelling of the feet, thighs, and
sometimes of the scrotum; it is cured, by preparants, purgers, tartar
vitriolate, jalap, pills of rhubarb, diacarthamum, diaphoenicon, juice of
elder, diagridium, elaterium, crocus metallorum, diaturbith, pills of mechoacan
and mezereon, medicate wines, the spiritus aureus of Ruland, and his
hydragogick extract, antihydropick clysters, external purgers, Agrippa his
ointment and that of sowbread, diuretics, sassafras, diacurcuma, dialacca,
troches of capers, cantharides, sudorificks, loconick baths, paracentesis,
cupping-glasses used to the navil, apertion of the scrotum, scarrification of
the legs, cauteries, veficatories, theriack salts, triacle, mithridate, oil
of elder, the martiat ointment, fumes, washing the legs with salt water,
friction with oxyrrhodine, alterants, aperients, troches of rubarb, wormwood,
with syrup of eupatorium, and chalybeats; if from colliquation, it is cured by
alterants, refrigerants, and evacuants, cataplasmes, epithems, inunctions,
diuretics, discutients, dry diet and air, moderate sleep, bread well
fermented, branny, with aniseseed, fennel seed, and cumin, mountain birds,
roste meat, the livers of living creatures, and aromaticks, hopps, cresses,
mustard, raisins, bitter almonds, capers, olives, white diuretic wine, and
wormwood, in thirst, washing the mouth with vinegar and chalybeat water.

5. The tympanites, which is a distension of the abdomen, caused, by much
flatulency, excited by weak or torrefacient heat, shut up in the capacity
thereof; it is cured, by evacuating the matter, and remooving the cause, by
discutients, and dissipants, pills of hiera with agarick, stomachick,
aggregative, and of rhubarb, dianisum, diacalaminth, electuary of bay berries,
discutient clysters, cupping-glasses, plasters of bay berries, friction with
the juice of garlic, oil of rue and bays, sacculs of anise and cumin-seed,
plasters, diet not flatulent, and sassafras wine.

6. The anasarca, or leucophlegmatia, which is an equal increase of the
quantity of the whole body, preternatural, caused, by the vice of the aliment,
by reason of immoderat refrigeration of the liver and veins* with a concrete
water; it is cured, by venesection if need, evacuation, by vomit and purgation,
also by urin, syrup of two and five roots, hysop, and water of carduus
benedictus, danewort, agarick, diacarthamum, diaturbith with rhubarb, benedicta
laxativa, pills of hermodactils, frictions, baths of salt water, and laconick,
cataplasmes of dry cow dung with oxymel and sulphur, leven with salt,
scarrification of the legs, the dried flesh of land urchins, and triacle
salts, roborants, diuretics, dialacca, diacurcuma and troches of rhubarb and
wormwood, diet drying heating and attenuating, roasted, drinking the decoction
of guajacum or fassafras, drinking little.

7. The pain of the liver, which is caused by inflammation and flatulency; it is
cured, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, preparers, purgers, and topic
discutients, anointing with oil of wormwood, bitter almonds, rue, and spike,
using diagalanga, and diacinnamomum, avoiding things flatulent.

8. The jaundise, which is an effusion of a yellow or greenish humor, into the
habit of the body, caused, by much choler, hot and dry distemper of the liver,
inflammation, compression, and obstruction; if from obstruction, it is cured, by
aperients, syrups of roots, tartar vitriolat, purgers of manna, rhubarb,
diacatholicon, aggregative pills, vomitories, thin diet, and bitter almonds,
etc. if from the heat of the liver with a fever, by venefection if need,
alterants, and roborants; if critical in acute fevers, by friction,
sudorificks, and looking upon things citrine; if symptomatick in fevers, by
removing the fever, using purgers and diuretics; if from inflammation of the
liver, by remooving the inflammation; if from the biting of poison some
creatures and poisons, by alexipharmicks, vomitories, triacle, mithridat,
bezoar, extrahents, and troches of camphire, and the black as above said.

XI. The diseases of the veins;
1. The distemper thereof, if caused, by heat and dryness, it is cured by
refrigerants and humecters, conserves, syrups, waters, and emulsions, epithems,
oiles, the rose ointment, cerot of saunders, a leadden plate there worn, diet
of ptisan, the four greater cold seeds, ribes, and barley water; if cold, by
calefacients, oiles, and the martiat ointment, aromatic diet, agarick, cassia
with turpentine, and benedicta laxativa.

2. The straightness of the vessels in the reins, which is caused, by
compression or obstruction, it is cured, if from crude and gross phlegm, by
vomitories, inciders, detersives, diuretics, the syrup of roots, and spirit
of salt and vitriol; if from grumous blood, by oxymel scilliticum with the
decoction of mugwort, mumie, myrrh, and the curd of a hare, etc. if from the
stone, as that.

3. Apertion of the vessels, which is caused, by a hot and moist distemper,
it is cured, by things adstringent and consolidating, as plantaine, bole, sealed
earth, coral, mumy, and the haematite.

4. The stone of the reins, which is a solid substance, mucilaginous, limose,
tartareous, having a lithopoietick faculty, arising in the reins, by the help
of heat, caused, by a lapidescent juice, from the feculency of aliments; it is
cured, by avoiding gross meats, using that which does attenuate and incide,
flesh of weathers, calves, yolks of eggs, bread not without bran, saxatile
fishes, bitter almonds, mallows, sperage, evacuation, by often vomiting,
lenients, syrup of roses solutive, cassia, manna, rhubarb, turpentine,
lithontripticks, nephritick wood, ivy, spirit of salt, and temperants; if
coagulated, by evacuants, clysters, venesection if need, unguents, plasters,
oil of sweet almonds, and ointment of marsh mallows, inwardly use cassia,
licorice, and marsh mallows, diuretics, lithontripticks, and the nephritick
stone, etc. anodynes, diachylon simple with the oil of scorpions, and ointment
of marshmallows, etc.

5. The worms thereof, which are killed, by scolecobroticks: The hairs
thereof, generated of a thick humor dried there, are cured by attenuants,
inciders, and a moistning diet.

6. The inflammation of the reins, or nephritis, is a swelling of the same,
caused, by blood, shed into their substance, and putrefying there, joined with
a vehement pain, and fibrous and sandy excretions; it is cured, by venesection,
cupping-glasses, friction, ligature, evacuation by cassia, tamarinds, rhubarb,
the lenitive electuary, diacatholicon, clysters, emulsions, conserve of
violets, oil of violets, epithems, diuretics in the declination, suppurants
if need, using the decoction of barley, and applying mallows; rumpents, using
the decoction of liquorice, abstersives, consolidants, thin cooling and
moistening diet, ptisans, juleps of roses or violets, or small drink, rest, and
emollients.

7. The scirrhus thereof, caused by thick humors, it is cured by emollients and
digerents, fat broths, and the decoction of mallows, using oil of sweet
almonds outwardly, and of white lillies, etc. the tabes, which is caused by
things hot and dry; is cured by humectants of good juice, milk, baths of sweet
water, etc. as in the hectic.

8. The wounds of the reins, which are caused by violence, they are cured V.P.
by glutinants; if deep, cast in austere wine, using a cataplasme of dates,
troches of carabe, with horse tail water, sealed earth, and turpentine,
applying oil of scorpions, and bitter almonds, use diet of good juice,
emulsions of the four greater cold seeds, ptisans, forbile eggs, barley water
with liquorice, drinking little, and rest.

9. The ulcers of the reins, which are caused, by an abscesse of a phlegmon,
or the stone; and are cured, by fit diet, venesection if need, mitigants,
temperants, and evacuants, mallows, hordeats, syrup of violets solutive, the
lenitive electuary, turpentine, detersives, mulse, ptisan with honey, asses
milk, consolidants, bole, coral, troches of spodium and sealed earth, decoction
of guaiacum, diet of good juice, easy concoction, and not easily corrupted,
ptisans, rice, flesh of hens, mountain birds, lambs, sweet almonds, milk, and
little drink etc.

10: The diseases of the ureters, which are caused, chiefly by the reins, if
obstructed, they are cured, as the reins, by fomentations with mallows, oil
of sweet almonds, scorpions, the ointment of marshmallows, and cupping-glasses;
their wounds and ulcers are helped as the former.

XII. The symptoms of the veins.
1. The imbecility thereof, and the secretion of the serum hurt, caused by cold
or straightness, inflammation, the stone, gross phlegm, clotted blood, or
matter, it is cured according to the cause; if from cold, by warming clysters,
aromatic consections, using unguents, and plasters, diuretics if from
imbecility, and radish wine; if from narrowness, as in that of the reins.

2. The diabetes, which is a most speedy and copious evacuation of drink not
altered, caused, by the intense attraction of the reins, and afflicting with
great and perpetual thirst; it is cured, by temperants, venesection if need,
astringents and roborants, red roses, plantain, coral, and spodium, opiats if
need, epithems, liniments, the cerot of saunders, and Gallen's refrigerant,
etc.

3. The nephritick pain, which is caused, by the stone or gravel, and sharp
sanies; it is cured, by phlebotomy if need, emulsions, anodynes, emollient
clysters, decoctions of mallows, fomentations therewith, ointment of marsh
mallows, and cupping-glasses, etc.

XIII. The diseases of the bladder.
1. The distemper thereof, caused, by heat or cold, if so, it is cured by
calefacients, nutmeg, licorice, and juniper berries, applying oil of nard and
dill.

2. The stone of the bladder, which is begotten, and caused, as that of the
reins, and it is so cured, sc. by prohibents, fit diet, necessary evacuations,
abstersives, lithontripticks, and expulsives, millepedes, diuretic decoctions,
injections, and section, etc. as in the stone of the reins.

3. Worms of the bladder, which are caused, by a pituitous humor, and are
cured, or killed by abstersive diuretics, with scolecobroticks.

4. The distension of the bladder, which is caused by obstruction, or too long
retention of urin; it is cured, by emollients, and laxants, and use of the
catheter; its inflammation is cured by phlebotomy, refrigerants, repellents,
after using anodynes and laxants, clysters, syrup of violets, poppies, and
conserve of violets, applying oil of roses and chamomil, maturants if need,
emollients if scirrhous, sc. cassia, etc. and the cath^ter if need.

5. Wounds thereof, caused by violence; they are cured, by glutinants,
anointing with oil of white lillies and mastick, etc.

6. Scabbednesse of the bladder, caused by sharp and salt humors; it is cured,
by evacuation with the syrup of roses solutive, manna, cassia, temperants, and
the four greater cold seeds, applying things cooling and consolidating: The
ulcers thereof, are helped, by temperants, syrup of violets, diverters, cassia
and turpentine, abstersives, barley water and honey, injections, consolidants
of bole, sealed earth, mastick, troches of winter cherries, juice of
horse-taile, Gordonius his troches, milk and emulsions if from cantharides,
amygdalats, mucilages, diet of good juice, easy concoction, and glutinative,
milk, barley, and rice, etc. its fistula's, are helped by cassia, diachylon
with gumms, cyprus turpentine, abstersives, and epuloticks, etc.

7. The refrigeration of the sphincter, which is caused, by external
refrigerating causes, it is cured, as the resolution of other parts.

8. The narrowness of the urinary passage, which is an interception of the
same, caused by obstruction, constipation, and compression, occasioning a
suppression of urin; it is cured, according to the cause; if from the stone, by
concussion and the catheter, compression downwards, a cochleary probe, and
section; if from clotted blood, by oxymel, mulse, and syrup of maiden hair; if
from thick phlegm, by attenuants and inciders, insessions, oil of rue,
scorpions, and the catheter; if from compression, according to the cause; if
from a caruncle or callus, it is to he remooved.

9. The caruncle, callus, and excrescencies therein, caused, by viscid humors,
and are cured, by consumers of flesh, and consolidants, V. P. the decoction of
china and sarsaparilla, drying it with a dry wax candle, and injections, etc.

XIV. The symptoms of the bladder.
1. The stupidity of the sphincter, which is caused by the affection of the
nerves of the sixth conjugation, refrigerated, obstructed, or compressed; it is
cured, by fomentations, oiles, unguents, and plasters, etc.

2. The ischury, which is a suppression of urine, caused by the frustration of
the expulsive faculty, so that none thereof can pass out, from diseases of the
bladder, sc. stupidity, distemper, narrowness, too much extension, and vices
of the reins and ureters; it is cured, according to the cause; if from
stupidity, the heat is to be excited, and suppositories are to be used, and the
cathether, or a cerare candle with honey of roses, injections, mulse water,
fomenting with the decoction of chamomil, anointing after with the oil of
scorpions, nard, and rue, drinking little, and using liniments, etc.

3. The diminute excretion of the urin, when in a less quantity, caused by
crisis, and laxity of the belly, it is cured, by foments, cataplasmes, loosening
unguents, violets, and feed of fenigreek, etc. if slow, by diuretics,
stimulants, and quickners.

4. The strangury, which is an excretion of urin made by drops, with, or
without a fever, with a continual stimulation to evacuate, caused, by a
continual stimulation, of the expulsive faculty, by reason of the affection of
the sphincter, or debility of the retentive faculty; it is cured, if from biting
humors, by universal gentle purgations, syrup of roses solutive, manna,
diaprune, diacatholicon, cassia, turpentine, temperants, syrup of roses,
violets, poppies, licorice, baths, insessions, emulsions, and whey if from salt
phlegm, with sugar of roses if putulent; if from new drink, by oxymel; if from
refrigeration, by diagalanga, triacle, and mithridat, applying oil of rue, and
mastick plasters; if from consent, by fomentations and other topics, ptisans,
milk, fresh eggs, flesh of good juice and easy concoction, white wine, the
decoction of barley and licorice, shunning what may cause acrimony.

5. The dysury, which is an excretion of burning urine, sometimes of little,
sometimes of much, with torment, without interruption, caused, by things
external and internal, affecting the urinary passage; it is cured, by remotion
of the cause, lenients, syrup of violets, decoction of mallows, jujubs, and
liquorice; using outwardly, the oil of sweet almonds, poppies, clysters,
injecting new milk, and emulsions, and using narcoticks if need; if from
poison, by cassia, mallow water and alexipharmicks; if from cantharides, by
milk, mucilages, emulsions, syrup of violets, and poppies, etc.

6. The involuntary excretion, and incontinency thereof, caused by the
relaxation, and imbecility of the sphincter, it is cured, if from resolution, by
contrary corrigents, diacyminum, frankincense drunk in wine, calamint, mints,
and sulphurious and aluminous baths, anointing with oil of wormwood; in
incontinency, drinking little at night, abstaining from diuretic wine, and
whatsoever may moove the urin to the bladder.

7. The redness of the urine, which is caused, by a thick and crude humor; if
without heat, it is cured by heaters and wine; if bloody, caused, by
anastomosis, erosion, or diapedesis, it is cured by remooving the cause, by
astringents if from laxity; if erosion, by occludents; if rupture, by
consolidants; if from the quantity of blood, by phlebotomy using astringents,
condensants, obturants, and consolidants, medicines of red roses, plantain,
acacia, bole, sealed earth, coral, troches of spodium, sealed earth, and those
of Gordonius, applying the cold diaphoenicon plaster, and that against
rupture, etc. if from the bladder, by injections; if blood be coagulated, by
oxymel and mummy, meat of good juice mixed with astringents, and red austere
wine, mixed with chalybeat water, abstaining from things sharp, etc. if black,
it is helped by fumitory and diuretics; if pilare, it is helped by clysters, and
potions.

8. The excretion of urine, by other passages, which when accidentally caused,
may be cured, by diuretics, turpentine, oxyrrhodines, and lotions, etc.

XV. The diseases of the genitals in men.
1. The distemper of the testicles, which if caused by heat, it is cured, by
internal and external refrigerants, lettuce, violets, endive, purslain,
poppies, emulsions, fomentations, fit diet, ptisan, and juice of citron and
limons; if cold, it is helped by internal and external heaters, betony,
calamint, marjerom, cinnamon, pepper, cubebs, the rosat aromatic, diasatyrion,
diambra, and the sweet diamoschum, anointing with oil of spike, nutmeg, mace,
and pepper, etc. meat of good juice, much nourishment, moderately hot and
moist, sorbile eggs, parsley, and onions, etc. if moist or dry, by humectants,
and dryers.

2. Inflammation thereof, caused, by blood preternaturally flowing thither, and
is cured, as other inflammations, by venesection, cupping-glasses, evacuants,
repellers, cataplasmes of barley and bean meal, epithems of rose water,
plantain, and quinces, with ligature upwards, intercipients, defensives, of
bole and the white of an egg, and plaster against ruptures, digerents with
repellers afterward, oil of roses, chamomil, and the poplar ointment,
diachylon with oil of roses, refrigerants and laxants if painful, cataplasmes
of the leaves of henbane, if need, aperie^ts if suppurating, cleansers, and
consolidants; if inflation, by discutients, barley meal with axunge and pigeons
dung, with the leaves of henbane, if need, etc. if hard swellings, and
scirrhous, they are helped, V.P. by emollients and discutients, oil of bitter
almonds, ointment of marshmallows, martiat, and diachylon simple and compound,
and section if need, or amputation.

3. mutation of situation, which if caused by laxation, and cold, it is cured,
by purgers, and hot exsiccants, applying cataplasmes of sage, etc. if
retracted, they are helped, by emollients, and laxants.

4. The wounds thereof, are caused and are to be cured, as those of other
parts, by venesection if need, clysters, inunction with oil of roses, ^igerent
and roborant cataplasmes, and diapalma; if ulcerous, they are helped by
purgation, mundification with the ointment of the apostles, and the aegyptiack,
washing with the decoction of roses, with frankincense, plantain water, and red
wine, and ointment of miniu^, etc.

5. The diseases of the scrotu^, which, if it be an inflammation, it is caused
and to be cured, as that of the testicles, so the wounds: the excoriation
thereof is helped, by pompholix, myrrh, and frankincense, etc. the ulcers
thereof are helped as those of the testicles; the gangreen is helped as the
rest.

6. The rupture, which is a swelling of the same, caused, by the omentum fallen
into it, or flatulency and water gathered there, or flesh there begotten; it is
cured, if ventose, called pneumatocele, V.P. by discutients, as in the
flatulent colic, rue, aniseseed, bayberries, sacculs, fomentations, anointing
with oil of rue, chamomil and bays, discutient cataplasmes, plasters of
bayberries, or melilore, abstaining from flatulent meat; if aquose, called
hydrocele, it is cured by prohibents and evacuants, apertion, defensives,
digestives, mundificatives, discutients, fomentations, cataplasmes, inunctious,
oil of chamomil, rue, the plaster of Agrippa, and arregon, cauteries if need,
and amputation; if carnose, called sarcocele, it is cured, V. P. by repriments
and exsiccants, section if need, and ustion, and cataplasmes; if varicose,
called cirsocele, caused by melancholy, it is cured, V. P. by melanagogons,
exsiccants, washing often with the water of cypress nuts, with suspension,
some use emollients, and discutients, baths, oil of sweet almonds with
bdellium, and cataplasmes: stones therein are to be removed by section.

7. The diseases of the penis, sc. the distortion thereof, caused, by venery,
and is cured, by abstaining from it, putting in a leaden or silver pipe, with
ligature, and astringents, etc. as in the hernia: the inflation, is helped by
dryers and discutients as in the pneumatocele; its inflammation, is helped as
others, by phlebotomy, and purgation if need, using repellers in the beginning,
and resolvers in the augmentatio^, which are to be increased in the state, and
after to be applied alone; if tubercles, by ligature with silk, after applying
alum rose water and tutty, section, stoppers of blood, digestives, and
defensives; if imperforat, by apertion, and a pipe with oil of roses; if
wounds, as the rest, using litharge, cerusse washed, myrrh, sarcocol, tutty
prepared, and tragacanth, used as a powder, or unguent, with oil of roses; if
ulcers, by abstersives and dryers, aloes, pompholix, water of roses, plantain,
hydromel, alum water, the white ointment camphorat, and diapompholigos, if in
the glans; if old and putrid, by hydromel with alum, the Apostles ointment, and
aegyptiack; if virulent, by precipitate, etc. if betwixt the glans and prepuce,
by the green water, or wine with honey of roses; if the ulcer be creeping, by
incision; if near a gangreen, by defensives, aegyptiack and the Apostles
ointment, and amputation if need; if an ulcer in the passage, it is helped by
ptysans, amygdalats, shunning things sharp, acetose, salt, and diuretic,
temperants, evacuants, injections of abstersives and glutinants, plantain and
horse-taile water, and troches of winter cherries with cicatrizants.

8. The diseases of the prepuce, sc. the phimosis, or too much covering of the
glans, caused by conformation, or ulcers etc. it is cured, by section, dry
liniments, and the white of an egg with rose water; if callous, it is to be
mollified with the oil of sweet almonds, putting in a pipe, and making it
larger by degrees; if with a defluxion, by emollients and discutients, and
tepid milk; if a paraphimosis, or retraction of the prepuce, use a thin and
cooling diet, purge with cholagogons if need, use phlebotomy, and refrigerating
ointments, and the laudan opiat, if need; if from an impure congresse, by cold
thin diet, evacuants, and cataplasmes; if there be a coalitus of the frenum,
it is helped, by section, applying the white of an egg, digestives, and drying
plasters; if there be a fissure of the prepuce, use oil of roses, amylum, and
frankincense.

XVI. The symptoms in the genitals of men.
1. The generation of sperme hurt, which is when it is not generated, or such,
as is not prolifick, caused by vice of the matter, or faculty hurt, etc. it is
cured, according to its causes; if by the vice of the whole body or any
principal part, it is helped accordingly; if distemper, by correctors, and
specificks, etc. the greater roots of satyrion, artichoacks, sperage, rapes,
garlic, onions, dates, sweet almonds, cubebs, oisters, diasatyrion, diambra,
and sweet diamosch, syrups, eryngo roots, applying oil of mastick, bread of
wheat, rice, almonds; sorbile eggs, veale, kids flesh, weathers, hens,
partridges, pheasants, young pigeons, sparrows, shelfishes, figgs, pease,
beans, garlic, carrots, and mirth, shunning ebriety, and refrigerating meats.

2. Erection, and ejaculation of sperm hurt, when the genital cannot be erected
or extended, caused by the defect of vital spirit, or resolution; it is cured,
if by defect of sperm, or distemper, by heaters, inunctions with oiles and
unguents, oil of costus and musk, etc. if from distorsion, according to the
cause, as aforesaid; if a node, by astringents, and fomentations; if a double
foramen, by scarrification of one, and occludents; if laxity of the passage, by
dryers, and sulphurous baths; if the sperm be aquose, by incrassation.

3. Salacity, priapisme, and satyriasis, the first is too great a propension to
venery, caused, by the vice of the sperm, and sometimes so great, that it is
turned into fury. The second is an erection of the pudend, about the desire of
venery, caused by a flatuous spirit; filling the fistulous nerve of the
genital. The third is a palpitation of the pudend, following an inflammatory
affection of the spermatick vessels, with tension; the first is cured, by
phlebotomy, temperants, and evacuation of sharp humors, spermosbesticks, and
refrigerants, agnus castus, lettuce, purselain, hempseed, coral, crystal,
camphire, chaste water, epithems, fomenting the loins, Galen's refrigerant,
cerot of saunders, fasting, and abstaining from aromaticks; so also the
satyriasis and priapisme is cured, sc. by venesection, purgation,
spermosbesticks, refrigerating topics, repressers of flatulency, the rose
cerot, and avoiding venerious imaginations.

4. The running of the reins or gonorrhoea, which is an excessive and
involuntary profusion of sperm, caused, by its proper vice, and that of the
spermatick parts; it is cured, V. P. if from imbecility of the retentive
faculty, by dryers and astringents, sumach, and sealed earth etc. if cold, by
mastick and frankincense, and astringent baths; if the sperm be hot and sharp,
by phlebotomy, rhubarb, myrobalans, succory, the four greater cold seeds,
anointing the spine and loins, with refrigerating unguents, the cerot of
saunders, and comitissae; if the sperm be thin, and aquose, by dryers, and
roborants, the rosate aromatic and syrup of mints, eating rice, incrassants,
and evacuants if cacochymick; if passing out too soon in the venereal act,
it is to be helped as imbecility, and too much aquosenesse; if corrupt and
virulent, by dryers, triacle, and mithridate, after purgation, and astringent
powders.

5. Nocturnal polution, which is caused, by the irritation of the expulsive
faculty, by copious sperm, etc. it is cured, by abstaining from spermatogenetick
meat, using that which is refrigerant and astringent, and phlebotomy if the
body be plethorick, hindering the motion of the sperm, shunning imaginations
and sleeping on the back, using lettuce, blites, pompions, cucumers, rue,
troches, and liniments; there are diverse other accidents which are helped,
according to the cause.

6. The emission of blood, which is caused, by the apertion of the mouths of
the spermatick veins; it is cured, by abstaining from venery, and use of the
aforesaid astringents.

7. The pain of the testicles, which is caused, by inflammation, frigidity,
ulcers, and external causes; it is cured, according to the causes; if from
percussion, by phlebotomy, things hindering the flux of humors, sc. violets
and roses, using discutients, lenients, sc. dill, chamomil, leaves of henbane,
bean meal, and milk: The pain of the genital, arises from the same causes,
and is cured, as its inflation, inflammation, wounds, and ulcers, by anodynes,
fomentation with the decoction of mallows, camomil, melilot, plasters thereof,
white bread boiled in milk, yolks of eggs, oil of roses, saffron, and opium,
or henbane leaves roasted.

8. The itching of the scrotum and prepuce, which is caused, by sharp humors,
it is cured, V. P. by what helps it in other places, abstersives, anodynes,
washing with the decoction of sage, ammoniack salt with vinegar; and that of
the prepuce, by the decoction of lentils, with the barks of pomegranats.

XVII. The diseases of the navil.
1. The apertion thereof, caused by much blood, and acrimonious, etc. it is
cured by the juice and leaves of plantain, purging with rhubarb, agarick and
sena, etc.

2. The umbilical hernia, or exomphalos, which is caused by an emollient laxant
humor, etc. sc. falling down of the intestines and omentum into the navil;
it is cured, after purgation, by adstringent and consolidating remedies, as in
the rupture of the intestines, reposition and convenient topics, plasters,
abstaining from flatulent meat, and excessive motion, using a girdle with a
globule over the navil, applying a cerot of bole, mastick and the white of an
egg, etc. if aquose, it is cured by prevention and remotion, exsiccants and
discutient topics, lunate section if need, cicatrizants, and roborants; if
flatulent, by discutients, decoctions, fomentations, and sacculs; if carnose,
by causticks, and traumaticks, ligature with a mercuriate thread, using burnt
alum, etc.

3. The inflammation of the navil, which may be caused, by percussion, falls,
or section; it is cured, by lenients, prohibents, discutients, and digerents,
etc. as in the inflammation of the testicles and duggs; if abscesses, they are
to be opened, and cured as other ulcers.

4. Worms there, caused, as the rest, and are cured, or killed, by applying
venice glass with honey and savin, giving hearts horn with tansey water.

XVIII. The diseases of the abdomen.
1. The inflammation of the muscles thereof, caused, as the rest; it is cured,
as the rest, by venesection, clysters, cholagogons, and phlegmagogons,
sudorificks, and plasters of cows and goats dung in vinegar.

2. The spasme, which is caused, by flatulency, is cured, by melanagogons,
phlegmagons, discutients, and anodyne oiles.

3. The tumors of the abdomen, are caused, by flatulency or humors, and are
cured, as those of the mesentery, and omentum.

4. The wounds of the abdomen, which are caused, by violence, and are cured, as
others, with ligature in the form of a cross, if not penetrating; if
penetrating, with future also, after reposition, turning the opposite way, etc.

5. The fistula's thereof, caused, by wounds, or ulcers, they are cured, by
natural baths, or artificial, of sulphur, alum, and salt; if outwardly by
incision, etc.

XIX. The diseases of the pudend, and neck of the womb.
1. The narrowness thereof, which is a shutting of the same, or of its
orifice, caused, by compression or coalition, and amplitude, is caused by
frequent coiture and parturition; it is cured by astringents, purgation,
fomentations, baths, astringent pessaries, alum water, and astringent
decoctions; if there be a rupture of the perinaeum, by emollients, reposition,
future, tar, and consolidating powders.

2. The feminine mentula, which is caused, by too much afflux of nutriment to
the part, it is cured by evacuation, section, dryers, discutients, and
astringents, causticks, burnt alum, aegyptiack, ligature with silk, and
restrictive powders: The caudate affection, or carnose excrescence, is so
helped also.

3. The shutting of the womb, which is caused, by conformation, wounds, and
ulcers, it is cured, by section, V. P. by retraction and opening of the legs;
if from flesh, by dryers and discutients if need, cathereticks, burnt alum, and
aegyptiack; if from a hard tumor, by emollients and resolvents; if from
astringents, by emollients, as butter, and oil of sweet almonds.

4. The pustules and roughness of the pudend, which are caused, by an adust,
malignant, and sharp humor; and are cured, by preparers, borrage, fumitory,
and endive, etc. evacuants, sena, syrup of apples R.S. of violets and roses
solutive, diacatholicon, confectio hamech, pills of fumitory and tartar,
phlebotomy if need, decoction of guaiacum, and sarsaparilla, using oil of
roses and yolks of eggs, antipsoricks, and meat of good juice, shunning things
sharp, salt, and acid.

5. The condylomatae of the neck of the womb, which are swellings of the
wrinkles, with heat and pain, caused, by a sharp and malignant humor; they
are cured, V. P. by remedies against the french disease, topics, anodynes if
with inflammation, repellers and dryers, and discutients; emollients if hard,
digerents, ficcants, scrophularia, powder of eggeshels, burnt misy with
turpentine, and balsam of mercury.

6. The warts of the pudend and neck of the womb, which are caused by thick
feculent and malignant humors; they are cured V. P. by medicaments, section,
and ustion, exsiccants, discutients, erodents, and adurents, with defensives of
bole, sealed earth, rose water and vinegar, using corrosives in shells, and
ligature with horse hair, etc.

7. The hemorrhoids of the womb, which are tubercles, like those of the anus,
in the neck of the womb, caused, by the afflux of feculent blood, they are
cured, V.P. by purgation, revulsion, derivation, anodynes if need,
fomentations, unguents, butter, oil of roses, poplar ointment, yolks of eggs,
saffron, and opium if need; if they bleed not, they are helped by
scarrification, sprinkling on a sharp and drying powder, bole and alum, etc. if
bloody, by emollients, aperients, and discutients, leeches, section, and
extirpants; if the flux be great, by revulsion, cupping-glasses, frictions,
ligatures, and stoppers of blood with the white of an egg.

8. The ulcers of the neck of the womb, which are caused, by sharp humors, and
things corrosive, they are cured, by evacuants, anodynes, emulsions,
astringents, and dryers if pure; if deep, by injecting the decoction of red
roses, detersives if sordid, whey, barley water with honey, wormwood, myrrh,
turpentine, and alum; if sordid, by aegyptiack or ointment of the Apostles; if
creeping, by abstergents, dryers, and astringents, alum water, sarcoticks and
cicatrizants, fumes, drying sulphurous and aluminous baths, traumaticks,
turpentine with sugar, pills of bdellium, and milk and the conserve of roses if
tabid.

9. The rhagades of the neck of the womb, or fissures, which are caused by
laborious birth, afflux of sharp humors, and viscid; they are cured, if from
violent coiture, by the decoction of roses, plantain, bole, and frankincense
with the white of an egg; if from the flux of sharp humors, V. P. by topics;
if from inflammation, accordingly, by topics, etc. according to the cause, and
the fissures are to be cured, by things binding without biting, oil of
lineseed, and roses, with the yolk of an egg, and ointment of mucilages with
pompholix and burnt lead; if callous, by oil of lillies, turpentine, and wax;
if malignant, by things helping fistula's; if itching and painful, by ointment
of mucilages, white camphorat, pomatum, or diapompholygos, moistening diet of
good juice, chickens, veale, broths, sorbile eggs, mallows, borage, ptisan, and
sweet almonds, abstaining from things sharp and salt.

10. The fistula of the neck of the womb, which is caused, when the matter of
abscesses is not evacuated, and corrodeth; it is cured, by universal
evacuations, palliatives, sudorificks, detersive and roborant injections,
diapalma, drying potions of centory, agrimony, and betony, etc. topics,
gentian roots and bryony, used as tents, things taking away callus, section,
ustion, remedies, aegyptiack, sublimat, causticks, detersives, incarnants, and
cicatrizants.

11. The cancer of the womb, which is caused, by menstruous adust blood, and
torrified humors flowing thither; it is cured, by a fit diet, universal
purgations, and melanagogons, taking the powder of bozoar, sapphir and emerald,
cooling and astringent topics, and fomentations of plantain and night shade
water, diapompholigos, herb Robert, and fomentations of mallows, etc. if
painful, by corrosives of antimony and arsnick if need, and chickens dissected,
and applied.

12. The gangreen and sphacelus of the womb, which is caused, by inflammation,
cancers, and ulcers, it is cured, by things hindering putrefaction,
scarrification, washing with the decoction of wormwood, lupines and myrrh,
using aegyptiack, the powder of aloes and myrrh, amputation, ustion, ligature,
cordials external and internal, injections of night shade and plantain, taking
the decoction of sorrel, scabious, and damask prunes, little refrigerating acid
diet, and cathereticks, etc.

XX. The diseases of the womb it self.
1. The distemper of the womb, which is a deflexion of the same, from its
natural temper, so that which is preternatural, caused by things external and
internal; it is cured, if hot, by refrigerants, cold hystericks, endive,
violets, lettuce, diatrion santalon, the rose ointment, Galens refrigerant, the
cerot of saunders, cataplasmes of barley meal, baths, fomentations, abstaining
from hot meats, and aromaticks, using barley water, etc. if cold, by heaters,
mugwort, savin, rue, spices, diamoschum, triacle, mithridate, oil of bays,
rue, nutmeg, and diet of easy concoction and good nourishment, with aniseseed,
fennel, and aromaticks; if moist, by dryers, sulphurous baths, and drying
diet; if dry, by humecters, borrage, mallows, satyrion and eryngo roots,
conserves, emulsions, baths, fomentations, oil of sweet almonds, and the
resumptive ointment, moistening and humecting diet, of good juice, easy
concoction, much aliment, and not excrementitious, fat broth, veale, hens,
weathers flesh, sorbile eggs, milk, fresh cheese, almonds, dates, sweet wine,
and rest; if with matter, sc. if cold and moist, by fit remedies, preparants,
purgers, syrup of mugwort, betony, and hissop, agarick, turbith, sena,
aloephangin and mastick pills, and cochie, diaphoenicon and dacarthamum, purging
pessaries, dryers, heaters, consumers, and discutients, sudorificks, the
decoction of guajacum, china, and sarsaparilla, thin diet, roasted birds, veale,
and sweet almonds, chalybeats, insessions, baths, plasters of caranna,
sulphurous and drying baths, bread seasoned with anise and cumin seed, meat
roasted, with aromaticks, and strong wine; if hot and dry with choler, by
preparants, alterants, and evacuants, syrup of citrons, violets, and roses
solutive, manna, tamarinds, rhubarb, and sena, etc. as for the temper of the
womb, it is known, by the gynaecomystax on the lip and genitals, menstruals,
venery, and conception, they all being soonest in those that are hot and
prolifick.

2. The narrowness of the womb and its vessels, which is an interception
thereof, caused, by viscid humors, inflammation, astringents, compression, and
cicatrices, etc. it is cured, according to the cause; if by obstructon, by
evacuants, aperients, attenuants, abstersives, things mooving the courses,
chalybeats, fomentations, baths, oil of rue and dill, fumes, and pessaries; if
from diseases, according to the cause.

3. The opening of the vessels of the womb, preternaturally, which is caused,
by anastomasis, diaeresis, and diapedesis, it is cured according to the cause,
by astringents, agglutinants, sarcoticks, condensants, and incrassants, not
viscid if an anastomosis, as roses, saunders, and coral, and viscid if a
diaeresis, sc. comfrey, plantain, the whites of eggs, troches of carabe, bole,
and macilages, etc.

4. Things troublesome in the womb, sc. worms, generated and caused, as the
rest, and are cured, or removed, by the powder of illyrick flowerdeluce, with
the juice of pomegranats, made into a pessary, fomenting with the juice of ivy,
and metrenchyts of the decoction of wormwood and hiera picra: Stones in the
womb, are removed by clysters, the decoction of fenegreek, mallows, and oil of
roses, resupination, depression, and extraction by the two longest fingers.

5. The inflation of the womb, which is a distension of the same, caused by
flatulency, from a cold, pituitous, and flatulent matter, begotten by the vice
of deficient heat; it is cured, by discutients, evacuants, temperants, hiera,
diaphoenicon with castor, hystericks, diagalanga, oil of aniseseed,
cataplasmes of rue and chamomil, plasters of bay berries, or caranna,
carminative metrenchyts, pessaries, fumes of aloes, myrrh and nutmeg,
cupping-glasses, sulphurous, bituminous, and salth baths; if from cold after
childbirth, by heating discutients, inciding and attenuating diet.

6. The dropsy thereof, which is an impotency of the same, caused by water
collected there, by its own vice, or that of other parts; it is cured, if from
suppression of the courses, by the apertion of a crural vein, preparants,
purgers, heaters and dryers, dialacca, diacurcuma, tobacco water, dianisum,
diagalanga, pessaries, fomentations, oil of elder and aniseeds, plasters of
bay berries, or goats dung, hysteric roborants, anodynes, decoction of
chamomil flowers, hydropick clysters, issues, and drying diet.

7. The tumor of the womb, caused, by blood, contained in the veins thereof,
it is cured, by things provoking the suppression of the menses.

8. The inflammation of the womb, which is a tumor of the same, caused, by the
putrefaction of blood, shed into the substance thereof, troubling with diverse
symptoms, and sometimes turning into a scirrhus, sometimes into an abscessus;
it is cured, by phlebotomy if there be no prohibents, cupping-glasses,
evacuants, syrups of roses and violets solutive, manna, rhubarb, the lenitive
electuary, and diacatholicon, vomitories, alterants, refrigerants, emulsions,
hypnoticks, V.P. repellers, rosate ointment, Galens refrigerant, the cerot of
saunders, oil of quinces, cataplasmes of purselane, endive, and night shade,
pessaries of their juyces with oil of roses, new milk with rose water
injected, refrigerating clysters, anodynes, the yolk of an egg with fatts,
saffron, poppies, woman's milk, and mucilages, cataplasmes of white bread and
milk, discutients, oil of chamomil, butter and fats, suppurants if need,
apertion by motion, sternutation, cupping-glasses, detersive and attenuating
injections, evacuation of purulency, detersives, consolidants, section if need,
washing with mulse water, or that of barley or plantain with sugar; if toward
the bladder, by emulsions, and whey with syrup of violets, thin diet, ptisan,
broths, lettuce, and decoction of barley somewhat tepid.

9. The scirrhus thereof, which is a hard swelling of the same, and troublesome
without pain, caused, by a thick, terrestrial, and faculent humor; it is
cured, by evacuants, preparation by moisteners and heaters, borage, buglosse,
fumitory, polypody, sena, black hellebore, emollients and discutients,
insessions, diachylon ireat, and metrenchyts; if not legitimate, by heaters and
digesters; if from things too much heating and discutient, by humectants,
emollients, and moderate heaters, mallows and oil of sweet almonds, increasing
discutients in the declination, bryony roots, chalybeats, abstaining from cold
drying and viscid meats, beef, bacon, geese, and ducks, etc. using diet of
good juice, moist, and moderately hot.

10. The rising of the womb, which is caused by corruption of the sperme, and
ill vapors; it is cured, by evacuants and dissipants, etc. as in the
suffocation of the same.

11. The falling down of the womb, which is a propension of the same, out of
the abdomen, caused, by the solution of the unity of its ligament; it is cured,
by reposition, clysters, resupination, and elevation of the inferior parts,
fomentations of mallows and lineseed if swelled, holding a red hot iron near,
and sprinkling astringents and glutinants thereon, a fumigation of salted and
dried eele skin, cupping-glasses applied to the navil, piriforme pessaries of
astringents, ointment comitissae, the same used to the back, as also that
against ruptures, or diaphoenicon, fomentations of astringents, sulphurous
baths, roborant decoctions of oak moss, lying with the legs extended,
wearing a pessary of cork, and the Hypocratick zone if need, and excision,
rest, dry astringent and glutinative diet, rice, quinces, pares, fresh cheese
and red wine; if the womb move to either side, it is helped, V. P. by
cupping-glasses, decubiture on the other side, rectification by the finger
humected with oil of sweet almonds, and fumes of fetid things, using sweet to
the nostrils.

12. The wounds and rupture of the womb, which are caused, by violence, and are
cured, by consolidants, anodynes, pessaries, injections, wax candles or
plasters with vulnerary unguents, hydromel, agrimony, and plantain, etc.
decocted.

13. The ulcers and corruption of the womb, which are caused, as those of the
neck of the womb, and so cured, and as fistula's, taking cumfrey roots,
rhapontick, plantain, and sealed earth, etc. injecting hydromel frankincense
and myrrh, the lesser centory, and alum, using aegyptiack, consolidant
decoctions, syrup of dried roses, powders of myrrh aloes and bole, and
unguents of turpentine, honey, and spirit of wine.

XXI. The symptoms in the womb.
1. The imbecility thereof, which is a slowness and defect thereof, in its
action, caused, by distemper and vice of the native heat, etc. it is cured, by
things restoring heat and spirits, things aromatic, and which hinder the
effluvium of heat and spirits, and strengthen the substance of the womb, sc.
aromaticks, diacalaminth, the rosate aromatic, diamosch, mithridat, and oil
of lavender, and the like heaters, and dryers, meat of good juice and much
nourishment, chickens, capons, partridges, pigeons, veale, new eggs, almonds,
dates, sack, and strong beer.

2. Itching of the womb, which is caused, by a salt, serous, and adust humor;
it is cured, by evacuants, phlebotomy, temperants with fumitory, borrage,
polypodie and sena, abstergents with plantain, etc. Galens refrigerant, or
ointment of roses, and aegyptiack, or the enulate ointment with mercury, if
need, and meats of good juice, moistening and refrigerant.

3. Pain of the womb, which is a painful sense thereof, caused, by solution of
continuity, from erosion, or distension; it is cured by anodynes, and narcoticks
if need; if from flatulency, as from inflation; if from grumose blood, by
calefacients and attenuants, evaporations, baths, and inunctions, triacle, rue
with honey, clysters of rue and seed of fenegreek, and triacle water; if from
narrowness of the vessels, by phlebotomy, purgation, laxants, dilatants,
insessions, inunctions and discutiens if from flatulency and phlegm,
injections, hysteric plasters, cupping-glasses, suffumigations of laudanum,
storax and musk, and pessaries; if from malignant matter, by bezoar stone,
angelica, triacle, and mithridate; if from corruption of sperm, as
suffocations, etc. according to the cause.

XXII. The symptoms about the menses and other fluxes of the womb.
1. The defect and suppression of the menses, which is a retention of the
menstrual blood, caused, by the narrowness of the passages, or vice of the
blood it self; it is cured, by phlebotomy in the ankle, if need,
scarrification, cupping-glasses, ligature, friction, apertion of the
hemorrhoids, lenients, hiera picra, preparants, calefacients, inciders, and
attenuants, calamint, mugwort, and borage if melancholic, the decoction of
guajacum, if pituitous, evacuants, agarick, turbith, foetid pills, vomitories
if need, moovers of the menses, castor, myrrh, galbanum, bryony root, medicat
wines, decoctions of red cicers, syrup of mugwort and calamint, troches of
myrrh, leven, baths of emollients and laxants, oiles, cataplasmes, fumes of
aromaticks and savin, evaporations, injections, clysters, pessaries of honey,
wax and emmenonagogick powders; if from obstruction in the bowels, coldness of
the air, hardness of the womb, distortion, tumor, or disease, the cure is to
be accordingly, with a fit diet, heating and attenuating fermented bread with
seed of fennel anise and cumin, meat of good juice, rosemary and cinnamon,
little sleep, and much exercise.

2. The paucity of the menses, which is caused, by the blood, expulsive
faculty, or passages, it is cured, if from defect of blood, by analepticks; if
from thickness thereof, by attenuants and inciders and purgation, etc.

3. dropping of the menses, which is an eruption of menstrual blood, by drops,
for more days, or continually, caused from externals, feculent blood, or
imbecility of the retentive faculty; it is cured, by good diet, evacuation if
need, and purgation; if from imbecility, by roborants, dryers and binders, etc.

4. The excessive flowing of the menses, which is caused by anastomosis,
diapedesis, diaeresis, or erosion, tenuity of the blood, and laxity; it is
cured, if from the quantity of blood, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses,
ligatures, frictions of the arms, temperants, evacuants, water of plantain and
purslaine, surup of dried roses, conserve of red roses, bole and sealed earth,
norcoticks if need, syrup of poppies, triacle, and the laudan opiat; if by a
serous humor, by evacuants, mechoacan, rhubarb, and china, revulsives,
astringents, and emplasticks if need, stoppers of blood, syrup of purselane,
coral, troches of sealed earth, pessaries of astringent herbs, the ointment
comitissae, injections of plantain and bole, fumes of mastick and frankincense,
astringent cerots, baths, and fomentations, astringent and roborant, and
myrtine syrup; if a rupture, by bole, and dragons blood in pessaries; if from
erosio^, by cholagogons, aversions, revulsions, glutinants, plantain, sealed
earth, cold diaphoenicon, and fit diet, cooling and astringent, hordeats,
purselane, roast flesh, feet of living creatures, rice, fresh cheese, quinces,
and barley or chalybeated water.

5. The difficulty of the menses, which is a flux of the same, with pain and
grief, and great symptoms, caused by the vice of the veins or blood; it is
cured, V. P. if from the thickness of the blood, by fomentations, inunctions,
and attenuants, syrup of five roots, diet thin, anodynes, and laxants.

6. The discoloring of the menses, which is a declination of the same, when
they ought to be red, to paleness, whiteness, greenness, yellowness, or
blewness, caused, by the vice of the blood, diet, distemper of the parts, or
mixture of vicious humors; it is cured, by evacuants, preparants, fit diet,
gentle attenuants if gross, sudorificks, pessaries, fumes, triacle, mithridate,
and the decoction of angelica roots, if the humors be cold.

7. The anticipation of the menses, which is caused, by things external and
internal; it is cured, if from irritation of the faculty, and plenty of blood,
by imminution, thin diet, exercise, and phlebotomy; if from acrimony, by
temperants, fit diet, evacuants, and baths; if from the retentive faculty
weak, and laxity of the vessels, by corrigents and astringents; if from
evident causes; it is to be cured, accordingly.

8. The stopping of the menses too long, which is caused, by the paucity or
thickness of the blood, narrowness of the passages, imbecility of the
expulsive faculty, and torpidity of sense; it is cured, if from paucity of
blood, by full diet and rest; if thick and feculent, by attenuants and
inciders, and preparants, evacuants, scarrification, friction, cupping glasses,
and pessaries; if from stupidity of sense, by things helping it, and
paralyticks, etc. according to the cause.

9. The excretion of the menses by other parts, which is caused, by suppression
thereof, strength of the womb, and vicious conformation; it is cured, by
venesection in the ankle, cupping-glasses, scarrification, friction, baths,
inunctions, injections, and pessaries, etc.

10. The whites, or woman's flux, which is an excretion of an excrementitious
humor, inordinate, out of the womb, much differing from blood, caused, and
collected by the vice of the whole, or some particular part; it is cured, by
evacuants, averters, good diet, preparants if pituitous, the decoction of
guajacum and china, drying and attenuating diet, and diuretics; if bilious, by
temperants, subastringents, succory and endive, evacuation by rhubarb,
aggregative pills, and those of rhubarb; if melancholic, by preparants and
evacuants; if serose, by dryers, heaters, and hydragogons; if from crudity of
the stomach, by heaters, dryers, and roborants after emeticks; if from choler,
by refrigerants; if from the vice of the womb and distemper, by correctors, and
baths, dryers and astringents, bole, spodium, coral, after purgation, triacle
and mithridate with conserve of roses, extersive liquours, the decoction of
barley with rosate honey, decoction of wormwood, mints, red roses, and alum
etc. fumes of frankincense, mastick, and red roses, meat of easy concoction and
good juice, and drying, abstaining from suppers, drinking red wine, frictions,
and moderate exercise.

11. The gonorrhoea, which is caused, by the imbecility of the retentive
faculty, and laxity of the containing vessels, etc. as in that of men, and it is
so cured, and as the nocturnal polution; if from the quantity of sperm, it is
helped, by the seed and leaves of willows; if from debility of the retentive
faculty, by castoreum, renal and lateral topics, baths, and sacculs of
astringents, using myrtine oil and mastick.

XXIII. The symptoms of virgins and women after twelve years of age, from the
womb.
1. The green sickness, virgins disease, white fever,, pallid, and amatory,
is a mutation of the natural color in the face, into that which is greenish
and pale, caused, by the quantity of crude humors, from suppression of the
menses, narrowness of the vessels, or obstruction; it is cured, by preparants,
evacuants, clysters, venesection in the ankle, calefacients, attenuants,
inciders, vomitories, specificks according to the part affected,
emmenonagogicks, conserve of marigold flowers, chalybeats, more gross if in
the ventrickle, and more fine if the liver be obstructed, with spleneticks if
the spleen be stopped, the syrup, powder, and wine thereof, roots of vipers
grass, bezoar, roborants, sudorificks, hot baths, corrigents, meat of good
juice, easy concoction, heating, with hyssope, sage, rosemary, and cinnamon,
bread with fennel and caraway seed, strong beer, exercise, friction, and
moderate sleep.

2. The symptoms of the womb, and other parts by consent, with the brain,
heart, liver, stomach, spleen, duggs, hence is caused, the syncope,
suffocation, aphony, convulsion, trembling, cachexies, hypochondriack
melancholy, noise and pain of the belly, and hysteric passion, which are
cured, according to the cause.

3. The suffocation of the womb, which is a congeries of symptoms, sometimes
hurting the actions natural, sometimes vital, by periods, joined with a
refrigeration of the whole body, caused, by a malignant vapor, elevated from
the womb, it is also called the strangulation of the womb, and hysteric
passion; it is cured, in the paroxysme, by supine decubiture, solution of
garments, noise, pulling of the hairs of the pudend, pinching the ears,
ligature, and dolorifick friction, revulsion by cupping glasses also, using
stinking things to the nostrils, burnt feathers, hair, castor, asa foetida,
galbanum, the fume of horses lichens, using odorats to the womb, discutient
clysters, pessaries, nascals, discutients, rue, castor, and sternutatories,
dropping oil of sage into the ears, discutient liniments and unguents,
dilatants, oil of nuts, rue, castor, plasters umbilical of galbanum asa
foetida and castor; triacle, mithridate, troches of myrrh, yet with caution in
those that are great: out of the paroxysme; if from corrupted sperm, by
universal purgation, injections, pessaries, and discutient roborant plasters
and unguents, and thin diet, shunning venerious thoughts; if from retention of
the menses and vicious humors, it is cured accordingly, by discutients,
roborants, bryony root, hysteric waters, castor, diagalanga, diacalaminth, and
diamosch, fetid pomanders, of asa foetida, galbanum, and sagapenum, and outward
hystericks with the plaster of bay berries.

4. The uterine fury, which is an immoderate appetite of venery, making women
almost mad, caused, by the copiousnesse of sperm, acrimony, and a peculiar
quality; it is cured, by venesection, temperants, evacuants, refrigerants,
lettuce, violets, willow, rue, hemp seed, coral, emerald, hemlock, chaste water,
inunctions with oil of water lillies, ointment of roses, camphorat,
cataplasmes of lentils, pessaries of plantain and purselain, thin sparing and
sober diet, beef with vinegar, pompions; lettuce, purselain, and prunes,
shunning things venerious.

5. The melancholy of virgins and widows, which is a delirium with sadness,
anxiety, weeping, or laughing by intervals, troubling without a fever, caused,
by a melancholic vapor, troubling the animal spirits; it is cured, by
phlebotomy, hilarity, thin and moistening diet, preparants, purgers, confection
of jacinth, the letificant species, and confection of alchermes, etc.

6. The epilepsy from the womb, which is caused, by a malignant vapor and
spirit, as in the suffocation, and is so cured, by rue, and castor etc. in the
paroxysme; out of it, by cephalic antepilepticks, and hystericks, piony roots,
galingal, zedoary, bezoar, diamosch, and syrup of mugwort, etc.

7. The headache from the womb, which is caused, by matter shed out of the womb,
by the veins and arteries, into the membranous parts of the head, vellicating
and distending the same; it is cured, by revulsives, repellers, evacuants,
anodynes, and corrigents.

8. The palpitation of the heart from the womb, which is caused, by ill
vapors, elevated from menstruous blood retained, and evil humors cumulated in
the womb, and stimulating the expulsive faculty; it is cured, as the
suppression, green sickness, and suffocation, by discutients, and cardiack
roborants, cinnamon and bawm water, cordial powders, and epithems, etc. as in
the palpitation of the heart. The pulsation of the arteries in the back and
hypochondria, caused by inflammation, is cured as melancholy, suppression of
the menses, and the hypochondriack affection thence.

9. The hypochondriack affection from the womb, which is caused, by vicious
humors, chiefly by the suppression of the courses; it is cured by phlebotomy,
opening of the hemorrhoids, evacuants, pills of tartar, ammoniack, and
birthwort, and chalybeats, etc. as in the hypochondriack melancholy, and
suppression of the menses.

10. The hairinesse and beard by consent of the womb, which is caused, by the
retention of menses, and is to be cured, by provokers of the menses; the same
affects the liver also.

11. The preternatural affections of the ventricle from the womb, sc.
imminution, abolition and depravation of appetite, hicket, vomiting, belching
and pain, which are caused, by ill vapors from the sperm, blood, and other
bad and corrupted humors; they are cured, by evacuants, vomitories, corrigent
and roborant hystericks and stomachicks, angelica roots, triacle, mithridate,
the rosat aromatic, and oil of cinnamon, and pills of aloes and mastick.

XXIV. The symptoms about conception.
1. The appetite of venery hurt, which is caused, by the defect of sperm, heat
or spirits; it is cured, by spermatogeneticks, liniments, unguents, anointing
the genital with civet; if there be too much salacity, it is helped by
spermosbesticks, and things mitigating acrimony, as in the uterine fury.

2. Sterility and defect of conception, which is an impotency, caused, by the
vice of the genitals, sperm, womb, or menstrual blood; it is cured, if from
narrowness of the neck of the womb, by helping it; if from distemper, V. P. by
roots of satyrion, diamoschum, diambra, triphera magna without opium, baths,
suffumigations, fumes, sulphurous, bituminous, aluminous, and nitrous baths,
fumes of ladanum and benjamin, uterine liniments, sacculs of bawm, calamint and
feaverfew; if laxity, by abstersive clysters, astringent and roborant topics,
decoctions of myrtles, wormwood, and red roses, fumes of mastick, frankincense,
alum, and aloes; if fat, by attenuating diet, exercise, purgation, and
sudorificks, etc. according to the cause, and fit diet, meat of good and much
juice, yolks of eggs, sugar, cinnamon, and saffron, and hilarity.

3. Sterility for a time, and infrequent conception, which is caused, by a
morbose constitution, etc. it is cured; if from want of age, by coiture not
often, good diet, and of much nourishment; if from dryness of the womb, by
baths, pessaries, and emollient fomentations, with emmenonagogicks; if from
debility of nature, by solid diet, and roborants; if from difficulty of
parturition or abortion, by temperants and corrigents; if from a dead birth, by
abstersives, mithridat injected, or used in a pessary, and liniments of styrax,
benjamin, and oil of lavender.

4. Superfetation, which is caused, after conception, by coiture, and
attraction of the sperme; it is cured, or the foetus is preserved by accurate
regimen, fit for those that are impregnate; and if the venture be weighty, it is
to be anointed, with laxants and emollients, using swathes and bands, shunning
coiture after conception.

5. The mola, mhich is a mass, without bones and bowels, caused, by an
imperfect conception, by the vice of the sperm of both sexes, in steed of a
foetus, the formative faculty being weak and the blood copious or impure; it is
cured, by venesection, purgation, emollients, laxants, clysters, fomentations,
liniments, unguents, of oil of white lillies, sweet almonds, butter, and
fatts, emmenonagogicks, dittany of creet, round birthwort, and bryony, etc.
injections of hystericks, pessaries of the troches of myrrh, galbanum, white
hellebore and rue, surgery if need, separation by the fingers, and extraction
with an embryulk by the uterine diopter, stopping the blood by friction and
ligature, astringent cataplasmes, pessaries, and powders, anodynes, diet of
easy concoction, good juice and much nutriment, sc. eggs, broth and flesh of
chickens, hens, capons, partridges, wine, conserves of roses, violets, borage,
the species of the electuary of gemmes and confection of jacinth; it is
prevented by refraining from coiture, about the time of the courses, or flux
thereof, and the body being impure, also by coiture not too often, which also
preventeth the generation of monsters.

6. False conception, and gravidation, which is caused, by flatulency, water,
purulency, thick and viscid phlegm, and morbose sperm; it is cured, according
to the cause, as in the distemper of the womb with matter, the dropsy and
inflation thereof.

XXV. The regimen of those that are great, and their preternatural affections.
1. Their diet, which should be of good juice and easy concoction, temperate,
or such as may correct distempers, often eating quinces, sweet almonds with
honey, raisins, pears, sweet apples, roasted figgs before parturition,
abstaining from things sharp, bitter and salt, sc. garlic, onions, olives,
mustard, parsley, fennel, pepper, and too much use of aromaticks, using cinnamon
and saffron moderately, in the last month, shunning horary fruits, and pulses,
but using copious diet, and good beer, avoiding violent motion, and venery to
the first months, as also baths, passions, vain imaginations, too much
watching, foetid smells, and strong, as that of rue, pennyroyal, mints, castor
and sulphur, the sight of unpleasant things, and great noises, using lenients,
prunes, broths with manna, things strengthening the womb and foetus,
diamargariton and diambra without musk, rotuls, and clarets, applying outwardly
to the navil, sacculs, or plasters, of nutmeg, cloves, mace, coral, and
mastick, bread with honey, or a crust with malago: As for conception it is
known, by retention of the sperm, dryness of the pudend, rigor, titillation of
the womb, retention of the menses, loathing of meat, the pica and vomiting,
elevation of the belly toward the ventricle, motion of the infant about the
fourth month, swelling of the duggs, milk therein, blewnesse of the nipples,
want of appetite to venery, and shining of the eyes lost, and little worms in
the urin, after three days standing, which may be seen by colature; and there
is a male if the woman has a good color, if the right dugg is biggest and
fullest of milk, and the nipple is blackish, and if the veins and arteries of
that side are more full, with agility and fewer symptoms.

2. The symptoms which happen in the first months, in those that are great,
which are caused, by the retention of the menses, sc. the loathing of meat,
which is cured, by gentle vomitories if need, aloephangine and stomach pills,
rhubarb, quinces, rotules of the rosate aromaticks, and diarrhodon abbatis,
anointing the ventricle with oil of mastick, mints, quinces, wormwood, and
myrtles, using the stomach cerot, plaster of the crust of bread, things
astringent and austere, and meat that is roasted, avoiding fat things. The pica
is helped by the miva of quinces. Vomiting, is stopped by a gentle vomit, and
roborants, rhubarb, aloes, sena, and peptick powders. Pains of the belly, are
helped by discurients, sacculs, inunction with oil of rue and bays,
plasters, taking cinnamon and aniseseeds, cinnamon water, or aromatic wine. The
flux of the belly, is stopped, by gentle abstergent and roborant remedies;
syrup of roses solutive, myrobolans, rhubarb, roborants, quinces, rice,
almonds, conserve of roses, umbilical cataplasmes of quinces with mastick,
nutmeg, mace, and cloves. The toothach, is helped, by astringents, plasters of
mastick and tacamahaca, holding in the mouth the decoction of fern roots, red
roses, sage, five leaved grass, and bistort. The pains of the head, are eased,
by repellers and anodynes. The vertigo, is helped by temporal repellers,
discutients, roborants, peptick powders, if from the stomach, and quinces.

3. The symptoms which happen in the middle months of women, which are caused,
as those aforesaid, sc. The cough, which is cured, by evacuants, rhubarb, or
agarick, roborants, errhines, thoracicks, rotuls, and troches. The palpitation
of the heart, is helped, by cardiacks, bezoar, the electuary of gemms,
confection of alkermes, applying roborants, discutients, oil of bawm, and
cordial spirits, and phlebotomy if need. Watching, is prevented, by averters,
frictions, lotions for the feet, syrup of poppies or dried roses, and emulsions
of sweet almonds and poppy-seeds. Pains of the loins and hips, are helped, by
phlebotomy if need, swathes if from burden, rest, sleep, and anodyne oiles.
Hemorrhages, are stopped, if from quantity of blood, by phlebotomy, and
astringents, umbilical roborants, frictions, ligatures, and cupping-glasses
used to the arms; if there be a cacochymy, by temperants and evacuants; if a
flux of the haemorrhoids, by anodynes, drinking red wine with nutmeg.

4. Symptoms happening in the last months, which are caused, as the rest, and
so cured, sc. The suppression of urin, which is helped, by fomentation,
cataplasmes, baths, pellitory, stone parsley, lineseed, etc. and the catheter
if need. Stopping of the belly, is cured by temperants, liquid and moistening
meats, purgers, butter, mallows, borrage, sweet prunes, rosat honey, humecting
and emollient clysters. Distension of the veins of the hipps and legs, is
cured by abstaining from much walking, laying the legs higher than ordinary.
Inflation and swelling of the legs, is helped by digerents, discutients,
fomenting with lixives, the decoction of organy, chamomil, pennyroyal, and
calamint, sacculs of salt and ashes, and salt water, and hepatick roborants if
the liver be weak. Fissures of the belly, are removed, by laxant unguents and
liniments, calves marrow, oil of sweet almonds, hens fat, pomatum, and dog
skinn applied with oil of sweet almonds. The effusion of water out of the
womb, is helped by good diet, and roborants.

5. Debility of the foetus, which is caused, by debility of the sperm, and
defect of aliment; it is known by falling of the duggs, flux of the menses,
sickness, fluxes, and cessation of the motion of the foetus; it is cured, by
roborants, good diet, of good juice and easy concoction, chickens flesh, eggs,
sweet almonds, raisins, quinces, pearls, coral, mace, cinnamon, zedoary, aloes,
and hot roborant hystericks, diamargariton, balsam of infants, and the embryon
water, fennel and cumin seed in the water of honey, sweet bread used to the
navil, the ointment Comitissae, and astringent sacculs.

XXVI. Symptoms about parturition.
1. Abortion, when the infant is borne before the fit time, caused, by too much
cold, sudden terror, lipothymy, anger, and fluxes, want of aliment, and
diseases of the womb, etc. it is cured, by laxants, and irritation of the
expulsive faculty: preservation is by removing diseases, cocochymy and
plethora; if from too much blood, by phlebotomy; if from cocochymy and cold
humors, by evacuation, purging pessaries, heaters, dryers, and roborants,
decoction of china and sarsaparilla, avoiding internal and external causes, ill
smells, heat and cold, using temperate meats, of good juice and easy
concoction, not using much motion of the body or mind, venery, alterants,
roborants, astringents, coral, conserve of roses, myrobalans, dates, syrup of
quinces, magistery of coral taken in a sorbile egg, using the ointment
Comitissae, to the loins, reins pecten and perinaeum, and astringent
plasters, wearing a lodestone at the navil.

2. The regimen of those that bring forth, who when near the time of
parturition, should shun stinking smells, and strong, astringent vapors, sweet
smells, using meat of easy concoction and good juice, abstaining from
astringents and densants, sc. rice, hard eggs, birds and hard flesh, using
broths with cinnamon and saffron, lenients, repid baths of sweet water, with
mallows, seed of faenigreek, lineseed, and camonil flowers, afterward
anointing the belly, loins and uterine parts, with a liniment of the mucilage
of the seed of marsh mallows, lineseed, oil of white lillies, sweet almonds,
violets, fresh butter, and henns fat; the signs of parturition near are, pain
from the navil to the groin, falling of the upper parts, and extension of the
lower, and it is natural, when the head is downwards, and the membrans are to
be broken, by the midwife putting her finger into the mouth of the womb; the
patient being placed in a semilunate chair, leaning backwards, and opening the
legs wide, is to retain the breath, when the womb opens it self, and is to
strive to expel the foetus; then is the midwife to comfort her, and anoin the
womb with oil of white lillies, in those that are fat, that have narrow
pudends, dry, and at the first time of parturition, sitting on a low chair, and
so receiving the infant, in a fine linnin cloth, pressing the blood in the
umbilical vessels toward the navil, and cutting it four fingers off the
belly, tying it gently an inch off applying a dubled cloth wet in oil of
roses: also the secundine is first to be drawn out, putting in the hand
anointed with hot oil, if need; those that stand by are to encourage, and
press down the belly, preventing fainting by giving wine, distilled waters,
and odorats, and they are to be such as are old, and have had experience of the
pains of childbirth.

3. The difficult natural birth, which is caused, by the debility of the
expulsive faculty and infant, or bigness thereof, or the membrans of the womb
if thick, and the womb and fissure are narrow, and not slippery; it is cured, by
things facilitating, almost like emmenonagogicks, sc. round birthwort, dittany
of creet, seed of lavender, thyme, saffron, cinnamon, cassia lignea, myrrh, oil
of amber, mineral borax, cinnamon water, and oil thereof, vervain water, powder
of the secundine, sweet fumes, pessaries, unguents of savin, myrrh and
galbanum, sternutatories, eagle stone, and coral, strengthening the patient with
wine and nutmeg, confection of alchermes, diamoschum and hot diamargariton; if
there are twins, the midwife is to order them by her hand; if large, the ways
are to be laxed and lubrified, by oiles and emollient decoctions, oil of sweet
almonds, fatts, and mucilages; so if there be tumors; if fatt, the site is to
be directed; if the membrans are strong, they are to be broken by the fingers
anointed with sweet oil; and if the foetus be weak, they are to te breathed
into, after chewing aromaticks, anointing the mouth with honey, dropping
aquavitae on the tongue, using the same to the pulses and nostrils, washing the
foetus in wine or milk, putting a sacculus upon the head, made of nutmeg, mace,
cloves, cinnamon, wet with malmesey, and fomenting the navil with the same: the
diet about the time of parturition, ought to be of easy concoction and good
juice, little in quantity and taken often, chicken broth, dates, and raisins,
using laxant baths, anointing with oil of white lillies and sweet almonds,
using in travel, sorbile eggs, and citron pills, etc.

4. The vicious birth, or difficult preternatural, which is caused, by the
amplitude of the womb, and inordinate motion of the patient, and thickness of
the involving membrans; it is cured, or helped, by the hand of the midwife,
anointed with oil, by putting the foetus back into the womb if with the feet
foremost, or else taking by the hands, lubrifying the passages, and giving a
sternutatory to the patient; if the arms and legs are distorted, the patient
is to be moved about, and the womb to be pressed, till there be a more fit
site; if the arms are stretched upwards, the patient is to be supinated, and
the lower parts elevated, removing the pillow, pressing up the belly, and
putting back the foetus till the head be turned; so also if only one foot
appears, and the hands are joined to the thighs, or else they are to be
pressed together by the midwife, so if the knees are foremost, using
volutation; if the hands are foremost, they are to be reduced to the sides, as
before, and the parts are to be relaxed; if only one hand be foremost, the
foetus is to be put back, till the site be natural; if the feet and hands be
joined, the feet are to be put upwards, and the arms to be reduced; so if the
posteriours move to the mouth of the womb; or the site be transverse; or
lateral; if the belly be forewards, the arms are to be taken hold of by the
hands, and so the head is to be turned, or else the patient is to be had to bed
as in the rest, that the position may be natural, by concussion and motion; if
there be twins rightly mooving, that next the mouth of the womb, is first to
be taken, yet the other is not to be let go, lest the site become worse; if the
feet be forewards, one is to be taken by the arm, and the body is to be
inverted, and so the other afterward; if only one moove regularly, that is to
be taken, and the other is to be reduced by volutation, etc. as aforesaid, till
there be a precipitant and fit site.

5. Defect of parturition, and the dead foetus, which is caused, by weakness of
the mother, foetus, or narrowness of the passages, and death by defect or
plenty of aliment, percussion, coughing, sternutation and diseases, etc. it is
cured, by surgery, or section; and if dead, it is to be expelled by savin,
dittany of creete, round birthwort, gentian, myrrh, castor, borax, powder of
horses testicles, after emollient baths, sternutatories, anointing the pudend
with oil of sweet almonds, chamomile, and goose grease, purgers, external
ocytocions, ointment of sowbread, pessaries, suffumigations of asses hoofes,
galbanum, and castor, extraction after supination, as aforesaid, using fat
injections, insessions, irrigations, and cataplasmes, dissection of the dead
foetus, and eduction thereby, with analepticks, anodynes, prevention of
symptoms, keeping the bed, using hen broth, eggs, cold diamargariton, diambra,
electuary of gemms, with wine and borage water, roborants, fomenting with the
decoction of mugwort, mallows, rosemary, wormwood, and hypericon, using the
ointment Comitissae.

6. The caesarean birth, which is to be preserved by keeping the mothers mouth
open, and the womb warm, then is section to be made as in lithotomy, beginning
at the top of the womb and avoiding the spermatick vessels, and testicles, so
taking out the foetus and secundine, wiping away the blood, and fomenting with
an astringent decoction, then using gastroraphia speedily, and so curing it as
green wounds, preventing cold by unguents, cataplasmes, plasters, and
fomentation, etc. using pessaries, and injections, those may be made of wax
candles, or linen covered with butter, hens fat, oil of roses, and the yolk
of an egg; these may be abstersive, roborant and consolidating, of the
decoction of mugwort, plantain, wormwood, marsh-mallowes, red roses, roots of
birthwort, and salsa-parilla sod in chalybeat water, with hydromel and austere
wine, with meat of good juice, corroborating, clysters of red sugar, simple
diaprune, fresh butter, rosate oil, and hens broth, etc.

XXVII. The regimen of breeding women and their affections after childbirth.
1. Their rule after childbirth, at which time the secundine also is to be
drawn forth, and the air is to be temperate, avoiding odorats, and anointing
the belly and sides with the oil of sweet almonds, and white lillies, with a
little warm wine, using meat of good juice and easy concoction, sc. broth of
hens, and their flesh with white bread, panadoes, sorbile eggs, chickens,
capons, kids, veale, drinking water boiled with cinnamon, or coriander seed,
eating sparingly, avoiding noises, and passion: And if they will not be nurses,
the blood is to be diverted from the duggs by repellers under the armpits, the
rosate ointment, cerot of saunders, cataplasmes of bean meal, oxymel, mints and
parsley, baths of mugwort, agrimony, borrage, rosemary, lineseed, faenigreek,
and hempseed, etc. before going abroad, using suffumigations of frankincense,
saunders, kermes, nutmeg, cinnamon, and cloves, to dispose to conception.

2. The secundine retained after the birth, and mola, which may be caused, by
their thickness, rupture of the navil, smells, cold, and fear etc. it is
cured, or remooved by attraction, sternutatories, fumes of burnt feathers, and
asses hoofes used to the nostrils, specificks, some what like those that expel
the dead foetus, sc. dittany of creet, the secundine prepared, troches of myrrh
borax and castor, powder of horses testicles, onions, and warm wine, pessaries
of mugwort, sage, savin, coloquintida, hellebore, honey and bulls gall, fumes
of cassia, nard, savin, mugwort, pennyroyal, and dittany, injections of the
same, suppurants if need, detersives, and expulsives; the mola is remooved as
aforesaid.

3. The purgation after childbirth retained or lessened, which is caused, by
narrowness of the vessels, or the blood is diverted, by reason of thickness
thereof, or perturbations, etc. it is cured, by frictions, ligatures,
cupping-glasses, and scarrifications, phlebotomy in the foot, and other
revulsives, laxants and reserants inward and outward, anointing the region of
the womb, with oil of white lillies, sweet almonds, oily pulse, ointment of
marsh mallows, hens fat, saffron, oil of angelica, spike, cinnamon, fomenting
with the decoction of plants, as in the suppression of the menses, emollient
and laxant clysters, purging with rhubarb, agarick, or sena, emmenonagogick
pessaries, things attenuating and diffusing the blood, juice of borrage, and
stone parsley with wine, etc. as in the narrowness of the womb.

4. The excessive flux of blood after childbirth, which is caused, by the
quantity of blood, thin and acrimonious, opennesse of the vessels, and violent
extraction of the secundine, it is cured by revulsories, roborants, roasted hens,
almonds, rice, quinces, conserve of red roses, red wine, mastick water,
friction of the extremes, anointing the belly with oil of roses and myrtles,
cupping-glasses used under the duggs, and to the hypochondria, cataplasmes of
red roses, bole and rose water, used to the region of the liver; if violent, by
astringents, and stoppers, sc. syrup of dried roses, myrtles, purselain, coral,
comfrey, conserve of red roses, bole, troches of carabe, purselain and plantain
water, ointment Comitissae, using astringent oiles and unguents, astringent
fomentations, fumes of frankincense, mastick, red roses, tragacanth, and horse
hoofes, and phlebotomy in the arm if need; if there be grumous blood in the
womb, the patient is to walk, and the decoction of barley, oxymel, or honey of
roses is to be injected, etc. as in the flux of the menses.

5. The pains after childbirth, and tormina, which are caused, by external
air, grumous blood retained, and sharpness thereof; they are cured, by
extenuation and evacuation of what does irritate, diacyminum, and diagalanga,
and cardiacks, if need; if the humor be thin and sharp, it is cured almost as
the colic from choler, using external extenuants, laxants and anodynes,
fomenting with betony, mugwort, bawm, pennyroyal, bays, calamint, seed of
cumin, caraways, wild carrot, or cataplasmes of white lilly roots, onions,
cumin seed, and oil of white lillies, and fumes.

6. The rupture of the womb to the anus, which is caused by narrowness
thereof, and is cured by fomentation with hot wine and butter, reposition of
the matrix, future, tar, and consolidants, it is prevented by putting a role
into the anus; if there be a falling of the womb, it is helped by rest, using
foetid things to the pudend and sweet to the nostrils, and astringents after
the menses; if there be inflammation, it is helped as aforesaid, carefully using
coolers, least the courses should be stopped; if there are ulcers, they are to
be helped after the courses are past; if there be suffocation, the belly is to
be swathed, or girt with a girdle made of man's or staggs skin, with friction
and ligature of the legs, cupping glasses, castor and rue applied to the
nostrils, and sweet things to the pudend, etc. as aforesaid.

7. Watching, delirium's and the epilepsy of childing women, are caused, by
vapors, etc. and are cured, by revulsion, and evacuation of the courses, etc.

8. The swelling of the belly, which is caused, by cold, it is cured by
hysteric fomentations, a warm sheeps skin, and wine; the swellings of the
legs, arising from flatulency, are cured by hysteric fomentations; and if
from viscous humors, by good diet and little drink, evacuation after the
courses, and discutient fomentations, of wormwood, southernwood, mugwort,
flowers of chamomil and betony, etc. as in the inflation and dropsy of the
womb.

9. Their vomiting, which is caused, by retention of the menses, etc. and is to
be cured, by stoppers; if the meat also be evacuated, a good diet is to be
used, of easy concoction, and in a little quantity, with roborants; if vicious
humors, they are to be remooved by abstersives; if blood, it is to be revelled,
by friction, cupping-glasses, phlebotomy in the ankle, topics mooving the
courses, anodynes, asses milk if there be an opening in the liver, and the oily
pulse. If there be a flux, caused by meat not well concocted, there must be a
good diet, external roborants, abstersives after the courses, decoction of
barley, syrup and honey of roses, temperant and abstersive clysters, gentle
astringent purges, syrup of roses solutive, pulp of tamarinds, and rhubarb,
astringents of roses, plantain, tormentil, quinces, and coral, etc. topics,
eating quinces, pears, almonds and rice, using emmenonagogicks if the courses
be retained, pessaries, evaporations, and unguents; if the belly be bound, it is
helped by suppositories of figgs, and white soap, etc. clysters of pellitory,
mallows, line-seed, with common oil, and that of sweet almonds, cassia, and
manna taken; if there be incontinency of urin, it is helped by baths of betony,
sage, laurel, rosemary, pennyroyal, and organy, and the citrine and rose
ointment.

10. The wrinkles of the belly after childbirth, which are caused by the
extension of the skin, and are cured, by the juice of the roots of white
lillies, honey and wax; and when great, it is to be laxed if need, with oil of
sweet almonds, oily pulse or white lillies; after delivery, oil of mastick and
roses also may be added to the former, and baths detersive may be used; if the
pudend be dilated it is to be helped as aforesaid.

11. The lecteal fever, which is caused by the suppression of the menses, or
vicious humors; it is cured, if from the generation of milk, by good diet, and
sudorificks; if from the suppression or imminution of the courses, by
emmenonagogicks, venesection, and purgation; if from vicious humors, by
venesection, purgation, and hystericks; if their fevers are putrid, they are
cured, by phlebotomy in the foot if need, purgation with care, and in the
beginning, with cassia, manna, syrup of roses solutive, rhubarb, and sena,
alterants, of endive, borrage, barley water, and juice of sweet pomegranats,
with moderate attenuants, avoiding things very cold, or acid, and using thin
diet at first, of ptisan, and chicken broth, etc. if there be a pleuresy,
caused by the retention of the menses, or vicious humors; it is to be cured by
phlebotomy in the ancle, revulsive clysters, gentle purgers in the remission,
etc. as in other pleuresies, so in the quinsey; if inflammation of the liver,
by phlebotomy in the arm etc. as aforesaid, using attenuants, that the courses
may not be stopped. Hereto may be reduced the affections of the duggs, being
chiefly in those that are newly delivered.

XXVIII. The diseases of the duggs.
1. Their vicious magnitude, which is caused by a great quantity of aliment,
and attrahent heat, rest, retention of the menses, and handling, etc. it is
cured, or prevented in virgins, by fit diet, repelling, cooling, and astringent
topics, linen cloths applied, humected with water of plantain, roses, mints,
and hemlock, or the leaves thereof applied with vinegar, as a cataplasme,
powder of whetstones applied with oil of roses, and the same used under the
armpits; in those that are delivered, it is helped, by exsiccants and
discutients; the smalnesse thereof is caused by things hindering diverting and
intercepting the afflux of blood; it is helped by good and copious diet, white
wine, removing the intercipient, repellent and averting causes, using
fomentations of warm water with emollient herbs, anointing with oil of sweet
almonds, or the Indian nut, frictions, and gentle dropaces; if there be
softness and flaccidity thereof; it is helped by copious aliment, afterward
using astringents, etc.

2. The swelling of the duggs by milk, which is caused, by reason of too great
quantity of blood, and retention of milk, the infant not drawing it out, or
after weaning; it is cured, by sucking, or the suctory instrument, hindering the
afflux, by epithems of rose water, rose-vineger and alum, resolvers and
consumers, mints, parsley, corriander, red cabbage, and bryony, or cataplasmes,
of barley meal, beans, lentils, lupines, chamomil-flowers, wormwood and mints.

3. The inflammation and erysipelas of the duggs, which are caused, by blood,
and quantity of milk, etc. it is cured by venesection in the ankle, if the
courses are stopped, gentle purgers, alterants, refrigerants, lettuce, endive,
plantain, and water lillies, gentle repellers, posca, and oil of roses with a
cloth, lettuce, oil of roses and vinegar, afterward adding discutients, and
using only discutients, at last; if hard, it is helped by emollients and
attenuants, album graecum with turpentine, and oil of earthworms, and
suppurants if need, diachylon simple, or white bread boiled in milk, with
saffron, apertion in the lower part, mundificants, with turpentine and honey of
roses, oil of roses and myrrh. The erysipelas, is helped by sudorificks, hearts
horn, sealed earth, carduus benedictus and water of elder, resolvent topics,
applying scarlet or barley flower wet in elder water, avoiding external coolers
and binders, and after curing it as the inflammation.

4. The ^^demd of the duggs, which is caused, by a pituitous humor, and
suppression of the menses; it is cured, by a heating and drying diet, purgation,
resolving discutient and roborant topics, not too hot, or strong,
fomentations, of sulphur, hysop, sage, organy, and chamomil flowers, anointing
after with oil of chamomil, white lilles, and bays, cataplasmes of bean
meal, chamomil flowers, and cumin-seed, the melilot plaster, great diachylon,
and that of bay berries, and suppurants if need, roots of white lillies,
bryony, and the ireat diachylon.

5. The scirrhus thereof, which is caused, by pituitous and melancholic
humors, incrassated; it is cured, V. P. by remotion of the cause, emollients,
attenuants, and discutients, avoiding what may too much heat and attenuat,
humect or mollify, using the decoction of mallows, faenigreek, and chamomil
flowers, anointing with the oil of sweet almonds, chamomil, fats, calves
marrow, and ointment of marshmallows, the great diachylon, Vigo's plaster of
frogs, or that of ammoniack; if it be illegitimate and degenerat into a cancer;
it is cured, by universal evacuation, by venesection or purgation, emollients
with exsiccants, oil of roses, juice of plantain, the plaster of frogs,
adding juice of nightshade if there be pain, causticks and section if need,
aegyptiack, and stoppers of blood, etc. as in wounds.

6. The swellings of the glandules of the duggs, scrofula's and strumes, which
are caused, by a thick humor, and retention of the menses, etc. they are
cured, after universal purgation, by emollients and discutients that are more
strong, suppurants if need, section, and causticks, etc.

7. The cancer of the dugs, which is caused, by vicious humors regurgitant,
and adust; it is cured, by phlebotomy, purgation, anodyne specific topics, the
juice and water of nightshade, boiled snailes, oil of green frogs, remedies
of lead, agrimony, and blessed thistle, taking the powder of burnt crabs, and
herb robert, by extirpation, defensives, of oil of roses, wax and bole,
balsams, basilicon, and plasters of gum elemi; if exulcerated, it is to be
extirpated as before, with ustion, if great, things remooving the malignant
matter, and stoppers of blood, often purging, opening the hemorrhoids, and
provoking the courses, taking triacle, and mithridate with borrage and sorrel
water, chickens dissected and applied, Fuchsius his powder, precipitate,
ointment of turpentine and the yolk of an egg, the ammoniack plaster when
young; and palliatives when old, and plates of lead, etc.

8. The ulcers and fistula's thereof, which are caused, by abscesses, they are
cured, by universal evacuations, dryers of the milk, bands, and rest from
motion of the next arm, abstersives, and cleansers, the roots of rhapontick,
zedoary, and leaves of agrimony boiled in white wine, with a leadden pipe in
the bottom of the ulcer, consolidants, injecting astringent wine boiled with
cypress nuts, sumach, and agrimony; if fistulous, the orifice is to be
enlarged, and the callus to be remooved, and then it is to be cured as other
ulcers.

9. The narrowness of the vessels in the duggs, which is caused, by thick
humors, tumors, ulcers, and conformation; it is cured, by attenuants, fennel,
dill, stone-parsly, anise-seed, earthworms, cataplasmes and fomentations
thereof, and friction.

10. Hairs therein, which are caused, by putrefying blood, and are cured, by
applying the flesh of sea crabs, or those of the river, etc.

11. The diseases of the nipples, sc. the shortness thereof, which are helped,
by the suctory instrument, and sucking by whelps, applying walnut shells half
full of the rosin of the larch-tree; if the perforation be small, it is helped
by often sucking; if fissures therein, they are prevented by wearing coverings
of wax, with rosin of the firre-tree, and cured by oil of wax, ointment of
lead, or tutty, populeon, and pomatum, and the pain in sucking may be
prevented by an artificial nipple, covered with that of a young heifer, etc.

XXIX. The symptoms of the duggs.
1. The defect of milk, which is caused, by the defect of blood, or debility of
the galoctopoietick faculty; it is cured, by remotion of the cause, by aliments
of good and much juice, and easy concoction, galactogeneticks, the udders of
beasts, sorbile eggs, milk, pulps, thin puddings, almonds, sugar, rice, butter,
fresh cheese, raisins of the sun, analeptick broths, ptisan with fennel and
anise-seed, new bread with fennel-seed, strong drink, avoiding passions and
great evacuations, using powder of earthworms, crystal prepared, lac lunae,
fomentations of the decoction of fennel, parsley, cataplasmes of barley meal
and leaven, dropaces, and sinapismes.

2. The redundancy of milk, which is caused, by the quantity of blood, and a
good constitution; it is cured, by thin diet, that is of little nourishment,
barley, small drink, exercise, watching, phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, repellers,
astringents, resolvents, mints, calamint, coriander, and hemlock applied,
anointing the armpits with myrtine and rose oil, vinegar, bole, plantain,
oxycrat, exsiccants and discutients, repellers if hot, lettuce, water lillies,
poppies, and house-leek.

3. The vices, and coagulation of the milk, which is caused, by the exhalation
of the thinner parts; it is cured, as the scirrhus in the beginning, by
prohibents, oil of mints, chamomil, dill, and rue, resolvents, seed of fennel,
cumin, parsley, sage, mints, saffron, myrrh, fomenting with the decoction of
fennel, dill, southernwood, chamomil flowers, melilot, and lineseed, applying
parsley and butter, etc.

4. The evacuation of the menses by the duggs, etc. which is removed by
phlebotomy in the ankle.

5. The pain of the duggs, which is caused by solution of continuity,
distension, inflammation, erosion, and vellication by sharp humors, etc. it is
cured, according to the cause; if from milk and inflammation, by anodynes,
lettuce, chamomil, crumbs of bread with oil of roses, and water of nightshade
in the cancer, applying green pimpernel.

IV. The diseases and symptoms of infants.
1. Their regimen and diet, which should be answerable to their age: as for the
nurse, she should be healthful, of a good habit of body, ruddy color, and
good temper, young, of good manners, quiet and ingenious, that has had
children, and having mean duggs, using a good diet, of good juice and easy of
concoction, veale, chickens, hens, capons, partridges, and eggs, shunning
intemperate meats, salt, and hot, as also immoderation in diet, and drink, etc.
abstaining from venery; but it is better to be nursed by the mother, except the
former qualifications, are wanting, and the milk be not good, which ought to be
of a mean consistence, white color, sweet and pleasant taste, and smell; which
if it be thin and aquose, it is helped by drying and heating diet, bread
seasoned with anise and fennel-seed, rostmeat, rice, almonds, strong drink,
purgation if need, with the syrup of roses solutive, mechoacan, and rhubarb,
and sudorificks; if thick, it is corrected, by meat of good juice and easy
concoction, chickens, veale, heaters, moisteners and attennants, fennel,
hyssop, succory, and evacuants if need; if acrimonious, of a vicious taste,
smell, and color; it is helped by correcting the vice of the blood, good diet,
odorats, abstaining from that which is sharp, salt, and of ill juice, by
alterants, lenients, syrup of roses solutive and rhubarb if bilious, agarick if
pituitous, sena if melancholic, not giving suck that day; when newly borne,
after cutting of the navil and washing, (if in health, which is known by
redness, loud crying and health of the mother) all the parts are to be viewed,
and cleansed, and the infant is to be swathed after salted, giving it a little
honey, oil of sweet almonds, diamygdale, or sugar, before sucking, keeping it
in a temperat air if temperate, before the light, avoiding frights, rocking it
in a cradle, and bathing it daily in tepid water, and rubbing it, after which
it is to be swathed up, that it may not move the hands or feet, the belly also
is to be kept open, anointing below the navil with oiles, and fats, or using
emollient clysters, after some months, it is to be fed with bread and milk till
dentition, after which, they are to be fed, by masticated bread, and flesh, and
then they are to be let stand, or go, according to their strength, having a
prominent cap for defense, also they are to be washed every other day from the
third month, to the seventh, and after twice a week, at which time if they use
the left hand, it is to be tied, that they may use the other, and they are to
be weaned, after the number of teeth is almost perfected, but it is better to
continue their sucking longer if they are weak, and to take them off by
degrees, using them to broths of henns, flesh of easy concoction and good
juice, half chewed, then the niple is to be anointed with the juice of
wormwood, or aloes, with absence of the nurse, and they are to be fed with
pulps, broths, and panadoes, and after weaning, for the first seven years, they
are to have meat often, and their passions are not to be moved, but corrected,
and they are to be exhilerated by exercise.

2. As for their diseases in general, they are to be cured, by gentle remedies,
sc. suppositories, clysters of the decoction of mallows, violets, and syrup of
roses solutive, unc. 4. or 5. according to the age, or they may take syrup and
honey of roses and violets solutive, syrup of succory with rhubarb, and sena,
manna, cassia, and laxative raisins, mechoacan in broth, and gentle alterants.

3. Their fevers, etc. which are caused, by the corruption of milk, and
breeding of teeth; they are cured, if from corrupted milk, by coolers and
moisteners, lettuce, endive, sorrel, emulsions, and ptisans given to the nurse,
also manna, cassia, lenitive electuaries, diacatholicon, and solutive syrups;
giving to the infants, the juice and syrup of violets, citrons, water of
succory, endive, and violets edulcorated, anointing the spine, with the
mucilage of psyllium and quince seeds, with a little oil and wax, and applying
a plaster of houseleeke, plantain, night shade, rue, barley meal, and the
white of an egg, and coolers and binders to the ventrickle to prevent the
corruption of milk; if from dentition, by things to facilitate, anodynes, and
the precedent alterants; as for the pocks and measels, they are cured as
aforesaid.

4. The lacteal crust, achores, and scaule, which are ulcerose tubercles,
chiefly in the head, sometimes in the whole body, yielding matter, out of the
holes, caused, by excrementitious and serous and sharp humors, they are cured,
by expulsion, with fumitory, scabious, blessed thistle, and hearts horn, the
nurse abstaining from things salt, sharp, and of vicious juice, using evacuants
if need, alterants and preparants, borage, buglosse, fumitory, hopps, and roots
of polypody, purgers of sena, epithymum, rhubarb, black hellebore,
diacatholicon, and triphera persica, and roborants, giving to the infants syrup
of borrage, fumitory, polypodie, hops, evacuating with clysters, manna,
laxative raisins, syrup of fumitory compound, and of sena; if corroding, by
washing with the decoction of mallows, and barley, wormwood, lupines, and
beans, or of the roots of marshmallows in boys urin, anointing after with
oil of roses, bitter-almonds, and a little litharge, and soap sudds; if the
cranium be hurt, the crust is to be mollified and remooved by herbs boiled in
axunge, then the ulcers are to be dried by the ashes of vines, beech, and ash,
with butter; the cranium appearing, use honey of roses with spirit of wine,
after adding the powder of round birthwort and balsam of Peru.

5. The tinea, which is caused, by salt and sharp humors, and contagion, it is
cured, by detersives, corrosives to remoove the crust, humecters, laxants and
aperients, cabbage leaves or those of beete applied with butter, after
evacuation with sena, rhubarb, and agarick, cresses applied with axunge as a
cataplasme, to take away the crust, psilothrons, cutting of the hair,
anointing with honey and meal, then using emollients, aperients, and
discutients, brimstone, scabious, chamomil, rubbing with a rough cloth, or the
oil of staves acre, radish, or juice of onions, and quicksilver killed by
fasting spittle, using diet as in the achores, abstaining from salt meats, and
sharp, garlic, onions, pease, cabbage, pork, etc. of ill juice.

6. The phthiriasis, or lousy evil, caused by sordid matter and putredinal
heat, excrementitious and promiscuous meats; they are cured, or remooved, V. P.
by abstersives and enecants, which are hot, dry, of thin parts, attrahent, and
for the most part bitter, sc. wormwood, staves acre, scordium, rue, roots of
elecampane, long birthwort, lupines, nettle seed, black hellebore,
coloquintida, and sulphur, bulls gall, soap, and salt water, white hellebore,
salivated mercury which is not to be used in the weak: They are prevented, by
good diet, change of garments, washing, abstaining from figgs, using things
cooling and drying, or hot, dry, and of thin parts, and not fat.

7. The hydrocephalus, which is caused, by water, collected betwixt the
cranium; it is cured, by evacuants and dryers, a cataplasme of house-snailes,
marjerom, mugwort, camphire, saffron, and oil of chamomil, using balsam of
marjerom, cloves, nutmeg with musk and amber to the nostrils, and putting hot
oiles into the ears, and by apertion if need. The inflation of the head, is
helped by rarefacients and discutients, chamomil, rue, organy, cumin-seed, and
anise-seed, etc.

8. The siriasis, which is an inflammation of the brain and membrans, after
which follows a cavity of the sinciput and eyes, caused, by phlegm and
choler; it is cured, by refrigerants, discutients, clysters, syrup of roses or
violets solutive, coolers, sc. the juice and water of lettuce, gourds, and
melons, and oil of roses, and poplar ointment, afterward using discutients,
chamomil oil, and that of dill, and water of the same, the nurse using good
diet, and cooling, ptisans, emulsions, and small beer, etc.

9. Fearfulness in sleep, which is caused, by impure and filthy vapors,
mixed with the animal spirits, and troubling the same, from the ventricle, and
depraved coction, and plenitude; it is cured, the nurse observing a good diet,
and the infant sucking sparingly, and not being suffered to sleep presently
after it; giving if need, oil of sweet almonds, and honey of roses solutive,
roborating the ventrickle with the magistery of coral, diapliris, and the
confection of jacinth; applying outwardly, oil of wormwood, mints, nard,
mastick, and nutmeg, and giving troches of diamosch; if from fevers and
worms, it is cured accordingly.

10. Watching too much, which is caused, by the vice of the milk, and
corruption of the same in the stomach, from which sharp vapors ascend to the
brain, and trouble the animal spirits; it is cured, if from corrupted milk, as
aforesaid; if a fever or dolorifick affection, it is to be taken away, and all
things are to be looked too and shifted, and hypnoticks are to be given to the
nurse, sc. sweet almonds, lettuce, and the seed of white poppies, using
outwardly lotions of the feet, of the decoction of mallows, chamomil, vine, and
heads of poppies, anointing the soles of the feet with the marrow of
staggs-bones; and the temples with the fresh oil of dill, oil of roses, with
a little oil of nutmeg by expression, or a cataplasme of white poppy-seed with
woman's wilk, or water of roses and nightshade with a little saffron, and the
nostrils with the oil of violets and juice of lettuce; if there be dryness of
the brain, apply a linen cloth moistened with cold water, or that of violets
and lettuce.

11. The epilepsy and convulsion, which is caused, by the consent of other
parts, worms, vicious humors, and aliment, the toothach, and fear; it is cured
and prevented, by giving the root of male peony, and magistery of coral in
milk, the nurse is to use good diet, and the infant to be caused to vomit, if
the stomach be too full, putting a feather to the throat, with oil of sweet
almonds or olives; if from worms, they are remooved by scolecobroticks with
antepilepticks; if with a fever, by temperants, coral, emerald, and the Elks
claw, etc. in the paroxisme use epileptick waters, using water of lavender and
oil of amber to the neck, and tying the remedies aforesaid about the neck etc.
as aforesaid: As for the convulsion, which is caused by matter in the spinal
marrow; it is cured, by washing the body and spine with the decoction of marsh
mallow roots, white lillies, piony, and chamomil flowers, anointing with
liniments, of man's fat, goose grease, oil of worms, flowerdeluce, white
lillies, foxes, turpentine, mastick, and washing with the decoction of
tornesole.

12. The strabisme, or squintnesse, caused, by evil conformation, custom, or
disease; is cured, by placing a light in the opposite part, or some delightful
object, or putting somewhat before the face with a hole therein.

13. The pain of the ears, inflammation, humidity, ulcers, and worms, that is
caused, by the collection of excrements; it is cured, if the pain be great, by
the oil of roses and violets, or decoction of the heads of poppies, or the
white of an egg with milk and a little saffron put in; if the ears are moist,
they are to be cleansed, by honey of roses and water of honey put in, or wool
with alum and wine, or myrrh and nitre.

14. The aphthae, bladders of the gumms, and inflammation of the tonsils, which
are caused, by vicious milk and corrupted; and the aphthae are cured as
aforesaid; the vesicles of the gumms, are so cured, by lentils, meal of
millet, rosewater, and oil omphacine. The inflammation of the tonsils, is
helped by repellers after clysters, resolvents, gargarismes, or anointing the
gumms with honey of roses, syrup of dried roses, myrtles, pomegranats,
diamoton, and the rob of nuts, and outwardly using oil of sweet almonds,
chamomil, and hypericon, etc. as aforesaid.

15. Dentition, which is about the seventh month, and first the incisory, then
the canine, and the molar after, from which many symptoms do arise; it is
cured, or helped, by laxants and emollients, with refrigerants, rubbing the
gummes with honey and butter, or a wax candle, the emulsion of the seed of
quinces made with mallow water, or hares brains, fomenting the jaws with the
decoction of marshmallows, flowers of chamomil, and dill; if there be
inflammation, add the juice of nightshade and lettuce, anointing the jaws
therewith, and oil of roses, the nurse using a good and temperate diet, and
cooling, broths, sorbile eggs, prunes, lettuce, and endive, abstaining from
things sharp and biting.

16. Tongue-tiedness, and the ranula under the tongue, that is cured, by
section, and a liniment of barley meal, despumate honey, yolks of eggs,
frankincense, mastick, and burnt alum with honey of roses: as for the ranula,
caused by a pituitous humor transuding, it is helped by salt armoniack, salt
and frankincense, or powder of sage and organy, with honey of roses, and spirit
of vitriol; applying a plaster under the chin, of goose dung and honey, boiled
in wine.

17. The catarrhe, cough, and difficulty of respiration, which are caused, by
excrementitious humors; and cured by temperants, and impedients, the infant
being kept from plenitude, and the nurse abstaining from things sharp, salt,
and acid, or vaporose, using a pectoral decoction, keeping the body loose with
honey, syrup of roses solutive, cassia, manna, clysters, or oil of sweet
almonds with sugar; if from repletion, it is helped by line-seed, with honey,
and a little cumin-seed, juice of fennel with milk, syrup of jujubes and maiden
hair; and if the matter be thicker, by syrup of hyssop and horehound, or
emulsion of almonds, and lohochs, and in those that are bigger, rotuls of
diaireos, and cold diatragacanth, with the extract of licorice and oil of
fennel; if the catarrhe be hot, by the emulsion of the four greater cold seeds
with cold diatragacanth, applying hempen towe heated, with the powder of red
roses and frankincense to dry, fomenting the feet with a cephalic decoction,
and anointing them with oil of bays or costus; if the nostrils are stopped,
by anointing with butter, and oil of almonds, or sternutatories of basil,
cloves, or marjerom, anointing the breast with butter, hens fat, or oil of
chamomil and sweet almonds.

18. The singult, which is caused, by the corruption of aliment, repletion, or
refrigeration; it is cured, if from corruption of aliment, by vomit with an
oleated feather, calefacients and subtraction of milk; if from corruption of
milk, it is to be corrected, and what is corrupted is to be remooved, by the
syrup or honey of roses solutive, giving after the conserve of red roses, with
the powder of coral, or bole; if from refrigeration, by heaters, giving to the
infant, syrup of mints and betony, fomenting the ventricle with the decoction
of mints, organy, and wormwood, after anointing with oil of mints, mastick,
and dill, or applying of mints, and anet-seed, with oil of mastick, or
applying mastick and frankincense with the white of an egg to the navil; if it
be with calling, the back of the infant is to be knocked, with the hand.

19. V^^ting, which is caused, by quantity of milk, pravity, worms, phlegm,
debility, and laxity of the stomach; it is cured, if from quantity of milk, by
subtraction of milk; if from corruption thereof, by correctors and abstersives,
and syrup or honey of roses solutive, roborating the ventricle; if moist, and
laxe, by syrup of mints and quinces; if the humor be sharp and hot, by syrup
of pomegranats, ribes, and coral, using outwardly, the plaster of the crust of
bread, stomachick cerot, or a crust of bread moistened with malmesey; if the
milk be too hot by anointing with oil of roses, myrtles, and quinces, wearing
coral about the neck.

20. The tormina of the belly, which are caused, by the corruption of milk and
worms, etc. and cured, if from flatulency and crude humors, by clysters, oil
of sweet almonds and sugar, and powder of anise-seed, using outwardly, heaters,
attenuants, dissipants, and laxants, as also anodynes, oil of dill, and
chamomil to the belly; if from corrupted milk and sharp humors, by
abstersives, syrup of roses solutive, honey of roses solutive, syrup of succory
with rhubarb, or a clyster of bran and the decoction of pellitory, using
outwardly oil of dill, roses and chamomil.

21. The inflation of the belly and hypochondria, which is caused by too much
milk taken; it is cured, by subtraction, evacuation with honey of roses
solutive, water of motherwort, powder of piony-roots, cumin-seed, honey, oil
of sweet almonds and sugar, fomenting the hypochondria with the decoction of
motherwort, chamomil-flowers, and cumin seed, anointing with oil of chamomil,
rue, and bays.

22. The flux of the belly, which is caused by dentition, watching, pains,
fevers, refrigeration, humidity, and laxity of the intestines; it is cured, by
correcting the vice of the milk, cleansing the vicious humors, by the syrup or
honey of roses solutive, conserve of roses with manna, using after, if the
matter be hot, syrup of dried roses, quinces, myrtles, coral, ribes, or powder
of coral, mastick, hearts horn, and red roses, fomenting the belly with the
decoction thereof, plantain and red wine, applying the plaster of the crust of
bread, or the stomachick cerot; if the cause be cold, by syrup of mastick, and
quinces, with mint-water, and hares curd, applying mints, wormwood, mastick,
and cumin, or sacculs thereof.

23. The astriction thereof, which is caused by a cold or dry distemper, viscid
humors, and vice of the milk, etc. it is cured, by remooving the cause; if
cold, by frequent washing in baths of stomachick heaters; if dry, by humecters
of mallows, pellitory, and branck u^f^^ anointing the belly if cold, with
heaters, if dry with humec^^, as oil of white lillies, ointment of dialthaea,
hens fat, and butter, the nurse not using astringents, sc. quinces, medlars,
pears, services, barberries, and ribes; but mallows, raisins, prunes, and
broths; if the infant be stronger, give him the decoction of colewort with a
little salt or honey; if there be viscid phlegm in the intestines, use
inciders, abstersives, and honey of roses solutive; if any of the intrals be
hot and dry, use syrup of violets, succory, decoction of barley, and emulsions;
if the biliary meatus are obstructed use the decoction of sennel, sperage and
maidenhaire, using suppositories of honey and salt, lard, soap, and mallow
roots with butter, clysters, epomphalia, butter, oil of sweet almonds with a
grain or two of scammony or coloquintida, bulls gall, or juice of sowbread,
emollient unguents, and aloes; if strong and not very young, give cyprus
turpentine, syrup of violets and roses, or their honey solutive, laxative
raisins, cassia, or manna, and honey, and milk and sugar if young.

24. The worms, which are caused, by too much eating, a hot and moist
constitution, sweet things, and fruits, and are cured and expelled, by
coralline, wormeseed, roots of white dittany, hartshorn, gr. viii. of
mercurius d. infused in the grass water, water of fearn, or the powder
thereof; if there be a fever, use the juice of limmons, pomegranats, orenges,
vinegar, hartshorn, bezoar, and the confection of jacynth, and spirit of
vitriol, giving a clyster of milk and sugar, applying worm wood and lupines to
the navil, with bulls gall, triacle, aloes, myrrh, mithridat, and oil of rue
and wormwood; they are prevented, by diet of good juice, seasoned with juice of
pomegranats, orenges, or citrons, shunning things that are sweet, fat, and
viscid, using hartshorn drink, use of aloes, hiera picra, rhubarb if elder,
else use clysters, rotuls of diaturbith with rhubarb, sena, and agarick,
wormwood, scordium, or the juice of limons, and citrons, with spirit of
vitriol.

25. The hernia, which may be caused, by crying, coughing, and astriction of
the belly, etc. it is cured, by laxation of the belly, moderate diet, rest,
reposition after resupination, convenient astringent plasters, and trusses,
red roses, frankincense, the white of eggs, myrrh, bole, rupturewort, and
ichthyocolla, giving powder of mouse ear, decoction of cumfrey, rupturewort,
and roots of cumfrey; if there be a tumor of the scrotum from an aquose
humor, it is helped by consumers and discutients, anointing with oil of elder,
bays, rue, or cataplasmes of bean meal, line-seed, powder of chamomil
flowers, and cumin-seed.

26. The prominency of the navil, which may be caused, by the fault of
ligature, laxation of the peritonaeum, weeping, and coughing, etc. it is cured,
if from laxation of the peritonaeum, by astringents and roborants, rest,
abstaining from things flatulent, and keeping the belly loose; if there be
flatulency, use cataplasmes of the powder of cumin-seed, bayberries, and meal
of lupines with red wine, after using astringents with binding; if there be a
rupture of the peritonaeum, it is helped by reposition, and remedies as in the
intestinal hernia, applying plantain, and moss of sloe-trees sod in red wine,
or mints with the white of an egg, giving powder of comfrey root, coral,
mastick, and scrosulary; if the womb be exulcerated, apply oil of roses with
cerusse, or the gryseum plaster, etc. as in the hernia intestinal.

27. The inflammation of the navil, which may be caused, by pain and external
air; it is cured, by anodynes, of mallows, barley meal, and oil of roses,
repellers, powder of frankincense, and the white of an egg; if suppurating,
use turpentine, yolks of eggs, and oil of roses.

28. The falling of the anus, which is caused, by the laxity of the sphincter,
from emollition or humidity, and tenesmus, etc. it is cured, by reposition, and
retention; if there be a tumor, by fomenting with the decoction of mallows,
marshmallows, and oil of white lillies, astringents afterward, of red roses,
sumach, frankincense, and mastick, and fumes thereof, as aforesaid in the
falling of the fundament.

29. The stone of the bladder, which may be caused, by corrupted milk, gross
and viscid mear, and heat of the reins; it is cured, and prevented by
abstinence, abstaining from things viscid and gross, sc. both the infant and
nurse, keeping the belly loose, baths of the decoction of mallows, pellitory,
stone parsley, dill, line-seed, and saenigreek, anointing with ointment of
marshmallows, oil of white lillies, scorpions, and cataplasmes of green
pellitory with oil of white lillies, or chamomil, giving the power or
magistery of crabs eyes, white amber, goats blood prepared, with water of stone
parsley, and spirit of vitriol, and cypress turpentine, etc.

30. The difficulty and r^tention of urin, which may be caused, by a thick
humor, or the stone; it is cured, almost as the stone, abstaining from things
engendring thick humors, by evacuants, honey of roses solutive, flowers of
cassia, and turpentine, and the remedies aforesaid, water of rest-harrow,
dropwort, and saxifrage; if from the stone, by concussion, and the catheter,
etc.

31. The incontinency of urine, which is caused by the imbecility of the
sphincter, and from a cold and moist distemper, etc. it is cured, if from ill
custom, by threatening; if from cold and moist distempers, by consumers and
dryers, the nurse using hot and dry aliment, seasoned with sage, hyssop,
marjerom and fennel, the infant drinking little, anointing outwardly with
dryers, oil of costus, and flower deluce, haths of sulphur, nitre, and oak
leaves, giving the powder of a boares bladder, eggs, cocks throats, accorns,
and mace, with the water of oak leaves, etc. as abovesaid.

32. Galling, which may be caused, by the acrimony of urin, etc. is cured, by
often shifting their linnens, lotion, abstersion, baths of marshmallows,
pellitory, roses, and bran, sprinkling with the alcohol of white pompholyx, or
spume of silver, burnt alum, and frankincense, or anointing with the ointment
of white litharge, and diapompholigos.

33. The leanness, and fascination of infants, that may be caused, by the vice
of milk, worms of the back, and fascination; it is cured by correcting the vice
of the milk, killing the worms, by baths, and friction with honey, and rubbing
with a crust of bread; if from dryness, by bathing with the decoction of
mallows and branck ursin, anointing with oil of sweet almonds; if with heat,
by the bath of lettuce, endive, violets, and poppies, oil of roses and
violets; if with cold, by flowers of chamomil, melilot, and oil of dill and
chamomil.

34. The rickets, which consist in the natural constitution, as similar, and
the first and radical essence in a cold and moist distemper, with a defect and
torpor of the insite spirits, concurring in the insite constitution of the
affected parts; the parts first affected, are the spinal marrow, entering the
scull, and all the nerves arising from the same, and all membranous and fibrous
parts, to which those nerves are extended; the secundary essence, is in the
vitiated tone, too laxe, flaxid, soft, lubricous internal, from a preternatural
aquose lubricity; from whence there is a vitiated generation of vital and
natural spirits, from alogotrophie, and of the animal, caused, in respect of
the parents, by cold and moist distempers, want of insite spirits, torpor, and
vicious disposition of the parents; after the birth, by error in the six
things not natural, and precede^t diseases, the internal are, humors, and the
causes of antecedent diseases, cold and moist, emaciating, and torpefying: the
signs are laxity, debility, sluggishnesse, increase of the head,
protuberances, narrowness of the breast; the cough, and loss of appetite. The
diagnosticks appear out of the signs of other diseases; the prognostics from
the degree and increase; it is cured, by scarrifying the ear, issues in the
neck, vesicatories, and ligatures below; the remedies are such as cleanse the
first passages, clysters, emeticks, catharticks lenitive, as manna, cassia,
aloes, tamarinds, polypody of the oak, raisins of the sun, jujubs, sebestens,
prunes, figgs, flowers of mallows, violets, pellitorie, roots of marshmallows,
and licorice, etc. the compounds are cassia extracted with, or without the
leaves of sena, diacassia, the passulate electuary, diaprune lenitive, the
common decoction, syrup of violets, and honey of the same, syrup of roses
solutive, mercurial honey and passulate, and conserve of pallid roses, etc.
prepara^ts are, the capillary herbs, wall-rue, polypody of the wall,
spleenwort, liverwort, agrimony, scabious, bettony, dodder, tamarisk, caper
roots, endive, sperage, liquorice, raisins, anise-seed, sweet fennel-seed, seed
of coriander, carawayes, and dill: The compounds are, syrup of maiden hair,
bettony simple and compound, succory, agrimony, of the five roots, miltwast and
stoechas. Elective purgers, sc. rhubarb, agarick, seed of bastard saffron,
Jallap, turbith, and epithymum, etc. the compounds are, syrup of roses
solurive, of succory and rhubarb, of dodder of time and fumitory,
diacatholicon, confection hamech, and benedicta laxativa, also manna, cassia,
Mercurius d. syrup of apples, the lenitive electuary and diaprune, and by
specific alterants, the roots of osmond the royal, cryngo, tamari^k,
sowthernwood, sea wormwood, saffron, maddir roots, sarsaparilla, sassafras,
china, the three saunders, guajacum, and it is bark, flowers of brimstone,
steel prepared, sperage, maidenhaire, spleenwort, hearts tongue, liverwort,
bettony, sage, rosemary, steel prepared, chalybeat wine and syrup, parmacity,
musk, amber greese and castor, etc. hereof may be made, potions, powders, and
electuaries, etc. if there be a flux of the belly, purge with rhubarb, and use
diacodium; if great, use syrup of sloes; if obstructed, use chalybeat salt; if
immoderate sweat, use rhubarb and chalybeat wine; and roots of marshmallows to
facilitate dentition, using fit decubiture, agitation, gestation, sedentary
sports, walking, suspension, friction, muscadine, red wine, aquavitae,
fomentations, oil of earthworms, foxes, castor, capers, wormwood, and elder,
balsam of Tolu, the nervine ointment, aregon, and martiat, and pectorals,
applying plasters of betony and diacalciteos, with mastick and olibanum.

Thus of the universal and particular internal diseases, common to both sexes,
and propper to each, as also those that belong to infants: There yet remain.

1. The arthritis, which is a pain of the parts about the joints, caused, by
the defluxion of a serous and sharp humor, shed out of the veins and arteries
into them, invading by periods, and having a conjunct impedite motion, the
membrans being affected; it is cured, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, leeches,
purgation, alterants, succory, endive, purselane, sorrel, conserve of roses,
diatrion santalon, defensives of bole, flowers of roses, rosewater, vinegar,
and the white of an egg, red roses, oak mosle, and the ointment Comitissae,
purgers of serous and bilious humors, syrup of roses solutive, purging thorn,
or domestic, manna, mechoacan, sena, seed of bastard suffron, diacatholicon,
triphera persica, and of the juice of roses, and caryocostinum, vomitories,
sudorificks, hearts horn, diaphoretick antimony, decoction of sassafras,
sarsaparilla, or china, with succory and endive, topics, anodynes, goats milk,
white bread, yolks of eggs, saffron, mallows, mucilages, cassia with
nightshade water, and that of roses, and oil of chamomil, water lentils,
water of frogs, chamomil flowers if cold, melilot and wormwood, and plantain
and rose water if shot, narcoticks if need, henbane, opium, repellers, lettuce,
purslane, violets, plantain, roses, and houseleeke, discutients, salt of urine,
mustard and figgs if cold, antipodagrick waters, oxycrocium, fomenting with
mugwort, organy, wormwood, bettony, calamint, flowers of lavender, chamomil,
melilot, and decoction of foxes; if tophous, by ammoniacum dissolved in
vinegar, diachylon simple, lute of baths, and the decoction of ground pine
taken, if a sciatica, by phlebotomy, purgation, caryocostinum, pills of
hermodactils, arthritick and foetid, attrahents and resolvents, elder,
danewort, bays, rue, bettony, chamomil, melilot, rosemary, cantharides, pitch,
sulphur, turpentine, ammoniacum, bdellium, galbanum, winter cresses, dittander,
ants earth, cupping-glasses, and vesicatories. etc. it is prevented, by using a
temperate air, sparing diet, little supper, not various, weather mutton,
veale, cabbige, avoiding things fat, fried, and aromatic, as also wine and
fruits, little drink, using moderate sleep and rest, and exercise, etc.
phlebotomy, purgation, taking scrup.

1. of pills twice in a week before supper, syrup of roses solative, aloes,
agarick, rhubarb, and caryocostinum, antipodagricks, vomitories, triacle, the
antidots of four and seven things, as also of centory, hypericon, that of
Heraclitus, and diacorallion, pulvis Jovis, and Saracenicus, decoction of
germander, aqua vitae if cold, ground pine, S. John's wort, round birthwort and
long, centaury, rhapontick, gentian, spignel, root of mugwort, coral, and crabs
eyes, the arcanum of tartar, issues, things roborating the joints, baths of
betony, sage, ground pine, roses, cranes-bil, oak leaves, and juniper berries,
baths sulphurous, salt, nitrous, vitriolat, and aluminous, anointing after
with oil of myrtles or roses, with salt of juniper, diacalciteos, diapalma,
cerot of bryony, excision of the veins, mithridat and arthriticks.

2. Occult diseases in general, which are caused, by malignant and pestilent
humors, air, contagion, poisons taken, and externally communicated; they are
cured, by purgation, sudorificks, vomitories, clysters, attrahents, ligature,
corroborant alexipharmicks, common, and proper; if sharp poison, by things sat
and unctuous, with specificks, and appropriats, and the common if need, sc.
roots of angelica, tormentil, devils bit, vipers-grass, gentian, white dittany,
round birth-wort, bark of ash, carduus benedictus, rue, dittany of creete,
scordium, wormwood, plantain, sage, scabious, vervain, flowers of marigolds,
roses, borrage, bugloss, orrenges, juniper berries, walnuts, seeds of cirrons,
ash, basil, sorrel, balsam, juice of citrons, bezoar, unicorns horn, hearts
horn, pearls, bole, earth of Lemnos, sealed earth, coral, jacynth, mithridat,
triacle, the Saxony powder, diascordium, with conservant diet, corrected with
juice of citrons, pomegranats, sorrel, coral, pearls, and milk if poison be
taken, abstaining from sleep and motion; they are prevented by things
hindering putrefaction, evacuants, and alexipharmicks; sc. malignant epidemical
and pestilential fevers, the plague, scurvy, elephantiasis, and french pocks,
etc.

3. Malignant, occult, and venenate diseases, from an internal vice of humors,
which may be caused, by disposition of the body, peccant meat and drink,
influence of the stars, air, imagination and affections of the mind, and ill
matter, sc. the epilepsy, hydrophoby, chorea S. viti, the mania, epidemick and
malignant catarrhes, coughs, quinsies, pleuresies, the scorbute, malignant
colic, dysentery, uterine suffocation, elephantiasis, malignant gangreen,
bubones, malignant and pestilent fevers; they are cured, by evacuants, pills
of three things, rhubarb, syrup of roses, alexipharmicks, absinthiat wine,
carduus benedictus, scordium, citron pills, zedoary, elecampane root, and the
elixi^ proprietatis.

4. Occult, malignant, and venenate diseases, from water, which are caused,
thereby, they running by minerals, or having a malignancy from venomous
creatures, etc. they are cured, by alexipharmicks, etc. note, the vices of
waters may be corrected, by boiling, or quenching hot stones or iron therein,
also by colature through a handkercher; if nitrous and bitter, by barley meal;
if unwholesome, by horsemint, or spirit of vitriol, and by percolation through
sand.

5. Malignant diseases from the vice of the air, which are caused by malignant
vapors therein, from the earth, water, and things putrefying; they are cured,
by remooving the causes, by the use of fire, alexipharmicks, sudorificks,
purgation, and venesection, if need, and the body be strong; hereto bolongeth
contagion, which is a preternatural affection, communicated to an other body,
from a body preternaturally so affected, to which belong certain catarrhes,
malignant and pestilential fevers, lippitude, phthisicks, the dysentery,
scurvy, scab, tinea, Arabian leprosy, canine madness, and the French pocks.

6. The French disease, called also Italick, Neapolitan, Spanish, Indian,
siphylis, pudendagra, variola magna, and the venereal plague, and it is a
virulent and contagious cachexy of the whole body, for the most part with a hot
dyscrasia, falling off of the hair, spots, tubercles, contumacious ulcers,
great pain, chiefly in the night, hurting the liver and nutrient facultity,
caused by an excrement infected with a malignant and poysonsome quality, by
contagion, but chiefly by concubiture, and hurting by many symptoms; it is
cured, by phlebotomy, cupping-glasses, preparants, mercurial purgers, proper
remedies, antidots, alexipharmicks, guajacum, sarsaparilla, sassafras, and
china root, as also sopewort, the antidots of Fernelius and Palmarius, also his
water and powder, the triacle water of Rondeletius, the troches cypheos,
triacle, mercurials, mercurius vitae, it is diaphoretick spirit, inunction
therewith, mixed with butter, oil, and turpentine, and oil of guajacum, V. P.
taking ptisan with milk, washing after with the decoction of rosemary, bays,
calamint, and organy, using nervine plasters, holding gold in the mouth,
diamoron if hot, washing the teeth with Austere wine, and drinking the
decoction of pock wood, applying the plaster of froggs to the hands, feet, and
emunctories, mercurial lavatories, girdles, fumes, and salivating pills, with
conservatory diet, of good juice, and single, eating little when sudorificks or
hydrargyrats are used, using bread and raisins; if weak, a little veale,
chickens, biscuit, and the decoction of the aforesaid woods; if salivation, use
ptisan, conserves of roses and violets if hot, and moderate exercise, keeping
the belly open. The diseases and symptoms conjunct, are, ulcers, chiefly of
the genital, which are cured, by anointing the root with a defensive ointment,
and washing the ulcer with the decoction of scabious, horehound, sopewort, and
guajacum, and after with some convenient ointment, and mercurials; if in the
prepuce, remedies are to be injected with a syringe, so if in the genital,
plantain water, with alum, litharge and cerusse boiled, and mercureals if
great; if in the womb, use injections of aluminous water, with guajacum and
sarsaparilla, or pessaries of the juice of plantain, with the powder of aloes,
bole, and cerusse etc. if sordid, use aegyptiack, that of pompholix, and
suffumigations; if in the jaws, use gargarismes, of the decoction of
sarsaparilla, bark of guajacum, leaves of plantain, scabious, myrtle, red
roses, sumach, alum, using after oil of sulphur with some convenient liquour,
or alum water compound; if in the nostrils, use errhines, powders, and fumes of
guajacum and cinnabar. Fissures of the hands and feet, are cured, by the
decoction of guajacum, its bark, scabious, scordium, five leaved grass and
mallows, and marshmallows if hard, after using an ointment of butter, fat,
ammoniacum, bdellium, apples and quick lime; as also by the juice of tansey.
Bubones are helped by friction, scarrification, in the inferior parts,
venesection, applying strong attrahents thereto, purgation, apertion, maturants
to suppurate, of the mucilage of mallows, wheat, lineseed and lard and goose
grease, or diachylon simple or compounded with gummes; if cold, use purgation,
sudorificks, and alexipharmicks. Gummatous and nodose tumors, as in the
forehead, head, and legs, are helped by sarsaparilla, and mercurials; if after
the disease, by attenuants and digerents more strong, sc. the roots of wild
cucumbers, bdellium, sagapenum, opopanax, ammoniacum, diachylon with gummes,
the mercurial cerot, and lavatory, and causticks, if need. Tubercles and
pustules, are cured, V. P. if in the head, by the decoction of guajacum,
chiefly its bark, and sarsaparilla, oil of scorpions and vipers, mercurial
ointments, and aluminous water; if in the mouth, by gargarismes of the
decoction of guajacum, and chalybeat whey, roses, and plantain, if
inflammatory; if sordid, use scabious and alum, and aluminous water with that
of roses and plantain; if in the anus and genital, by fomenting with the
decoction of guajacum and sarsaparilla, with aluminous waters, unguents and
precipitats, exsiccants, refrigerants, and touching with oil of vitriol. The
falling off of the hairs, is cured, V. P. by shaving, discutients and
abstersives, lixive of guajacum and its bark, sarsaparilla, leaves of sumitory,
bettony, scabious, southernwood, wormwood, asarum, agarick, mallows and
pellitory if the skin be dry, hydrargyrate suffumigations. Pains, which are
remooved by sarsaparilla, and guajacum, and china root, purging every week,
applying fomentations of guajacum, leaves of pennyroyal, sage, rosemary,
flowers of chamomil, oil of white lillies, rue, scorpions, vipers, and
guajacum, laudan opiat if need, mercurial unguents, with castor and
arthriticks, Vigo's cerot of froggs, and that of Plater, as also mercurial
lavatories. The gonorrhoea, is helped by decoctions, astringent oiles, of
mastich, mints, roses, and myrrses, used to the loins and perinaeum, giving
remedies of the seed of agnus castus, lettuce, hemp, with the powder of
sarsaparilla, or water lillies, or rosin of guajacum, and turpentine washed in
violet water, with the yolk of an egg, or decoction of sarsaparill. The tabes,
is helped by specificks, sarsaparilla, guajacum, and Septalius his remedy, etc.

7. Diseases from witchcraft and inchauntment, which may be caused by
philtrons, and natural causes, and may be cured, by vomitories, purgers,
diuretics, alterants, alexipharmicks, the herb Paris, Saxonick powder, round
and long birthwort, hypericon, rue, unguents, fumes, of bays, rue, sage,
rosemary, roses, wood of aloes, saunders, bark of citton, frankincense,
mastick, myrrh, benjamin, storax, ladanum, musk, and brimstone, to roborate and
discuss, and baths, ceruleous fleabane, triacle, syrup of water lillies,
anointing with the juice of mugwort, bugloss, fumes of horns and dungs for
preservation, and bettony, etc. but chiefly, by sanctity, and intercession.

8. Poisons, which are things, having a faculty, by themselves, greatly and
vehemently, to hurt the body of man, in an occult manner, and to destroy the
same, with a multitude of strainge symptoms, caused, by things taken inwards,
or happening outwardly; they are cured, in general, by expulsion the same way
they entered into the body, by alexipharmicks, and cordials, hot, cold, moist,
or dry, according to the occasion, roots of tormentil and white dittany, leaves
of borage, buglosse, violets, roses, and water lillies, seed of citrons,
flowers of borrage, buglosse, bawm, sorrel, scabious, seed of citrons, and
basil, wood of aloes, juice of citrons, oranges, quinces, saffron, cinnamon,
cloves, hartshorn, ivory, pearls, musk, amber, coral, jacinth, emerald,
sealed earth, bole, syrup of borrage, buglosse, oranges, sorrel, violets,
roses, and conserves of the same, species of gemms, letificant, temperate,
diamargariton and confection of alchermes, with vomiting, etc. abstaining from
sleep; if taken inwardly, they are evacuated by gentle emeticks, of fat
broths, oil, butter, milk, decoction of broom-flowers, and radish, etc. with
hartshorn, and bezoar; by clysters if descending, gentle purgers, of cassia,
manna, and agarick with roborants, diuretics, emulsions of melonand citron
seeds, cassia with liquorice powder, common and proper alexipharmicks, applying
compound oil of scorpions, to the pulse in the hands, feet, temples, and
region of the heart, or put the patient into the belly or skin of a horse, etc.
newly killed, using sudorificks, with a fit diet, milk, meat fat and unctuous,
sc. butter, oil, borrage, bugloss, and figgs, with cardiacks and
alexipharmicks, hartshorn, coral, pearls, jacynth, emerald, zedoary, saffron,
and citron pills; if admitted outwardly, it is to be helped, by extrahents, or
epispasticks, sc. mustard seed, pyrethrum, birthwort, sowbread, pepper, bryony,
bulls gall, live lime, goats dung, galbanum, opopanax, euphorbium, sulphur, and
leven, and young creatures dissected and applied hot, oil of scorpions,
spiders, and the venomous creatures themselves applied, also by intercipients,
ligature, amputation, and alexipharmicks, the patients drinking their own urin;
and if there be an ulcer, it is long to be kept open, using scarrification; if
from venenate unguents, by those that are extrahent, and oil of scorpions
aforesaid; if from suffumigations or odours, by the contrary, of myrrh, amber,
musk, civet, rue, aspalathus, roses, gum animae, wood of aloes, saunders,
cloves, saffron, storax, receiving the odours by the nostrils, the mouth being
shut, using balsam of rue, odorate masticatories, and the precedent
alexipharmicks, and particular specificks, which relate to peculiar poisons; as
amongst animals, to that of the aspe, horned serpent, hemorrhe, seps, dipsas,
water-snake, double head, scytal, millet, dryine, cockatrice, viper, scorpion,
land dragon, crocodile, lizard, stellion, salamander, leeche, scolopender,
toad, shrew-mouse, spider, tarantula, spanish flies, burn-cow, caterpillars,
flies, bees, wasps, mad-doggs, etc. brains and blood of a cat, menstrual
blood, bulls blood, coagulated milk, staggs tails, pairing of the nails, sweat
of beasts, cramp-fish, lamprey, sea hare, fork-fish, sea scorpion, sea dragon,
and dogg-fish's gall, etc. amongst minerals, to that of quick lime, plaster,
vitriol, aqua fortis, antimony, lodestone, diamond, azure-stone, arsnick,
sandaracha, and realgar, brass, burnt, it is squams, flowers, and verdigrease,
copper, filings of bells, iron, its dross, and rust, lead, cerusse, minium,
litharge, quicksilver, crude, sublimate, and precipitate, and sinople, etc. of
which in their proper places: amongst vegetables, to that of opium,
road-stooles, helmet flower, wolfsbane, toxicum, pharicum, hemlock, quickfading
flower, henbane, deadly nightshade, dorycniu^, mandrake, apiu^ risus,
coriander, chamelion, yew-tree, euphorbium, nut methel, rose-bay, walnut-tree,
spurge, vomiting nut, hellebore, African flower, darnel, juice of Indian bread,
and other exoticks, etc. which see in my Pambotanologie.

These are the internal diseases, etc. that belong to the body of man:
The external maladies are.

1. Tumors, which are recesses of the parts of man's body, from the natural
state, the magnitude being increased, caused, by humors, flatulency and solid
substance; they are cured, by imminution, subtraction of aliment, digestion,
and discussion, etc. if from humors, and by congestion, it is helped, by
alteration, and evacuation, sensible and insensible; if by affluxion, and
flowing, by evacuation, revulsion, derivation, repulsion, and incerception,
after flowing, by emollients and maturants if impacted; if from humors
included in a peculiar membran and malignant, it is helped accordingly; if from
flatulency, by evacuation, discussion and roborants; if in solid parts it is
cured accordingly, and they terminate by discussion, suppuration, induration,
or corruption.

2. Ulcers, which are solutions of continuity, with imminute magnitude, caused,
in a soft part, by an eroding matter, external or internal; they are cured, by
evacuation and venesection if need, suppuration, turpentine, oil of mastick,
etc. abstersion, sarcoticks, and cicatrizants; if from hot distempers, by
coolers, anodynes, astringents, plantain, roses, saunders, bole, turpentine,
and plantain water; if cold, by heaters, oil of S. John's wort, nard,
flowerdeluce, and rue; if dry, by tepid water; if moist, by squams of iron, and
horehound; if from afflux of humors, by revulsion, interception, repulsion,
sarcoticks, and epuloticks; if sordid, from humors, by evacuation and
detersion; if from unctuous medicines, by gentle abstersives; if from strong
medicines, by gentle coolers, and diapompholigos, etc. if livid, by
scarrification and exsiccation, and the green water; if callous, by emollients,
corrosives, and section; if with tumors, it is so cured; if with hypersarcosis
from blood, by dryers; if from debility of sarcoticks, by wood of aloes; if
sinuose, it is so cured; if verminose, by extraction, and enecation; if
varicose, by sublation; if with rottenness of the bone, by denudation with the
root of gentian, causticks, or section, ablation by euphorbium or surgery,
ustion, and anodynes; if with a fistula, V. P. by remooving the callus,
aegyptiack and the Apostles ointment, apertion by cauteries, and consolidants,
etc.

3. Wounds, which are solutions, in soft parts, caused by things sharp, cutting
or pricking; they are cured, by remotion of things therein, conjunction of the
lips, digestion, turpentine, gum elemi and hoggs fat, conglutination,
traumaticks, balsam of sulphur, and aversion of fluxion, by phlebotomy and
purgation; if of the vessels, by conjunction of the lips, obstruction of the
orifice by vitriol, myrrh, camphire, revulsion, interception, and dissolution
of the blood; if of tendons, as those of the nerves; if of the nerves, by
venesection, evacuation, apertives, temperate exsiccants, and fomentations; if
from puncture, by purgation, anodynes, attrahents, and moderate heaters,
dryers, and diet; if by incision in longitude, by bands, traumaticks, and
diapalma; if transverse, by future; if in the joints without luxation, by
conjunction, prevention of afflux by evacuation, interception, and right
situation; if with luxation, as the rest, preventing fluxion by purgation, and
sudorificks; if with contusion, by preventing afflux, by revulsions, defensives
and repellers, and suppuration of the contusion, and the wounds by digestives,
of rosin, turpentine, and yolks of eggs, abstersives and consolidants, and
scarrification if tending to a gangreen; if of the nerves and tendons, by
discutient oiles, lenients of the white of an egg and oil of roses, and
emollients and digerents if hard; if of the ligaments, by heaters and dryers;
if by gunshot, by extraction, suppuration, abstersion, and sarcoticks; if
venenate, by preclusion, extraction by cupping-glasses, deligation, excision,
washing with wine and triacle, causticks, alexipharmicks and traumaticks, etc.

4. Fractures, which are divisions of bones, caused, by externals violently
forced on them, they are cured, by repellents hindering inflammation, and the
fracture by extension, right conformation, deligation, applying defensives, of
the white of an egg with bole, etc. elevated collocation, venesection and
purgation if need, colleticks, ostiocolla and comfrey water, remooving
symptoms, sc. inflammation and gangreens by appropriats; itching, by the white
comphorate and rose ointment; pain, if from too much adstriction of the bands,
by laxing them; if from pungent bones, by reposition, remotion, or precision;
if from afflux of homours, accordingly; if from ill situation, by mutation; if
gracility of the part, by attrahents, etc.

5. Luxations, which are falling of the joints, out of their proper place into
an other, with hinderance of arbitrary motion, caused, by tension, violent
impulsion, laxity, and contraction of the ligaments, etc. it is cured, by
sufficient extension, reposition, apposition of astringent remedies, to hinder
inflammation, diligent deligation, and soft collocation; if with inflammation
and pain, by anodynes, prevention of inflammation, and reposition; if with a
wound, by reposition, and prevention of inflammation; if with fracture, by
reposition if it may be, after, curing the fracture.

6. Pains, which are sad and troublesome dispositions, caused, by a sudden
and vehement alteration, in the sense of feeling; it is cured, by anodynes and
narcoticks, oil of white lillies, worms, chamomil, laudan opiat, and remotion
of causes, sc. heat and dryness, and cold and dryness, humors, flatulency,
and external causes, etc. Note, pain if punctory, is in the membrans; if
pulsatorie in the arteries; if torpid, in the carnose membran; if gravative, in
the reins liver and spleen; if tensive according to longitude, in the nerves;
if according to latitude, in the membrans covering the muscles; if wandering in
the greater cavities, from wind; if terebrant, in the intestines, from cold
humors, impacted in the tunicles; if persultant, in the meninges of the
brain; if ulcerative, in the sobcutaneous parts, and intestines; if deep, it is
in the periostium. These are the general external diseases belonging to the
body of man, of which (...), more particularly hereafter, (occasions now
preventing,) more may be said.

Furthermore, besides what has been already said, concerning the nature of
diseases and remedies, etc. there is also required, before the use thereof, a
due consideration of the speculative parts of Physic, as touching Physiologie,
and Pathologie, as also the Semeiotick, Therapeutick and Hygiastick part
thereof: more particularly.

I. Touching Physiology.
1. In respect of the nature of Elements, as also their number, qualities, and
mixture.

2. Of temperaments, in respect of their differences, as simple and compound,
and by reason of the age, sex, or seasons of the year.

3. Of humors, which are. 1. Blood, of an aerie, hot, and moist, or temperate
nature, of indifferent consistence, red, rosy, or crimson color, and sweet of
taste, chiefly serving for the nourishment of the fleshy parts, and being
carried by the vessels, it imparts hear to the whole body. 2. Phlegm, watery,
cold and moist, of liquid consistence, white color, and sweet taste, or rather
unsavory, fit to nourish the brain, and all other cold and moist parts, to
temper the heat of the blood, and by its slipperinesse to help the motion of
the joints. 3. Choler, fiery, hot and dry, of thin consistence, yellow of pale
color, and bitter taste, serving to provoke the expulsive faculty of the guts,
and to extenuate phlegm cleaving to them; but the alimentary is fit to nourish
the parts of like temper with it. 4. Melancholy, earthy, cold, and dry, of
gross and muddy consistence, blackish color; acid, sour, or biting taste,
serving to stir up the appetite, nourish the spleen; and all other parts of
like temper with it; as the bones, etc. all which are to be considered with
their differences, as nutritive and excrementitious, primary and secundary.

4. Of spirits, with their differences, as innate and adventitious, natural in
the liver, vital in the heart, and animal in the brain.

5. Of innate or implanted heat, being a humid fat and oily substance.

6. Of the parts, with their differences, as similar and dissimilar, spermatick
and fleshy: Dissimilar and organical: principal and ignoble.

7. Of the faculties and functions with their differences, as natural, vital,
and animal: Nutritive, auctive, and generative: Attractive, retentive,
concoctive, and expulsive: Alterative and conformative; together with the
pulsifick and respirative principal and less principal faculties: Imaginative,
ratiocinative, and memorative; waking, sleeping, and dreaming: Sensitive and
motive: Conception, deliniation and parturition.

II. Touching Pathologie.
1. In respect of the nature of Diseases, causes and symptoms, with their
differences as essential and accidental: Similar, organical, and common. Simple
and compound: Material and immaterial: Inchoate and hectic: Equal and unequal:
In conformation, magnitude number and conjunction: In figure, asperity and
levity, in passage and cavity: In astriction, obstruction and dilatation:
Augmentation and diminution: Excess or defect: Situation and connection:
Section, erosion, contusion, ruption or divulsion: By wound, ulcer, fracture,
fissure, putrefaction, incision, and puncture: Property, and cause, in
magnitude, motion, manner, and event: As little and great: In the beginning,
increase, state, and declination: Gentle and malignant: healthy, deadly, or
dangerous: Idiopathetick and sympathetick: Legitimate, or spuriouse: Endemical,
epidemical and sporadical.

2. Of their changes, by cris, or lysisis and solution, especially the crisis,
with it is differences, as perfect or imperfect: For good, or evil, as also the
signs, by acuteness, and concoction: With the critical days computed from
the hour of sickness, (the 7th, 14th, and 20th, etc) perfectly, indicative,
(the 4th, 11th, and 14th,) and intervening ( sc. the rest,) with the causes, as
the expulsive faculty quantity and quality of the matter, and changes of the
moon, motion of the humors, and nature of the patient.

3. Of their causes, with their differences, as proper, or by accident:
Principal, helping, and requisite: Remote and nigh: External and internal: As
air, meat and drink, motion and rest, excretions and retention, sleeping and
waking, and the passions of the mind; or unnecessary, as wounds, etc.
antecedent and concomitant: Simply concomitant, or continent. More
particularly:

1. The causes of similar diseases, as 1. Of hot distempers, are putrefaction,
(which is caused by things hot and moist, diet hot and moist, fruits raw and
immature and south winds etc.) motion, vicinity of hot things, constipation,
and hot meat and drink. 2. Of cold distempers, the causes are, vicinity of cold
bodies, the quantity and quality of meat and drink, constipation, rarity,
idleness, and immoderate motion. 3. Of dry, much transpiration and little
nutrition, dry aliments, solicitude, watching, immoderate study, dry air,
baths, and waters that are nitrous, aluminous, bituminous, and exiccating
medicaments. 4. Of moist, moist diet, much drink, tender education, idleness
and tranquillity, frequent use of sweet baths, moist constitution of the season,
and moist medicaments; But the chief causes are peccant humors; to which the
compounded distemper is like.

2. The Causes of organical diseases, as of the shape, are, the imbecility of
the formative virtue, defect in the matter, or hereditary disposition,
commotion, inward and outward occasions. So asperity and levity, astriction,
obstruction, and dilatation. Of magnitude increased, blood, affluxion and
congestion of humors. Of number, the redundancy of sperme. Of situation
changed, crassitude or gravity, bursting, and loosening. Of connection of the
parts destroyed, shallowness of the cavities, excess, defect, and looseness:
Which also are the causes, of accidental diseases. Those of the common diseases
are manifest.

3. Of Symptoms, which are affections following the disease, with their
differences; as of action hurt, default in excrements, and quality changed:
Action abolished, deminished, and deproved: Animal, vital, and natural, etc. as
aforesad. Of excrements peccant, in substance, quantity, quality, first second
and third, and manner of excretion. Substance differing, quantity excessive or
defective, and excretion not due, or by unusual parts. And of quality changed,
first second or third with their causes: As of Injured actions, the animal are
offended by distempers, organical diseases, and solution of continuity. The
vital by heat or cold, chiefly by obstruction, and solution of continuity: The
private natural by similar diseases, the official also by the organical. Of
symptoms in excreme^ts, excessive weakness of the rete^tive or expulsive
faculty of the part, irritated by the quantity or vicious quality of humors. If
too much evacuated, weakness of the retentive. If deminished, obstruction,
strength of the retentive, and imbecility of the expulsive faculty. Of changed
quality, if the first, the distemper of the conjunct parts; if the second,
distemper of the parts, and pravity of humors. Of color, distemper of the
part and a latent humor. Of vitiated smells, the putrefaction of the parts or
humors. Of the taste, vicious excrements. Of sounds, enclosed vapors and
flatulency.

III. As touching Semeioticks.
1. In respect of the nature of general signs, with their differences, as
healthy, unhealthy and neutral: Pathognomonical, signifying passion; and
concomitant, showing coction and crudity, health, crisis and solution:
Demonstrative, predictive, and commemorative, as also their original, sc.
essence, causes and effects.

2. Of diagnostick or demonstrative signs.
1. Of the predominancy of choler, use of dry meats, and drinks, defect
thereof, hot medicines, retentions of excrements, a hot liver, bilious parents,
youth, sex virile, hot and dry regions, labor, desire of venery, watching,
cares, quickness of wit, dreams of fire, swift motion, teastiness, pulse great,
frequent, and hard, want of appetite, desire to cold things, thirst, timely
age, propensity to diseases, bitterness of the tongue, ears full of
excrements, yellow ordure, urin thin and yellow, or red and flaming, heat and
hardness of the skin, color pale, thin hair, curled and yellow or somewhat
black, soon growing and falling off, broad veins, and a slender and lean
body.

2. Of phlegm, use of meats cold and moist in a great quantity before
concoction, cold medicaments, retention of excrements, coldness of the
principal parts, phlegmatic parents, age very young, and old, sex feminine,
countries cold and moist, winter season, idleness, much sleep, carelessness,
easy apprehension, and forgetfulness, remiss anger, dreams of cold etc.
dullness of sense, slownesse of motion, pulse small, slow, and soft. Weak
appetity, little thirst, slow growth, slownesse to venery, inclination to cold
diseases, health in clear weather, mucous excrements, thin white or pale urine
if obstructed, else thick, skin cold, soft, and white; hair soft, smooth,
yellow and straigth growing slowly, and not falling off, narrow veins; and
body soft, fat, and fleshy.

3. Of blood, meats of good juice and easy concoction, retention of usual
evacuation, liver hot and moist, parents sanguine, age juvenile, warm
countries, idleness, little use of venery, moderate sleep, mirth of life, easy
apprehension, dullness of ratiocination, weakness of memory, sound sleep,
dreams of mirth, moderate motion; pulse great, slow and full, a mean appetite,
little thirst, inclination to venery, inclination to continual fevers, copious
excretions of blood, and urine of a good color and consistence. Ordure ruddy,
and of a mean consistence; skin hot and moist, of a ruddy color, much yellow
hair, meanly large vessels, a body fleshy and well compact: And if abounding,
there is lassitude.

4. Of melancholy, thick meats and drinks, retention of such excrements, liver
cold and dry, parents melancholic, consistence of age, unequal air, autumn
season, watchings, anxieties, sadness, hatred, implacability, difficulty of
apprehension, firmness of memory, troubled sleep, horrid dreams, dullness of
sense, motion slow and composed, pulse slow and hard, voracity, little thirst,
acid belching, slow accretion, not prone to venery, invasion of melancholic
diseases, vomiting of melancholy, customary spitting, excretion of black blood
by the hemorrhoides, urine thick and white, sometimes thick and pale; skin
cold, dry, hard, and rough, face leaden and blackish, veins narrow, and a
slender and lean habit: Hence also may appear the temper of the parts,
considering their actions and excrements.

5. Of the part affected, action hurt, excretions, according to the substance
and manner of evacuation; situation, propriety of grief, and proper accidents,
also sex, age, custom, diet and precedent causes, as also things helping and
hurting: or the signs are taken from the essence; temper, magnitude,
situation, and figure; or from the causes external or internal, as also the
effects, which are actions, animal, vital, natural; or excrements, in their
substance, as essential, naturally or preternaturally contained, quantity,
manner of excretion, order, quality changed in color, taste, and sound.

6. Of the part primarily affected or by sympathy. From the essence, temper in
the first and second qualities, vicinity, kind office, and connection: From the
causes, helpful or hurtful, or effects and symptoms, considered in magnitude,
time, order, and duration.

7. Of the species of a disease, from the essence, causes of similars,
organical, and common, medicaments and aliments, disposition of the part, and
temper thereof, quality of parents, venery; animal actions, principal, sleep,
watching, sense, motion, and pain. Vital actions, and natural, attraction,
expulsion, and generation: Excrements, by the mouth, belly, bladder, and heart:
Substance, manner, and quality changed.

8. Of a disease as great or small, from the essence; causes, efficient,
external, internal, helpful, hurtful, and matter or subject, also from the
symptoms or effects; actions, animal, vital, natural, excrements, and
qualities changed.

9. Of a gentle and malignant disease, from the essence; causes, material;
aliments, medicaments, and disposition of the parts: Efficient external,
necessary, not necessary, and fortuit: Internal, blood, phlegm, and choler:
Helpful and hurtful: From effects; actions animal, vital, and natural:
Excrements ejected by vomit, stool, urine, or the habit: Qualities changed,
and proper accidents.

10. Of an acute and chronical disease, from the essence, humors, effects or
symptoms: Actions animal, vital, and natural: Excrements voided by the belly
and bladder, and qualities changed.

11. Of preternatural humors abounding, as of choler, from motion every third
day, bad aliments, yellow excretions, and the rest showing adustion and
choler; Of phlegm, if salt, from thirst, long use of a salt diet, and
itching: If vitreous, from fixed pain. If gypseous, by nodous swellings.

12. Of the serous humor, from the causes, material, assumed meat and drink:
Excreted and retained: Efficient, natural, as the disposition of parents, and
preternatural, sc. various diseases: And from the effects; excrements or proper
accidents.

13. Of flatulency, from the causes, external, aliments; or internal, temper of
the body: And from effects; actions animal hurt, consisting in sense common; as
dreams: Private, in touching and hearing; and motion depraved; as also
excrements and qualities.

14. Of the times of diseases, of the beginning, less considerable injury of
action, and crude excrements: In the augmentation worse, with concoction,
begun: In the station worst with great signs of concoction: In the declination
better, with absolute concoction.

3. Of prognostical signs or predictive.
1. Of longitude or brevity of a disease, from the essence, and accessions
together with the magnitude, motion, time, and manner of solution: From the
causes; efficient, not natural, as the country, season of the year, and
condition of life past: Preternatural, or various humors, in respect of
quality and quantity: Material or subject, considering the age, temper, and
various disposition of the parts; from the effects, actions, and excrements,
with their concoctions; and in them, the time of their appearance, increase and
duration, qualities, first, second, and third. Quantity of excretion, manner,
and place, considering the aptitude, rectitude, and latitude: The time and
contents thereof; and from the qualities of the body, first, second, and third.

2. Of a healthy and deadly disease, from the essence, as similar, organical,
or common; simple or compounded. From the causes; efficient, or various
humors: Material or the subject: Helpful or hurtful. From the effects, sc.
actions; animal, principal, and less principal, either senses internal or
external; or motion, to which is reduced a voluntary commotion of the parts,
lying down, trembling, convulsion, stiffnesse; shaking, and sneezing. Vital, in
respiration and pulse. Natural, in attraction, to which belongs hunger and
thirst; and expulsion, to which the hicket is reduced: From excrements; by the
eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth, belly, and bladder, in respect of urines liquor
and contents, and in these the substance, quantity, quality, and manner of
excretion, as also, sweats; abscesses and pimples. From qualities first,
second, and third, and from proper accidents chiefly considered in the eyes,
cares, nostrils, teeth, temples, lips, tongue, jaws, and hypochondium's.

3. Of the time when the disease will end, with the day and hour of the
crisis, from the acuteness of the diseases and signs of concoction; if simply
acute they may be judged on the fourteenth day: If peracute on the seventh; if
perperacute on the fourth. If there be signs of concoction the first day of
the disease, it may be judged the fourth day; and if on the fourth, at the
seventh, etc. according to quaternaries, or septenaries, after the nature of
the disease. The approach of the crisis is easily known from the precedent
perturbation, and the hour from the height of the disease, time of the
paroxysmes or fits, time of their stay, and prevalency.

4. Of the crisis by vomit, from dark apparitions, sharp pain of the head,
stiffnesse of the hypochondrium's, trembling of the lower lip, and frequent
spitting.

5. Of the crisis by looseness, from belching, with noise of the belly, and
pain of the loins.

6. Of crisis by sweat, from the essence, and causes; efficient, external, as
the air, internal, as humors; and material, the body of the patient. From
effects, sc. actions, animal, coldness: Vital, pulse: Natural, suppression of
urine, as also from excrements, and the change of qualities.

7. Of crisis by urine, a cold constitution, old age, thickness of the skin,
frequent pissing, itching of the secrets, and heaviness of the
hypochondrium's.

8. Of crisis by bleeding, from the essence, and effects, sc. dreams of red
things, pain of the head, heaviness in the temples, sounding in the ears,
dimnesse of the eyes, redness of the face, aversion from the light,
involuntary tears, itching of the nose, bleeding on the symptomatical day,
difficulty of breathing, and a stretching of the hypochondrium without pain.

9. Of crisis by the months and haemorrhoids, a pain, heat, and heaviness in
the loins, pain and distension in the hypogastrion, and distemper at the
mouth of the stomach.

10. Of an ulcer, distemper in any part, after the recovery of the patient.

11. Of madness, continual watching, a sound in the ears or deafness,
exquisite sense of smelling, pain in the side and legs, vehement drawing of
the breath, clear urines in acute diseases, or the white of the eye seeming
red, and a pulse in the hypochondrium.

12. Of convulsions, causeless fear, fierce ravings, pain of the head with
costivenesse of the body, deep pains in the neck, suppression of the urine
with coldness, and flux of urine in the fleepe.

13. Of a future relapse, malignant diseases and long, with those of black
choler, autumnal, and cachectick, actions, excrements, and qualities of
persons, differing much from the natural constitution: and long voiding of thin
water, little colored, after the crisis, shows danger of a relapse.

IV. Touching the Therapeutick part.
I. In respect of indications.

1. In general, as also their differences, being preservatory or curatory:
Generical, subalternal, and specifical: Artificial and inartificial: Profitable
or unprofitable, with the things indicating, sc. the disease and cause of the
disease; as also the coindicants, which are either natural, to which are
referred the temperament, age, sex, custom and manner of living, also the part
affected and its substance, temperament, action, figure, situation, connection,
dull or exquisite sense: Or unnatural, to which belong, the air, meat and
drink, motion and rest, sleep and watching, excrements and retentions, and the
passions of the mind; together with contraindicants, opposed to indicants; and
correpugnants, opposed to co-indicants, from all which the thing indicated is
manifest, and the right administration thereof, to which belong four scopes.
Which enquire. First what is to be done, or the kind of remedy; taken from the
essence of the thing indicating. Secondly how much is to be done, or the dose
of the remedy, which is judged by the greatness of the disease, or distemper
of the natural habit. Thirdly in what manner, or way of applying the remedy,
indicated from the preternatural affection. Fourthly when it is to be done, in
respect of time, occasion, and order, indicated by the presence of the most
urgent indicant. Fifthly where it is to be done, in or through what place,
indicated by the place of the indicant. Amongst which also coindicants and
correpugnants must be considered, prohibiting the use. Else the other course
must be taken, removing contraries by contraries, proportioned in equality in
respect of the disease, both in degree and copiousnesse, which remedies are
found out by reason, experience, or probable collections.

2. Of indications from the cause, with general evacuations, and their
differences. Universal and particular: Spontaneous and artificial: Natural and
symptomatical: By revulsion, derivation, and particular evacuation sensibly or
insensibly. And blood letting indicated by fullness, and permitted by the
strength of the body, and vigorous age: The quantity, by the greatness of the
disease, and strength of the patient, causes internal, as the temper, habit,
and age; or external, sc. the country, season, position of the heavens,
evacuation suppressed, or immod^rate custom of diet, manner of living or
evacuating: As also of purging indicated by cacochymie or the vitiosity of
blood, coindicated by the strength, temperament habit, age, sex, manner of
living, and state of the air: The time from the height or declination of the
disease, in which the humors are concocted and prepared, for evacuation. And is
then to be done in a temperate, intermitting day. The place is discovered by
the place and nature of the humor, and coindicated by the time of the year,
habit of the patient, nature and custom: Before which there must be
preparation and concoction of the humors, by nature or art, respecting either
the humor, or way through which it is to be purged. If the humors be serous
thin and few they are to be evacuated by urine, and by sweating if in the habit
of the body or veins.

3. Of indications from the disease, which if similar, it is to be corrected by
contrary alteration, with appropriat remedies: If organical, and common, or
solution of unity, according to the cause thereof, which is more evident.

4. Of indications from the strength, which indicates the diet of the sick,
which also is coindicated or prohibited by the disease or cause thereof; and is
full, as whole barley broth, fish and eggs, and more solid flesh: Sparing, as
unhusked barley, hydromel, and fasting; or moderate as bread in pottage, or
flesh of pullets, usualy prescribed to the sick; or else the proportioned, by
comparing the strength with the disease, and more full or slender according to
the length or acuteness of the disease The quantity is high, indifferent or
small, slenderest in the height of a disease, and in a little quantity and
often if the strength be impaired, and the peccant matter very oppressive; and
if the disease be continual, diet is to be given at the accustomed time; but if
accessions, in the time of intermission, and in the fit, if there be great want
of strength.

More briefly, the Practitioner coming unto the patient, is.

1 To enquire of the patient what his grief is.

2. Of what cause arising.

3. How many days he has been sick.

4. Whether his body be open or not.

5. What kind of diet he uses. From the first question appears the essence
and Idaea of the disease, and place affected. From the second, the Idaea and
invention of curation. From the third, the motion of the disease and degree
thereof, the knowledge of which is of great moment, toward prognostication.
From the fourth, whether the belly be to be loosened or not. From the fifth,
whether the diet be causatory, conservatory, or sanatory: Which being done, he
is to try the pulse, which shows the strength of the heart and vital faculty,
the simple differences of which are taken from the faculty, artery, quantity of
distension, quality of motion, and rest: The significations of which are, as
follows. A strong pulse shows strength of the heart; a weak one, the
debility thereof. If strong in the beginning and afterward more remiss, it is
an evil sign; but if weak in the beginning and afterward more strong, it is a
good sign. A swift pulse in a healthy body shows sanity: A small one, if the
body be healthful declares a debility of the breast and midriffe; and in a
sick person it portendeth the nigh approach of death. A small and swift pulse
in a healthful body, shows anger and choler; in one that is sick, the
excess of heat. A slow pulse in health, shows frigidity; and siccity in a
sick person. A rare pulse shows decay of virtue: Also a slow pulse signifies
the abatement of heat. Hence also may appear the signification of those that
are more compounded. The alteration thereof is from the faculty, artery and use
altered, by things natural, not natural and preternatural. The next thing to be
done is, the inspection of the urine, which shows the affections of the
liver, reins, bladder, and veins, and is to be taken notice of in the
morning, in a light place, after it is cold, and within six hours after made:
In which are observable the substance, quantity, smell, manner of excretion,
color, perspicuity, taste, heat, and contents, or weight. The best is of a
light golden or light saffron color, of mean substance, in proportion
answering to what is drunk, without bubbles, not staining the chamber pot, of a
white hypostasis or sedement smooth and equal, without hairs, scales, gravel,
and other great contents. According to the age; that of young men is of a light
saffron, or light golden color. Of old men, thin, with a small sediment. Of
women, almost of a light saffron color and thin. Of children, differing from
the rest, excelling in substance, and of a large sedime^t. According to motion
and rest: that of laboring people, is of a light saffro^, or coming near a
saffro^ color, with a thin sedime^t, little, some times with a fatness
swimming on the top. That of resting people is almost white, with a greater and
thicker sediment. That of sleepy persons, is white, thick, with many
unconcocted contents. Of Watching people, thin, tending from white to watery
and golden; if fasting, flame colored, croceous, and thin; if hunger starved,
thin and white without sediment. According to temperaments and the qualities of
the year: In the Spring time, it is of a straw color and light straw color,
tending toward a light golden, and light saffron, with a thick sediment,
beginning to change into a thinner. In Summer, of a light golden color, and
light saffron, of a mean substance, of a light, white, and equal sediment. In
Autumn, of a mean color, shining, and thin, of an obscure sediment, mean,
white, thin, and equal. In Winter, of an answerable proportion, tending to
whiteness, of a greater sediment and quantity, winter going on, as also of
greater and unconcocted contents. As for the significations of colors, they
are manifest. These things being done, other excrements also are to be
examined, as also the part affected, and (if there be need, of consultation.)
the dignotion, prenotion, and curation are to be propounded: The first is done,
by considering the existence and essence of the disease, the pathognomonical
signs and idea including its species, form, and generation; then the
greatness of the disease is to be propounded, by reason of the essence,
symptoms, and part affected: Afterward the motion thereof, from the
alteration of the matter, urine, pulse, and dignity of the part affected; and
the condition, from symptoms: The second, by comparing things past and
present; like and unlike, by things natural and not natural; the event is known
by the strength of nature and the disease; that of nature, by the quantity and
quality of spirits, humors, and solid parts, temper, habit and age; that of
the disease, by symptoms, things helpful and hurtful, and the cause, hence
appears the event, and the manner thereof is by nature or art. The third by
considering the indications.

1. From the affect, contrary to nature, sc. from the disease, morbifick cause
and symptom.

2. From the temper of the whole body: The signs of which are, if hot, it
easily grows and is augmented: It Is hot in touch, slender and lean, with
large and stuffed veins, swift motion, boldness, little sleep, swift pulse,
much hair, crisped and black, a reddish color, and dark If cold, slow grouth,
dullness of wit, a slow and small pulse, occult breathing, coldness to the
touch, impotence to venery, and sleepiness. If moist, softness of touch,
tenderness of the flesh, loose members, hiddennesse of the bones, impotency to
labor, immoderate sleep, and paucity of hair. If dry, roughness, leanness,
stiffenesse, strength to labor, manifest veins, and much hair, etc.

3. From the part affected.

4. From the strength of the patient.

5. From the air.

6. From the age.

7. From custom.

8. From every ones peculiar nature.

9. From the sex.

10. From exercise, and course of life.

11. From the four times of diseases.

12. From the length or shortness of the disease.

13. From the paroxismes of diseases.

14. From the functions of nature.

15. From the strength of remedies.

16. From the constitution of the heavens. After which is to be considered;
whether any thing is to be done or not, what is to be done, with what remedy,
of what quality, in what quantity, after what manner, at what time, and in what
order it is to be used. More particularly, for cure.

1. Usually a diet suitable to nature and opposite to the disease is to be
appointed.

2. The body is to be opened with some gentle remedy, or suppository, and
sometimes with a clyster.

3. If need, a vein is to be opened, with revulsion.

4. The quantity of morbifick matter is to be lessened by a gentle apozeme.

5. The more churlish matter is to be prepared for evacuation.

6. The matter prepared is to be expelled by some strong purge.

7. Revulsion is to be again used, diuretics, sudorificks, frictions, and
cupping-glasses.

8. Derivation is to be made to the next parts.

9. It Is to be drawn out by fomentations, dropaces, and cauteries, that the
containing cause may be removed.

10. The residue of the matter is to be dissipated, and the part to be
strengthened.

11. The strength is to be repaired by analeptick and pleasant diet etc. All
which being considered, it is manifest, that this Art, is not so facile, and
easy to be attained to, as many lately have dreamed of, and willingly would
have others to have believed; to their own infamy, and their proselites ruin;
who thought it sufficient to consult with some empyrical matrone, and that
having got a remedy with the testimony of probatum est unto it, it should be
sufficient to vanquish the Antagonist to nature, without the precedent
knowledge of the aforesaid tackticks, not regarding the knowledge of Anatomy,
Haplologie, Physiologie, Pathologie, Semeioticks, Therapeuticks, and
Hygiasticks, Dieteticks, and Pharmaceuticks, etc. the dose of the remedy,
nature of the disease, its complication, and strength of the patient, etc. and
this they say, is only periculum facere, to make an experiment, or try what may
be done without troubling the Physician; (who finds it work enough for the
time of his whole life, to studdy the hidden secrets of nature, and how to
overcome the enemies thereof) and indeed usually, it is not sine periculo, for
though such cure not the disease, yet the patient is never more troubled
therewith; and thus whilst they studdy to save the fee, they often loose the
Farmer; yet Friend, whoever thou art, think not, that what is here said, is
intended to make thee Prodigal, or to send thee to the Artist in every petty
distemper, or to discourage thee in attempts therein; but rather to advise thee
not to be too bold in tampering with thy self unadvisedly, least thou purchase
thy knowledge of the danger, by the loss of thy health: Which, that it is so
intended, and that thou art not envied knowledge therein, thou have reason to
judge, by what is now presented to thy view.

Thus of the Anatomy of the whole body of man, and the Definitions, causes, and
method of curing all diseases thereof. Now follows the matter of physic,
which is internal or external.

I. Internal.
1. Medicines cooling and attenuating choler, fc. Simples, Roots, of sorrel,
grass, succory, and sharp pointed dock Leaves, of endive, succory, sorrel,
maidenhaire, garden endive, and Lions tooth. Seeds, the four greater cold
seeds, seeds of endive, sorrel, and barley. Fruits, apples, sour plums, and
sour cherries. Flowers, of succory, with flowers of borrage, buglosse, and
violets. Compounds Waters, of sorrel, succory, grass, endive, and barley by
decoction. Juices, of limons, granates, apples, vinegar, and bitter grapes.
Syrups, of limons, vinegar simple, juice of sorrel, maidenhaire, apples, sour
granates, agresta, and oxysaccharum. Conserves, of flowers of succory, sorrel
leaves, maidenhaire, and cherries preserved. Powders and electuaries, cold
diamargarite, and diatriasantalon. Chymicals, spirit of sulphur, vitriol, and
sal prunellae.

2. Cooling and thicking choler. sc. Simples, Roots, of marshmallows and
plantane. Leaves, of purslaine, plantain, mallows, and marshmallows. Seeds, of
lettice, purslaine, white poppy, mallows, fleabane, and quinces. Fruits,
juiubes, sebestens, and quinces. Flowers, of water-lilly, poppy, pine tree,
violets, and red roses. Gumms, arabic, and tragacanth. Animals, ivory,
spodium, and harts-horne. Minerals, terra sigillata, and bole armenick.
Compounds. Waters, of lettice, purslain, poppy, pine-apples, water-lilly, and
roses. Syrups, of violets, jujubes, poppy, dry roses, and white poppy. Juice,
of quinces. Conserves, of roses, violets, flowers of water lillies, candid
lettice, and preserved quinces. Electuaries, diatragacantum frigidum, and
diapenidion without species. Troches, of spodium. Chymicals, laudanum
opiaticum, and sal prunellae.

3. Altering phlegm. sc. Simples. Roots, of elecampane, cyperus, calamus
aromaticus, galingal, smallage, parsley, fennel, zedoary or serwal, florence
orrice, china, sarsaparilla, and ginger. Woods, xyloaloes, guaiacum, and
sassafras. Barks, of dry citrons, guaiacum, and cinnamon. Leaves, of sage,
betony, rosemary, marjerom, thyme, origanum, calamint, penniroyal, wormwood,
mint, germander, and groundpine. Seeds, of anise, smallage, parsley, citron,
blessed thistle, carawaies, bishops-weed, carrots, and hartwort. Fruits,
pepper, cubebs, cloves, and cardamome. Flowers, of sage, stoechas, rosemary,
lavender, betony, squinanth, and mace. Animals, musk, civet, and castor.
Minerals, amber greese, and prepared steel. Compounds. Waters, of sage, betony,
fennel, hyssop, wormwood, bawm, blessed thistle, celestial, imperial, treacle
water, cinnamon, and aqua vitae. Syrups, of stoechas, hysop, mint, wormwood, the
five roots, simple oxymel and compound, of conditement of citron pills, and mel
rosatum. Conserves and comfits, of sage flowers, stoechas, rosemary, leaves of
wormwood, ginger, roots of elecampane, root of acorus, citron pills,
myrobalanes, and nutmegs. Confections, treacle, mithridate, aurea alexandrina,
and alkermes. Powders and electuaries, diambra, diamosch, of gemms, dianthos,
diaireos, and diagalanga. Troches, gallia moschata, alipta moschata, of myrrh,
wormwood, and eupatory. Chymicals, oil or essence of annise, fennel, thyme,
sage, cinnamon, and gilliflowers.

4. Altering Melancholy. sc. Simples. Roots, of elecampane, eringoes, parsley,
buglosse, and fennel. Barks and rinds, of roots of capers, the middle rind of
ashtree, tamarisk, elder, and citron pills. Leaves, of fumitory, hops,
spleen-wort, dodder, bawm, borrage, burnet, and maiden-haire. Seeds, of annise,
fennel, smallage, citron, and blessed thistle. Fruits, raisins, capers, sweet
smelling apples currants, and kermes. Flowers, of broom, tamarisk, borrage,
buglosse, marigolds, elder, violets, and saffron. Gumms, bdellium, and
ammoniack. Minerals, steel. Compounds. Waters, of borrage, buglosse, bawm,
fennel, and carduus benedictus. Syrups, of sweet smelling apples, fumitory, the
five roots, byzantine, and maiden-haire. Conserves and Comfits, of flowers, of
borage, buglosse, broom, violets, roots of elecampane, rinds of citron, and
condited myrobalanes. Confections, of alkermes, and treacle. Powders and
Electuaries, diambra, laetificans Galeni, of gemms, and diamoschum dulce.
Chymicals, salts of ash-tree, tamarisk, tartar, cream of tartar, and prepared
steel.

5. Altering black choler. sc. Simples. Roots, of buglosse, borrage, and
liquorish. Leaves, of borrage, buglosse, fumitory, and hops. Seeds, the four
great cold seeds. Fruits, fragrant apples. Flowers, of borage, buglosse,
violets, and water-lilly. Compounds Waters, of borage, buglosse, and
water-lilly. Syrups, of violets, and fragrant apples. Conserves, of violets,
borrage, buglosse, water-lilly, and lettice. Chymicals, spirits of sulphur,
vitriol, sal prunellae, saturni, martis, tartar, and cream of tartar.

6. Aperients Hot. sc. Simples. Roots, of smallage, parsley, fennel, fern,
cyperus, elecampane, gentian, eringoes, cammock, both birthworts, and
asarabacca. Rinds, of roots of capers, middle rind of ash, and middle rind of
tamarisk. Leaves, of organy, calamint, pennyroyal, germander, ground pine,
lesser centaury, betony, S. John's Wort, wormwood roman, and all the maiden
hairs. Seeds, of smallage, parsley, fennel, blessed thistle, nettle, agnus
castus, anise, carrots, hartwort, bishops-weed, and red chiches. Flowers, of
stoechas, rosemary, broom, elder, tamarisk, hysop, and betony. Gumms,
ammoniack, bdellium, aloes, turpentine, and myrrh. Minerals, steel. Compounds.
Waters, of fennel, betony, wormwood, hysop, carduus benedictus, and cinnamon.
Syrups, byzantine, of the five roots, wormwood, simple oxymel and compound.
Conserves, of flowers of broom, tamatisk, leaves of wormwood, maiden-haire,
roots of elecampane, and ginger. Electuaries, aromaticum rosatum, and
diarrhodon abbatis. Confections, alkermes, and treacle. Troches, of capers,
wormwood, eupatory, and myrrh. Chymicals, prepared steel, salt of wormwood,
tamarisk, ash-tree, tartar, cream of tartar, oil of anise, fennel, cinnamon,
and spirit of turpentine. Cold. sc. Simples. Roots, of succory, grass,
asparagus, sorrel, knee-holly, and sharp pointed dock. Leaves, of endive,
succory, sow-thiftle, sorrel, liverwort, agrimony, and all the maiden-haires.
Seeds, the four greater cold, and of sorrel. Flowers, of succory. Compounds,
Waters, of endive, succory, grass, sorrel, and agrimony. Syrups, of vinegar
simple, limons, succory, the juice of sorrel, and maiden-haire. Electuaries,
triasantalon, diarrhodon abbatis. Chymicals, spirit of sulphur, vitriol, sal
prunellae, and cremor tartari.

7. Cholagogons. sc. Simple. More mild, cassia, from unc. 1. to unc. 1. sem.
manna, from unc. 1. to unc. 2. juices of roses, from unc. 1. sem. to unc. 3.
tamarinds, from unc. 2. to unc. 3. Moderate, aloes, from drach. 1. to drach. 2.
corrected with mastick, and tragacant. Rhubarb, from drach. 1. to drach. 2.
with spiknard, and cinnamon. Myrobalans citrine, from drach. 2. to drach. 3.
their binding faculty is diminish't by infusion, and rubbing them with oil of
sweet almonds. Vehement, scammony, from gr. 8. to gr. 15. corrected with juice
of quinces it is called diagridio^. Compounds. Syrups, of roses solutive, of
succory with rheon, from unc. 3. to unc. 4. Opiats, catholicum, diaprunum
simplex, and diacassia, from unc. 1. to unc. 1, sem. diaprunum solutive,
electuary of the juice of roses, and tryphera persica from unc. sem. to unc. 1.
Pills, aurea or golden-pills, sine quibus or pills without which, and of
rhubarb, from drach. 1. to scrup. 4. Chymicals, extract of rhubarb, scammony,
mercurius dulcis, mercurius vitae, and crocus of metals.

8. Phlegmagogons. sc. Simple. Mild, seeds of wild saffron, from unc. 1. to
unc. 2. it is corrected with anise and cinnamon. Moderate, agarick, from drach.
1. to drach. 2. with ginger, and sal gemmae. Vehement, turbith, from scrup. 2.
to scrup. 4. with ginger. Hermodactyls with the same dose and correction.
Colocynth, prepared, and corrected in troches called alhandal, from, 8. gr. to
gr. 15. Compounds, opiates and electuaries. Catholicum, diaphoenicum, hiera
picra, electuary of diacarthamum, and of citron solutive, from unc. sem. to
unc. 1. Pills, of cochie the greater, agarick, sine quibus or without which,
and stomach pills, from drach. 1. to scrup. 4. of cochie the lesser, soetidae
majores, lucis majores, arthritical, and of hermodactyles, from scrup. 2. to
drach. 1. Troches, agarick trochiscated, from drach. 1. to scrup. 4. Chymicals,
extract of agarick, colocynth, mercurius dulcis, mercurius vitae, and crocus
metallorum.

9. Melanagogons. sc. Simple, sena, from drach. 1. to drach. 2. polypodium,
from drach. 2. to unc. sem. epithymum, in the same dose: black hellebore, from
gr. 15. to drach. sem. or infused, from drach. 1. to drach. 2. Compounds,
Opiates, catholicum, and diasena, from drach. 6. to drach 10. confectio hamech,
from drach. 3. to drach. 6. Chymicals, extract of sena, black hellebore, and
antimony prepared.

10. Hydragogons. sc. Simple. Mild, seed of wallwort to drach. 1. the middle
rind of the same to drach. 2. the juice of the same, from unc. 1. to drach. 10.
the juice of our orice, from unc. 1. to unc. 2. elder, in the same quantity
with the former, but it is less efficacious. Moderate, the root of mechoacan,
from drach. 1. to drach. 2. of Jalap the same quantity. Vehement, bindweed
powdered from drach. 1. to drach. 2. juice thereof, from unc. sem. to unc. 1.
elaterium, from gr. 8. to gr. 16. spurge, from gr. 8. to gr. 12 chamelaea,
thymelaea, and gutta gummi from gr. 5. to scrup. sem. Compounds, diaturbith to
drach. 1. diacarthamum, from drach. 6. to unc. 1. pills of sagapenum to scrup.
6. Chymicals, resin of jalap, scammony, Cornachinus's powder, mercury, and
antimony prepared. Note, these are the doses hereof taken in substance, the D.
being double of the vehement in infusion, and treble in decoction, the moderate
quadruple, and treble in infusion, except rhubarb and myrobalanes.

11. Vomitories, sc. Gentle, water, barley water, fat broths all luke warm,
butter, oil, simple oxymel, and simple syrup of vinegar: All drunk in a good
quantity. Moderate, seed of orach, and dill, in decoction, from unc. sem. to
unc. 1. flowers, of dill, and broom, in decoction; from p. i to p. 2. seeds,
of radishes in decoction, from unc. sem. to drach. 6. juice of radishes, to
unc. 3. pompeon roots in decoction, to unc. 1. agarick from drach. 1. to drach.
2. root of asara-bacca from drach. 1. to scrup. 4. Vehement, nux methel,
balanus myrepsica, cataputia, burnt copper, and white hellebore, not to be
used without accurate preparation. The chemical are, white vitriol prepared,
Crol. Begu. gentle and safe, given from scrup sem. to drach. sem. and drach. 1.
to the strong, in water, and it only evacuats the stomach; so the salt of
vitriol, Begu. but, is more strong, D. from gr. 10. to 20. dissolved in
ordinary water as the former. The aqua benedicta of of Quercetan, is more
strong, given from unc. 1. to unc. 3. drawing humors from the whole body.
Mercurius vitae, Begu. and Crol. and is more strong, from gr. 3. to 5. in broth
or conserves of roses, against obstinate diseases.

12. Sudorificks. sc. Simple. Guajacum wood, and the bark of it, sassafras
wood, china root, and sarsaparilla root. These effectually. Roots, of carline,
angelica, setwal, vipers-grasse, fennel, smallage, parsley, burdock, burnet, and
tormentil. Leaves, of water germander, meadsweet, carduus benedictus,
maiden-haire, and burdock. Seeds, of carduus benedictus, common millet, and
lentils. Flowers, of camomil, blew-bottles, and red poppy. Less effectually.
Compounds. Water, of red poppy, carduus benedictus, scabious, treacle, opiate,
and old treacle. Chymicals, salt of carduus benedictus, mother of pearls
calcined, the bezar mineral of Beguinus, antimonium diaphoreticum of Crollius,
bezoardicum joviale Hartmanni, etc.

13. Diuretics. sc. Hot. Simple. Roots, of smallage, parsley, fennel, eringo's,
valerian, asarabacca, cammock, and radish. Rindes, the middle one of broom,
and of tamarisk. Leaves, of saxifrage, burnet, smallage, nettles, fennel,
germander, lesser centaury, water-mint, watercresses, and savine. Seeds, of
massilian hartwort, macedonian parsley, smallage, radish, nettles, lovage,
millet of the sun, white thorn, and red chiches. Fruits, laurel, and juniper
berries. Flowers, of broom, and camomil. Gumms, turpentine. Animals, prepared
blood of goats, and cantharides. Minerals, carabe. Compound. Water, of fennel,
smallage, and savine. Syrups, of the five roots, venus hair, byzantine, oxymel
simple and compound. Conserve, of broom-flowers. Chymicals, spirits, of
sulphur, vitriol, salt, tartar, and turpentine. Salt, of tartar, ivie-berries,
and bean-husks. Cold. Simple. Roots, of asparagus, grass, knee-holly,
marshmallows, sharp pointed dock, and sorrel. Leaves, of venus hair, sorrel,
pellitory of the wall, burst-wort, marshmallows, and tops of asparagus. Seeds,
the four greater cold ones, sorrel, alkekengi, and barley. Fruits, gourds,
pompions, cucumers, and strawberries. Flowers, of althaea, and succory. Gummes,
caphura. Juices, of limmons, and sour pomegranates. Compound. Waters, of
pellitory of the wall, grass, sorrel, barley. Syrups, of venus hair, limmons,
and marshmallows. Conserves, of venus-haire, eringo roots, and the inside of a
gourd. Troches, of caphura. Chymicals, sal prunellae, spirit of sulphur, and
vitriol.

14. Errhines. Roots, of orrice, cyclamine, and wild cucumer. Leaves, of beet,
colewort, pimpernel, marjoram, sage, betony, pennyroyal, organy, horehound,
ivy, and tobacco, Gum, Euphorbium. Juices, of the roots, and leaves of the
aforesaid herbs, and elaterium.

15. Sternutatories. Roots, of ginger, wild pellitory, florence orrice, white
and black hellebore. Leaves, of marjoram, betony, sage, and tobacco. Gumms,
euphorbium. Animals, castor. Chymicals, spirit of sulphur, vitriol, and salt of
vitriol.

16. Masticatories. Simple. Roots of ginger, wild pellitory, and angelica.
Leaves, of sage, marjoram, hysop, and organy. Seeds, of watercresses, mustard,
stavesacre, nigella, white and black pepper. Fruits, raisins, and cubebs.
Gumms, mastick Compound, vinegar of squils, oxymel of squils, treacle, and
confectio anacardina.

17. Cephalicks. Hot. Simple. Roots, of spiknard, calamus aromaticus, valerian,
florence orrice, acorus, galanga, setwal, and piony. Woods, misleto of the oak,
and xyloaloes. Bark, of cinnamon. Leaves, of betony, marjoram, sage, rosemary,
laurel, calamint, and poleymountain. Seeds, of piony, cardamome,
mountain-ofier, and Roman nigella. Fruits, berries of laurel, and juniper,
cloves, nutmegs, cubebs, and grain of kermes. Flowers of betony, lavender,
rosemary, sage, mace, camomil, lilly of the valley, and line-tree. Juices and
Liquors, opobalsamum, and wine. Gumms, frankincense, mastick, styrax and
benjoin. Things taken out of the Sea, succinum, and amber. Animals, castor,
musk, and civet. Compound waters, of betony, sage, marjoram, orange flowers,
cinnamon, treacle, imperial, coelestis, and aqua vitae. Syrups, of stoechas, and
mel rosatum. Conserves, of acorus, ginger, flowers of french-lavender,
rosemary, sage, candid mirobalans, candid wallnuts, candid nutmegs, and bark of
citron. Confections, alkermes, treacle, mithridate; and aurea alexandrina.
Electuaries, dianthos, diambra, diamoschum dulce, diaireos, and aromaticum
rosatum. Troches, of gallia moschata, and carabe. Externals. Oiles, of castor,
camomil, orrice, laurel, nard, rue, spike, and of foxes. Unguents, martiatum,
and arregon. Emplasters, of betony, laurel-berries, melilot, and mucilages.
Chymicals, distilled oiles of rosemary, lavender, sage, time, fennel, anise,
cinnamon, nutmegs, and cloves. Cold. Simple. Woods, all the saunders. Leaves, of
lettuce, purslain, and plaintain Seeds, of lettuce, white-poppy, the four
great cold seeds, fleabane, and barley. Flowers, of roses, violets,
water lillies, and red-poppy. Juices, of limmons, granates, vinegar, sour
grapes, opium, pears, and camphire. Compound. Waters, of purslaine, lettuce,
plantaine, roses, red-poppy, and water-lilly. Syrups, of violets, dry roses,
and poppy. Conserves, of roses, violets, water-lilly, lettuce, and cucumers.
Electuaries, triasantalon, and cold diamargarite. Confections, philonium, and
requies Nicolai. Troches, of caphura. Pills, of hounds-tongue, and laudanum
opiaticum. Chymicals, sal prunellae, spirit of sulphur and vitriol. Externals.
Oiles, of violets, water lillies, roses, caphura, and of sour grapes.
Unguents, of roses, poplar, refrigerans Galeni, and santaline cerecloth.

18. Ophthalmicks. Quickening the sight, Roots, of fennel, celandine and radish.
Leaves, of celandine, vervaine, rue, eyebright, and fennel. Seeds, of fennel,
radish, and great clary. Easing pain, woman's milk, the white of an egg
stirred, and turned to water, rose water, mucilage of the seed of fleabane,
quinces, crumbs of grated bread and boiled in milk with a little saffron, sweet
apples boiled, the pulp of rotten apples, and white troches of Rhasis with
opium. Repellers Water, of roses, plantain, peculi rosarum, and purslain.
Juice, of quinces, sour apples-white of an egg, and alum. Dryers, ceruse
washed, tutty washed, antimony washed, ointment of tutty, and white troches of
Rhasis without opium. Resolvers, sarcocol nourished with milk, saffron, woman's
milk, decoction of fenugreck, and the blood of young doves forced out of the
greater feathers into the eye. Cleansing without acrimony, sugar candy, syrup
of dry roses, tutty, pompholyx, lead burnt and washed, and antimony washed.
Cleansing with acrimony. Gentle, galls of fish; moderate, of beasts; strongest,
of birds; and of all birds, that of a partridge, of all gentlest that of an
hen: the juice of celandine, fennel, and compound water of honey.

19. Pectorals. Hot. Simple. Roots, of elecampane, florence orrice, both
birthworts, liquorice, ginger, and squills. Leaves, of colts foot, white
horehound, hysop, thyme, savory, origan, calamint, cars-foot, ground ivy, ros
solis, and tobacco. Seeds, of nettles, lineseed, colewort, massilian seceli, or
hartwort. Fruits, fat figgs, sweet raisins, almonds, pine-nuts, and
laurel-berries. Flowers, of camomil. Spices, saffron. Gumms, turpentine, and
myrrh. Animals, honey, and fox lungs prepared. Minerals, flowers of sulphur.
Compound. Waters, of hysop, and coltsfoot. Syrups, of colts foot, hysop,
liquorice, venus-haire, simple oxymel, oxymel of squills, and sugar candied.
Conserves, of venus-haire, elecampane roots, and ginger. Elect. diaireos
simple, and diaireos of Solomon. Externals. Oiles, of orrice, sweet almonds,
camomil, and lillies. Fats, hens-grease, ducks, calves grease, and butter.
Marrowes, of hearts and calves. Unguents, of althaea, or marshmallows, and
resumptive. Emplaisters, of sulphur, bay berries, and filii zachariae, Cold.
Simple, roots, of marsh-mallowes, and liquorice. Leaves, of venus-haire, and
lungwort. Seeds, the four greater cold ones, mallows, white-poppy, fleabane,
bombax, and barley. Fruits, jujubes, sebestens, sweet almonds, and sweet prunes
Flowers, of violets, water lillies, and red-poppy. Gumms, arabic, and
tragacanth. Juices, amylum or juice of wheat, and juice of liquorice. Animals,
woman's, asses, goats milk, flesh of lobsters, and river crabs. Compound.
Waters, of lettice, purslain, water lillies, red-poppy, and barley. Syrups, of
jujubes, violets, venus-haire, and white-poppy which is narcotick. Sugars, of
roses, and penids. Conserves, of roses, violets, borrage, lettice, and inside
of gourds candied. Electuaries. diatragacanth cold, diamargarite cold, and
diapenidion without species. Externals, Oiles, of violets, water lillies, and
sweet almonds. Greases, of hens, ducks, calves, and new butter.

20. Cardiacals. Hot, Simple. Roots, of dittany, cinkfoile, vipers-grasse,
setwal, gentian, masterwort, and doringium. Barks, cinnamon, and dry rind of
citron. Wood, xyloaloes. Leaves, of bawm, scabious, carduus benedictus, basil,
polley mountain, southernwood, rosemary, and lavender. Seeds, of carduus
benedictus, basil, and citron. Fruits, dyers-grains, juniper berries, nutmegs,
and cloves. Flowers, of rosemary, borrage, buglosse, mace, saffron, and
spikenard. Gumms, frankincense, myrrh, and mastick. Juices, of bawm, scabious,
and borrage. Animals, musk, civet, bezoar-stone, and raw-silk. Minerals, amber,
succinum. Compound. Waters, of orange flowers, bawm, rosemary, carduus
benedictus, scabious, aqua vitae, imperial, treacle, coelestis, and cinnamon.
Oiles Chemical, of cinnamon, cloves, and nutmegs. Syrups, of the conditure of
citron peel, and byzantine. Conserves, of the flowers of citron pills candied,
nutmegs candied, and mirobalans candied. Confections, alkermes, and treacle.
Electuaries, aromaticum rosatum, diambra, de gemmis, laetificans Galeni, and
diamoschum dulce. Cold. Simple. Roots, of sorrel, buglosse, bistort, and
tormentil. Woods, all the sanders. Leaves, of borrage, buglosse, sorrel, and
sharp pointed-dock. Seeds, of quinces, plantaine, and sorrel. Flowers, of
roses, violets, borrage, buglosse, and water-lilly. Fruits, citrons, limmons,
sour cherries, ribes, sour granats, sweet apples, and quinces. Gumms,
camphire. Animals, pearl, unicorns horn, the bone in the heart of a stag,
ivory, spodium, hartshorn, and bezoar-stone. Minerals, terra sigillata, bole
armoniack, precious fragments, gold, and coral. Compound Water, of roses,
borrage, buglosse, and sorrel. Syrups, of granats, limmons, violets, of the
juice of sorrel, dried roses, and fragrant apples. Conserves, of the flowers of
borrage, buglosse, roses, violets, and leaves of sorrel. Confection, of
hyacinth. Electuaries, cold diamargarite, and diatriasantalum.

21. Hepaticals. Hot. Simple, Roots, of calamus aromaticus, cyperus, and
elecampane. Leaves, of agrimony, wormwood, mint, germander, ground pine,
betony, and lesser centaury. Seeds, of anise, fennel, carawaies, and
bishops-weed. Flowers, of rosemary, mace, squinanth, and spiknard. Fruits,
cloves, nutmegs, and raisins. Compound. Waters, of wormwood, mint, and betony.
Syrups, of mint, wormwood, byzantine, and the five roots. Conserves, of the
flowers, of sage, rosemary, pil of citrons, root of elecampane, acorus,
walnuts, nutmegs, and mirobalans all candied. Confections, treacle, and
mithridate. Electuaries, aromaticum rosatum, diambra, and diarrhodon. Troches,
of wormwood, rhubarb, and eupatory. Externals, oil of wormwood, mint, and
nard. Cold. Simple. Roots, of grass, asparagus, succory, sorrel, and
knee-holly Woods, all the saunders. Leaves, of endive, succory, scariola,
chondril, liverwort, maiden-haire, sorrel, lettuce, and purslain. Seeds, the
four greater cold ones, and four lesser, and the seed of sorrel. Flowers, of
roses, water-lilly, and succory. Fruits, sour prunes, sour granats, gourds,
ribes and cucumers. Juices, of limmons, granats, quinces, endive, sorrel,
succory, vinegar, and sour grapes. Animals, ivory, and spodium. Minerals,
coral. Compound. Waters, of succory, endive, grass, sorrel, roses, and
agrimony. Syrups, both simple and compound of succory, of the juice of sorrel,
granats, limmons, and dry roses. Conserves, of flowers of succory, leaves of
sorrel, roses, barberries, and sour cherries preserved. Electuaries,
diatriasantalum, diarrhodon abbatis, and cold diamargarite. Troches, of
spodium, and caphura. Externals Oiles, of roses, sour grapes, and
water lillies. Ointments, of roses, santaline cerecloth, and refrigerans
Galeni.

22. Stomachicals. Hot. Simple. Roots, of ginger, cyperus, calamus aromaticus,
and galanga. Rindes, of dry citrons, and cinnamon. Wood, xyloaloes. Leaves, of
mint, both wormwoods, sage, betony, and rosemary. Seeds, of anise, fennel,
coriander, citrons, and pepper. Fruits, cloves, and nutmegs. Flowers, of sage,
rosemary, betony, mace, and saffron. Gumms, mastick. Minerals, succinum, and
amber. Compound. Waters, of betony, wormwood, mint, and sage. Syrups, of mint,
and pontick wormwood. Conserves, of flowers of sage, rosemary, flowers of
wormwood, pills of citrons, nutmegs mirobalans ginger and acorus all candied.
Confections, treacle, mithridate, and alkermes. Electuaries, aromaticum
rosatum, diambra and diagalanga. Troches, of wormwood, and of rhubarb.
Externals. Oiles, of nard, wormwood, mint, nutmegs, mastick, and myrtle.
Emplasters, of mastick. Cold. Simple. Roots, of plantain, and sorrel. Woods,
red saunders. Leaves, of plantain, and myrtle. Seeds, of plantaine, and
quinces. Flowers, of red roses, and pomegranates. Fruits, quinces, pears,
medlars, and myrtle-berries. Juices, acacia, and hypocistis. Minerals, coral.
Compound. Waters, of roses, plantain, and sorrel Syrups, of dried roses,
quinces, granates, myrtle, the juice of sorrel, and agresta. Conserves, of red
roses, and the leaves of sorrel. Electuaries, diatriasantalum. Externals,
Oiles, of roses, mastick and sour grapes. Ointments, santaline cerecloth, and
of roses.

23. Spleneticks. Hot. Simple. Roots, of smallage, elecampane, orrice, calamus
aromaticus, and birthwort. Rindes, of the roots of capers, of the middle rind
of ash-tree, as also of tamarisk, and cinnamon. Leaves, of germander, dodder,
spleenwort, heads of hops, tamarisk, penniroyal, time, watercresses, fumitory,
centaury the less, and bawme. Seeds, of agnus castus, watercresses, anise,
smallage, and carduus benedictus. Flowers, of broom, marigolds, tamarisk, and
saffron. Fruits, capers. Gumms, ammoniack, bdellium, and myrrh. Minerals,
steel. Compound. Waters, of fennel, fumitory, bawme, carduus benedictus, and
cinnamon. Syrups, of fumitory, of five roots, simple oxymel, and oxymel of
squills. Conserves, of flowers, of tamarisk, broom, acorus candied, ginger
candied, and citron pil candied. Confections, alkermes. Electuaries, de gemmis,
and laetificans Galeni, Troches, of capers, and of cuphorbium. Externals.
Oiles, of capers, tamarisk, orrice, and rue. Ointments, of sowbread, and of
marshmallows. Emplaisters, of mucilages, melilot, and diachylum with gumms.
Cold. may be fetched from those before mentioned that attenuate choler.

24. Nephriticks. Tempering the heat, of the reins, and urine. Simple Roots, of
althaea, and liquorice. Leaves, of mallows, lettuce, purslain, endive,
sowthistle, and scariola. Seeds, of mellons, pompions, cucumers, althaea,
mallows, lettuce, white-poppy, fleabane, and barley. Fruits, sweet prunes,
raisins, jujubes, and almonds. Flowers, of violets, and water lillies. Gumms,
tragacanth. Animals, milk, and butter. Compounds, Waters, of lettuce,
purslaine, and water-lilly. Syrups, of liquorice, jujubes, and violets.
Conserves, of violets, water-lilly, and candied lettuce. Electuaries, cold
diatragacanth. Externals. Oiles, of violets, roses and water-lilly. Ointments,
refrigerans Galeni, and of roses. Stone-breaking. Simple. Roots, of cammock,
great burdock, saxifrage, golden-rod, and caltrops. Wood, nephritical wood.
Rindes, of dry beans, and of laurel roots. Leaves, of saxifrage, caltrop, wild
tansy, strawberries, pellitory of the wall, and sea fennel. Seeds, of millet of
the sun, nettles, and radish. Fruits, kernels of cherry-stones, peach-stones,
medlars, juniper-brries, and ivy-berries. Gumms, turpentine. Animals, hog-lice,
goats-bloud prepared, and river-crabs eyes. Stones, the judaick, nephritick,
and crystal prepared. Compound. Waters, of saxifrage, caltrop and of tobacco.
Syrups, nephrocathartick of Joubertus, of radish of Fernelius, simple oxymel,
and oxymel of squils. Electuaries, lithon-tripticon, or the stone-breaking
electuary. Clansing away sand, and viscous humors. The same with diuretics,
and those which expel the stone, but the most efficacious are, turpentine,
pellitory of the wall, radish, smallage and red chiches.

25. Hystericals Helping conception. Simple. Roots, of calamus aromaticus,
bistort, galingal, or cyperus. Leaves, of bettony, sage, rosemary, and
marjoram. Fruits, nutmegs, and cloves. Flowers, of sage, rosemary, betony,
mace, and spikenard. Gumms, styrax, benzoinum, frankincense, and mastick.
Animals, civet, and musk. Minerals, succinum, amber, and coral. Compound.
Waters, of sage, betony, and marjoram. Conferves, of flowers of betony, sage,
rosemary, acorus candied, and walnuts, nutmegs, myrobalans, and roots of
satyrion, all candied. Confections, treacle, and mithridate. Electuaries,
diamoschum, diambra, de gemmis, diagalanga, and aromaticum rosatum. Troches,
galliae moscharae, and aliptae moschatae. Externals, oil of nard, and of
myrtles. Expelling the birth, and secundine, cretian dittany, mugwort,
birthwort, saffron, cinnamon water, confectio alkermes, borax of the shops,
savine, opopanax, sagapenum, mirth, castor, and assa foetida, the two last are
proper only for the secundine, because they kill the child with their evil
smell. Moving the months. Simple. Roots, of both birthworts, madder, valerian,
cyperus, orrice, and gentian. Bark, of cinnamon. Leaves, of mugwort, mercury,
featherfew, cat-mints, sage, calamint, pennyroyal, organy, rue, southern-wood,
horehound, and cretian dittany. Seeds, of hartwort, anise, carrots, fennel,
rue, and carawaies. Flowers, of camomil, featherfew, and saffron. Gumms, myrrh,
assa foetida, opopanax, sagapenum, and galbanum. Animals, castor. Minerals,
borax of the shops, Compound. Waters, of mugwort, and of cinnamon. Syrups, of
mugwort, and of hysop. Conserves, and electuaries, among the diuretics.
Troches, of myrrh. Externals, the oiles, and unguents are to be seen in the
emollients among external medicaments. Stopping the months, Simple. Roots, of
lungwort, snakeweed, and tormentil. Leaves, of plantain, mastick-tree,
horse-tail, raspis, purslain, myrtle, knot-grasse, and mint. Seeds, of
plantaine, and of sorrel. Fruits, of myrtles. Flowers, of roses, and of
pomegranats. Gumms, mastick, and dragons-bloud. Animals, kids-rennet,
harts-rennet, harts-horne burnt, ivory, and spodium. Minerals, bolearmoniack,
terra sigillata and coral. Compounds. Waters, of plantaine, roses, water-lilly,
purslain, and mints. Syrups, of myrtle, mint, quinces, and dry roses.
Conserves, of roses, and candied quinces. Confections, philonium Romanum.
Troches, of spodium, and of terra sigillata. Externals. Oiles, of roses, myrrh,
and of quinces. Unguents, comitissae. Emplaisters, of mastick, and plaster
against a rupture. Purging the womb. The same which move the months, cheifely,
briony, both birthworts, gentian, mercury, mugwort, featherfew, horehound, and
germander. etc.

26. Arthriticks. Hindering defluxion. Leaves, of henbane, hemlock, nightshade,
mandrakes, and sempervivum, or ever-live. Juices, of henbane, nightshade,
lettice, vinegar, and opium. Gumms, caphura. Mucilages, of the seed of
fleabane, and of quinces. Waters, of roses, plantain, and nightshade. Oiles, of
roses. Easing pain. Roots, of marsh mallows, cows milk, cows-dung,
sheeps-dung, frankincense beaten with the white of an egg, yolk of an egg,
flowers of camomil, melilot, and saffron. Digesting. Roots, of elecampane, and
hermodactyls. Leaves, of mullin, ground pine, nettles, walwort, sage, and
centaury the less. Seeds, of nettles, and water-crosses. Gumms, opopanax,
bdellium, ammoniack, sagapenum, galbanum and cuphorbium. Animals, castor, and
live puppies applied. Liquors, wine, aqua vitae, seawater, and water of
sulphurous baths. Chymicals. Oiles, of vitriol, wax, and bricks. Emplaisters,
of mucilages, melilot, oxycroceum, and diapalma.

27. Increasers and Diminishers of milk. Increasers, green fennel, seed of the
same, green dill, smallage, powder of crystal, decoction of colewort, butter
taken with milk and fennel. Decreasers, mint, celandine, the greater, calamint,
coriander, basil, sour grapes, vinegar, oxymel, and camphire.

28. Increasers and Diminishers of seed. Increasers. Seeds, of rocket, turnep,
nettles, mustard, and pepper. Fruits, pistachias, and pine-kernels. Animals,
scincus, sparrows brains, and cocks stones. Decreasers, lettice, purslaine,
camphire, mint, rue, seed of agnus castus, and dill.

29. Discutients of wind, heat and attenuate, and are not much differing from
such as attenuate phlegm.

30. Astringents. Some cold and dry. Some hot, as wormwood, mastick, vitriol,
or all things before proposed for stopping of the months, are astringents.

31. Killers of worms. Simple. Roots, of grass, cowslips, setwal, white
dittany, gentian, angelica, mulberry, and rhubarb. Leaves, of purslain,
cichory, sorrel, wormwood, water germander, S. John's wort, lesser centaury,
vervain, hoarhound and cretian dittany. Seeds, of citron, tansy, coleworts,
supines, and bitter almonds. Juices, of limons, granates, purslain, and aloes.
Animals, shavings of ivory, and of harts-horne. Compound. Powders, against the
worms, and hiera picra. Chymicals, spirit of sulphur, vitriol, and mercurius
dulcis.

32. Vulneraries, Roots, of comfrey, round birthwort, zedoary, and tormentil.
Leaves, of perwinkle, pimpernel, sanicle, bugle, mouseare, speedwel, agrimony,
and lesser centaury. Seeds, of carduus benedictus. Animals, river crabs.

II. External.
1. Medicines, refrigerating, and repelling. Refrigerating. Simple. Rindes, of
the root of nightshade, and of mandrake. Leaves, of lettuce, endive, henbane,
ducks-meat, and navel-wort. These simply refrigerate, purslaine,
knotted-grasse, plantaine, privet, night shade, ever-live, and mandrake. Seeds,
of fleabane, white-henbane, white-poppy, the four cold great and lesser seeds.
Flowers, of roses, violets, and water-lilly. Juices, of granates, lettuce,
purslain, ever-live, nightshade, plantaine, limons, vinegar, and bitter
grapes. Animals, the white of an egg. Compound. Waters, of nightshade,
water lillies, roses, plantain, and knotted grass. Oiles, of roses, violets,
water lillies, poppy, henbane, and of mandrake. Ointments, of roses, santaline
cerecloth, refrigerans Galeni, and of the buds of black poplar. Repelling, and
astringents. Simple. Roots, of snakeweed, comfrey, tormentil, and rhapontick.
Rindes, the middle rind of sumach, granates, green walnuts, and of the cups of
acorns. Leaves, of the vine and its tendrels, myrtle, cypress, oak,
wild-olive, sumach, knot-grasse, shepheardspurse, horsetaile, plantain,
wormwood, mint, mullein, and tops of bramble bush. Seeds, of purslaine,
plantain, shepheards-purse, grana tinctorum, and stones of grapes. Flowers, red
roses, the setlings of distilled roses, and flowers of pomegranates. Fruits,
myrtles, cypresse-nuts, unripe galls, midlars, services, and quinces. Juices,
of plantain, the forementioned herbs, acacia, and hypocystis. Gumms, mastick,
dragons-blood, frankincense, sandaracha, tragacanth, sarcocol, and gum-arabick.
Minerals, bole arminack, terra sigillata, alume and coral. Compound. Waters, of
roses, plantaine, nightshade, and nut-shels. Oiles, of roses, unripe olives,
myrtles, mastick, wormwood, and of mint. Unguent, comitissae. Emplaisters,
contra rupturam, and of the crust of bread.

2. Emplasticks. Simple. Meals, of wheat, and of beans. Juices, amylum. Gumms,
mastick, and dragons-bloud. Animals, the white of an egg, and mummy. Minerals,
blood stone, coral, creta sigillata, bole-arminack, lime, gypsum, litharge,
ceruse, pompholyx, cadmia, lapis calaminaris, antimony, alume, and lead.
Compound. Unguents, album Rhasis, of litharge, nutritum, diacalciteos,
diapompholygos, and red desiccative.

3. Anodines. Simple. Roots, of althaea, mallows, and lillies. Leaves, of
mallows, marshmallows, and bears-breech. Seeds, lineseed, fenugreek, and of
marshmallows. Flowers, of lillies, chamomil, and melilot. Meals, of the seeds
of flax, and of fenugreek. Compound. Oiles, common, of sweet almonds, lillies,
cammomil, dill, flower-deluce, and of the yolks of eggs. Unguents, de althaea,
and the resumptive.

4. Narcoticks. Simple. Roots, of mandrake, and henbane. Leaves, of henbane,
hemlock, mandrake, and white-poppy. Seeds, of henbane, and white-poppy. Juices,
of lettuce, hemlock, henbane, and opium. Compound. Opiates, philonium Romanum,
and requies Nicolai. Oiles, of mandrake, henbane, and white-poppy. Chymicals,
laudanum opiaticum.

5. Emollients. Simple. Roots, of mallows, marshmallows, lillies,
flower-deluce, briony, dwarfe-elder, and wild cucumer. Leaves, of violets,
pellitory of the wall, bears-breech, mallows, marshmallows, orach, and
dwarf-elder. Seeds, lineseed, of fenugreek, mallows, and marshmallows.
Flowers, of camomil, melilot, and lillies. Fruits, satt figgs. Gumms,
turpentine, ammoniack, bdellium, styrax, galbanum, and opopanax. Animals,
butter, hogs-fat, henns, goose-grease, sheeps, harts-marrow, and marrow of
veal. Compound. Oiles, common, oil of lillies, violets, worms, camomil,
lineseed, flower-deluces, and whelps. Unguents, of althaea, and resumptive.
Emplaisters, the great diachylum, of mucilages, melilot, of the son of
zacharias, ceroneum, oxycroceum, and of frogs.

6. Resolvers. Simple. Roots, of elecampane, orrice, carrots, birthwort, and
galingal. Leaves, of marjoram, wormwood, hyssop, calamint, penniroyal, origan,
laurel, rue, savory, sage, and rosemary. Seeds, of carrots, cumin, dill,
fenugreek, lineseed, nigella, anise, and fennel. Fruits, lawrel-berries,
juniper berries, and pepper. Flowers, of stoechas, hyssop, lavender, dill,
camomil, and melilot. Compound. Oiles, of dill, rue, bitter almonds, capers,
scorpions, nard, S. John's Wort, of foxes, turpentine, and of spike. Unguents,
of Agrippa, arregon and martiate. Emplaisters, of sulphur, laurel-berries, and
diachylum ireatum.

7. Epispasticks. Simple. Roots, of birthwort, pellitory of spain, thapsia,
hermodactyls, orrice, hellebore, cyclamine, and anacardium. Leaves, of
pimpernel, calamint, sopewort, nettles, and setwal. Seeds, of thlaspi, mustard,
watercresses, and nettles. Fruits, colocynthis. Juices, claterium. Gumms,
pitch, euphorbium, and ammoniack. Animals, castor, pigeons-dung, cocks-dung,
and goats-dung. Minerals, sulphur. Compound. Oiles, balanine, and of mustard.
Emplaisters, of melilot, lawrel-berries, sulphur, and oxycroceum.

8. Suppurants. Simple. Roots, of althaea, lillies, and onions baked under
ashes. Leaves, of mallows, althaea, bears-breech, coltsfoot, and sour dock.
Seeds, of althaea, lineseed, and fenugreek. Flowers, of camomil, and melilot.
Gumms, liquid pitch, turpentine, rofin, ammoniack, and bdellium. Meals, of
wheat, lineseed, and fenugreek. Animals, butter, sheeps-dung, hogs, calves,
capons, and goos-grease, harts-marrow, calves-marrow, and yolks of eggs.
Compound. Oiles, of lillies, camomil, flower-deluces, common oil, and
hydraelium. Unguents, basilicum, of althaea, agrippa, and resumptive.
Emplaisters, diachylum magnum, and of mucilages.

9. Detergents. Simple. Roots, of smallage, orrice, both birthworts, and
gentian. Leaves, of wormwood, centaury the less, horehound, smallage,
agrimony, plantaine, and pimpernel. Seeds, of smallage and plaintain. Juices,
of the aforesaid leaves, and wine. Meals, of beans, lupines, fenugreek, barley,
and lineseed. Gumms, turpentine, aloes, frankincense, and myrrh. Animals, honey,
and urine. Minerals, burnt vitriol, rust, and saltpeter. Compound. Syrups, of
dry roses, and honey of roses. Oiles, of myrrh, tartar, yolks of eggs, and
elder. Unguents, aureum, of elecampane, Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, and the
cleansing ointment of smallage. Emplaisters, de janua, gratia dei, and divinum.

10. Sarcoticks. Simple. Meals, of fenugreek, tares, and lupines. Gumms,
frankincense, pitch of both sorts, turpentine, sarcocol, aloes, and myrrh.
Minerals, burnt lead, and ceruse. Compound. Unguents, basilicon, aureum,
pompholygos, and apostolorum. Emplaisters, de janua, de gratia dei, divinum,
and of betony.

11. Cicatrizers, Simple. Plants, malicorium, plantain, myrtle, balaustia, and
roses. Minerals, bole-armoniack, terra sigillata, litharge, ceruse, lapis
haematites, calaminaris, cadmia, pompholyx, dross of iron, burnt lead, squamma
aeris, burnt brass, burnt antimony, lime, burnt alume, and burnt vitriol. The
six latter must be washed till they have lost their acrimony. Compound.
Unguents, white of Rhafis, red desiccative, and diapompholygos. Emplaisters, de
cerussa, of the stone calaminaris, diapalma, and of Paracelsus.

12. Stoppers of blood. Roots, of lungwort, and cinkfoyl. Leaves, of
knot-grasse, burnet, horsetail, plantaine, perwinkle, and nettles. Fruits,
galls. Flowers, of pomegranats. Juices, vinegar, sour grapes, acacia, and
hypocistis. Gumms, mastick, dragons blood, frankincense, and myrrh. Animals,
gluten, mummy, and the white of an egg. Minerals, bole-armoniack, terra
sigillata, the stone haematites, jaspis, coral, alum, and vittiol.

13. Glutinants. Simple. Roots, of lungwort, tormentil, and cinkfoyl. Leaves,
of lambs-tongue, hounds-tongue, milfoyl, vervain, yarrow, mous-eare, betony,
scabious, bugle, sanicle, S. John's Wort, and self-heal. Gumms, sarcocol, myrrh,
frankincense, aloes, turpentine, and liquid pitch. Animals, worms, mummy, and
hares hairs cut small. Minerals, litharge of gold. Compound Oiles, of myrrh,
tobacco, and balsames. Unguents, aureum, and red desiccative. Emplaisters,
against ruptures, triapharmacum, and nigrum.

14. Vesicants. Simple. Roots, of thapsia, and pellitory of spain. Seeds, of
mustard, and stavesagre Gumms, euphorbium. Animals, pigeons dung, and
cantharides. Compound, emplastrum vesicatorium.

15. Cathereticks, Simple, burnt pumice-stone, parched salt, burnt alum, burnt
vitriol, burnt antimony, or crocus metallorum, rust, sqamma aeris,
praecipitated mercury, cinabar, and powder of savine. Compound. Oil, of
vitriol, and sulphur, aqua secunda, unguentum Apostolorum, and aegyptiacum.

16. Causticks, live lime, burnt-brasse, sublimat mercury, arsenick, the common
caustic of the chirurgions, and the gummy liquor which is drawn out for the
confection of mercurius vitae. These are the most usual simples and
compositions now in use; but for the more reddy use thereof, note, that
Cephalicks are used in the headache, vertigo, loss of memory, convulsion,
epilepsy, apoplexy, palsy, trembling, stupidity, cramp, nightmare, lethargy,
coma, catalepsy, catarrh, melancholy, dotage, raving, phrensy, and every hot
and cold distemper of the head. Ophthalmicks, in weakness, and dullness of
sight, webs, palsy, weepings, films, and inflammation of the eyes. etc.
Pectorals, in all difficulties of breathing, coughs, inflammation or impostume
of the lungs, pleurisy, spitting corrupt matter, consumption, spitting blood,
not receiving nourishment, and hectic fevers, etc. Cardiacks, in all
continuing and intermitting fevers, malignant, pestilent, measils, small-pocks,
all pestilent diseases, french pox, leprosy, taking poison, sincopal fever,
pain of the heart, swoundings, palpitation of the heart, and sadness of the
heart, etc. Stomachicals, in weakness of the stomach, difficulty of digestion,
less of appetite, loathing of food, belchings, windiness of the stomach,
waterings of it, vomiting, choler, immoderate thirst, pain of the heart,
burning of the stomach, slipperinesse of the stomach, loosnesse of the belly,
loss of the stomachs retentive faculty, and all diseases of the intrals,
bloody flux, cholick, greediness of appetite etc. Hepaticks, in the cachexy,
general dropsy in the flesh, betwixt flesh and skin, timpany, yellow jaundise,
obstruction of the liver, weakness, inflammation, scirrhus, and flux of it,
french pox, and leprosy. etc. Spleneticks, in the black-jaundise, obstruction
and scirrhus of the spleen, pain of the sides, hypochondriack melancholy, and
scurvy. etc. Nephriticks, in difficulties of urine, not being able to hold it,
inflammation of the reins and urines heat, running of the reins, ulcers in the
reins or bladder, pissing of blood and corruption, and stone in the reins or
bladder. etc. Vterines, in suppression of the months and inordinacy of them,
flux, inflammation, scirrhus and ulcers of the womb, difficulty of birth, mola,
abortion, barrenness, slipperinesse, and falling of the womb, filthy color of
women, cachexy, and dropsy of the womb, raging of the womb, melancholy, and
hysteric passion. etc. Arthriticks in all greifs of the joints, hips,
hand-gout, foot-gout, and moveable-gout. etc. So the rest in hot or cold
diseases.

Note, Things hurtful to the parts are to be avoided, sc. To the head,
sowfennel, mandrake, hemlock, sowbread, camells hay, parsley, flowers of Ivy,
saffron, dates, ripe olives, nutts, accornes, juniper berries, toadstools,
horary fruits, seed of hemp, slax, coriander, darnell, bulbs, frankincense,
storax, livers, milk, wormwood, hops, vapors, narcoticks, and excess. To the
eyes, lettuce, cresses, cabbage, nuts, mushrooms, pulses, spices, bulbs,
sassages, milk, gross meats, winds, fumes, oiles, sternutatories, vomiting, and
too much light or darkness. To the ears, things far, winds, repulsives,
narcoticks, and too cold things. To the teeth, things too hot or cold, milk,
moist fruits, fatts, pulses, vinegar, things sharp, sweet, narcoticks,
corrosives. To the jaws, things sharp, and rancid, too hot, constipation of
the belly, long sleep, repellers, mercurials. To the breast, henbane, hemlock,
mandrake, horehound, things sweet, nutts, nettles, hot spices, aperient roots
if ill, arsnick, fumes, dust, things too cold, dry, astringent, purging, and
fatt, vomitories, sternutatories, and motion if affected, To the heart,
poisons, toadstooles, narcoticks, cold air, things too cold, passions, and
phlebotomy. To the stomach, pot herbs, meat salt, too dry, crude, fat, hot,
flatulent, aromatic, cold, gross, purging, and copious. To the liver, apples,
things too hot, cold, styptick, sweet, fat, or aperient, and hydrargyrats. To
the spleen, things gross, flatulent, astringent, heating, sweet, and acid. To
the reins and bladder, things too sharp, salt, pepered, acute, sweet, cold
actually, and cooling of the feet. To the womb, things too cold, moist, foetid,
odorate, sweet, and astringent, dry, strong, and chemical. To the joints,
things too strong, cold, hot, salt, sharp, gross, much motion, and strong
purgers.

DYNAMILOGIA PHARMACEUTICA.
Or The whole use, of all simples and compounds contained in the London
Dispensatory with the diseases cured by them in Alphabetical order: together
with the Doses and Forms of all kinds of remedies.
A.
ABortion hindering. Herb. Salvia. tanacetum. Lap. Aetites. Elect. Phylonium
persicum. Vng. Unguentum Comitissae. Empl. Emplastrum ad Herniam.

Ache. Rad. Acanthi. Herb. Nicotiana. Sem. Sinapis. Adeps anserina. Flor.
chamomillae. Aq. gentianae compositae. Ol. Hirundinum. Vng. laurinum commune.
Resumptivum, dialthaea. Empl. e cymino. Stypticum. See pain.

Adders sting, See venomous beasts.

Adust humors. Aq. fumariae, Lupuli. Elect. confectio hamech. Pil. de fumaria.

Afterbirth. Rad. aristolochiae, peucedani. Herb. aristolochia, artemisia,
calamintha, dictamnus creticus, hippoglossum, marrubium, pulegium, sabina,
thymum. Flor. lavendulae, pastinacae. Resin. myrrha. An. castoreum. Aq.
pulegii. Spir. castorii. Aq. gentionae c. bryoniae c. vel hysterica, and D.
Stephani. Tinct. castorii. Pulv. diacalaminthe simplex. Antid. antidotum
haemagogum. Pil. Arabicae. Troch. hysterici.

Agues in the breast to cure. Herb. carduncellus. See inflammation.

Agues. Rad. asari, imperatoriae, plantaginis. Herb. argentina, fumaria,
lupulus, pentaphyllum. An. testiculi galli. Aq. cardui. Sir. e coralliis c. de
papavere erratico sive rubro. Elect. diaprunum lenitivum, catholicon, e succo
rosarum. Pil. aggregativae, de eupatorio, de hiera cum agarico. Troch. de
aniso, diarhodon, de lacca. Vng. resumptivum. Ol. Chym. sulphuris, salis,
vitrioli.

Almonds of the ears, Herb. succisa ap.

Andicom. See Fellon.

Appetite provoking. Herb. acetosa, apium, betonica, magistrantia, mentha.
Fruct. cerasa. Aq. s. absinthii, menthae, epithymi, gentianae c. Sir. de
absynthio, de epithymo. Rob. de berberis. Elect. mithridatium. Troch.
diacorallion. Ol. menthae. Vng. mastichinum. Ceratum stomachicum Gal.

S. Anthonies fire. Herb. barva Jovis, helxine, solanum.

Apostumes. Herb. alsine, scabiosa. Aq. scabiosae. Vng. e nicotiana,
resumptivum. Empl. e nostratibus.

Apoplexies. Aq. cerasorum nig. Imperialis, bezoartica Matthew. Elect theriaca
Androm.

Asthma. Herb. nicotiana. Flor. malvae. Aq. flor. rorismarini, tabaci. Decoct.
pectorale. Lohoch, de pino. Pulv. diamargariton frigidum. Elect. theriaca
Androm. diaireos Salom. Troch. bechici. Vng. de peto, resumptivum. Ol. Chym.
terebinthinae. Aq. imperialis, mirabilis. Troch. aliptae moschatae.

B.
BAck strengthening. Herb. camphorata, centinodium, pulegium. Pil. foetidae. Ol.
moschaeleum, vulpinum. Empl. nervinum. Vng. Comitissae.

Baldness. Rad. arundinis. Adeps ursi. Aq. melissae composita.

Belly ach. Herb. amaracus, carduncellus vel senecio, carduus benedictus,
caryophyllata, geraneum calumbinum, mentha aquatica. Gum. tacamahaca. Empl. e
baccis lauri, diaphoenicon. See Bowels.

Belly loosening. Herb. atriplex, calendula, fumaria. Flor. violarum. Fruct.
ficus virides, passulae. Sir. rosaceus solutivus.

Belching. Herb. betonica, acetum scilliticum. Sir. de mentha. Ox. scilliticum
compositum. Pulv. diaspoliticum. Elect. hiera picra simplex.

Beauty causing. Herb. lupulus. Flor. fabarum. Sem. nigellae. Aq. fragorum.
Elect. diacrocuma, hiera diacolocynthidos. Troch. agarici. Ol. costinum. Vng.
catapsoras, citrinum.

Bees stinging. Herb malva. An. apes ap. Vng. e nicotiana.

Bleeding to stopp. Rad. pentaphylli, rhapontici, spinae albae. Herb. aparine,
bursa pastoris, centinodium, cauda equina, lotus, millefolium. Flor.
schoenanthi. Marin. succinum, corallium rubrum. Aq. symphyti. Elect. phylonium
persicum. Troch. ramich.

Bladder. Rad. asparagi, filipendulae, paeoniae, plantaginis. Herb. bardana,
betonica, ceterach, chamaemelum, geranium columbinum, malva, melilotus,
scordium, verbena. Fruct. dactyli. An. mel. Aq. chamaemeli, parietariae. Sir.
de althaea, de portulaca. Pulv. dialacca, lithontribon. Antid. haemagogum,
mithridatium. Elect. benedicta laxativa, elescoph, passulatum, triphera major.
Troch. de lacca, de terra lemnia. Ol. nymphaeae. piperis.

Blackness and blewnesse. Rad. poligonati. Herb. bellis, magistrantia.

Blood cleansing. Rad. cichorei. Herb. absinthium. Aq. cichorei, sumariae,
nasturtii.

Blood congealed. Herb. benedicta caryophyllata, chamaepytis, hypropiper,
lotus, magistrantia. Vng. basilicon minus.

Blood. Herb. acetosa, lujula, borrago, buglossum, portulaca. Fruct. fraga,
cassia fistula, tamarindi. Sem. cichorei, lactucae, cucurbitae, citrulli,
cucumeris, melonis, portulacae, endiviae. Aq. lactucae, portulacae, nymphaeae,
florum viol. acerosae, cichorei, endiviae, sumariae, cordialis frigida
Saxoniae. Sir. portulacae.

Bloody flux. Rad. althaeae. Herb. consolida rubra, lingua cervina, plantago.
Sir. de mucilaginibus, myrtinus. Elect. micleta, phylonium persicum. Troch. de
carabe, de spodio, de terra lemnia, ramich, diacorallion.

Black jaundice. Sir. de pomis purgans. Troch. de cupatorio.

Boyles, inguinalis. Sir. de cichoreo cum rhabarb. Vng. nutritum. See
Carbuncles.

Binding. Rad. acori, althaeae, hyacinthi, ulmariae, zedoariae. Cort. querci,
suberis. Herb. angelica, buxus. Isatis, solanum, sophia chirurgorum. Fruct.
dactyli, piper. Resin. sanguis draconis. An. priapus cervi, ebur. Min.
lithargyrum, pompholix. Vng. diapompholigos nihili. Empl. metroproptoticon.

Bones broken. Rad. acanthi, poligonati. Herb. spatula foetida, bursa pastoris.
Gumm. elemi. Emplast. de betonica.

Bowels. Herb. crassula. An. serum lactis. Flor. lupuli. Aq. iridis, pulegii.
Pulv. aromaticum rosatum. Pil. de aloe, de hiera cum agarico. Troch. de
absinthio, ramich. Empl. de meliloto c. vel comp.

Bowels excoriated, turbasis.

Brain. Rad. galangae. Herb. pulegium, salvia. Flor. stoechados, Fruct.
myrobalani. Sem. sinapi. Ex plant agaricus. Marin. ambra grisea. Aq. cardui
benedicti, melissae. Flor. calendulae, cinamomi Matthew. melissae composita. Mel.
emblicorum. Saccharum rosatum. Spec. aromaticum rosatum, diambra, diamoschu
dulce, and amarum, pleres arconticon. Elect. theriaca diatess. Pil. de aloe
lota, aureae. Troch. de gallia moschata, hedychroi, de agarico. Vng. martiatum.
Empl. cephalicum, a nostratibus, nervinum. Ol. Chym. sulphuris.

Brain cooling. Herb. acetosa, lujula, hedera arborea, primula veris,
magistrantia.

Brain heating. Rad. pyrethri salivaris. Herb. agnus castus. Elect. diacorum.

Breath short. Rad. enulae campanae, glycyrrhizae. Herb. adiantum, calamintha,
cattaria, chamaedrys, hyssopus, pulmonaria, thymum, tussilago, verbascum. Flor.
hedysari. Fruct. ficus. Sem. nigellae. Gum. galbanum. Aq. tuffilaginis,
petasitidis composita. Acetum scilliticum. Sir. botryos, capillorum veneris, de
glycyrrhiza, de prassio, melissophylli, de tussilagine, and eclegma. Spec. dia
moschu dulce, amarum. Elect. diaireos Salomonis. Pil. de hieracum agarico. Ol.
Chym. terebinthinae.

Breast cold. Lign. sassafras.

Breast inflamed, See inflammation.

Breast. Lign. sassafras. Herb. adiantum, apium, betonica, mentha, scabiosa,
thymum, vincetoxicum. Flor. violarum. Sem. urticae. Maria. succinum. Aq.
marrubii, scabiosae. Acet. scylliticum. Lohoch, scylliticum. Spec. diaireos
simp. pulvis Haly. Elect. mithridatium. Troch. de carabe. Ol. leucoii. Vng.
pectorale, resumptivum, dialthaeae.

Breath stinking. Cort. cinnamomum, citrii. Fruct. nux myristica. Sem. anisi.
Gum. myrrha. Aq. melissae. Pil. de agarico. Troch. de ligno aloes.

Bubo. See swellings.

Bruises. Rad. bardanae, eringii, polygonati, spatulae foetidae. Cort. fabarum.
Herb. adiantum, geranium columbinum, herba Paris, hydropiper, lotus urbana,
magistrantia. Sir. de symphyto. Ol. hirundinum, catel. hyperici comp. Empl. e
cymino. Ol. excest. Vng. nervinum.

Burnings. Cort. ulmi. Herb. ebulus, hedera. Fruct. pepo. Vng. populeum.

Burstnesse. See ruptures. Rad. acanthi, consolidae utriusque. Herb. adiantum
utrumque, auricula muris, dictamnus creticus, empetron, lotus urbana. Empl. ad
herniam.

C.
CAncersto help. confectio hamech.

Canker. Rad. cyperi utriusque. Herb. betonica pauli. Empl. a nostratibus. Mel
ros. Ol. vitrioli. Vng. aegyptiacum.

Catarrbs. Sir. tussilaginis compositus.

Carbuncles. Rad. mororum Celsi. Sem. nasturtii. Sir. de cichorio cum
rhabarbaro. See plague.

Choler. Rad. rhabarbari. Cort. berberis. Herb. acetosa, centaurium utrumque,
fumaria, lupulus, perficarum folia, violaria. Flor. violarum, centaurii, mali
persicae. Fruct. cassiae fistulae, tamarindi. Suc. aloes, manna, diagridium,
agaricus. An. serum lactis. Rad. asarabacca, rhaponticum, filicis. Fl. lupuli.
Gumm. arabicum. Acetum scilliticum. Sir. de absinthio comp. acetosus. fl.
nymphaeae, persicorum, de pomis magist. de rhabarbaro, rosaceus solutivus,
rosaceus solurivus cum sena. Spec. diaturbith cum Rhabarbaro. Elect. amarum,
diacassia cum manna, diaprunum lenitivum, cassia extracta sine foliis senae and
cum foliis, diaprunum solutivum, catholicon, elescoph, lenitivum, passulatum, e
succo rosarum. Pil. aggregativae, de aloe rosata, de hiera cum agarico, Rudii,
fine quibus, de fuccino, ex tribus, turpeti aureae, assaireth, de rhabarbaro.
Troch. de absinthio.

Chollick. Rad. anthorae, pastinacae, zedoariae. Herb. coronopus, saxisragia
alba. Flor. chamaemeli. Fruct. piper. Sem. ammi. anisi. Flor. anethi,
schoenanthi, spicae nardi. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Vinum absinthites. Sir. de
althaea. Spec. elect. diacymini, diagalangae. Elect. micleta, mithridatium,
theriaca Andromachi, diaphoenicon, diasena, elescoph, Reginae Coloniens. Troch.
ramich. Ol. de baccis lauri, moschaeleum. Vng. de nicotiana, nervinum. Ol.
Chym. piperis, de baccis lauri, succini, philonia. Empl. de baccis lauri.

Catalepsie. Herb. lavendula, chamaemelum.

Chapt lips and hands Vng. pomatum.

Chincough. Herb. urtica.

Cods swollen. Rad. phu. Herb. cicuta.

Conception, strengthening. Pil. de succino.

Colds. Rad. phu. Herb. betonica. Suc. liquiritiae. Sir. de betonica comp.
Resin. omnes. Spec. diambra, diaspoliticum. Troch. bechici albi and uigri.

Consumptions. Cort. juglandium viridium. Herb. borrago, tussilago. Flor.
malvarum, rosarum rub. Fruct. nuclei pinei, uvae passae. An. lac. Marin.
perlae, succinum. Lap. bezoar. Aq. bezoartica, cordialis frigida Sax.
Bezoartica Matthew. imperialis, rosae solis. Sir. cardiacus, e coralliis comp.
corticum citriorum. Lohoch, e passulis. Saceb. rosatum. Spec. aromaticum
rosatum, diamargariton frigidum, diapenidion, rosata novella. Elect.
diacorallion, mithrida tium. Pil. de hiera cum agarico. Vng. pectorale,
resumptivum. Ol. Chym. cinnamomi.

Cough. Rad. enulae campanae, mechoacanae. Herb. cauda equina, coronopus,
hyssopus, pentaphyllum, scabiosa, urtica. Flor. malvarum. Gumm styrax
calamitis. Succ. liquiritiae. Marin. succinum. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq.
nymphaeae, scabiosae, urticae. Decoctum pectorale. Sir. botryos, de erysimo, de
meconio, russilaginis, papaveris, glycyrrhizae. Lohoch de farfare, e passulis.
Saccharum penidium. Spec. diamargariton frigidum, diapenidion, diatragacanthum
frigidum. Elect. diacorum, theriaca Androm. diaireos Solomonis. Pil. de
styrace. Troch. bechici albi, and nigri. Ol. amygdalarum dulcium.

Convulsion. Rad. aristolochiae, centaurei majoris, spatulae foetidae. Herb.
beronica vulgaris, marum, serpillum, trinitatis herba. Flor. lavendulae,
paralyseos. Sem. paeoniae. An. castorium. Bac. juniperi. Aq. paeoniae,
cerasorum nig. comp. Sir. de paeonia comp. Lohoch e passulis. Spec. diamoschu
dulce. Elect. diacorum, theriaca diateffaron, hiera logadii. Ol. piperis. Vng.
arregon, martiatum. Ol. Chym. succini.

Cramp. See convulsion. Herb. hypericon, marum. An. anulus ex ungula alcis.
Flor. jasmini Bac. juniperi. Ol. rutae, rerebinthinae, latericium
philosophorum, succini, vulpinum, de castoreo, laurinum. Vng. martiatum.

D.
DEad flesh Rad. dracontii. Vng. Aegyptiacum.

Deafness. Rad. hellebori nigri. Spir. castorii Pil. sine quibu^. Ol.
castorii, baccarum lauri, corni, rutae, salviae, majoranae, rosarum.

Diabetes. Herb. centaurium utrumque.

Defluxions. Lign. santalum.

Dislocations. Herb. bardana, bursa pastoris. Empl. oxycrooeum.

Dogs biting. Rad. asclepiados, bardanae, gentianae. Herb. allium, buxus.

Dropsy. Rad. chinae, ebuli, rhabarbari. Cort. sambuci. Herb. agrimonia,
asarum, bryonia, carduus B. M. fumaria, hyssopus, polium, soldanella. Flor.
schoenanthi. Fruct. baccae lauri. Sem. fraxini. An. serum lactis. Marin. arena.
Bac. juniperi. Aq. betonicae, ebuli, nicotianae. Sir. de spina cervina, de
cupatorio. Pulv. dialacca. Elect. diacorum, theriaca diatessaron, diacureuma.
Pil. de hiera cum agarico. Troch. de ligno aloes, de lacca, de rofis. Vng.
Agrippae, de artanita. Ol. terebinthinae, salis, sulphuris. Pil. de euphorbio.

Drunkenness. Herb hedera utraque, lactuca. Fruct. a^agdala amara. An.
hirundo. Min. amethystus. An. lac. Acetum. Sir. accrosus, granatorum.

E.
Ears. Rad. hellebori nigri. Herb. dypsacus, hyssopus. An. adeps vulpis. Cons.
saccharum rosatum. Troch. pastilli Adronis. Empl. a nostraribus.

Eyes. Rad. doronici, glycyrrhizae, zingiberis. Herb. abfinthium, betonica
Pauli, cyanus, dypsacus, camphorata, lotus urbana, plantago, senna. Flor.
rosmarini. Fruct. gariophylli. An. hirundines, caput cati. Fruct. baccae
juniperi. Aq. rosarum alb. euphrasiae, cinnamomi, Matthew. Acet. scilliticum.
Sacch. rosatum. Elect. theriaca Andromachi. Confectio humain. Pil. de aloe
lota, aureae, mastichinae, sine quibus, arabicae. Sief. de thure, de plumbo.
Vng. tutiae, sive pompholigos.

F.
FAinting, Rad. borraginis, buglossi, galangae, scorzonerae. Marin. perlae.
Min. aurum. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq. imperialis, cinnamomi. Sir. corticum
citriorum, de rosis ficcis, cardiacus. Pulv. laetificans Galeni. Troch.
alexiterii.

Falling sickness bad for. Sem. apii.

Falling sickness helping. Rad. ononidis. Herba, betonica, galega, hypericon
pulicaria, lavendula, senna, Trinitatis herba, verbascum. Flor. paralyseos,
lavendulae. Ex plant. viscus quercinus. An. castorium, cranium humanum. Marin.
corallium rubrum. Min. aurum. Lap. hirundinis. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq.
cerasorum nigrorum, paeoniae composita, bezoartica Matthioli. Acet.
scilliticum. Spec. diamoschu dulce. Elect. diacorum, theriaca diaressaron,
Andromachi. Ol. Chym. baccarum juniperi, latericium philosophorum, succini.

Farnesse hindering. Herb. aparine.

Fevers. Rad. lilii albi, mechoacanae. Lign. santalum album and citrinum.
Herb. acetosa, lujula, bellis, cichorium, salix. Flor. nymphaeae, violarum.
Fruct. cassia fistula, tamarindi. Sem. citrulli, cucumeris, melonis, endiviae,
portulacae. An. testiculi galli. Marin. perlae. Min. aurum. Lap. hirundinum.
Aq. acetosae, cardui benedicti, absinthii, centaurei, pentaphylli, petasitidis
comp. bezoartica, cordialis frigida Sax. theriacalis, bezoartica Matthew. Sir.
infusionis fl. cariophillorum, acetositatis citriorum, corticum citriorum, e
coralliis compositus, de meconio comp. diacodium, melissophylli, fl. nymphaeae
simp. and comp. de papavere err. de cichorio cum rhabarbaro, papaveris. Lohoch,
de papavere. Sacch. tabulatum simplex and compositum. Spec. confectionis
liberantis. Elect. confectio de hyacintho, theriaca Androm. Ol. Chym. salis,
sulphuris.

Fear. Herb. thymum. Lap. adamas. Spec. pleres arconticon.

Fellon. Herb. hidropiper. Empl. de meliloto.

Fistula. Herb. bugula, chamaepitys, sophia chirurgorum. Troch. pastilli
Adronis. Vng aegyptiacu^, e nicotiana, apostoloru^. Ol. sulphuris.

Phlegm. Rad. bryoniae, mechoacanae, tripolii. Herb. senna. Fruct. nuclei pin.
Suc. aloe. Ex plant. agaricus. Min. sulphur. Cort. alni nig. Flor. genistae,
sambuci. Aq. hyssopi, pulegii. Vin. absinthites. Acet. scilliticum. Sir.
acetosus, byzantinus, de prasio, de quinque radicibus, scabiosae, rosaceus
solutivus cum agarico, portulacae, de eupatorio. Mel emblicorum. Spec.
diacalaminthes, dianisum, diaturbith cum rhabarbaro. Elect. diacinamomum,
benedicta laxativa. Pil. de agarico, aggregativae, de aloe rosata, de hiera cum
agarico, mechoacanae, Rudii, sine quibus, de succino, turperi aureae. Ol.
euphorbii. Vng. Agrippae.

Fleas. Herb. hydropiper, pulicaria.

Flux. Rad. acori, althaeae, bistortae, nardi, rhapontici, rhabarbari,
ulmariae, zedoariae. Cort. avellanarum, castancarum, pinearum, querci, suberis.
Lig. aspalathus. Herb. acetosa, aparine, argentina, barba jovis, beta rubra,
cauda equina, centinodium, clematis daphnoides, crassula, lentiscus,
millefolium, muscus, myrtus, nummularia, pyrola, rosmarinum, salix, sedum
majus, vitis vinifera. Flor. balaustia Fruct. pyra, galliae, mespila, berberis.
An. hepar anatis. Aq. cydoniorum, plantaginis. Sir. de mucilaginibus, myrtinus,
de rosis siccis. Rob. de cornis, cydoniorum, prunorum sylvestrium. Saccharum,
rosatum. Elect. diacydonium, micleta, diascordium, phylonium persicum. Ol.
cydoniorum, mastichinum, myrtinum. Empl. diaphoenicon calidum, frigidum.

Forgetfulness. Lap. smaragdus. Aq. majoranae, melissae comp. Sir.
melissophilli. Spec pleres arconticon. Elect. confectio hamech.

Freckles. Rad. bryoniae, argentinae, artanitae. Herb. bryonia, levisticum,
sabina, tithymalus. Aq. fumariae. Vng. citrinum. Ol. tartari per deliquium.

French pox. Rad. chinae, sarsae parillae, scabiosae. Lign. guajacum,
sassafras. Herb. betonica Pauli, carduus benedictus, trinitatis herba. Aq.
theriacalis.

Frenzies. Herb. dypsacus, sumaria, lactuca, plantago, salix, senna, verbena,
violaria. Fruct. bac. juniperi. Sir. de papavere erratico, sive rubro. Elect.
phylonium magistrale, requies Nic. Ol. nymphaeae, mandragorae.

Face. Vng. pomatum, citrinum.

Fundament. Rad. labrum veneris.

Fundament fallen out. Herb malva, marrubium nigrum and foetidum. Fruct.
gallae. Vng. comitissae, sumach.

G.
GAll. Rad. rubiae tinctorum. Herb. centaurium utrumque.

Gangreenes. Herb. bugula, nicotiana. Sem. lupinorum. Ol. sulphuris.

Gnats. Herb. pulicaria.

Gouts. Rad. hermodactyli. Cort. fabarum. Herb. centaurium utrumque, ebulus,
hydropiper, hyoscyamus, iberis cardamantice, lepidium. Ex An. pinguedo caprae.
Fruct. baccae juniperi. Acetum, scilliticum. Elect. cathol. Pil. foetidae, de
hermodactylis. arthriticae, de euphorbio. Ol. avellanarum, piperinum, vulpinum.
Vng. e nicotiana, martiatum. Empl. de baccis lauri. Ol. Chym. bac. juniperi,
salis, sulphuris.

Griping of the belly. Rad. althaeae, asclepiadis, graminis. Herb.
carduncellus, carduus benedictus, chamaemelum, utrumque serpillum. Aq.
calaminthae, iridis, parierariae. Spec. diacymini. Elect. micleta.

Gravel. Rad. althaeae, graminis. Herb. consolida rubra, helxine. Lap.
nephriticus. Aq. saxifragiae, quinquefolii, rhaphani, helenii, pimpinellae.
Sir. de althaea. Pulv. senae comp. ma.

Green sickness. Rad. asari. Herb. ageratum, centaurium utrumque, genista
nasturtium aquaticum. Vin. absinthites.

Gumms. Fruct. gallae, berberis. Resin. myrrha, mastiche. Vin. fl. rosmarini.

Gunshot. Herb. dictamnus creticus. Vng. e nicotiana.

H.
Hardness. See swellings.

Head strengthening. Herb, betonica, hedera utraque, herba paralysis,
rosmarinum, salvia. Fruct. myrobalani. An. castorium. Marin. succinum.
amethistus. Vin. fl. rosmarini. Pil. mastichinae, lucis majores. Ol. nardinum.

Headache helping. Rad. plantaginis. Herb. betonica, coronopus, hedera utraque,
herba paralysis, nicotiana, verbena, violaria. Flor. violarum. Sem. anisi,
nigellae. Gumm, styrax calamitis. Aq. papaveris albi. Ox. scilliticum, comp.
Lohoch de brassica Elect. diacorum, theriaca Androm. catholicon. Pil. aloe
phanginae, arabicae. Ol. anethi majoranae. Vng. ^e nicotiana, rosatum. Empl. a
nostratibus, de janua.

Health to preserve. Acetum scilliticum. Spec. cordiales temperatae.

Hypochondriacal melancholy. Herb. fumaria. An. serum lactis. Aq. Iupulorum.
Sir. de fumaria, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro, de epithymo. Ox. Julianizans. Sir.
de eupatorio. Troch. de capparibus. Empl. de meliloto comp. See melancholy.

Heart. Rad. borraginis, buglossi, scorzonerae. Cort. citriorum, limoniorum,
maci^. Herb. borrago, buglossum, genista, melissa, vitis vinifera. Flor.
borraginis, buglossi. Sem. citriorum. An. ebur, os de cord cervi. Mir. aurum.
Flor. chamaemeli. Aq. cardui, melissae, cerefolii, borraginis, buglossi. Aq.
comp, and Spir. angelicae, Gilberti, caponis, cinnamomi coelestis Matthew.
Tinctura croci. Sir. cardiacus, infusionis fl. cariophillorum, de cinnamomo,
acetofitatis citriorum, corticum cirriorum, e coralliis simp. and comp.
cydoniorum, melissae, fl. nymphaeae, de rosis siccis, violarum, de cichorio cum
rhabarbaro. Mel. emblicorum. Saccharum perlatum, rosatum. Spec. aromaticum
caryophyllatum, aromaticum rosatum, cordiales temperatae, cardiacus
magistralis, diambra, diamoschu dulce, diarrhodon abbatis, confectionis
liberantis. Elect. confectio alkermes, de hyacintho. Pil. Ruffi. Troch. de
gallia moschata, hedychroi. de ligno aloes, croco magma Damoc. ramich Mes.

Heart qualms. Fruct. myrobalani, baccae juniperi. Aq. cinnamomiper infusionem.
Spec. dianthos, rosata novella. Troch. de ligno aloes.

Heart burnings. Herb. lactuca, vitis vinifera.

Hectic fevers. An. testiculi galli. Aq. caponis Spec. diamargariton
frigidum. Elect. diacorallion, diaprunum lenitivum. Troch. de camphora, de
rosis. Ol. amygdalarum dulcium. Vng. resumptivum.

Humors. Rad. bryoniae, glycyrrhizae, polypodii. Herb. adiantum utrumque,
anethum, chamaedrys, nicotiana. Flor. fabarum. Fruct. praecoc. flor.
chamaemeli. Decoct. epithymi, sennae Gereonis. Vng. desiccativum rubrum.

Hemorrhoides helping. Rad. consolidae utriusque, cynoglossae, rubiae
tinctorum. Herb. cynoglossum, scrophularia, verbascum. Elect. antidotum
haemagogum, philonium persicum. Troch. de carabe, de terra lemnia. Vng. e
nicotiana, comitissae. Empl. a nostratibus.

Hiccoughs. Herb. anethum. Sir. de pomis alterans.

Hoarsenesse. Rad. glycyrrhizae. Herb. pulmonaria, verbascum. Gum.
tragacanthum, myrrha, styrax calamitis. Decoct. pectorale. Sir. jujubinus
^^hoch. de brassica Gordonii. Spec. diaireos simpl. diapenidion. ^^^^chici albi
and nigri.

Hair. He^^^ ^^us, tithymalus. Fruct. gallae. Sem. nasturtii. Gum. etc. lada^^
An. cerebrum leporis. Ol, vitellorum ovorum.

Hornets stinging. Vng. e nicotiana.

I.
I Liack passion. Spec. lithontribon Nich. Elect. theriaca Androm. Troch. de
rosis. Vng. e nicotiana. Ol. chym. baccarum juniperi. Indigestion. Rad.
gentianae, Cort. cinnamomi, citrii. Lign. xiloaloes. Herb. althaea,
malabathrum, mentha sativa. Fruct. caryophylli. piper. Cort. alni nigrae. Fruct
bacc. juniperi. Aq. betonicae, rorismarini. aq. and Spir. absinthii comp.
utraque, gentianae comp. usquebach. Tinct. scordii. Acetum scilliticum. Sir. de
absinthio, simp. and comp. de cinnamomo, de mentha. Lohoch scilliticum. Spec.
aromaticum rosatum, caryophyllatum, dimthos, diaspoliticum, diatrion piperion,
diacymini, diagalangae, lithontribon Nich, diamargariton calidum. Elect e
fassafras, diacinnamomum. Antid. haemagogum, theriaca Land. diacrocuma. Pil.
aloephanginae, stomachicae, turpeti aureae. Troch. de absinthio, hedychroi,
rosarum. Ol. menthae. Vng. mastichinum. Empl. e crusta panis. diaphoenicon,
Stomachicum magistrale, ceratum stomachicum.

Infection. Spec. confect. liberant. pulvis Saxonicus. Elect. theriaca Land.
diacrocuma. Troch. alexiterii. Ol. baccarum juniperi, sulphuris.

Inflammations. Rad. bistortae. Lign. santala 3. Herb. barba jovis, calendula,
centinodium, cyanus, ebulos, hepatica, hyoscya mus, millefolium, plantago,
portulaca, serpillu^, solanum, sonchus laevis and asper, ulmaria. Flor. crocus,
Schoenanthi. Fruct ficus recentes. Sem. soenugraeci, lupinor. Re^n. camphora.
An. hirundines. Lap. topazius. Aq. rosarum albaru^, fragorum. Spec.
diatragacanthum frigidum. Elect. caryocostinum. Troch. albi Rhasis, de terra
lemnia. Ol. violarum. Vng e solano, populeum, refrigerans Gal. Empl. barbarum
magnum, ex cicuta cum ammoniaco, gratia dei, de janua.

Inflammations in the privities. Herb. bellis, centinodium, herba Paris, ruta.
Flor. schoenanthi, leucoii. Gran. cicer. Sir. florum nymphaeae simp. and comp.

Joints. Rad. hermodactyli, sarsae parillae, zingiberis. Cort. fabarum. Herb.
centinodium, herba paralysis. Fruct. nux myristica. Ex Plant. agaricus. Acetum
scilliticum. Elect. theriaca Androm. elescoph, hiera diacolocynthidos. Pil
foetidae, de hermodactylis, de opopanace, arthriticae. Ol. avellanarum de
behen, nucis myristicae, maceris, iridis, lumbricorum terrestrium, vulpinum,
piperis. Vng. arregon, martiatum. Empl. e baccis lauri. Ol. Ch^^^ ^^accarum
hederae, latericium philosophorum.

Joynt-ache. Herb. hypericon, nicoriana. Vng* ^^um. Pil. de euphorbio.

Itch. Rad. chinae, enulae campanae, hellebori nigri, glycyrrhizae, scabiosae.
Herb. sumaria, lupulus, nicotiana, scabiosa, senna. Sem. foenugraeci,
lupinorum. Marin. spuma maris. Min. sulphur. Cort. alni nigrae. Aq. lupulorum.
Sir. de ammoniaco, de fumaria, scabiosae, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro. Elect.
confectio hamech. hiera Logadii. Pil. de fumaria. Ol. Nicodemi. Vng. enulatum
utrumque e nicotiana, nutritum five triapharmacon, ex oxylapatho, catapsoras,
citrinum.

K.
KIbes. Herb. umbilicus Veneris.

Kings evil. Rad. eringii, spatulae foetidae. Herb melissa, scrophularia.

Kidneys. Rad. glycyrrhizae, gramini^. Herb. helxine, mentha aquatica. Sir.
acetosus comp. de althaea. Pulv. sennae comp. ma. sive Hollandicus. Elect.
passulatum. Vng. populaeum.

L.
Leanness causing. Herb. aparine. Sem. fraxini.

Leanness helping. Spec. diatragacanthi frig.

Leprosy. Rad. Chinae, hellebori nigri. Cort. fraxini rad. Lig. guajacum.
Herb. alsine, herba venti (...) anemone. Sem. nigellae, nasturtii, Min.
Sulphur. Aq: summitatum lupulorum. Acetum. Sir. de ammoniaco, de epithymo, de
pomis purgans. Elect. confectio hamech, hiera logadii. Pil. foetidae, indae.

Lethargy. Herb. magistantia, serpillum. Sem. sinapis. An. castorium. Min.
sulphur. Spir. ca storii. Pil. cochiae cum helleboro. Ol. anisi.

Lice killing. Herb. cotonaria, stoechas. Sem. staphisagriae.

Ligaments. Oleum, costinum.

Liver. Rad. asari, chamaeleontis utriusque, and chelidonii, chinae, cicho^i,
curcumae, endiviae, foeniculi, lauri, mororum Celsi, pentaphylli, rubiae
tinctorum, scorzonerae. Lign nephriticum. Herb. acetosa, agrimonia, ageratum,
anagallis, apium, asperula odorata, beta alba, nigra, and rubra betonica,
centaurium utrumque, chamaepitys, chamaedrys, cichoriu^, fragaria, fraxinus,
fumaria, hepatica, hedera terrestris, lingua cervina, lupulus, portulaca,
scordium, senna. Flor. lavendulae, violarum, cichorei, centaurei, sambuci.
Fruct. Ficus recentes. Sem. cichorei. Resin aloes. Ex plant agaricus. An. jecur
anatum Aq. lactucae, portulacae, violarum, acetosae, endiviae, and cichorei,
fragariae, graminis ca^ni, marrubii, gentianae comp. cinamomi, Matthew. Acet.
scilliticum. Sir. de absinthio uterque. s. etc. acerosus. s. etc. de ammoniaco,
byzantinus. s. etc. infusionis fl. cariophillorum, de fumaria, de cichorio cum
rhabarbaro, de epithymo, de portulaca, de euparorio. Spec. dialacca, diarrion
san^^son, diagalanga, diacurcuma. Elect. catholicon, Athanasia Mithridaris.
Pil. aggregarivae, ex tribus, de rhabarbaro. Troch. de absinthio, de ligno
aloes, de rhabarbaro, de aniso, de lacca. Ol. iridis, costinum, nardinum Cerat.
Oesypatum, santalinum. Empl. e baccis lauri, diachilon simplex, diaphoenicon
frigidum, de meliloto, comp. ceroneum, de janua, Ceratum stomachicum. Ol.
sulphuris.

Longing of Women. Herb. vitis vinifera.

Lust provoking, Rad. enulae campanae, eringii, galangae, pastinacae utriusque,
sisari. Herb. ceresolium, galion, urtica. Flor. crocus. Fruct. cubebae. Sem.
nasturtii, ciceres, fraxini. Resin. asa foetida. An. priapus cervi. Elect.
diacorum.

Lust staying. Rad, nymphaeae. Lap. Jaspis. Herb. mentha, lactuca. Sem. agni
casti, rutae, Gum, etc. camphora.

Lungs. Rad. aristolochiae, pentaphylli, spatulae foetid. Cort. iugland. virid.
Herb. adiantum utrumque, and aureum, auricula muris, attractylis, betonica,
consolida Saracenica, crassula, herba camphorata, marrubium album, nummularia,
pulmonaria, scabiosa, thymum, trinitatis herba, tussilago, violaria, urtica.
Fruct. ficus recentes, passulae. Sem. urticae. Suc. saccharum, liquiritiae. Ex
plantis, agaricus, An. pulmones vulpis. Marin. succinum. Aq. tussilaginis,
enulae campanae, absin thii mag is comp: and spiritus ejusdem. Aq. cinnamomi,
Matthew: rosae solis. Decoctum pectorale, florum and fructuum. Sir. botryos,
capillorum veneris, de glycyrrhiza, de hyssopo, jujubinus, de meconio,
melissophilli, scabiosae Ox. scilliticum comp. papaveris. Lohoch de papavere, e
passulis. Spec. diamargariton frigidum, diamoschu dulce, diatrion santalon,
pulvis Hasy. Elect. e sassafras, pectorale. Pil. de agarico, de hiera cum
agarico, de rhabarbaro. Vng. pectorale. Ol. chym. terebinthinae.

M.
MAd dogs biting. Rad. gentianae. Herb. allium, buxus, carduus benedictus,
cynoglossum, ebulus, echium, magistrantia, marrubia tria, melissa. An. cancer.

Madness. Rad. hellebori albi, and nig. Herb. borrago, fumaria, salix, senna.
Flor. rosmarini. Bac. juniperi. Decoct. epithymi. Sir. de pomis purgans, de
pomis magistralis. Elect. consectio hamech, requies Nich.

Marasmus. An. testiculi galli. Aq. caponis, bezoartica Matthew. Elect. diaprunum
lenitivum.

Mare. Sem. paeoniae. Elect. pleres arconticon, dianthos.

Megrim. Herb. nicotiana. Aq. betonicae, paralyseos. Ox. scilliticum comp.
Elect. confectio hamech, hiera logadii. Pil. arabicae.

Melancholy. Rad. hellebori albi, polypodii, scorzonerae. Herb. aspergula
odorata, borrago, ceterach, echium, epithymum, matricaria, melissa, senna.
Fruct. myrobalani. Sem. ocymi Ex plant. agaricus. An. serum lactis. Min. aurum,
lapis lazuli. Aq. summitatum lupulorum, borraginis, buglossi, bezoartica.
Tinct. croci, Acetum, scilliticum. Decoct. epithymi, senae Gereonis. Sir. de
betonica comp. melissophilli, de scolopendrio, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro, de
epithymo, de pomis purgans, de pomis magistralis, de rhabarbaro. Mel.
helleboratum, emblicorum. Sir. de eupatorio. Spec. diamoschu dulce, and amarum.
Elect. mithridatium, theriaca Androm. amarum minus, cassia extracta cum foliis
sennae, confectio hamech, lenitivum, passulatum, triphera mayor. Pil.
aggregativae, de hiera cum agarico, Rudii, sine quibus, arabicae, de fumaria,
indae.

Mice to kill. Rad. hellebori albi.

Mothers fits. Rad. bryoniae, peucedani, scorzonerae. Herb. anethum, nicotiana,
succisa, verbascum. Sem. paeoniae. Resin. asa foetida, galbanum. An. castorium.
Spir. castorii. Aq. perasitidis comp. Pil. de hiera cum agarico. Troch.
hysterici. Cerat. de galbano. Empl. hystericum. Ol. chym. sulphuris.

Moths. Herb. absinthium, botrys, coronopus, malabathrum.

Morphew. Rad. ari, chamaeleontis albi and nigri, dracontii. Herb. caprifolium,
tithymalus. Aq. fumariae, nasturtii aquat. Ol. vitellorum ovorum.

Mouth sore. Rad. bistortae. Herb. consolida saracenica, Sir. diamoron, vel mel
mororum.

N.
NAvil. Rad. peucedani. Herb. nicotiana.

Nits. Herb. cotonaria, stoechas.

Noise in the ears. Rad. porri, hellebori nig, Herb. hyssopus, melilotus. Ol.
Majoranae, castorii.

Numbnesse. Rad. acanthi. Vng. martiatum.

Neck stiff. Herb. nicotiana.

Nurses to breed milk. Rad. echii. Herb. anethum, ^oeniculum, herba venti,
Lactuca. Gran. cicer, hordeum Gall. Aq. foeniculi.

O.
OBstructions. Herb. absinthium, agrimonia, ageratum, carduus Mariae, erithmus,
epithymum, hedera terrestris, laurus, linaria, schoenanthus, scordium, sena.
Flor. lavendulae, lupuli, violarum, centaurii, sambuci, cichorci. Sir. acetosus
compositus. Pil. de hiera cum agarico, macri.

Opium, Rad. Doronici.

P.
PAin easing. Rad. althaeae. Herb. althaea, hyoscyamus, plantago.

An. adeps anserina. Flor. anethi, chamaemeli, centaurii, meliloti, rosmarini.
Ol. anethi, chamaemesi, meliloti, leucoii, vulpinum. Vng. anodynum,
resumptivum, populeum. Empl. stypticum, oxycroceum.

Palsy. Herb. camphorata. Flor. paralyseos. An. cranium humanum. Fruct. baccae
juniperi. Aq. cerasorum nigrorum, paralyseos. Spec. diamoschu dulce and amarum.
Elect. theriaca diatessaron. Pil. de opopanace. Ol. rutaceum, piperis,
nardinum, latericium philosophorum, majoranae. Vng. martiatum,

Perfume. Ol. nardinum.

Pestilence. Rad. angelicae, bistortae, chamaeleontis albi and nigri, doronici,
lilii albi, petasitidis, tormentillae. Herb. carduus benedictus, galega,
magistrantia, ruta, Flor. cariophillorum. Fruct. juglandes. Sem. citri. An.
ostrea. cornu unicornu. and cervi. Marin. ambra grisea. Lap. bozoar. Fruct.
baccae juniperi. Aq. portulacae, nymphaeae, acetosae, cardui benedicti,
scabiosae, pimpinellae, angelicae magis composita, and spiritus ejusdem. aq.
perasitidis composita, bezoartica, gentianae composita, theriacalis, bezoartica
Matthew. Sir. acetositatis citri, violarum, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro,
diacaryon, Spec. confectionis liberantis. Elect. confectio de hyacintho,
theriaca diatessaron, elect. de ovo, theriaca Andromachi, and Londinensis,
confectio humain. Pil. Ruffi. Troch. alexiterii. Ol. baccarum juniperi,
succini, vitrioli.

Pimples. Cort. cinnamomi. Herb. dypsacus. Lac virginum. Vng. e nicotiana,
citrinum.

Pissing blood. Herb. agrimonia, betonica, lentiscus. Marin. corallium rubrum.
Sir. de symphyto. Cons. saccharum rosatum.

Plague sores. Rad. imperatoriae. Herb. nicotiana, ranunculus. Aq. theriacalis,
coelestis, cardui benedicti.

Poisonous Weapons. Herb. dictamnus creticus, nicotiana.

Pleuresie. Herb. carduus benedictus, urtica. Flor. Violarum. Aq. nymphaeae.
Sir. de glycyrrhiza. Lohoch. de papavere. Spec. diatragacanthi frigidi. Elect.
lenitivum. Troch. diaspermaton. Ol. amygdalarum dulcium, violarum. Vng.
pectorale, resumptivum, althaeae. Pulvis Haly.

Pock holes. Herb. artanita. Marin. sperma ceti. Troch. alexiterii. Ol.
Nicodemi. Ol. Chym. terebinthinae.

Poison. Rad. angelicae, anthorae, aristolochiae, allii, chamaeleontis albi and
nigri, echii, petasitidis, phu min. scorzonerae. Cort. cinnamomi, citrii. Herb.
abrotanum utrumque, absinthium, allium, angelica, betonica, consolida regalis,
echium, magistrantia, malva, ruta, scordium. Sem. apii, anisi. An. cornu
unicorn. C. C. os cordis cervi. Lap. bezoar. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Spir.
castorii. Aq. theriacalis, bezoartica Matthew. Sir. acetositatis citri, corticum
citriorum, violarum. Spec. pulvis saxonicus. Elect. theriaca diatessaron,
mithridatium, theriaca Andromachi, and Londinensis, Athanasia Mithridatis.
Troch. de vipera ad theriacam, alexiterii. Vng. e nicotiana. Ol. Chym. succini.

Preparatives for vomiting. Sir. acetosi.

Priapismus. Herb. cicuta.

Phthisick. Herb. marrubium album, plantago. An. lac. Aq. tussilaginis,
plantaginis, rosae solis Sir. de meconio uterque, de mucilaginibus, de prasio,
de papavere. Pil. de cynoglosso, Scribonii. Troch. de camphora. Vng. e
nicotiana.

Putrefaction. Lign. guajacum, sassafras. Elect. diacrocuma, hiera
diacolocynthidos. Empl. e crusta panis, diacalciteos.

Q.
QVinsey. Herb. crassula.

R.
Reins. Rad. asparagi, asphodeli maris, bardanae, behen albi and rubri,
consolidae utriusque, endiviae, galangae utriusque, mechoacannae, peoniae
utriusque, plantaginis, saxifragiae albae. Herb. anagallis utraque, cauda
equina, centinodium, consolida rubra, epithymum, chamaepitys, linaria,
melilotus, plantago, scordium, thymum. Flor. schoenanthi. Fruct. ficus
recentes, dactyli, sebesten sive myxa. Sem. grana Paradisi. An. lac, mel.
Marin. corallium rubrum. Flor. chamaemeli. Aq saxifragiae, parietariae,
quinquefolii, raphani. Sir. acetosus comp. Fl. nymphaeae comp. Ol. Nymphaeae,
vulpinum, piperinum. Empl. e baccis lauri, a nostratibus sive Flos unguentorum.
Ol. chym. cymini, baccarum juniperi, latericium philosophorum. Aq. fragorum
etc. Elect. benedicta laxativa, cassia extract. pro clyster. Saccharum.

Rheum. Rad. nardi, phu. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq. rosarum albarum. Sir. de
meconio uterque and de papavere. Pil. de cynoglosso, e styrace. Vng. de minio,
ophthalmicum. Empl. epispasticum. Lig santalum. Ol. maceris.

Rheum in the head. Rad. nardi, pyrethri salivaris. Cort. winteranus. Cons.
diacodium solidum, sive tabulatum. Empl. Caesaris. Ol. maceris.

Rickets. Rad. capparum, filicis, polypodii, rhapontici. Cort. Rad. capparum,
fraxini, medius tamarisci. Herb. betonica, epithymu^, fraxinus, fumaria,
nicotiana, tamariscus. Cort. alni nig. Flor. periclymeni. Aq. summitatum
lupulorum. Sir. byzantinus uterque de scolopendrio. Oxymel julianizans. Lohoch
de brassica. Troch. de capparibus. Ol. de capparibus. Vng. e succis aperitivis,
barbarum magnum. Ol. sulph.

Ringworms. Sir. de epithymo, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro. Ol. vitellorum
ovorum. Vng. e nicotiana, nutritum, sive triapharmacum, rosatum.

Running of the reins. Rad. bardanae. Lign. santalum. Herb. cauda equina,
centinodium, horminum, millefolium, plantago Fruct. cassia fistula. Resin.
terebinthina. Marin. corallium rubrum. Troch. albi Rhasis. Ol. chym.
lavendulae, baccarum juniperi.

Ruptures. Rad. acanthi, aristolochiae rot. bistortae, consolidae, enulae
campanae, gentianae, ononidis, peucedani, spatulae foetid. Herb. adiantum
utrumque, alchymilla, auricula muris, cyanus uterque, empetron, hippoglossum,
lotus urbana, serpillum. G^m. elemi. Aq. Symphyti, cerefolii. Sir. de symphyto.
Empl. diacalciteos, ad herniam. Ol. chym. salis.

S.
Sadness. Rad. scorzonerae. Herb. echium, melissa. Spec. laetificans Gal.
diamoschu dulce and amarum.

Scurf. Rad. arundinis, ari, dracontii. Sem. foenugraeci.

Scabs. Rad. chamaelcontis utriusque, enulae campanae, lapathi acuti,
scabiosae. Lign. guajacum, juniperus. Herb. agrimonia, fumaria, lupulus,
nicotiana, origanum, scabiosa, sena. Sem. lupinorum. An. serum lactis. Min.
sulphur. Cort. alni nig. Aq. summitatum lupulorum. Sir. de ammoniaco, de
fumaria, scabiosae, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro, de epithymo, de pomis purgans.
Pil. ex tribus, de fumaria. Ol. vitellorum ovorum, Nicodemi. Vng. e nicotiana,
nutritum, ex oxylapatho, catapsoras, citrinum. Empl. de cerussa. Ol. chym
terebinthinae.

Scaldings, Herb. alcanna, barba jovis, sive sedum majus, cynoglossum, ebulus,
hedera arborea, and terrestris. Vng. de calce, e nicotiana, populeon. Empl.
diacalciteos.

Scabbed heads. Sem. nasturtii, cicer. An. cerebrum leporis. Marin. spuma maris.

Sciatica. Cort. fabarum. Herb. chamaepitys, hypericon, iberis cardamantice,
nasturtium hortense, nicotiana, thymum.

Skull broken. Gum. elemi.

Seed increasing. Rad. enulae campanae, satyrii utriusque. Sem. pastinacae
angustifoliae, nasturtii. erucae. Herb. cerefolium. An. cerebrum passeris,
testiculi galli. Ol. amygdalarum dulcium.

Scurvy. Herb. nasturtium hortense, and aquaticum, cochlearia. Cort. winteranus.

Serpents to drive away. Herb. absinthium, pulicaria. Sem. ammi, cumini,
nigellae.

Shingles. Rad. pentaphylli. Herb. cicuta, helxine, plantago, solanum.

Sighing, Rad. rhapontici. Herb. amaracus. An. castorium.

Seed consuming. Herb. agnus castus.

Sides pained. Herb. althaea, card. benedict. caryophyllata, chamaemelum, ruta,
salvia. Flor. schoenanth^ Resin. bdellium, galbanum, myrrha. Aq. gentianae
comp. Ol. moschaelcum, vulpinum.

Sinews. Rad. centaurii majoris, pyrethri salivaris. Herb. alsine, amaracus,
carduncellus. An. lumbrici terrestres. Mel. emblicorum. Spec. pulvis ad casum.
Pil. macri, de opopanace. Ol. anethi, castorii, leucoii, castorii comp.
costinum, crocinum, euphorbii, piperis, Vng. arregon, martiatum. Cerot.
oesypatum. Empl. nervinum. Ol. Chym. terebinthinae, latericium philosophorum,
succini.

Sinews shrinking. Herb. al sine, alcanna, amaracus, bardana, canda aquina.
Fruct. mirobalani. Resin. bdellium. An. castorium. Marin. sperma ceti.

Sneezing to cause. Rad. hellebori albi.

Spiders. Rad. allium. Herb. echium.

Spirit animal. Flor. rosarum rubrarum. Excr. sericum crudum. Spec. diambra.
Troch. de gallia moschata. Conf. alkermes, manus Christi.

Spirit natural. Excr. sericum crudum. Spec. diambra. Pil. imperiales.

Spirit vital. Rad. scorzonerae. Flor. melissae. Excr. sericum crudum. Metal.
aurum. Aq* angelica major, bezoartica Matthew. Sir. corticum citriorum,
melissophilli. Spec e chelis cancrorum comp. cardiacus magistralis, cordialis
major and minor, confectionis liberantis, cordiales temperatae, diambra. Troch.
alexiterii.

Spitting of blood. Rad. bardanae. consolidae majoris, rhapontici. Cort.
maceris. Herb. betonica, bursa pastoris, centinodium, clematis daphnoides,
hypericon, lentiscus, plantago, salvia. Flor. schoenanthi. Fruct. berberis.
Marin. corallium rubrum, succinum. Aq. portulacae. Sir. myrtinus, de symphyto,
coral. saccharum rosatum. Elect. philonium persicum, theriaca Andromachi. Pil.
Scribonii. Troch. de terra lemnia.

Spleen. Rad. asari, cichorii, curcumae, filicis, lauri, mororum Celsi,
rhapontici, scorzonerae. Cort. rad. fraxini. Lign. nephriticum. Herb.
agrimonia, apium, beta alba, betonica, brassica hortensis and sylvestris,
centaurium majus, ceterach, chamaepitys, chamaedrys, epithymum, hedera arborea,
hyssopus, isatis, nasturtium hortense, nicotiana, scordium, senna, stoechas,
tamariscus. Flor. schoenanthi. Fruct. ficus recentes, nux myristica. Sem.
foenugraeci, lini, lupini, erucae, nasturtii aquatici. Gumm. ammoniacum. Ex
Plant. agaricus. Excr. serum lactis. Cort. alninig. capparis, fraxini, lauri.
Flor. lupuli. Aq. acetosae, calaminthae, nasturtii, absinthii, cuscutae,
linguae cervinae, tamarisci, thymi, graminis, parietariae, summitatum
lupulorum, cinnamomi Matthew. Acet. scilliticum. Sir. acetosus uterque, de
ammoniaco, byzantinus uterque, de scolopendrio, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro, de
epithymo. Lohoch de brassica Gord. Spec. diarrhodon abbatis. Elect.
diacapparis, micleta, theriaca Androm. catholicon, triphera major, Athanasia
Mithridatis. Pil. de hiera cum agarico, Macri. Troch. de eupatorio. Ol. de
capparibus, nardinum. Vng. splanchnicum utrumque. Empl. ex ammoniaco, diachylon
simpl. de meliloto comp. ceroneum. Ol. Chym. cumini, latericium philosophorum,
sulphuris.

Stitch. Herb. benedicta caryophyllata, cerefolium, salvia. Flor. jasmini. Aq.
gentianae comp. Vng. dialthaeae. Empl. diacalcit. caranna.

Spraines. Rad. arundinis vallatoriae and saccharinae. Vng. resinum. Ol. hirund.

Stomach. Rad. endiviae, galangae utriusque, glycyrrhizae, rhaponcici,
rhabarbari. Cort. cinnamomi, citrii, granatorum, macis. Lign. agallochum. Herb.
absinthium, acetosa, benedicta caryophyllata, cichorium, crassula, epithymum,
malabathrum, genista, hypericon, magistrantia, nicotiana, violaria. Flor.
leucoii, schoenanthi. Fruct. dactyli, sebesten, nux myristica, piper, pyra,
cucumer, cubebae, mespila. Sem. ocymi. Resin. etc. manna. Ex. plant. agaricus.
An. e^u^. Lap. nephriticus. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq. endiviae, cichorei,
fumariae, marrubii, melissae, absinthii, serpilli, fl. althaeae, centaurii.
Spir. absinthii, uterque. Aq. absinthii urraque, sc. magis and minus comp.
gentianae comp. cinnamomi Matthew. melissae major, usquebach. Tinct. scordii.
Vin. absinthites. Sir. de absinthio comp. acetosi omnes, infusionis fl.
cariophillorum, de cinnam^mo, uvarum, aurantiorum, berberum, cerasorum,
cydoniorum, limonum, lujulae, mororum, acetosae, uvarum crisp. rub. corticum
citriorum, de fumaria, melissophylli, de mentha, de pomis alterans, violarum,
rosaceus solutivus cum agarico, portulacae. Ox. scilliticum comp. Rob. de
berberis, cydoniorum and miva vel gelatina eorundem. Saccharum rosatum. Spec.
aromaticum caryophyllatum, rosatum, dianisum, diambra, dianthos, diarrhodon
abbatis, diaspoliticum, diatrion pipereon, diatrion santalon. Elect.
diacinnamomum, diacydonia tria, autidotum haemagogum, pectorale, theriaca
diatessaron, diascordium, mithridatium, theriaca Androm. and Londinensis,
diacrocuma, hiera picra simpl. cum agarico and diacolocynthidos, Athanasia
Mithridatis, e scoria ferri. Pil. aggregativae, aloephanginae, de aloe lota, de
aloe rosata, de hiera cum agarico, imperiales, Macri. Ruffi, stomachicae, and
cum gummi, ex tribus, turpeti aureae, de rhabarbarbaro, arabicae, arthriticae.
Troch. de absinthio, de berberis, de camphora, hedychroi, de ligno aloes,
crocomagma Damocratis, ramich, rosarum, Gord. Ol. amygdalarum dulcium, rosarum,
absinthii, mastichinum, menthae, moschaeleum, nardinum. Vng. e nicotiana,
rosatum, mastichinum, nervinum, pectorale, e succis aperitivis. Cerat.
santalinum. Empl. e baccis lauri, e crusta panis, diaphoenicon calidum, de
meliloto comp. metroproptoticon, stomachicum magistrale, ceroma vel ceroncum,
de mastiche, stomachicum. Cerot. stomachicum. Ol Chym. anisi, sulphuris. (Herb.
sonchus laevis and asper.

Stomach hurtful to. Rad. colchici, raphani Herb. allium, soldanella. sem.
nasturtii.

Stone. Rad. cyperi utriusque, endiviae, lauri, o^onidis, rusci, saxifragiae
albae. Cort. avellanarum. Lign. nephtiticum, sassafras. Herb. althaea,
betonica, carduus mariae, empetron, genista, geranium columbinum, melilotus,
pulegium, saxifragia alba. Sem. lithospermi, saxifragiae albae, genistae.
Fruct. alkekengi, cassia fistula. Aq. fragorum, chamaemeli, adianti, urticae,
saxifragiae, quinquefolii, ^aphan^, pimpinellae, levistici. Sir. de
mucilaginibus. Spec. dialacca, lithontribon. Elect. theriaca Andromachi,
passulatum, reginae Coloniens. Troch alkekengi. Ol. nymphaeae, piperis. Ol.
Chymbaccarum juniperi, baccarum haederae, terebinthinae. Sapo ven.

Strangury Rad. phu. Herb. caprifolium, hippoglossum, limonium. Flor.
caprifolii. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Lap. tiburonum. Elect. antidotum
haemagogum, mithridatium, philonium Romanum. Ol. moschaeleum.

Strength lost. Rad. acori. Herb. herba paris. An. cornu unicorn. C. C. Sir. de
cinnamomo. Saccharum tabulatum simplex and per latum. Spec. confectionis
liberantis, rosata novella. Empl. stypticum. Aq. caponis.

Sunburnings. Rad. bryoniae. Herb. argentina, artanita, caprisolium, sabina,
tithymalus. Aq. fumariae, nasturtii. Vng. e nicotiana. Ol. Chym. tartari per
deliquium.

Surfeits. Herb. absinthium, hedera utraque. Aq. papaveris erratici. Sir. de
ammoniaco, de fumaria, de papavere erratico sive rubro. Pil. stomachicae cum
gummi, Ruffi.

Sweat causing. Rad. chinae, gentianae, imperatoriae, sarsae parillae, scordii,
tormentillae. Lign. guajacum, sassafras. Herb. carduus benedictus. Aq. cardui
benedicti, bezoartica, theriacalis. Elect. diascordium, mithridatium, de ovo,
antidotus Matthioli.

Swellings in the mouth. Herb. succisa.

Swellings. Rad. capparum, phu, scabiosae, spinae albae. Herb. anethum,
calendula, ebulus, inguinalis, malva, melilotus, succisa. Flor. chamaemeli.
Sem. foenugraeci. Resin. bdellium. Flor. erucae, buphthalmi. Sir. jujubinus, de
mucilaginibus. Vng. e necotiana, dialthaeae, refrigerans Gal. Cerot. oesypatum.
Empl. ex ammoniaco, e cymino, diachylon cum gummi magnum, e mucilaginibus, a
nostratibus, de meliloto simpl. Cerot. ex ammoniaco. Ol. latericium
philosophorum.

Swounings. Min. aurum. Aq. imperialis. Sir. corticum citriorum. Spec. pleres
arconticon.

T.
TEeth on edge. Herb. portulaca. Rad. liquiritiae.

Teeth to make them fall out. An. lumbrici terrestres.

Teeth to breed easily. An. cerebrum leporis.

Teeth loose. Cort. granatorum. Herb. argentina. Resin. myrrha. Min. allumen.
Ol. sulphuris.

Teeth to make white. Herb. vitis vinifera. Marin. spuma maris. Sal. alumen.

Teeth strengthening. Fruct. berberis.

Tenesmus. An. columbae juvines.

Terms provokeing. Rad. capparum, cepae, chamaeleontis utriusque, dictamni,
eryngii, foeniculi, lilii albi, scorzonerae. Cort. rad. petroselini. Herb.
ageratum, apium, caulis, chamaepitys, chamaemelum, chamaedrys, chrithmus,
foeniculum, hypericon, hypoglottis, marrubium album, origanum, pulegium,
serpillum, tamariscus, thymum, verbascum Flor. centaurii, lavendulae,
schoenanthi. Sem. paludapii, ammi, foeniculi, pastinacae angustifoliae,
nigellae. Ex plant. agaricus. An. castorium. Fruct. bacc. juniperi. Aq.
salviae, majoranae, chamaemeli, foeniculi, calaminthae, serpilli, rhaphani,
artemisiae, pulegii, cinnamomi Matthioli, D. Stephani. Sir. de artemisia, de
betonica comp. rosaceus solutivus cum agarico. Ox. scilliticum comp. Elect. e
sassafras, diacinnamomum, antidotum haemagogum, theriaca Andromachi. Pil. de
hiera cum agarico. Ol. majoranae. Chym. baccarum hederae. Spec. diacalaminth.

Terms stopping. Rad. acori, bistortae, cepae, consolidae majoris, cyperi
longi and rotundi, rubiae tinctorum, ulmariae, zedoariae. Cort. avellanarum.
Herb. argentina, mentha, mille^olium, myrtus, nummularia, pyrola. Flor.
balaustium. Fruct. berberis. Marin. corallium rubrum. Aq. cydoniorum,
plantaginis. Sir. myrtinus, de symphyto. Rob. de cornis. Sir. e coralliis comp.
Elect diacorallion, micleta, philonium persicum, triphera major. Troch. de
carabe, de terra lemnia, diacorallion. Vng. comitissae. Herb. bursa pastoris,
clematis daphnoides.

Tetters. Rad. chameleontis. Sir. de epithymo. Vng. rosatum.

Thirst. Rad. liquiritiae. Herb. lactuca. Fruct. tamarindi. Aq. lactucae,
portulacae, nymphaeae, fl. violarum, acetosae. Sir. acetosi. violarum. Rob. de
berberis. Troch. de berberis, de camphora. Ol. Chym. vitrioli.

Thorns. Rad. phu. Herb. anagallis, dictamnus creticus. Empl. a nostratibus.

Throat narrow. Troch. aliptae moschatae.

Throat sore. Herb. aquilegia, solidago saracenica, crassula, helxine,
hyssopus. Flor. violarum. Resin. etc. manna. An. hirundines. Turbasis. Lohoch
de papavere, e passulis, sanum and expertum, diacodion solidum. Ol. amygdalarum
dulcium.

Toads. Rad. allii. Herb echium. Lap. bufonis.

Tongue rough. Rad. lactucae. Fruct. tamarindi. Aq. hord. Sir. viol. Spec.
diatragacanthi frigidi.

Toothach. Rad. capparum, chamaeleontis albi, chelidonii majoris, hellebori
nigri, mororum Celsi, pyrethri salivaris, spinae albae. Herb. allium,
calendula, lepidium. Fruct. gallae. Aq. plantaginis, melissae comp. Ol. Chym.
sulphuris.

Trembling. An. castorium. Pil. de opopanace. Ol. piperis, rutaceum, laurinum,
costinum.

V.
Veins broken. Herb. cyanus.

Veins opening. Herb. schoenanthus.

Venomous beasts. Rad. allii, artanitae, doronici, gentianae, pastinacae
sativae and sylvest. Herb abro^anum, apa^ine, carduus benedictus, echium,
malva, melissa, origanum, pulicaria. Sem. ammi, cumini. An. viperae, canc^i
fluviatiles, castorium. Lap. bufonis, bezoar. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq.
betonicae. Spir. castorii. Aq. compos. theriacalis, cinnamomi Matthioli. Elect.
theriaca diatessaron, and Andromachi, Athanasia Mithridatis. Troch. de vipera
ad theriacam, alexiterii. Ol. majoranae. Vng. e nicotiana. Empl. barbarum
magnum, a nostratibus, sive flos unguentorum.

Vertigo. Rad. doronici, sarsae parillae, scorzonerae. Herb. beta alba, carduus
benedictus, matricaria, salvia. Resin. galbanum. An. castorium. Lap. smaragdus.
Aq. betonicae, paralyseos. Sir. de betonica comp. Ox. scilliticum comp. Spec.
diamoschu dulce. Elect. theriaca Andromachi, confectio hamech, hiera Logadii.
Pil. aloephanginae, de hiera cum agarico, arabicae. Ol. chym. anisi.

Ulcers. Rad. asphodeli maris, bryoniae, chinae, lilii albi, malvae, phu. Lign.
guajacum. Herb. allium, anagallis, argentina, bugula, caprifolium, carduus
benedictus, cicuta, hedera arborea, marrubium, nicotiana, sanicula, tithymalus.
Gran. lupinorum. Sem. nasturtii, sinapis. Gumm. myrrha. Marin. sperma ceti.
Min. Lithargyrum. Lap. sapphirus. Aq. petasitidis comp. Tinct. viridis. Elect.
mithridatium. Troch. pastilli Adronis. Ol. Nicodemi. Vng. album, aegyptiacum,
ex apio. Lin. gummi elemi, e nicotiana, apostolorum, diapompholigos nihili.
Empl. de beronica, de cerussa, divinum, de minio comp. oxycroceum, gratia dei,
de janua, nigrum. Ol. chym. sulphuris.

Ulcers in the bladder and reins. Herb. cauda equina. Fruct. cucumeres. Aq.
plantaginis. Sir. de mucilaginibus. Elect. mithridatium, theriaca Andromachi.
Troch. Gordonii. Ol. amygdalarum dulcium.

Ulcers in the eyes. Troch. sief de plumbo.

Ulcers in the lungs. Herb. cauda equina, nummularia. See Phthisick.

Ulcers in the mouth. Rad. cyperi utriusque, pentaphyll^* Herb. alleluja, sive
lujula, pentaphillum. Flor. leuco^. Fruct. gallae. Aq. nicotianae. Ol. chym.
sulphuris.

Ulcers in the privities. Herb. herba paris. Aq. levistici. Sir. portulacae.

Ulcers in the throat. Rad. trachelii.

Vomiting blood. Herb. hypericon, salvia. Flor. schoenanthi. Resin. mastiche.
Sir. de symphyto. Cons. saccharum rosatum. Elect. theriaca Androm* athanasia
Mith.

Vomiting provoking. Rad. asari, asphodeli maris. Herb. atriplex. Vin.
helleboratum, benedictum, antimoniale, rubellum.

Vomiting stopping. Rad. bistortae, zedoariae. Cort. fraxini rad. Lign.
sassafras. Herb. alchymilla, anethum, fraxinus, mentha utraque, muscus, myrtus,
pulegium, vitis vinifera. Fruct. tamarindi. Sem. anethi. Aq. absinthii,
menthae. Sir. cydoniorum, uvarum, de mentha, de rosis siccis. Mel. emblicorum.
Rob. de berberis. Spec. aromaticum caryophyllatum, rosata novella. Elect.
theriaca Androm. Ol. cydoniorum, mastichinum, menthae, myrtinum. Empl. e crusta
panis. Empl. metroproptoticon, stomachicum magistrale.

Voice. Resin. styrax calamitis. Aq. bezoartica Matthew. Acet. scilliticum.
Decoct. pectorale. Sir. de hyssopo, jujubinus, tussilaginis comp. Lohoch sanum
and expertum. Elect. theriaca Androm. Troch. bechici albi and nigri.

Urine stopped. Rad. allium, caepae, cyperi utriusque, endiviae, filipendulae,
foeniculi, lauri, nardi caelticae, rusci, saxifragiae albae. Cort. cinnamomi.
Lign. sassafras. Herb. allium, anethum, asarum, bardana, betonica, calamintha
montana, caprifolium, cerefolium, consolida rubra, epithymum, malabathrum,
foeniculum, fumaria, helxine, hippoglossum, lupulus, nasturtium aquaticum,
origanum, pulicaria, scabiosa, scordium, stoechas, tanacetum, urtica. Flor.
croci, schoenanthi. Fruct. alkekengi, cassia fistula. Sem lithospermi, anethi,
apii, erucae, ocymi, ammi, cardamomi, foeniculi, pastinacae angustifoliae,
nigellae, saxifragiae albae. Ex plant. agaricus. An. priapus cervi. Marin.
succinum, spuma maris. Flor. lupuli, periclymeni. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq.
graminis, alkekengi, majoranae, serpilli, nasturtii aquatici, urticae,
saxifragiae, enulae campanae, pimpinellae. Sir. de absinthio comp. tres
acetosi, de 5. radicibus, de cichorio cum rhabarbaro, rosaceus solutivus cum
agarico, de eupatorio. Spec. diacalaminthes simpl. dialacca. Elect.
mithridatium, theriaca Androm. Troch. alkekengi, de lacca. Ol. Chym. cymini,
juniperi, sulphuris.

W.
WArts. Rad. labri veneris.

Wasps stinging. Herb. malva, laurus. An. vespae. Vng. e necotiana.

Watching. Herb. hyoscyamus, lactuca. Flor. violarum, nymphaeae. Sem.
papaveris. Aq. cordialis frigida Saxoniae. Sir. de meconio simpl, and comp. fl.
nymphaeae simpl. and comp. de cichorio cum rhabarbaro, de portulaca, papaveris
omnes. Lohoch de papavere. Cons. diacodium solidum. Elect. diascordium. Pil. de
styrace, laudanum. Ol. anethi. Vng. populeum, rosarum.

Weariness. Herb. agnus castus. Flor. chamaemeli. Ol. majoranae.

Wens. Rad. labri veneris.

Wheales. Pil. de tribus.

Wheezing. Herb. hyssopus, pulmonaria. Rob. liquiritiae. Turbasis.

Whites in women. Herb alchymilla, horminum, muscus, myrtus, plantago, quercus.
Fruct. cassia fistula. Sem. anisi. An. ebur. Marin. corallium rubrum, succinum.
Elect. diacorallion.

Wind. Rad. bardanae, galangae, rhapontici, zedoariae. Cort. rad. apii,
aurantiorum, citriorum. rad. petroselini. Herb. agnus castus, chamaemelum,
foeniculum, hipposelinum, schoenanthus, succisa, thymum. Flor. chamaemeli.
Fruct. baccae lauri. Sem. lithospermi. Resin. asa foetida. An. castorium.
Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq. saxifragiae, parietariae, levistici, absinthii
magis comp. and Spir. aqua vitae utraque. Vin. absinthites. Acer. scilliticum.
Sir. de absinthio comp. Spec. aromaticum caryophyllatum, diacalaminthe simpl.
dianisum, diatrion pepereon, diacymini, diagalangae. Elect. de baccis lauri,
antidorum haemagogum, mithridatium, diaphoenicon. Pil. aureae. Troch. de lacca.
Ol. nardinum, rurae. Vng. laurinum. Empl. e baccis lauri. Ol Chym. anisi,
cymini.

Windpipe. Rad. glycyrrhizae. Herb. pentaphyllum. Flor. violarum. Fruct.
sebesten.

Wisdom. Elect. diacorum.

Witchcraft. Herb. herba Paris. Marin. corallium rubrum.

Womb. Rad. lilii albi. Herb. atriplex, matricaria, ruta, salvia. Fruct.
dactyli, cubebae, gallae. Sem. paeoniae, ammi. Resin. ladanum, styrax
calamitis. Ex plant. agaricus. An. adeps anserina. Aq. majoranae, calaminthae.
Ox. scilliticum comp. Elect. Athanasia Mith. Ol. rutae, asphodeli, nardinum,
piperis. Cerot. ^esipatum. Empl. ceroma, vel ceroneum. Ol. Chym. sulphuris.

Womb fallen out. Herb. bardana, caulis, vel brassica. Fruct. gallae. Vng.
comitissae, sumach.

Womb hardened. Herb. ageratum. Resin. styrax calamitis. Flor. buphthalmi.

Womb inflamed, See Inflammations.

Womb swelled, See Swellings.

Women's breasts, See Breasts.

Women's travel. Rad. dictamni, peucedani. Cort. cinnamomum. Herb. calamintha
montana, caprifolium, dictamnus creticus, hypoglottis sive laurus alexandrina,
marrubium album, matricaria, ocymum, sabina. Flor. lavendulae, centaurei. Sem.
pastinacae angustifoliae. Resin. galbanum, myrrha. An. castorium. Lap. Jaspis,
aetites. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq betonicae, chamaemeli. Spir. castorii. Aq.
gentianae comp. raphani comp. D. Stephani. Elect. antidotum haemagogum,
diascordium, theriaca Androm. Ol. Chym. succini.

Women newly delivered and not well purged. Herb. betonica. Ox. scilliticum
comp. Elect. hiera picra simpl. and cum agarico. Pil. arabicae.

Worms. Rad. chamaeleontis albi, mororum Celsi, zedoariae. Herb. abrotanum,
absinthium, betonica, calamintha montana, dyp sacus, galega, hydropiper,
hyssopus, nicotiana, sabina. Fruct. berberis. Sem. lupini. Resin. aloes,
myrrha. Ex plant. agaricus. Min. sulphur. Aq. graminis, absinthii, centaurii,
nasturtii. Vin. absinthites. Ol. absinthii. Vng. e nicotiana, contra vermes
Foesii. Ol. Chym. nardi, sulphuris.

Wounds. Rad. acanthi, consolidae majoris, dentariae majoris, graminis, phu,
polygonati, scabiosae. Herb. agrimonia, alleluja, alchymilla, aparine,
argentina, betonica Pauli, bugula, cauda equina, chamaepitys, consolida rubra,
and saracenica, coronopus, cruciata, cyanus, cynoglossum, dictamnus creticus,
geranium col^mbinum, herba Paris, hypericon, lotus urbana, marrubium foetidum,
mentha, millefolium, nicotiana, nummularia, ophioglossum, pulicaria, pyrola,
sophia chirurgorum. Gumm. elemi, myrrha. Sir. de pilosella, de symphyto. Mel.
rosatum solutivum. Elect. caryocostinum, lenitivum. Troch. polyidae Andromachi,
pastilli Adronis. Ol. hyperici, carellorum. Vng. album, anodynum, ex apio. Lin.
gummi elemi, basilicon utrumque e nicotiana, nutritum, e solano, apostolorum,
diapompholigos nihili, refrigerans. Empl. e baccis lauri, ex cicura cum
ammoniaco, diacalciteos, a nostratibus, de minio comp. oxycroceum, gratia dei,
de janua, nigrum. Ol. Chym. myrrhae, sulphuris.

Wry mouths. Ol. majoranae, piperis, de castor.

Wry necks. Herb. calamintha montana, nicotiana, urtica.

Y.
YArd. Herb. cicuta, millefolium, ruta. Ol. piperis. Ol. Chym. baccarum
juniperi.

Yard excoriated. Herb. cichorium, millefolium.

Yellow jaundice. Rad. chelidonii majoris, lapathi acuti, plantaginis, rubiae
tinctorum. Cort. berberis. Herb. apium. aparine, beta rubra, chamaepitys,
cichorium, hepatica, hedera terrestris, pentaphyllum, polium, pulicaria. Flor.
violarum. Fruct. tamarindi. Resin. aloe. An. millipedes, ebur. Min. sulphur.
Cort. alni nigra^. Fruct. baccae juniperi. Aq. nymphaeae, fumariae, fragorum,
agera^i, gentianae comp. de absinthio comp. Spec. dialacca, diatrion santalon.
Elect. theriaca Andromachi. Pil. de aloe rosata, de hiera cum agarico, ex
tribus, de rhabarbaro. Troch. de absinthio, de eupatorio, de rhabarbaro.

Youth preserving. Herb. senna. Spec. laetificans Galeni. Ol. salis, myrrhae.

This is the full Use and Appropriation of all Remedies, both simple, and
compound, that are men^ioned in the London Pharmacopoeia: the Doses whereof,
are, as follows.
Of Waters. absinthii minus compositae unc. 1. magis unc. sem. angelicae comp.
unc. 1. spiritus lavendulae and castorii drach. 1. aq pe^a sitidis comp. cochl.
1. raphani comp. unc. 1. paeoniae comp. unc. sem. bezoarticae unc. 1.
lumbricorum magistralis unc. sem. gentianae comp. unc. sem Gilberti drach. 2.
cordialis frig Saxoniae unc. sem. ^heriacalis unc. 1. bryoniae comp. unc. sem.
imperialis cochl. sem. mirabilis unc. 1. protheriacalis unc. 1. caponis unc. 2.
limacum magistr. unc. sem. scordii comp. cochl. 1. Mariae unc. 1. papav^ris
comp. unc. 1. juglandium comp. unc. 1. bezoarticae Matthew. unc. sem. cinamomi
unc. 1. Matthew. and per infusionem, unc. 1. coelestis unc. sem. melissae unc.
sem. rosae solis unc. sem. D. Stephani cochl. 1. vitae communis and usqueb.
unc. 4.

Of Tinctures. croci drach. 1. castorii drach. 2. fragorum unc. sem. scordii
unc. 1. theriacalis unc. sem.

Of Wines. absinthitis unc. 2. cerasorum nig. unc. 1. helleborati drac. 2. sem.
rubelli unc. 1. benedict. unc 1. antimonialis unc. 1. scillitici unc. 3.

Of Vinegers. distillati unc. 1. rosati unc. sem. scillitici unc sem.
theriacalis unc. sem.

Of Decoctions. communis pro clystere unc. 12. 16. epithymi unc. 4. sennae
Gereonis unc. 4. pectoralis unc. 4. traumatici unc. 6. florum and fructuum unc.
4.

Of Syrups, altering. de absinthio simplicis unc. 3. comp. unc. sem. acetosi
simplicis unc. 4. and simplicioris. comp. unc. 1. sem. de agno casto unc. 1. de
althaea unc. 3. de ammoniaco unc. 1. de artemisia unc. 2. de betonica comp.
unc. 3. byzantini simplicis, and comp. unc. 2. botryos cochl. 1. capillorum
veneris unc. 2. cardiaci unc. 2. infusionis fl. caryophyllorum unc. 1. sem. de
cinamomo unc. sem. acetositatis citri unc. 4. corticum citriorum unc. 2. e
coralliis simplicis and comp. unc. 1. cydoniorum unc. 4. de erysimo unc. 1. de
fumaria unc. 2. de glycyrrhiza unc. 2. granatorum cum aceto unc. 4. de hyssopo
unc. 2. ivae arthriticae unc. 1. jujubini unc. 1. de meconio simplicis unc. 2.
comp. unc. 1. melissophylli unc. sem. de mentha unc. 2. de mucilaginibus, unc.
4. myrtini unc. 2. florum nymphaeae simplicis and comp. unc. 1. de papavere
erratico unc. 1. de pilosella unc. 1. infusionis florum paeoniae, unc. sem. de
paeonia compositi unc. sem. de pomis alterantis unc. 2. de prasio unc. 3. de
quinque radicibus unc. 4. rhaphani unc. 3. regii unc. 3. de rosis siccis, unc.
4. scabiosae unc. 2. de scolopendrio unc. 2. de stoechade unc. 3. de symphyto
unc. 4. violarum unc. 2. de portulaca unc. 2. de tussilagine comp. unc. 2. de
papavere magis comp. and minus unc. 1. de eupato^io unc. 2. Purging, de
cichorio cum rhabarbaro unc. 3. de epithymo unc. 2. e floribus persicorum unc.
2. ad 4 de pomis purgantis unc. 3 de pomis magistralis unc. 2 ad 4. de
rhabarbaro, unc. 2. rosacei solutivi unc. 2. ad 4. e succo rosarum unc. 2.
rosacei solutivi cum agarico unc. 2. and cum helleboro unc. 1. and senna unc.
2. de spina cervina unc. sem.

Of Honies. anthosati unc. sem. helleborati unc. sem. mercurialis unc. 1.
mororum unc. 1. nucum unc. sem. passulati unc. 1. scillitici unc. sem.
emblicorum. unc. sem. rosati ^ommunis, colati, solutivi unc. 1.

Of Oxymels. simplicis unc. 2. compositi unc. 3. helleborati cochl. 2.
julianizantis unc. 2. scillitici unc. 3.

Of Robs. simplicis, de berberis, de cerasis, de cornis, cydoniorum, and mivae,
baccarum sambuci, succi glycyrrhizae simplicis and comp. and prunorum
sylvestrium, parum.

Of Lohochs. de farfara parum cum baculo liquiritiae, de papavere, e passulis,
e pino, de portulaca, e pulmone vulpis, sani and experti, scillitici, and de
brassica, parum per baculum liquiritiae.

Of Conserves. etc. diacodii tabulati drach. 1. sacchari tabulati simplicis
drach. 2. and perlati drach. 1. tabellati comp. drach. 1. penidii drach. 2.
rosati unc. 1. confectionis de thure drach. 1.

Of Powders. aromatici caryophillati drach. 2. rosati drach. 1. ex chelis
cancrorum comp. gr. 15. specierum cordialium temperatarum drach. 1.
diacalaminthes simplicis, drach. 1. sem. comp. drach. 1. dianisi drach. 3.
radicum a^i comp. drach. sem. diaireos simplicis drach. 1. dialaccae drach. 1.
cardiaci magistr. drach. 1. diamargarit. frigidi drach. 2. diambrae drac. 2.
diamoschi dulcis drac. 1. and amari drach. 1. specierum dianthos drach. sem.
diapenidii, unc. sem. diarrhod. ab. drach. 2. diaspolitici drach. sem.
specierum diatraganthi frigidi drac. 1. diatrion pipereon drac. sem. diat.
santalon drach. 2. Haly drach. 1. laetifieantis drach. 1. bezoardici magistr.
drach. sem. specierum confectionis liberantis drach. 2. Saxonici drach. 1.
antilyssi drach. 1. rosatae novellae drach. 1. sem. hermodactylorum comp.
drach. 2. senae compositi maioris drach. 2. and minoris drach. 2. diasenae.
drach. 1. sem. diaturbith cum rhabarbaro drach. 3. cordialis minoris drach.
sem. majoris drach. sem. ad casum drach. 2. praservativi contra pestem drach.
sem. contra vermes drach. 1. diaturbith majoris sine rhabarbaro drach. 1. sem.
specierum electuarii diacymini drach. sem. diagalangae drach. sem. de gemmis
frifrigidi scr 2. diamargaritonis calidi drach. sem. lithontribon drach. 1.
pleres arconticon scr. 4.

Of Electuaries. altering, antidoti analepticae drach. 1. confectionis alkermes
drach. 2. e sassafras drach. sem. de baccis lauri drach. 1. diacapparis drach.
2. diacinnamomi drach. 2. diacorallion drach. 1. diacori drach. sem. diacydonii
simplicis unc. 1. diacydonii cum speciebus and comp. magistr. drach. 1.
confectionis de hyacintho drach. 1. sem. antidoti haemagogi drach. 3.
diasatyrion drach. 2. diaspermaton unc. sem. micletae drach. 2. pectoralis
parum. theriacae diatessaron drach. 2. diascordii drach. 2. mithridatii, drach.
2. philonii persici scr. 4. Romani drach. 1. magistralis parum. de ovo drach.
1. theriacae Andromachi drach. 2. Londinensis drach. 2. diacrocumae drach. 1.

Purging. benedictae laxativae drach. 1. sem. caryocostini drach. 1. sem.
cassiae extractae pro clysteribus unc. 1. amari magistratis majoris unc. 1.
minoris unc. 1. diacassiae cum manna unc. 2. cassiae extractae sine foliis
senae unc. 1. sem. and cum foliis senae unc. 1. diacarthami drach. 6.
diaphoenicon, drach. 6. diapruni lenitivi drach. 1. solutivi unc. 1. catholici
unc. 2. de citro solutivi drach. 6. elescoph drach. 6. confectionis hamech unc.
1. lenitivi unc. 1. sem. passulati unc. 1. sem. e succo rosarum unc. 1. sem.
hierae picrae simplicis unc. 1. cum agarico unc. sem. logadii unc. 1. sem.
diacolocynthidos drach. 6. tripherae majoris drach. 2. solutivae unc. sem. e
scoria ferri unc. sem. confectionis humain drac. 1. diaireos Solomonis unc.
sem. diasatyrion drach. 1. antidoti contra pestem Matthew. drach. 1. sem. requiei
drach. 1. sem. Reginae Coloniensis drach. 1.

Of Pills. de agarico drach. 1. aggregativae scr. 4. aloephanginae drach. 1. de
aloe lota drach. 2. rosata drach. sem. aureae drach. sem. cochiae majores
drach. sem. minores drach 1. de cynoglosso scr. 1. ex duobus scr. 1. de
eupatorio drach. sem. foetidae drach. sem. de hermodactylis drach. 1. de hiera
cum agarico drach. 1. imperiales scr. 4. de lapide lazuli drach. 1. macri
drach. sem. mastichinae drach. 1. mechoacanae drach. sem. de opopanace drach.
1. Rudii drach. sem. Ruffi drach. 1. sine quibus drach. 1. sem. stomachicae
drach. 2. and cum gummi drach. 1. e styrace scr. 1. de succino. drach. sem. ex
tribus drach. sem. turpeti aureae drach. sem. laudani gr. 2. nepenthes opiati
gr. 1. 4. assayreth drach. sem. de bdellio drach. 2. de rhabarbaro scr. 4.
arabicae drach. sem. arthriticae drach. 1. cochiae cum helleboro drach. sem.
fumariae drach. 1. indae drach. sem. lucis majores drach. 1. de esula scr. 1.
sem. de euphorbio drach. sem. Scribonii drach. 1.

Of Troches. de absinthio drach. 1. sem. agarici trochiscati drach 1. albi
Rhasis drach. 1 alexiterii. scr. 1. ahandal scr. 4. aliptae moschatae drach
sem. alkekengi drach 1. bechici albi drach 1. and nigri drach. 1. de berberis
drach. 2. de camphora drach. 1. de capparibus drac* 1. de ca^abe scr. 4.
cypheos drac. 1. de eupatorio drac. 2. galliae moschatae drac. 1. Gordonii.
drach. sem. hedychroi drac 1. hysterici drach. sem. de ligno aloes drach. sem.
e myrrha drach. 1. de rhabarbaro drach. 1. de santalis drach. 1. de scilla ad
theriacam drach. sem. de spodio drach. 1. terrae lemniae drach. 4. e violis
solutivi drach. 1. de vipera ad theriacam drach 1. de agno casto drach. 1.
alexiterii scr. 1. de aniso drach. 1. diarrhodon drach. 1. de lacca drach 1.
ramich drach 1. de rosis drach. 1. de agarico drach. 2. diacorallion drach.
sem. diaspermaton drach. 1. haemoptoici drach. sem. crocomagma Damocratis
drach. 1.

Of Essences. camphorae alexiteriae gut. 2. vini cochl. 1. chinae drach. 3.
agarici drach. 1. ad drach. 2. in jusculo. ambrae gr. 1, 2. in aq. cin. anisi
scr. 1. apii drach. 1. ad drach. 2. aristolochiae rotundae and consolidae
majoris Fab. drach. 1. ad drach. 2. brassicae marinae drach. sem. ad drach. 1.
carannae gut. x. ad 12. in ovo. caryophillorum gut. 6. ad x. in approp.
centauriae majoris and minoris ad drach. 2. cerae a gut. 8. ad 12. chelidonii
drach. 1. cinnamomi gut 3. 4 colocynthidis drach. sem. drach. 1. cucumeris
agrestis. drach. 1. ebuli drach. 1. ad drach. 2. nepetae scr. 1. ad drach. 1.
guttae gambae gr. 6. 7. halicacabi scr. sem. scr. 1. hellebori scr. 1.
jalappae. drach. 1. ad drach. 2. nucis moschatae gut. x. ad 12. mechoacannae
scr. 1. ad scr. 2. myrrhae mastiches thuris scr. 1. ad scr. 2. melissophilli
drach. 1. ad drach. 2. menthae scr. sem. mirobalanorum unc. sem. ad unc. 1.
papaveris and hyoscyami gr. 4. ad 6. pepli drach. 1. ad drach. 2. rhabarbari,
drach. 1. ad drach 2. rosarum pallidarum and moschatarum unc. 1. sambuci drach.
1. ad drach. 2. sassafras drach. 6. scammonii scr. 1. ad scr. 2. senae scr. 1.
terebinthinae drach. 1. turbith. drach. sem. drach. 1.

Of Extracts. agallochi gr. 4. ad x. agarici. scr. 1. ad scr. 2. asari
alcalisati scr. 1. ad scr. 2. cassiae ad drach. 1. sem. colocynthidis gr. 4. ad
x. cum corrig. diacarthami drach. sem. ad scr. 4. angelicae scr. sem. ad drach.
1. aeori rad. scr. 1. cariophilli hortensis scr. sem. ad drach. sem. esulae
scr. 1. ad drach. 1. e baccis juniperi scr. 1. ad scr. 2. e floribus violarum
drach. 1. buxi ligni pilula exigua, gentianae drach. 1. ligni colubrini scr. 1.
centaurii minoris drach. 1. mechoacannae drach. 1. sambuci scr. 1. symphyti
scr. 1. hellebori nigri, gr. x. ad 20. cum oleo mastichino. gratiolae scr. 1.
ad drach. sem. gialappae scr. sem. ad scr. 1. ita resinae. rhabarbari scr. 1.
ad drach. 1. senae scr. 1. sem. ad drach. 1. rhamni gr. x. turpethi gr. 6. ad
x. tamarindorum drach. sem. ad drach. 1. aloes scr. 1. ad drach. sem. elaterii,
gr. 1. 2. opopanacis drach. sem. ad drach. 1. scammonii scr. sem. ad. gr. 15.
ita resinae.

Of Flowers. benzoin gr. 3. ad scr. sem.

Of Magisteries. corallinae scr. 1. jalapae. ad gr. 18. vini guttae aliquot.
succini g. 12. tartari gr. 5. ad scr. sem. scammonii scr. sem. scr. 1.
guttaegemou gr. 10. ad scr. 1. de peru rosati gr. 15. ad 20.

Of Cremors, tartari drach. sem. ad drach. 2.

Of Oiles. fuliginis gr. 2. 3. tartari gr. 3. 4. vitrioli gut. 1. ad 3. guajaci
gr. 3. ad 5. baccarum lauri g. 2. ad 4. nucistae still. gr. 3. 4. macis still.
gr. 3. 4. piperini still gr. 2. ad 4. ex arillis baccarum sambuci drach. 1. ad
drach. 1. sem. camphorae succinei gut. 6 ad 8. caerae gut. 3. ad 5.
garyophillorum gut. 2. ad 6. cinnamomi g. 2. mastiches g. 6. ad 12. absinthii
g. 15. paeoniae seminis gut. pauc. majoranae g. 2.

Of Salts. tartari gr. 5. 6. vitrioli scr. sem. ad scr. 2. prunellae drac. sem.
cardui benedicti gr. 2. 3.

Of Spirits. guajaci drach. sem. ad drach. 1. sulphuris g. 4. ad 6. vitrioli g.
5. ad scr. 1. vel ad aciditatem gratam. cinosbati spongiae ad gut. 20.
mastiches cochl. 1. terebinthinae gut. 6. 20. fuliginis gr. 6. ad scr. sem.
tartari scr. 1. ad scr. 2. mannae cochl. 1.

Of Tinctures. sambuci cochl. sem. hyperici gr. 6. ad drach. sem. tartari gut.
4. ad 8. senae cochl. 2. in jusculo. rhabarbari gut. 10. ad 12. corticum citri
g. x. ad 20. rosarum drach. sem. florum serpentariae majoris Fab. drach. sem.
drach. 1.

These are the particular doses of Galenical and chymicall remedies, the rest
that are taken from animals, and minerals, see in their proper places: hereof
also with the aforesaid simples and co^pounds are made several sorts of
remedies: the Forms of which are as follows.
Of Apozems. R. if altering. rad. unc. 4. ad 7. cort. unc. 1. ad unc. 2. lign.
unc. 1. ad unc. 2. fol m. 5. ad x. sem. unc. 1. ad unc. 2. fruct. minor. unc. 1
ad unc. 2. vel no par. 4. ad 20. major. par. v. ad x. etc max. no. 1. ad 3.
etc. flor. p. 4 ad 6. fiat decoctio in aquae fontanae, vel alterius q. s. vel
sufficient quantitate, cape de colatura lib. 1. sem. in quibus dissolve
dulcorant unc. 4. ad 6. vel succ. and liquor. val. ad unc. 2. sacch. unc. 3.
arom. drach. 1. ad drach. 2. fiat apozema, clarificatum and aromatizatum pro 4
dosibus matutinis, vel etiam vespertinis, tribus horis ante cibum. If purging.
R. decoct. sen. Ger. vel decoct. praedict. addit. cathart. approp. cum corrig.
drac. 2 unc. sem. inter fructus and flores, cape de colat. lib. 1. sem. in
quibus dissolve syrup. unc. 4. ad unc. 6. succ. ad unc. 4. opiat and tabel.
drach. 3. fiat apozema clarificatum (vel non ut sit validius) and aromatizarum
etc. pro 4. dosibus matutinis, in quarum ultima (and prima, minorativo non
praemisso) dissolve elect. aliquod, fiat potio.

Of Juleps. R. Aq. distill unc 10. ad unc. 16. sir. vel dulc. unc. 4 ad unc. 6.
succ. depur. unc. 2. ad unc. 4. confect. scr. 4. ad scr. 8. pulv. scr. 4. ad
scr. 8. rarior. ad scr. sem. spir. vit. q. s. ad great. acid. fiat julepus pro 4
dosibus matutinis. Vel R. etc fiat decoctio ad lib. 1. in colatura dissolve
sir. unc. 4. fiat julepus, qui pulv. drach. 1. ad drach. 1. sem. aromatizetur
pro 3. dosibus matutinis and vesp.

Of Potions. R. if purging. decoct. sen. Ger. unc. 2. ad unc. 5. in quibus
dissolve cathart. (dos. deb.) sir. unc. 1. ad unc. 1. sem fiat potio, quam
sumat cras mane, cum custodia, levi coena praecedente. Vel R. etc. (mat. dict.)
fiat decoctio in liquoris idonei s. q. cape de colatura unc. 3. vel 4. in
quibus dissolve etc. fiat potio. Vel R. etc. infundenda proport. 2 pl. 3 pl. 4
pl. quam substantia per se, cum corrig. sub 4 pl. sub 6 pl. fiat infusio in
liquoris dicti q. s. supra cineres calidos per horas 12. vel per noctem,
expressione facta dissolve etc. fiat potio. vel R. expressionem mat. dict.
factam in aqua idonea, in qua dissolve etc. fiat potio. Vel R. etc.
(dequoquenda) fiat decoctio in liquoris q. s. in colaturae s. q. infunde, etc.
(i. e. praedicta in infusione) expressione facta dissolve etc. fiat potio. Vel
R. etc. (catharticum dissolvendum) cum talis liquoris unc. 2. ad 4. vel s. q.
fiat potio. If corroborating, R. aq. distill. unc. 3. ad 4. in quibus dissolve
syrup. ad unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. confect. card. a drach. sem. ad drach. 1. sem.
pulv. card. a scr. 1. ad drach. 1. pretios. scr. sem. ad scr. 1. fragment.
pret. and unicorn. a gr. v. ad scr. sem. lap. bez. ad g. 4. vel 6. fiat potio,
vel potus, quem sumat tali hora. If altering, its composition etc. is as the
corroborating. If somniferous and roborating. R. aq. papaver. rhoead. vel
nenuphar. and lactuc. an. unc. 2. syrup. papav. alb. unc. 1. syrup. violac.
unc. sem. cons. alkerm. drach. sem. fiat potio, quam sumat hora somni. If
elmintick and cardiack. R. aq. portulac. gram. an. unc. 2. conf. de hyacinth.
drach. sem. pulver. lumbr. terrest. siccator. scr. 1. corallinae, and rasur.
cornu cervi an. scr. sem. syrup de limon. unc. 1. fiat potus, If an eutocion.
R. vini Hippocr. ex infusione cinam. and dictamn. cum vino albo facta unc. 4.
vel 5. aq. cinamom. unc. sem. confect. alkerm. drach. 1. croci drach. sem.
syrup de artemis. unc. 1. fiat potus.

Of Syrups. R. if altering. materiam apozematis alterantis, fiat decoctio in
etc. q. s. cape de colatura lib. 1. sem. in quibus dissolve sacch. pari q. aut
mei and sir. ad unc. 5, 6. sacch. q. s. succ. de purat. unc. 6. fiat syrupus
persecte coctus, clarificatus, and aromatizatus cum etc. reponatur in ampulla
vitrea, in loco tuto, capiat de eo syrupo unc. 1. ad unc. 3. per se vel cum aq.
decoct. jusc. etc. tali hora, tories in die etc. Vel R. succi de talire
contusa, recenter expressi, recte depurati, etc. in quibus dissolve etc. fiat
syrupus. Vel R. succi recenter expressi, ac depurati etc. in quibus decoque vel
infunde talis unc. 2. vel 3. cape de colatura etc. in quibus dissolve etc. fiat
syrupus. Vel R. etc. infundantur in talis liquoris q. s. per hor. 24. cape de
colatura levi expressione adhibita etc. dissolve. Vel R. sir. unc. 3.6. utatur
saepe lambendo vel ante cibu^. If Purging. R. cathart. simplic. cum suis
correctivis, fiat decoctio in etc. q. s. cape de colatura lib. 1. lib. 1. sem.
qua dissolve sacch. vel mellis lib. 1. lib. 1 sem. sir. unc. 5. ad unc. 8.
succ. 6. ad 8. fiat syrupus perfect coctus, clarificatus, and aromatizatus cum
drach. 2. cinamomi, reponatur in ampulla vitrea, de quo capiat unc. 1. ad 6.
bis in mense horis matutinis, cum jusculo foliis borrag. bugloss. and capil
ven. alterato.

Of Vomitories. R. etc. fiat decoctio etc. q. s. cape de colatura unc. 8. etc.
in quibus dissolve etc. fiat vomitorium, quod sumat tepide tali hora (mane) and
si paulo post non rejecerit, vomat digito in fauces immisso. Vel R. sc. croci
metallorum scr. 1. ad drach. sem. fiat infusio per noctem in vini albi unc. 3.
vel cardui benedicti cum pauxillo cinnamomo, colentur omnia and filtrentur per
chartam emporeticam, fiat vomitorium, etc. Vel R. liquoris talis etc. sumat and
paulo post vomat. Vel R. etc. quibus dissolve etc. fiat vomitoriu^. Vel R. etc.
sumat ex cochleari cum liquore idoneo. Vel R. pulver. etc. misce cum conserva
tali, fiat bolus, quem sumat, and paulo post vomat.

Of Wines Medicate. R. if purging. cathart. cum suis correctivis and alterant.
q. v. insundantur in vini albi lib. 2. stent loco calido per horas 12. dein
coletur per manicam Hipp. aliquoties and postea addatur sacch. alb. unc. 6. vel
8. cinamomi drach. 4. beneque misceatur: ad plures dies ab unc. 1. ad unc. 4.
If altering. R. etc. concisa and contusa crasso modo infundantur in vini albi
q. s. stent in infusione per dies aliquot, colatis denique per manicam add.
sacch. q. s. and usurpetur ab unc. 1. ad 4. per horam 1. 2. ante prandium.

Of Emulsions. R. amygd. dulc excort. unc. 1. ad unc. 2. sem. sem. 4. frigid.
major. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. lactuc. papav. alb. unc. sem. contundantur in
mortario marmoreo, affundendo sensim aq. hord. lib. 1. in colatura dissolve
dulcorant. unc. 3. 4. sem. aq. ros. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. manus Christi. drach.
3. fiat emulsio pro 3 vel 4. dosibus matutinis and vespertinis, vel hora somni,
ab unc. 3. ad 4. per se, vel cum jusculo.

Of Amygdalats. R. amygdal. excort. unc. 2. terantur in mortario marmoreo,
affundendo sensim aquae ferventis lib. sem. colentur deinde addaturque sacch.
unc. 1. ad unc. 2. pro lubitu, deinde coquantur and exhibeatur hora commoda vel
somni.

Of Hordeats. R. hordei mundati unc. 2. decoquantur igne lento in aqua
limpidissima, quae ferve facta abjiciatur, nova addatur, coquatur per 4 vel 5
horas igne blando, hordeum deinde colo trajiciatur, colati lib. 2. sacchari
unc. 1. ad unc. 2. addantur, parum deinde rursum coquatur and derur circa horam
somni etc. etiam potest addi emuls. cum papav. alb. praeparat.

Of Milks. R. lactis asinini unc. 4. sacchar. vel melllis unc. 1. idque pro
prima do, pro secunda augendo unc. 1. ad unc. v. donec venerit ad unc. x. vel
xii. deinde retrogradiendo ad primam quantitatem redeundo; sumatur autem mane
4. horis ante cibum, (corpore repurgato) and ab ipso assumpto neque dormiat,
neque corpus agitet validius.

Of Whey. R. serum lactis, coletur, deinde bulliat, tunc in lib. 2. ejus,
maceretur per noctem fumariae m. 1. cichor. m. sem. (vel acetosae m. 1. sem.)
mane coletur, colaro add sacch. alb. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. succ. pom. redol.
unc. 1. secundo autem die huic dosi unc. 2. addendae donec veneris ad lib. 3.
deinde serie praepostera sensim ad lib. 1. redeundo, singulis diebus assumendam
per mensem, idque mane 4. horis ante cibum.

Of Hydromel R. mell. opt. lib. 1. aq. fluviat. lib. x. coquantur donec ovum
crudum innatet, vel ad tertiae partis consumptionem, spumam inter coquendum
accurate abjiciendo postea colet^r; condiatur cinam. drach. 2. ad unc. sem and
servetur pro hydromelite aquoso; (pro pot. ordinar.) quod vinosum redditur, si
per mensem in vitro clauso ad solemn ponatur: and medicatum, post despumationem
addendo herb m. 4. coq. pene ad tertias, and in colatura infund. per 2. 3.
horas aromatum unc. sem. drach. 6.

Of Hydrosaccharate. R. aq. font. fervore repurgatae part. 12. sacch. alb.
part. 1. aromarizentur cinam. (vel santalis in feb.) ad drach. 3. unc. sem.
utatur pro potu. Of Ptisan. R. hord. integr. select. and a paleis liberat. unc.
1. passul. corinth. unc. 2. sem. anisi drac. sem. infund. in aq. purae lib. 2.
per horas. x. post coq. in olla munda vitreata, tecta, ad hordei crepaturam,
circa finem decocti onis add cinnamomi acuti in parts confracti drach. 1.
sem. colatum servetur usui.

Of Diet drinks R. if altering and not pectoral. sudoris. unc. 6. aq. com. lib.
x. 12. vel q. s. fiat decoctum ad mediae partis consumptionem, sub finem
decoctionis addendo alterant. (ut in apozem.) edulc. unc. 4. ad 6. coletur per
manicam Hipp. aromatizetur, and servetur in vase vitreo pro 4. aut 5. dosibus
matutinis, quo corpore prius purgato utatur per x. 15 dies observato victu
sobrio and exsiccante, ac pro potu utatur decocto secundario, vel bocheto. If
Pectoral, R. chin. etc. unc. 1. infunde in decoct. hord. q. s. fruct. pectoral.
unc. sem. unc. 2. sem. pector. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. ponantur deinde in ventre
pulli, coquantur ad putrilaginem, addendo sub finem decoctionis folior. etc.
exprimantur omnia, colentur, in colaturae lib. 1. dissolve sacch. ros. etc.
unc. 2. unc. 3. pro duabus dosibus mane calide continendo se in lecto per horas
2. 3. sine sudore, and continuando per dies 15. 20. 30. corpus autem prius cum
manna repurgandum, ut and singulis 15. diebus: and interim vivendum sobrie, ac
pro potu, decocto chinae utendum vel hydromelite. If vacuating. R. If
Sudorifick, rasurae ligni sancti unc. 4. cortic. eiusdem unc. 2. infundantur in
lib. 6. vel 9. aquae fontanae per 24. horas, seu diem naturalem, supra cineres
tepidos vel calidos, vase clauso accurate, decoquantur deinde igne lento,
prunis luculentis sine sumo, donec redeant ad medias, refrigerentur, colentur
postea per manicam Hipp. (vel exprimantur ut sic validius) dulcoretur decoctum
sacchari unc. 3. 4. aromatizeturque cinam. drach. 1. sem. drach. 2. reponatur
ad usum in ampulla vitrea, capiat de hoc decocto unc. 8. calide mane, tegendo
corpus plus solito, sudando ad placitum. R. residentiam decocti superioris,
add si volueris sudorifici alicujus recentis unc. 1. infunde in aquae sontanae
lib. 12. per horas 8. vel 12. decoquantur ad tertiae partis, vel quartae tantum
consumptionem: cola per manicam Hipparomatiza and dulcora cum sacchar. q. s.
cinam. drach. 1. sem. drach. 2. fiat decoctum secundarium, sive bochetum pro
potu ordinario. If sudorificocathartick. R. decoctum sudorificum, sub finem
decoctionis add purgant. cum suis corrig. una simul cum alterant. (minore q.
quam in apozem. purg.) colentur, etc. finito hoc decocto purgante, and 4.
dosibus matutinis absoluto, utatur eodem deinde, detractis laxantibus, per dies
10. 15. 20. etc.

Of Bochets. R. resident. decocti sudorifici superius praescript^ q. s. add
ligni guajac. recent* unc. 2. infunde in aq. com. lib. 12. supra cineres
calidos per horas 12. coquantur ad tertiae vel quartae partis consumptionem,
exprimantur, colenrurque per manicam Hippocr. add. sacchar. lib. sem. lib. 1.
vel q. s. cinamom. drach. 3. unc. sem. fiat decoctum secundarium, seu bochetum,
servetur in ampulla vitrea pro potu ordinario, per totum tempus diaetae, utendo
interim pane bis cocto, cum semine anisi, assatis, avibus montanis cinamomo
carioph. etc. transfixis, gallinis, caponibus, passulis, amygdalis torrefactis,
and in ultima mensa coriandro, aniso saccharato, etc.

Of Decoctions of an old Cock. R. If altering. gallum veterem rufum,
decrepitum, vel 4. aut 5. annorum, cursu, verberibus fatigatum, deplumetur
vivus, juguletur, and exenteretur, hujus venture repleatur sudoris. unc. 2.
alterant. (fere ut in apozem.) fruct. sem dictis, consuatur, coquatur deinde in
olla vernisata, vel stannata, cum aquae. q. s. perfect, donec carnes
contabescant, and separentur ab ossibus, ubi autem jusculum despumatum fuerit,
add radic. etc. sub finem vero decocti, folia flores etc. coquantur, usque
supersint jusculi lib. 3. exprimantur fortiter, colentur, servetur decoctum in
ampulla vitrea, in loco frigido, omni pinguedine detracta^; cape de eo jusculo
unc. 6. unc. 8. vel lib. sem. mane, addendo si volueris (maxim in affectibus
thoracis,) sacch. vel syrup. idon. unc. 1. continuando per 15. dies, vel
spatium mensis unius. If Purging. R. praedict. cum cathartic. sc. sen. polyp.
cartham. an. unc. 2. unc. 2. sem. agar. epithym. unc. 1. quae ventri galli
includantur, fiat decoctum ad lib. 2. in quo dissolve si volueris sacchar. ad
unc. 3. aromatizeturque etiamnum pro 4. dosibus matutinis singulis mensibus
usurpandis.

Of Destillates restorative. R. carnem caponis unius optimi, vel gallinae (una
cum carn. perd. arm. vitul. testud. ranar.) dissectam, ab ossibus vel
pinguedine saltem purgatam, pone in olla vernisata cum aquae s. q. coquantur,
addendo sub finem radic. fol. sem. flor. alterant. q. volueris, ubi omnia sunt
ad putrilaginem cocta, colentur, exprimantur fortiter, pinguedine omni ablata
cape de hoc jure lib 4. 5. cui add aq. cardiac. idon. unc. 8. 12. conserv.
conditur. idon. unc. 4. 6. consect. drac. 3. unc. sem. pulv. cardiac. unc. sem.
unc. 1. destillentur omnia in balnco Mariae, ambr. mosch. gr. 5. ad scr. sem.
in nodulo liga^. and alembici naso appens. liquor exceptus reponatur in ampulla
vitrea in loco frigido, de quo capiat unc. 1. 2. 3. per se ex cochleari vel cum
succ. idon. unc. 3. 4. ad lubitum; idque ter, quater, vel saepius in die.

Of Broths. R. rad. fol. etc. decoquantur cum pullo gallinaceo, fiat jusculum,
utatur mane vel etiam circa vesperam per dies 8. vel 9. if altering. but if
restaurative. R. gallin. ping. (vel capon. exenterat.) quae in parts minutas
concisa, in olla vernisata, vel alembico conclusa accurate, ne quid expiret,
coquatur in B. M. ad putrilaginem, colentur omnia, succus exprimatur, ab eo
pinguedo separetur, asserveturque in ampulla vitrea ad usum, in loco frigido:
potest etiam dissolvi in ejus lib. 1. vin. alb. succ. card. aut liquor. idon.
unc. 3. sacchar. unc. 2. cinam. and confect. alkerm. drach. 1. ferveant omnia
dum saccharum dissolutum fuerit, colentur, and serventur ad usum. These are the
forms of internal liquid remedies: the next are those of the soft ones.

Of Boles. R. if purging. medul. cassiae recenter extract. cum aq. hord. etc.
drach. 6. (vel alterius) opiat. purg. drac. 2. cum saccharo fiat bolus mane
sumend. cum sir. capil. ven. q. s. vel alterius palato grati. Vel R. cass.
recent. extract. unc. 1. cum sacch. fiat bolus. Vel. R. opiat. purg. unc. 1.
cum sacch. fiat bolus. Vel R. pulv. etc. humectentur cum tali syrupo and cum
saccharo in boli formam reducantur, quem sumat etc. Vel. R. terebinth. lot. aq.
viol. etc. drach. 2. vel drach. 3. cum pulv. liquirit. scr. 1. sacch. q. s. f.
boli, qui nebulis involvantur, and ex cochleari cum syrupo idoneo, ut capil.
ven. viol. etc. devorentur, mane, 3. 4. horis ante prandium, idque usitate per
triduum. If corroborating. R. conserv. drac. 3. unc. sem. pulver. scr. 1.
confect. scr. 1. drach. sem. cum saccharo fiat bolus, quem sumat mane 2. horis
ante cibum, die post purgationem. Vel R. confect. drach. 1. drach. 1 sem. cum
sacch. f. bolus, devorand. si volueris cum syrupo, superbibendo parum vini
diluti, vel alterius liquoris pro scopo.

Of Opiats. R. if purging. pulv. cathart. drach. 4. drach. 8. (vel q. deb.) cum
suis corrig. sir. vel mel. s. q. (sc. tripla vel quadrupla) fiat opiata, de qua
sumat unc. 1. etc. per se in forma boli, vel diluas cum jusculo, decocto, vel
quovis liquore idque singulis 15. diebus praemisso clystere pridie. Vel R.
opiat. offic. purg. unc. 2. elect. unc. 2. 3. pulv. simp. purg. drac. 1. sir.
purg. q. s. fiat opiata, de qua capiat unc. 1. etc. cum cura, and regimine
artis, etc. Vel R. purg. simpl. mol. (ut cass. tamarind. man. pulp. prun.
passul. sebest.) unc. 1. cum suis correctivis f. B. and sumatur cum jusculo. If
roborating. R. conserv. unc. 4. conditur. unc. 1. sem. unc. 2. confect. drach.
2. ad unc. sem. pulv. drach. 1. ad unc. 1. cum sir. etc. q. s. fiat opiata, de
qua sumat drach. 2. ad unc. sem. vel ad magnitud. avellan. aut castan. per
horam ante prandium etc. quotidie, superbibendo momentum aq. borrag. etc.
potest addi ambr. mosch. gr. aliquot and fol. auri no 2. 3. post pulv.

Of Lohochs. R. pulv. rad. fol. sem. succ. exsicc. bechic. vel electuar.
thorac. ad unc. 1. sir. idon. mel. sap. mucilag. sem. convenient. gummat. vin.
dulc. etc. quadrupl. quintupl. vel q. s. fiat lohoch, quo saepius utatur aeger
capite erecto (vel potius prono ad pectus, ut epiglottis, quae laryngi
incumbit, magis dehiscat,) cum baculo liquiritiae contuso, etc. vel ex
cochleari, sensim lambendo. Vel. R. rad. unc. 2. 3. fol. m. 4. 5. fruct. mayor.
par. 18. minor. 20. 24. unc. sem. sem. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. f. decocct. in liq.
idon. q. s. ad consumpt. medietat. maneant per noctem in infusione, mane forti
expressione facta, add sacch. cand. unc. 4. 6. pulv. elect. unc. 2. 4. etc. ad
consistentiam mucilaginis. Vel R. pulp. fruct. (passul. fic. jujub.) ad unc. 1.
pulver. ad drach. 6. syrup. q. s. fiat linctus etc. Vel R. ex lohoch offic. ad
unc. 1. 2. pulver. ad drach. 2. 3. sir. q. s. fiat lohoch. Vel R. fruct. unc.
2. sem. unc. 1. succ. unc. sem. contus. cribrat. and traject. excipiantur cum
sir. mel. vel mucilag. q. s. fiat eclegma, potest pulvis etiam addi ad unc.
sem. Vel R. sir. pectoral. unc. 4. ad 6. pulv. ad unc. 1. fiat lambativum. Vel
R. conserv. astring. unc. 2. pulv. ad unc. sem. unc. 1. sir. q. s. fiat lohoch.
Vel R. butyr. unc. 1. sacch. mel. unc. 2. pulv. drach. 3. terebinth. unc. 1.
vel ol. amygd. dulc. sir. q. s. f. linctus. Vel R. sir. unc. 4. 6. de quo
capiat saepius ex cochleari, sensim lambendo.

Of Conditements. R. conserv. cardiac. unc. 4. confect. card. drach. 1. drach.
2. pulv. card. corrob. pulv. unc. sem. drac. v. sacch. alb. rosat. tabulat. ad
pondus omnium, dupl. tripl. vel. q. s. fiat mixtura vel conditum auro
coopertum, quo utatur ad cochleare 1. per se vel dilutum liquore idoneo, aqua
simplici, julepo, vino vel jusculo, hora somni vel post cibum (pro naturali
facultate ante, cum, and post cibum) pro facultate debili roboranda. The
subsequent forms are of solid internals.

Of Pasta Regia, morsels. R. fruct. pin. pistac. amygd. excort. lot. macerat.
contus. unc. 4. bechic. 4. frig. major. excort. incis. contus. papav. alb.
lactuc. unc. 2. unc. 2. sem. sacch. alb. solut. liquor. idon. dupl. vel q. s.
spec. drach. 2. fiat confectio in morsellis, additur aliquando: instar
pineolati, utatur per se, vel ex jusculis unc. sem. unc. 1. vel morsel. no. 1.
2. saepius cum cibo, inter pastus. Vel R. pulp. carn. testud. nemoral. cancr.
fluv. capon. aut perdic. elix. unc. 3. 4. fruct. unc. 3. sem. unc. 1. unc. 1.
sem. pulv. drach. 3. sacch. in aq. ros. solut. parum cocti q. s. ambr. mosch.
gr. aliquot, fiant morselli auro obducti.

Of Pandaleons. R. pulv. becch. unc. sem. sacch. liquore idoneo soluti unc. 4.
vel. q. s. fiat pandaleon in pyxide idonea: de quo cum cochleari vel cultro
frustum modicum desumatur, ore contineatur, sensim eliquetur, and instar lohoch
sensim deglutiat, utaturque frequentius.

Of Marchpane. R. amygd. excort. unc. 3. pistach. mundat. unc. 1. contusis in
mortario marmoreo cum parum aq. ros. addit. sacchar. alb. lib. sem. fiat pasta,
hinc placentulae coquendae leviter in furno ad colorem flavescentem, and
duritiem mediocrem. Of Pineolate R. pineor. sacch. solut. an. q. v. mosch. ad
gratiam q. s. fiant morselli.

Of Tablets. R. If purging. pulv. unc. 1. cum sacchari soluti in liquore idoneo
unc. 3. 4. fiant tabellae pondere drach. 2. unc. sem. capiat 1. quotidie 2.
hor. ante cibum, per se, vel solut. idoneo liquore. If roborating. R. pulv.
rob. drach. 5. drach. 6. conserv. idon. drach. 3. confect. drach. 2. cum
sacchari solut. in etc. q. s. fiant tabellae ponderis drach. 1. 3. quarum unam
capiat per se. vel solut. in liq. idon. 3. horis ante prandium vel coenam,
idque postridie purgationis praecedentis, diebus alternis, vel quovis tempore.

Of Pills. R. If purging. pulv. drac. 4. scr. 4. corrig. drac. 2. scr. 2.
diagrid. troch. alhand. vel castor. gr. 5. gum. aceto. dissol; drac. 2. cum
sapa, succ. mucilag. mel. vel sir. tali, fiat massa pilularum, quae oleo
amygdalarum dulcium vel anisi, etc. oblita, aluta obvolvatur, reponaturque in
pyxide idonea, capiat de hac. massa scr. 4. formentur pil. 6. 7. 8. deaurat.
sumend. no. 3. 4. mane hor. 2. ante prandium, semel septimana. Vel R. mass.
pil. tal. drac. 1. diagrid. etc. gr. 4. 5. cum aq. tali formentur pil. 6. 7. 8.
deaurat. sumantur summo mane, vel etiam post mediam noctem, cum custodia, levi
coena praecedente, vel hora somni. Vel R. cathart. unc. 4. 6. cum suis corrig.
decoq. in s. q. liquor. idon. ad medietatem in olla clausa, facta deinde
expressione forti, in colaturae hujus unc. 6. 8. dissolve in B. M. aloes
succotrinae drach. 6. unc. 1. fiat levis inspissatio, levi calore, ad mellis
consistentiam, addendo sub finem coctionis pulv. idon. corrob. ad drach. 2.
diagrid. drach. 1. ad drach. 3. fiat pilularis massa. If usual, R. aloes
succotr. ad drac. 6 purg. levior ad drach. 2. corrob. cinam. garyoph. vel
mastich. aut elect. comp. ad drach. 2. ammon. drach. 1. drach. 2. cum sir.
absynth. etc. fiat massa pilularis, de qua sumatur drach. sem. ex qua formentur
pil. 4. quarum duas sumat mane, duas alias 2. hor. ante coenam bis vel ter in
hebdomade etc. If corroborating and altering. R. pulv. thoracic. lenient ut
succ. liquirit. gum. trag. arab. amyl. sacch. sem. papav. alb. ad unc. 1. unc.
1. sem. cum mucilag. gum. tragac. extract. in aq. ros. vel cydon. etc. vel sir.
pect. fiat massa, ex qua formentur pilulae hypoglottides, quarum unam passim
and saepius contineat sub lingua, donec liquescat, and sensim deglutiatur. If
lupinar troches. R. pulv. astring. ad unc. sem. drach. 6. pulverisata
excipiantur sir. idon. q. s. fiat massa, ex cujus drach. 1. formentur pil. 6.
quarum 2. ante somnum and mane ante cibum exhibeantur ad sanguinis fluxum
qualemcunque sistendum.

Of Troches. R. pulv. idon. ad unc. 1. unc. 2. excipiantur. in aq. succ. vel
mucilag. (cum sacch. q. v.) s. q. ex cujus pasta fiant trochisci lupinares vel
pastilli ponderis drac. 1. 2. 3. charactere impresso, siccentur in umbra, and
reponantur, usus tempore teratur unus, duo pro ponderis ratione, and
efficaciae, solvatur liquore idoneo. utatur intra and extra. Of Muscardines. R.
mosch. aq. ros. dissol. (ambr.) gr. 3. 4. 6. scr 1. etc. q. v. pulv. aromat.
suavis odoris drach. 1. amyl. tantil. drach. sem. sacch. albiss. drach. 6. etc.
atterantur pistillo; and cum mucilagine tragac. (ex unc. 1.) in aq. ros. fact.
s. grana instar hordeaceorum, quae exsicc. in umbra pro usu. Vel R. praedict.
cum s. q. aq. ros. F. trochisci: quorum unum teneat saepius in ore.

Of Powders. R. if purging, cathart. cum suis correctiv. ad unc. 1. sacch. pari
pond* vel parum, fiat pulvis subtilis, de quo sumat etc. cum jusculo, vel alio
liquore convenience, manc cum custodia. If roborant and digestive. R. peptic.
unc. 1. flat. discut. unc. sem. drach. 6. corroborant, stomach. ad drach. 2.
sacch. albiss. ad pondus omnium. vel rosar. tabulat. q. s. fiat pulvis
digestivus, cujus sumat drach. 2. vel cochleare 1. post singulos pastus, nihil
superedendo vel bibendo. vel R. sem. anis. foenic. carui. an drach. 1.
coriandri pp. cinnam. an. drach. 1. cort. arant. scr. 2. sacch. albis. ad pond.
omnium. f. pulv. digestivus etc. If roborating and cardiack. R. pulv. electuar.
idon. and specif. etc. ad unc. sem. unc. 1. (per se vel cum sacch. tripl.
quadrupl. and mosch. gr. aliquot) fiat pulvis, de quo sumat drach. 1. 2. unc.
sem. cum aqua, jusculo, vel liquore idoneo, idque mane jejuno ventriculo, vel
alias urgente necessitate, maxim si fuerit alexiterius. If altering and
aperient. R. limatur. chalyb. praepar. unc. 1. sem. unc. 2. addit. aperient.
etc. cum sacch. portione pari fiat pulvis, cujus sumatur drach. 1. (vel cochl.
1.) aut 2. mane per dies aliquot cum vino, vel superbibendo parum liquoris
idonei. If lithontriptick also. R. lithontript ad unc. 1. unc. 1. sem sacch. q.
s. pulverisata tenuissime misceantur, de quo sumatur drach. 1. drach. 1. sem.
cum liquore diuretico idoneo. or if a dystokia, R. borac. drach. sem. croc.
succin. alb. an. scr. sem. F. pulvis. If suppression of the menses. R. troch.
de myrrh. drach. 2. dauc. cretic. pulv. assari, sabin. an. drach. 1. castor*
scr. 2. fiat pulvis. If a flux thereof. R. thuris, mastich. nuc. cupress. rad.
bistor^. an. scr. 2. fiat pulvis. etc. If medicinal and roborant. R. rad
cephal. unc. 2. sem. drach. 6. flor. drach. 3. aromat. drach. 2. fiat pulvis
paulo crassior, quo exsiccetur caput mane, quod usitatissimum post lotiones
ipsius. if chirurgical. R. mat. idon. etc. f. pulvis pro etc. These are the
forms of internalls, the next are externals, and common to more parts.

Of Epithems. R. if liquid. aq. unc. 8. succ. unc. 2. 3 vini vel aceti unc. sem
unc. 1. pulv. card. hepat. lign. cort. flor. sem. unc. sem. drach. 6. spec.
elect. drach. 1. drach. 2. troch. aromat. drach. 1. confect. card. drach. 1. 2.
croc. gr. 4. 5. m. siat epithema liquidum, in vase vitreo reponendum, usus
tempore, cum panno scar latino adhibeatur, vel linteum imbutum leviter
expressum applicetur tepide, and ubi exaruit aut resrixerit; renovetur, vicibus
repetitis continuando per horae quadrantem mane and vesperi: vel saepius, and
postea solidum admoveatur. If solid. R. conserv. unc. 3. confect. drach. 3.
pulver. drach. 1. 2. liquoris q. s. fiat epithema solidum opiatae forma,
extendatur supra pannum scarlatinum liquore idoneo imbutum, ac leniter
expressum, and tepide regioni cordis admoveatur, idque vel post liquidi usum,
vel alias etiamnum, and bis vel ter renovetur in die. Vel R. ung. (rosac.
cerat. santal.) unc. 2. conserv. idon. unc. sem. drach. 6. pulv. cardiac.
drach. sem. scr. 2. fiat epithema linimenti forma. Vel. R. pipion. per medium
dissect. qui conspergarur deinde pulver. card. drach. 1. aut drach. 2. pulveris
pro epithematibus ordinariis (vell catell. dissect. conspers. pulv. diger: and
rob. ex flor. ros. c^mom. etc. unc. sem. pro cap.) applicetur regioni cordis.

Of Lotions. R. if cephalic. rad. ad unc. 2. 3. fol. a m. 4 ad 8. sem. unc. 1.
unc. 2. flor. 4. (aromat. unc. sem. drach. 6. sulph. viv. unc. sem. fol. sen.
unc. 1. agar. alb. unc. sem.) coq. in lixiv. q. s. (add. vin. alb. and aq. ad
unc. 4.) hoc decocto caput ex alto irrigetur sub radiis solaribus, sereno and
tranquillo caelo, vel loco calidiore, caput deinde probe exsiccandum cum
spongiis aqua vitae maceratis, and stupis cannabinis obtegendum, suffimine
aliquo suffitis idque mane 2. hor. ante prandium, alvo prius exonerato. If for
the feet. R. ingred. dos* praedict. (cap. papav. alb. no. 4. ad some. sal.
alum. unc. 4. sulph. viv. ad unc. 2. ad exsiccandum) fiat decoctio in s. q. aq.
font. pro lotione pedum mane vel vesperi ante cibum; vel etiam ante somnum, ad
conciliandum somnum.

Of Fomentations. R. if humid. rad. sol fruct. sem. flor. etc. (dos. apozem.)
aq. lact. lixiv. sarmentorum oxycra^. vel aq. fabror. lib. 3. vel q. s. (sed
pro oculo unc. 4. 6. pro ventric. lib. 1. lib. 1. sem.) decocto facto colatoque
add. vin. alb. lib. 1. lib. 1. sem. acet. unc. 6. 8. aq. vit. unc. 2. 3. vel
ol. unc, 4. ad lib. sem. (pro scopo) fiat fotus, quo foveatur locus affectus,
linteo duplicato, filtris, spongia imbutis, and leviter expressis, vel etiam
vesica suilla semiplena mane and sero, vel urgente necessitate, calide per
horam dimidiam, aut unam, vicissim ubi refrixerit applicandum. vel si in
hypochondriis, dicitur, foveatur regio hypochondriaca mane 1. 2. 3. horis ante
prandium vel etiam ante coenam, per triduum aut quatriduum, frequenter mutando
ne frigescant: pars deinde ungatur tali oleo, linimento, vel unguento calide,
scilicet, post universales purgationes, etc. If dry, they are called sacculs.

Of Semicupes. R. rad. sol. fruct. sem. flor. etc. (dos. apozem. dupl. and
balnei dimidia) fiat decoctio pro semicupio, ubi aeger insideat a pedibus ad
umbilicum mane and vesperi long a pastu, exonerata alvo, per biduum aut
triduum, prout opus; tepide, sine sudore: mora autem sit in eo per 2 horas, and
deterso madore lecto se componat, uncto deinde loco affecto, si volueris,
linimento idoneo. Of a Vaporarie. R. etc. (mat. and dos. ut in fotu) fiat
decoctio in liq. idon. quant. sufficient. cujus vaporem excipiat, ex sella
persorata, olla subdita decocto illo plena, quo frigido aliud indatur.

Of Baths. R. rad. a lib. 3. ad 6. herb. 10. aut 12. recensit. singul. m. 3. 4.
vel. herb. 6. 7, 8. an. fascic. 1. s^m. unc. 4 ad lib. 1. fruct. ad lib. 1.
sem. flor. quatuor. an. p. 4. 6. aq. dulc. q. s. fiat decoctum pro balneo (quo
sacto, add. ol. butyr. an. lib. 3. vin. alb. lib. 4.) quod ingrediatur manc and
vesperi long a pastu (vel urgente necessitate) exonerata prius alvo, per
biduum aut triduum, tepide sine sudote, mora autem sit per 2. horas, vel pro
viribus, and deterso madore post egressum balnei (usitate imperatur) ungatur
regio hepatis, renum etc. unguento refrigerante. Vel R. aq. ^ep. lact. ol. etc.
q. s. fiat balneum.

Of Stuphes or sudatories. R. If humid rad. fol. sem. flor. idon. q. apozem.
aq. q. s. fiat decoctum, cujus vaporem capiat aeger sub conopeo been clauso,
sude^ ad placitum duobus lebetibus vicissim calent. in cupam immiss. bis
ingrediatur in die long a pastu, alvo exonerata, idque per biduum: mora autem
sit in balneo pro viribus, post egressum detergatur sudor, lecto se componat,
etc. If dry. R. silie. candent. sub conopeo jam dicto super laminam serream
dispon. vel sub textura lignea instar caveae, qua aegri obducantur, stragulae
imponantur, donec sudor eliciatur copiosissimus, praebito guajaci aut alterius
sudorifici decocto, sit mora pro viribus, vel per horae quartam partem vel
dimidiam.

Of Irrigations. R. stirp. idon. etc. aq. q. s. fiat decoctio ad tertias, ex
cujus colati lb. 1. 2. 3. cum acet. vin. vel aq. vit. drach. 2. ad 6. 9. fiat
irrigatio ex alto, cum gutturnio in partem affectam.

Of Embrocations. R. olei unc. 4. succ. aq. an. unc. 4. (vel 1. solum,) pro
embrocatione, fricetur pars leviter, tegatur postea linteo, cotone, stupis
imbutis eodem oleo, vel non imbutis. Vel R. etc. intingantur stupae vel lintea,
applicentur saepius renovando.

Of Liniments. R. ol. part. 2. vel. 3. butyr. 1. pingued. 1. pulv. drach. sem.
pro olei unc. 1. cerae drach. 1. vel q. s. ung. offic. dupl. vel ex horum 2.
fiat linimentum ad, unc. 4. 8. quo illinatur pars affecta, calide post fotum si
praecesserit; ut saepe fit, vel alias.

Of Unguents. R. Ung. offic. unc. 2. 3. 4. pulv. unc. sem. drach. 6. ol. and
cer. vel analog. q. s. f. ung. pro part affecta. Vel R. ol unc. 4. 6. 8.
succor. tantund. aut unc. 2. 3. 4. pulv. unc. sem. drach. 6. decoquantur ad
consumptionem succ. in liquore expresso dissolv. cerae q. s. f. ung. potest
addi ung. offic. ad unc. 2. Vel R. ol. unc. 1. pulv. drach. 1. drach. 1. sem.
cer. drach. 2. f. ung. vel R. ung. offic. ad unc. 4. 6. 8. fiat linimentum
tepide, calide vel frigide pro scopo. Vel R. pulv. cum ol. aut analog. 1. 2.
etc. liq. idon q. s. agitentur in mort. marmor. cum pistillo plumbeo, sensim
affundendo liquor. idon. fiat Nutritum.

Of Cerots. R. ol. unc. 1. pulv. drach. 1. drach. 1. sem. cerae unc. sem. (vel
analog. etc. ut in emplast. quo est mollius, sed durius unguento) fiat ceratum,
quod extendatur super alutam, fig. deb. Vel R. empl offic. unc. 2. ad unc. 8.
ol. q. s. f. ceratum.

Of Emplasters. R. ol. unc. 1. pulv. unc. sem. cerae vel. anal. unc. 1. pro
duriore ol. unc. 1. pulv. drach. 6 cerae unc. 1. sem. pro durissimo ol. unc. 1.
pulv. drach. 6. unc. 1. cerae unc. 2. fiat emplastrum quod extendatur super
alutam, and applicetur (oleo illitum, vel pulvere conspersum si nolis tenacius
adhaereat) fig. deb. pro tali part, pro capite instar literae T. pro
ventriculo scuti, pro spleen oblonga, utero rotunda, renibus quadrata. Vel. R.
emplast. offic. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. pulv. unc. sem. drach. 6. ol. unc. 1. cer.
q. s. addendo parum terebinth. f. emplastrum, etc. Vel R. emplast. offic. q. s.
f. empl. fig. deb. pro part affecta. Vel R. gumm. drach. 6. unc. 1. pistillo
calido liquat. extendatur super alutam. Vel. R. succ. etc. coq. l. a. ad
consumptionem succorum, postea add. etc. fiat emplastrum. etc.

Of Spanadraps, or telae Gualt. R. emplast. idon etc. liquetur in mortario,
pistillo calido add ol. q. s. and tela saepius immergatur and fiat instar
ligaturae expulsivae. Vel. R. ol. unc. 8. pulv. idon. unc. 4. cerae vel analog.
unc. 8. liquefactis omnibus, pannus imbuendus paretur in fascias, latas digitos
3. 4. longas debite, imbuatur tela bis aut ter, quae polita and siccata
servetur in usum. Of Medicate telae, for fucus's R. talci laevigati unc. 1. ol.
pavav. alb. unc. 3. camphor. drach. 1. borracis drach. 1. sem. cerae albissimae
saepius lotae unc. 3. vel q. s. fiat tela ad nitorem faciei, ad ruborem ejusdem
and albedinem.

Of Cataplasmes. R. mucilag. seu materiae, (seu, rad. fol. sem. fruct.) coct.
contusae and trajectae unc. 10. lb. 1. pulver. unc. 2. 3. 4. ol. aut ipsi
analog. unc. 3. 4. vel q. s. fiat cataplasma, extendatur in linteum, admoveatur
autem semel, bis, in die, post fomentationem cum ejus decocto. Vel R. rad. fol.
sem. fruct. etc. coquantur in liquore idoneo, perfect contundendo deinde
omnia, trajiciendo per setaceum, eujus lb. 1. add. pulv. vel farin. etc. fiat
cataplasma post fotus applicandum. Vel. R. fruct. coct. sub ciner. vel liquor.
idon. ac contus. lb. 1. add. pulv. idon. f. catapl. Vel. R. crust. panis vino
macerat. tossed. quae pulv. adstring. rob. unc. 2. conspers. ventriculo
admoveatur, pro flux and vom. vel mic. panis albi lacte macerat. lb. sem. cui
add. vitel. ov. no. 2. croc. drach. sem. ol. idon. q. s. f. catapl. ad dolores.
vel pulv. astring. unc. 1. 2. cum ovi album. except. cum stupa macerata in
aceto vel vino, instar cataplasmatis vulneratis partibus admoveatur.

Of Poultises. R. farin. legum. unc. 6. coq. in liq. idon. quibus add ol.
axung. vel analog. ad unc. 3. 4. fiat pulls. vel ex mica panis ut supra. vel ex
mucilagine idonea cum pulveribus and oleosis.

Of Oiles. R. ol. com. etc. lb. sem. simpl. pulverisat. unc. 1. succvin. vel
liquor. idon. drach. 2. 3. decoq. ad consumptionem succorum, exprimantur
fortiter, and fiat oleum ad usum servandum. Vel. R. ol. offic. etc. misce, fiat
oleum, quo inungatur pars talis, calide vel tepide, pannis callidis etiam
applicatis. Vel R. etc. m. fiat embrocatio supra talem partem, applicando, etc.

Of Dropaces. R. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. ol. unc. sem. drach. 6. liquatis simul
and in alutam extensis, fiat dropax. Vel. R. simplic. etc. call. 20. 30. sc.
piper. pyrethr zinzib stercor. etc. ad unc. sem. drach. 6. fiat drop. Vel. R.
pulv. calid. ad drach. 6. sem. sinap. sterc. columb. ad unc. 1. excipiantur
picis and terebinth. q. s. fiat emplastrum: vel cum empl. de mucilag. and ol.
irin. applicetur parti calide, derasis capillis, repetatur antequam fuerit
frigidum, idque saepius, dum rubor in part efflorescat, eo remoto, pars oleo
camomillae, etc. illinatur, quo claudantur pori.

Of Vesicatories. R. mass. emplast. vesicator. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. etc. fiat
vesicatorium magnitudinis debitae super alutam extensum, applicetur parti
affectae, donec vesicae excitentur, quae acu aperiantur, and sinantur diu
fluere, imponendo folium brassicae torresactum leviter and oleo illitum, ne
exsiccentur, sinantur autem apertae, donec humor totus effluxerit. Vel. R.
empl. de mucilag. unc. 2. 3. canthar. drach. 2. 3. incorporentur, super alutam
f. empl. vesic. Vel R. ferment. veter. unc. 2. cantharid. drach. 2. cum aqua
vitae vel aceto malaxat. fiat vesicatorium, potest addi piper. zinzib. euphorb.
drach. 1. drach. 1. sem. sem. sinap. unc. sem. and si post aures applicand. f.
2. emplastr. form. semilunar.

Of Sinapismes. R. caricar. macerat. pulp. pro forti part. 1. sinap. 2. pro
mediocri an. p. aeq, pro debili 2. sinap. 1. misce, fiat phoenigmus, and
admoveatur usque dum pars rubescat.

Of Sacculs. R. rad. lign. cort. fol. flor. sem. aromat. gumm. unc. 2. unc. 2.
sem. pro capite, unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. pro cord, unc. 2. unc. 3. pro
ventriculo, mosch. ambr. gr. 4. scrup. sem. etc. pro scopo, ex omnibus fiat
pulvis, cotone moschato and acu interpuncto cum serico rubro intercludatur,
effingantur facculi, (pro capite pileiformes, pro ventriculo scutiformes, pro
hepate fig. lunae crescentis, pro liene linguae bubulae,) torrefacti in
fartagine, sensim affundendo vin. generos. acet, etc. q. s. vel in liquor.
idon. pa. rum decoct. saepius alternatim calentes admoveantur, possunt etiam
and ex sale fieri, etc.

The next are the forms of remedies belonging to some certain parts.

Of Frontals. R. if dry. flor. viol. ros. nymph. pugil. 3. 4. sem. papav. alb.
lactuc. unc sem. drach 6. cherm. drach. sem. pulv. santal. drach. 1. and
aliquando flor. chamom. melilot. an. p. sem. sem. coriand. aneth. an. drach.
sem. (vel fol. lactuc. hyosciam. an. m. 2. 3. contusis add. ol. viol. f. F.)
contundantor crasse, and includantur panno lineo raro, fiat frontale, quod
vapore aceti perfusum, and irrora tum, fronti and temporibus admoveatur hora
somni. If moist, R. ung. popul. vel. rosat. drach. 6. ol viol. etc. unc sem.
album. ov. dimid. ace^. parum, in conquassatis panni lin. intinct. applicentur
fronti and tempor. hora somni, and 4. 5. horis elapsis re^^^ possunt etiam addi
cons. ros. viol. unc. sem. drach. 6. Vel. R. fol. flor. sem. dict. contus.
addito pauco oleo and aceto, fiat instar cataplasmatis, quod duplici linteo
exceptum fronti and temporibus applicetur. Vel R. bol. sang. drac. terr. sigil,
thur. ol. mastich. an. drach. 1. farin. volat. and pil. lepor. incis. an drach.
1. alb. ovi no. i. acet. q. s. m. f. anacollema fronti and temporibus
applicandum ad sistendas fluxiones, and impetum humorum.

Of Oxyrrhodines. R. ol. rosat. unc. 6. 9. acet. unc. 2. 3. agitentur omnia
fortiter simul, and huic mixturae linteola immersa imbutaque admoveantur
capiti, fronti, and temporibus, mutando saepius. Vel R. ol. rosat. and cephal.
unc. 1. unc. 6. acet. unc. 2. 3. aq. cephal. frig. vel succ. unc. 4. m. fiat
oxyrrhodinum quod utatur, ut jam dictum est.

Of Cucupha's or quilts. R. unc. 1. rad. cephal. fol. sicc. m. 2. 3. pond. unc.
sem. drach. 6. flor. p. 2. 3. and pond. drach 2. 3. aromat. drach. 3. unc. sem.
gumm. drach 1. 2. mosch. scrup. sem. scrup. 1. etc. fiat pulvis, qui excipiatur
cotone, vel bombace moscatellino, and cum panno sericeo interpuncto seu
interbastato, ut vocant, fiat cucupha supra caput gestanda, vel pileo assuenda.
Duabus praescriptis, pulvis est duplicandus, diciturque. Fiant duae cucuphae,
quarum unam gestet de nocte, alteram pileo assutam interdiu, and quando erunt
pinguedine delibutae removeantur, renoventurque. Exemplum tale est. R. rad.
acori, calami aromat. cyperi irid. fl. an drach. 2. fol. sicc. rorismar.
meliss. salv. origan. m. sem. fl. stoechad. arab. lavend. lill. convall. spicae
nardi an p. sem. cinnam. nuc. mosch. macis, caryophill. an scrup. 2. storac.
benzoin. an. drach. sem. fiat pulvis, qui excipiatur cotone moschato, and cum
panno serico interpuncta fiat Cucupha.

Of Collyriums. R. if vaporose, fol. sem. flor. oxydore. etc. fiat decoctio in
vin. alb. aq. etc. (addit. non nunquam urina pueruli ad unc. 2.) pro suffitu,
hujus decocti vaporem vel fumum recipiat ex olla parva, vel per tubulum aeneum,
in oculum, reseratis partibus, mane and sero long a cibo, (per dies quibus
opus erit) deinde per horae quadrantem soveantur etiam oculi spongia decocto
imbuta, vel sacculis simplicibus ipsius repletis, qui tepentes vicissim
applicentur oculo laboranti, per horae quadrantem aut dimidiam. If Liquid. R.
oxydore. fol. m. 6. 8. sem. unc. 1. sem. unc. 2. cephalic. fol. m. 2. aromat.
unc. sem. drach. 6. fellis unc. 2. urinae lb. sem. lb. 1. lb. 2. mellis lb.
sem. lb. 1. vini lb. 2. macerent. per octiduum in vase vitreo, in loco calido,
vel fimo equino, destillentur postea in B. M. reponatur ^^^a in ampulla vitrea,
servetur ad usum, instellando in oculum, mane and vesperi. Vel. R. succ. fol.
depurat. vel decoct. fol. flor. sem. idon. unc. 4. vel ex infus. antimon.
drach. 1. in aq. unc. 3. ad visum clarif. vel vitriol. gr. 2. 3. in aq. ros.
foenic. ad ruborem and dolorem. vel vegetab. idon. fact. in aq. destill. succ.
decoct. etc. unc. 4. 6. liquore colato. vel aq. destill. succ. infus. decoct.
confus. ad unc. 3. 4. vel. album. ov. vin. aq. solum. vel aq. destil. unc. 3.
4. pulv. tut. pp. antimon. lot. troch. alb. Rhas. sarcocol. lacte nutrit. etc.
drach. 1. drach. 1. sem. succ. vel album. ov. unc. 1. unc. 2. m. f. collyr. If
Melliforme. R. pulv. idon. laevigat. in alcool drach. 2. 3. mucilag. idon. mel.
butyr. ung. rosat. etc. unc. sem. drach. 6. fiat instar linimenti, quo
illinantur oculorum canthi, ut sensim penetret ad interiora, etiam penicillo
palpebris applicetur e regione affectus. vel fit ex mucilaginibus sem. idon. ut
cydon. etc. vel. R. medul. panis unc. 2. macerat. in lactis q. s. cui add.
mucilag. psyl. ad unc. sem. op. gr. 2. etc. fiat instar pultis vel
cataplasmatis, ex linteolo madido liquore idoneo applicetur. vel pulp. pom. sub
ciner. coct. aut lacte ad unc. 2. vel pulp. cydon. coct. vel resident. decoct.
digerent. oxydore. contus. and traject. ad unc. 2. F. cataplasma. If Dry, R.
ophthalmic. idon. ad unc. sem. unc. 1. fiat in cote cum liquore idoneo pulvis
instar alcool subtilissimus, de quo parum vel gr. 2. instillentur in oculum cum
tenui calamo, deinde palpebra leviter diuque confricetur, vel cum liquore
idoneo fiat litus. Vel. R. alcool idon. ad drach. 6. unc. 2. cum liquor. idon.
fiant trochisci lupinares, vel pastilli pondere drach. 1. siccentur in umbra,
teratur unus, solvatur pro collyrio, aut linimento conficiendo cum jam dictis.

Of Gargarismes. R. aq. destill. lb. 1. lb. 1. sem. sir. idon. unc. 3. 4.
diamor. dianuc, mel. ad unc. 1. sem. unc. 2. succidon. acet. omphac. ad unc. 2.
3. vel. aq. unc. 8. 10. succ. unc. 4. cum dissolvend. vel decoct. stirp. var.
dosi fere clysteris, fact. in liq. idon. in cujus colaturae lb. 1. lb. 1. sem.
jam dicta dissolv. fiat gargarisma, quo colluat os saepe per horam ante
prandium and coenam, vel etiam omni hora si opus, frigide si repellamus, tepide
si digeramus. Exempli gratia. R. aq. stillat. plantag. solan. rosar. an. unc.
3. aceti unc. 1. sem. syrup. granat. acid. myrtin. an. unc. 1. m. f.
gargarisma. Vel R. aq. prunell. unc. 2. acetos. rosarum an. unc. 1. sir.
diamor. unc. 1. nitri praepar. scrup. 1. m. f. gargarism. ad anginam. Vel R.
succ. cydon, vel granat. lb. sem. aq. comm. unc. 3. m. f. gargar. astringens,
ad tonsillas inflammatas. Vel R. fol. acetos. portulac. plantag. an. m. 1.
cort. granat. sem. sumach. an. drach. 2. rosar. rubr. sicc. p. 2. decoq. in aq.
com. ad lb. 1. colaturae add sir. diamor. dianuc. aceti an. drach. 1. m. f.
gargarismus, quo os colluatur gargarizando, sine deglutitione.

Of Apophlegmatismes. R. if dry, rad. pyrethr. macerat. per noctem in aceto ad
unc. 1. 2. quam mane masticet. vel pulv. rad. pyrethri, zinzib. sem. sinap.
staph. ag. piper. long. mastic. cum cephal. carioph. nuc. myrist. ad drach. 3.
unc. sem. excipiatur cerae vel mastic. q. s. fiant pilulae, vel formulae
salivales, vel globuli instar pilutae majoris vel formae lupinar. vel trochisc.
forma lupinor. aut avellanarum pondere scrup. 2. drach. 1. fiant trochisci
mansiles, quorum unum masticet, and voluter saepius in ore, mane jejuno
stomacho, idque per semihoram capite prono, expuendo saepius quod dissolvitur,
os deinde abluat aqua tepida, vino, etc. ut reliquiae haerentes eluantur.
poterit repeti etiam 2 horis ante coenam. vel ex pulv. praedict. cum panno raro
forti tamen except. fiat nodulus, sc. ex mastic. unc. 1. pulv. acr. drach. 2.
3. If liquid. R. decoct. cephal. atten. incid. rad. fol. sem. flor. dosi
gargarismatis, add. apophlegm. ad unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. unc. 2. fact. in vino
hydromel. etc. q. s. ad tertias (add. sen. etc. si cathart. ad unc. sem. drach.
6.) quant. gargar. qua dissolv. etc. ut in gargar. colatum servetur pro
apophlegmatismo purgante, etc.

Of Dentifrices. R. liquor. vitriol. sulph. pauc. aqua pauca dilut. vel pulv.
coral. crust. panis ust. sal. os. sep. pumic. tartar. etc. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem.
mosch. ambr. parum. etc. vel pulv. drach. 6. unc. 1. mel. ros. q. s. vel pulv.
unc. 1. sem. unc. 2. cum mucilag. gumm. trag. fiat lotio. pulv. lin. vel troch.
etc. abluatur os saepius, etc. vel illinantur aut fricentur dentes, postea os
abluatur idoneo, aqua, vino, etc.

Of Errhines. R. if purging and liquid succ. fol. capurpurg. incis. contus. m.
4. vin. alb. unc. 4. vel. succ. recenter extracti, cum vino albo, ex fol.
virid. herbarum, etc. unc. 4. 8. lb. 1. decoct. cephal. parum, aquae vitae,
unc. 1. M. and liquor servetur in ampulla vitrea ad usum. Vel. R decoct.
cephal. cum fol. errhin. colat. unc. 6. 8. quibus dissolv. succ. idon. unc. 2.
3. sir. unc. 2. aq. vit. pulv. drach. 1. etc. fiat errhinum, seu caputpurgium,
reponatur in ampulla vitrea: hoc autem utatur repide, mane duabus horis ante
prandium, vel etiam ante coenam, ex vola manus, ore aqua pleno, ter, quater,
per triduum, quatriduum, aut, si diaeta quaedam fuerit instituta, toto diaetae
tempore. If soft, R. succ. idon. ol. ireos an. unc. 2. decoque ad succorum
consumptionem, add cerae q. s. fiat linimentum, cui addi potest. pulv. acrior.
drach. 1. sem. elaterii scrup. sem. scrup. 1. Vel R. succor. dict. unc. 2. vin.
unc. 1. sem. mel. q. s. coque leviter in opiatae consistentiam, potest addi
pulv. acr. vel purg. ut clater. colocynth. ad scrup. 1. vel ex pulv. drach. 2.
3. mell. q. s. f. opiata, etc. cum digito vel penna nares illinantur, and
capite prono humores sic proliciantur, optimu^ postea nares abluere. If solid.
R. pulv. idon. drach. 2. 3. 4. etc. insuffletur parum, sc. scrup. sem. scrup.
1. cum calamo in nares mane, etc. Vel R. pulv. dict. drach. 2. 3. excip. cum
mucilag. idon. vel terebinth. q. s. and cerae, fiat nasale forma pyramidis,
quod oleo imbutu^ naribus indetur Of Ptarmicks. R. pulv. simplic. ptarm. ad
drach. 1. sem. drach. 2. fiat pulvis tenuissimus, cujus vel vapor tantum
naribus attrahendo inspiretur, vel (maxim cephalicis admixtis p. aeq.)
tantillum, sc. gr. 1. 2. mediante calamo in narem insuffletur tempore matutino:
possunt and quavis hora usurpari sopito cerebro, and ubi excludendus foetus. If
an altering errhine. R. succ. idon. fol. extract. cum aq. liquor. idon. ad unc.
6. 8. in quibus dissolv. postea mel. sir. idon. ad unc. 1. sem. 2. and pulv ad
unc. sem. vel in decocto idon. dose clyst. dissolv. mel. succ. idon. ad unc. 2.
3. vel form. lin. ex idon fiat errhin. Vel, R. pulv. astring and sicc. drach.
3. cum album, ovi, succ. idon. mel. except. adjectis pilis leporin. minutim
dissectis, fiat veluti turunda, indatur omni fere hora, and privatim dum ibit
cubitum, turundam unam indat, alteram sequenti die.

Of Suffiments. R. if for pleasure. gum. styrac. benzoin. drach. 4. 6. pulv.
rad. acor. lign. xiloal. fol. majoran. cort. citri, arant. flor. cephal. arom.
mac garyophyl. drach. 3. vel part. aequal. ambr. mosch. zibet. pro lubitu, fiat
pulvis, qui conjiciatur in carbones ardentes, and fumus excipiatur cuhiculo vel
vestibus. Vel. R. pulv. dict. etc cum eliquatione gum. tragac. fact. cum aq.
idon. fiant trochisci pro sumo, ponderis drach. 1. siccentur, and usus tempore
conjiciatur 1. 2. in carbones, etc. Vel, R gum. odorat. ad unc 3. pulv. dict
unc. 2. 3. cum eliquatione gum tragac. etc. aut ladani liquati q s. fiant
aviculae vel candelae odoratae pro sumo, mosch. ambr. add. pro lubitu ad scrup.
sem. scrup 1. accendatur 1. ad odorem cubiculi. Vel, R. gum. styrac. benz. unc.
2. pulv. pauc. drach. 2. 3. omnia solvantur cum aq odo^ata, ur rosarum: cosso
letae, ut vocant, indantur instar. pastae, ad longum usum: usus tempore
conspergatur cossoleta cum aq. ros. igne subdito expiret vapor jucundissimus,
qui, ut tunc placeat, add. mosch. gr. 3. 4. If for sanity, R. gum. ladan.
storac. benzoin. galban. ass. foet. castor. etc. unc. 2. pulv. rad lign. idon.
gall. and alypt. mosch. drach. sem. drach. 1. pulv. elect. rob. ad drach 1.
fiat pulvis, de quo conjiciatur in carbones ardentes, fumus excipiatur: si pro
capite, ore hiante, vel suffitis ipsius operimentis; si pro pectore ore patulo:
si pro utero and aliis cavitatibus, per infundibulum vel cum sella perforata:
si doloribus juncturarum, suffiatur lana, bombax apponatur, vel fiat sumus ex
sola nicotiana. Vel. R. etc. fiant trochisci, ut cum cinnab. unc. 1. sem. gumm.
drach. sem. drach. 6. pulv. rob. drach. 2. 3. and terebinth. q. s. Vel. R.
acet. vin. aq. vit. ros. etc. ex olla, etc. Vel. ex decoct. idon. dosi fotus
vel q. s. pro part. affect. cujus vaporem suma^ per sellam perforatam vel
infundibulum pro utero, vel per tubulum aut embotum pro auribus.

Of Odorats. R. if dry, pulv. violac. vel cypr. pro sacculis majoribus, pro
minoribus unc. 2. 3. fiat pulvis, qui pyxide conclusus perforata, alias quoties
videbitur, naribus admoveatur, vel nodulo aut sacculo serico includatur ad
usum. Vel R. pulv. in suff. ad volupt. unc. 1. ad 2. addito mosch. ambr. zibet.
ad gr. 6. scrup. sem. scrup. 1. ad lubitum, excipiatur cum gum. tragac. solut.
in aq. ros. fiant poma adorata no. 2. manibus gestanda odoranda saepius, vel
ladano soluto incorporetur, fiat pomum, quod illinatur oleo odorato, aut mosch.
ambr. solut. vel formentur globuli. Vel R. sapon. Venet. vel alterius albi unc.
4. pulv. odor. drach. 6. mosch. ambr. gr. 3. 4. cum aq. ros. q. s.
incorporentur, fiant globuli seu pilae majores, vel smegma odoratum. If Humid.
R. aq. citrangulorum unc. 3. ambr. mosch. gr. 2. 3. vel aq. ros. naphae unc. 6.
aq. cinam. unc. 1. sicc. pulv. odorat. drach. 2. 3. 4. mosch. ambr. gr. aliquot
m. s. aqua odorata. Vel R. pulv. odorat. unc. sem. cerae albae saepius lotae
drach. 3. ol. idon. de been, vel amygd. dulc. q. s. fiat linimentum, vel
balsamus, add. mosch. ambr. etc. ad gr. aliquot.

Of Scutums. R. stomach. call. unc. 2. fiat pulvis crassiusculus, qui excipiatur
cotone moscatellino, vel floccis panni coccinei, and cum panno sericeo fiat
sacculus scutiformis, interpunctus, vel interbastatus, qui collo appensus
gestetur supra regionem ventriculi, irroratus aliquando, si lubeat, pauca aq.
vitae. Vel. R. mass. emplast. stomach. ut de mastic. unc. 2. pulver. stomach.
unc. sem. gum. odorat. ad drach. 2. excipiantur terebinth. q. s. fiat
emplastrum scutiforme super alutam, ventriculo applicetur illitum, si vis,
oleo, aut pulvere conspersum, ne adhaereat.

Of Pessaries. R. if purging, opiat. laxant. unc. 1. sem. 2. pulv. aperient.
uterin. aut purg. ad drach. 2. vel gum ammon. aut myrrh. cum succo
incorporentur, cum santalo rubro vel panno sericeo fiat pessus, vel cum pauco
cotone excipiatur, obvolvaturque panno sericeo rubro, fiat pessus magnitudinis
debitae, qui filo coxae alligatus (ut extrahi possit pro lubitu, quod fit post
4. 6. horas, quo sordes eluantur, postea iterum idem vel alius immittitur, ideo
duplex effingi solet.) indatur, vesperi maxim hora somni per triduum, an^
quatriduum, and ipse vel interiora vulvae prius illinantur oleo idoneo. Vel R.
pulv. cathart. s. vel c. ut hier. picr. ad drach. 6. unc. 1. alterant. uterin.
drach. 1. sem. drach. 2. cum mellis vel succi q. s. m. fiat pessarium. Vel R.
succ. unc. 2. 3. mel. unc. 1. sem. pulv. cathart. unc. 1. sem. coq. ad
consumptionem succorum in consist. opiatae, F. pessarium. If altering R. pulv,
idon. uterin. rad. fol. aromat. etc. drach. 6. unc. 1* unc. 1. sem. succ. q. s.
coto ista mixtura imbuatur, fiat pessulus obvolutus; etc. vel cum mel. q. s.
fiat pess. cum panno sericeo. vel opiat. officinal. ut triph. persic. sine opio
ad unc. sem. pulv. drach. 2. unc. sem. f. p. Vel R. pulv. drach. 6. unc. 1. cum
ol. nardin. and cerae q. s. fiat instar linimenti, quo imbuatur coto, vel lana
carminata, formetur pestarium, tenui panno sericeo obvolvendum. Vel R. mellis
unc. 1. sem. unc. 2. coct. cum succ. idon. unc. 2. 3. addendo, si vis, pulv.
unc. sem. f. forma suppositorii: vel fit ex solis ung. idon. cotone except. vel
ung. comitis. and pulv. idon. an. unc. 1. vel ex herb. virid. ad m. 1. contus.
cum mel. vel succ. incorporat. add. si lubet, pulv. unc. sem. drach. 6. vel ex
cotone solo, zibet. drach. sem. imbuto. aut mosch. solut. and aliis odoratis,
statim indito. vel succ. idon. ad unc. 2. 3. pulv. unc. sem. drach 6. cotone
except. f. pess. no. 2. Of nascales, R. coton. vel lanae floc. aut haps. etc.
insuccat. vel imbut. succ. idon. vel ung. etc. s. q. F. nodul. vel penicil. vel
ex cotonis flocculo zibeto leviter imbuto, vel mosch. etc. solut.

Of Suppositories. R. rad. bet. brassic. alth. etc. detracto cortice externo,
quibus sal aspergatur and oleo illit. indantur. fiunt etiam ex caul porri,
butyro inunct. sapone albo in formam glandis acuminat. vel melle ad duritiem
cocto, and succ. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. Vel. R. mellis unc. 1. pulv. acr. scrup.
4. ut sal. stere. mur. pulv. purg. aloes, agar. sen. hier. pier. colocynth.
hier. diacolocynth. ad scrup. semscrup. 1. opii ad dol. scrup. sem. fiant
suppositoria, quorum unum oleo vel butyro illitum indatur urgente necessitate,
ita ut, si sint purgantia, semel, bis in die, ad alterandum saepius, si ex
narcoticis non saepe, filo alligat. ut retrahantur pro lubitu.

Of Clysters. R. if purging. decoct. com. pro clyst. vel idon. emol. rad. unc.
2. 3. fol. m. 4. sem. drach. 6. unc. 1. unc. 1. sem. fruct. par. 8. flor. p. 3.
purg. (post sem.) ad drach. 6. unc. 1. decoquantur omnia idoneo liquore vel
aqua, cape de colat. unc. 4. pro infant. pro adultiore unc. 5. 6. pro adultis
lb. 1. in vastis lb. 1. sem. in qua dissolve mel sacch. ad unc. 2. 3. pro
infant. unc. sem. ol. in adult. ad unc. 3. sal ad drach. sem. drach. 1. opiat.
ad unc. 1. sem. vel unc. 2. pro infant. unc. sem. etc. fiat clyster, injiciatur
long a pastu vacuo stomacho: tamen and quavis hora, necessitate urgente. If
Altering. R. lact. decoct. cap. intestin. vervec. ol. vin. generos. hippocrat.
lact. ferrat. decoct. hord. furfur. ros. horum 3. ad p. 1 juscul. stirp. var.
praedict. dos. quo dissolv. mel, sacch. ad unc. 2. 3. butyr. ping. ad unc. 3.
succ. ad unc. 2. 4. pulver. ad drach. 6. unc. 1. sevi unc. sem. unc. 1. urin.
ad unc. 2. 3. philon. a drach. 1. ad drach. 2. conserv. unc. sem. ad unc. 1.
sem. sacch. alb. unc. 2. 3. ut and consummat. confect. drach. 1. drach. 2.
theriac. rec drach. sem. drach. 1. vitel. ov. no. 1. 2. pro scopo. F. enema,
injiciatur autem hora commoda quacunque, urgente necessitate.

Of Injections. R. If for the ears, ol. unc. sem. drach. 6. unc. 1. succ.
aquar. decoct. unc. 1. unc. 2. quibus dissolv. pulv. ad scrup. sem. scrup. 1.
ping. drach. 2. mel ad unc. sem. etc. instellentur in aurem. gut. 2. 3. etc.
vel decocto auris adimpleatur; sed paulo post reclinato capite expurgetur: vel
ol. gut. quaedam infundantur, obturetur deinde auris cotone moscatellino. If
for the womb, R. succ. depurat. aq. destil. liquor. simpl. vel decoct. rad.
fol. etc. dosi clysteris, de cujus colatura cape unc. 3. 4. (servetur tamen lb.
1. pro pluribus injectionibus, addendo var. pro scopo) injiciantur calide vel
tepide per vices, cum metrenchyta in uterum. If for the bladder and yard, R.
liq. idon. emuls. unc. 3. 4. quibus dissolv. mel sir. idon. ad unc. 1. pulv.
laevigat. in alcool ad drach. 1. drach. 1. sem. drach. 2. fiat injectio per
syringam, vel catheterem. If sinus's and fistula's, R. liquor. idon. q. s.
injiciatur etc.

Of these Remedies, belong to the head, almost all internals, as decoctions,
infusions, distilled waters, spirits, oiles, tinctures, essences, elixirs,
syrups, emulsions, conserves, conditements, electuaries, extracts, powders,
confections, rotuls, morsuls, magisteries, pills, and troches, etc. and
externals, sc. epithems, oxyrrhodines, embrocations, oiles, balsames,
liniments, unguents, cataplasmes, plasters, cerots, powders, sacculs, quilts,
and periapts. To the eyes, sc. internals, those aforesaid: the externals are
waters, mucilages, collyries, liniments, fomentations, unguents, cataplasmes,
and sine powders. To the ears belong decoctions, distilled waters, oiles,
juyces, liquid balsams, fumes, liniments, unguents, fomen tations, epithems,
and cataplasmes and such like remedies. To the nostrils, errhines and
p^armicks, etc. To the teeth, collutiones, liniments, pills if hollow, balsams,
oiles, spirits, infusions, fumes, inunctions, dentifrices, troches, penicils,
fomentations, cataplasmes, and plasters. To the mouth and jaws, lotions,
gargarismes, liniments of honey and juyces, etc. lambatives, syrups, fumes,
sublinguale G.
GRyllus, vid. Scarabaeus. Gryllus, Kind.
H.
HIrudo, Leech.
I.
IUlus, Gally-worme.
L.
LOcusta, Locust. Lumbricus, Worm. Lycos, vid. Araneus.
M.
MUsca, Flic. Myrmecion, vid. Arancus.
P.
PApilio, Butter-flie. Pediculus, Louse. Phalangium, vid. Arantus. Pollin, vid.
Asellus. Pulex, Flea.
R.
RIcinus, Tike.
S.
SCarabaeus, Beetle. Scolopendra, Scolopender. Scorpio, Scorpion. Stella
marina, See-Padde.
T.
TAbanus, Oxe-flie. Tarantula, vid. Araneus. Taurus, vid. Scarabaeus. Teredo,
Wood-worme.
V.
VEspa, Wasp.
Anthropologia. Of Man.
HOmo, Man, etc.
Geologia. Of Earths.
ALana terrae, Alanian earth. Ampelitis terra, Ampelite earth. Arena, Sand.
Bolus Armenus, Bole arm^niack. Cimolia, Fullers earth. Creta, Chalk. Eretria
terra, Eretrian earth. Japonica terra, Japonian earth. Lutum, Clay. Marga,
Marle. Ochra, Oker. Pnigites, Black earth. Rubrica, Rubric. Selenusia terra,
Selenu^^ine earth. Terra Chia, Earth of Chios. Terra Lemnia, Earth of Lemnos.
Terra Melia, Earth of Mel^s. Terra Samia, Earth of Samos. Terra sigillata,
Sealed Earth.
Metallologia. of Metals.
Argentum, Silver. Aurum, Gold. Cerussa, vid. Plumbum. Cuprum, Copper. Ferrum,
Iron. Minium, vid. Plumbum. Plumbum, Lead. Sandix, vid. Plumbum. Stannum,
Tin. Viride Aeris, vid. Cuprum.
Hemi-Metallologia. Of Semi-Mettals.
Antimonium, Antimony. Cinnabaris, Sinople. Mercurius, Mercury, or Quicksilver.
Minium, vid. Cinnabaris.
Metals natural Excrements.
Chalcitis, Chal^ite. Cobaltum, Cobalt. Marcasira, Marcasite. Misy, Misy.
P^oricum, vid. Chalcitis. Sorry, Sorry.
Metals artificial Excrements.
Cadmia, Cadmia. Diphryges, Diphryges. Lithargyrium, Litharge. Plumbago,
Plumbage. Tutia, Tuttie.
Halologia. Of Salts.
Alumen, Alume. Ammoniacum, s. Ammoniack. Aphronitrum, vid. Nitrum.
Aquafortis, vid. Nitrum. Nitrum, Nitre. Sal communis, common Salt. Sal gemmae,
Gemme Salt Vitriolum, Vitriol.
Theiologia. Of Sulphurs.
Ambra grysea, Amber-griece. Arsenicum, Arsnick. Asphaltos, Asphalt. Gagates,
Agath. Lithanthrax, Lithanthra^. Naphtha, Naphth. Orpimentum, vid. Arsenicum.
Petrolaeum, Oil of Peter. Pissasphaltos, vid. Naphtha.
linguale troches, outward inunctions, and cataplasmes. To the thorax or lungs,
almost all internals, especialy the thicker syrups, lohochs, troches and
sublinguale rotules, electuaries, waters, vapors and fumes to be attracted
with the air; and Outwardly, oiles, liniments, unguents, cataplasmes,
plasters, cerots, epithems, fomentations, and facculs. To the heart;
decoctions, infusions, medicate wines, clarets, potions, distilled waters,
spirits, oiles, tinctures, essences, elixirs, solutions, syrups, emulsions,
conserves, conditements, gellies, flowers, magisteries, confections, tablets,
rotuls, troches, odorates, and all internals: Outwardly, epithems, oiles,
balsams, liniments, unguents, and periapts. To the ventricle, all inward
remedies: Outwardly, oiles, inunctions, liniments, epithems, fomentations,
cataplasmes, plasters, sacculs, tosted bread irrigated with wine, and applied
warm. To the liver, all internals: Outwardly, those that agree to the stomach,
sc. inunctions, plasters, cerots, cataplasmes, epithems, and sacculs. So to
the spleen, the same internals and externals. To the reins, almost all
internals: and Outwardly, clysters, insessions, baths, fomentations, oiles,
liniments, unguents, cataplasmes, plasters, and periapts, etc. To the bladder,
almost all the same internals: Outwardly, injections, insessions, baths,
fomentations, oiles, liniments, and unguents, etc. To the spermatick vessels,
internals, oiles, liniments, insessions, and baths. So to the womb, as also
injections, pessaries, fumes, evaporations, plasters, sacculs, and odorars to
the nostrils. To the intestines, internals, and externals, suppositories,
clysters, injections, and umbilical inunctions. To the joints, outwardly agree,
spirits, oiles, balsams, liniments, unguents, baths, lotions, fomentations,
cataplasmes, plasters, and smegmas. Of these, some are more liquid, as
apozems, emulsions, infusions, juleps, and potions: Some are a little thicker,
as syrups, eclegmas, electuaries, and boles: Others are more solid, as troches,
powders, rotuls, morsuls, and pills, etc. The external, are either liquid, as
waters, oiles, epithems, and clysters: Or thicker, as liniments, and unguents:
Or harder, as ^erots, emplasters, cataplasmes, and sacculs. As for the Form to
be prescribed, it is according to the manner of using, adaptability of the
matter, and nature of the patient. Therefore some are prescribed in a potable
form, as apozems, waters, emulsions, infusions, and other potions: Others are
lingible, as lohochs, syrups, and sublinguale troches: Some masticable, as
boles, conditements, conserves, confections, marchpane, marmaleds, electuaries,
rotuls, and trageas, etc. Others deglutible, as pills and powders, etc. Some
are used by immission, into the cavities; sc. The mouth, eyes, nostrils, ears,
womb, anus, and genital. Others are applied to the superficies, by inunction,
as oiles, liniments, unguents; as emplaisters, plasters, cerots, and dropaces;
as cataplasmes, cataplasmes, sinapismes, and phoenigmes; by irrigation,
epithems, and embrocations; by washing, waters, lixives, and baths, etc. by
tepid imposition, and fomentation, sacculs, cucupha's, and the warm flesh of
animals; or by fume, as suffumigations. Here Note, as to the Quantity or Dose,
that a compact body, has need of a great dose; and an open and laxe body, of a
smaller: if strong, a large dose; and if weak, a small one. A thick and tough
humor, wants a large dose; and small, if gentle, and fluxile; if to be
evacuated from the next direct, common parts, small; if indirect, a mean dose.
Those that are of a full age, and young, want a great dose; and children and
old men, a small one; men, a large; and women a small dose; the great, a small;
and the fat, a great dose; the red a small, and black a large one; but the
white require a mean dose. Those that are of a hot and dry temperature, a small
one; the cold and dry want a large dose; and the cold and moist a mean one. In
the time of heat, a small dose; and great when cold; in the time of showers
small, and great in the time of squalidity, great in autumn, small in summer,
and mean in winter. In a hot and dry region, small; and great if cold and dry;
but mean if cold and moist. If the diet be hot and dry, it requires a small
dose; if cold and dry, a great one; if cold and moist, a mean dose. The
condition of life, if sedentary, requires a great dose; if laborious, a small
one. If the urin appear thin and sharp, the dose must be small; and mean, if
obscure large and white. If the belly be bound, a great dose is necessary; and
lesser if moister. If the sweat be sharp, the dose must be small; and great if
less sensible. It must be small in the irefull, and great in the mild. If
dreams of fire, the dose must be small; mean, if of rain and snow; and great,
if of sad things. If fevers, especially the burning, and exquisite tertians,
and diseases, if hot, they require a small dose; and quartans continual and
intermittent, a mean one. The affection of the gall, requires a small one; the
scirrhus, elephantiasis, cancer, black jaundise, and melancholy, require a
great one; and the oedema and dropsy, a mean. Those that are thirsty, watching
and weak, require a small dose; and the hungry, troubled with acid belching,
and strong, a great one. If the mouth be bitter, and the mouth of the stomach
troubled, a small dose is needful; if the mouth be insipid, and the stomach
oppressed, a great one. Therefore a small dose is prescribed, if all these
indications do concur with many or the chiefest, of a small quantity; mean,
if all those indications concur; and great, if all concur, or most, and
those the chiefest. Thus of the dose, which is small, mean, or great. Now
follows the Quality of the compound, which is vehement, weak, or mean. The
humor therefore indicateth first, which is in the ventricle, intestines, and
mezereum, that there is need of a more weak remedy; but those that are in the
joints, brain, and breast, of a stronger. The sense of the intestines, if
exquisite, wants a more gentle remedy; and if dull, a stronger: Also the
senses of the intestines are perceived by the course of diet; for those that
feed upon mustard, or the like biting and more sharp meat, without trouble, are
of a most obtuse sense; but those of an exact sense, which presently perceive
the mordacity; and those that are of a mean sense, want a mean dose. The
humors, which easily follow the attrahent medicament, or are bilious also,
want a weaker medicine; but those that follow hardly, a more strong one, as the
melancholic, but the pituitous, a mean one. The age of children has need of a
most gentle remedy; youth, of a gentle; and young men, of a mean one; and the
middle aged, of the strongest. The sex of men, requires a more strong remedy;
that of women, a weaker; the reddish, a weaker; and the white, a stronger. The
temperature, of the cold and dry, wants a stronger; of the hot and dry, a
weaker; and of the cold and moist, a mean. The time of cold, requires a
stronger; of heat, a weaker; of rain, a mean; of autumn, a stronger; summer, a
weaker; and winter, a mean. The region, if cold and dry, wants a stronger
remedy; if hot and dry, a weaker; and if cold and moist, a mean one. The diet,
if cold and gross, in the strong, requires a more strong medicament; if thin,
hot and weak, a mean one. The condition of life, if sedentary and idle, wants
a stronger remedy; if laborious, a weaker. The urin if yellow, thin, and sharp,
shows need of a weaker medicine; and of a stronger, if dark and thick. The
vomiting of bitter matter, indica^s a weaker; of drier, a stronger; and of the
insipid, a mean one. The sweat that passes out as it were pricking the skinn,
shows need of a weaker remedy; and those that are without sense, of a
stronger. The dreams if sad, require a stronger; if of fires and contentions, a
weaker; if of rain, snow, and waters, a mean one. The passion, of anger, wants
a weaker; and the mild a stronger. The fever, burning, continual, tertia^, or
intermittent exquisite, requires a mean remedy. The diseases of the gall, and
phrensy, want a weaker; the scirrhus, elephantiasis, cancer, black jaundise,
melancholy, and those of the spleen, a stronger; the oedema, dropsy, apoplexy,
palsy, stupidity, and coma, a mean; much thirst, and watching, a weaker; great
hunger and acid belching, a stronger; bitterness of the mouth, and griping of
the mouth of the stomach, a mean one: Therefore a strong remedy is to be
prescribed, if all the signs of a stronger medicament do concur; as black
hellebore, and scammony, etc. weak, if all the indications of a weaker remedy
concur, as manna and tamarinds etc. and mean, if all those of a mean
medicament, as sena and rhubarb, etc. As for the Form and consistence of the
remedy, it liquid, thick, or mean: The liquid, as all potions, are used to
evacuate humors, that do not resist the trahent medicine; or those that are
not remote from the mezereum. The gross, as pills, to purge those that
strongly resist the medicine, or are far distant from the mezereum. The mean,
as boles, or morsels, to evacuate humors, which neither easily yield, or
altogether resist the remedy, and are neither close, nigh, or remote from the
same. Also, in respect of the age, the first, indicateth, a liquid form of
remedy; the middle, a mean; the last, a gross one. The sex virile, a liquid;
the feminine, a gross one; The habit, if lean, wants a liquid one; and gross,
if fat; if reddish, a liquid one; gross, if black; and mean if white. The
temperature, requires a liquid form, if hot and dry; gross, if cold and dry;
and mean, if cold and moist. The time, if hot and in the summer, indicats, a
liquid remedy; mean, if cold, and in the midst of winter keeping its course;
and gross, in dabbleing weather and autumn, except the melancholic humors
are adust. The country, if hot and dry, wants a liquid remedy; and gross, if
cold and moist. The diet if delicate, indicates a liquid form; and gross, if
courser. The condition of life, if laborious, wants a liquid form; and gross,
if sedentary. The urine, if yellow, thin, and sharp, requires a liquid
remedy; and thick, if obscure and white. The belly if bound, wants a liquid
form; and thick, if moist. The vomit, if difficult, must have a liquid
medicine; and thick, if easy. The sweat, if sharp, requires a liquid; and a
gross remedy, if insensible. The passion of anger indicats a liquid; and
mildness, a thicker one. The dreams, of fire, have need of a liquid one; but
of a mean one, if of waters, rain, and snow; and of a gross one, if of sad
things, without a manifest cause. A fever, burning, tertian, and exquisite,
requires a liquid consistence; and a quotidian exquisite, a mean; The disease
of the gall, pleurisy, etc. wants a liquid form; the oedema and dropsy a mean;
the apoplexy, palsy, stupidity and coma, etc. a gross one. Great thirst, and
watching, must have a liquid remedy. Great hunger and acid belching, want a
mean; and bitterness of the mouth, and trouble of the mouth of the stomach, a
liquid one; but insipidity of the mouth, and pressure of the stomach, require a
gross form of remedy. Now whether a purger of phlegm, choler, or
melancholy, or one or more, are to be used, appears, from the age, sex, habit
of body, temperature, pulse, time of the year, diet, condition of life, urin,
excrements of the belly, vomit, sweat, spittle, ^xcretion of the womb, dreams,
fevers, erysipelas, cancer, ^hlegmon, thirst, hunger, and taste in the mouth:
From whence ^^e taken the signs of the predominancy of humors; of which, if
^ll of a single humor concur, a single remedy is to be given; and a mixed, if
of more; and of an equal or different quantity, according to the equality or
difference of the combination thereof; which is known from the indication of
all, or excess of some, all which signs are above mentioned in the Synopsis
of the Theory, amongst the Diagnosticks: And as for other things concerning the
use, and manner of using remedies, etc. see my Isagoge Phytologica, etc. in all
which is to be observed, the basis as simple or compound, and its conservant,
adjuvant, dirigent, and corrigent associate, that so the right dose, and use
etc. may be the better judged of, and a right application made.

FINIS.
LOVELLS HISTORY Of Animals, And minerals.


Let the Binder put this leaf in the second part, betwixt the pages 112, and
113.

HANOPTKTOAOTIA. SIVE PAMMINER ALOGICON. OR An Universal History OF MINERALLS
Containing the sum of all Authors, both Ancient and Modern, Galenical and
Chemical, touching Earths, Metals, Semimettals, with their natural and
artificial excrements, Salts, Sulphurs, and Stones, more precious and less
precious etc.

Showing their Place, Matter, Names, Kinds, Temperature, Virtues, Choice, Use,
Dose, Danger, and Antidotes.

By ROBERT LOVELL. St. C.C. Ox. (...).

OXFORD, Printed by W. Hall, for JOSEPH GODWIN, Anno Dom. MDCLXI.

GEOLOGIA. Of Earths.
A.
Alanian Earth. Alana terra.
Place. In Alania, a place which lies near to Scythia. Matter. It seems to
be a species of Oker. Name. Tripolis. Tripela, Aldrov. Exhebenus Plin.
ALanian Earth. Schrod. T.V. it serves for the distillation of saline spirits,
being mixed with the salts, that they may flow the less. Aldrovand. it is used
in stead of Lapis Samius, by Goldsmiths, to cleanse their Gold and Silver,
being of a very extersive nature.

Ampelite Earth. Ampelitis terra.
P. In Seleucia, being counted to be a place of Syria. M. Of a Bituminous
Earth, So Aldrovandus. N. (...). Pharmacitis.
Ampelite Earth. Caes. T. dissipateth, refrigerats, and honestats the
eyebrowes, V. Gal. used to vines it preventeth worms. Diosc-Wock. it serves
to color the hair. the best is the black, equally shining, and that which is
easily dissolved in liquors: which is also a trial for the rest: Aet. its
mixed with remedies to dry and discuss, So Avic. Aldrovand. it digesteth and
helps malignant ulcers, and mollifieth: which are all its virtues. So Plin.
Matthew. Agricola. and others.

B.
Black Earth. Pnigites.
P. In Pnigeum, a village of Libya. M. Of a fat, glutinous, and aereall matter.
N. (...). Suffocativa terra.
BLack earth. Agric. T. is somewhat sharp, partly astringent, abstersive, and
refrigerating. Gal. V. it is in faculty, like the fullers earth in all things.
So Diosc. and weck. yet weaker. C. it is almost like the Eretria in color, and
sticks to the tongue. Aldrovand. its fat and glutinous, something aereall and
so heating; yet some parrs cool.

Bole Armoniack. Bolus Armenus.
P. It Is brought out of Armenia, and Germany, etc. M. Of Earth impregnate by
the vapors of Mars. N. Bolus Armena, and orientalis. Gleba. Lutum Arm.
Bole Armoniack. Schrod. K. as the Armenian and Germane. T. it is very dry,
astringent, and strengthening. V. it serves to stop fluxes, and to thicken,
humors, to resist putrefaction, and to expel poison, etc. therefore it is
excellent in the diarrhoea, dysenterie, and flux of the terms: as also in
catarrhes, spitting of blood, bleeding at the nose, and wounds, etc. its often
used outwardly also, in cataplasmes, and astringent powders, etc. C. The best
is the clean, smooth, and that which being tasted seems to melt like butter.
Note, the goodness of earths is known by their sticking to the tongue and
bubling being moistened: as also that they all bind and resist putrefaction.
Gal. the differences thereof are, according to levity, and gravity, asperity,
and lenity, tenacity, and abstersion: their coldness is known by astriction;
heat by acrimonie, and this by lightness; and simplicity by weight. Gal. bole
helps putrefying ulcers of the mouth, ulcers in the tabes, and pestilent
diseases, being drunk in white wine. So Aet. Avic. it helps catarrhes.
Aldrovand. it helps Fistulaes in the fundament, and all kinds of distillations.
Caes. Agric. and pains of the belly, with the tabes.

C.
Chalk. Creta.
P. It Is brought from Crete, and to be had in England. M. Of Limestone,
dissolved with water. So Agric. N. (...). Terra Cretica. Acida Martialis.
Chalk Schrod. T. it is dry, abstersive, and emplastick. V. it is sometimes
used inwardly for the heat of the stomach: outwardly if serves to dry up
wounds and ulcers, etc. Gal. it is of an aereous substance, and abstersive
without biting. So Aet. by which also it cleanses silver: it is in some measure
like unto the Samia, etc. but very weak. So Avic. it helps ulcers and
inflammations of the eyes: and facilitates the birth, being used as a perlapt.
Aldrovand. it a little binds, and is alexipharmick, and serves for all
things that require extersion without biting, used in milk it kills worms in
children.

Clay. Lutum.
P. Almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of earth without fatness. N.
(...). Argilla. Terra figulina.
Clay. Avic. T. all sorts hereof are cold, drying, abstersive, and astringent.
Aet. Note, all earths before burnt are good against ulcers: after they gently
dry, and are of more thin parts, sharp and discutient: if washed they loose
their acrimonie; but retaining the tenuity of parts, dry more, and are
therefore better to incarnate and cicatrize. Barth. Ang. applied to the temples
with vinegar it stops bleding at the nose. Aldrovand. it attracts, and helps
bruises. Caes. Earths may be judged of by their dryness, acrimonie, and
fatness, and as glutinous, astringent, and sharp.

E.
Earth of Chios. Terra Chia.
P. In the Isle Chios, in the Aegean Sea. M. Of a fat, sharpish earth. N.
(...). Tinbalad almastichi. Arab.
EArth of Chios. Diosc. T. V. as Eretria: also it extends the face, and
takes away wrinkles, causing it to shine, being detersive. So Gal. Diosc.
Weck. it is of the virtue of the Samia: it mendeth the color of the face and
whole body, and in baths is used for detersion, in stead of nitre. C. the best
is the white, somewhat ash-colored. Aet. it is of the same virtue as the
Selinusia is. So Aldrovand, and serves to cleanse the hair. Caes. Agric. it is
more abstersive than the Samia; yet less effectual in curing inflammations,
of the dugs, groine, or testicles.

Earth of Eretria. Eretria terra.
P. In Eretria, a city of Euboea in the Aegean Sea. M. Of a fat and sweet
matter. N. (...). Creta Eretria Aldrov.
Earth of Eretria. Diosc. T. V. as the Samia. Gal. it is more astringent than
the Lemnia, yet not biting: and may be washed once or twice, (as also the
Fullers.) that it may be more gentle: some also burn it, that it may be more
subtle, sharp, and digesting; after which if it be washed, it is much more
effectual, to fill and cicatrize wounds. C. the best is that of an ash color,
the other is white. So Weck. Diosc. it cools, binds, and gently mollifieth.
it fills hollow parts, and conglutinateth bloody wounds. Aldrovand. it
colors the hair black, and helps pains of the head from heat. Hippoc.
applied to the breast in the empyema, it shows the place for Section, by
drying first there.

Earth of Lemnos. Terra Lemnia.
P. In the Isle Lemnos, or Salimine, in the Aegean sea. M. Of a fenny earth and
goats blood. N. (...). Sigillum Lemnium, and Sphragis. Milton lemnia.
Earth of Lemnos. Diosc. T. it is drying, and alexipharmick. V. it is an antidote
against poison, and helps against poysonsome wounds: also it stops fluxes,
and cures the dysentery. Gal. it helps putrefying ulcers being injected with
the juice of plantaine, and drunk in aquose oxycrate: and then with brine. Aet.
washed in wine it gleweth fresh wounds: and drunk stops spitting of blood
and vomiting of the same. Given in clisters with the juice of plantaine it
helps the dysentery. Caes. it helps the pains of the intestines, Aldrov. it
cures the bitings of a mad dog, and helps malignity in pestilentiall fevers,
and is used in the rest, it kills worms in trees.

Earth of Melos. Terra Melia.
P. In Melos, an Isle nere Creet, or Candy. M. Of an aluminous and earthly
matter. N. (...). Terra melitensis, Aldrovand. Melina Theoph.
Earth of Melos. Diosc. T. is aluminous abstersive, and extenuates. V. Week. it
gently dries the tongue, and cleanses the body, and causes a good color: it
extenuates the hair, and cleanses the leprosy and freckles: Painters use it
to preserve their colors, and chirurgions to put into their green plasters.
C. the best is the fresh, soft, friable, clean, and easily resoluble being
touched with water: so the rest. Aldrovand. some equalize it to that of Samos
and Lemnos, in fevers, fluxes, and against worms, the D. is. drach. 1.

Earth of Samos. Terra Samia.
P. In the Isle Samos, in the Ionian Sea. M. Of much aerie substance, so
Aldrovand. N. (...). Stella Samia. Syropicon. Collyrion. Caes.
Earth of Samos. Diosc. T. is cold, stopping, and repressive. V. it operateth
as Eretria. Gal. it is more aereous than the Lemnia: of which the Samius after
is most used, against spitting of blood, and fluxes of women, and dysenteries,
with oil of roses it helps hot phlegmons, new buboe's, running gouts, and
others requiring mitigation and cooling. Week. Diosc. with oil of roses, and
water, it helps the inflammation of the testicles, etc. and preventeth
sweating: drunk in water it helps the bitings of serpents, and poison. C. the
best is the white, light, so^t, juycie, and crumbling, Aet. with the juice of
plantain, it cures noma's, and ulcers with inflammation. Avic. and parotides.
Aldrovand, and the coeliack.

F.
Fullers Earth. Cimolia.
P. In the Isle Cimolus, or Cicandro in the Sea of Creet. M. Of a meanly sat
earth. N. (...). Terra saponaria Aldrov. Creta cimolia. Smectis.
FUllers earth. Caes. T. it is abstersive, and dis^utient. Gal. it partly
refrigerateth and partly gently digesteth, and works according to the nature
of those things with which it is mixed; but it is very good in burnings (as
also all other earths) being applied with oxycrate or vinegar, preventing the
rising. Diosc. Week. both the white and purplish with vinegar help swellings
behind the ea^es, and other knobs, it helps the hardness of the testicles, and
collections of the whole body are restrained thereby; as also St Anthonies
fire, it being applied. C. the best is the cold, and fat. At if washed it
discusseth not. So Avic. Aldrovand. it operates as chalk but is stronger. it
helps the gout, achores, and falling of the hair. Caes. applied it hinders
sweat, so Plin.

I.
Japonian Earth. Japponica terra.
P. In Japonia, or Japan. M. The original matter thereof is not much observed.
N. Catechu: terra Japoniae.
JAponian earth. Schrod. T. is drying. V. held in the mouth it stops catarrhes,
and strengthens the head, as for its taste it is a little austere and sweetish.

M.
Marie. Marga.
P. Almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of the fat, and marrow of the
earth. N. (...). Creta fossitia, Minsh.
MArle. Schrod. T. it dries, binds, consolidates and is sarcotick. V. taken
inwardly it dissolveth tartar, and coagulated blood. Aldrov. Gesn. that which
is called lac lunae, is very good to dry ulcers, drach. 1. thereof taken in any
liquor, increases milk in nurses: also it stops haemorrhages.

O.
Oker. Ochra.
P. In Asia, Hungary, Germany, and Bavaria. M. Of the harder parts of Earth. N.
(...). Sil, Vitruv. Plin. Aldrov. Agric.
OKer. Schrod. T. dries, binds, discusseth, and represseth excrescencies. V.
it is used outwardly, chiefly in strokes, and bruises, and to discuss hard
tumors. Diosc. Weck. it corrodes, in cerots, fills up hollow parts, and
breaks the tophi of the joints. C. the best is the light and muddie. So
Aldrovand, and is used by Painters. Caes. Fallop. it is detersive; and that
which is taken out of Brass mines, is caustic. Agrie. the factitious is most
used by painters, and is made of lead.

R.
Rubric. Rubrica.
P. In Cappadocia, Egypt, and Germany. M. It Is generated of Oker. N. (...).
Sinopis. Miltos. Barb. Magra.
Rubric Schrod. T dries and binds. V. it is used chiefly in vulnerary and
drying plasters, Weck. Diosc. it binds the belly taken in an egg, or
clyster: it is also given to those that are troubled with the distemper of the
liver. C. the best is the heavy, thick, one colored, and that without stones:
the Fabrile is weaker. Aet. drunk, it expels worms. Aldrovand. it is used by
Painters, and is detersive. Hippoc. it helps against burnings, and according to
signature is good for the liver, as appears by the color. So Aldrov.

S.
Sand. Arena.
P. Almost every where, in England, etc. M. Of a most dry earth, and stones. N.
(...). Heb. Chol. Sabulum.
SAnd. Diosc. Gal. T. that of the seashore is abstersive. V. it helps the
dropsy being covered therewith. Barth. Ang. it is cold, and dry, and asswageth
swellings, by its repulsion. Note, Caes. waters infected by the earth, if much,
they stop the bowels, and cause the stone of the bladder, else are not so bad.

Sealed Earth. Terra Sigillata.
P. In Turkey, Maltha, and Germany. M. Of the sulphur of Sol, and Luna. N.
Arab. Terimachtim. Silesiaca. Offic: Sphragis.
Sealed earth, Schrod. K. as the Turkish, Melitean or of St Paul, and Germane
strigensis and lignicensis. T. it dries, binds, resists putrefaction and
poison, dissolveth congealed blood, comfort and strengthens the heart and
head, dilateth the blood, and provokes sweat. V. it is used chiefly in the
plague, malignant fevers, bitings of venomous beasts, diarrhoea's, and
dysenteries. Used outwardly, it cures venomous bitings, and mundifieth
malignant wounds. C. the best is the red. The strigensis, or axungia solis,
helps the diseases of the heart, and epilepsies, and resists philtron's
being taken crude, the Dose is from drach. sem. to drach ij. The ash-colored,
lignicensis, or axungia lunae, helps diseases of the head and liver, near
also unto the nature of the first, is the Labacinsis, being astringent and
provoking sweat. The D. of the Magisterie of sealed earth is from scrup. sem.
to drach. scm. of the spirit. scrup. sem. of the alcalisate, less, which
besides the former virtues, eases the gout, cures the itch, and dissolveth
gold, the D. of the strigoniense oil is gut. 6. in some convenient vehicle,
against the stone, pocks, and malignant fevers. Barth. Aug. the powder of
sealed earth with the white of an egg stops bleeding at the nose, as also
swellings in the feet, and gout applied plaisterwise. Avic. it cures wounds and
ulcers, bruises, and corrosions: it stops catarrhes, and spitting of blood, and
helps extenuation. Aldrovand. Florent. it kills worms in trees, and helps
ulcers, the salt resists poison, plagues, and troublesome agues.

Selenuntine earth. Selinusia terra.
P. In Selinunta, a town of Sicilie. M. Of a white f^^able matter. N. (...).
Creta Selinusia. Aldrov.
Selenuntine earth. Diosc. T. V. as the Chian. Gal. it is moderatly abstersive:
and therefore diverse women use it to cleanse the face. Weck. Diosc. C. the
best is the white, shining, and crumbling. At. it gently dries and cleanses,
and is therefore good against ulcers in the superficies of the body: So that of
Chios. Aldrovand. it is alexipharmick as the Lemnian, and equal to the same.

METALLOLOGIA. Of Mettalls.
C.
Copper. Cuprum.
P. In Cyprus, and Corinth, etc. and other places. M. Of purple sulphur, red
salt, and citrine. N. (...). Aes. Venus. Chym.. Orichalcum Val.
COpper. Schrod. or brass. T. V. it strengthens the generative parts, and is
of excellent use in physic. The spirit is excellent against the falling
sickness by sympathy: after purgation with the red flowers of. the D. is from
8 drops to 10. in broth made acid, that it cause not vomiting* The flowers are
excellent to mundifie wounds, and are therefore put into the plaster
Oppodeldoch. so the crocus. The tincture is very good against the epilepsie,
and many other diseases, being taken in some convenient liquor. S. Closs. The
quintescence is very effectual against diseases of the brain, all fevers
continual and intermitting, and purifieth the blood. Thold. ex Basil. The salt
is hotter, than those of other metals, it strengthens the stomach, and
helps the crudities thereof, therefore it is used against the colic,
flatulencies, and distempers thence arising: also it warmeth a cold womb,
helps its suffocation, provokes the terms, and helps the diseases of the
reins: the D. is from 3 gr. to 8. there may also be thence made one, serving
instead of vitriol. Note, metals are hard bodies, that may be melted, and
begotten of a saline juice or Mercury, coagulated in the earth by the virtue of
their own sulphur; both which are founded in vitriolated salt. S. Closs. The
green caustic oil of brass, cures venereous pushes, and consumes warts.
Note, Verdegrease is made by the vaporose calcination thereof. Aldrovand.
brass is hot and dry: initio 4ti. and so poysonsome. H. causing pain of the
stomach and belly, vomiting, and fluxes, ulcers and difficulty of breath, and
is worse if burnt, but is to be helped, by warm water, oil, or butter and
clysters: Rhas. and Avic. use those remedies against arsenick, and the
Conciliator, the juice of mints, or acorus, drach: ij. being taken in wine, or
drach. 1. of sealed earth, or red coral pp. yet it is good for the eyes,
therefore burnt, together with the flowers rust and squamms it is kept by
apothecaries to dry and bind. Diosc. the flouers bind, repress excrescencies,
and clear the eyes, so the squamme, and helps their flux, and asperity of the
eyebrowes, the rust is sharp and digesting, therefore mixed with oil and wax
it cicatrizeth ulcers: when burnt it mightily binds, dries, and easily
cures ulcers. Caes. aeruginous waters, drunk, cause vomiting, and their baths
help creeping ulcers. Those of brass help ulcers of the mouth and genitals, as
also distillations to the eyes and jaws. Aldrov. T. brass is hot and dry 3o.
and very hurtful to man.

G.
Gold. Aurum.
P. In India, Scythia, Spain, Italy, Asia, etc. M. Of principles exactly
digested and fixed. N. (...). Sol. Chym.. Rex metallorum.
GOld. Schrod. K. as the Arabian. Hungarick and Rhenish. T. is cordial, and
mundifying. V. it does very much strengthen the heart, and natural balsame, or
heat, and is therefore given with good success in all diseases, in which the
strength is to be repaired: it does also cleanse the blood, discussing humors,
and being diaphoretick. The Aurum Fulminans, is used to provoke sweat: the D.
is from gr. 3. to 4. The Diaphoreticum, is given with malmesey or some other
liquor against sundry diseases, especially such as arise from obstruction: it
is also very cordial. H. yet naught for women troubled with the fits of the
mother, by reason of the musk and amber in it. The aurum potabile, by the
spirit of wine, acuated with the salt of urine. D. is given from 3 gr. to 8. or
more. So Heart. Senn. Kest^ Gluckr. in Beg. That by the glaciale oil of
antimonie, from 3 drops to 5: and is an excellent diaphoretick: also the oil
of antimonie coming from the Gold in the first distillation, does gently purge,
and open obstructions, etc. so Heart. in Crol: The aurum potabile by the oil of
Saturn, does resist poison. D. and given from 4 drops to 8 in wine, does
revive those that are even at deaths door: it is also very good against the
falling sickness, apoplexy, palsy, and other diseases of the head. So Heart.
in Crol. Kesl. The compounded aurum diaphoreticum of Poppius, helps the
shrinking of the limbs: the D. is g. 8. so Popp. in Thesaur. The aurum potabile
by the spirit of manna, expels sweat, and is most prevalent to carry forth
the seminary of any malignant and poysonsome disease: so Cl. Helv. the D. is a
few drops. The D. of that of Dr. Antonie of London, is g. 6, 7, 8, etc. The
aurum vitae of Quercetane, is of incredible virtue, against a multitude of
diseases. The D. of the mercuriale laudanum of Bayer, is from gr. 2. to 5.
Unicornu solare or manna solaris, D. is given from gr. 1. to 5. and the Flores
solis, from 6 gr. to 9. The Salt from 2 gr. to 4. and is an excellent
diaphoretick remedy: that of Basil, from 2 gr. to 4 etc. Aldrovand. T. gold is
hot and moist 2o. having antipathie to lead; yet others count it cold and dry.
V. it hinders ill exhalations, and resists putrefaction: held in the mouth it
helps the breath, boiled with meats it resists putrefaction, Plates thereof
being heated hot and often quenched in wine help the splenetick and
obstructions. Lemn. and its good against the plague: and also good mixed with
tartar, against blemishes of the face. Lang. the pla^e thereof held upon the
tongue quenches thirst in fevers: Mizald. and the same applied to the reins
helps the pain thereof. Villanov. and on the head strengthens it, and on the
heart it causes mirth. Alex. Ped. used hot it prevents the grouth of hair.
Mizald the leaves steeped 24 hours in the juice of limmons with white wind,
and powder of angelica, cure the plague: also the leaves applied to ulcers,
consume the flesh without biting, and cauteries are best made by gold. The
Scobs thereof Diosc. helps those that are hurt by quicksilver, taken inwardly,
or used outwardly, it attracting it to it self. Renod. the filings thereof
help the evil colors of maids, as steel. Matthew. the scobs helps the
eyesight, as an alcohol. Gold being applied helps the pocks in Children: the
powder helps the alopecia, drying the same, and the elephantiasis, scab, or
leprosy, in electuaries: some use it against melancholy, the ointment thereof,
helps the hurts of quicksilver. The oil helps the elephantiasis, phagedens and
cancrous ulcers, and the leprosy, strengthening the heart, refreshing the
vital spirits, and expelling all kinds of sicknesses, and it preserves youth;
notwithstanding these Chimists scarce outlived the same. Caes. the powder
blowed into the eyes strengthens them: it helps and consolidates the
complexion.

I.
Iron. Ferrum.
P. Almost in all countries, in England, etc. M. Of sulphur and salt mixed with
the cruder parts of earth. N. (...). Mars. Chym.. if purified, Chalybs.
IRon. Schrod. T. it is both astringent, and opening. V. its opening quality
resideth chiefly in the more volatile part, and therefore in the salt: the
astrictive in that which is more fixed, sc. in the earth: Querc. Sena. The
Crocus martis obstructivus, is drying, and therefore helps the dysenterie,
lienterie, and gonorrhoea, etc. outwardly it is used to dry up ulcers and
wounds. Querc. Begu. The aperitivus does reserate, open, and attenuate. Note,
the first is made by reverberatory calcination, and the second by fusorie.
Querc. The crocus made by calcination of illinition, is a very great opener,
and excellent against the cachexie: the D. is gr. 3. or 4. The white oil of
Mars, opens obstructions, but chiefly of the liver, spleen, meseraick veins,
and womb: the D. is some few grains. Helvic. Dieter. The red oil of Mars,
does gently bind and strengthen, and therefore is Very good in the dysenterie,
loosnesse of the belly, and other fluxes: the D. is gr. 3. or 4. and more:
Kell. The sulphurous oil of Mars, is very fat and fragrant, and is very
excellent in obstructions, and weakness of the spleen. That of J. C. Facis. is
very obstructive. The D. is gr. 4. or 5 etc. Heart. in pract. the D. of the
tincture is from unc. sem. to unc. ij. in broth or a draught of succorie water.
Finck. the tincture helps all diseases of the spleen, also the menses, both
to provoke them and correct them when inordinate: the D. is from unc. sem. to
unc. ij. Senn. Inst. the D. of the tincture of Mars crude is to scrup. 1. of
that of Quercitan of crocus martis, 9 or 10 drops in the decoction of Juniper,
against the dropsy, being taken morning and evening, after universal
remedies. So Heart. in pract. That made of the caeruleous dross, is stronger
then the common crocus made by reverberation, and serves to stop all fluxes,
as the menses, gonorrhoea, dysenterie, diarrhoea, and haemorrhage. etc. S.
Closs. The Sal Saccharinum and yellow tincture of Mars, strengthens the liver,
therefore it helps those that are hydropicall, and have running ulcers in
their legs, it dries up the superfluous menses, and haemorrhoides. taken with
fresh treacle it helps the dysenterie and opens the spleen: the D. of the
Salt is scrup. sem. with the oil of nutmeg: and of the tincture, 6 or 8 drops
in wine: of the red tincture, drach. sem. in white wine against the ischurie.
Joel. Langel. The white magisterie of Mars helps those that are hepatick and
hypochondriacall, etc. Kesl. The Flowers of the crystal of Mars are excellent
in the obstruction of the spleen and mesenterie: Horst. Epist. The sweetish
salt of Mars does incide and open obstructions (though great) of the bowels and
womb. The D. of that of Basil is gr. 6, 7, 8, etc. of the purging salt, scrup.
sem. or scrup. 1. in one or two spoonfulls of the syrup of violets laxative,
etc. Note, steel is made of Iron, by gradatorie purgation: and the vitrioll of
Mars, by cementatorie calcination. Caes. waters running through iron mines,
help the vices of the stomach, and spleen, flux of the sperme, and whites: it
helps the reins, colic, pains of the joints, and exulcerations of the
bladder. Note, all waters are of the faculty of the mineralls by and through
which they pass. The water in which steel has been quenched, helps the
dysentery, so Plia. Myl. it helps the collerick, lienose, coeliack distempers,
and resolutions of the stomach: also all iron strengthens, extenuates, and
resolves what is dry. Myl. The iron baths, help hot and moist diseases, as the
asthma, gout, pain of the joints, weakness of the stomach, tenderness, filth
of the ears, flux of the stomach, dropsy, colic, menses, and urines flux,
hemorrhoids, falling out of the fundament, and poisons, Diosc. The rust
binds, stops the terms, and hinders conception: applied with vinegar it
helps S. Anthonies fire, and pushes, whitlowes, rough nails and eyebrowes, and
the alopecia, so the dross Caes. drach. sem of steel with the sugar of roses,
prevents the putrefaction of evil humors, strengthens the stomach, opens
obstructions of the bowels, and helps the cachexie, and obstructions.

L.
Lead. Plumbum.
P. In Lusitania, Biscay, Spain, France, Britain. M. Of indigested sulphur,
aluminouse salt and, emulating. N. (...). Saturnus. chym.. Plumbum nigrum.
LEad. Schrod. T. it is cold, binds and incrassats, etc. V. it represseth
lust, fills ulcers with flesh, cicatrizeth, removes excrelencies, and
helps cheronious ulcers; as also the malignant, cancrous, and putrefying,
both used alone, and mixed with other things. Note, hereof is made the minium
or red lead of the shops, by reverberatorie calcination, and the burnt lead by
the cementatorie. The sugar or salt and magisterie of Saturn, are of the same
virtue, so either of them being taken into the body, by reason of its
coldness, does extinguish venery: the D. is from gr. 4. to 6. used outwardly
it hinders lust, the navil and genital being anointed therewith. ( Note also,
the same may be helped again, by a Laconick bath, anointing the navil with the
distilled oil of nutmegs,) it is also of excellent virtue in the curing of
cancrose, malignant, and corrosive ulcers, ringwormes, burnings, and
inflammations. it dissolveth hard and scirrhous tumors, it is very useful in
bruises, being applied, and in inflammations and redness of the eyes, being
used in rose or euphrage water, or applied to the eyelids. So Crol. Beg. Senn.
The salt with that of nitre an. crystalizeth, and helps the asthma. S. Closs.
The milkie Liquour of Saturn for ulcers, helps those that are dysepulotick,
and quickly cicatrizeth the same, being applied twice or thrice in a day with
clothes wet therein, being first warmed. Note, ceruse is made hereof by
vaporose calcination. Tentzel. The spiritus ardens of Saturn is sudorifick and
useful in the plague, hypochondriacall melancholy, and burning fevers, as
also in the french pocks, etc. the D. is 2. or 3 drops, it hinders venery: and
is used to dissolve pearls, The yellow oil dissolveth gold. The red
mundifieth and cures wounds, being put thereon: so the caput mortuum: see
Begu. Heart. in Crol. Senn. Inst. Kesl. The balsamic oil of Saturn, is very
excellent in cancrous, eating, and other malignant ulcers, Kell. the sulphur of
Saturn, or supernatant oil, is very effectual in the phthisick and diseases
of the lungs. the D. of the Tincture is g. 2. or 3. the more elaborate is very
effectual in madness, melancholy, the quartane ague, phthisick, and
hypochondriacal melancholy, and opens the spleen. The stone helps saturnine
diseases. Basil. Thold. The true salt of Saturn, does exceedingly cool and
dry, and therefore extinguisheth sperme; the D. is g. 4. outwardly it helps
redness of the eyes, and ulcers of the whole body. Diosc. washed lead, does
cool, bind, soften, fill with flesh, and stop fluxes of the eyes, and blood:
it removes excrescencies in ulcers, and helps ulcers of the fundament,
haemorrhoides, and inflammations, with oil of roses: also it cicatrizeth those
sores that are hardly cured; and is in all things like Spodium; but only that
it does not cause crusts. and by the rubbing thereof it hepls the wounds of the
Sea scorpion and dragon. Of the same effect is burnt lead, but much sharper: so
the dross, but is more astringent. Caes. waters running by lead, harden the
nerves, contract them, trouble, and fill them with phlegm. The plates of lead
being bound to the loins and reins resist Venus by their coldness; so Plin.
Albert. Oribas. it hinders the flux of sperme. Hereof with vinegar is made
ceruse: which used outwardly helps ulcers. Diosc. it cools, fills,
mollifieth, gently extenuates, represseth excrescencies, and cicatrizeth, it is
used in gentle cerots and plasters; C. the best is that which is first sifted,
and serves for the eyes. Being taken inwardly it is deadly, causing a white
color in the parts it touches; a cough, dryness, and sluggishnesse, as also
shortness of breath. It Is used by women as a fucus; so Caes. Diosc. the
Antidote is honied water, the decoction of figs or mallows, buttermilk, oil
of flower deluce, or marierom, pigeons eggs with frankincense, or the
decoction of barley, warm water and vomiting. Aldrovand. the oil helps the
hemorrhoids, the plate helps tumors of the ganglion. the headpice helps the
headache. Caes. Of ceruse burned is made sandix, which dries without heat or
cold: if washed it dries and cools.

S.
Silver. Argentum.
P. Almost in all countries, Spain, and the Indies, etc. M. Of Sulphur and
quicksilver. So Albert. Myl. etc. N. (...). Cerebrum. Luna. Chym..
SIlver. Abert. Mag. T. is cold and somewhat moist. Schrod. V. it does
specifically strengthen the head, and cherish the animal spirits, and is
therefore good in all diseases of the head; as in the apoplexy, epilepsie,
etc. Gluck. The Luna potabilis by the simple spirit of wine, D. is given from 3
grains to 6. to more, if acuated by the salt of urine. That by the vitriolate
spirit of wine exceeds the rest, in curing the epilepsie: Thold. the salt
cures diseases of the head, especially the epilepsie; and dries up hydropick
water: the D. is gr. 4. or 5. S Closs. the Lunarie spirit, is very effectual
in curing the idiopathetick falling sickness. Caes. waters running through
silver mines, are thought to be cordial, so if by Gold. Caes. Albert. Mag.
Myl. silver is cold, and dry, yet not without a certain temperate moisture. It
helps the trembling of the heart, in some measure it operates as Gold, and is
given by physicians in the same diseases, especially against madness, and all
melancholic distempers; and to comfort and strengthen the brain, it is put
into diverse remedies, with which gold also is mixed: it helps the
palpitation of the heart, strengthens the heart and brain, begets good
blood, consumes the putrified flesh of wounds, glueth the same, and with the
oil of tartar, cures the troublesome scab; so Myl. The excrement or dross of
silver, is used in black plasters, and those that cicatrize; and that for its
astringent, and attracting nature; so Diosc. The spume thereof, or Litharge,
does thicken, soften, fill hollow ulcers, repress the excrescencies of the
flesh, cicatrize, refrigerate, and stop, being washed it is used in collyries
for the eyes, to take away the unseemlynesse of cicatrices, the wrinkles,
scratchings, and spots of the face. H. Being drunk it loadeth and tormenteth
the stomach, belly, and intrals, and sometimes wounds them by its weight. It
suppresseth the urine, and makes the body swell, and to be deformed, and of a
leadish color. The Antidote is the seed of wild clary drunk, drach. VIII. of
myrrh, wormwood, hyssop, parsley-seed, or pepper, and the dry dung of
Ringdoves, with spicknard and wine. Aldrovand. the filings of silver with
quicksilver help the hemorrhoids. The oil helps diseases of the brain, as the
epilepsie, 3 or 4 drops being drunk in the water of betony, sage, or bawme, so
the salt. The salt taken from gr. 4 to 5. in Juniper water helps a weak
stomach, and the dropsy.

T.
Tin. Stannum.
P. In Germany, and Britain or England. M. Os more soft mercury, fugacious:
and white, crude sulphur. N. (...). Plumbum album. Jupiter. Chym.. Plumbum
candidum.
Tin. Serap. T. is cold and drying. Schrod. V. it is appropriated to the
liver, and also helps diseases of the womb. The salt of Jupiter is an
excellent and present help in the suffocation of the womb, which it does
miraculously ease, both inwardly and outwardly used: it is also commended
outwardly against all stinking ulcers, phagedens, fistula's, and cancers: the
D. is from g. 2. to 4. etc. at several times. The magisterie has the same
virtues with the salt. Begu. the D. of Jupiter diaphoreticus is from g. 4. to
6. The sulphur serves only outwardly. The spirit cures gangreens by the very
touch. So S. Closs. The crystal of Jupiter, cures ulcers that are scrophulous
and cancrouse, by causing a deep escharre, which being removed, they may be
cicatrized by the balsame of sulphur. Thold. The true salt, helps the falling
sickness, melancholy, vertigoes or dissinesse in the head, and dries up
catarrhes, especially such as fall down unto the eyes: the D. is from g. 6. to
scrup. 1. or scrup. ij. Aldrovand. the fine powder of tin helps the wounds
of scorpions. The Arabians use the ceruse thereof in wounds made by the sea
scorpion; many also affirm that tin helps old ulcers, and eating, in short*
time cicatrizing the same. The salt helps the falling sickness, melancholy,
and vertigo, as also catarrhes troubling the head, and dries those that come
from the eyes, also gr. 6. thereof being taken do wonderfully strengthen the
memory.

HEMIMETALLOLOGIA. Of Semi-mettals.
A.
Antimonie. Antimonium.
P. In Germany, Hungary, and Transylvania. etc. M. Of mineral sulphur partly
pure, partly combustible, much crude and little sait N. (...). Heb. Zadadah.
Arab. Aitmad. Stibium. Chym..
ANtimonie. Card. T. its cold 3o and aqueous astringent and drying. Schrod. it
obstructeth the passages of the body being crude, wastes excrescencies of the
flesh, and cicatrizeth. V. it cleanses the ulcers and filth of the eyes, and
is therefore much used in collyries: some also give it in the fit, against the
falling sickness. Querc. in Tet. there are various, innumerable and excellent
properties herein, sc. to prepare, purge, and cause vomiting, etc. insomuch
that it cannot have its due commendation. Hereof is made the vitrum or glass
of antimonie, which by vomit and purgation brings forth thick viscid and
superfluous humors, out of the stomach and parts nigh thereunto. It also
resists the poison and infection of the plague: especially if taken with
vinegar, it hereby causing sweat: furthermore it is useful in the dropsy,
putrid and malignant fevers, etc. D. it is given from. g. 2. to 4. in infusion
from 3. to 6. as afterward, sc. the white, so the Hyacinthine: the powder to
g. 8. being infused in wine, and taken with the juice of marygolds, to cause
sweat, and to preserve from the plague. The black of S. Closse serves for the
purification of metals. The Regulinum may be given in a greater quantity than
the former. That of the Regulus causes sweat, and is given from gr. 3. to 6.
P. de Spin. The vitrum or glass of antimonie corrected, is given from g. 2. to
6. The purging from 3 to 5. of which are made pills against agues: So Heart. in
Crol. The purging spirit of Vitriol. D. is from 6 drops to 10. The common
crocus metallorum is used in pains of the head, caused by the foulness of
the stomach (from which they often arise.) in the falling sickness, pleurisy,
hypochondriacall melancholy, fevers, both continual, especially the
hungarick, and intermitting, as also against the plague, coagulation of blood,
and to preserve from the gout: in all which being given in some convenient
water, it purges by vomit, and sometimes by stool: the inward D. is from gr.
3. to x. yet 6 are seldom to be exceeded: it also is sometimes used in
clisters, against the colic drach. sem. or drach. 1. being boiled in some
convenient water or wine, and the colature mixed with broth or the decoction of
emollient simples; and so used it is a most excellent remedy for the same. The
same virtues also has that of Rula^dus. Greg. Horst. The Crocus Regulatus
works less upwards, and more downwards: the D. is gr. x. with raisins. The
common Antimonium diaphoreticum, or diaphoretick antimonie, resists
corruption, cleanses the blood, and removes all obstructions though
inveterate, both of the liver, spleen, mesenterie, and of the other inward
parts, ^^t helps the retention of the menses, and green sickness or cachexi^
in maids. it cures the dropsy, hypochondriacall melancholy, french pocks,
itch, and ulcers inward and outward. it is excellent good in malignant fevers,
the small pocks, and breakings out. it breaks inward impostumes, yet it
works not suddenly; but by degrees: the D. is from g. x. to 25. Basil. the
Flowers of fixed Antimonie, help inward impostumes, and the french disease., g.
15. being given in the spirit of pockwood, four or five times in a day. The
tartarised F.F. is given from g. 5. to 10. Tentzel. the martial Regulus,
works gently both upwards and downwards, the D. is gr. 2. or 3. The
antimoniale ceruse taken inwardly is very good to cure old ulcers, scabs, and
troublesome breakings forth, being taken every day, for 3. 4. or more weeks
together; but it works variously, for in some for the 2 or 3 first days, it
causes a certain nauseousnesse, with a frequent spitting, and afterward
works in sensibly: in others it gently looseneth the body; in some it causes
sweating, and in diverse it works altogether insensibly, and not manifestly,
till at last: outwardy it dries, binds, moderately cleanses and opens:
the D. inwardly is from scrup sem. to drach. scm. four or five hours before
dinner. The diaphoretick ceruse of antimonie produces the same effects, yet
without nauseating, and more effectually in the same q. See Sala's Anat. Ant.
The Solar ceruse thereof, provokes sweat. The red fixed antimonie, purges
equally, both upwards, and downwards, and that not so much by its own nature,
as the bilious humor remaining about the stomach, also in some it works as a
diaphoretick: the D. is from g. 2. to 4. and more. That of Basil is very good
to resolve congealed blood, break apostumes, and cure the french pocks. The
diaphoretick precipitate of antimonie, D. is given from g. 4. to 12. so Sala.
The compounded flowers cause vomiting; but more gently than the simple: the D.
is from g. 4. to 6. Horst. Epist. they cure quartane agues and those that are
mad, or melancholic. Two gr. hereof being mixed with 12 of mercurius dulcis,
purge serous and bilious humors, scarce causing vomiting. The flowers of the
Regulus being impregnate by the spirit of Mars and Venus, do gently purge and
cure all intermitting agues: the D. is a few gr. So Querc. in Tetr. Basil. the
Liquor hereof is excellent in wounds. Note, in general, the flowers of
antimonie do cause violently to vomit, yet nevertheless some give 2. 3. or 4.
g. thereof. The flowers of antimonie corrected, cure diseases arising from
black choler, purging forth coplously, both upwards and downwards, what is
hurtful: the D. is from g. 5. to 10. S. Closs. the fixed flowers, purge more
gently, and provoke much sweating: the D. is gr. 8. to scrup. sem. The powder
diaphoretick made of the cinnabaris antimonii, is very good in the epilepsie.
The vinegar of antimonie, serves to extract the tincture thereof, it
powerfully cools the blood, especially in the malignant and hungarick fever,
being mixed with lapis pruvellae and some convenient distilled water: it cures
the inflammation caused by gunpowder, being mixed with saccharum Saturni.
Poter. The oil, is a great dissolver. Begu. the Saccharate oil, cures
diseases both inward and outward, of which may be made pills, against a quartain
ague: That of Senn. gently purges and helps the dropsy: the D. is g. 2. to
6. The white liquor of that of Querc. helps cancrous ulcers, and outward
diseases: the yellow purges upwards and downwards: the reddish, being
rectified by 2 or 3 cohobations and washed in some cordial water, is most
excellent, to cure the leprosy, morphew, apoplexy, epilepsie, and plague,
being given in some appropriate water. Querc. in Tetr. the D. is from g. 3. to
6. of that of Faus. g. 8. to scrup. sem. in fluid diseases: of that of Basil in
curr. triumph. a few drops, against the falling sickness. Sala. the oil, or
honied liquor of antimonie, is corrosive and penetrating, and very mundifying,
especially in ulcers, consuming excrescencies, etc. it is also very good against
gangreens, and may be used alone, or mixed with rosate honey, unguents,
powders, or waters, etc. it may be used in stead of the philosophic vinegar,
in the preparation of the tincture of antimonie, called (...). Kesl. The
Magisterie of antimonie purges kindly by vomit: the D. is g. 3. The glaciale
oil of antimonie or butter thereof, is a most excellent and precious remedy,
for the cure of many and great griefs: as tertian, quotidian, and chiefly
quartaine agues: for in many it gently causes vomit, in others it purges, and
is of that strength, that it quite eradicateth, and expels the seminaries of
the evil. Heart. in Crol. Senn. Inst. The chrystaline oil of the flowers, is
the same almost with the former: and serves for the solution of Sol, and is
the basis of the purging precipitate, as also of the vomitorie: the D. is g. 1.
to 4. Basil, The compounded oil for wounds does mightily mundifie the same,
though old. The balsame of antimonie, is of great virtue in old ulcers. The
vulnerarie balsame of Basil, is excellent in inveterate wounds. The spirit of
the Regulus, is good in all intermitting fevers, and quartane agues, it
cleanses the blood as a diaphoretick, consumes the stone of the reins and
bladder, discusseth the matter of the gout, and appeaseth the pain being
outwardly applied: the D. is g. 3. to 5. The antepileptick water of Quercetane,
of crocus metallorum is most excellent in curing the falling sickness. The
sulphurous water of Stibium, or Clyssus, does attenuate the thick, tartareous
and mucilaginous matter lying in any part of the body; and expels the same
by convenient emunctories, sc. by the belly, urine, sweat, and spittle:
therefore it is a very good remedy in the obstruction of the liver, spleen,
mesenterie, and womb, in the hypocondriack melancholy, and chollick, etc.
especially if acuated with the crystals of Mars. it is to be mixed with spring
water or some other convenient liquor, to a pleasant sharpness, and so drunk
as often as one lists. The tartareous water thereof is also good in
obstructions, but it chiefly expels by sweat, matter lying in the habit of
the body. S. Closs. The compounded spirit of antimonie serves to fix Mercury
and Cinnabar. The liquor or balsame of the dross of the Regulus is of
excellent use in chirurgy, especially in fistula's and foetid ulcers. The
liquor of the salt of the glass of antimonie, being taken inwardly does
effectually stay defluxions of the gout, and paroxismes: outwardly, it keeps
wounds and fistula's from putrefaction, and cures the same; yet without
mordacitie: the D. is scrup. sem. or scrup. 1. Heart. in pract. Kesl. The
sulphur of crude antimonie serves to draw forth a tincture, and purges
upwards and downwards: the D. is g. 2. to 5. That of Begu. and Querc. is a more
safe vomit, than crocus metallorum: and of the same D. The nix diaphoretica S.
Closs. is very good to cause sweat, and kills worms. The sulphur of
antimonie calcined, serves to purge, the D. is g. 4. to 8. The sulphur
auratum, causes vomit, and sometimes purges: the D. is g. 6. Heart. in Crol.
in pract. Agric. The panacaea of the sulphur of antimonie, is like a panacaea,
having a diaphoretick faculty, and cleansing the blood; therefore it may serve
in all diseases, curable by sweat, especially the french pocks, and foulness
of the skin, the D. is gr. x. to 20. and is often to be repeated in diseases,
especially in the epidemick, and malignant. Fab. Monsp. The tincture of crude
antimonie, is an excellent balsame for to cure wounds inward or outward: it
causes sweat, and sometimes vomit, and purgation: it cures the symptoms of
the leprosy. Basil. the balsame of life, is of great virtue, it cleanses the
blood, cures the morphew and scab, and exhilerateth the spirits. The tincture
of the glass of antimonie, the bezoartick thence, the Magisterie of Sala, and
Basils oil of the glass thereof, helps all old obstructions of the liver,
spleen, lungs, etc. also against the retention of the menses, green sickness,
black jaundise, dropsy, phthisick, asthma, pleurisy. cachexie, hypochondriack
melancholy, inward and outward ulcers, all sorts of scabs and itch, french
pocks, and continual, putrid, and pestilentiall fevers, etc. and pocks and
measles: it expels what is hurtful, by sweat, urine, and spittle, the use
thereof being continued. So Tentzel. the D. of the tincture is g 3. to 9. in
malmesey or some other liquour: of the bezoartick from 4. to 12. etc. The
tincture of the solar glass of antimonie, causes sweat, without vomiting or
nauseousnesse, and cleanses the blood from all impurities, and tartareous
seculencies. it coagulates the microcosmick salt, which being dissolved,
causes the dropsy, and purges noxious phlegm out of the body: it cures the
gout, especially if taken with the arcanum of fearne. it eases the pain of
the joints caused by the french disease, and the disease it self, with
convenient decoctions. it cures ulcers, and is very good in the pestilence and
other epidemick diseases: the D. is drach. 2. 3. or more. That of Basil, is an
excellent diaphoretick, and purges well with the extract of rheubarb: so
Hartm. Tentzel. Bicker: The tincture of crocus metallorum, purges, and
vehemently moves sweat: the D. is g. 6. to 12. of the febrifuge and
antiphleuritick oil of antimonie of S. Closs. gr. 4. Querc. in Tetr. The
tincture of the regulus of mars or, or antidotos pantagogos, purges the blood,
helps the appetite, strengthens the bowels, cures the cachexie,
hypochondriack melancholy, jaundise, and dropsy, and that by gentle purgation:
the D. is a few drops. 2 or. 3. etc. of the precipitate gr. 3. or 4. The
balsame of the Regulus, and tincture thence, is a very excellent remedy in the
diseases of the lungs; as the ph^hisick, asthma, and cough being often taken:
the D. is g. 3. or 4. Kesl. The tincture of antimonie calcined with the lapis
prunellae purges downwards, and by sweat: the. D. is g. 2. 3. 4. etc. of the
earth thereof remaining in the extraction with distilled viniger, if
dulcorated; g. 8. or 10. and stops all fluxes of the belly. Basil. in curr.
triumph. Baco de antimon. The tincture of red fixed antimonie, is of excellent
virtue in dissolving blood, breaking apostumes, and curing the french pocks,
etc. the D. is g. 3. or 4. Bacon extols it for a panacaea. Paracels. in
chirurg. mag. Basil. in curr. triumph. Hartm. in disp. Chym. Querc. Poter.
Sala. The tincture of the flowers of antimonie, or Lilium Paracelsi, is a
medicine restorative to the whole body, acting only by the correction of
humors: it cleanses the body of man more than any arcana: it is also useful
in obstructions of the liver, dropsy, morphew, leprosy, and in diseases of
the spleen, as the scurvey, etc. it provokes the terms, and if we may believe
Basil, it gently purges downwards, with the extract of rheubarb and tincture
of coral: the D. is g. 3. to 8. Basil's arcanum antimonii, strengthens the
stomach, consuming hurtful humors, it causes appetite, helps
hypochondriack melancholy, suffocation of the womb, and colic, etc. the D. is
g. 1. or 2. The Solar Elixir of antimonie, or electrum and lili Parac. is an
excellent remedy in the black jaundise, gout, and dropsy: the D. is the q. of
a coriander seed in syrups, twice in a day for curation, and once in a month
for preservation. The tincture of Basil, purges gently, and cures fevers
tertian and quartans. Querc. in Tetr. The tincture of the flowers, antidotus
(...) Querc. is a true balsame of life, that cannot be sufficiently commended:
it is given with things appropriate, in the epilepsie, apoplexy, palsy,
pestilent diseases, leprosy, morphew; and to cleanse the whole blood: the D.
is a few drops. Querc. in Tetr. The tincture of the vitriolated flowers,
antidotus (...). Querc. is a true antidote against all sorts of fevers, even
the pestilent: the D. is 4 or 5 drops in some convenient liquour. Querc. in
Tetr. The tincture of the flowers of the Regulus, antidotus (...). Querc.
helps the whole mass of blood, the morphew, leprosy, kings evil, and
french pocks, it restores and increases the natural heat, consumes the
viscidities of the stomach, and cleanses the body from all excrements, it is a
very good medicine against the chollick, and suffocation of the matrix. Querc.
in Tetr. The tincture of the precipitated flowers of the regulus of mars,
antidotus (...). Querc. it is of most admirable virtues, and may be compared to
the aurum potabile it self. it opens and cures all inward impostumes, it
dissolveth congealed blood, and purifieth that which is corrupted, it is good
against the leprosy, schrophula's, the french pocks, plague, and many other
diseases; the D. is from 6 drops to 10. Gluckr. The tincture of the saccharate
oil, purges downwards, the D. is g. 3. Hartm. in pract. The tincture of the
sulphur of antimonie is a great strengthner, provokes sweat, and preserves
from the gout, the D. is g. 1. to 4. it also cures the spasme. The tincture of
the aurate sulphur provokes sweat, and purges chiefly by the belly, without
trouble, yet not the first, but 3d day. the D. is g. 4. Querc. in Tetr. The
tincture of the sulphur, of the Joviale Regulus, antidotus (...). Querc. is of
equal virtue with balsame in curing all affections of the lungs, it helps
the phthisick, difficulty of breathing, asthma, pleuresie, and peripneumonie,
etc. to be short, it cures very many dangerous diseases: the D. is g. 3. to 6
or more. Querc. in Tetr. The tincture of the Mercury of antimonie with sol,
antidotus (...). Querc. is extraordinary good against the plague, leprosy,
morphew, etc. the D. is 3. 4. or 5 drops, in treacle water. Basil. in C.
triumph. The magisteriate tincture, has the virtues of Basil. Poter. in
Pharmac. The infusion of crude antimonie purges both upwards and downwards.
Hartm. in Croll. The infusion of the glass of antimonie, is emetick with good
effect, especially in those diseases, that are cured by vomiting, as coughs,
pleuresies, quinsies, want of appetite, belchings, and many other of the first
region: the D. is scrup. 1. to scrup. v. some also take a piece of the vitrum
q. drach. ij. to unc. sem. without poudering, and steep it in some beer or wine
certain hours, according as they desire it more or less strong and so
strain, and use it* it is also to be admired, in the infusion thereof, that
the emetick virtue is not exhausted, but it may be infused almost in infinitum,
and that scarce any of the strength, or very little thereof will be lost: as
also, that the same, if it be at all weakened; by new fusion does recover its
former virtue. The infusion of crocus metallorum, or aqua benedicta. Querc. is
given to unc sem. or more, and is thus made.. croc. metal. Ungar. unc. 1. Aq.
card. b. lib. ij. vel. 3. cinam. unc. sem. steep it two or three days, then
strain it, and keep it for use. That of Rulandus is given from unc sem. to unc.
ij. or use this, Take of crocus metallorum, (either the common, or that of
Hartm.) from gr. 3. to x. of sack, malmesey, hydromel, beer, or any other
convenient liquor, from unc. sem. to ij. steep it, if necessity require boil
it, and strain it through a paper: both these aq. benedictae, are useful in
the headache, caused by the foulness of the stomach, which is often so, as
also in the epilepsie, pleurisy, hypochondriack melancholy, fevers, plague
gout, and coagulation of the blood, etc. in all which they are to be given with
an appropriate liquour: besides it is excellent good to give them in clysters,
for the collic^^, sc. drach. sem. or drach. 1. being boiled in some convenient
water or wine and the colature mixed with broth, or the decoction of mollifying
simples. Thold. in Halogr. Horst. The salt of antimonie, is equal in virtue to
that of Sol, cleanses the blood, purges the body from all excrements, cures
the french pocks, gout, and fevers, breaks apostumes, and outwardly
cleanses malignant ulcers: the D. is gr. 4. Basil. So the spirit of the
crystals, and breaks the stone. Agric. The crystals open obstructions, arising
from a viscous and tartareous mucilage, and purge downwards, therefore are of
chief use in the hypochondriack melancholy, pleurisy, and tertian fever, etc.
the D. is gr. 4. or 5. Note, antimonie is called by the Barbareans, Antistini.
Alcosol Othi. enigmatically, Lupus, consuming all metals except Sol. Proteus,
showing all colors by the help of vulcaine. Radix metallorum, being their
mineral or lying near them. Saturnus philosophorum, for its devouring, and
being something of his nature, and the Philosophers stone being thence made:
and for the same reason it is called Magnesia Saturni. C. the best is the
Hungarian and Transilvanian, having the purest sulphur, and being endowed with
the mineral of Gold: and is found having more shining and long streaks, with
an obscure redness (which shows its goodness, by reason of the abundance of
brimstone) of which Paracelsus makes mention under the title of, rubens leo and
Basil the monk in Curr. triumph. by the name of oriental: and this is most
fit for the elaboration of medicines, it may be known also by its red line
being drawn upon a sad colored paper, smoothed with a boares tooth. Caes.
waters running by antimonie, harden the nerves, contract, and fill them with
phlegm. Fallop. The oil or blood of antimonie is good against eating and
malignant ulcers. The substance helps diseases of the eyes, and stops
blood, issuing from the membrans of the brain, by a wound: it has some sharp
and sulphurous parts: it is used by women, as a fucus for the eyes, dilating
them. The ether helps all external ulcers. So Cardan. Erast. it does also
participate of quicksilver, tending upwards, working so quickly and violently,
and purging forth both by vomit and stool so many, so thick, so various, and
tough humors: it serves also to purge metals, especially gold, it destroying
the rest. Grevin. it partaketh of a plumbeous nature, its the matter thereof,
and has its faculties, being a forth kind of lead. It is used by b^lfou^de^s
to help the sound of bells, a little thereof being added to the metal, also it
causes it to meet sooner, Agric. being found in veins, it is a sign of
silver. Plin. Stibium helps fluxes of the eyes, and exulcerations with
frankincense, as also blood flowing from the bra^ne it helps green wounds and
old bitings of dogs, the powder being strewed thereon; as also burning with
fire with fat, litharge, ceruse, and wax. it is also mixed with plasters, and
collyries. Diosc. it is of the nature of burned lead. Fernel. it does not
corrode; but helps creeping ulcers, being used with oil of roses, myrrh,
mastick, omphacine, or meline. Fallop. it helps bleared eyes, and fluxes, and
is a platyophthalmon. Aldrovand. it helps putrid ulcers, long fevers, the
asthma, melancholy, pains of the belly, and many other dangerous diseases of
the body. Note, H. it is not to be used in children, women great with child,
effeminate men, as those that have a narrow breast, or vomit with difficulty,
and are subject to fainting. Caes. or to those that are slender or lean, or
troubled with the mouth of the stomach or wringings in the belly or guts: In
others, it is to be used, in diseases that have their seat in the stomach,
intestines, mesentery, and first passages only; its virtues not passing beyond
the liver, therefore its counted excellent against the hypochondriacall
melancholy, and long fevers, which arise from great obstructions, and thick
and cold humors; as also against many other chronicall and dangerous diseases
arising from phlegm, melancholy, or both mixed together, being used twice or
thrice, or oftener, intermitting some days: after preparation of the body. As
for the D. of stibium it is diverse, according to the diversity of strength,
temperaments, habit, age, diseases, and times of the year, therefore to those
that are strong, and in inveterate diseases gr. 6. may be given in substance,
and 3 to the weak, and 4 to those of indifferent strength, adding always sugar
of roses, and a little mastick, or some other thing: or it may be infused in
malago wine, some water or cordial decoction, with some thing that may take
away acrimony. Fren. the purging and sweating water of antimony, almost without
smell or taste, if taken to 20 drops will purge, else cause sweat. The essence
is equal to aurum potabile; he D. is gr. 5. or. 6.

M.
Mercury. Mercurius.
P. In Spain, and Hungary, sc. the best: and other places. M. Of much earthy
matter with water. N. (...). Arab. Zaibar. Barb. Azock. Chym..
Mercury. Schrod. or Quicksilver. K. as the natural and artificial. T.
Albert. is cold and moist 2o. so Caes. V. inwardly it cleanses the blood from
its filth, especially the venerious, it expels worms, and the difficult
birth, etc. anointed outwardly, it helps all kinds of itch, kills lice, and
dissolveth hard tumors. being hung about the neck, it preserves from the
plague, (and as some would have it) from inchauntments and fascination: and as
for its preparations, there is nothing in the shops except Antimonie, that will
yield greater variety of remedies than this: serving to purge, cause sweat,
cleanse wounds, and appease acrimonie, especially in the running of the reins
as appears in the forms of remedies thence made. The use of crude Mercury is
both inward and outward, but oftener outwardly, seldomer inwardly, and then in
pills: outwardly, in unguents, in which it shows not it self, and in
plasters for the itch, to be applied to the joints, but it is carefully and
sparingly to be used: for being any where applied it causes putrefaction by
salivation, so also the precipitate. C. the best is that which lies in mines
near gold or silver, and has least of an arsenicall, antimonial, saturnine,
or cadmiose commixture, and leaves no excrement in the retort, or leaves a
yellow or white spot, and not dim or black, being evaporated in a silver
spoone. Mercury precipitate per se, does strongly cause sweating, and given 6
or 7 times, does eradicate the french disease. it cures all agues, and expels
worms: also for the most part it strongly causes vomiting: See S^nn. Inst.
Heart. in Crol. Tentz. Begu: Kest. The precipitate per silices, is of the same.
D. and V. sc. from g. 4. to 6. Fixed Mercury, panacaea, does dry up all noxious
humors, and as a diaphoretick expels the same: the D. is scrup. sem. scrup.
1. or drach. sem. Crol. Senn. in Just. Begu. untz. The precipitate by the oil
of sulphur, purges all vitous humors, resolves catarrhes, helps
infirmities arising from the putrefaction of humors: and in dangerous
diseases, there is scarce a more present remedy: hence it is useful in the
dropsy, gout, french pocks, poison, plague, fevers, malignant ulcers, and the
itch: the D. is g. 3. to 8. Croll. Hartm. in Croll. Mercurius corallatus, as to
the use, it is of the same with coralline. Vntz. The precipitate by the water of
eggs, cures ulcers of the neck of the bladder, though counted almost
incurable. It cures wounds, and external ulcers. Begu. Gluckr. Kest. The
precipitate by the tincture of smiris, called the miraculous, purges upwards
and downwards: the D. is gr. 3. or 4. Begu. Hartm. in pract. The common
precipitate purges both ways: the D. is g. 6. to 12. The white
vomitivocathartick of S. Closs. D. is given from scrup. sem. to gr. 12. with
drach. ij. of confectio hamech, in the siphylis, leprosy, tinea and
schrophula's; as also in the erysipelas, the venereous chiefly. The D. of the
rectified precipitate, is from g. 4. to 6. So Vntz. Hartm. in Croll. it purges
downwards, especially febrile matter, it is useful in the plague, and
epidemicall diseases, being given in treacle before the fit. The incarnate
precipitate also is given to work downwards, D. from gr. 6. to x. so the
Luteous. The precipitate of Senn. in Inst. D. is given from. gr. 1. to 6.
Hartm. in Croll. The solar precipitate does mightily cleanse the blood, and the
whole body from the french pocks. It Is also very effectual in the dropsy,
expelling the water by urine and drying up the fountain thereof. It helps
the falling sickness, colic, quartain ague, and malignant and cancrous
ulcers. The solar reguline or diaphorctick precipitate, is most excellent in
all diseases that require sweating: the D. is gr. 3 or 4. That of Hercules
Bovius (as he says) excels all other catharticks; and kills worms. it
helps the french pocks, spotted fevers, plague, quartane agues, and other
dangerous diseases: the D. is gr. 3 to 8. with sugar of roses, an egg, broth,
or pills. Hartm. The aurum vitae, helps the plague, and many other diseases.
That of S. Closs. purges gently, and causes much sweat. the D. is gr. 8. or
12. That of Senn. in Inst. Hartm. in pract. purges gently by stool, without
vomiting, except the stomach be very foul. it is a great arcanum in the
dropsy, french pocks, all affections of the skin and defluxions; also when
the body is full of pituitous diseases, and humiditie. the D. is g. 3. to 8.
with a little turpentine or some extract. Hartm. in Croll. The virid or
venereous precipitate, is specificall in the virulent gonorrhoea, which if
excessive it removes, and promoveth if insufficient: therefore its use is to
be continued every day until the flux be quite stopped: the D. is g. 2. to 8.
The reguline sublimate serves to the preparation of Mercurius dulcis: and
other remedies made by it self. The common Mercurius dulcis, draco mitigatus,
does gently purge forth all noxious humors without trouble, insomuch that it
may be given to infants; D. it may be given to drach. sem. but that it may
work the sooner, and not abide in the body, it may be acuated with diagridium,
or the trochisci alhandal etc. and is given with the same from 8. gr. to 15.
and more. So Hartm. in Croll. Senn. in Jnst. Tentzel. The water hence made, aq
aluminis Fallop. helps inflammations, fistula's and malignant ulcers,
cleansing and cicatrizing, especially in the french disease, and itch. The
sweet talcose sublimate of S. Closs. does pleasantly purge without vomiting,
opens obstrustions, and cools, and is very safe in intermitting fevers. The
lanugo perlata or silver flowers of Mercury of S. Closs. D. are given to gr.
6. in the form of pills, with a little of the extract of liquorish, and gently
bring forth vicious humors, in the quotidian fever, itch, and leprosy.
Croll. The red sublimate mercury not corrosive. arcanum corallinum, purges
chiefly by stool, and is a great secret in the dropsy, french pocks, gout,
itch, ulcers, cancers, etc. so the Mercuriall. So Heart. in Croll. Tentzel: The
manna mercurii, or solar mercurius dulcis, is of admirable virtue in the
falling sickness and venerious diseases, being thus brought to the highest
degree of medicine. The corrected coralline arcanum of S. Closs. D. is given
from gr. 5. to x. with a panchymagogon. or gr. 8. with pills of washed aloes. C.
Faus. The purging panacaea of mercury. D. is given from gr. 5. to 8. The
mercuriale oil of antimonie, or butter, Liquor gummosus, is used alone only
outwardly, in the gangreen and sphacelus, in which if the dead part be herewith
anointed, the putrefaction creeps no further, and it is more fit for section:
it also kills the pestilentiall carbuncle, and fits it for other plasters.
Chirurgions often use it as a corrosive: and hereof is made the mercurius
vitae, and mineral bezoardick. Croll. Senn. in I^st. Beg. Sala. Kest. Tentzel.
Mercury of life, pulvis angelicus or aquila alba, cleanses by stool and
vomit, the whole body, especially the first region, from noxious humors. It Is
of excellent use in the plague, diseases of the head, french pocks, malignant
ulcers, fevers, joint ach, and dropsy, in which for the most part it works
strongly without vomiting: the D. is gr. 2. to 4. or 2. 3. or 4. gr. may be
steeped in a draught of wine, and so taken being filtrated, or take mercurius
vitae scrup. 1. sem. of sack unc. 18. the D. is unc. 1. Note the purging virtue
hereof is never exhausted, being like the vitrum antimonii: as also that it is
not to be used too much, it then causing a falling of the fundament. The
Mercury of life corrected purges very well by stool, and brings forth any
impuritie: the D. is g. 4. to 6. Hartm. Senn. Tentzel. Agric. The cathartick
purges only downwards. The mineral laxative. D. is given from g. 6. to 12.
Querc. in pharm. Croll. Senn. Just. Kest. Hartm, in pract. and in Croll. The
mineral bezoardick, is a great alexiterie, and very whole some medicine for
provoking sweat^it is of great effect in all pestilentiall and venenate
affections: the D. is g. 6. to 12. and more. The compound solar bezoardick does
mightily provoke sweat, and is good therefore in the apoplexy, palsy, gout,
joint ach, and trembling of the limbs: the D. is g. 4. to 8. The solar
bezoardick of Croll. is good in the french pocks, plague, gout, dropsy,
fever, and obstructions of the spleen: the D. is g. 3. to 8. yet that of
Hartm. in Croll. and Senn. in Inst. is more effectual. The Lunar bezoardick,
helps the distempers of the head, especially the ^rysipelas in the heads of
women, the D. is g. 6. to 12. Scheun. in hydromant. The martial bezoardic^, is
specificall in all fluxes of the belly, especially such as proceed from the
liver. The Joviall bezoardick, does strongly provoke sweat, and is a
polychreston against obstructions of the liver: the D. is g. 2. to 8. The
Saturnine helps diseases of the spleen* the D. is g. 6. The spirit, or white
diaphoretick oil of mercury, serves to cause sweat: the D. is g. 1. or 2. so
Rhenan: chymotech. Hartm. in pract: The spirit or red oil thereof, as the
other spirit, expels by sweat whatsoever is hurtful to the body, and hardly
overcome by other remedies, it cures the pustuls and knots of the french
pocks, eases pain, exsiccates, and consolidates stinking and running ulcers:
the D. is g. 1. or 2. etc. in treacle water, the spirit of pockwood, or some
decoction, etc. The sweet diaphoretick oil, cures malignant and cancrous
ulcers, especially of the reins, and bladder, it may be used both inwardly and
outwardly. Basil, The sweet oil called astrum, is diaphoretick, and a
specific remedy in the french disease: and of the same virtue, with the salt
of mercury, made of the residue. That also of Quere. in Tetr. is diaphoretick.
The saccharate oil and spirit of mercury, is excellent good in ulcers of the
bladder, or other affects proceeding from the French disease. the D. of the
spirit is 3 or 4 drops. The sulphur or Tincture of mercury, aquila caelestis,
Parac. is excellent to cure the gout, falling sickness, and french pocks etc.
the radix whereof it expels by sweat: the D. is g. 3 or 4. Basil. The oil
of mercury antimoniale, strengthens the brain, cures the apoplexy, and may
be used in stead of a panacaea. The liquour of mercury, cures wounds, and
malignant ulcers, being dropped into them. That of Vntz. helps the gout, and
those that are infected with the french pocks. it cures the canker, fistula's,
and all foul ulcers, putrid and inveterate being used inwardly or outwardly:
the wh^te sweet oil hereof used inwardly helps exulcerated reins and the
stone, and ulcers being applied. Hartm. in pract. The sweet diaphoretick oil,
D. is given from g. 2. to 6. So the joviall liquour and may be used both
inwardly and outwardly. Thold. ex Basil. The salt of mercury is a great and
most effectual arcanum in the extirpation of the french disease though
radicated and inveterate, it cleanses the blood, and therefore cures all kinds
of ulcers, with and without malignity, itch, and ringwormes: the D. is g. 1. 2.
or 3. Caes. Waters running by mercury, if drunk, are carried to the head, and
fill the same, and thence fall to the gummes, hurting them and the limbs, as
appears by the ointments of quicksilver. Isid. being taken in too great a q.
it breaks the intrals by its weight. Bras. given to infants it kills worms.
scrup. 1. facilitats delivery. it is very cold and moist and causes
congelation of the blood; so Matthew. it is to be kept in glazen vessels, it
consuming other matter, except glazed vessels. all things swim therein,
except gold which it attracts, and purifieth. it serves to guild with being
mixed with Gold, so laid on, and put to the fire, which disperses the
quicksilver; and it may after be separated by aqua fortis. it looseneth the
teeth. The water whitens the face. The sublimat in three hours, corrodes the
body. Anon. Mercurius dulcis is excellent against the worms: and it is used by
some against the french disease also. Fren. the purgative and diaphoretick
water of quicksilver causes vomit also. The fragrant oil helps the filth of
the blood, the D. is 4 drops. The outward sudorifick water used to the wrists
causes sweat.

S.
Sinople. Cinnabaris.
P. It is to be had in Hungary, and Germany. M. Of Sulphur and quicksilver with
a terrestrial matter. N. (...) Minium Diosc. and Cinnabari.
SInople. Schrod. K. as the natural and artificial. T. Diosc. it is of the
nature of haematites. V. it is sometimes used inwardly, being mixed with
antepileptick remedies: outwardly it cures the french pocks, and itch, in
suffiments etc. C. the best is that which is heavy, and therefore that of
Hungary, being of a solar nature, and having the best sulphur and Mercury.
Hartm. The diaphoretick precipitate hereof, is an universal remedy, fit to be
given in any desease, helping the inward balsam to expel what is offensive,
either by vomit, stool, or sweating: the D. is g. 1. or. 2. Diosc. Cinnabaris
is useful against diseases of the eyes, as the haematite: but is more
effectual, being more astringent, and stopping the blood; in cerots: it
helps burnings with fire; and breakings out of pushes, being used in cerots,
also Caes. Matthew. it helps the fluxes of women, dysentery, and spittings of
blood; it fastneth the teeth, and strengthens the gummes; but this as also
that of Diosc. agrees rather to the lachrimose cinnabaris, or sanguis
draconis, than to the metallic. Aldrovand. minium both fossile and factitious,
are seldom used in physic inwardly; yet some chemists use it in pills, in the
old french disease, and the fume with wood of aloes, and myrrh. etc.

Mettalls natural Excrements.
C.
Chalcite. Chalcitis.
P. It is to be found in the Isle so called, near Bithynia. M. Os sorry in
continuance of time. N. (...). So Calep. Gal. Plin. etc.
CHalcite. Diosc. T. is hot, abstersive obstructive or stopping; corrosive, and
makes escharres. Schrod. it burns, and does something bind. it is of thinner
parts than Sorry, but of thicker than Misy. Caes. Diosc. it exulcerates, and
cleanses what is in the eyes, or corners thereof. it gently eats, it helps
S. Anthonies fire, and creeping ulcers. with the juice of leeks, it stops the
flux of blood out of the nostrils, and wounds. it helps vices of the gumms, and
eating ulcers of the tonsils, sc. its powder, burnt and mixed with honey, it
helps callous and rough eye brows, and fistula's. Psoricum help the itch.

Cobalt. Cobaltum.
P. It Is to be sound near Goslaria, and to be had there: M. It Is generated of
brass or silver. N. Cadmia nativa, fossilis, metallica.
CObalt. Schrod. T. is caustic and corrosive, in so much that it exulcerates
the hands and feet of those that dig it: and therefore it is reckoned amongst
poisons, it killing whatsoever creature takes the same.

M.
Marcasite. Marcasita.
P. It Is found in Mines, and to be dug there. M. Of matter not fit for the
generation of metal. N. Bismuth^m. Marchasita librariorum, Aldrov.
MArcasite. T.V. Schrod. the virtues thereof answer those of leads excrement;
but it is very seldom used, and only outwardly. Begu. The magisterie thereof
helps the vices of the skin, sc. ringwormes, lichens, and roughness of the
hands, etc. Parac. The oil or liquour and salt of marcasite, are very
effectual in cancrous ulcers, fistula's, and other malignant affections. The
water thereof, is said to draw out the virtue of Gold, leaving a white body,
and to revive any dry plant, the root being put therein: as also to show the
form of any plant, it being mixed with the distilled water, and a little of
the salt of any herb. The same water with it is own salt (of the caput mortuum)
alcalised is said miraculously to dissolve Gold, but the credit hereof may be
left to experience. Andr. Orthel. in Lum. Chym. also this water kept in a close
vessel, is said to increase in the new of the moon, and decrease in the full
thereof. The extractum marcasitae aureae of S. Closs. being kneaded with crumms
of bread, and made into pills of the bigness of pease, purges the body, in
intermitting agues; the D. is one pill, of gr: VI. The other extract of the
same author does mightily purge serous humors, and miraculously help the
dropsy.

Misy. Misy.
P. It is to be had in, and brought from Cyprus. M. Of and upon chalcitis,
melanteria, and vitriol. N. (...). So Diosc. Gal. Calep. etc.
MIsy. Aet. T. is very astringent, burning, and of thinner parts than
chaleitis. So Schrod. Caes. it is of the same virtue with Chalcitis, Diosc. but
differing in degree. C. the Egyptians is the best, being most effectual; but
much inferior in occular remedies. Fernel. This as also sorry, chalcitis; and
vitriol, burned and washed, does mightily cleanse fistula's, and malignant
ulcers: So Caes.

S.
Sorry. Sorry.
P. It Is to be had in Egypt, Lybia, Spain, and Cyprus. M. It Is of the same
kind as Melanteria. N. (...). So Gal. Diosc. Aldrov. etc.
Sorry. Diosc. the Egyptian is astringent. V. it helps the teeth being put
therein. Schrod. it burns and causes escharres, and is of thick parts.
Diosc. it is in virtue like the former, and causes vomiting, it fixes the
teeth, infused in wine, it helps the sciatica, applied with water it helps
spots in the face. it is used also in medicines that make the hair black: but
these and other things that are not burned, are stronger than after, except
salt, the dreggs or wine, nitre, and lime, etc. C. the best is the Egyptian,
hollow, fattish, and stinking.

Metals Artificial Excrements.
C.
Cadmia. Cadmia.
P. It Is made in furnaces when the brass is tried. M. Of the soute of brass,
when made. N. (...). Arab. cl^mia.
CAdmia. Schrod. K. as the botritis, ostracitis, and placites. T. it gently
dries, and cleanses* V. it cures moist, and putrefying ulcers, and
cicatrizeth the same: but the botritis and placitis are used chiefly in the
affections of the eyes, the rest in ulcers, in other parts. The native
metallic, see in cobaltum. That without metal. in lopis calaminris C. the
best is the botritis, thick, moderately heavy, smooth, of a racemose
superficies, which being broken is cinerulent. Diosc. it binds, fills
hollow ulcers, purges forth filth, and stoppe^h the pores of the body. it
restrains excrescencies in the flesh, and causes crusts.

D.
Diphryges. Diphruges.
P. It Is made of brass when in the surnace. M. Of brass settling by cold
water. N. (...). So called by the Ancients.
DIphriges. T. has a mixed faculty, being meanly astringent and sharp. V.
therefore it is most excellent against foul ulcers; yet it is seldom used in
the shops. Diosc. it purges and cleanses, dries, and consumes
excrescencies: it cicatrizeth creeping ulcers. being used with turpentine, or
in a cerot, it discusseth suppurations. C. the best is that which has the cast
of brass, or the rust thereof, being astringent, and mightily drying the
tongue.

L.
Litharge. Lithargyrium.
P. In Asia, Spain, Cicily and Campania, etc. M. Its a spumous excrement of
silver. N. (...). Lithargyros. Lithargyrium.
LItharge. Schrod. K. as the white and yellow. T. dries, cools moderately,
binds, represseth, shuts, fills up hollow places, detergeth, and is
sarcotick: so the salt and is like that of Saturn: Inwardly it helps
diarrhoea's, dysenteries, and other diseases of solution. it cures and
consolidates the intestines; hurt, and exulcerated, and refrigerates the blood
when hot: the D: is drach. sem. with treacle, or any other sudorisick or
anodyne electuary. The red oil of litharge, cures wounds of the eyes. The
caput nigrum is to be cast upon wounds. The terebinthine tincture or balsame
thereof, is of excellent use in chirurgy, old ulcers, tumors, and wounds,
preserving them from accidents, especially unc. sem. of camphire being added;
also it helps fistula's, cancers, and the morphew, etc. The balame or unguent
helps inflammations, burnings, and the hot gout, etc. ^^ Silver.

P.
Plumbage. Plumbago.
P. It sticks to the furnace in the purifying of Silver or Gold. M. Of Silver
or Gold purified, with lead. N. (...). Molybdaena.
PLumbage. T. it is like litharge in virtue, a little inclining to cold, and no
abstersive. V. Diosc. it has the virtue of the spume of silver, or excrement
of lead, and is burned and washed after the same manner. It Is fitly mixed with
soft plasters, and such as are not biting. it causes flesh, and cicatrizeth
ulcers; but it agrees not with glewing or abstersive remedies.

T.
Tuttie. Tutia.
P. In the upper part of the furnace, when the brass is melted. M. Of the
thin and volatile part of brass. N. (...). Pompholyx. spodium. bulla. nil.
Nihili album: et spodiu^ grise^^.
TUttie. T. is the best of almost all, remedies that dry without biting, when
washed. V. therefore it is good against cancrous ulcers, and others malignant,
it is put into collyries against fluxions to the eyes, and against pushes and
swellings. The greek spodium, or nil gryscum is of the same virtue: in stead of
which sometimes cadmia is used. Renod. Horst. Pompholix is like volatile meal,
and white, and so is elevated upwards; but that which falls downwards is
called spodium, and is more heavy: they are both made in the same furnace, and
are so near in nature; that the one may be a substitute for the other* as for
Tuttie, some is nearer the color of brass, and fattish; the other is more
white and light, yet less useful for the Cyprian, is counted best, which with
vinegar yields the fu^e of brass, and is of a kind of pitch color, but of the
taste of mud. before it may be used, it must be prepared, that is washed, after
this manner: the pompholix is to be wrapped up in an indifferent fine white
cloth, and bound up, and so moved about in a vessel full of clean water, so
that the more useful and finer part may pass into the water, and the
excrementitious way be left behind, and the other may be left to residence.
There are other ways of washing it; but this may suffice, and is like that in
the London Dispensatory; in which also, their is an unguent hereof made.

HALOLOGIA. Of Salts.
A.
Alum. Alumen.
P. In Spain, Egypt, Macedonia, Africa, and Germany. M. The roch is of the
salt of a mineral saturnine earth, having an acid spirit and earthly caustic
salt. N. (...). Ruspeum. glaciale. Arab. Sceb. Chym..
ALum. Schrod. K. as the roche, plumose, cleaving, saccharine, and catine. T.
it dries, binds, and incrassats. V. when crude it is chiefly used outwardly,
especially in the quinsey; and laxate uvula, putrefaction of the gums, and
oedematose tumors of the feet, etc. inwardly it is used by empiricks against
agues: and some use it in dysenteries, and in stead of a suppositorie. if
burned, it consumes excrescencies in wounds, and resists putrefaction, etc. The
sweet spirit of Alum, used inwardly is duretick, expels the stone, opens
obstructions of the spleen, and helps the heat in agues: outwardly, it cures
diseases of the mouth, sc. inflammations, and the aphthae etc. the D. is g. 4
or 5. in wine, or some other convenient liquour. The phlegma mundifieth wounds,
and binds, etc. The magisterie, or magisteriate spirit of Alum, is an
excellent styptick, equal to the essence of iron, bole, or sperniol etc.
almost. The sug^r helps disseases of the breast, especially arising from the
vapors of minerals. at helps the toothach, applied to the gums: the D. is gr.
5. to 8. The extract or magistery provokes sweat, helps the scurvy; it being
taken once or twice a week, and tertian agues taken several times before the
fit. the D. is g. 8. to 20. Caes. aluminous waters do mightily bind,
strengthen the stomach weakened by vomiting, stop fluxes of the womb, prevent
abortion, help ulcers of the mouth, bladder, and inflammations of the gums, as
a gargarisme, as also distillations: so the bath thereof, and helps all
exulcerated outward parts, especially if troubled with defluxions. it helps
spitting of blood, bleeding at the fundament, and superfluous sweating; but
both ways hurts those that are obstructed and feverish. The alum helps ulcers
of the mouth, privities and eyes. The saccharine clears and whitens the face.
Plin. Alum helps the itch, bleeding, dropsy, kibes, phagedens, burnings, and
leprosy, etc. Alum. Caes. makes black, helps roughness of the eyes, and the
epiphora burnt, after evulsion. with vinegar it mollifieth the hair. with fat
it helps fluxions of blood, ulcers of infants and putrefying ulcers, and vices
of the ears with the juice of pine apples, also roughness of the nails, hard
cicatrices, nits, and the dysentery. Diosc. it purges, clears the eyes,
helps moist gums, ulcers of the mouth, aphthae, distillations of the ears,
scurfe, lice, smell of the arm holes, and brings out the foetus. Fernel, it
consumes dead flesh and helps putrefying ulcers. Cardan Roch alum preserves
wine. The plumose causes itching: Agric. it serves to prepare for coloring
and hardens iron, with atrament: and makes it yellow.

Amoniack. Ammoniacum.
P. It is to be had at Venice, and Antwerp. etc. M. Of sand, salt of soute,
common, or gemine, etc. N. Sal solare. Mercurialis philos. Aquila C. Chym.
{sal ammoniac}. ARmoniack. T. is diaphoretick. V. Schrod. it is used in Agues,
especially the quartain, and resists putrefaction, etc. the D is scrup. sem.
outwardly it consumes the putrid flesh in gangreens. in gargarismes it helps
the quinsey; hereof also barbers make their C^rulious water to take away the
albuginous distemper of the eye. The flowers of salt armoniack, are better than
the Crystal, and therefore used in quartans: also they perfectly cure
crudities of the stomach, being drunk for certain days, in wormwood wine or
the decoction of sassafras, with sweating after it: the D. is g. 3. to sorup.
sem. and more: so Hartm. in pract. Tentzel. Exeg. if calcined it serves to
make a liquor. Rhenan. Chymiotech. The spirit is diaphoretick, incisive, and
diuretic: the D. is gr. 3. That of Helvic. Dieter. being powered upon metallic
solutions made with water, and then abstracted by an alembick transports other
corrosive waters along with it. The same also is good in quartans,
obstructions, and breaks the stone: the D. is g. 3. to 10. outwardly being
mixed with the spirit of wine, and anointed several times on a gouty al^eing
place with a feather, it does miraculously appease the pain, especially if a
little camphire be dissolved therein. So Senn. Inst. Heart. in prax. Tentzel.
The acid spirit of S. Closs. is very subtle and piercing by reason of the
mixture of the volatile salt of urine; therefore is very diaphoretick, and helps
the colic. the D. is 6. 7. or 8. drops in wine. The fugacious spirit; it good
in many diseases especially those of the head, as the epilepsie, apoplexy,
deafness, and those of the womb; as retention of the menses, and difficulty
of conception, being applied. Bras. Caes. it serves to make suppositories of,
for derivation in difficult diseases, and is of an unpleasant taste.

C.
Common Salt. Sal communis.
P. It is made in England, as at Witch, etc. M. Of a salt water inspissat by
the evaporation of the humidity. N. (...). Arab. Melich. Melha. optimum aroma.
Basil.
COmmon Salt. Schrod. K. as the marine, and fountain. T. it warmeth, dries,
abstergeth, dissolves, purges, gently binds, consumes superfluities, penetrats,
digests, opens, and incideth, provokes venus, and resists putrefaction and
poison: therefore it serves inwardly in crudities of the stomach, appetite
lost, obstructions of the belly, and urine and colic, etc. outwardly it
serves in the mundifying of putrified and creeping ulcers, in the discussing
of simple and pestilentiall tumors, in extracting the fire in combustions, in
the itch and drying up of the scab, in bruises, and resolution, and discussion
of extravasate blood, in the pain of the teeth, head, colic, arthritick
pain, etc. and consumes the skin growing over the corner of the eye. The
spirit of common Salt, is diuretic and lithontriptick, and strongly resolves a
tartareous mucilage; and may therefore be given profitably in obstructions of
the liver, and spleen, etc. and in the dropsy and jaundise. it wonderfully
quenches thirst, and corrodeth without pain whatsoever is corrupted in wounds
or other affections mixed with the oil of turpentine, wax, camomile, mullein,
etc. it ^aseth the pain of the gout, and discusseth hard swellings, etc. also
it cures shrinking of the joints, and blasting. Untz. Agric. The compounded
spirit of salt, is very good in the dropsy, given both inwardly and used
outwardly: also it helps fistulous wounds. The corallate spirit is good in
affections of the heart, as the palpitation thereof, etc. the D. is scrup. sem.
Hartm. in pract. Senn. in Inst. Tentzel. Gluckr. The sweet spirit, may be taken
with white sugar in the form of an electuary, every day fasting, and is a very
good preservative in the plague, for it resists all putrefaction, and
preserves the stomach and other intrals in a good disposition. That of
Agricola besides this, yields a good menstruum, for to draw out all tinctures,
and cures the carnose hernia, being thrice applied every day, and taken
morning and evening, the D. is x. drops. Hartm. in Crol. Tentzel. Vntz. The
compound sweet spirit, does so quench thirst, that by the use thereof for some
certain time, the drouth of the hydropick is quenched, also it helps the
jaundise, and powerfully expels worms. outwardly it helps the gout being
cautelously applied, yea whatsoever is contained in Paracelsus or modern
authors, concerning the oil or spirit of salt, is chiefly to be ascribed unto
this: the D. is g. 6. to scrup. sem. in wine or some other liquor. S. Closs. G.
Horst. The diuretic spirit of vitriolated salt, is to be given in the morning
with broth of the decoction of stone parsley. S. Closs. The essential spirit is
said to draw a tincture of gold without dilaceration of the body: also it stops
vomiting in a moment, and that indifferently and in all diseases* the D. is 3
drops in some syrup, broth or wine. The sweet crystal of salt, or coagulated
spirit thereof is sudorifick, and no less quenches the thirst of the
hydropicall, than the compound sweet spirit, and helps the essential
humidity exhausted; also it strengthens the stomach, and other bowels, and
powerfully discusseth malignity in the pestilence, and pestilentiall fevers:
the D. is gr. 5. to 20. The flowers of salt, are of various use, to incide
thick phlegm, and to recover corrupt humors from putrefaction. The sweet
Christals being mixed in a due proportion with their oil; or by themselves a
part, dissolve and are a true menstruum of Sol. augmenting and exacuating its
properties, and vital and vegetating virtues. The tincture of sa^t is an
excellent sudorifick and diuretic remedy, it incideth tartareous mucilages,
resists all kind of putrefaction, and therefore strengthens the natural
balsame, and so is to be used chiefly in the plague, fevers, dropsy, stone by
wasting it, obstructions of the liver and spleen, etc. also it cleanses the
blood, and so helps the itch, and arthritrick pains, etc. the D. is scrup. 1.
to drach. 1. Caes. Diosc. Matthew. salt. is mixed in things that smooth the
skin, with oil it helps lassitude, and intercutaneous water. it helps
ringwormes, and the leprosy. with honey vinegar and oil it helps the quinsey,
the tonsills with honey, and moist gums with barley flower. it helps S.
Anthonies fire applied with vinegar, or hyssop. it eases pain being applied
hot in a bag. Caes. the salt waters, purge phlegm, dissolve blood, extenuate,
help the dropsy, hurt the stomach corrode the intrals, and cause the itch. in
clysters they cut phlegm, purge it, and pains thereby: in baths it helps the
dropsy, cold grief and moist heaviness of the head, and pains of the ears,
and bruised salt helps against the bitings of serpents. Salt. Caes. extenuates,
represseth, and helps the stingings of insects with fa^; in water it troubles
the stomach. Plin. it dries and binds the body, and causes appetite, with
calves fat it helps ulcers and pustules of the head. it helps swellings of the
gums, and roughness of the tongue, it preserves the teeth, it helps the itch,
with wine it looseneth the belly. it helps kibes and warts: the jaundise,
dropsies, and luxations with meal and honey. Midwives use it to young
children, to make their bodies dry, and more firm, and less tender.

G.
Gemme Salt. Sal Gemmae.
P. It is to be had in Hungary, in abundance. M. It Is a kind of common salt
found in quarrios. N. Sal fossile, Gemmeum, Indum, Chym..
GEmme Salt. T. it has the same virtue with common salt, and may be
substituted thereunto; yet it is more seldom used in the practice of Physic:
oftener in Chemistry, excelling the common salt in the solution of metals, yet
it is commended peculiarly by the experience of Forest, to loosen hard
excrements, and to ease colic griefs, used inwardly and outwardly. The
balsame or liquour of Sal gemme is a great arcanum in ruptures, being used
inwardly and outwardly: the D. is 3. 4. or 5 drops. Caes. it is a great
consumer of thick humors.

N.
Nitre. Nitrum.
P. It is to be had in Nitria, a region of Egypt. M. It Is sulphurious,
bitterish, and out of a fat earth. N. (...). Cerberus Chym. infernalis.
Sulphureus. Hermes. Anatron.
NItre. Diosc. T. it has the strength and heat of salt, so its spume. V. it
brings forth humors, that stick in the belly, and eases the pain thereof; if
pounded and drunk with cummin seed, in hydromel, sapes, or other things which
may discuss inflations, as rue, or anet. It Is used outwardly in intermitting
fevers, before the coming of the fit. It Is mixed in plasters which draw and
discuss, extenuate and cleanse the leprosy. being infused in hot water or
wine, it cures inflations, purulent ears and soundings of the same, and
purges forth filth being dropped in with vinegar. with the fat of an ass or
hog, it cures the bitings of dogs. Being mixed with turpentine it opens
fellons. applied with sigs it helps the dropsy. with honey it cleares the eyes,
and helps the poison of toad-stooles drunk in posca; or of buprestes biting in
water, or with laserwort against bulls blood drunk, and may be used outwardly in
pinings. it helps the more remiss opisthotonos and luxations, in cerots. with
bread it helps the resolution of the tongue. C. the best is the red, or white,
light and spongious. Schrod. T. some count it hot, others cold. V. it resists
putrefaction, and quenches thirst, it incideth a tartarious fullness, resolves
coagulated blood, and eases pain (which is chiefly attributed to the lapis
prunellae.) it is used commonly both inwardly and outwardly. Inwardly it is
dissolved in liquours, and chiefly in spring water, drach. 1. or drach. 1.
sem. being added to a pint thereof, and is so given in burning putrid fevers,
especially the Hungarick, in the pleuresie, peripneumonie, stone of the reins
and bladder, and obstructions of the liver, and mesaraeum. if the belly be too
loose or stomach weak, the use thereof will not be so convenient. Outwardly
it is commonly used in the inflammations of the jaws and quinsey, being
dissolved in gargarismes. It Is to be applied with lint in anodyne, and
refrigerating topics, being dissolved in some appropriate liquour, so in
combustions. the D. is the same with that of lapis prunellae, which is of the
same virtue, or more effectual. scrup. 4. being dissolved in a pint of water,
for to drink in fevers, yet it a little weakens the stomach, and some times
causes fluxes, otherwise it may be taken from drach. sem. to drach. 1. without
hurt, especially taken with sugar which mitigates its bitterness, so Senn.
Inst. Begu. Querc. Pharm. rest. and alexicc. The other fixed nitre makes
metals malliable. Wirtz. the mineral saccharate crystal is an arcanum in the
haemorrhage of wounds. The perlate nitre is an excellent cordial, and
mitigates the heat in fevers. The corallate nitre is of the same use with the
former, in fevers, and restoration of the strength. The saturnisate nitre
helps the asthma: the D. is g. 6. or 7. in some convenient water. The crystal
of nitre or the fortified dragon of S. Closs. expels tarrareous matter, and
provokes sweat, the stool and urine. the D. is scrup. 1. in an appropriate
water. The Terra foliata of nitre S. Closs. opens obstructions of the
mesenterie and spleen, and gently purges with the extract of rhubarb and
Senne, to increase their virtue: the D. is drach. sem. with the aperitive
roots. Langel. The vitriolate nitre, sweet salt Hols. panacaea duplicata, or
duplicate arcanum, has been often tried in melancholic affections, fevers
continual and intermitting, the stone, and scurvie, etc. also it provokes
sleep, especially in the melancholic: the D. is scrup. 1. or 2. it is called
arcanum duplicatum by Mynsicht. The chalybeat cachectick salt hereof, as also
of that of Holsatia is excellent in the decay of appetite, cachexie, fevers,
nephritick passion, catarrhes, scurvie, french pocks, contractions, palsy, and
wheresoever there is need of the emendation of blood, it povokes sleep, and
serves for many other purposes; therefore for the most part, it does this by
insensible transpiration, and sometimes by sweat without trouble, in some it
gently causes vomit, but seldom: in others it gently opens the belly: the
D. is g. 6. to scrup. 1. in some appropriate liquour. Langel. The flowers of
nitre are good in a tertian fever or ague, and other inquietudes. The spirit
of nitre represseth and quenches the effervescencie of the spirit of the
microcosmick salt, by discussing and resolving the malignant, crude, nitrose,
and tartareous vapors: it opens the bowels, infringeth preternaturall hea^,
and causes sweat: therefore it is of excellent use in the colic, pleurisy,
prunel, and fevers especially the malign: the D. is scrup. 1. to scrup. ij.
etc. it may be used both inwardly and outwardly, sc. in gargarismes, etc. in
the colic it is mixed q. an. with the spirit of wine, to make a mixture,
scrup. ij. or drach. 1. which may be taken in a draught of spring water: also
it may be anointed on the navil with the oil of nutmeg and a little civet. The
bezoardick spirit, is a fit menstruum for the solution and volatisation of Sol.
The common aqua fortis dissolveth Luna and Venus. The aqua regia, stygia,
chrysulca Basilii; dissolveth Gold, and transports it self with it through the
alembick. So Basil. ^^ Clav. Tentzel. The tincture of nitre, is an excellent
corroborative and diaphoretick remedy Caes. Nitrous waters, being drunk,
trouble the belly, make women fruitful and assuage tumors: the baths thereof
help the cache^ie by phlegm, vices of the nerves, catarrhes, and have the
same virtue as the salt, but more effectual; yet they do not bind, but
cleanse; therefore they help the skin, and scab; also being dropped in, they
help purulent ears, soundings thereof, and discuss tumors. Agric. Nitre
dries digesteth and cleanses, its spume is stronger, which is light, soft and
purplish. Fallop. Niter attenuateth, cleanses the womb, and causes sneezing.
Plin: it causes sweat. being anointed with oil, it helps ulcers: applied with
figs it helps cicatrices of the eyes, and roughness of the cheeks: with wine
and pepper it helps the toothach, kills nits, and helps singings of the cares,
fellons, venomous bitings, and pains of the belly. Plin. it heateth,
extenuates, bites, chickens, dries, and exulcerates, and is useful to
evocate, and discuss, etc. with green oil it stops sweating with dry iris,
with honey it clears the eyes, if burned and used in a dentifrice it whitens
the teeth, with the earth of Samos and oil it kills nits: with wine it helps
purulent ears, and cleanses them with vinegar. with fullers earth, an. and
vinegar it helps the vitiligines. with rosin it helps fellons. it helps the
inflammations of the testicles, and eruptions of phlegm in the whole body with
axunge. it helps the bitings of serpents, phagedens, and ulcers with lime and
vinegar. drach. 1. being decoct with rue, anet, or cumin, and drunk, discusseth
the tormina; anointed with oil and vinegar it helps lassitude, and it helps
against honors, rubbed on the hands or feet with oil. taken with vinegar it
helps chollerick itch, with honey and cows milk it helps ulcers in the face,
tosted, till black and stamped it helps burnings, it helps the pains of the
belly, reins, and nerves, with ptisan it helps shortness of breath, and the
cough with galbanum, and turpentine, with tar in helps the quinsey, taken,
the flower with cyprine oil helps pains of the joints, drunk in wine it helps
the jaundise, and discusseth inflations, the vapor taken in hot water helps
bleeding at the nose. with alum it helps the itch. with water it helps the
stinck of the arme-holes. with wax it helps pituitous ulcers and the nerves: it
helps the colic taken, with oil it helps the leprosy: applied, in baths it
helps the podagrick and a trophy. Gal, burned it dries and digesteth; and
taken, is stronger than salt, and betwixt it and aphronitrum, Agric. which is
strongest, S. Hieron. Nitre it sprinkled with vinegar grows hot, and it
crackles in the water.

V.
Vitriol. Vitriolum.
P. It is to be found near metals, especially Copper. M. Of a mineral salt,
or humor corroding pyrites. N. (...). Arab. Calcantum. Alcalcadis. Atramentum
sui.
VIttiol. Schrod. K. as the caeruleous, greenish, and white. T. heateth,
dries, mightily binds, constipats, causes vomiting, and kills worms. V.
used outwardly, as an errhine, it causes sneezing. C. the best is the
greenish, and of that, that which participates more of copper than iron, which
rubbed on a knife, colors it red; avoiding the subceruleous, pale, aquose, and
that which moistens the hands when touched. Que. in Tetr. vitriol is of so
excellent use, that Paracelsus counts it the third part in naturals, and
Phoedro So in Physic, yea almost the whole shop. Diosc. it causes crusts, and
kills broad worms in the belly, drach. 1. being taken alone or in honey,
taken in water it resists the poison of toad-stooles, the same purges the
head, being injected into the nostrils. The white emetick or vomitive vitriol,
causes vomiting gently, and works well in fevers, distempers of the
stomach, catarrhes, plague, and the epilepsie; also it kills worms, etc. the
D. is scrup. 1. to drach. 1. in wine, broth, or some other liquor. Croll. Begu.
the water of centorie does mightily promote its emetick virtue. The rest of the
Gillae also provoke vomiting. Sala. Gluck^. in Begu. The Hermetick purging
vitriol, evacuates by vomit and stool, and is an excellent remedy in
pestilentiall fevers: the D. is gr. 20 to 31. or more in liquor, or an
appropriate water. The Coagulum of vitriol of S. Closs. purges and is not so
emetick: the D. is drach. sem. to drach. 1. in fevers intermitting, and to
purge out melancholy. When defecated, it serves for many preparations. The
nitrate salt of vitriol of S. Closs. helps the cachexie, dropsy, stone,
suffocation of the matrice, and stoppage of the menses: the D. is scrup. 1. to
drach. 1. Sala. The ros of vitriol, helps hot pains of the head, adustion of
the blood, and strengthens the bowels: the D. is drach. ij. being continued
certain days. Sala, The second water of vitriol, purges the reins, eases
internal corrosions and provokes urine and sweat. being a little heated, it
helps the inflammation of corroding wounds or sores. it asswageth and
mitigates the grief, and helps toward consolidation, one or two drops of the
oil of tartar, being put in; that it may be more biting, it helps the dry
itch, and makes the flesh more solid. Hartm. in Croll. The acid phlegm of
vitriol, is an arcanum against pain of the head, and the epilepsie. The
volatile spirit of vitriol, being mixed with rain water is very penetrating,
and uses to work most effectually in the hungarick fever, and others that are
burning. Hartm. in Croll. Senn. Inst. Tentzel. it cures the epilepsie. That of
Glauber, with the sweet oil, opens mightily the liver and spleen. it helps
burning fevers: the D. is scrup. 1. in a draught of beer, also it sixeth
Mercury. The spirit of vitriol distilled after the common manner is diuretic,
diaphoretick, inciding, attenuating; and resists putrefaction, etc. so is
useful in burning fevers, obstruction of the liver, spleen, and mesenterie;
it helps decayed appetites, etc. also mixed with wine, or some other liquour it
helps the toothach being applied to the gums, so the tinea of the head, and
other kinds of the scab and itch, being mixed with the water of celandine: the
D. is g. 3. to scrup. 1. in some liquour, or so much as may cause a pleasant
acidity. Tentzel. Kest. the sweet spirit of vitriol, or sweet oil thereof,
helps the stone, and tartareous diseases, and catarrhes, etc. the D. is scrup.
1. in some convenient liquour. Hartm. in Croll. Kest. The philosophic spirit
of vitriol called Cohob antimonii, is of greater virtue, than that made after
the common manner, it cures fevers, and mitigateth the french disease, it
opens the spleen and meseraicks. it comforts the weak stomach, and when stuffed
with thick phlegm. it is very effectual in hypochondriacall melancholy, the
epilepsie, and all affections of the head, thereby may the^ tincture of
minerals be drawn forth, and pearl and coral be dissolved, the same also
being acuated by the spirit of common salt dissolveth gold: the D. is g. 3. to
8. in a small draught of wine, or other convenient liquour. Tentzel. The
tartarised spirit of vitriol, or liquor Di^nae, is very good to cause sweat, in
all inward obstructions, against clotted blood, and itch, and to cleanse and
smooth the skin: the D. is drach. 1. to unc. sem. with broth, or a little
sack, being continued three mornings together: Senn. Inst. The spirit or
opening water of P^notus, is of excellent use in obstructions of the liver,
spleen, and mesentery, the D. is scrup. t. to drach. iij. in wine or some other
fit liquour: So Hartm. in pract. it is also called Muffets antihydropicum, being
excellent against the dropsy, the cause of which, it expels by urine and
siege, even the spirit before alcalised: one spoonful being given fasting;
every one or two hours, in a convenient water: So Horning. in Cist. med. Med.
dest. The mellisate spirit of vitriol, asswageth the pain of the gout: and if
there be inflammations, it is to be mixed with vinegar, else with wine. Sala,
The diaphoretick spirit purifieth the blood, and cures the itch, and scabs; it
opens obstructions, provokes sweat in the plague, poison, dropsy, jaundise,
and contractions, etc. Also it is very good in cleansing the lungs: the D. is
scrup. 1. to drach. sem. and the use thereof may be continued according to
pleasure, without danger. The antepileptick spirit of Hartman for children,
cures them effectually of the falling sickness: so also the oil, made of the
salt of urine, dissolved in the spirit of vitriol, and distilled through sand.
Tentzel. The antepileptick spirit of Basil, does not only cure the falling
sickness, but is also good against the stone: the D. is scrup. 1. in peony or
fennel water, etc. The antepileptick spirit of Quercetan, called the green
spirit of vitriol, in his Tetras, is most penetrating: the D. is 15, or 16
drops. The antepileptick spirit of Paracelsus, may be given in and before the
paroxisme: the D. is scrup. sem. with some convenient liquour. See Querc. in
Tetr. The sweet oil of vitriol, is an excellent diaphoretick, and gently
binds; the D. is 1, 2, or 3 drops. Gluckr. The red oil, is used more about
metals, than medicine, yet it may also be given inwardly, see the spirit of
Penot, before. That of calcined vitriol distilled with Lytharge, helps the
gout. That of the earth of vitriol. D. is given from 6 to 10 drops, and is very
useful in diseases of the head. Tentz. 15. or 20 drops thereof, as some
observe, cause vomiting. The oil of the sulphur of vitriol, is good, but more
effectual in the same affections, in which the sulphur of vitriol is used.
Sala, The cupreous substance of vitriol, helps putrid wounds, also it
incarnates, and cicatrizeth. Hartm. in Croll. Sala, Tentzel. Kest. The sweet
sulphur or brimstone of vitriol, helps affections of the lungs, cleanses
putrid wounds or ulcers, and cicatrizeth. Kest. The fixed or martial sulphur of
vitriol, D. is given from g. 5 to 10. The fixed or martial sulphur of vitriol,
serves to make anodynes of, called by the name of laudanum. Sala, Querc. in
Tetr. and Pharm. rest. Senn. Inst. Begu. The salt of vitriol, is commended by
Sala even to the heavens, as a vomitorie, in the epilepsie, and other symptoms
of the brain, arising from corrupt and sharp vapors, ascending from the
stomach; also in the pleuresie, pestilentiall fevers, lipothymie from the
repletion of corrupted humors, and boiling of choler about the mouth of the
stomach, and in obstructions of the liver, spleen and reins: also the salt
blown up into the nostrils, does mightily cause sneezing, and without force
cleanses the brain from it is serous excrements: the D. is scrup. sem. to
scrup. ij. The remaining earth is very good in the diarrhoea and dysentery,
Hartm. in Croll. The salt of vitriol, out of the caput mortuum, from which the
flowers of sulphur, are elevated given from scrup. sem. to scrup. ij. in fennel
water or wine does easily cause vomiting, and sometimes stool and sweating.
Sala, The narcotick anodyne extract of vitriol, serves to stupifie and ease
pain, and in virtue is not inferior to opium; yet without danger it does
repress and coagulate, thin venomous vapors, causing the epilepsie; and
that specifically: the D. is 6 drops to 12. with a convenient liquour. Hartm.
in pract. Tentz. Kesl. The essence of the sulphur of vitriol, is equal in
virtue, to the tincture of antimonie, and works wonderful effects in bawm
water, it expels all noxious humors of the whole body by insensible
transpiration, it provokes venery, strengthens the womb, and stops its
inordinate motions; and in both sexes it works a prolifick virtue, in the
sperm, for the generation of children: it does the same also almost, in the
water of stone parsley, and besides cures the dropsy, all which it does being
used for some convenient time together: the D. is g. 1. to 4. So is the
tincture or manna of vitriol, in operation. Querc. in Tetr. the tincture is of
admirable virtue against all grief, residing in thick matter. Querc. in Tetr.
the magisteriate tincture or magisterie of vitriol, is a remedy that cannot be
too much commended, and that chiefly, if gold philosophically dissolved be
added thereto: for it is good against the epilepsie, all astrall affections, the
apoplexy, palsy; disinesse, madness, exstasie, syncope, cochexie, dropsy,
and stone: the D. is one or two drops: So the other, and is an universal
extraordinary penetrating medicine. Caes. The vitriol or atramentose waters,
from vitriol, misy, sorry, or melanteria, being all of the same faculty, are
very like to the aluminous, but these are more strong having besides the
astringent faculty, a certain sharp juice, wherefore they are good against
ulcers that spread; but if too sharp, they hurt them. Bras. The oil of vitriol
is caustic, and used for a potentiall fire. it easily takes off parts, it
helps against the plague, being taken in rose water. Bov. it kills worms in
children, and helps the plague 6 drops being taken in aqua ardens. 6. in unc.
ij. of sorreil water taken in the morning for 6 or 8 days helps the hectic,
and the quartain ague in aqua-vitae, also it helps the canker of the mouth,
pain of the side, rotten teeth, dropsies, beating of the heart, memory, and
sound of the ears. Fallop. Vitriol burned is sharp and catheretick: if washed
it is epulotick used in cerots. Agric. drach. 1. loses the belly. it stops
bleeding, applied. Gal. vitriol preserves moist flesh. Plin. it helps the
roughness of the eyes, pains, dimnesse, and ulcers of the mouth; with the
seed of henbane it draws out broken bones, used to the forehead it helps
epiphora's, in plasters, it purges wounds, and excrescencies in ulcers. put
upon plasters with line seed it eases pain, the white blown into the ears
helps deafness. Agric. the oil looseneth the belly. Schrod. it is a mineral
salt, found near unto metals, especially copper. C. the kinds thereof are
diverse, according to the nature of the mineral, which they do contain, but
those of the best account, are the ceruleous, like sapphir, compact, white as
sugar, dry in touch, and is called the Hungarick; the second is subvirid, of
the color of herbs, more granulate, grumous like salt, a little unctuous, and
sticking to the fingers; the third is white and dry.

THEIOLOGIA. Of Sulphurs.
A.
Agath. Gagales.
P. It Is found in Germany, and Cilicia, and other places. M. Of a black, stony
earth, full of bitumen. N. Obsidianus, Thracius, Agric. Caes.
AGath. Diosc. mollifieth and discusseth. V. the suffumigation shows the
falling sickness, and helps the strangulation of the womb, it drives away
serpents by its savor, it is also used in podagrick medicines, and such as ease
pain or wearisomnesse. Schrod. it is said to cure the colic drach. 1. being
taken powdered seven days together. Aet. being heated red hot and quenched in
wine it helps the cardiack passion. The oil helps the epilepsie, madness,
palsy, spasme, cramp, joint-ach, and suffocation of the matrice, being
anointed on the nostrils. Plin. Caes. being boiled in wine the Agath helps the
teeth, and botches being mixed with wax. Isid. the sum shows virginity, it
is kindled by water, and quenched by oil; so Maiol. Cause. Zanard. Aldrovand.
being worn it helps the ephialtes, and night fears. it helps old troublesome
cold flatuous swellings of the knees, and dries with the barbarum plaster;
with wax it helps botches, and is very good in the cold gout, and all cold
affections; it is of the nature of bitumen, the powder with wine helps the
toothach, it is diuretic and causes delivery, it helps the dropsy and liver,
the oil helps the epilepsie, palsy, cramp, and suffocation of the womb.

Amber. Succinum.
P. It is to be found in the Sea in Italy, and the Ocean. M. Of a bituminous
juice, and rosin of the earth well digested. N. (...). Arab. Ambra citrina.
Electrum. Chrysolectrum. Carabe. Glessum. Resina terrae, Paracelsi.
Amber. Schrod. K. as the yellow, white, and black. T. it heateth, dries,
strenghneth, gently binds, and is appropriated chiefly to the head and womb.
V. therefore it is profitably used in catarrhes, the epilepsie, apoplexy,
lethargy, vertigo, suffocation and inflation of the matrix, in the flux of
blood, and sperme which it reduces to it is natural state, also it helps the
whites in women, but the globuls are excellent against defluxions to the eyes,
being used to the hinder part of the head; and applied to the neck, hinder
distillations to the throat. so Bapt. Port. and Matthew. The white is most used,
and that both inwardly and outwardly. the D. is to drach. 1. some commend it
for an amulet against the plague, the pulses being often rubbed with the same.
C. the white is the best, and most digested and fragrant: the next is the
yellow, pellucid, and sweet when rubbed. the black is worse. The prepared amber
is of the same virtue with the first. The magisterie, being the more pure and
resinous part is more strong. That made hereof when powdered, a little tosted,
having distilled vinegar poured thereon, and so extracted, and precipitated
with the spirit of vitriol, is sudorifick and diuretic. The sweet fixed
magisterie of amber is an excellent sudorifick and very useful in the measles,
and pleuresie, and comfort the heart, etc. the D. is g. 6. to 12. the pills
and troches thereof may be seen in the London Dispensatory. Callist. Caes.
being drunk it helps the difficulty of urine, hung about the neck it helps
fevers. powdered, with honey and oil of roses it helps the vices of the
ears: and of the eyes, with attick honey; as also of the stomach being drunk
in water; so Plin: Ru. it is used as an amulet for children, against fantasies.
it helps fluxes of the stomach and belly. Agric it strengthens the bowels, and
other parts of the body, if there be not a plenitude of humors; being drunk
with wine it prevents the epilepsie, resolution, convulsion, and distension of
the nerves, and helps the pains of the stomach, especally the o^le, and helps
the trembling of the heart. the fume dries the phlegm of the head, and helps
parturition, and infection of the air; so Cardan. Aldrov. the magisterie helps
cicatrices and virtigoes. so the oil.

Amber-griece. Ambra grysea.
P. It Is brought from the Septentrional region. M. It Is a kind of bitumen cast
from the Sea. N. (...). Ambarum. ambara.
Amber-griece. Schrod. T. heateth, dries, resolves, strengthens the heart and
brain, and restores the vital and animal spirits, by its sulphurous and sweet
exhalation. V. therefore its often used in balls, to correct infected air, and
to preserve the spirits from infection, which balls are therefore called
vulgarly poma ambrae, or Pomanders. The essence of amber-griece is given in the
q. of a few g. Hartm. in pract. and in Croll. Essentificated amber-griece is an
excellent strengthner of all the bowels, especially it provokes procreation:
the D. is the q. of a small pease, in wine or some other liquour. C. The best
is the amber-griece, and that of an ash color, clean, sweet, light, and which
sends forth a fat juice, being pricked with a needle; the black and very white
are bad. the factitious is known by odor showing the materials, as also by
color commonly black, and quickly is disolved in water, it is made of musk,
civet, wood of aloes, siorax, and ladanum.

Arsnick. Arsenicum.
P. In Mysia, Pontus and Cappadocia. M. Of a mineral sout, or juice, fat, and
combustible. N. (...). Auripigmentum. Arab. Harnet.
Arsnick. Schrod. K. as the white or crystall^ne, citrine or yellow, called
orpine, and red called sandaracha. Diosc. T. it is astringent and corrosive. V.
it causes crusts, by it is vehement burning, and violent biting, it represseth
excrescencies, and eradicates the hair. Sandaracha, helps the alopecia, (being
used with rosin^) with pitch it helps rough nails, with oil it helps the
phthiriasis or lousiness, with fat, it discusseth knots, with oil of roses, it
helps the ulcers of the mouth, and nostrils, and other breakings forth of
pushes, and swellings in the fundament. with honied wine it helps spitting of
purulent matter. the fume taken with rosin, through a funnel, helps an old
cough. it cleares the voice taken with honey, and shortness of breath, made
into a pill with rosin. Schrod. arsnick is not the least among poisons, being
sharp and adverse to the balsame of life, insomuch that not only inwardly, but
used outwardly it often produces horrid symptoms. H. sc: convulsions,
stupidity in the hands and feet, cold sweats, palpitations and faintings of the
heart, vomiting, corrosions and pains in the intestines, thirst, and
unquietness; yet it has some useful faculties inwardly in the curing of the
plague, and other poysonsome affections, as also of the malignant itch or scab,
and cancrose evils, being rightly prepared and used. outwardly, it is used in
cauteries, and amulets. as for orpine and sandaracha, they are almost of the
same virtue. note the sandaracha of the Arabians is only the gum of juniper.
(the white arsnick is the best, and oftenest used, the yellow seldom, and the
red less often, of the white crystaline, the best is heavy, hard, pure, tending
to a milkie color R. the remedy against orpine, and sandaracha which is more
concocted in the earth is whatsoever dulleth its ac^imonie, and looseneth the
belly, as the juice of mallows, decoction of lineseed, rice, honied water, fat
broth, much milk, and good juyces: so Diosc. Querc. in Alexicac: The sweet
arsnick, is so far from hurting those that take it; as that it will gently,
and without any perturbation, expel those poisons, which will not yield to
other catharticks. D. the sublimate thereof may be given in substance, in
infusion to 5, 6, 7. or 8 grains: also per deliquium, it may be reduced into
an oil, useful in ulcers. The diaphoretick Rubinus of arsnick, is specific
in affections of the lungs from thick catarrhes; also it may be used to provoke
sweat, in mal^gnant and venenate d^seases: used outwardly it cures all
malignant ulcers hard to be cured the D. is from 5 gr. to 8 Tentzel. Querc.
arsenick thus prepared may be given to scrup. 1. after the same manner may be
made the rubinus of orpine, used in an equal dose, and for the same affections.
The oil of orpine, as also the fixed is a sudorifick. Mull. in mirac. chym.
Querc. in spag. The fixed arsnick for sudorificks, moves sweat, given with
triacle: the D. is g, 3, 4, or 5. The anodyne oil, butter or liquour of
orpine, cures venomous ulcers, in the french pocks, the cancer, tetter,
fistula's of the fundament, and bitings of a mad dog, used in plantain water,
so mixed that it may not offend the tongue, and so used to the wound. S. Closs.
as for the spirit of arsnick it dissolveth iron radically, and affords an
ingresse into metallic bodies: but the butter of arsnick, is a violent
septick, it eradicates exulcerated cancers, yet an equal q. of opium ought to
be added to take away the feeling of pain, and it is to be applied with lint,
and convenient defensives. Caes. waters flowing amongst orpine or sandaracha,
heat, and bind; but they clarify the voice, and help shortness of breath.
Caes. The oil is caustic. Albert. Mag. arsnick is of a sulphurious nature,
burning, more hot than dry, and therefore putrefactive and biting, and if
burned it is of more thin parts; Agric. orpine wrapped in a cloth and applied
to the heart freeth a man from the plague. Aldrovand. the oil of the luteous
arsnick applied to the pulses, expels poison by vomit stool and sweat. it is
used in plasters with sulphur lime and soap to cure fistula's, by purifying
and cleansing them, so Schol. Salern: some use the oil in stead thereof.

Asphalte. Asphaltos.
P. In Judaea, being a Country in Asia. M. Of the bitumen of the macrocosme. N.
(...). Bitumen. Sevum. Resina.
Asphalt. Plin. T. Bitumen is of the nature of sulpur: it discusseth, stopps,
contracts, and gleweth V. Agric. drunk it dissolves clotted blood, and causes
the terms. applied it helps the scab in cattle, the Babilonian helps wefts
and spotts in the eyes, leprosies, tetters, itch, and gouts. the fume drives
away serpents, and discovers the epilepsie. it is hot and dry 2o, the black
dries and digesteth. Perer: it binds wounds, and gleweth the nerves Caes.
bituminose waters, mollify the nerves, and heat them; but fill the head, and
dull the senses, especially the eyes. Diosc. C. That of Judea is the best,
which shines like purple, and that is ponderous and of a strong smell; but the
black and sordid is bad. It is adulterated by pitch: and Pissasphalt is used in
its steed.

B.
Brimstone. Sulphur.
P. It is to be had in Italy. Bohemia. and Melos. M. Of the resin and fat of
the earth, full of a vitriolat acidity. N. (...). Arab. Cibur. Rabrick. Chym.
Akiboth. Ahusal. Tin.
BRimstone. K. as the natural, and factitious. T. Diosc. sulphur heateth,
discusseth, and quickly concocts. V. it helps coughs, shortness of breath,
spitting of purulent matter, taken in an egg, or by fume; and so expels the
birth; with turpentine it helps the leprosy, ringworme, and scabbed nails.
applied with vinegar it helps the leprosy; and with rosin helps the wounds by
scorpions; so with vinegar, and those of the sea-dragon, with nitre it helps
the itch breaking out in the whole body, it cures the jaundice; a spoonefull
thereof being put upon the forehead, or taken in a soft egg. it cures
heaviness of the head, and destillations: applied it hinders sweating. it
cures the gout being anointed with water and nitre. the fume thereof taken in
a funnell helps deafness, and the lethargy, it stops blood flowing out of any
part, and helps the ears bruised, being applied with wine or honey. Schrod. it
dries, and is appropriated to the breast. so it opens, incideth, and resists
poison, and the bitings of venomous beasts, provoking sweat, etc: therefore it
helps the phthis^ck, plague, and pestilentiall fevers; outwardly it helps hard
tumors, etc. C. the best is the purest, greenish, that easily inflamed;
burning bright, and yielding a more sky colored smoke. The vitriolat Flowers
of brimstone, resist putrefaction, provoke sweat, and dry, etc. therefore are
good in the plague, and pestilentiall fevers, either by way of preservation or
curation. they are also very profitably used in catarrhes, diseases of the
lungs, and coughs, etc the D. is drach. 1. to the strong, drach. sem. to the
young, and scrup. sem. for preservation, with the extract of elicampane. The
gummmate or myrrhate flowers, are stronger than the simple, both in drying, and
resisting putrefaction. Querc. in Pharm. rest. The saccharate, are better also
than the former against the asthma, and other diseases of the lungs. Senn.
Jnst. Tentzel. The white flowers of sulphur, are in virtue aad operation equal
to the milk of brimstone. The corallate, are better than the common, and a
balsam made hereof is an excellent balsame for the lungs. The benzoinate, are
preserved as smelling better, and of more virtue. Milk of brimstone, is a
balsam for the lungs, and is therefore given against catarrhes, the flux of the
head, asthma, phthisick, cough, colic, etc: it helps expectoration,
intercepts defluxions to the joints, and prevents and discusseth the windiness
of the stomach and intestines. D. so much of the powder must be mixed as may
color the vehickle white, and one spoonful thereof may be given morning and
evening: note the vehicle must be some appropriate liquor; as the water of
cinnamon, bawm, or spirit of wine, etc. Quercetan gives drach. 1. as a
cathartick. The milk thereof of S. Closs. operates as that of Crollius; but
because that it sometimes fails, or is but little precipitated, this
infallible kind was invented. The spirit of sulphur, as it is scarce any thing
else than the spirit of vitriol, so also it has the same virtues, furthermore,
it serves against the plague, and asthma, etc. and is profitably used
outwardly in the falling down of the fundament; a little thereof being mixed
with plantine water, and so applied with a sponge to the place affected: see
Senn. Jnst. Begu. Gluckr. Tentzel. The acid water, acidity, or phlegm of
brimstone works as the former spirit; but is less effectual, and seldomer
used. Croll. The water, or ens of the balsam of sulphur, is of the same use
with the flowers, in the plague fevers, colic, obstructions, and other
affections of the lungs. The linate oil of sulphur helps ulcers, and ripens
pestilentiall botches. Tileman. The golden oil of brimstone, is given with
good success in cachexies, and obstructions of the bowels, and preserves from
the plague. The red oil is of great use in ripening pestilentiall buboes. The
true oil of sulphur of S. Closs. is an excellent vulnerary remedy, taken
inwardly, it cures inward ulcers, resists the suffocation of the matrix,
plague, colic, catarrhs, the asthma, empyema, and provokes urine: the D. is
3 drops in some convenient syrup, or the yolk of an egg. Querc. in pharm.
rest. Hartm. in pract. Senn. Jnst. Begu. and others. The turpentined balsam of
sulphur, or rubinus thereof, is most excellent against the phthisick, for it is
good to consolidate the ulcers of the lungs, it preserves from the plague, and
other contagious diseases, also it serves for the tincture of sulphur: the D.
is g. 4. to 7. sc. separated from its solver, or 20. therewith. The compound
balsame of sulphur, or balsame of life, works more strongly than the simple.
That of Rulandus to be used outwardly, is used in diverse griefs. The tincture
of brimstone is more effectual than the balsame. That of S. Closs. is used in
the plague, fevers, the scurvey, obstructions of the liver, and diseases of
the lungs: the D. is 8 drops. The crystals of the tincture of sulphur are given
to g. 4. in some appropriate liquour. The salt of brimstone is very effectual
against worms. The essence of sulphur, is of great virtue to resist
putrefaction, the D. is 8 drops: in which essence if myrrh, aloes, or spices
are infused, and the tincture be, extracted by B. M. it is called the dead man's
balsam. so Basil. in rep. lap. ph. Caes. Sulphurous waters heat, and greatly
mollify the nerves; therefore help resolutions, convulsions, tremblings,
stupidity, and contractions; also they discuss the swelling of the ioints, and
ease pains of the hip, feet, or hands used in a bath; they cure the scab,
ulcers, leprosy, and morphew, pains of the liver, spleen, and womb, and
wonderfully resolve tumors therein, but they laxe and weaken the stomach.
Falloo. the oil operates, as that of brimstone. Agric. brimstone is of a
drawing nature: Cardan. being drunk or applied it helps the french pocks; but
the oil is most effectual. Plin. it helps the running at the nose, and
distillations to the inferior parts. applied with water it helps the gout.
Gal. it is hot, and of thin parts.

L
Lithanthrax. Lithanthrax.
P. The place is not much observed. M. It is a kind of a terrene bitumen. N.
Carbo petrae, and carbo fossilis.
LIthanthrax. Schrod. T. V. it is not as yet used in physic, but it is probable
there may thence be drawn an oil, to ripen ulcers, and soften tumors It is a
fossile kind of terrene bitumen, stony, friable, and black; it is called carbo,
because in diverse places in England and Germany, it is used to nourish fire
with all.

N.
Naphth. Naphtha.
P. It is to be found in Austagen of Parthia. M Of a bituminous matter, and
fiery. N. Medeae oleum. (...).
NAphtha. Diosc. T. V. it helps suffusions and spotts of the eyes, it is easily
sired, and leapeth therein though at a distance, it is a kind of bitumen, all
which discuss, glue, soften, defend from inflammation, and help the falling
down and strangling of the womb, being either smelled to, applied, or
suffumigated. the fume discovers the falling sickness, after the manner of
the Agath-stone. drunk with wine and castor it draws the purgations of women.
it cures the old cough, and shortness of breath. it helps the bitings of
serpents, and pains of the hipps and sides. it is given against the coeliack in
pills. drunk with vinegar it discusseth congealed blood. melted with ptisan
it is injected against the dysentery. the fumes help distillations. applied it
helps the toothache: dry, it causes the hair to curle being applied. being
heated and applied with barley meal, nitre, and wax, it helps the gout, pain
of the joints, and lethargy. pissasphalt does the same, that pitch and bitumen
do being mixed. Maiol. Naphtha being once inflamed, burns more when water is
powered thereon, but is quenched by dirt, vinegar or alume. Aldrovand. it
extenuats, penetrats, digests, dries and consumes moisture. so helps the
palsy and joints. Diosc. some call it the colamen of bitumen, and it is white
in color; yet there is some that is black also; diverse use petrolaeum in the
steed thereof.

O.
Oil of peter. Petrolaeum.
P. It is to be had in diverse places of Insubria. M. I'ts generated of the fat
of the macrocosme. N. Oleum petrae. oleum saxeum. Axungia macrocosmi.
Oil of peter. Schrod. T. it is hot and dry, of thin parts, digesting, and
resolving. V. it is good for the nerves, and brain. The spirit thereof, helps
ulcerated kibes or chilblaines, and strengthens the nerves being laid on with
the spirit of wine, the vernice is good to consolidate wounds: near unto this
is the oil of the earth, but more pleasant, brought out of India, which being
applied to the running gout, is a very good remedy. Caes. it is very hot. it
consumes all cold matter in any part of the body, it helps the epilepsie,
palsy, spasme of the nerves, and joints, pains of the spleen, reins,
bladder, and cold distempers of the womb, Aldrovand. it is thought to have all
the faculties and properties of naphtha.

P.
Parmaceti. Sperma ceti.
P. It is to be had in Egypt, at the river Nilus. M. Of a kind of bitumen, of
sulphurous earth and salt. N. (...). Ambra subalbida. flos maris vel salis
veterum.
Parmaceti. Schrod. T. it resolves, moistens, and is anodyne. V. therefore
it is commonly used in the resolution of coagulated blood, caused by falls or
otherwise. it appeaseth the pain of the colic, and in the bellies of infants:
also it helps the cough, and tartar of the lungs: the D. is scr. 1. to drach.
2. some use it outwardly, upon the cicatrices of the small pocks, to fill them
with flesh. note also some give it to women after delivery, to strengthen the
laxate parts. C. the best is the white, sat, wen, and not unsavory, etc,

LITHOLOGIA. Of Stones.
1. Stones or jewels more precious.
A.
Achates. Achates.
P. It is found in Achates, a river of Sicilie, and in Crete, etc. M. It Is of
thinner juice, and like the Jasper. N. (...). Passhachates. Cerachates.
Sardochates. Haemachates.
ACates. Caes. K. as the black, coral like, Indian, and that of Crete. T. V.
Plin. it helps against the stinging of scorpions: so Matthew. Ru. Myl. as also
the bitings of spiders. Myl. it helps the bitings of serpents. Ru. Albert. it
resists pestiferous poison. Plin. Matthew. Albert. Ru. the sight thereof
helps the eyes, and held in the mouth it quenches thirst. Plin. Matthew. That
of one color causes audacity. Albert. Mag. Myl. being laid under the head,
it causes variety of dreams. Ru. it animates to overcome dangers. Myl. the
powder thereof drunk or applied helps the bitings of serpents. being hung
about the neck it makes prudent: Ru. Albert. and eloquent, it refreshes the
heart. Albert. it strengthens the body, and causes a good color. Plin. Isid.
Matthew. the suffumigation thereof cease tempests, etc. most of which as being
fantastical, is here mentioned to show the opinions of authors, and the rest
left to experience.

Amethist. Amethystus.
P. In India. Arabia. Armenia. Egypt. etc. M. It Is generated of the Corneol: so
Alcasar. N. (...). Gemma Veneris Plin. Caes.
Amethist. T. Alcas. is of an attracting nature. V. Arist. applied to the
navill, it first draws the vapors of wine unto it self, and then discusseth
them, and therefore defends those that use it from drunkenness and
surfeiting; also it is good against outward injuries, and others say that it
drives away evil cogitations, and whetteth the wit, and that it causes
vigilance and amity, it is used for many other superstitious uses not worthy to
be related: so Rueus: C. The best are the purple, shining, and sparkling. Myl.
it causes quietness in him that uses it. it resists poison and is an
amulet, drives vapors from the head, and hinders sleep: it helps against
raging, and makes fruitful.

B.
Berill. Berillus.
P. In India chiefly: so Plin. Ru. Isid. Myl. Solin. etc. M. Of gross
crystal, of cold air and water hardened. N. (...). Heb. Joshpeh.
BErill. Ru. K. as the common, and golden. Myl. it is of a fortifying enlivening
nature. V. it helps against moistness of the eyes. belchings, shortness of
breath, and evils of the liver, being infused in water: some also say it is good
against the danger by enemies, and that it prevents sloth, causes wit, and is
profitable for the conjugate, all which may be left to every ones censure. C.
the best are those of the sea green color, next the golden colored. Albert.
Mag. Alcas. Ru. Myl. it makes unconquerable, Vieg. Co^^. a L^p. if held it
burns the hand. Albert. Alcas. Ru. Myl. it helps defluctions to the throat.

Bezoarstone. Bezoar.
P. In Persia, India and Peru: out of the Capricerve. M. Of poison and a
certain herb: of a crass terren matter. N. Bezaar. Belzaar. Begaar. Bezard.
Lapis there. Bauh.
Bezoarstone. Bauh. K. is oriental, or occidentall, etc. T. Sarr. it is
unpleasant and stinking, Rich. or rather not tasting, some account it
temperate, others cold and dry, others say it works by it is whole substance, or
occult quality. V. Richard. 5. grains help against napellus: the same q. in
borage water causes sweat in a continual ague, or fever. Ruland. 6 grains
with sudorificks help the hungarick disease. 24. taken often help the plague,
so Diomed. Portus 12. gr. with sugar of roses help against poison: Arnold. and
cause sweat. some give it to drach. 1. but it is to be proportioned according to
the occasion: and is to be given at any time against poison, so in putrid
fevers, except in the declination, in a time of quiet, the stomach being
empty, 3 or 4 hours before meat, after universal purgation, and that in any
form, with things appropriate. Fragos. the powder applied helps bitings, and
carbuncles, it is taken inwardly either to preserve health, and youth, or for
prevention of diseases, some use 10 or more grains for 4, or 5 days together
after purgation, note the oriental causes sweat most, and the occidentall
loosens the belly, it is good against dangerous griefs, chronicall, and long:
also to increase strength and flesh: some say it may be used in any disease
without hurt. Monard. Caesalp. it helps the vertigo it cures the epilepsie:
so Monard. Lacun. Caesalp. Brud. Boet. both in children and in men given to
them with milk; and to the elder, in the water of lillies, or piony: in the q.
of 2. gr. to children, 8 or 12 men, according to the disease and constitution.
Solenand. it mightily strengthens the heart, therefore the oriental, exceeding
the occidentall: by having more virtue and influence from the aspect of the
sun, has excellent faculties in diseases of the heart, and helps all
diseases thereof, being taken from. gr. 5. to 10 in some convenient liquour. so
Boet. therefore it is given in the syncope in the paroxisme, or a little before,
in rosewater, if there be- a fever, if not in that of carduus benedictus,
bawme, vipers grass, or of the flowers of gilloflowers in the q. of gr. 4. or
gr. 3. in borrage water: so Lonic. Caesalp. Monard. Chain. and that by
comforting the spirits of the heart, and strengthening its substance by an acute
property, or bezoardick quality: and helps the palpitation of the heart, yet
not by reason of the tenuity of it is parts; but by a certain property
respecting the heart, being found in the heart of the Capricerva, and it being
manifest, that some parts of bruites, are good for like parts in man, by reason
of similitude. Manl. it roborats the vital virtue, and by helping the
expulsive faculty of the heart, causes sweat, therefore Heurnius uses it
amongst things that strengthen the heart, and alter it when moist with Jacinth:
so Horst. and to drive filthy vapors from the heart. Rod. a Cast. gives it
to women that are troubled with the leaping of the heart, melancholy or
corruption of the sperme, sc. gr. 5. or 6. every morning being powdered, and
disolved in some opening or fit water, or mixed with the conserve of maidens
hair, or borrage a little of the water being drunk after it: also it may be
added to chalybeat electuaries, or cordial and opening troches. Brud. it helps
the pleurisy and peripneumonie. Amat. it cures the pain of the side though
violent, and with a malignant quality, being taken with the water of scabious
or blessed thistle, so Gebelch. Lo^ic. it cures the pleurisy though
desperate. Avenz. it cures the jaundise, yellow, Crat. and black, C. Acost.
choleric passions, as also the loss of appetite. Caesalp. therefore it helps
the troubles of the stomach; so the skin of the beast, as Thevet reports.
Lonic. it helps the colic and pains in the belly. Sarrac. it helps the
dysentery though epidemick. C. Acost. Montan. Amat. it kills worms, both
expelling them, and freeing from their symptoms: and is to be given with wine
if there be no fever, else with the water of porcelain, so Monard, Amat. Frag.
or with the juice of limons, citron, or syrup thereof, so Ryff. 3. grains
being taken by children. Boet. prescribes it in the water of grass or blessed
thistle. Brud. it expels the stone of the reins, and breaks it if in the
bladder drunk in wine, so Lacun. C. Acost. therefore it expels the urine out of
the reins and bladder, and viscid matter there. Caesalp. those of Lusitania
use it against troubles of the matrice. Monard. so it helps the obstructions of
the menses, and strangulation of the womb: 6 grains being taken. Rod. a Cast.
the oriental bezoar taken in mugwort water facilitates the birth, and expels
the secundine. C Acost. Gebelch. 3 grains hereof being taken with the water of
white lillies, betony, or pennyroyall do the same, Garz. Jordan. it helps
all melancholy diseases, Ruff. though they affect the head, brain, or heart.
Abrahmed. lus. drach. 1. hereof, is used by the Indians to purge. Brud. so by
those of Lusitania. Monard. 3 grains taken in bugloss water, help sadness,
melancholy, and fainting thereby: so Boet. also it helps against melancholic
humors in the whole body, or part thereof, and diseases of the skin caused
thereby: so Solenand. Gebelch, it exhilerates: so Heurn. also it cleanses the
blood, with mytobalans, or jacinth; and to conclude it helps all long, and
strong diseases, and the flatuous, being like a panacaea, given diverse days
together, after purgation. Amat. given in fevers it causes sweat and cures
the same, Manl. it is not to be given in malignant fevers, till after
universal purgers, and openers. Augen. it is not to be used in putrid fevers.
Garz. it helps quartans: so Ryff. Caesalp. Boet. however, it removes the
symptoms thereof, sc. sadness and anxiety, etc. Crat. it helps the catarrhose
fever, Manard. Acost. Lacun. it helps malignant and epidemick fevers,
Caesalp. and the Portugals use it in sorrel water: so Fragos. Amat. and that to
exstinguish the malignity thereof: Manard: so the water wherein it has been
infused, and helps the malignity of all fevers. Montan. Amat. it cures the
pestilentiall and malignant. Matthew. it preserves from the pestilentiall, as
also triacle, and m^thridate. Market. each time 4 or 5 gr. thereof are to be
given, in some water, syrup, or broth, Monard. it is good in the spotted fever,
and pustulous, so Boet. though Syluaticus denies it. Port. it preserves from,
and cures the plague, as also pearls, and the bone of a stag's heart: Monard.
therefore many then carry it in their mouth, Forness. some use it in the water
of roses or violets, with Unicorns horn, whereof, Andern. and Gebelch. may be
made troches, so Lacun. Lonic. Fallop. Wittich. Rulandus gives it with the red
powder of Caesar, and hearts horn in scabious or carduus water. Mercurialis
adds bole, unicorns horn dittany of Creet, and red coral thereto against
poison: and gives drach. 1. thereof in wine, and Gallen, with bole in fevers.
Manl. yet it is to be given only in the beginning of pestilentiall fevers: but
Saxonia attributes little virtue to it. Garz. used outwardly to plague sores,
it sucketh out the poison thereof, being used also inwardly with the conserve
of sorrel, powder of pearl, and hearts horn, so Wittich. and Fallop. Ruland.
it cures the Hungarian disease, yet he attributes more to hearts horn, and
uses it with other alexipharmick remedies. Par. it helps against pushes,
pocks, and measles, and St. Anthonies fire, 1 or 2 grains being given every
day in rose water, Garz. others give it in sorrel water, carduus, or
brook-lime water, in the juice of limons, and citrons, or syrup thereof; yet
Crato mai^es no great Caesalp. Outwardly it is used in troublesome scabs, the
leprosy, itch, and ringwormes: so Garz. Acost. therefore the Portugals use it
often with bugloss-water. Boet. it is also a present remedy against the
crysipelas, and other vices of the skin. Acost. it helps the Kings-evill
being opened. Arnold. it helps hard collections in the side, a small. q. being
taken daily, for 2 or 3 weeks: Acost. Fragos. the Indians use it in old ulcers.
Rod. a Castr. the powder helps an ulcerated cancer. Agric. it helps the bitings
of poison some beasts: Garz. as of vipers and serpents, Acost. Cardan. with
treacle. Fabric. it helps the bitings of a mad dog being applied, and Jordan.
Ryff, also it cures the same without damage. Monard. it helps wounds made by
poisoned arrows, and against toxicum. Garc. it helps exceedingly against
poison, in so much that other remedies for that purpose, are called by its
name: so Matthew. Jordan. Par. Forest. Ardoyn. Acost. Amat. Rauwolf. Crat. Lacun.
Ryff. Montu. Rhas. Avenz. Conciliat. Augen. Diomed. and Serapio being either
taken by the mouth, hung about the neck, or the infusion in water being taken,
or applied; it resists all poison, both hot and cold, and all bitings, and
wounds of venomous beasts. Amat. gives it against all poison q. gr. 3. in the
distilled water of orange flowers, and Gebelch. in that of vipers grass,
Caesalp. in that of orange flowers, and Portus tox gr. with the sugar of roses:
Caesalpinus adds also Bole-armoniack. Amat. and Mercurialis use it also in
vomits, with other alexipharmick remedies, as hearts horn, emeralds, sealed
earth, and bole; that by the emplastick and alexiterie virtue it may impair
the strength of the poison. Boet. Sarr. Card. Augen. Garz. also it may be used
as an amulet, some further, affirm it expels all putrid matter out of the
body, insomuch, that it is of more worth than Unicorns horn. Bauh. yet though
it be alexipharmick, it is not sufficient against all poison; but chiefly
napellus, and a^snick, or sublimate. Ryff. and Linscot. prefer it before
unicorns horn; though Valesius contemnes it, and Jordan preferres Earth of
Lemnos, and others; and therefore the rest is left to experience. Thus of the
oriental bezoar: now follows the occidentall, or that of Peru. which some say
is taken from all beasts there; but Baccius says from the Capricerve, Acost.
out of the stomach or belly thereof, containing 3 or 4 thereof, and are
generated of the same principles, and matter as the first, and of the same
laminate form, they also for the most part are of an ash color, with a
certain blackness, being less elaborated by heat, and compacted than the
oriental. As for taste, they have almost none. Bacc. T. they are temperate, and
not drying as other stones, and antidotes, and are rather eccoprotick than
d^aphoretick. Monard, says that the occidentall of Peru is equal to the
oriental: so Salmuth. in Pancirol. Pet. de Osma, and Wittich. As for the D.
Alvar. Torres, and Baccius give seven grains in wine, when there is no fever,
else with an ounce of sorrel water. Saxonia gives twice as much as of the
oriental. V. The occidentall bezar also, Monard. has excellent faculties,
especially in diseases of the heart, as the syncope being drunk in the
paroxisme, or a little before, in the morning, the stomach being empty, and
then in rose water, if there be a fever, or else in the water of orange
flowers, being powdered, to the q. of gr. 4. each time. Note also its more
effectual in women, than in men. It resists poisons by bitings, wounds, water,
or the like, being taken twice or thrice. It helps pestilentiall fevers, and
spotted, the quartan agues symptoms, melancholy humors, in the whole body, or
part thereof, as also the leprosy, scab, itch, St Anthonies fire, and other
vices of the skin, having a peculiar faculty against the same. It helps long
diseases, especially where there is suspicion of poison, or flatulency, being
appropriate, therefore it is good to put some grains thereof into purging
remedies, to correct, strengthen, and facilitate dejection. It kills worms,
especially in children and young people, with other elmintick remedies, giving
it in the morning, and afterward a clyster of milk and sugar: it helps the
epilepsie in children with milk, or with other things in the aged: in short we
use this stone in all long and difficult diseases, in which vulgar remedies do
little good, and that with great profit, or however without hurt, thus
Monardes. Pet. de Osma, also used* outwardly it resists poison and
intoxication, as also wounds made by venomed arrows, all which both affirm
out of their own experience: it is to be given pouderod in some liquour, as
wine, vinegar, and destilled water of borrage, buglosse, or other, according to
the disease and pleasure of the Physician. Note the Spanish are less
effectual. C. The true oriental may be known, by their form not smooth:
shells, diverse: inward hollownesse: weight, light: mixture with chalk,
tincture, and burning being laid on coals: blowing in it, friability,
liquation, and dissolution in water: blacking of the teeth: clearness of
sound, when struck to the teeth: a needle heated, being fastened to it:
fragments, crusty: magnitude, little: vomiting, being given after poison: and
by experiments on beasts: these are the signs whereby to know the true from
the adulterate; though found salt with by Sylvaticus. If any desire the whole
History thereof they may read Bauhinus, though this is the sum thereof. He
also reckons other Bezoar stones, as the Paxar, that of the Aspe, Toad, gall of
a Porsupine, the mineral of Serapio, Rabbi Moses, and Caesalpinus, that of
Hercules Saxonia, that of the Staggs tears, heart, that in a Calfes maw, in
the Roch goat, or Germanebezoar. that in a Horse, and the Arabians, and
American. Much also may be seen in Aldrovandus, who has been as serviceable as
some of the Authors aforesaid. Schrod. The oriental stone is of diverse
figures, ovall, round, and hollow within, containing a chafe, or hair, or the
like. it is of a diverse color, (most commonly a blackish green) green,
paleish, ash, or yellowish, etc. without smell, of a diverse magnitude; but most
commonly less than a walnut The adulterated are made of the fragments of the
stone and pitch, or of chalk; ashes of shells, and dry blood, or of cinabaris
antimony and qu^cksilve^, united by the, help of the fire: all which are not
only useless; but hurtful to the body the D. of the oriental is from gr. 3.
to 12. of the occidentall from gr. 6. to 20. Myl. Scal. Matthew. Caes. against
all sorts of poison, etc. and other malignant diseases.

C.
Calcedonie. Calcidonius.
P. The place is not much observed, where it is found. M. It Is between berill
and jacinth, so Lapidar. N. Carchedonius, Chalcedonius lapis.
CAlcedonie, Ru. K. as the male and female, T. V. it is commended against
symptoms from black choler, etc. some promise victory to those that have
them: being hot it draws motes unto it. C. the best are the males which shine
more bright, showing shining stars within, which are witnesses of its
excellent virtues. Campeg. those of Lotharingia, help hoarsness and clarify
the voice.

Chrysolite. Chrysolithos.
P Often in Bohemia, in India, Arabia, and Ethiopia. M. It Is of a solar nature.
N. (...). Topasius Germ. mod. Heb Tharsis.
Chrysolite. Schrod. K. as the oriental and European. T. its judged to be of a
solar nature, according to its signature. V. therefore it is thought good to
lesson night griefs, and melancholy, to strengthen the intellect, and to
prevent troublesome dreams, being hung about the neck or arm. some commend
the taking of it against the falling sickness. Ru. it helps the parts for
respiration and asthma, as also against pusilanimity, and stupidity: so Alcas.
Myl. Ru. Myl Albert. Mag. it removes folly and causes constancy of mind.
Alcas. Abuleaf. it seems of a golden color in the day, and fiery in the
night Plin. Alcas. Ru. the best is of agolden color; and that makes gold look
like silver ilaid together.

Chrysoprase. Chrysoprasus.
P. In India: so Plin. Albert. Mag. Isid: Anselm. Rib. M. Of certain drops of
gold, so Lapidar. N. (...). Lapis Chrysoprasinus.
Chrysoprase. Ru. K. as the prasoide, and chrysopteron: V. Ru. it strengthens
the heart, and helps weakness of the eyes: some count it also good against
the desire of covetousness, and say that it shows it self only in the
dark. Caes. Alcas. Arnold. and Berchor, and others, it helps the eyes to fix
upon an object. Alcas. it causes generosity. its reported to be of a pale
color in the day, and fiery in the night: So Isid. Cause. Alcas. Maiol. though
Pliny Alcasar and Solinus doubt thereof.

Coral. Corallium.
P. The red in India, and the Tyrrhene sea, the black in Spain. M. Of an
arboreous. stone, hardened by air: So Ru. Caes. N. (...). Arab. Bassad,
Morgen, besd. Corallum.
Coral. Schrod. K. as the male or red, female or pale, white, black, green,
yellowish, ash-colored, and dusk colored. T. all coral dries, cools, and
binds. V. it strengthens chiefly the heart, then the stomach and liver. it
purifieth the blood, and therefore resists the plague, poison, and malignant
fevers; also it makes a man merry; but the black makes melancholy. it
stops all fluxes of the belly, womb, and yard. It prevents the gonorrhoea,
and epilepsie in children, 10 gr. thereof being given to the infant in the
mothers milk, before the taking of any other thing, as soon as it is borne.
Outwardly it helps ulcers, filling them with flesh. it extenuates cicatrices;
it helps the eyes, and stops the weeping of the same; in collyries it
recreates the sight: the D. is scrup. 1. to drach. 1. Paracels. the bright and
shining helps against fears, fascinations, inchauntments, poisons, the
epilepsie, melancholy, and as some say against the insults of evil spirits,
and lightnings, (which every one may censure) the white hanged to the breast
helps the hemorrage of women. C. the best is the red or masculine, which is
to be understood as often as it is prescribed without mention of the color,
the next is the pale, then the white, last the black: that of other colors is
neither used, nor commonly accounted for true coral. Diosc. it meanly cools,
restrains excrescencies: it helps the cicatrices of the eyes, cleansing the
same, it stops the evacuation of blood, helps the difficulty of urine, and
lessens the spleen being drunk in water. That called antipathes, being black,
has the same virtues. Caes. coral exhilerates the heart, helps the formina,
evils of the bladder and stone, being powdered by the help of fire, and drunk
in water, so Matthew. Plin. Myl. and Ru. some say it resists tempests, as Ru.
Myl. drunk in water it causes sleep. Plin. Ru. it preventeth danger. Plin. Ru.
Bras. it helps children. Myl. hanged to the neck or arms it prevents
fascination and poisons: Bras. as also melancholy, the epilepsie, and
apoplexy. Myl. Matthew. it helps the falling sickness being taken. Matthew. Myl.
it restrains the menses, fastens the teeth, rectifieth the gummes, and helps
ulcers of the mouth, drunk it helps the dysentery, flux of sperme, night
pollutions, and stops the whites in women. Myl. being taken with hearts horn,
and rain water, it helps diverse diseases of the body, especially the worms.
Myl. Ru. being powdered and put into hollow teeth, it draws them forth,
without pain. Myl. the Chymicall oil of coral taken in the q. of scrup. 1. in
sack, helps all diseases of the parts, both inward and outward; in 5 weeks
space. it cures the falling sickness both in children and young people, as
also all fluxes, of the belly, womb, or blood, in any part. Ru. white coral
hanged to the breast, so that it may touch the stomach stops blood flowing
out of the nostrils; also it strengthens the heart and stomach, either being
taken inwardly or applied. Ru. the powder of coral makes bitter water sweet.
some say also that it helps fruits; but it is censured by Rueus. Plin. Matthew.
Bras. Ru. also many use it by way of ornament, etc. Schrod. Hartm. in Pract.
The salt of coral, made by the spirit or acid liquour of pockwood, does
mightily purify the blood in the french pocks: the D. is gr. 6. to 20. the
virtues are to be seen before. The magisterie of coral, differs not from the
salt in substance, virtues, or dose. The oil or liquour of coral, besides the
forementioned virtue of coral, does also help the stone: the D. is gr. 4. to
15. The essence and tincture, as they are of a more operose preparation, than
the salt or magistery, so also are they of more excellent virtue: the D. is 6
drops to 15. and more. The tincture of Basil, cures those that are mad, or
melancholic. Hartm. in Croll. That of Hartman, is of such virtue, that after
the repeated use thereof, it will be impossible, that any impurity should
remain in the blood of the whole body: D. it is given in fit vehicles, from 3
drops to 10. this tincture deserves to be well esteemed of by the
practitioner, by reason of its excellent virtues, as agreeing very well with
the spirits of man's, body. Hartm. in Croll. That by the spirit or water of
honey, D. is given from 4 gr. to 12. Agric. That by the phlegm of Saturn, is
an excellent cordial, and does mightily exalt the native balsame; and is of
chief use in the fears of infants, and the epilepsie, etc. the D. is gr. 3 to
5. Langel. the Holsatick tincture of coral, is good in all affections arising
from the impurity of blood. The tincture of S. Closs. is good against
contractures: the D. is drach. sem. alone. The succinate oil of coral, is
good in the epilepsie and apoplexy, the D. is 4 drops to 8. The compounded
syrup of coral, of Sr. Th. Mayerne, which is thence made, D. is given to one
spoonefull morning, and evening, long from meals: the virtues thereof may be
conjectured from those of coral and juice of barberries: it is greatly
commended in the diarrhoea, dysentery. hepatick, flux, and the restoration of
the natural faculties. hereof is made the diacorallion Pharm. Land.

Corneol. Sardius.
P. In Sardinia, Epirus and Egypt, Bohemia and Silesia. M. It Is the original
of the Amethist, so Alcas. N. (...). Sarda. Carnerina. Cornerina. Heb. Adam.
Corneolus.
Corneol. Caes. S. Epiphan. Riber. Alcas. T. V. it cures wounds that are made
by iron, and tumors. Vieg. Alcas. Riber. Aret. it causes fear in wild
beasts. Abulens. Alcas. it causes joy. Ru. it expels fear, causes
audacity, prevents dangers, stops blood flowing out of the nostrils, and
sharpneth the wit. Albert. Meg. it sticks to bords, as the iron to the
lodestone. Alcas. it is as it were, the mother and original of the amethist.
Schrod. the powder being drunk stops all fluxes of blood, and defends the
body against all poison: but it chiefly stops blood, and applied preserves
the birth. Aldrov. applied it helps hot tumors, the powder whiteneth the teeth.

E.
Emerald. Smaragdus.
P. In Scythia, Egypt, and Cyprus. M. It Is begotten of the green Jasper. N.
(...). Arab. Zamarrut. Prasinus.
EMerald. Schrod. K. as the oriental and occidentall. T. is astringent. V.
being drunk it stops all fluxes of the belly, and blood, especially the
dysentery, either arising from a sharp humor, or poison: also it cures
venomous bitings, the plague, and pestilentiall fevers: the D. is gr. 6. to
10. amongst amulets, it is commended chiefly against the epilepsie, applied to
the hip it accelerates the birth, and retains the same of to the belly, held
in the mouth it stops the hemorrhage, applied to the belly it does undoubtedly
stop all dysenteries, and flux of the hemorrhoides. Guain. it drives away
fears, and the haemitrite ague being hung about the neck. Plin. Isid. Alcas.
Riber. Ru. Caes. it does mightily recreate the eyes. Epiphan. Alcas. it is of an
acerb and bitter taste. Albert. Mag. it has an antipathie to venery, and if
near, it breaks thereby: so Pier. Cause. Myl. Alcas. Ru. it is a most present
remedy against all poisons. Albert. Ru. Alcas Myl. it is said to cause riches,
and facundity to those that keep it. Ru. it dazels the eyes of serpents.
Albert. Ru. Myl. it strengthens the memory, and helps the epilepsie, and
vertigo, being worn about the neck, or in a ring. Myl. gr. 8 therefore taken
expel poison, and hinder the falling off of the hair. also it causes good
manners, and expels vain fears. Myl. held under the tongue, it helps
toward divination. Plin. Isid. Albert. it has the greenest color of all
things, which is so constant and firm, that it is not changed by the shade,
light, or sun. Schrod. the salt or tincture of the emerauld, helps the
dysentery, and other fluxes, also diseases of the head and heart, as it is
panting, swimming, and the Paraphrentis, and melancholy. the D. is gr. 10.

G.
Granate. Granatus.
P. It is to be had and found in Ethiopia. M. The matter is not much observed.
N. Or variety of names.
GRanate. Caes. K. as the oriental and occidentall. Myl. T. it is of a terrene
and fiery substance. V. it strengthens the heart, H. it hurts the brain, and
moves the blood, and anger, Albert. it is hot and dry, and expels sadness,
being hung about the neck, or drunk, so Myl. and gteatly hinders sleep. C.
Schrod. the best are the oriental. it helps the palpitation of the heart,
resists melancholy and poison, stops the spitting of blood, and resolves
tartar in the body: so worn about the neck.

I.
Jacinth. Hyacinthus.
P. It is to be had in Ethiopia, Lufitania, and the Indies. M. Its of a purple
matter. Lapis Hyacinthinus. N. (...). Lapis hyacinthinus.
IAcinth. Schrod. K. as the oriental and european. T. V. Myl. drunk or carried
about it strengthens the heart, and is therefore used in venenate diseases,
hereof is made the confection in the London dispensatory. Ru. Alcas. Albert.
it is a most present remedy against poison, and the plague, and is therefore
worn over against the heart, as an amulet. it being cold strengthens the body
of him, that carries ^t, Albert. Alcas. Ru. Myl. it causes sleep. Myl. it is
said to cause favor and prudence, Albert. Ru. Alcas. and riches, wit, and
mirth. Albert. Alcas. also to cause acceptablenesse to straingers. Myl. if any
one infected with the plague has it, it loses its color and defends from
the same. Solin. Isid. Alcas. Maiol. Riber. put into the mouth it grows more
cold, so seems more to cool the heat thereof. Solin. Isidor. Anselm. Alcas.
Maiol. Cause. Ru. Vieg. Riber. its clear in fair weather and dull if it be foul,
Ru. Myl. Alcas. it defends from thunder. it strengthens the sight, expels
fear, removes enmity, and stops the flux of blood: so Abulens. Schrod. it has
a singular faculty against spasmes, and contractions. Querc. in ph. rest. and
as an amulet helps against the plague. The D. of the salt and magisterie, is
scrup. sem. to scrup. 1. Aldrov. being worn it prevents putrefaction in
wounds, it is used in pestilentiall fevers.

Jasper. Jaspis.
P. In India, Cyprus, Persia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia. M. Of a more impure and
terrestrial matter than Achates. N. (...). Heb. Jaholom. It. Jaspide.
Jasper. Plin. Alcas. K. as the green, sky colored, white and red, etc. and
grammatias. T. V. Myl. Ru. S. Hieron. its said to drive away all phantasmes.
Diosc. Ru. Plin. Alcas. it is used as an amulet. Alcas. it strengthens the
stomach, and diverse count it does resist witchcraft, the former is attested by
Gal. Ru. Myl. also, being worn about the neck over against the stomach, sc.
the green. Isid. Albert. Matthew. Pier. some say that it causes amity, and
preventeth dangers, all which is magical and superstitious. Albert. Matthew.
Myl. Ru. Alcas. it stops the flux of blood, and of the menses. Ru. Myl. it
stops sweating. Albert. Ru. Matthew. M^l. Alcas. being worn it rep^^sseth
venery; and luxury. Diosc. Ru. Matthew. Albert. Myl. Oribas. tied to the thigh
of those that are great, it hastens the birth. Albert. Ru. Matthew. Myl. it helps
the dropsy and fevers. Ru. Myl. by its greenness it recreates the eyes, and
cleanses them from their filth. Myl. it strengthens the heart. There are also
diverse other fabulous reports made hereof by the Ancients, as also of the rest
of the stones, which as not worth writing, may be omitted. C. the best is the
grammatias. Aldrov. it helps the epilepsie worn on the breast, and pain of the
stomach, colic, and nephritick pain.

L.
Ligurius. Ligurius.
P. The place is not much observed. M. Some say it is the matter of Lincurius.
N. The Various names are not much noted.
LIgurius. Caes. Riber. takes it for a species of carbuncle, others for the
lynxes stone. Corn. a Lap. for the jacinth. Alcasar, for amber, of which the
two last opinions are most probable, yet neither certain. As for the virtues
therefore, they are to be sought there, whereto it shall be reduced. See, Isid.
Albert. Mag. Riber. Corn. a Lap. Alcas. Maiol.

N.
Nephritick-stone. Nephriticus.
P. It Is to he had in new Spain, and Bohemia. M. The matter is not much
observed. N. (...). Lapis nephriticus.
NEphritick-stone. Myl. T. it expels the stone and gravel being tied to the
arm. Schrod. it is commended against the pain of the stomach, but especially
against the nephritick grief, as also the stone, and gravel, being hung about
the hip or neck: wherefore diverse have bracelets made thereof for this purpose.

P.
Pearl. Margarita:
P. In the shell fishes of the Sea, or ocean in persia. M. Of the celestial
dew, as some: others say as the stone in the reins. N. (...). Unio. Perla.
Arab. Lulu. Erythraeus Lapis: Gall. perle:
Pearls. Caes. Aldrovand. T. they are cold and dry. V. they dry up moisture;
so Ru. Bras. Ru. Myl. Aldrovand. they strengthen and confirm the heart. Ru.
Aldrovand. Myl. Albert. Mag. they cherish the spirits, and principal parts of
the body. Ru. Myl. Aldrovand. being put into collyries they cleanse weafts of
the eyes, and dry up the water thereof, help their filth, and strengthen the
nerves by which moisture flows into them. Ru. Aldrovand: they are very good
against melancholic griefs. Ru. Albert. Aldrovand. they help those that are
subject to cardiack passions. Ru. they defend against pestilent diseases; Myl.
and are mixed with cordial remedies. Albert. Aldrovand. they are good against
the lienterie, that is, the flux of the belly, proceeding from the sliperinesse
of the intestines, insomuch that they cannot retain the meat, but let it pass
undigested. Albert. Aldrovand. they are good against swounings. Myl. they help
the trembling of the heart, and giddiness of the head. Myl. they are mixed
with the Manus Christi, against fainting, (called Manus Christi perlata in the
London Pharmacopoea.) Myl. they are put into antidotes, or corroborating
powders. Myl. Aldrovand. they help the flux of blood. Myl they stop the terms,
and cleanse the teeth. Aldrovand. they are put into antidotes for the bowels,
and increase their virtue, make the blood more thin, and clarify that which is
more thick and feculent. Aldrovand. they help fevers, and make the teeth
white. Aldrovand. Myl. The oil of Pearls or unions helps the resolution of
the nerves, convulsion, decay of old age, frenzy, keeps the body sound, and
recovereth it when out of order. it rectifieth women's milk, and increases it,
corrects the vices of the natural parts, and seed. it cures abscesses, eating
ulcers, the cancer, and hemorrhoides. Plin. Alcas. Maiol. they ate soft in the
water, and harder after. Solin. Plin. Alcas. their whiteness decays by age:
Plin. Solin: they wax red by the sun. Myl. those taken before the full of the
moon, never decay. Schrod. they are either oriental or occidentall. C. the
best are the first sort, especially the Persian, they are an excellent
cordial, by which the oppressed balsame of life, and decayed strength are
recreated, and strengthened, therefore they resist poison, the plague, and
putrefaction, and exhilerate, and therefore they are used as the last remedy
in sick persons. The salt thereof D. is given from gr. 6. to scrup. sem. in the
water of May dew, distilled with manna, or in cinnamon and rose water, so Hartm.
in Pract. to which Paracelsus attributes extraordinary virtues. The salt or
magisterie of Pearls of Riverius, besides the former virtues, is an excellent
preservative in the joint ach. Hartm. in Pract. the D. is scrup. 1. at the
most. The virtues of the magisterie of pearls, may be known by the properties
of Pearls themselves: the D. is from gr. 6. to 15. The essence, tincture or
arcanum thereof is also thence known, as to its virtues; but it is of exceeding
strength by reason of its great subtilty. Hartm. in Croll. the D. is gr. 6. to
14. Hartm. in Croll. The arcanum by the spirit of Guajacum, or pockwood, does
mightily cleanse the blood and is of excellent virtue in the french pocks: the
D. is the same. The perlate spirit, is an excellent secret in the gout. C. the
best are the greatest, and perforated, being shining.

R.
Ruby. Rubinus:
P. In Zeilan, Calecut, and Bisnagar: with the sapphir: M. Of matter near the
sapphir. N. (...). Carbunculus. Pyropus. Apyrotus. Jacut. Ar.
RUby. Caes. K. as the white, amethistizont, sirtite, and lithizont, T. V.
Albert. Mag. Myl. Ru. it resists acreous and vaporose poison. Myl. drunk it
restrains lust, preserves the body, removes ill cogitations, strengthens
the vital spirits; resists putrefaction, and makes man prompt and cheerful.
Ru. Ruby is an amulet against fearful dreams Rueus and Causin affirm it
makes it own figure on other stones, and none on it. Albert. C. if good it
shines in the dark: so Isid. Ru. Maiol. August. some say it will not be heated
by the fire* Alcas. wax sealed therewith melts. Plin. warmed by the sun or
hand, it draws chafe to it. Plin. it shines most when lifted upwards: and
more out a door, than in the house. Schrod. being carried about one, or drunk,
it resists poison, and the plague, and drives away sadness: he also says
that if a man be in danger, it changes its color, and becomes more dim, and
when it is past recovereth the same again.

S.
Sapphire. Sapphirus.
P. In Calecut, Zeilan, and near Bohemia. M. It Is the mother of the
carbuncles, as some think. N. (...). Heb. Sapphir. Gemma gemmarum.
SApphire Schrod. K. as the oriental and occidentall, male and female: sky
colored and white. T. it is cold and dry, astringent, consolidating,
alexipharmick, cordial, and ophthalmick. V. therefore it dries up the
moisture of the eyes, helps and extinguisheth inflammations, being applied in
collyries to the upper eyelids, or with washed butter. it helps all fluxes of
the belly, the dysentery hepatick flux, hemorrhoides, and spitting of blood,
being taken with the water of plantain or tormentill. it cures inward ulcers,
or wounds, strengthens the heart, exhilerates, resists the plague, all
poison, and malignant fevers. it helps all cardiack and melancholic diseases,
being taken inwardly. The whole stone being applied to the forehead stops
the hemorrhage, and inflammations. being made up into a ball of the bigness of
a pease, and put unto the eye it removes dust, gnats, or whatsoever falls
therein: also it defends the eyes from the pocks, and other diseases. it may
be dissolved in distilled vinegar and juice of limons, and so used with any
other cordial. Sapphire drunk helps against the bitings of the scorpion: So
Diosc. Gal. Matthew. Ru. Alcas. and others. Diosc. Matthew. Ru. it is profitably
drunk against inward exulcerations, and represseth any excrescencies, haws, or
pushes in the eyes, and gleweth the broken tunicles thereof: Greg. Nyss. by
reason of its ceruleous color it refreshes wearied eyes. Albert. Mag. it
makes a man chaste, refrigerates the inward heat, represseth sweat, and cures
the pain of the forehead and tongue. Albert. Myl. it comfort and
strengthens the body, cures diseases of the skin, as the scab, or itch and
causes a good color, removes vain fear, resists melancholy, and is used in
antidotes and cordials. Ru. it resists witchcraft, and agues being applied to
the pulses. it stops blood. Albert. Ru. Myl. it helps plague sores. Albert.
Mag. Ru. it causes peaceablenesse, and vertuousnesse. Ru. it helps against
anger, envy, fraud, and sadness. Myl. it opens locks, Vieg. and being wrought
on by the sun beams, sends forth a hot lightning. there are also other
fictitious and superstitious things, mentioned hereof, which as they are not
pleasant to the writer, so neither would they be useful to the reader hereof,
and therefore are left to the further search, of those that fancy, such
fruitless curiosities.

Sardonyx. Sardonyx.
P. In Arabia and the Indies, so Barth. Aug. M. Of the corneoll, and onyx
stone. N. (...). Lapis Sardonicus:
SArdonyx: Albert. K. as the black, white, rain bow-like, and feculent. T.V.
Albert. Myl. Ru. it resists venery, and makes chaste.

Alcas. Myl. Ru. it takes away the heaviness of mind. Alcas. it is very
healthful, and makes cheerful. Alcas. Abulens. Albert. Myl. it hinders the
effects of the onyx-stone, causing sadness; fear, hatred, wars, contentions,
and terrible dreams, all which proceed from melancholy, which this stone
causes, being worn about the neck, or on the finger.

T.
Topaz. Topasius.
P. It is to he had in, and brought from Arabia, and Zeiland. M. It Is of the
kind of the Rubie and the Sapphir. N. (...). Heb. Pitdah. Gall. Topasse. Ital.
Topatio.
TOpas. Pli^. K. as the prasoide, and chrysopter. T.V. Ru. Myl. Alcas. it helps
against the lunatic passion, and varieth its virtues according to the
variation of the moon. Alcas. Abulens. Berchor. Ru. it appeaseth anger,
represseth luxury, and restrains venery. Alcas: it is good against sadness.
Alcas. Vincent. Arnold. it is good universally against noxious motions, that is,
the perturbations of evil appetites. Myl. Ru. it is reported to drive away
folly and madness, and divert sudden death. It Is good against the eruptions
of blood, therefore being applied to a wound, it presently stops the blood.
Myl. it is good against the dropsy and tabes. Plin. Alcas. it is the biggest of
all jewels. Albert Ru. Alcas. being cast into seething water it hinders the
boiling thereof, and so tempereth the fleat thereof, that the bare hand may be
presently put therein, without any hurt. Alcas. Strab. Eustach. it is of such
excellent splendour, that in the day time, it cannot be looked upon, Vincent.
Berchor. Abulens. exceeding all jewels in brightness. So Ambros. Alcas. Myl.
Vieg. Myl. Paracels. it shines in the night: some say that being rubbed upon a
whetstone of Cyprus, it produces an oil which will cure diseases in the eyes.
Aldrov. it is of a solar nature, and so strengthens the vital faculty, and
helps night fears and melancholy, as also the fluxes of blood: it helps the
asthma and pestilence, so the Chrysolite.

Stones less Precious.
A.
Alabaster. Alabastrites.
P. The best is said to be brought out of the Indies. M. Of unconcocted and
imperfect marble. N. (...). Alabastrum. Onyx. Unguis.
ALabaster. Diosc. T. discusseth. V. Gal. being drunk it helps those that are
stomachick. Caes. being burned into ashes, and mixed with rosin and pitch, it
presently discusseth hard swellings* with wax it eases the pains of the
stomach and represseth the gummes: So Schrod. outwardly it is used in the
alabaster ointment.

Amianth. Amianthus.
P. It is to be found and had in Cyprus, so Diosc. M. Some confound it with
scissil alum. N. (...). Alumen plumosum.
Amianth. Schrod. T. is cleansing. V. it cures the scab; and being dissolved
in aqua vitae and sugar, and a little thereof taken every day, it cures the
whites in women: it is also said to resist witchcraft. it is used in the citrine
ointment, and some commend it mightily against worms in children, and ulcers
in the legs. Isid. Plin. Diosc. Matthew. Brasav. Zanard. Myl. Cause. Maiol. some
say that clothes made thereof, will not burn in the fire, but become more
white. Aldrov. it dries and binds.

Armenian-stone. Armenus L.
P. In silver mines, in Armenia, and Germany. M. Of the same matter, as the
Azurestone. Fallop. N. (...). Arab. Hager, and Hagiar. Melochites.
Armenian-stone. Schrod. T. it moderately dries, and cleanses with a little
acrimonie, and light astriction. V. taken inwardly it purges melancholy
without hurt: so Myl. both upwards and downwards; but if it be washed 12 times
or oftener, it purges only downwards; therefore it is good in madness,
melancholy, and the falling sickness, etc. The D. in substance is drach. 1. to
scrup. iiii. outwardly it is mixed, in ocular remedies, and Psilothrons for the
eye lids. Caes. being cast upon the eyelids, it increases the hair thereof.

Azure-stone. Lazuli L.
P. In the veins of Gold, silver and brass. M. Of a salt and acid humor
corroding metals. N. (...). Cyaneus. Caeruleus. Stellans. Azurus.
Azure-stone. K. as the fixed, and not fixed. T. Myl. it represseth, moderately
corrodeth, exulcerates, and causes crusts. V. it exhilerateth, Ru. Myl. it
purges melancholy, refreshes the sight, and hung about the necks of children,
it drives away night-feares: and if about the necks of women that are great,
it preserves from abortion, and is therefore to be removed at the time of
delivery. Myl. some say, that it makes a man fortunate and rich: and is used
in bracelets for women. Schrod. in virtue it agrees with the Armenian stone;
but is weaker. it purges, but chiefly melancholic diseases: therefore it is
used against quartan agues, the apoplexy, epilepsie, vices of the spleen, and
many other diseases arising from melancholic juice: the D. is drach. 1. in an
alcohol, or fine powder. Boet. it is used as an amulet to prevent swounings in
women that are great. Schrod. the D. of the magistery is scrup. 1. Fierovant.
the Elixir made hereof being calcined and dissolved in aqua vitae, cures many
diseases, and malignant fevers: also it reduces the most troublesome ulcers,
almost miraculously, into a good order. The oil or liquour being applied
eases the gout, and inflammations. Hartm. in Pract. The D. of the essence or
extract thereof, is from scrup. sem. to scrup. 1. The purging Crystals, salt,
or flower hereof will increase the virtues of a panchymagogon, or other
extracts, being mixed therewith.

B.
Bloud-stone. Haematites.
P. In Germany and Bohemia: in iron mines. M. It is the matter of Iron, by
concoction. N. (...). Arab. Scedenigi.
BLoud-stone Diosc. T. it binds, gently heateth, and extenuates. V. with honey
it remooveth the cicatrices and roughness of the eyes, with woman's milk it
helps bleere eyes, ruptures, and bloody surfusions in the eyes. drunk in wine
it helps against the retention of urine. Plin. drunk it stops the fluxes
of women, and spitting of blood, with the juice of pomegranates: also it is
good in diseases of the bladder, and wounds of serpents drunk in wine. in
women's milk it helps the weeping of the eyes. Myl. cast into hot water it
cools it. some say that those that carry it, will not be hurt by the sun, and
that it keeps fruits from grasshoppers and hail, which is fond: and that
being held in the hand, it stops bleeding at the nose. Maiolus affirms that of
Pliny. Schrod. it cools, dries, gleweth, and therefore helps the ulcers of
the eyes and lungs, and stops fluxes of the womb, and belly, etc. D. the
powder is given inwardly from scrup. 1. to scrup. iiij. outwardly it is used
diverse ways. Lang^l. the powder with a diaphoretick water is given with good
success in gouts. C. the best is friable, blackish, hard, equal, and without
filth, chiefly the Spanish. Caes. waters flowing rom bloudstones, bind, and
stop fluxes of blood.

Borax. Borax.
P. In Armenia, Macedonia, and Cyprus in mines. M. Of a boys urine and nitre.
sc. the factitious. N. (...). Chrysocolla. Auri gluten, Jun.
Borax. T.V. Fallop. scrup. 1. thereof being taken in the decoction of some
heating herb, as of feaverfew, savin or the like, by women that cannot be
delivered; is a most present remedy, to bring forth the birth either alive or
dead: So Caes. The natural Borax. Diosc. purges cicatrices, restrains proud
flesh, and gently wastes the body by its biting quality, it is counted amongst
remedies, which cause vomiting, and may be lethal, so Weck.

C.
Calaminare. Calaminaris L.
P. It is to be had and found in the mines of metals. M. It Is generated of
Cadmia without the metal. N. Cadmia Lapidosa. Climia. Cathimia.
CAlaminare. Schrod. T. it gently dries, cleanses, binds, cicatrizeth, and
incarnates. V. it fills ulcers with flesh; it is used only outwardly, and
often in the excoriacions of children, being sprinkled thereon to dry them. It
is used also by copper smiths to make lattin, it causing the copper to wax
pale. S. Closs. the magisterie hereof, evacuates by vomit and stool more
gently than prepared antimonie.

Crystal. Chrystallus.
P. In India, and Asia, Scythia, Germany, and Spain. M. Of the same humor, as
the Berill and Diamond. N. (...). Heb. Zechuchith. Ital. Christallo. Gall.
Crist. l.
Crystal. Matthew. T. is astringent. V. therefore it is given being finely
powdered against the dysentery in austere wine, it stops the whites, and
increases milk in nurses: hereof may be made burning glasses serving for
cauteries. Albert. Mag. being held under the tongue. it quenches thirst; being
powdered, mixed with honey, and applied it causes milk in women: so Vincent.
Bell. Agric. it is used by witches: Brasav. it resists poison. Solin. it
serves to make cups of, as also the triangulous serving for recreation, so
Cardan. Schrod. it helps the diarrhoea, colic, choler, flux of the matrix,
breaks the stone in any part of the body, and helps the gout. Boet. Matthew.
scrup. ij. or drach. 1. of the powder thereof being given in the the oil of
sweet almonds cures those that have drunk quicksilver. Hereof is made a
nephritick salt by ebullition in the great nettle water, being fortified with
its own salt and unc. ij. of the spirit of sea salt; sc. of the calx thereof:
the D. is gr. 6. to 20. of the oil or liquour of Crystal gr. 15. to 20.
Horst. the D. of the cremor of crystal is scrup. sem. to scrup. 1. alone, or
with that of tartar, in the dropsy, and stone. C. the best for chymicall use
is the most pure and pellucid.

Cleaving-stone. Schistus.
P. In Iberia, Germany, and Bohemia. Agric. M. Some count it a species of
talch. N. (...). Iscistus Isidori.
Cleaving-stone. Diosc. T. is of the nature of the blood stone, but less
effectual. V. with women's milk it fills up hollow ulcers. Plin. it helps
against the hemorrhoids: so Caes. Aldrovand. it helps against ruptures,
thickness of the cheeks, and affections of the eyes. Pliny makes hereof with
gold a remedy against lichens, Agric. the nodes thereof serve to polish silver
withal, and bracelets.

Cocks-gizard-stone. Alectorius.
P. It is often found in the ventricle of cocks. M. It Is like dim crystal.
N. (...). It is also called Alectoria. Alectorias.
Cocks-gizard-stone. Ru. Albert. T.V. is said to provoke venery, and cause
agreement betwixt the sexes: so Myl. as also that it resists dangers, makes
unconquerable, pleasant, eloquent, constant, and that being held in the mouth
it quenches thirst. So Weck.

E.
Eagle-stone. Aetites.
P. It is found in the Eagles nest, in Germany. M. It Is made like the
Bezoar-stone. N. (...). Lapis aquilae. Gall. Pierre d'aigle.
EAgle-stone. Plin. K. as the soft containing a white clay in it, the male or
hard, having a hard stone, that of Cyprus containing sand, and the Taphiusus.
T. V. Diosc. bound to the left arm it helps against the slipperinesse of the
matrix and retains the child in the womb: the same being tied to the thigh
facilitates childbirth. Being shaken it causes a sound, having an other stone
in it: so Plin. Isid. there are two thereof found in the nest, sc. a male and a
female, without which they bring not forth. Ru. being powdered and used in a
cerot it helps the falling sickness, he says also that a thief cannot
devour any thing in which it is, Bras. those in use are the white and black or
ashcoloured. Mylius reports that the eagle brings them into her nest to
temper the heat of her eggs, least they should be too hot when sat upon.
There are also diverse other frivelous things, reported of it by diverse
authors. Schrod. it is presently to be removed after the birth, least it draw
the womb unto it. Albert. Mag. it being present, meat suspected of poison
cannot be swallowed down, until it be removed again. Aldrovand. hung about the
neck, it helps affections of the heart, melancholy, and pains, fluxes,
pleurisies, and ruptures.

F.
Fier-stone. Pyrites.
P. It is to be found in Cyprus. and Goslaria. M. It is generated of an aeriall
quality. N. (...). Lapis aerarius. Lapis luminis.
FIer-stone. Caes. Plin. K. as the golden, and silver colored. T. both of them
heat, dry, discuss, extenuate humors, and soften hard swellings. V. S.
August. Albert. being held hard in the hand it burns it, sc. the Persick.
Diosc. it purges away things hindering the eye sight, also it softens and
discusseth hardnesses. Zanard. it serves to strike fire with C. the best is
that which is like brass. Aldr. with the gum of the pine tree it dissipats
tumors, and helps fellons. it helps the morphew, lentils and moistness of the
skin with vinegar. it stops women's fluxes. Cardan. it lessens the spleen.

Flint. Silex.
P. It is to be had and found almost every where. M. It Is generated of earth
and much sulphur. N. (...). Lapis vivus, and Siliceus Caton.
Flint. Schrod. K. as the fusile, hard, white, and diaphanous. T. V. the common
may be used inwardly to incide a tartareous mucilage, dissolve the stone, and
open obstuctions: outwardly it is often used in dentifrices The D. of the Salt
thereof is from. gr. 6. to 20. Of the ^ile scrup. 1. Caes. waters flowing by
flints, and other stones caused by cold, are for the most part too cold and
crude, and slowly descend being drunk.

G.
Geodes. Geodes.
P. It Is to be had in Misnia and Saxony, so Weck. M. Some count it a third
species of Aetites. N. (...). Lapis geodes.
Geodes. Caes. Diosc. T. it binds and dries. V. it clears and removes
whatsoever offends the sight: it being applied with water helps the
inflammations of the dugs and genitals. So Weck. Galen. Aldrovand. Some also
affirm that it preserves the conception, and accellerates the birth being of
the matter of the Eagle stone, and being found in a glutinous earth,
notwithstanding it is denied by many.

I.
Irish-slat. Hybernicus.
P. It Is brought out of Ireland, and is much used. M. It Is matter is not much
observed. N. Lapis hyberniae. Lapis hybernicus.
JRish-slat. T.V. it is often used against bruises, and after the travail in
women, in steed of sperma ceti, called parmacity: It Is much commended by some,
as very effectual against quartam agues: as for the way of taking it, it may
be in posset drink, or some other convenient liquour.

Jewes-stone. Judaicus.
P. It is to be had in Judea, and Silesia. M. Of a friable and striate matter.
N. (...). Arab. Hager alieudi. Tecolithos, Phenicites. Syriacus Aet.
Jewes-stone. Diosc. T.V. The quantity of a cich pease being grated by a
whetstone put into unc. iiiij. of warm water, and drunk, opens the stoppages
by the stone* and breaks the stone of the bladder; yet as to this Galen says
it does little; but is very effectual as to the other, so Bras. Caes, and Myl.
Schrod. Some distinguish the sex hereof, and call the less females, serving
against the stone in the bladder; and the greater males of which some are long,
and about the bigness of the little finger, serving to expel the stone of the
reins, and difficulty of urine. Qu^rc. ph. R. the D. of the magistery is a few
gr. Caes. waters flowing from it help the stone.

L.
Limestone. Calcarius.
P. It is found and had in diverse places in England. M. It is almost like
marble. N. (...). Arab. Herach, Nure. Gall. Chaux.
Limestone. Schrod. T. is fiery, biting, burning, and in progress of time
causes crusts, sc. the quick. V. being washed it dries without biting, and is
therefore good against troublesome ulcers, sc. the venereous; as also against
burnings, and other sores, that will not be easily cured. The lie thereof
serves to wash putrid wounds withal, and to make ophthalmick waters of. The
spirit is a great arcanum, in wasting and eradicating the stone, of whatsoever
kind, or in whatsoever place it be: it is also used by apothecaries to dissolve
crystal, crabs eyes, and the most hard stones: so Kesl. Basil. in Rep. l. p.
it fixes mineral volatile spirits. Caes. waters flowing by lime stones, do not
a little corrode, and dry, yet without biting. Aldrovand. being mixed with
vinegar and oil of roses it cicatrizeth ulcers: the powder with hogs grease,
rosin, and honey helps the kings evil, when washed it loses its biting, but
yet dries, and is used with oil and wax to cicatrize. with vinegar and oil
of roses it cures burnings. when alive mixed with soap it is used as a
potentiall cauterie. the water thereof helps fistula's, cancers, and redness
of the eyes with rain water, and armoniack salt.

Lodestone. Magnes.
P. About Iron mines, in Germany, Italy, and Norway. M. Of all mixtures of
stones with a metallic matter. N. (...). Heracleus, Herculeus, Nauticus lapis,
Sideritis.
Lodestone. Caes. T. is attractive. V. Port. Ru. it draws out the iron of
arrows sticking in wounds, Albert. Mag. Port. Ru. Myl. it being drunk draws
all humidity out of the body, causing a dropsy. Port. being applied to the
head it helps all griefs thereof. Myl. being drunk it looseneth the belly,
and thick humors: also some think that being taken in a small quantity, it
preserves youth. Plin. Ru. it is used in remedies for the eyes, helping the
watering thereof. being burned and powdered it helps adustions. Gal. it has
the virtue of the Haematite: Diosc. therefore some boil it, and sell it for
the same. Schrod. it binds and stops thick and melancholic humors; yet
it is seldom used. Some make a plaster thereof burnt, and wax, and commend it
mightily as helping the pain of the gout. it may be corroborated, being
cemented with live lime, and a gentle fire, if often quenched in the solution
or oil of Mars. C. The best is that of the color of iron. Barth. Ang. it is
hot and dry 30. Aldrov. it helps the gonorrhaea in women. applied it helps
those that are wounded by poysonsome weapons, it is used in the weapon salve.

Lynx-stone Lyncis L.
P. In Germany, Borussia, Pomerania, and Helvetia. M. It is generated of the
Lynxes urine. N. (...). Belemnites. Dactylus Idaeus. Lyncurius.
Lynx-stone. Caes. T. V. it helps the pain of the reins, and cures the
jaundise. Plin. it helps the stone. Diosc. drunk in water it helps the stomach,
and flux of the belly. Schrod. it helps against the stone, as that of the
Jews, cures wounds, and helps against the pleurisy. some think, that being
drunk it helps against the night mare, and fascinations. as for the smell it
is unpleasant, some say it helps the travail in women.

M.
Man's bladder-stone. Humanus L.
P. In the bladder of man, sometimes in the reins. M. Of a tartareous, salt,
terrene, and feculent matter. N. (...). Ludus. Lapis vesicae. Arenulae.
Man's bladder-stone. Schrod. T. V. it is very good against the tartar in all
parts of the body; and to dissolve the greater stones, expel them, and to
remove obstructions thence arising. Hartm. in pract. Senn. Inst. the D. of the
essence is gr. 5. to 12. every day in some convenient liquour.

Marble. Marmor.
P. In Italy, and Germany: and other places. M. Of a well concocted matter. N.
(...). Ophites. Serpentinus. Gall: Marbre.
Marble. Schrod. K. as the white, red, black, and various colored. T. V. the
ophite applied helps pains of the head, and wounds of serpents. those that have
lines help the lethargy and pains of the head, as also the spotted fever.
Gal. (according to signature) taken inwardly it is lithontriptick: some say
that a cup thereof, having wine therein that is poisoned shows it by sweat.
it helps the colic, pleurisy, pains of the belly, and cold stomach, pain
of the gout, and nephritick pain; being applied to the part affected. the cup
thereof helps tertian and quartan agues, the phthisicall and hepatick, being
daily used. Gal. Caes. it has a breaking and extersive faculty, as also
glass. Aldrovand. their waters are cold, keep in the natural heat, and help
sterility that is caused by the laxity of the womb, globes of the serpentine
marble help the heat of fevers being handled, and breakings forth, by heat.

O.
Ostiocolla. Ostiocolla.
P. In the Palatinat, Saxony, and Silesia, like coral. M. It grows on the
sand like coral. N. Ossifragus, Sabulosus, Ostrites, Osteolithos, Holosteus,
Morochtus Matthew.
OStiocolla Schrod. T. is glutinative. V. it speedily gleweth broken bones,
presently yielding matter, fit for a callus and so hastens conglutination: the
D. is drach. 1. to drach. 1. sem. outwardly it is used in cataplasmes, and
plasters, etc. Aldrovand. broken bones being put into their places, and tied
up, it heals them, using outwardly the ointment made of the roots of cranes
bill with axunge, some also use it with red wine, also it dries and binds
without acrimony. it helps poison and the plague.

P.
Phrygian-stone. Phrygins.
P. It is to be found and had in Phrygia, and Arabia. M. It Is generated of a
pumicose earth. N. (...). Lapis Phrygiae.
PHrygian-stone. Diosc. T. is very astringent and purges. V. it causes crusts
after the manner of fire. with wax it helps burnings. Plin. Isid. Maiol. it
serves for the dying of garments. Gal. it dries mightily; and is profitable
against putrid ulcers, and for the eyes. It Is washed as Cadmia.

Plaster. Gypsum.
P. Almost every wherein Hetruria, and other places. M. It Is of a crustaceous
matter. N. (...). Arab. Gepsim, seu giepsin. Gall. Plastre du gips.
Plaster. Caes. T.V. waters coming therefrom, are like those of limestone, and
if much thereof be therein, it causes death, Agric. Theophrast. fullers use it
in stead of fullers earth. in physic it dries and is emplastick, therefore
applied it stops bleeding with the white of an egg: when burnt it dries
more, and is less emplastick. Aldrov. it stops sweat and blood.

Pumeise-stone. Pumex.
P. It is found and to be had in Germany. M. It Is generated of earth torrified.
N. (...). Arab. Tanech. Lapis bibulus. It. Pumice.
Pumeise-stone. Schrod. T. cools, dries, and extenuateth. V. it gently
cleanses ulcers, fills and helps cicatrices. the powder is often used in
remedies for the eyes, and privities: it is used also in dentifrices, or
powders to cleanse the teeth, and sternutatories, or those that provoke
sneezing. C. the best are the white and lightest, most spongious, and dry,
easily poudered, and not sandy, when rubbed. Aldrovand. it is used to extirpate
hairs, and in remedies that help ringwormes. Theophrast. the powder being
taken hinders drunkenness except a very great quantity of beer be taken
after it. when burnt it is to be washed as cadmia.

S.
Samos-stone. Samius lapis.
P. It is brought from the Isle of Samos. M. It Is found in the earth of Samos.
N. (...). Lapis Insulae Samos.
SAmos-stone. Diosc. T. is cold and astringent. V. being drunk it helps those
that cannot contain their meat in their stomach; yet it dulleth the sense.
with milk it helps the fluxions of the eyes, and ulcers with milk, being
applied it hastens the birth, and preserves the conception. Plin. it helps the
vertigo, and commotion of the mind: some also use it against the falling
sickness, and difficulty of urine: Isid. it serves to polish-gold with, Myl.
C. the best is hard, and white: so Caes.

Smyris. Smyris:
P. It Is found where the earth of Samos is. M. It Is found in the earth of
Samos. N. (...). Ital. Smeriglio. Hisp. Esmeril.
Smyris. Caes. Diosc. T. wastes and consumes. V. it is therefore used in
plasters for the same purpose. it helps the moisture of the gums, and is used
in dentifrices. Matthew. the powder thereof serves to polish gemmes withal, and
all sorts of arms: it is so hard also that it serves to cut glass, as the
diamond does. Gal. it is abstersive, as appears by its cleansing of the teeth.

Spectacle-stone. Specularis.
P. In Muscovie, Spain, Turing, and Misnia. M. It Is near unto gypsum. N.
Selenites, Alumen Scaiolae, Matthew.
Spectacle-stone. Schrod. T. V. it is very seldom used, and then, to whiten
women's faces, and take away wrincles. Caes. before burned it is used with
commendation, against the dysentery, being drunk in austere wine: being burned
it is like gypsum, and choaketh those that take it. Aldrovand. the powder helps
the epilepsie, dysentery, hemorrhoids, and fluxes of urine; the powder helps
fistula's, and is used in dentifrices.

Spunge-stone. Spongites.
P. It is to be had in the places where sponges are. M. Of the concrescency of
the seawater. N. (...). Lapis spongiae. Cysteolithos.
Spunge-stone. Schrod. T. extenuates without much heat. V. it is good to break
the stone of the reins and bladder, it serves also to discuss the kings
evil, sc. a draught of a man's own urine being drunk every morning, and
afterward in the last quadrature of the moon, it being taken every day in
wine, with common salt, sal gemme, and tartar.

T.
Talch. Talcum.
P. It is to be had in, and brought from Venice, and Muscovie. M. It Is
generated of a pellucid matter. N. Stella terrae. Phengites, Constant.
TAlch. T.V. it is most used outwardly, as in cosmeticks; yet it cannot be used,
unless freed from its vinculum, being prepared, and reduced into liquour. C.
the best is the greenish, and that of Venice, or Moscovie. Hartm. in Crol. The
distilled or cosmetick oil thereof, serves to anoint the hands with, after
washing in vinegar: some say that if the face be very well washed, that the
fucus thereof will last a month. The liquour of S. Closs. consumes the
freckles and spots of the face, and whiteneth the skin, but it must not long
remain thereon least it corrode the epidermis, or outward skin. S. Closs.
The cremor thereof serves also to whiten the face. The tincture is a
preservative against the plague: D. gr. 6. being taken every day. Aldrov. Aver
the stone is cold, and temperately dry; but less than other earths or lutes.
Matthew. it strangles like gypsum, it binds, stops bleeding, fluxes, the
homerrhoids, and abscesses, and helps the itch, and ulcers.

Unicorne-stone. Unicornu sos.
P. In Germany, Moravia, Silesia, and Saxony. M. Of marle irrigated by a
subterraneous petrifying water. N. Cornu fossile. Ebur fossile. Ceretites
lapis.
VNicorne-stone. Schrod. T. for the most part they dry, and bind. V. therefore
they stop fluxes of the belly, gonorrhoea's, whites, the bleeding at the nose,
and hemorrhoides: and if the smell be sweet, they are pleasant to the heart,
strengthen it, and help the falling sickness. used outwardly they cicatrize
ulcers, and in collyries stop the watering of the eyes. Aldrovand. it helps
against all poisons, drach. 1. or scrup. iiij. of the powder being taken in
cardiack water, or in wine if there be no fever, it causing sweat, and driving
the poison outward: also it helps the syncope and other affections of the
heart, scrup. 1. being taken, having the virtue of the earth of Lemnos.

W.
Whetstone. Cos.
P. In Germany, Saxony, Cyprus, and Misnia. so Encel. M. Its matter is not
much observed. N. (...). Lapis naxius. Coticula. Acone.
VVHetstone. Weck. T. that which comes off from it by whetting, T. is styptick.
V. it stops the falling off of the hair, and causes it. to grow when fallen
off. it keeps down the breasts of women, or virgins: being, drunk with vinegar
it consumes the spleen and cures the epilepsie; so Dioscorides, and Wecker.
Aldrovand. the powder is cooling: that of the oleary whetstone, is of an
extersive virtue, therefore it is counted good against the alopecia, it is used
also by smiths, mowers, barbers, and by all men to sharpen tools withal, as
it is sufficiently known.

Stones less used in Physic.
STones less used in Physic. Caes. are the Antachates, which being burned
smells like myrrh: so the Aromatites, and Myrrhites. The Zanthena smells
sweet: so the Baptes, and Atizoe. The Libanochron is bituminous. The
Catochites, sticks to the hand, and draws all beasts after it, being
burned: all these are bituminouse. Asbestes, being once fiered cannot be
extinguished: so Isid. August. Maiol. Zanard. Myl. Selenites increases in its
candor according to the moon. So Plin. August, Isid. Diosc. Matthew. Zanard.
Maiol. Cause. Myl. Dionysius, being powdered and drunk in water causes a taste
of wine, and resists drunkenness: So Plin. Maiol. Cause. Thracius, is kindled
by water, and extinguished by oil; so Plin. Diosc. Myl. Plin. Gal. the stinck
thereof drives away wild beasts. Scyrus, swimmeth being whole, and sinketh
when broken, so Isid. Plin. Cause. Maiol. Albert. Mag. Arabicus, being burned is
used in dentifrices, and helps the hemorrhoids so Plin. Myl. Diosc. Gal. it
dries and cleanses. Memphites, being powdered and applied with vinegar to
places that are to be cut or burned, makes them to be so stupid, that they
cannot perceive the pain; so Isid. Diosc. Myl. Sarcophagus, consumes dead
bodies within eleven days, being, laid therein, sc. all but the teeth: so
Plin: Isid. Albert. Mag. Androdamas, restrains the wrath and rage of men; so
Plin. Albert. Mag. and draws silver or brass to it, so Isid. Galactites,
being powdered yields a kind of milkie juice, it causes milk in nurses, being
worn by children it causes spittle; so Plin. Maiol. it helps distillations of
the eyes, and ulcers being applied; but by reason of it is glutinosnesse, it is
to be kept when powdered in water in a leaden vessel; so Diosc. being worn it
helps the birth; so Myl. Mytridas, being shined on by the sun, shines with
variety of colors. Phengites is used as the specular stone, so Plin. Isid.
Cause. Chernites. preserves bodies from corruption, contrary to that of the
Asian stone, consuming all things, and reducing them into ashes; so Cause.
Ostracites, serves in stead of the pumis-stone to smooth the skin, being drunk
it stops blood; and applied with honey, cures ulcers, and pains of the
dugs; so Plin. as also inflammations, and eating ulcers, and causes sterility,
being drunk 4 days after the birth, so Diosc. Myl. Gal. it is very drying,
Smyris is used in plasters, to consume and eat; it helps moist gumms, and is
used in dentifrices, so Diosc. The powder serves to polish Jewels with, and
arms, also it serves to cut glass, as the adamant, so Matthew. it is very
abstersive; so Gal. Tusculanus, breaks being in the fire, so Isid. Sabinus
yields a light with, oil, so Isid. Sifnius, being heated with oil, waxes
black and hardens. Plin. Thebaicus is used in collyries; so Plin. Asius, is
salt, it helps the gout of the legs being held in a vessel thereof, mixed with
copper it helps vices of the dugs, and botches with pitch or rosin, also it
discusseth waxing kernels, and helps the bitings of beasts; so Plin. it gently
biteth and binds, the powder eats flesh, and extenuates, being used in
baths, in stead of nitre; so Diosc. Melitites, operates as the Lactarius; so
Diosc. Myl. being powdered it yields a sweet and hony-like juice, and being
mixed with wax, it helps eruptions of phlegm, spots of the body, and
exulcerations of the jaws, so Plin. Morochthus, is used by linen drapers to
whiten garments; also it stops spitting of blood: with water it helps pains of
the bladder, and stops destillations. Thyites, is very corrosive, and it
chiefly purges, those humors that hurt the eyes, so Diosc. Gal. Assyrius, is
used for an amulet, and being tied to the thighs of those that are great, it
facilitates childbirth, so Diosc. Tiburones, powdered, help the difficulty of
urine, and stone of the reins and bladder, the taste is insipid, so Myl.
Caymanus, helps the quartain ague, being bound to the temples; so Myl. Myexis,
or that of the toad, being worn helps the pains of the reins, inflammations
of the dugs, and generation of the stone; also it helps diseases of the
stomach, and fevers, and venomous wounds, so Myl. Chelidonius, being worn
under the left at me, helps old diseases, lunacie, epilepsies, madness, and
languishing, so drunk; also it makes pleasant and grateful, sc. the red. The
black helps against hurtful humors, anger, and fevers, also it causes good
success, and helps the pains of the eyes, being powdered and used in water:
so Myl. Ru. Malauar, held in the mouth in a certain leaf helps hunger; so
Maiol. Glass, is pleasant for the sight; so Maiol. Turchois, strengthens and
preserves the sight; so Ru. Myl. is defends from hurt, so Ru. Myl. Albert.
it strengthens and comforts the heart; so Myl. Ru. and causes mirth and
prosperity. used by the unchaste it loses its color and virtue, so Myl. there
are also other fabulous relations made hereof. Anthracites is quenched by fire,
and burns with water, so Isid. Cause. Hexecontalithus, hurts the nerves, and
weak eyes: so Albert. Liparia, being burned, draws all beasts to it, so
Plin. Cause. Mynda^, drives away wild beasts, and defends from them, so Cause.
Spinus, Smarillus and Maritha, being together and sprinkled with water, do
burn; so Aristot. Maiol. Nymphaeus is kindled by water, so Plin. Maiol.
Zanard. Droselitus, sweateth, being put to the fire. Ephestites, by the sun
fireth a dry matter, worn before the heart it hinders sedition, and the fury
of wild beasts, and being cast into boiling water it makes it cold; so Isid.
Plin. Maiol. Albert. Mag. Absicthus, being once heated, continues so 7 days,
so Plin. Isid. Maiol. Zanard. Albert. Jonis, being heated draws chafe, etc.
to it: so the Charchedonius; so Plin. Maiol. Enhydros, sweateth as if there was
a fountain in it, so Isid. Maiol. Solin. Thyrrhaeus, swimmeth being whole, and
sinketh when broken: so Plin. Maiol Sagda, swimmeth on the top of the water, so
Plin. Solin. Isid. Maiol. Catochites is glutinous; so Solin. Plin. Maiol.
Cinaedia, shows the change of the sea, by its cloudie color, or
tranquillity, so Plin. Isid. Ceraunia is said to help against lightning, so
Solin. Isid. Zanard. Plin. Phlegontis, seems to have a flame within it: so
Plin. Isid. Chrysolampis, seems to be of a golden color in the day, and
fiery in the night, so Isid. Solin, Plin. Chrysocolla, is said to attract Gold;
so Isid. Plin. Siderites, causes discord; so Plin. Isid. Eumeces, laid under
the head, causes many apparitions in the night, so Plin. Gasidanes conceives,
in three months space, so Plin. Judica, yields a purple sweat, so Plin.
Paeantides, are great, bring forth, and help women to be delivered; so Plin.
Diacodos, being laid on a dead man, does so loose its virtue, that it seems
to fear death* so Albert. Mag. Galaricides, is of the nature of galactites.
Garachides, makes amiable. so Albert. Gecolitus being powdered and drunk in
water, breaks the stone, and brinketh it out of the reins and bladder, so
Albert. Kacabres, is said to cause eloquence, and help the dropsy; so Albert.
Medius helps the gout, so Albert. Nuse found in the head of a toad, if held in
the hand, burns it when poison is present; so Albert, Peranites is said to
conceive and bring forth at a certain time, and therefore helps those that
are great, so Albert. Quiritia, found in the nest of a lapwing, is said to
discover secrets, being laid upon the breast, when a sleep: So Albert.
Quandros, causes milk, and helps against dainger, so Albert. Mag. Suetinus
being rubbed draws chafe, if worn, it causes chastity, drives away
serpents, and facilitates the birth, so Albert. Virites, if not gently handled,
it burns the hand: So Albert. Mag. But these are the fri^olous and
superstitious virtues, that many of the Ancients attribute to stones, which are
not here related, as if credited; but rather to satisfy the curious reader by
way of Syntagmaticall Hystory. Toad-stone, by gentle stroaking or touching
takes away, the swelling, inflammation, or pain from any wound, made by
venomous creatures, and presently draws out the poison. The same if true, and
held near unto a toad, she will presently proffer to take it, so Weck. it may
be got, by putting a toad into a perforated purse, and so leaving her in an
emmet hill, to be devoured. Snakes-stone, Holler, being bound to the belly of
one that has the dropsy, it dries and drinks up the water thereof, it is
got by hanging a water snake up by the tail over a vessel of water, and after
some hours or days he is reported to vomit a stone for that purpose. Diamond,
is the hardest of all stones, it helps against fears in the night,
melancholy, and adust choler, it is reported to strengthen the heart, and make
those undaunted that wear it; yet unfortunate. Millstone, Aldrovand. Hippoc. is
used to cause conception, it hinders the violence of milk, being powdered and
mixed with rosin, it is used as a cataplasme, and it is used against hard
choerades, Paulus substituteth it, in the stead of the fire stone; who against
the dysentery, heated a piece of a millstone, putting the baked leaves of leeks
thereon with vinegar for use. Glossopetra, Aldrovand. diverse authors commend
it for diverse purposes, some against witchcraft, others against poison, which
they affirm sweateth in the presence thereof, though Boethius denies it.
Gesner commends it against intoxications, others compare the virtues thereof
to those of bolus, and burned ivory, it being found in a very dry earth, and
for the most part in the mines of bole; as also to those of the Rhinoceros, and
it is much commended against dangerous fevers, and to expel the small-pocks.
furthermore it helps against worms, more than bezoar, there being nothing
that more resists putrefaction, it being of a most dry nature. Chelonites, is
of the nature of toad-stone, so Aldrov. as also of the belemnites and snakes
eggs, therefore some say that it helps against lightning, and poison, the first
being said to sweat when poison is present, and the other causing sleep and
victory, etc. Encel. it has the same virtue, as ostracites, Marbod. the
magicians thought that being held under the tongue it caused them to foretell
things to come. Trochites, Agric. Aldrov. as also Entrochos, have great
affinity to the loadstone, and being poudered, and taken with warm water
helps the difficulty of urine, and breaks the stone of the bladder and
reins, and performs the other effects of the Jewes-stone. Ammites, Aldrov. it
being bound to the arm on the grieved side, does not only ease the pain of
the reins, but breaks and expels the stone also, being of the nature of
the nephritick stone. Ammochrysus, Aldrov. being powdered serves only to dry
up ink in writings, and is therefore called writers dust. Sand-stone, is very
dry says Aldrovand, sticking to the tongue like Armenian earth, and may be
used in stead thereof, therefore Erastus says it was much used in Germany.
it is commended against fractures, being made into a plaster, with oil of
roses, myrtles, or mastick with a little wax, taking drach. 1. of the powder
morning and evening in some liquour, it so used, curing in few days.
Astroites, Aldrov. Ficin. being every day moistened with vinegar and worn, it
will preserve from poisons, and mightily exhilerate the vital spirits, others
say that being worn it defends from wild beasts, drives away pestilent
fevers; and spiders out of the room. Plin. it causes secundity. Bapt. Port.
being worn it drives away night fears, others say, that being worn about
the neck it greatly helps the epilepsie and apoplexy, and may then also be
used inwardly. the powder being drunk by those that are melancholic,
strengthens the principal parts, and helps the vertigo* also gr. 4. thereof
taken prevent the infection of the plague, and kill worms. Crucifer, Aldrov.
some affirm, that being worn upon the grieved part, it helps the nephritick
grief, and iliack passion, being as a most precious amulet. Boet. being worn
upon the skin it stops bleeding in any part, and causes much milk, also
it cures all agues, and is by some commended against phantasmes. Variolatus,
Aldrov. Patrit. being worn about the neck, so that it may touch the skin, it
draws out the ichor of the small pocks to the skin, and presently freeth
from the danger thereof, which some say it does by signature: also applied to
the eyes, or other parts it defends them from the hurt thereof. Prasius,
Aldrov. is commended against dimnesse of the eyes, Albert. Mag. it has the
virtues of the Jasper, and Emerald. some say it recreates the vital spirits.
Market. it loses it is greenness when poison is present, which cannot be
restored, except by much washing. Malachites, Aldrov. some report that being
used it keeps from lightning, petturbation of the mind, contagion, fears,
and witchcraft, and it is therefore hung about the necks of children, also it is
used as an amulet against the syncope, pains, rupture, and falls; the powder
drunk with milk helps the colic, heart-ach, by purging, gr. 6. thereof
serving in stead of antimonie, so Boet. the same drunk with a little honey
provokes the terms, and cures spasmes being applied with a moist linen
cloth. mixed with aqua vitae it cures virulent ulcers. Crat. being applied to
the stomach, it strengthens it, and agrees therein with jasper, so used.
Heliotropium, Aldrov. it has very great affinity to the Jasper, and is
therefore thought to have the virtues of the same, it resists poison, and
stops bleeding in any part. Boet. being worn, it hinders the generation
of the stone, helps the concoction of the stomach, and epilepsie. Marbod. it
was thought formerly to help to foretell things, and make invisible him that
wore it, which is both superstitious and fabulous. Ageratus, Aldrov. Gal. it
was formerly used by Carriers, being of an astringent and digestive faculty.
Alabandina, Aldrov. is used in the making of glass. Aphroselinus, Aldrov. is
corrupted by showers, it shines like Crystal, and may be cleft thinner than
writing paper. Adarce, Gal. is very sharp and hot, and is to be used outwardly
only mixed with other things, that may correct its violence, and so it helps
the leprosy, morphew, and other cutaneous affections. So Plin. Camphora.
Aldrov. some count it cold and dry 3o, others hot and dry 2o, and some of a
mixed quality, and therefore extol it both in hot and cold diseases. Rhasis
counts it of cold, moist, and thin parts: but Platearius cold and dry 4o,
therefore the very smell thereof is thought to hinder venery, and to provoke
sleep; but it is rather hot, sharp, and aeriall, and bitter, Gal. and easily
takes fire, therefore Mauritanus counts it hot and dry 2o. yet it cures
burnings by attracting the hot and fiery attoms. V. Avic. it helps the
concoction of the stomach and liver, cutteth phlegm, discusseth flatulencies,
and causes watching; but other authors attribute the contrary faculties unto
it. Aldrov. it helps hot head aches, inflammations, the crysipelas, and
burnings, sc. by drawing out the heat by the tenuity of it is parts, therefore
Fuchsius substitutes the flowers of water lillies, plaintain, or semper vive.
also taken with succinum it helps the gonorrhoea and flux of the womb, and used
to the forehead it stops bleeding with the water of plantain. it is used in
collyries also against lippitude, and causes sleep used both inwardly and
outwardly, and whiteness of the face: so the oil chiefly. Jodoc. also it
helps the heat of the liver, headache, poisons, pestilence, and prevents
putrefaction. Fren. the oil helps against putrefaction, fits of the mother,
passions of the heart, etc. a few drops being taken in any liquour, and
anointed on the breast, or the fume may be taken at the mouth. Merul. with a
like q. of pure powder of brimstone, and wax; it makes a candle that will not
be put out by any weather. Lapi^ Vulturis, see in my Panzoology, so Lapis
Cancrorum. Carpionis. Aldr. the powder helps the hemmorhage, having an
astringent faculty. Melanteria, Aldrov. is astringent as mysy: exceeding all
astringent remedies by its tenuity. Lodestone, Kirch. has the same faculty as
Iron, helps the spleen, and dropsy in mulse: worn about the neck, it helps
the spasme, and pains of the nerves: held in the hand it is said to accelerate
the birth. It is to be kept being hanged up, that it may have its natural
position, and to be fed with steel filings, it is to be preserved from things
that are greasy, being wrapped in a purple cloth. There are diverse other
nautick and mechanic uses thereof, but as not belonging to this purpose they
are here omitted, and the rest may be seen amongst the rest of the stones, in
the precedent Alphabet.

FINIS.
AN INDEX Containing the Latin Names of such Living Creatures, and Mineralls,
as are mentioned in this Book, in Alphabetical order, together with their
English Names.
Tetrapodologia. Of four-footed Beasts.
A.
AGnus, Lamb. Alce, Elke. Aper, Boar. Aries, Ram. Asinu^, Ass.
B.
BIson, vid. Taurus. Bos, Cow. Bubalus, Bugill. Bufo, Toad. Butrones, vid.
Taurus.
C.
CAbim, vid. append. Cajotl, vid. append. Camelus, Camel. Canis, Dog. Capra,
Goat. Capreolus, Roe-buck. Capricerva, Capricerve. Carygueja, vid. append.
Castor, Beaver. Catus, Cat. Catus Zibethi, Sivet Cat. Cervus, Heart. Chamaeleon,
Chameleon. Crocodilus, Crocodile. Cuniculus, Cony.
D.
DAms, Buck. Danta, vid. append. Dromedarius, vid. Camelus
E.
ELephantus, Elephant. Equus, Horse. Erinaceus, Hedghogg.
G.
Glis, Dormouse. Gulo, Gulion.
H.
Hoedus, Kid. Hippopotamos, Sea Horse. Hircus, Hee-goate. Hystrix, Porcupine.
Hyaen^, Hyena.
I.
IBex, Ibex. Ichneumon, Ichneumon. Iguana. vid. append. Izquiepotl. vid.
append.
L.
LEo, Lion. Lepus, Hare. Lupus, Wolf. Lutra, Otter. Lynx, Linx.
M.
MOschius, Musk-cat. Mulus, Mule. Mus, Mouse. Mus Alpinus. vid. Mus. Mus
araneus, Shrew. Mustela, Weasell.
O.
ORyx, Oryx. Ovis, Sheep.
P.
PAnthera, Panther. Putorius, Fitch.
R.
RAngifer, Rainger. Ranunculus, Frog. Rhinoceros, Horned-Snout. Rupicapra,
Rock-Goat.
S.
SCincus, Scinck. Sciurus, Squirrell. Simia, Ape. Sorex, Rat. Sus, Sow.
T.
Tajibi, vid. append. Talpa, Mole. Tamandua, vid. append. Tatus, vid. append.
Taurus, Bull. Taxus, Badger. Testudo, Tortise. Tigris, Tiger. Tlacaxolotl. vid.
append.
V.
VErvex, Weather. Vicunas. vid. Capricerva. Vitulus, Calf. Viverra, Ferret.
Uncia, Ounce. Unicornu, Unicorn. Upalim, vid. append, Ursus, Bear. Urus. vid.
Taurus. Vulpes, Fox.
Ornithologia. Of Birds.
A.
ACacalotl. vid. append. Accipiter, Hawk. Achalalactli. vid. append. Atragen,
Heath-Cock. Aiaia. vid. append. Alauda, Lark. Alcedo, King-fisher. Amalozque.
vid. append. Anas, Duck. Anser, Goose. Apos, Martinet. vid. append. Aquila,
Eagle. Ardea, Heron. Arquata, Curlne. vid. append. Arquatulae terr. Stone
Chatters. v. append. Asteria, Bitter. Avis Day. vid. append. Aura. vid.
append.
B.
BRanta, Barnicle. Buteo, Buzzard.
C.
CArduelis, Gold-Finch. Cariama, vid. append. Cleonia, Stork. Coccothraustes,
Clotbird, v. ap. Cocoi. vid. append. Columba, Pigeon. Cornix, Craye. Corvi
leguminales, Rooks. v. ap. Corvus, Crow. Corvus aquat, vid. Mergus, Coturnix,
Quail. Cozquauktli. vid. append. Cuculus, Cuckoo. Curicaca. vid. append.
Cygnus, Swan.
E.
ERythropodes, Red-shanks. vid. append.
F.
FEdoa, Godwit. vid. append. Ficedua, Colemouse. Flamenco, vid. append. Fulica,
Coote.
G.
GAlgulus, Yellow-hammer. vid, append. Gallina Corylorum, Moore-Hen. Gallinago,
Woodcock. Gallus etc. Cock. etc. Glottides, Gluts. vid. append. Graculus, Jay.
vid. append. Grus, Crane. Guarauna. vid. append.
H.
HAliaetus, Osprey. vid. app. Hirundo, Swallow. Hoactzin, vid. append.
I.
JAcacintli, vid. append. Jaribuguacu, vid. app. Jynx, Hickwal, vid. append.
L.
LArus, Sea Mew, vid. app. Luscinia, Nightingale.
M.
MAguari, vid. append. Mareca, vid. append. Mayae, vid. append. Meleagris,
Turkey. Mergus, Cormorant. Merops, Woodpecker, vid. append. Merula, Blackbird.
Milvus, Kite. Monedula, Jackdaw, vid. append. Motacilla, Wagtaile, vid. append.
N.
NOctua, Owl.
O.
OChropodes, Smirings, vid. app. Oriclus, Wi^wall, vid. append. Ossi-fragus,
Ossi-frage, vid. ap.
P.
PAlumbus, Ringdove. Parus, Titmouse, vid. append. Parus major, Oxe-eye, vid.
app. Passer, Sparrow. Pavo, Peacock. Pelicanus, Pelican, vid. append. Perdix,
Partridg. Phasianus, Pheasant. Phenicopteros, Phenicopter. vid. app. Pica, Pie.
Picicitli, vid. append. Picus marinus, Sea Pie, vid. app. Platea, Shovelar,
vid. append. Pluvialis, Plover, vid. append. Psittacus, Parret, vid. append.
Pusinae Brit, Puffins, vid. append.
Q.
QUerquedulae, Teale and Widgeons, vid. append. Quetzaltototl, vid. append.
R.
RAlloe, Railes, vid. append. Regulus, Wren, vid. append. Rubecula, Robin
Red-breast, vid. app.
S.
SNeppa, Snite, vid. append. Struthiocamelus, Ostrich. Sturnus, Stare.
T.
TInnunculus, Castrel, vid. app. Tominejus, vid. append. Totanus, Pool-suite,
vid. app. Turdela Angl. Mavise, vid. append. Turdus, Thrush. Turdus Exot.
Feldefare, vid. append. Turtur, Turtle-Dove. Troglodites, vid. Passer.
V.
VAnnellus, Lapwing. v. app. Vespertilio, Bat. Ulula, Howlet. vid. append.
Upupa, Houpe. Urogallus, Bistard. Vulpanser, Birgander. Vultur, Vulture.
Ichthyologia. Of Fishes.
A.
ABramis, Breame. Acus, Hornbeake. Alausae minores, Pilchers. Alburnus, Bleye.
Albus, vid. append. Alphestes, vid. append. Amia, vid. append. Anguilla, Eele.
Anthias, vid. append. Aphya, Groundlin. Apium, Alderling. vid. append. Apuae
Cobitae, Minoes. vid. ap. Apuae infumarae, v. Chalcides. Aquila mar. Sea-hawk
vid. append. Aranei mar. Quawiners, vid. ap. Asellus, Ling. vid. append.
Aselluli, Haddocks. vid. append. Asellus Islandicus, Haberdine. vid. append.
Aselluli longi, Hakes, vid. append. Asellus medius, Coafish. vid. ap. Astacus,
Crevisse. Atherina, vid. append. Aurata, Guilt-head.
B.
Balaena, vid. Cetus. Barbo, Barbell. Blatta Byzantina, vid. append.
C.
CAncer, Crab. Canis Cetaceus, Dog-fish. Cannes, vid. append. Cantharus, vid.
append. Caper, vid. append. Capitones, Millers thumbs. v. ap. Catulus, vid.
append. Centrina, vid. append. Cernuae, Ruffes. Cetus, Whale. Chalcides,
Sprats. Chalcides majores, Spurlings, ib. Chama, vid. append. Chromis, vid.
append. Citharus, vid. append. Cochleae marinae, Perwickles. Colybdaenae,
Yards. Concha, vid. append. Conchylium, vid. append. Conger, vid. Anguilla.
Coracinus, Crowfish. Corax, vid. append. Cuculus, Curre. Cyprinus, Carp.
D.
DElphinus, Dolphin. Dentalium, vid. append. Draco, Dragon.
E.
EGhinus, Vrchin. Enchrasicolus, Anchovae. Entalium, vid. append.
F.
FAber, vid. append. Farra, vid. append. Funduli, vid. Gobius.
G:
GLadius, Swordfish, v. append. Glancus, vid. append. Gobergus, v. append.
Gobius, Gudgeon.
H.
HAlec, Herring. Hepatus, Liverfish, v. append. Hippeis, vid. Cancer. Hippurus,
vid. append. Hirundo, Swallowfish. vid. ap. Huso. vid. append.
I.
IChthyocolla, vid. append. Iulis, vid. append.
L.
LAmpetra, Lamprey. Lavaretus, vid. append. Lepas, vid. append. Lepus mar. Sea
Hare. vid. append. Lenciscus, Dac^. Lira, Harpfish. vid. append. Locha, Loche.
vid. append. Locusta marina, Lobster. Loligo, vid. append. Lucernae, vid.
Aurata. Lucius, Pike. Lupus, vid. append.
M.
MAias, vid Cancer. Matter perlarum, Mother of Pearl. vid. append. Melanurus,
Blacktaile. vid. append. Membras, vid. append. Merula, Cookfish. Milvus,
Keeling. Mola, Mole. vid. append. Molva, vid. append. Monachae, Nun fishes.
vid. append. Mormyrus, vid. append. Mugiles, vid. Mullus. Mullus, Mullet.
Muraena, vid. Lampetra. Murex; vid. append. Musculi, vid. Mytili. Mustela, vid.
Anguilla. Mytili, Mussels.
N.
NAsus, vid. append.
O.
ONiscus, Whiting. Orbs, Lumps. Orphidion, vid. append. Orphus, vid. append
Ostrea, Oister.
P.
PAganelli, vid. Gobius. Pagrus, vid. append. Pagurus, vid. Cancer. Paru, vid.
append. Passeres, Plaice. Pastinaca, Fork-fish. Pavo, Peacock-fish. vid.
append. Pectines, Cocks. Pectines Veneris, vid. Pectines. Pectunculi, vid.
Pectines. Perca, Perch. Phoca, Sea-calf. Phocaena, Porpaise. Pholas, vid.
append. Pigus, vid. append. Pinna, vid. append. Pinnotheres, vid. Cancer. Pira
Acangata etc. vid. append. Polypus, Poulp. Pompilus, vid. append. Pulmo
marinus, vid. append. Pungitii, Harry Bannings vid. ap. Purpura, Purple.
R.
RAia, Thornback. Raiolae, Maids. Rana, Frog. Remora, Suckstone, vid. append.
Rhombus, Flounder. Rubellio, vid. Rutilus. Rutilus, Roche.
S.
SAlmo, Salmon. Salmerinus, vid. app. Salmunculi, vid. Salmo. Sarachus, vid.
append. Sargus, vid. append. Saurus, vid. append. Scarus, vid. append. Scarus
ruminans, vid. Abramis. Scolopax, vid. append. Scombrus, Mackrell. Scorpaena,
vid. append. Scorpio, Scorpion-fish. Sepia, Cuttle. Serpens mar. Sea serpent*
v. ap. Silurus, Sheath-fish. Smaris, vid. append. Solea, Sole. Solen, vid.
append. Sparus, vid. append. Sphyraena, vid. append. Squatina, Skate. Squilla,
Shrimp. Sturio, Sturgian.
T.
TAjasica, vid. append. Tethyia etc. vid. append. Thunnus, Tuny. Thymallus,
Grailing. Tinca, Tench. Torpedo, Crampfish. Trachurus, Roughtaile. vid. append.
Triches, Shadds. vid. append. Trochi, vid. append. Trutta, Trout. Turdus,
Thrush fish.
V.
VAriatae, vid. Alburnus. Vetulae, Oldwives. vid. ap. Violaceae, Smelts. Umbla.
vid. append. Umbra, Vmber. Uranoseopus, Stargazer. Urticae mar. vid. append.
ZYgaena vid. append.
Ophiologia. Of Serpents.
A.
AMmodytes. Ammodite. Amphisbaena, Double head. Anguis, Snake. Aspis, Aspe.
B.
BOa, Boas.
C.
CAecilia, Slow-worme. Cenchrus, Millet. Cerastes, Horned-serpent. Chelydrus,
Dryine. Coluber, Adder.
D.
DIpsas, Dipsas. Draco, Dragon.
H.
HAemorrhous, Hemorrhe.
L.
LAcerta, Lizard, Lacerta aquatica, Neute.
P.
PElias, Pelias. Praester, Prester. Ptyas, vid. Aspis.
R.
REgulus, Cockatrice.
S.
SAgitta, Dart. Salamandra, Salamander. Scytal, vid. Amphisbaena. Sepedon,
Seps. Serpens, Serpent.
V.
VIpera, Viper.
Entomologia. Of Insects.
A.
APis, Be. Aranea, Spider. Asellus, Cheselippe. Asterias, vid. Araneus.
Auricularia, Eare-wigge.
B.
BLatta, Moth. Bombyx, Silk-worme. Buprestis, Burne-cow.
C.
CAeruleus, vid. Araneus. Cantharides, Spanish-flies. Cayayahoal, vid. Asellus.
Cicada, Grasshopper. Cicindula, Glow-worme. Cimex, Wal-louse. Cinomyia, vid.
Tabanus. Cochlea, Snaile. Crabro, Hornet. Culex, Gnat.
E.
ERuca, Caterpiller. (...)
Sandaracha, vide Arsenicum. Sperma Ceti, Parmaceti. Succinu^^, Amber. Sulphur,
Brimstone.
Lithologia. Of Stones.
Pretiosiores. Or more Precious.
Achates, Achates. Amethystus, Amethyst. Berillus, Berill. Bezoar,
Bezoar-stone. Chalcedonius, Chalcedonie. Chrysoprasus, Chrysolite.
Chrysoprasus, Chrysoprase. Corallium, Coral. Granatus, Granate. Hyacinthus,
Jacinth. Jaspis, Jasper. Ligurius, Ligurius. Margarita, Pearl. Nephriticus l.
Nephritick-stone. Rubinus, Ruby. Sapphirus, Sapphire. Sardius, Corneol.
Sardonyx, Sardonyx. Smaragdus, Emerald. Topazius, Topaz.
Minus Pretiosi. Or less Precious.
Aetites, Eagle stone. Alabastrites, Alabaster. Alectorius, Cocks-gizzard
stone. Amianthus, Amianth. Armenius lapis, Armenian-stone. Borax, Borax,
Calaminaris lapis. Calaminare. Galcarius l. Limestone. Chrystallus, Crystal.
Cos, Whet-stone. Geodes, Geodes. Gypsum, Plaster. Haematites, Bloodstone.
Humanus lapis, Mans-bladderstone. Hybernieus l. Irish-slat. Judaicus l. Jews
stone. Lazuli lapis, Azure stone. Lyncis lapis, Lynx stone. Magues, Lodestone.
Marmor, Marble. Ostiocolla, Ostiocolla. Phrygius l. Phrygran stone. Pumex,
Pumise stone. Pyrites, Fire stone. Samius lapis, Samos stone. Schistus,
Cleaving stone. Silex, Flint. Smyris, Smyris. Specularis, Spectacle stone.
Spongites, Sponge stone. Talcum, Talch. Unicornu fossile, Vnicorn-stone.
Minus utiles. Or less Useful.
Absicthus. Adamas. Adarce. Ageratus. Alabandina Ammites. Ammochrysus.
Androdamas. Antachates. Anthracites. Aphroselinus. Arabicus. Arenosus lapis.
Aromatites. Asbestes. Asius. Assyrius. Astroites. Atizoe. Baptes. Bufonites.
Cacabres. Camphora. Ca^ochites. Caymanus. Ceraunia. Charchedonius. Chelidonius.
Chelonites. Chernites. Chrysocolla. Chrysolampis. Cinaedia. Crucifer. Diacodos.
Dionysius. Droselithos. Enhydros. Entrochos. Ephestites. Galactites.
Galaricides. Garachides. Gasinades. Gecolitus. Glossopetra. Heliotropium.
Hexecontalithus. Indica. Jonis. Lactarius. Lapis Cancrorum. Lapis Carpionis.
Lapis Molaris. Lapis Vulturis. Libanochron. Liparia. Magnes. Malachites.
Malavar. Maritha. Medius. Melanteria. Melitites. Memphites. Morochthus. Myexis.
Myndan. Myrrites. Mytridas. Nuse. Nymphaeus. Ophites. Ostracites. Paeantides.
Peranites. Phengites. Phlegontis. Prasius. Quandros. vel Vultutis lapis.
Quiritia. Sabinus. Sagda. Sarcophagus. Scyrus. Selenites. Siderites. Sifnius.
Smarillus. Spinus. Smyris. Suetinus. Thebaicus. Thracius. Thyrraeus. Tiburones.
Trochites. Turchois. Tusculanus. Thyites. Variolatus. Virites. Vitrum.
Zanthena.
An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Diseases specified in this Book, together
with the Appropriate Remedies therein, taken from Animals, viz. Beasts, Birds,
Fishes, Serpents, Insects, and Man: As also from Minerals, viz. Earths,
Metals, Semimettals, their Natural and Artificial Excrements, Salts, Sulphurs,
and Stones-More precious, Less precious, in Alphabetical order, and those
less used in Physic.
A.
ABscesses, see Impostumes. Abortion causing. Beaver, elephant, horse. Crow.
Double-head. Abortion hindering. Heart, hedghog, porcupine, sow. Goose. Urchin,
suckstone. Allume. Corneol, emerald, azure-stone, eagle-stone, geodes,
samos-stone, galactites. Aconites poison and of such like Herbs, to help.
Beaver, bear, hare. heart, kid, lamb. Cock, goose. Gudgion, purple. Fly.
Bezoarstone. Adders biting to resist. Adder. Aegilops, see Eyes fistula.
Afterbirth to expel and secundine. Beaver, goat, hare, horse, sheep. Cock,
cormorant, goose. Eele, pike, scorpion-fish, urchin. Spanish-Flies, wall louse,
worm, Bezoar-stone. Agues to help. Hedghog. Cock, cuckoo, pigeon. Crevisse,
pike, tench, mother of pearl, concha. Spider. Sealed earth. Antimony, mercury.
Allume, ammoniack. Sapphir, crucifer. Agues causing. Heart, sow. Sparrow. Eele,
lamprey, sprats, sturgian, trout. Agues cold shiverings to help. Crocodile,
seahorse. Frog. Spider. Agues heat and thirst to quench. Allume. Agues long to
help. Goose. Agues quartan to cure. Bear, camel, capricerve, cat, chameleon,
cow, dog, goat, hare, hyena, lion, mouse, scink, sheep. Cormorant, sparrow,
swallow. Crab, dolphin, frog, concha. Lizard. Beetle, kind, locust, spanish
flies, spider, wal-louse, waspe. Man. Lead. Antimonie, mercury. Ammoniack,
vitriol. Bezoarstone, azurestone, irish-slat, marble, caymanus. Agues quotidian
to cure. Ass. Anchovae. Scorpion. Antimonie. Agues tertian to cure. Horse,
ram. Hawk. Dolphin, concha. Spider, wall-louse. Antimonie. Allume, nitre.
Emerald, marble. Aires infection to resist. Cow, toad. Amber. Alopecia, see
Hairs falling off to stay. Ambergriece to adulterate. Ambergriece. Analeptick,
see Restorative. Ancles strained to ease. Boar. Angina, see Quinsey. Anodine,
see Pains to ease. S. Anthonies fire to cure. Ass, calf, cow, goat, heart,
lamb, sheep, saw. Cock, goose, pie, swan. Crab, frog. Viper, kind, tike, worm.
Fullers earth. Iron. Chalcite. Common Salt. Bezoarstone. Apes bitings to cure.
Ape, bull. Aphthae, see Mouths sores. Apophlegmatisme, see Head to purge.
Apoplexy causing. Sow. Pigeon. Mackrel, tench. Coral. Apoplexy to cure.
Beaver, sivet-cat. Partridg, pigeon. Sprats. Worm. Man. Gold, silver.
Antimony, mercury. Ammoniack, vitriol. Amber. Azurestone, astroites. Apostumes
to ripen and break. Bull. Appetite to whet. Musk-cat. Cock, lark, ostrich,
sparrow. Anchovae, mullet, oisters, sturgian, trochi. Be, cheselippe.
Antimonie. Common salt, nitre, vitriol. Bezoarstone. Argema, see Eyes spots.
Armpits stinck to help. Calfe, hee-goat, musk-cat. Allume, nitre. Arrows
invenomed to resist. Heart. Arrows to poison. Panther. Arteries loose etc. to
strengthen. Goat. Cock. Arteries stiff to lenify. Cow, goat. Arthritick, see
Joints pains, or gout. Ascarides to kill. Cow. Asthma, see Wheezing.
Astringents. Bull, calfe, cow, elk, goat, hare-hart, hee-goat, sheep, sow. Cock,
goose, partridg. Frog, hornbeak, mullet, anthias, pagrus. Be, spider. Man,
Black earth, bole armoniack, chalk, clay, earth of eretria, earth of samos,
marle, oker, rubric, sealed earth. Copper, iron, lead, silver. Antimonie,
sinople, misy, sorry, cadmia, diphryges, litharge. Allume, common salt, vitriol.
Arsenick, asphalte. Coral, emerald, sapphir, amianth, armenian stone,
bloud-stone, calaminare, crystal, geodes, loadstone, ostiocolla, phrygian
stone, samos stone, talch, unicorne stone, whetstone, asius, ageratus,
mela^nteria. Atrophy, see Tabes. Attenuating and rarifying. Beaver, musk-cat.
Common-salt, gemmesalt, nitre, vitriol. Naphth. Bloud-stone, fier-stone,
pumice-stone, spunge-stone, asius. Austere. Ape. Japonian-earth. Audacity to
cause. Ape, hyena, musk-cat. Blackbird, Achates. Beril, chrysolite, corneol,
cocksgizard-stone.
B.
BAcks Consumption to cure. Goose. Back and reins to strengthen. Ass, bear,
cat, lamb. Barrenness causing. Hare, lion, mule, panther. Vulture.
Ambergriece, ostracites. Barrenness to cure. Bull, sivetcat. Goose, kite.
Serpent. Spider. Nitre, vitriol. Amethist, marble. Bears diseases to cure.
Pismire. Bears bitings to help. Bear. Beasts, see Cattle. Beasts etc. venim,
and bitings, etc. to resist. Capricerve, goat, heart, horse, hyena, kid, lamb,
mouse, oryx, roebuck, seahorse, sheep, sow, toad, tortise, unicorne, weasel.
Bat, duck, hawk, pigeon. Forkfish, scorpion-fish, sprats. Lizard, caterpiller,
fly, leeche, locust, scolopender, scorpion, spider. Man. Sealed earth.
Common-salt, nitre. Brimstone. Bezoarstone, asius, toad-stone. Beasts venomous
to drive away. Ass, elephant, lion, seahorse. Cormorant, crane, eagle, kite.
Adder, dragon. Lizard. Corneol, emerald, dionysius, myndan, astroites. Beetles
bitings to cure. Beetle. Bees fluxes to help. Cow. Bees to keep together, and
preserve Moth. Bees stingings to cure: Cow. Belching to provoke. Goat. Be.
Belching sour to repress. Antimonie. Berill. Belly to Bind. Boar, bull,
camel, cow, dog, goat, hare, heart, horse, roe-buck, sow. Cock, duck, partridg,
ringdove, sparrow. Cocks, cockles, roch. Rubric, sand. Common-salt. Amber.
Belly causing to swell, etc. and counterfeiting. Hornet. Belly gently to
loosen. Ass, beaver, bull, calfe, camel, cow, goat, hedghog, horse, mouse,
porcupine, roebuck, sheep, woolfe. Cock, goose. sparrow, swallow. Anchovae,
cocks, cockles, crampfish, cuttle, eele, groundlin, gudgin, mussels, oister,
perch, pike, plaise, purple, scorpion fish, sprats, thornback, tunie, whale,
alphestes, atherina, blatta byzan. tina, cantharus, julis, lepas, urtica
marina. Be, fly. Man. Gold. Antimony. Allume, ammoniack, common-salt,
gemme-salt, nitre, vitriol. Bezoarstone, lodestone. Bellies pains to help.
Beaver, calf, cow, dog, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, heegoat, hyena, roe-buck,
sivet-cat. Bat, blackbird, cock, crane, duck, partridg, ringdove, turtle,
ibis, martinet. Eele, frog, mullet, loligo, tethyia. Myllet. Be, burn-cow.
Bole armoniack. Antimonie. Nitre. Parmaceti. Bezoar-stone, coral, marble. Belly
troubling. Ass, goat, horse, lion. Barbel, pike, murex. Be, pismire,
spanish-flies. Copper, silver. Antimonie. Nitre. Bezoar adulterate to know.
Bezoarstone. Birth to kill. Ass. Spanish-flies. Suetinus. Biting of raving men
etc. to cure. Calf, cow, goat. Cock. Bitings venomous, see Beasts, etc. venim
and bitings to help. Bladder to cleanse. Cock, goose. Grasshopper. Bezoar-stone,
coral. Bladders defluxion on to stop. Ass. Bladder hurting. Spanish-flies.
Bladders pains and reins to help. Bear, hare, heart, lamb. Cock, goose. Oil
of Peter. Morochtus. Bladders ulcers and carnosity to cure. Cock. Frog. Iron.
Mercury. Allume. Bloodstone. Blasting to cure. Ass. Man. Common-salt. Bleeding
to stay. Ass, boar, bull, calf, cow, dog, goat, hare, heart, hee-goat, horse,
kid, ram, roebuck, sow, cabim. Cock, duck, goose, vulture. Frog, poulp.
Caterpiller, silk-worme, spider, wallouse. Man. Marle. Iron, lead. Antimony,
sinople. Allume, vitriol. Amber, brimstone. Coral, corneol, emerald, jacinth,
jasper, pearl, sapphir, topaz, bloodstone, plaster, talch, ostracites,
crucifer, heliotropium. carpstone. Bleeding and pissing blood to cure. Goat,
hare, heart, lamb. Cock. Bleeding causing. Leech. Spanish-flies Bleeding of
wounds to stop. see Wounds, bleeding. Blistering things to the skin.
Caterpillars, spanish-flies. Blood bad causing. Eele, mussels. Blood thin
causing. Kid. Partridg Mullet. Pearl. Blood good causing. Sow. Cock. partridg,
pheasant, quail. Cookfish, gudgin, alphestes. Silver. Blood to cleanse. Sow.
Pigeon. Copper, gold. Antimony, mercury, Common salt, nitre, vitriol.
Bezoarstone, coral, pearl. Blood congealed to dissolve. Hare, heegoat, woolf.
Cock, crab, crevisse. Man. Marle, sealed-earth. Common-salt, nitre, vitriol.
Asphalt, naphth, parmaceti. Bezoarstone. Blood to cool. Badger. Antimony,
litharge. Vitriol. Blood to increase. Ram, cock, pigeon. Gudgin. Sealed-earth.
Boars wounds to help, see Boar. Bodies diseases to help. Bear, boar, camel,
cow, hyena. Hawk. Gold. Antimony, mercury, sinople. Coral, ruby, sapphir.
Boiles and botches to help. Ass, boar, bull, cow, goat, bare, kid, ram,
tortise, weafel. Pigeon, vulture. Frog, herring, pike, sprats. Serpent. Beetle,
^^^th, pismire. Fullers earth. Agath, brimstone. Asius. Bones broken to knit.
Bull, dog, goat, sow. Cock. Worm. Ostiocolla. ^^ones naked to cover with
flesh. Swallow. Bowels griping pains to ease. Ass, bull, cow, dog, hare,
heart, musk-cat, sheep, sow. Earth of Lemnos. Brimstone. Bowels ulcers to cure.
Beaver, cow, hare, heart, sheep. Cock. Be. Litharge. Sapphir. Brain, see Head.
Brain cold and moist to warm. Beaver, muskcat. Be. Brain hurtful to.
Mackrell. Spider. Granate. Brain good for. Musk-cat. Cock. heath-cock.
Silkworme. Man. Copper, silver. Mercury. Ambergriece, oil of Peter. Brains
rheum to purge. Vitrioll. Breast and lungs to cleanse, and expectorat phlegm
etc. Cow, dormouse, fox, goat, heart. Cock, goose, turtle. Cuttle. Man.
Brimstone. Breasts empyema to show. Earth of Eretria. Breasts great to lessen.
Sow. Bat, goose. Skate. Whetstone. Breasts to fill with milk, see Milk. Breasts
hurtful to. Mackrell. Breasts sore to heal. Badger, sheep, sivet-cat. Goose.
Be, worm. Allume. Asius. Breasts inflammations to cool. Cock. Geodes,
myexis. Breasts cancer to cure. Hare. Crevisse. Breasts pains and diseases to
help. Ass. Bat, cock, goose. Murex. Brimstone. Ostracites. Breasts of women
hard and swollen to cure. Mous. Sow. Goose. Breath short to help. Ass, bear,
beaver, camel, fox, mule, woolf. Cock. Cheselippe. Nitre. Arsnick, brimstone.
Beril. Breath stinking to mend. Cow, mouse, sheep. Gold. Breathing upright to
help. Ass, cow. Owl, storke. Moth. Antimony. Bruises to cure. Ass, bore,
bull, dog, goat, heart, kid, ram, sheep, sow, woolf. Crane, goose. Eele, Lizard.
Be, wall-louse. Clay, oker. Lead. Common salt. Parmaceti. Irish-slat,
malachites. Bulls blood helping against. Kid. Nitre. Bubo, see Groin swollen.
Burning and scalding to cure. Bear, bull, cow, dog, dormouse, hare, mouse,
mule, sheep, sow. Cock, pigeon. Crab, frog, grailing. Be, worm. Man. Fullers
earth, rubric. Lead. Antimony, sinople, litharge. Allume, common salt, nitre.
Limestone, lodestone, phrygian stone, camphire. Burstings or ruptures to cure.
Ass, boar, bull, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, hyena, kid, mole, ram, sheep, sow,
Cock, goose. Lizard. Seepad, snaile. Common-salt, gemme salt. Cleaving-stone,
eagle-stone, malachites.
C.
CAchexie to cure. Cow, hedghog. Nightingale, pigeon, Tethyia. Pismire. Man.
Iron. Antimonie. Nitre, vitriol. Brimstone. Cacochymick, see Juice evil of.
Cankers to cure. Crocodile, goat, heart, lamb, lion, sheep. Crane. Crab.
Burne-cow, spanish-flies, woodworme. Man. Tin, Mercury, litharge. Arsnick.
Bezoarstone, pearl, limestone. Cankers in the mouth to cure. Sprats. Cankers
to drive away. Bugil. Cantharides to resist. Cow, goat, mouse, ram. Goose.
Spanish-flies. Carbuncles to cure. Goat, sheep, sow, toad. Cock, goose, pigeon,
sparrow. Crab, mullet, anthias. Beetle, snaile. Man. Mercury. Brimstone.
Bezoarstone. Castoreum corrupted to help against, see Beaver. Castoreum
adulterated, see Beaver. Catarrhes or thin rheumes to stop. Cow, elephant,
weasel. Cock. Pike, whiting. Be. Bole armoniack, japoni. an earth, sealed
earth. Tin. Mercury. Nitre, vitriol. Amber, brimstone. Cathartick, see
Purging. Cattle to preserve. Badger, bull, cow, dog, fox, goat, hee-goat,
horse, ram, sheep, sow. Cock, Musculus. Fly. Asphalt. Caviare to make. Carpe,
sturgian, huso. Causticks. Horse. Cantharide^^ spanish flies. Oker. Cobalt,
misy, sorry. Vitriol. Arsenick. Crystal, limestone. Cephalic, see Head.
Cerastes biting to cure. Beave^^ Chameleon to help against. Beaver. Chaps and
chilblaines to cure. Ass, bear, dog, heart, horse, sow, tortise. Goose, pigeon.
Crab. Snaile. Man. Charms, enchantments etc. to resist. Pike. Coral,
glossopetra, malachites. Children male or female to produce. Hare. Childbirth
to help. Ass, chameleon, cow, hare, heart, sow. Hawk, turtle, sea-mew. Serpent.
Man. Chalk. Mercury. Agath, amber. Emerald, eagle-stone, lynx-stone,
samos-stone, assyrius, paeantides, peranites, loadstone. Children to
strengthen. Common salt. Child or foetus to expel. Ass, beaver, bull, cat,
dog, goat, hare, horse, hyena, mouse, sheep, woolf, carygueja. Cock, eagle,
goose, pigeon, swallow, vulture, per^nopter. Forkfish, pike. Serpent.
Burne-cow, wallouse. Man. Allume. Brimstone. Bezoarstone, jasper, borax,
geodes. Children hurtful to. Cock. Childing women good for. Goat; hyena,
porcupine, carygueja. Eagle. Lobster, pike, poulp, loche. Be. Parmace^i.
Corneol, irish-slat. Childing women hurtful to. Antimonie. Choler and phlegm
to purge. Cock. Tunie. Be. Antimonie. Choler to repress. Calf, cow, sheep.
Crystal. Choler generating. Goat. Sturgian. Cockatrice. Be. Cicatrices to
help. Calf, cow, dog, goat, ram, sheep, sow. Cock, goose, pigeon, ringdove,
swallow, pelecane, starre-gazer. Be. Man. Silver. Allume. Amber. Coral, borax,
pumic est. Cl^nsing. Dog, fox, goat, hedghog. Bat cock, goose, pheasant,
stare, Crab, cuttle, pike, scorpion-fish. Be, cheselipp. Alanian earth,
black-earth, chalk, clay, earth of Chios, earth of Melos, fullers earth, oker,
rubric, sand, selenuntine earth. Gold. Antimony, mercury, chalcite, cadmia,
diphryges, litharge. Allume, common salt, nitre, vitriol. Brimstone. Amianth,
armenian stone, calaminare, marble, smyris, whetstone, arabicus. Colic of
wind etc. to ease. Ass, beaver, bull, cow, dog, goat, heart, hedghog hee-goat,
horse, ichneumon, mouse, musk-cat, roe-buck, sheep, sivet-cat, sow, wolf,
carygueja. Cock, crane, duck, eagle, goose, hawk, lark, partridg, peacock,
pigeon, ringdove, storke, swallow, swan, turtle, gold-finch, lapwing, pelecan,
titmouse, ossifrage. Carp, cockles, crab, crow-fish, eele, gudgin, mullet,
oister, sturgian, umber, whale, blacktaile, thrush-fish, glaucus, orphus,
scarus. Serpent. Be, cheselippe, grasshopper, scorpion, snail, wal-louse,
worm. Man. Copper, iron. Antimonie, mercury. Ammoniack, common salt, gemme
salt nitre. Agath, brimstone, parmaceti. Bezoarstone, jasper, crystal,
marble, malachites. Colic causing. Kid Eele, mullet, plaise Myllet. Coeliack
to help. Ass, calfe, cow, goat, hare, heart, bee-goat, horse, hyena, kid,
roe-buck, sheep, sow. Cock, duck, goose, partridg, pigeon, ringdove. Be. Earth
of Samos. Iron. Naphth. Cold members to refresh. Bear, beaver, bull, cat, cony,
lion, sheep. Scorpion, Nitre. Colds, coughs, and hoarsnesse to cure. Ass,
Bear, boar, frog, goat, heart, hedghog, horse, sheep, sow, woolf, swallow. Pike.
Cold things, Ape, bear, cow, elephant. Carp, crab. Snailes. Earths. Litharge.
Topaz bloud-stone, marble, whetstone. Color good to cause, and help
cicatrices. Ass. Cock, duck, goat. Serpent. Be. Man. Earth of Chios, earth
of Melos. Gold. Achates, sapphire. Color to preserve. Earth of Melos.
Conception to cause. Bear, beaver, bull, camel, cow, elephant, fox, goat, hare,
horse, hyena, lamb, lion, mule, musk-cat, sow. Goose, hawk, partridg, quail,
ringdove. Carp, poulp, purple. Spanish-flies. Ammoniack. Millstone. Conception
hindering. Elephant, heart, mouse. Mullet. Iron. Concoction, see Digestion.
Congealing. Boar, frog. Consumptions to cure. Sheep, Cock, Crab, crevisse,
thornback, cheselippe, Consumption. Eele, blacktaile. Contractions convulsions
and shrunk sinews to cure. Ass, badger, bear, beaver, boar, bugil, bull, cat,
else, fox, heart, hedghog, horse, hyena, linx, lion, mouse, rainger, sheep, sow,
weather. Crane, goose, quail, ringdove, vulture, mole. Be, beetle, earewig,
leech, silk-worme. Man. Nitre, vitriol. Agath, amber, arsnick, brimstone, oil
of Peter. Coral, jacinth, pearl, malachites, loadstone. Contraction or
convulsion causing. Goat, panther. Fork-fish. Aspe, salamander. Antimony.
Contraction backwards or opisthotonos to help. Beaver, goat. Blackbird, kite,
nitre. Corpulency to hinder, see Leanness to cause. Corns to remove. Ass,
cow, dog, heart, mule, sheep, sow. Cock, pigeon. Smaris. Salamander. Pismire,
spanish flies, worms. Cosmetical, see Deformities to help. Costivenes to
help, see Belly to loosen. Coughs to help. Ass, cow, elephant, goat, hare.
Cock, crow, eagle, goose, swallow. Be, snail. Man. Antimony. Nitre. Atsnick,
brimstone, naphth. parmaceti. Coughs causing or hurtful to. Lead. Courses of
women to provoke. Beaver, bull, camel, cow, goat, heart, hyena, musk-cat,
panther, sheep, sivet-cat, sow. Cock, goose. Cuttle, poulp, scorpion-fish.
Serpent. Burn-cow, leech, spanish-flies. Man. Copper, iron. Antimonie.
Ammoniack, vitriol. Asphalt, naphth. Bezoarstone. Courses to stop. Cat, goat,
hare, kid, mule, sheep. Cock, turtle. Frog. Caterpiller. Man. Bole armoniack,
earth of Samos. Iron. Sinople. Allume. Coral, jasper, pearl, bloodstone,
crystal, fierstone, malachites. Camphire. Cramps to ease. Sow. Cheselippe.
Agath. Jacinth. Crudities causing. Sow. Cuts to heal. Spider.
D.
DAemoniack to help. Kingfisher. Dandriffe to cleanse. Ass, bear, bull, calfe,
camel, cow, goat, heart, hee-goat, mouse, sheep, sow. goose. Man. Deadly. Lion.
Dart, dryine, salamander* Plaster, talch. Dead bodies to preserve. Be.
Chernites. Deafness to help. Ass, beaver, bear, bull, calfe, cat, cow, dog,
goat, hare, heegoat, horse, lion, musk-cat, woolfe. Cock, crane, goose, heron.
Eele, grailing. Lizard. Eare-wig, fly, moth, pismire, worm. Man. Ammoniack,
vitriol. Brimstone. Deafness causing. Aspe. Defluxions on the joints to stop.
Beaver, dog, elephant. Cock. Deformities to help. Cow, panther, sheep. Pigeon,
state. Gold. Talch. Delivery, see Childbirth. Diamond to dissolve. Hee-goat.
Diabetes, see Urin to stop. Diarrhoea. Cow, hee-goat Bole, sealed-earth. Iron.
Litharge, see Flux. Diaphoretick, see Sweating to cause. Die brun helping. Cow,
horse, sow. Digestion easy of. Bear, calfe, kid, sow. Cock, heath-cock, lark,
pheasant, turkey, turtle, godwit, robin-red-breast, snite. Anchovae, barbel,
bream, cooke-fish, cockles, cramp-fish, dog-fish, gudgin, mackrell, roche,
smelts, sole, umber, whiting, yard, blacktaile, codfish, liver-fish, loche,
millers-thumb, minoes, alphestes, amia, cannes, faber, julis, nasus, pigus.
scaras, sparus, scolopax, salmerinus. Digestion hard of. Ass, bear, bull, cow,
elephant, fox, goat, heart, hee-goat, horse, lion, ram, sow. Blackbird, cock,
coot, cormorant, crane, duck, eagle, goose, ostrich, peacock, ringdove,
sparrow, stare, stork, swan, puffins, wood-pecker, avis day. Carp, crab,
cramp-fish, crevisse, curre, cuttle, dolphin, dragon, eele, flounder,
guilt-head, hornbeak, keeling, lamprey, lobster, mullet, mussels, oisters,
plaise, porpaise, poulp, purple, salmon, scorpion-fish, sheath fish, shrimp,
skate, sturgian, tench, thornback, tunie, whale, harp-fish, mole, swallow-fish,
sword-fish, sea-hawk, thrush-fish, albus, corax, catulus, centrina, caper,
chama, glaucus, hippurus, murex, musculus, orphidion, pagrus, pinna, sphyraena,
sarachus, Zygaena. Digestion and concoction to help. Cormorant, eagle, ostrich,
swan, vulture, sea-mew, ossifrage. Pike, orphus. Leech. Camphire. Digesting.
Bear, goat, sheep. cock, duck, goose. Alanian-earth, earth of Eretria, fullers
earth. Copper. Brimstone. Dimnesse of sight to help. Bear, goat, hee-goat.
Cock, eagle, hawk, partridg, pie, vulture, howlet, osprey. Carp, dace, pike.
Dragon, Lizard, viper. Be. Vitriol. Prasius. Diseases from cold to cure. Hare,
mouse, musk-cat. Pigeon Curre, scorpion-fish, skate. Be. Lead. Antimonie,
mercury. Oil of Peter. Bezoar-stone, azure stone. Diseases contagious to
cure. Hare, horned snout, unicorn. Be, fly. Man. Bole armoniack. Gold.
Mercury, Arsnick, brimstone. Bezoar-stone, jacinth, pearl. Diseases dangerous
to preserve from. Goat, horned-snout, hyena, unicorn. Mercury. Bezoar-stone.
Diseases inveterate to cure. Sheep. Cock, craye, pigeon. Be. Antimonie.
Bezoar-stone, chelidonius. Diseases putrid to cure. Vitriol. Diseases hot to
temper. Badger, frog, heart* Cookfish. Leech. Iro^. ontimon. Distillations
rheumatick to cure. Dog, elephant. Cock, purple. Leech. Man. Bole armoniack.
Mercury. Allume. Brimstone, naphth. Morochtus. Diuretic, see Urin to provoke.
Dizinesse, see Heads giddiness. Dogs mad etc. their bitings to cure. Badger,
bear, boar, calfe, dog, goat, heart, hee-goat, horse, hyena, ram, shrew, sow,
unicorne. Cock, cormorant, cuckoe, goose, swallow, lapwing. Crab, crevisse,
gudgin, mussels, tunie, smaris. Serpent. Be, beetle, spanish flies. Man. Earth
of Lemnos. Antimonie. Nitre. Arsnick. Bezoarstone. Doglike appetite to help.
Dormouse. Dragon of the sea its bitings to cure. Brimstone. Dreams troublesome
causing. Goose, lapwing. Achates, eumeces. Dreams troublesome to prevent.
Dragon. Amber. Chrysol^te, ruby, sardonyx. Dropsy to cure. Ass, boar, calfe,
camel, cow, dog, frog, goat, heart, hedg-hog, hee-goat, porcupine, sheep, sow,
toad, woolfe. Cock, goose, pigeon. Crab, crampfish, dolphin, herring, mullet,
mussels, oister, starre-gazer, thrush-fish, sargus. Leech, locust, snaile,
spanish-flies, worm. Man. Sand. Iron, lead, silver. Antimonie, mercury,
marcasite. Allume, common-salt, nitre, vitriol. Agath. Jasper, topaz, crystal,
lodestone, kacabres, snakestone, loadston. Dropsy causing. Cow. Salamander.
Drousy evil see Lethargy. Drunkenness causing. Dog, sivet cat. Drunkenness
to preserve from* Boar, kid, ram, sheep, sow, swallow. Eele, frog. Be.
Amethist, pumicestone, dionysius. Drying. Earths. Dulnes to help, see Spirits
to quicken. Dumbness causing. Fork-fish. Dysentery, see Lask. Dyspeptick, see
Digestion hard of. Dyspnoea, see Wheezing. Dysury, see Strangury.
E.
Ears pain and noise to help. Bear, beaver, boar, bull, calfe, cow, dog,
dormouse, fox, hare, heart, horse, lion, mouse, ram, roebuck, sheep, sivet-cat,
squirrel. Cock, goose, pigeon, turtle. Dace, eele, frog, mackrel, tench,
thornback. Snake. Be, beetle, cheselippe, leech, moth, scorpion, snaile,
spider, wall-louse, worm. Allume, common-salt, nitre, vitriol. Amber. Ears
sores to cure. Beaver, boar, bugil, bull, cow, dog, dormouse, goat, sheep, sow.
Goose. Starre-gazer, conchylium. Serpent. Be, cheselipp, kind, wood-worme.
Man. Iron. Ears broken to help. Calf, sheep. Goose. Wood-worme. Brimstone.
Ears running to cure. Boar, bull, cow, fox, goat, sheep. Goose. Grailing,
tench, Serpent. Be. Man. Allume, nitre. Ears kernels to cure, and swellings
behind them. Bear, bull, cow, fox, goat, sheep, shrew, sow, weasel, pigeon.
Murex, scarus. Kind. Earth of Samos, fullers earth. Ears impostumes to cure.
Bull, cow, goat, heart, sheep, sow. Cock, owl, Grailing, Cheselippe. Ears
worms etc. to kill, and draw out. Mouse. Goose. Grailing, tench. Lizard.
Eare-wig, flea. Ears hurtful to. Ass. Be. Earths goodness etc. to know.
Bole armoniack. clay. Elephantiasis, see Leprosy. Emetick, see Vomiting to
cause. Empyema, see Breast to cleanse. Enterocele or ruptures in children to
help. Bear, hare. Epilepsie, see Falling sickness. Epiphora, see Eyes
watering. Erysipelas to cure. Bear, cow, goat, mouse, Cock, swallow, Frog,
umber. Silk-worme. Man. Mercury. Bezoarstone. Camphire. Escharres causing.
Sorry, cadmia. Vitriol. Arsenick Azurestone, limestone, phrygian-stone.
Euchymick, see, Juice good of. Eupeptick, see Digestion easy of. Excoriated
bowels to cure. Camel, goat. Vitriol. Excrementitious. Bear, lamb, sheep,
tatus. Duck, eagle, goose, ostrich, pigeon, ringdove, swan, pelecan. Dogfish,
flounder, frog, mackrel, tench, whale, Zygaena. Excrements little of. Cock,
partridg, pheasant, Scorpion-fish, sole, thrush-fish. Excrescencies, see Wenns.
Exhilerating, see Mirth to cause. Exulcerating things to the skin. Burn-cow.
Chalcite, cobalt. Nitre. Azure-stone. Eyesight to quicken. Bull, camel,
crocodile, dog, dormouse, fox, goat, hare, heart, hedg-hog, hyena, lion, mouse,
musk-cat, rat, ro-buck, sheep, tortise, veasel, woolfe. Cock, cole-mouse,
crane, hawk, heron, kite, nitingale, owl, partridg, peacock, phesant, pie,
quail, storke, swallow, vulture. Cutile, frog, grai^ing, pike, scorpion-fish.
Blacktaile, lupus. Dart, lizard, serpent, snake, viper. Be, cheselippe, fly,
kind, pismire, wall-louse. Man. Copper, gold. Nitre, amber. Achates,
chrysoprase, coral, emerald, jacinth, jasper. sapphire, topaz, azure-stone,
lime stone, pumice-stone, turchois. Eyes inflamed, red, or bloudshot to cure.
Cat, chameleon, mouse, ram, sheep. Bat, cock, eagle, partridg, pigeon, pie,
swallow, howler, esprey, woodpecker. Eele, frog, grailing, keling,
starre-gazer, centrina, scarus, Lizard, serpent. Pismite, snale. Man. Chalk.
Lead. Antimonie. Allume. Naph^h. Sapphire, blood st. lime st. Eyes bleer and
watering to help. Cow, fox, goat, byena, rat, sheep, sow, woolfe. Cock, hawk,
kite, peacock, storke, swallow. Crab, grailing. Be, fly, leech. Spider.
Antimonie. Coral, bloodstone, unicornstone. Camphire. Eyes pain and weakness
to help. Bull, cow, capricerve, cat, goat, hare, heart, hyena, kid, roe-buck,
sheep. Cock, hawk, pigeon, pie, swallow. Orphus. Lizard. vitriol. Chelidonius.
Eyes pearl, filme or web ^oremove. Ass, bear, bull, calf, cat, cow, dog,
hare, hyena, mouse, musk-eat, ram, rockgoat, robuck, scinck, weasel, wolf Bat,
cock, stork, osprey Eele, frog, grailing, ^eling, centrina, musculus. Viper,
Be, louse, pismire Man. Copper, chalcite. Allume, common-salt, nitre. Asphalt.
Coral, jasper, pearl, sapphire, fier-stone, goods. Eyes distillations into
to stay. Bull, heart, musk-cat, Cock. Serpent, viper. Snaile. Copper, lead,
tin. Antimonie, tuttie vitriol. amber. Beril, pearl, sapphire, bloodstone,
cleaving stone, load st. samos st. galactites, thyites. Eyes spots to take
away. Ass, beaver, dog, fox, goat, hodg-hog, hee-goat hyena, lion, musk-cat,
ram, robuck, scinck. Bat, cock, crane, eagle, kite, owl, pigeon, pie, storke,
swallow, turtle, vulture, castrel, howlet, percnopter. Eele, grailing, lupus.
Serpent. Be, fly, gally-worme, spider. Antimonie. Ammoniack. Asphalt, naphth.
Sapphire. Eyes fretting sores in the corners to heal. Cow, heart, hee-goat,
hyena, sheep, sow. Goose, pie, ringdove, stork. Be. Chalk. Lead, silver.
Antimonie, chalcite, cadmia. Allume, nitre. Pearl, armenian. stone,
bloud-stone, phrygian-stone, samos-stone. Eyes hairs to remove. Bear, dog,
hee-goat. Swallow. Eyes fistula, Aegilops to cure. Sow. Pigeon Lopus marinus.
Eyes hurts and blows to cure. Goat, hyena, ro^buck, sheep. Duck, goose,
pigeon, swallow. Litharge, Sapphire. Boodstone. Eyes swollen out to help.
Camel, goat, Hyena, sheep. Eagle, swallow. Be, beetle. Bloud-stone. Eyes to
preserve from pocks and Measels. Sapphire, variolatus. Eyes black causing. Rat.
Eyes hurtful to, and causing blindness. Camel. Bat, pigeon. Fork-fish,
mullet, perwinckle, skate. Dryine, horned serpent, lizard, pelias, prester.
Be. Man. Asphalt. Hexecontalithus. Eyebrows heat to cool. Cock. Alanian
earth. Eyebrows hair to take away. Goat, hedghog. Cormorant, swallow.
Lizard. Fly. Eyebrowes bare to help. Ass, bear, cow, hee-goat, mouse, sheep.
Craye. Armenian-stone. Eyebrowes to extenuate. Calfe. Eyebrowes black to make.
Dog. Pismire. Eyebrowes bard to help. Calfe, kid. Copper, iron, chalcite.
F.
FAce red to make white. Ass, goat, horse, lion, Frog. Leech. Man. Lead. Face
hard to help. Calfe. Face red to make. Bull. Face and skin to cleanse and make
smooth. Ass, bull, calf, cow, dog, elephant, lion, roebuck, sheep. Birgander,
goose, sparrow, storke, swallow, swan, Anthias, murex. Lizard. Be, pismire,
snaile, spanish-flies. Man. Earth of Chios, selenuntine earth. Silver. Mercury,
sorry, allume, nitre. Cleaving-stone, spectacle-stone, talch. Camphire. Fell^ng
sickness to cure. Ape, ass, bear, beaver, boar, bull, camel, capricerve, cat,
chamelion, cow, dog, elephant, elk, ferret, fox, goat, hare, heart, hee-goat,
horse, lamb, linx, lion, mouse, mule, musk-cat, otter, ram, roebuck, scinck,
sheep, sivet-cat, sow, tortise, unicorne, weasel, woolf. Cock, coot, crow,
cuckoe, eagle, moorehen, partridg, peacock, pigeon, pie, quail, sparrow,
storke, swallow, vulture, seamew, ossifrage, tominejus. Carp, Cooke-fish,
cramp-fish, frog, pike, sea calfe, thrush-fish, blatta byzantina, scarus.
Lizard, serpent. Be, caterpiller, fly, leech, wal-loufe. Man. Copper, gold,
silver, tin. Antimonie, mercury, sinople. Ammoniack, vitriol. Agath, amber,
asphalt, oil of Peter. Bezoarstone, chrysolite, coral, emerald, jasper,
armenian stone, azurestone, eagle-stone, samos-stone, spectacle-stone,
unicorne-stone, whet-stone, chelidonius, astroites heliotropium. Falling
sickness causing and hurtful to. Cow, goat, heart, hee-goat, mouse, hawk,
king-fisher, quail, jay. Cocks, cockles, mackrel, tunie. Naphth. Fat to cause.
Cow. Cock duck, partridg. Lizard. Sealed earth. Fears in infants to help.
Ass, bear, hyena, musk-cat, scinck. Dolphin. Agath. Coral, emerald, jacinth,
sapphire, sardonyx, topaz, azure-stone, diamond, Astroites, malachites. Fevers
to cure. Ass, badger, crocodile, elephant, frog heart, hedghog, lion, roebuck,
sow, toad, weasel, Cock, partridg, swallow. Cooke-fish, pike, roche, concha.
Leech, ox fly, pismire, scorpion, spider, wall-louse. Man. Earth of Lemnos,
earth of Melos. Copper. Antimonie, mercury. Nitre, vitriol. Amber, brimstone.
Bezoarstone, jasper, pearl, azurestone, myexis. Fevers burning to cure.
Badger, cow, frog, heart. Cock. Carp. Frog, herring, perch, tench. Be. Lead.
Nitre vitriol. Marble. Fevers pestilentiall and Hun, garick to cure.
Capricerve, heart, rock-goat, sow, unicorne. Cock. Earth of Lemnos, sealed
earth. Antimonie, mercury. Common. salt, nitre, vitriol. Brimstone.
Bezoarstone, coral, emerald, jacinth, sapphire, marble, glossopetra, astroites.
Fevers putrid to cure. Leech. Vitriol. Bezoarstone. Fevers ^ectick to cure.
Frog. Cock, pheasant. Crab, crevisse. Be. Vitriol. Fevers hectic causing.
Ca^. Fevers intermittent to cure. Woolfe. Crab. Copper. Antimonie, mercury,
marcasite. Nitre, vitriol. Fevers causing. Beaver, cow, sow. Cock, duck,
goose, pigeon, sparrow. Dragon, tench. Viper. Be, beetle, care-wig, leech.
Allume. Fevers ephemeral to cure. Ass. Mercury. Nitre. Feets running ulcers
to cure, and galling^. Boar, hare, horse, lion, ram, rortise, woolfe. Cock,
pigeon, storke. Crab. Scaled earth. Fellons to help. Cow, elephant, goat, ram,
sheep, shrew, sow. Cock, storke, vulture. Fly, Nitre. Fier-stone. Fish to
catch. Ass, beaver, calfe. Heron. Shrimp, lepas. ^^nter-fly, caterpillars,
fly, glow-worme, gnat. Fish glow to make. Cu^fish, huso, molva. Fish feeding.
Cow. Fistula's, see Ulcers hollow, and fistulous. Flatulency, see Windiness.
Fl^s to kill and drive away. Bear. Flea. Phlegm tough to expectorate. Anchovae.
Common salt. Phlegm to purge. Ass, goat. Cock. Anchovae, starre-gazer, tunie.
Be. Antimonie. Common salt. Phlegm causing. Lamb, otter, sow, tatus. Eele,
lumps, mackrell, oisters, porpoise, murex, pagrus. Flesh to beget. Cocks,
cockles, mussels, huso. Clay, marle. Lead, litharge, plumbage. Vitriol,
Bezoar-stone, calaminare. Fleshs lightness and heaviness in digestion to
know. Swan. Flesh proud to remove. Ass, sow. Stargazer, urchin. Spanish-flies.
Gold, lead, silver. Antimonie. Allume, vitriol. Borax, asus. Flies, gnats,
wasps etc. to drive away. Lion, sow. Fly, gnat, horner, wasp. Flints and other
stones to dissolve. Be. Flux of the belly or humors to stop. Boar, bull,
camel, cow, dog, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, hee-goat, horse, hyena, kid, lamb,
lion, otter, rockgoat roe-buck, sheep, sow. Blackbird, cock, cormorant, craye,
duck, goose, ostrich, partridg, ringdove, thrush, turtle, vulture. Crab,
gudgin, skate, sturgian. Be. Spider. Man. Bole armoniack. Earth of Lemnos,
earth of Melos, earth of Samos, sealed earth. Iron. Antimonie, mercury,
sinople, litharge. Allume, vitriol. Naphth. Bezoarstone, coral, corneol,
emerald, pearl, sapphire, boodstone, crystal, eagle-stone, lynx-stone,
spectacle-stone, talch, unicorne-stone, mil-stone. Flux bloody to stop. Hare,
heart. Serpent. Coral. Flux causing. Eele. Be, spanish-flies. Copper. Nitre.
Footus, see Birth and child. Folly causing. Cocks, cockles, dog-fish
Forgetfulness to cure. Beaver, heart, hyena. Houpe, lapwing. Forgetfulness
causing. Mouse. Fractures, see Ruptures. Freckles to remove. Bull. Freckles
causing. Cock. French pox to cure. Sow, izquiepotl, tatus. Partridg, hoactzin,
aura, cozquaul^tli. Serpent. Lead. Antimonie mercury, sinople. Nitre, vitriol.
Arsnick, brimstone. Coral, pearl. French pox hurtful to. Duck, goose.
Frenzy to cure. Ass, beaver, dog, hee-goat, hyena, mouse, sheep, toad. Cock,
hawk, owl, pigeon, vulture. Dryine prester. Leech. Lead, silver. Antimonie.
Vitriol. Agath. Amethist, coral, emerald, pearl, topaz, armenian-stone,
chelidonius. Frenzy or madness causing. Beaver, camel, cat, lion. Eagle.
Ammodyte, horned serpent. Spanish-flies, spider. Frettings or gaulings of the
skin to help. Ass, bear, boar, cow, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, horse, lamb,
mule, ram, sheep, sow. Goose. Fucus's for the face. Antimonie. Lead. Talch.
Fumes and vapors to repress. Nitre. Amethist, bezoarstone. Fumes causing.
Crevisse. Fundaments diseases to cure. Ass, bear, bull, cow, dog, goat, mouse,
sheep, shrew, sow, woolf. Cock, crane, goose, swan. Mullet. Spider. Arsnick.
Fundaments chapps and gaulings to heal. Goat, sheep. Goose. Crab, mullet.
Allume. Fundaments heat and pain to alay. Calfe, goat. Cock, goose. Fundaments
warts and knots to cure. Goose. Crab. Fundaments fistula's and ulcers to cure.
Bole armoniack. Lead. Arsnick. Fundaments falling or exiture to help. Goat,
sow. Cock. Crab. Be, beetle. Iron. Brimstone. Fundament causing to fall
Mercury.
G.
GAll to open. Man. Galls overflowing, see Jaundise. Galling of the skin, see
Frettings. Gangreens to cure. Goat, Frog, herring. Leech. Man. Tin.
Antimonie, mercury. Ammoniack. Garments to preserve from m^ths. Moth. Geese
hurtful to. Kid. Genitals to heat. Beaver. Be. Gnats to kill and drive away.
Elephant. Gnat. Gl^coma to help. Dog, goat, hyena, roe-buck, tortise, woolfe.
Gonorrhoea, see Reins running. Glass to mollify. Hee-goat. Gold to dissolve.
Man. Sealed earth. Lead. Antimonie. Marcasite. Common salt, gemme salt, nitre,
vitriol, Arsnick. Gout to cure. Ass, bear, beaver, boar, bull, calfe,
capricerve, cat, chamelcon, cow, dog, fox, goat, hare, heart, hee-goat, hyena,
mol^, mouse, mule, ram, sheep, sow, toad, weasel, woolfe. Bat, cock, crow,
eagle, goose, heron, kite, ostrich, peacock, pigeon, ringdove, storke, swallow,
turkey, turtle, vulture. Cramp-fish, sea-calfe, sturgian, liver-fish, lepus
marinus. Serpent, viper. Be, beetle, leech, pismire, scorpion, snaile,
spanish-flies, worm. Man. Earth-of Samos, fullers earth, sealed earth. Iron,
Antimonie, mercury, litharge. Ammoniack, nitre, vitriol. Agath. asphalt,
brimstone, naphth oil of Peter. Azurestone, bloodstone, crystal, load-st.
marble, asius, medius. Gout causing. Sow. Cock, goose. Eele, lamprey, tunie.
Gout in the hips, see Sciatica. Gravel, see Stone. Green sickness to cure.
Antimonie. G^in swollen or insta^ed to help. Fox, goat, hee-goat, swet-cat,
sow. Cock, turtle. Be, beetle. Earth of Samos. Mercury. Gumms loose and
spungy to strengthen. Ass, cow, dog, goat, heart. Sinople, chalcite. Allume,
common-salt. Coral, alabaster, smyris. Gumms sore and foul to help. Sheep,
woolfe. Cuttle, sprats. Allume. Guts pains to ease, see Bowels pains. Guts
stopped, see Isiack passion to cure. Gypsum, ceruse and quicksilver to help
against. Ass.
H.
HAemoptysis, see Spitting of blood. Hairs causing to grow. Ass, bear, buck,
goat, hare, heart, hedghog, mole. Cock, pigeon. Eele. Lizard, serpent, viper.
Be. Man. Whetstone. Hairs falling off to stay. Ass, bear, bull, calfe, cat,
dormouse, fox, goat, hare, hedghog, hee-goat, mouse, rat, sheep, sow. Cock,
goose, pigeon, sparrow. Frog, scorpion fish, skate, urchin, smaris. Salamander.
Be, fly, leech, spanish-flies. Fullers earth. Gold, iron Arsenick. Emerald.
Hair to beautify. Purple. Earth of Chios. Allume. Hair to take away. Ass,
beaver, dog, frog, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, horse, hyena, lamb, mole,
roebuck, sow. Bat, owl, swallow, aura. Cramp-fish, eele, frog, tunie, lepus
marinus, urticae marinae, pulmo marinus. Prester, seps. Caterpiller, leech,
pismire, seepadde, tike. Cold. Arsnick. Pumice-stone, whet-stone. Hair black
to make. Crow, storke, woodpecker. Fly, leech. Alanian earth, earth of
Eretria. Sorry. Allume. Hair to curle. Ass, camel, ram. Naphth. Hair red to
make. Be. Hair white to make. Boar, mole. Graye, crow, swallow. Hare of the
Seas poison to cure. Ass, cow, horse. Cock, goose. Hawks good for. Pie.
Lyzard, serpent. Butter-slie, leech. Hawks worms to kill, etc. Toad. Sparrow.
Hawks hurting. Craye, crow. Headache to cure. Ass, beaver, bull, cow, dog,
elephant, fox, goat, hare, heart, hyena, mouse, otter, ram, sheep, sow, weasel.
Cock, craye, eagle, goose, houpe, kite, owl, pigeon, swallow, vulture,
lapwing, percnopter. Crab, cramp-fish, lamprey, pike, tench. Dragon.
Cheselippe, leech. Earth of Eretria, japonian earth, sealed earth. Gold, lead,
silver. Antimonie, mercury. Common-salt, vitriol. Amber. Emerald, sapphire,
loadstone, marble, Camphire. Heads baldness to help. Lamb, mole. Heads cold
diseases to cure. Beaver, musk-cat, siver-cat, road. Cock, eagle. Be. Man.
Gold. Antimonie Ammoniack, vitriol. Amber. Heads giddiness and swimming to
help. Beaver, capricerve, cat, hare, musk-cat, otter, panther, rock-goat,
sivet-cat, weasel. Pigeon. Anthias. Silk-worme. Tin. Vitriol. Amber.
Bezoarstone, emerald, pearl, samos stone, astroites. Head to purge. Cow.
Herring. Serpent. Man. Tin. Vitriol. Heads running sores to heal. Ass,
bull, calfe, cow, dog, fox, sow. Cock. Skate, urchin, centrina, murex. Man.
Fullers earth. Antimonie, mercury. Common salt, vitriol. Brimstone. Heads dry
scab and scurfe to cure. Cow, hee-goat. Goose. Heads wounds and fractures to
heal. Cow. Spider. Heads heaviness to cure. Ass, musk-cat. Common-salt.
Brimstone. Heads itching to help. Dog. Head hurtful to, or causing headache.
Ass, cow, fitch, musk-cat. Pigeon. Mackrel. Lizard. Mercury. Heads giddiness
causing. Ass. Snake. Spanish-flies. Health to preserve. Goose. Be, louse.
Gold. Bezoarstone, pearl, sardonyx. Heart to comfort and strengthen against
infection. Ape, elephant, heart, musk-cat, sivet-cat, unicorn. Cock, partridg.
Silk-worme. Sealed earth. Gold, silver. Acharts. B^acar-stone, chrysoprase,
coral, emerald, granate, jacinth, jasper, pearl, sapphire, unicorne-stone,
turch^is, diamond. Hearts faintings, passions and trembling to cure. Ape, hare,
hyena, musk-cat, panther, sow, toad, unicorn. Cock, pie, wood pecker, Mother of
pearl. Spider. Sealed earth. Silver. Common salt, nitre, vitriol. Agath,
amber, amber griece. Bezoarstone, granate, pearl, sapphire, eagle-stone,
unicorne-stone, malachites. Camphire. Heating and discussing. Bear, camel, cat,
cow, heart, hee-goat, hyena, lion, musk-cat, sheep, sow, wool^e. Goose, pigeon,
swallow. Oister. Be, cheselippe, scorpion, worm. Man. Diphryges. Common salt,
nitre. Agath, amber, ambergriece, asphalt, brimstone, naphth, oil of (...),
parmaceti. Fierstone. Heat of the body to cool. Cow, sow. Cock. Crab, frog,
sturgian. Nitre. Sapphire. Heat and moisture natural to preserve. Antimonie.
Hellebore white to help against. Beaver. Henbane, hemlock and cold poisons to
resist. Ass, heart, sow. Be. Hemicrania to help. Cow, Bee-goat, mouse, ram.
Eagle, pigeon. Hepatick to help. Ass, fox, heart, woolfe. Goose, pigeon,
swallow, Cooke-fish, cramp-fish, fork-fish, liver fish, lupus. Iron. Marble.
Hepatick ^ad for. Peacock, coral. Hemorrhoids, see Piles. Hickock or hicket to
stop. Beaver. Hip gout, see Sciatica. Hoarsenesse and loss of the voice to
help. Cock, duck, swallow. Calcedonie. H^arinesse of the hair to prevent.
Ass. Worm. Horses scabs, or farcie to cure. Sow. Horses lively to make. Eele.
Horses hurtful to. Caterpiller. Horses cough and broken windednesse to help.
Heart, sow. Cock, moorehen. Eele. Horses to cause to stale. Beaver, fly. Horses
diseases to help. Horse, sheep, sow. Cock, goose. Lizard, serpent.
Horsel^eches to draw away. Buck. Leech, wall louse. Hot bodies hurtful to.
Beaver. Pigeon, sparrowes, turkey. Crab of the sea, mussels. Be,
spanish-flies. Not bodies good for. Cow, kid, lamb, sheep, Duck. Crab. Humors
gross and cold to concoct and expel. Cow, hedg-hog, sow. Cock. Anchovae,
blatta byzantina, p^l^ ^o marinus. Be, spanish-flies. Gold. Antimonie,
mercury. Common salt, gemme salt, nitre, vitriol. Boz^arstone, granate, man's
bladderstone. Humors sharp and putrid to repress. Cock, goose, Be,
cheselippe. Mercury. Vitriol. Humors fluxibility to stay. Hare, heart Pigeon,
Bole armoniack. Mercury. Humors tough to cut and cleanse. Camel, cow, hare,
sow. Anchovae. Cheselippe. Marle. Iron. Antimonie. Flint, lodestone. Humors
slimy to purge. Sow. Blacktaile. Antimonie. Humors gross causing, and bad.
Ape, buck, heegoat, lion, sow. Quail. Eele, lamprey, mackrell. oister,
porpaise, tunie, whale, catulus, centrina. Hurtful things to the body. Duck.
Hunger to prevent. Horse. Be. Malavar Hydragogon, see Watery humors to purge.
Hydrotick, see Sweat to cause. Hydrophobic to help. Dog, mole, wolf. Goose.
Hypercatharsis, see Purging violently to hinder. Hypochondriack passions to
ease. Sheep, man. Iron, lead. Vitriol. Hysterical see Mothers pains.
I.
IAundise yellow to cure. Ass, bear, Cow, dog, elephant, goat, heart, horse,
linx, lion, ram, roe-buck. sheep. Cock, eagle, goose, partridg, ringdove,
sparrow, wood-pecker. Crow-fish, mackrell, mussels, tench. Be, cheselippe,
louse, moth, scorpion, spanish-flies, worm. Man. Antimonie. Common salt,
nitre, vitriol. Brimstone, bezoarstone, lynx-stone. Jaundise causing. Panther.
Jaundise black to cure. Man. Antimonie. Bezoar-stone. Jaws to help. Ass,
bear, heart, horse, lamb, roe-buck, sheep, swallow. Be, kind. Copper. Nitre.
Melitites. Illiack passion to help. Sheep. Cock, partridg, pigeon, goldfinch.
Crucifer. Illiack passion causing. Sow. Impostumes to cure. Ass, bear, beaver,
bull, cow, dog, goat, hee-goat, horse, mole, sow. Cock, goose, vulture. Mole,
anthias. Serpent. Antimonie. Pearl, talch. Impostumes causing. Leech.
Impostumes hard to ripen and cleanse. Ass, cow, dog, hee-goat, horse, toe-buck,
sheep, sivet-cat, sow. Cock. Be. Antimonie. Impostumes inward to help. Sow.
Impregnation to counterfeit. Hornet, wasp. Insatuating. Ass. Enchantments to
help. Ass. Mercury. Jasper, sapphire, amianth, lynx-stone. Infection to
resist. Horned-snout. Amber griece. Malachites. Infections causing. Duck,
goose. Inflammations to assuage. Boar, Calfe, lamb, sheep, sow. Goose,
woodpecker. Crab, cramp-fish, frog, Leech, scorpion, spider, worm. Man. Earth
of Chios. Lead. Mercury, litharge. Allume. Naphth. Sapphire, azure-stone,
ostracites. Camphire. Inflaming. Cock, pigeon. Dragon, double-head, lizard,
prester. Snake, viper. Scorpion, spider. Inks spots to remove. Ostrich* Aqua
fortis, see Nitre. Intestines or intrals to help. Camel, elephant, goat, hare,
heart, mu^^-cat, sheep. Cock, houpe, turtle, vulture. Be, worm. Antimonie,
Common salt, vitriol. Amber, amber griece. Pearl. Intrals to open and cleanse.
Cock. Man. Iron. Antimonie. Nitre, vitriol. Brimstone. Intrals exulcerated to
cure, see Bowels. Intrals hurtful to. Oister. Silver. Mercury. Intrals
exulcerating. Arsnick. Joint aches and pains to ease. Badger, bear, beaver,
boar, calfe, cat, dog, fox, goat, hare, hyena, ibe^, lion, sheep, sow, weasel,
woolfe, Cock, duck, goose, kite, ostrich, pigeon. Frog, mussels, tenth, mole,
ce^^trina. Viper. Be, spanish-flies, worm. Iron. Antimonie, merourie. Common
salt, nitre. Agath, naphth, oil of Peter. Pearl. Joints luxate to settle.
Boar, calfe, cow, dog, goat, heart, horse, li^^x, sheep, sow. Be, Man. Common
salt, nitre. Sand-stone. Joints swelling to cure. Ass. Oker. Agath, brimstone.
Joints to strengthen. Beaver, boar, calfe, cat, goat. Goose, hawk, pigeon, pie.
sparrow, storke. Man. Brimstone. Joints cold and stiffness to help. Cat, cony,
sow. Be. Man. Iron to harden and color. Allume. Iron to preserve. Bear.
Ischury causing. Salamander. Iron. Itch to cure. Cock, goose, Crab, cuttle,
fork-fish, frog, thornback. Pismire, spanish-flies. Man. Sealed earth.
Antimonie, mercury, sinople. Allume, common salt, nitre, vitriol. Arsnick,
asphalt, brimstone. Bezoar-stone, sapphire, talch. Itch causing. Scolopender.
Allume plumose, common-salt. Juice good of. Buck, camel, cow, hare, danta.
Bistard, blackbird, buzzard, cock, duck, heath-cock, lark, moorehen, peacock,
pheasant, pigeon, stare, thrush, turtle, wood-cock, clotbird, curlne,
feldefare, goldfinch, gluts, phenicopter, red-shanks, robin red-breast, rooks,
shovel^r, smitings, stone-chatters, witwall, flamenco, curicaca, jaribuguacu,
cariama, maguari, guarauna, aiaia, cocoi, mareca. Barbel, bream, cook-fish,
cramp-fish, crevisse, crow-fish, dace, dragon, eele, grailing, gudgin,
guilthead, hornbeake, lamprey, maids, mullet, oister, pike, plaise, roche,
shrimp. smelts, sole, sturgian, trout, umber, whiting, alderling, blacktaile,
haddocks, loche, millers-thumbs, oldwives, thrush-fish, amia, cannes, chromis,
cantharus, chama, faber, lupus, lavaretus, musculus, nasus, orphus, sargus,
smaris, scolopax, salmerinus, umbla, tajasica, paru, etc. Juice evil of. Ass,
bear, bull, cow, fox, goat, hee-goat, horse, ram, sow. Barnicle, bittor, coot,
craye, crow, duck, pie, sparrow, stare, storke, swallow, swan, jay, jack-daw,
oxe-eye, teale, widgin, woodpecker, wren, Avis day, jacacintli,
achalalalactli, amalozque Barbel, bleye, carp, cramp-fish, dolphin, eele,
fork-fish, frog, lumps, mussels, poulp, sea-calfe, tench, tunie, whale, mole,
peacockfish sword-fish, sticklebacks. Citharus, centrina, musculus, zygaena,
pholas. Juice thick of. Bear, boar, bugil, cow, elk, fox, goat, hare, lion,
otter, sow, woolfe. Cormorant, crane, duck, eagle, goose, kite, ostrich, owl,
peacock, pigeon, acacalotl. Eele, flounder, mackrell, oister, salmon, sturgian,
tench, cod^ling, roughtaile, gobergus, molva, sarachus. Juice thin and watery
of. Ass, hyena. Groundlin. Itch, see Scab. Ixa's ipoyson to resist. Hare, kid.
K.
KErnels hard and knots to consume. Fox, mole. Vulture. Serpent. Arsnick.
Asius. Kibes and chilblaines to cure. Ass, bear, cow, dormouse, goat, hare,
heart, horse, lamb, lion, ram, rat, sheep, sow. Goose. Sturgian. Allume,
common-salt. Oil of Peter. Kidneys good for, see Reins. Kidneys to cleanse.
Pigeon. Kidneys pains to ease. Ass, fox. Cock, heath-cock. Lamprey, mullet,
pike. Be. Nitre. Kidneys ulcers to cure. Cock. Mercury. Kidneys hurtful to.
Eele. Kings evil to cure. Cow, heart, mole, sheep, sow, toad. Anthias. Adder,
lizard, serpent. Chesclippe. Man. Antimonie. Bezoarstone, limestone,
spunge-stone, millstone.
L.
LAmeness in the joints to cure, see Joints. Lamps serving for. Groundlin,
mole, sarachus. Lasks to stay. Ass, bull, calfe, camel. Laskes or looseness
causing, see Flux. Leanness causing. Hare. Eagle. Mussels. Leanness helping.
Ass, scinck, woolfe. Leeches how to use. Leech. Leeches to remove. Leech.
Legs scabbed ulcers to heal. Bear, cow, goat, heart, sow. Cock, vulture.
Snaile. Iron. Amianth. Legs weak to cure. Pigeon. Leprosy to cure. Ass,
badger, bear, bull, calf, cow, dog, elephant, fox, goat, heart, hedghog,
hee-goat, hyena, mole, porcupine, scin^, weasel. Bi^gander, cock, cormorant,
houpe, partridg, peacock, ringdove, vulture, lapwing, ossifrage. Dolphin,
forkfish, lamprey, salmon, sea-calfe. Dragon, serpent, viper. Bu^necow, locust,
moth, pismire, spanish-flies. Earth of melo^. Gold. Antimonie, mercury.
Allume, common salt, nitre. Asphalt, brimstone. Bezoar, stone, adarce. Lepry,
melancholy, etc. causing. Cow. Pigeon. Eele. Lethargy to cure. Ass, beaver,
boar, calfe, elephant, goat, sheep, weasel. Pigeon, vulture. Sea-calfe,
ichthiocolla. Leech, wal-louse. Amber, brimstone, naphth Marble. Lethargy
causing. Mackrel. Ammodyte, myllet. Lice and nits to kill. Bull, calfe, dog,
elephant, goat, heart, horse, sow. Cock. Be, louse. Mercury. Allume, nitre.
Lientery to help. Ringdove. Gudgion. Man. Iron. Lightning to defend from.
Seahorse. Lions diseases to c^re. Ape. Lips chapped etc. to cure. Heart,
hee-goat, kid. Cock, goose, swallow, oister. Be. Liver obstructed to open and
purge. Cock. Man. Rubric. Iron. Antimonie, mercury. Common salt, nitre,
vitriol. Agath, brimstone. Camphire. Livers pains and statulency to cure.
Cock, partridg, vulture, mo^e. Brimstone. Liver to strengthen. Camel, elephant,
lion, musk-cat, sow. Cock, partridg, mackrel, perwinckle, centrina. Sealed
earth. Iron, lead. Beril, Coral. Liver hot to cool. Hee-goat. Cook-fish,
Snaile. Camphire. Livers scirrbus to cure. Bear, woolf. Skate, centrina. Leech.
Man. Livers ulcers to heal. Horse. Livers flux to stop. Duck. Sapphire. Liver
offensive to. Bear, cow. Eele. Myllet, viper. Be. Lizard to help against.
Beaver. Lizard. Lodestone to fortify, see Lodestone. Loathing of meat
causing. Duck. Loins pains to ease. Bear, boar, hyena, sheep. Eagle, goose,
pigeon. Lizard. Love causing. Woodpecker. Love dissolving. Chameleon. Lousy
evil to cure. Calfe, heart, sheep. Serpent. Arsenick. Lunaticks to help.
Woolfe. Lungs to open and cleanse. Bear, cow, fox, have, mouse, weasel. Cock.
Lizard. Be. Lead. Antimonie. Vitriol. Arsnick, brimstone, parmaceti.
Chrysolite. Lungs distillations and consumption to cure. Crab, purple. Snaile.
Man. Brimstone. Lungs inflammations and ulcers to cure. Cow, dormouse,
rock-goat. Purple. Be, snaile Man. Antimonie. Nitre. Brim-st. bezoar-st.
bloud-st. Lungs cold to warm. Beaver. Brimstone. Lungs roughness to help.
Cow. Snaile. Lungs pains to ease. Snaile. Lungs hurtful to. Heart. Eele,
tench. Lust or venery to provoke. Ass, badger, bear, beaver, boar, bull, cow,
crocodile, fox, frog, goat, hare, heart, horse, hyena, linx, mouse, musk-cat,
panther, scinck, sivet-cat, sow, toad, woolfe, carygueja. Buzzard, cock, crow,
duck, eagle, goose, kite, ostrich, partridg, pheasant, pigeon, quail, sparrow,
turkey, vulture. Carp, cocks, cuttle, lamprey, oister, poulp, roche, shrimp,
thorne-back, lupus, urticae marinae. Be, burn-cow, pismire, spanish-flies,
wall-louse. Copper. Common salt, vitriol. Beril, bezoarstone, ruby,
cocks-gizard-stone. Lust to repress. Bull, dog, elephant, goat, linx, mule,
panther, ram, seahorse, tortise, woolfe. Ringdove, turtle. Barbel, crampfish,
mullet, suck-stone. Leech. tike. Iron, lead. Jasper, sapphire, sardonyx, topaz.
Camphire. Luxations, see Joints luxate.
M.
Madness, see Frenzy. Males to produce. Calfe, fox, hare, hee-goat. Marasmus,
see Consumption. Marine creatures bitings, see Beasts venim and bitings. Mares
to cause to go to horse. Horse. Cock. Matrix, see Mother. Measils to cure.
Antimonie. Amber. Bezoarstone. Melancholy to repress and purge. Ass, calfe,
capricerve, cow, elephant, heart. Blackbird, cock, hawk, owl, pigeon, pie,
aura. Leech. Gold, lead, silver, tin. Antimonie. Nitre, vitriol. Bezoarstone,
calcedonie, chrysolite, pearl, sapphire, sardonyx topaz, armenian-stone,
azure-stone, eagle-stone, diamond. Melancholy breeding. Buck, bugil, cow, goat,
heart, lion, mouse, musk-cat, rock-goat, sow, woolf. Blackbird, crane, duck,
peacock, pigeon, quail. Dog-fish. Coral black, emerald, granate, astroites.
Members weak to strengthen. Calfe, cow, fox, goat, gulion, hare, lamb,
musk-cat, rainger. Be. Amber. Memory to strengthen. Badger, buck, chameleon.
Cock, houpe, partridg, swallow, turtle. Man. Tin. Vitriol. Emerald. Memory
hurting. Ram, fow. Mice to kill and drive away. Cat, cow, rat, weasel. Metal
to cleanse. Alanian earth, chalk. Antimonie, mercury. Cleaving-stone,
samos-stone, smyris. Milk to cause in women's breasts. Ass, cow, hare, sow,
carygueja, partridg, glaucus, smaris. Worm. Marle. Pearl, crystal,
galactites, quandros, crucifer. Milk curdling in the stomach to dissolve.
Ass, boar, goat, hare, kid, lamb. Be. Milks curdling to cause. Calfe. Mirth
causing. Musk-cat. Gold. Antimonie. Bezoarstone, coral, corneol, granate,
jacinth, pearl, ruby, sapphire, sardonyx, topaz, azure-stone, chelidonius,
turchois. Misseltoe to help against. Beaver, goat, hare, kid. Be. Moisture
superfluous to consume. Mouse, roe-buck, sheep. Naphth. Pearl, fier-stone.
Moist things. Bear, lamb, sheep, sow, weather. Cock, duck, quail, Barbel,
carp, crab, crampfish, crevisse, hornbeak, oister, pike, skate, thornback,
sea-hawk, mormyrus, membras. Man. Silver. Parmaceti. Moles, see Child and
foetus to expel Mole to drive away. Mole Man. Mollifying. Badger, bear, boar,
bull, calfe, cat, cow, heart, sheep, sow, squirrel. Cock, duck, goose, swan,
vulture, huso, mormyrus. Lizard, serpent. Be. Worm. Man. Alanian-earth, earth
of Eretria. Lead. Silver. Nitre. Agath, naphth. Morphew to cure. Bull, cow,
dog, hee-goat, mouse, ram, sheep, sow, toad. Goose, peacock, pigion, stare,
swan. Serpent. Locust. Antimonie, litharge. Nitre. Brimstone. Fierstone,
adarce. Moths to destroy. Moth. Mothers pains, windiness and suffocation to
help. Ass, beaver, bull, dog, elk, fox, goat, hare, heart, horse, hyena, kid,
musk-cat, otter, panther, scinck, sheep, sivet-cat, sow, toad, tortise, woolfe.
Cock, goose, partridg, peacock, pheasant, vulture. Dolphin, eele, mackrell,
sea-calfe, blatta byzantina. Burn-cow, pismire, see-padde, spanish-flies,
spider, wall-louse. Man. Copper, tin. Antimonie. Ammoniack, vitriol. Agath,
amber, brim-stone, naphth. Bezoarstone. Camphire. Mothers cold griefs to cure.
Ass, beaver, calfe, heart, mouse, sivet-cat. goose, ringdove. Copper. Oil of
Peter. Bezoarstone. Mother hurting. Goat: Mothers inflammations to assuage.
Ram, sheep, Goose. Mothers impostumes and ulcers to cure. Ass, calfe, cat,
fox, heart, sheep. Cock, goose. Crab. Mother fallen to restore. Bear, bull, cow,
musk-cat, ram, woolfe. Cock, goose, crampfish; fork-fish, poulp. Naphth.
Mothers hardness, and tumors to lenifie. Ass, calfe, cow, goat, heart. Goose,
swan. Poulp. Burn-cow. Mouths sores and ulcers to (...) Calfe, cow, hare,
heart, hyena, sheep, Goose. Sturgian, smaris. Be. Bole armoniack. Copper.
Allume, vitriol. Arsenick. Coral. Mouths inflammations and heat to allay.
Dog. Jacinth. Mouths stench to cure. Badger, hare, hyena, musk-cat. Sprats.
Serpent. Mouth awry to help. Cat. Mushroomes to help against. Kid. Cock. Be.
Nitre, vitriol. Musks scent to recover. Musk-cat.
N.
Nails rugged and overgrown to help. Ass, bull, calf, cat, dog elephant,
goat, hee-goat, mole, sheep, sow. Frog. Be. Iron. Allume. Arsenick, brimstone.
Nails loose to take away. Spanish-flies. Narcotick, see Stupifying. Scinck,
Memphites. Nauseousnesse causing, see Stomach hurtful to. Necks crick to help.
Bear, beaver, cow, goat, lamb, sow. Crane, goose, pigeon. Anthias. Viper.
Neesing to provoke. Beaver. Storke. Viper. Nitre, vitriol. Pumice stone.
Nephritick, see Kidneys pains. Neurotick, see Sinews. Nightingals to cure.
Pismire. Night mare to help. Agath. Lynx-stone. Nipples sore to cure. Be. Nits
to kill, see Lice. Nodes, see Kernels. Nomae, see Ulcers foul, spreading, etc.
Nose bleeding to stop. Ass, beaver, boar, camel, cow, goat, hare, hee-goat,
horse, lamb, sheep, toad. Cock, duck, goose, pigeon. Carp, frog. Snaile. Man.
Bole armoniack, clay, sealed earth. Chalcite. Nitre. Coral, corneol,
boodstone, unicorne-stone. Camphire. Nose bleeding to cause. Musk-cat. Goose.
Nose's polypus, and filthy ulcers to cure. Heart. Goose. Poulp. Arsnick.
Nostrils stench to help. Ass. Goose. Nourishing much. Boar, calfe, cony, cow,
goat, heart, horse, kid, sheep, sow. Cock, duck, goose, partridg, peacock,
pheasant, ringdove, turkey, mayae. Carp, crab, cramp-fish, crevisse, dragon,
eele, flounder, gudgin, guilthead, lamprey, lobster, mackrel, maids, mullet,
mussels, perch, perwinckle, poulp, roche, salmon, scorpion-fish, skate,
thornback, tunie, yard, blacktaile, loche, swallow-fish, stock fish,
sword-fish, shads, anthias, cantharus, chama, glaucus, lupus, lavaretus,
mormyrus, orphus, sargus, tethyia. Be. Nourishing little. Cow, heart.
Blackbird, goose, quail. Anchovae, cookfish, crowfish, cuttle, gudgin, sprats,
umber, whale, amia. Numnesse to help. Hare. Pigion. Mole. Double-head.
Numnesse causing. Fork-fish. Arsnick. Nyctalops to help. Goat, rock-goat,
roe-buck, sheep. Owl, pie.
O.
OBstructions to remove. Camel, elephant. Cock, starre-gazer. Serpent. Be,
cheselippe, spanish-flies. Man. Gold, iron, Antimonie, mercury. Ammoniack,
common salt, vitriol. Brimstone. Flint, man's bladder-stone. Obstructions
causing. Sow. Goose. Mackrel, tench. Prester. Iron. Antimonie, chalcite,
cadmia, litharge. Allume. Asphalt. Oedemata see Swellings. Oligotrophick, see
Nourishing little. Opening. Beaver, dog. Goose. Mussels. Cheselippe, scorpion,
worm. Man. Iron. Common salt, vitriol. Brimstone. Bezoar-stone. Ophthalmick,
see Eyesight to quicken. Opisthotonos, see Contraction of the body backwards.
Opium to resist. Beaver. Be. Oppilations causing, see Obstructions.
Orthopnoea, see Breathing upright. Oxydorkick, see Eyesight to quicken.
P.
Pains in the body to ease. Ass, badger, bear, beaver, bull, cow, dog, goat,
heart, hee-goat, horse, hyena, lion, sheep, sivet-cat, weasel. Cock, goose,
partridg, pigeon, vulture, hoactzin. Crab, crampfish, frog, musculus. Be,
beetle, fly, glow-worme, leech, scorpion, spanish-flies, worm. Man. Mercury.
Common salt, nitre, vitriol Agath, parmaceti. Eagle-stone, malachites. Pains
in the back to help. Cat. Paint. Oker, rubric. Allume. Pallat, see Uvula.
Palsy to cure. Bear, beaver, dog, dormouse, fox, goat, hare, lion, musk-cat,
otter, panther* rat. Crane, goose, owl, pigeon, stork. Viper. Be, pismire.
Man. Gold. Antimonie, mercury. Nitre, vitriol. Agath, amber, naphrh, oil of
Peter. Palsy causing. Sow. Mackrel, tench. Paraplexy to cure. Beaver. Passions
to repress. Topaz, samos-stone, chelidonius, malachites. Palympsestus to make.
Ass. Perfumes to make. Musk-cat, sivet-cat, tortise. Pearls to dissolve. Lead.
Pestilence or plague to prevent. Badger, elephant, horse, ram, rock-goat, sow.
Blackbird, cock, pigeon, ringdove, storke, thrush, turtle. Hornbeack, mullet.
Slow-worme. Scorpion, seepadde. Man. Bole armoniack, sealed earth. Gold, lead.
Antimonie, mercury. Common salt, vitriol. Amber, arsnick, brimstone.
Bezoat-stone, coral, emerald, jacinth, pearl, ruby, sapphire, topaz,
ostiocolla, talch, astroites. Camphire. Pestilence causing. Cat. Phagedens, see
Ulcers spreading. Phalangium, see Spiders of the field. Phantasmes to prevent.
Woolfe. Jasper, crucifer. Phlegmons to cure. Cow, sheep. Goose. Earth of Samos.
Philtrons to resist. Sealed earth. Philtrons. Frog. Spanish flies. Man.
Amethist, jacinth. Piles or hemorrhoids to cure. Bear, camel, cat, cow, dog,
heart, hee-goat, lion, otter, seahorse, sheep, sow, toad, woolfe. Goose, pigeon,
swan. Eele, frog, mullet, pike, trout, concha. Beetle, cheselippe, leeches,
locust. Iron, lead, silver. Emerald, pearl, sapphire, cleaving-stone,
spectacle-stone, talch, unicorne-stone, arabicus. Piles or hemorrhoids,
causing, and hurting. Buck, bull, cow. Goose, heron, peacock, stare. Pissing in
bed to stay. Boar, heart, hedg-hog, mouse, porcupine, sheep. Cock. Pismires to
drive away. Pismire. Plague sores to break. Cock. Man, bezoar-stone. Plague
sores to consume. Badger. Oister, tench. Emerald. Plants dead to revive.
Marcasite. Pleurisy to cure. Boar, sheep, sow. Cock, duck, peacock. Crab, pike,
thrush-fish. Be. Man. Antimonie. Nitre, vitriol* Amber. Bezoar-ston, eagle-st,
lynx-st, marble. Pox small to cure and expel. Sealed earth. Gold. Antimonie.
Bezoar-stone, glossopetra, variolatus. Pox marks to take away. Camel.
Grailing, Man. Parmaceti. Poison and infection to resist. Ass, beaver, bull,
camel, capricerve, cony, cow, dog, elephant, ferret, goat, hare, heart,
hee-goat, horned-snout, kid, lamb, lion, mule, musk-cat, rock-goat, scinck,
sheep, sow, tortise, unicorn, weasel. Cock, cormorant, duck, goose, pheasant,
stare, stork, ibis. Crab, dragon, frog, purple. Serpent. Scorpion, see padd,
spanish-flies, wal-louse. Man. Bole armoniack, chalk, earth of Lemnos, earth
of Samos, sealed earth, selenuntine earth. Gold, iron. Mercury. Common salt,
vitriol. Arsnick, brimstone. Achates, amethist, bezoarstone, coral, emerald,
granate, jacinth, pearl, ruby, sapphire, crystal, marble, ostiocolla,
unicorne-stone, glossoperra, astroites, heliotropium. Camphire. Poysonsome.
Badger, bear, bull, car, ferret, heart, horse, ounce, panther, ram, rat, shrew,
wesel, tatus. Bat, ibi^. Barbel, forkfish, pike. Adder, ammodyte, aspe, boas,
cockatrice, darte, dipsas, double-head, dragon, dryine, haemorrhe, horned
serpent, lizard, millet, neut, pelias, prester, salamander, seps, serpent,
slowworm, snake, viper. Burncow, scolopender, scorpion, spanish-flies, spider.
Bras, led, silver. Mercury, cobalt. Arsnick. Psilothrons, see. Hairs falling
off to cause. Phthisick to cure. Ass, cow, dog, fox, goat, heart, hedg-hog,
horse, rock-goat, sheep, sow, woolfe. Cock, goose, pheasant. Crevisse. Snaile.
Man. Lead. Antimonie. Brimstone. Marble. Prester to help against. Beaver.
Tunie. Prester. Privities botches. Boar, bull, dog, horse, ram, sheep, fow.
Punctures to help against. Goat, woolfe. Purging the body of ill humors. Sow.
Antimonie, mercury. Nitre, vitriol. Arsnick. Bezoarstone, azurestone,
calaminare, chelidonius. Putrefaction to prevent. Elephant, heart, Heath-cock,
partridg, peacock, pheasant. Be,, silkworme. Man. Bole armoniack. Sealed
earth. Gold, iron. Antimony, mercury. Allume, ammoniack, common salt, nitre,
vitriol. Brimsto^. Jacinth, pearl, ruby, glossopetra. Camphire. Nutrifying
quickly. Lamb, mouse, sheep, sow, woolfe. Cock, quail. Eele, mussels, sprats,
tench, trout, salmerinus. Pelias. Arsnick.
Q.
QUinsey to cure. Ass, boar, bull, camel, cony, dog, goat, kid, lamb, mouse,
sow, toad, woolf. Cock, goose, owl, pigion, swallow. Crab, crevisse, herring,
sea-calfe. Be, catterpiller, cheselippe. Leech. Man. Antimonie. Allume,
ammoniack, commonsalt, nitre. Quinsey causing. Pigeon. Quickfading flower
resisting. Goat. Quicksilver to resist. Ass, dog, sow. Gold. Crystal.
Quicksilver to fix. Antimonie. Virtiol.
R.
RAts to kill. Rat. Reds to cure. Goose. Redness of the face to cure, see
Face. Reins to cleanse. Ass, cat, cow, horse, ram. Cock, goose. Crowfish,
cuttle, mussels. Copper, iron. Nitre, vitriol. Bezoar-stone. Reins heat to
allay. Bear, capricerve. Cock. Be. Reins cold to heat. Cat. Reins running to
cure. Beaver. Cock. Cuttle, frog. Iron, lead. Mercury. Amber. Coral,
lodestone, unicorne-stone. Camphire. Reins pains to ease. Ass, badger,
bear, boar, goat, hare, hedghog. hyena, lamb, linx, scinck. Cormorant, crane,
pheasant, pigeon, storke, turtle. Crab, crowfish, atherina, lupus, tethyia.
Cheselippe, scorpion. Gold. Nitre. Oil of Peter. Jasper, nephritick stone,
lynx-stone, marble, myexis, ammytes, crucifer. Reins stone to break, see Stone
to break. Rest or sleep to procure. Beaver, boar, dormouse, goat, hedghog,
horse, musk-cat, sheep. Bat, cock, cuckoe, goose, heron, houpe. Sea-calfe.
Aspe. Kind. Nitre. Coral, jacinth. Camphire. Restorative. Buck, musk-cat.
Cock, partridg, pheasant, pigeon. Snaile. Bole armoniack. Gold. Antimonie.
Nitre. Ambergriece. Rheumes and distillations to stay. Ass. Rheumes hurtful
to. Turkey. Rheumes falling on the Teeth to stop, see Teeth. Ringwormes to
cure. Bull, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, mouse, panther, ram, sheep, sow. Goose,
pigeon, stare. Dolphin, fork-fish, frog, lamprey. Viper, Be, burn-cow, leech,
tike. Man. Lead. Mercury, marcasite. Common salt. Brimstone. Bezoar-stone,
pumice-stone. Ripening and suppurating. Goat, hee-goat. Cock. Ruptures, see
Burstings. Rust to preserve from, see Iron to preserve.
S.
Sadness, see Melancholy. Scabs and scurfe to heal. Ass, bull, cow, dog,
goat, horse, panther, porcupine, ram, sheep, sow. Cock, goose. Lamprey,
sea-calfe, skate. Dragon, serpent. Moth, pismire, spanish-flies. Man. Gold,
silver. Allume, common salt, nitre, vitriol. Arsnick, brimstone. Bezoar-stone,
sapphire, amianth. Scab and itch causing. Be. Scabs running to cure.
Antimonie. Scabs causing. Cow. Cock. Scaldings to cure. see Burnings. Scarrs to
heal. Lizard. Sciatica or hipgout to cure. Ass, beaver, bear, cow, dog,
elephant, goat, hare, heart. ibex, mouse, mule, sow. Blackbird, goose, pigeon.
Herring, sturgian, tethyia. Lizard. Be, pismire. Sorry. Brimstone. naphth.
Scirrhus's to cure. Cow, lion, mouse. Bat, goose. Scorpions stinging to cure.
Ass, beaver, calfe, goat, hare, horse, mole, mouse, ram, sow, tortise, weasel.
Cock, eagle, percnopter. Crab, mullet, smaris. Lizard. Locust, seepadde, worm.
Man. Tin. Brimstone. Achares, sapphire. Scorpions to drive away. Scorpion.
Scurfe to cleanse, see Dandriffe. Scurvy to cure. Cow, goat, Goose, Worm. Man.
Antimonie. Allume, nitre. Brimstone. Sea serpents etc. virulent bitings to
cure. Houpe. Mullet. Secundine to expel, see Afterbirth. Seed to increase,
see Sperme. Senses to quicken. Cock. Senses dulling. Mackrel. Asphalt. Serpents
to kill and drive away. Bull, crocodile, goat, heart, horse, hyena, kid, lion,
panther. Crane, eagle, kite, vulture, ibis. Serpent. Caterpiller. Agath,
asphalt. Suetinus. Serpents etc. stingings and venomous bitings to help.
Beaver, boar, calfe, cow, elephant, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, horse,
ichneumon, kid, mouse, ram, seahorse, sheep, sow. Cock, vulture. Crab,
gudgion. Adder, ammodyte, aspe, boas, cockatrice, dart, dipsas, double-head,
dragon, dryine, haemorrhe, horned serpent, lizard, myllet, neut, pelias,
prester, salamander, seps, serpent, slowworme, snake, viper. Be, hornet,
scorpion, spanish-flies, wall-louse, wasp, worm. Man. Earth of Samos. Lead.
Common salt, nitre. Naphth. Achates, bezoarstone, bloud-stone, marble. Shingles
to help. Cat. Shortness of breath, see Breath short. Shrew mouse's bitings to
cure, etc. Hare, horse, lamb, mole, mouse, ram, shrew. Bat, craye. Sides pains
and stitches to ease. Boar, heart. Duck, goose, houpe, pigeon, lapwing. Bearch,
ruffs, tethyia. Vitriol. Naphth. Bezoarstone. Sick people hurtful to.
Sturgian. Silence causing. Chameleon. Silver rusty to cleanse. Pelican. Sinews
diseases to cure. Beaver, fox, hyena, mouse, otter. Cock, crane, duck, storke.
Frog. Viper. Be, beetle, worm. Nitre. Brimstone. Sinews to strengthen.
Beaver, cow, fox, linx, musk-cat, otter. Ostrich, storke, swan, vulture.
Pismire, snaile, worm. Amber, brimstone, oil of Peter. Pearl. Sinews
pains, shrinking, and stiffness to cure. Cony, cow, dog, fox, goat, hedghog,
hyena, lion, mouse, otter, sheep, sow, weasel. Cock, eagle, ringdove, storke,
vulture. Eele. Be, worm. Man. Gold. Common salt, nitre. Asphalt, brimstone.
Loadstone. Sinews prict or cut to help. Sow. Crab. Leech, snaile, worm.
Asphalt. Sinews hurtful to. Barbel, lamprey, mackrel. Lead. Antimonie.
Hexecontalithus. Sivet to adulterate. Sivet-cat. Man. Skins fretting and
gallings etc. to help. Cow, goat, horse. Leech. Sapphire, talch, adarce. Skin
smooth to make. Hare, sheep, toad, weasel. Hawk, ichthyocolla. Serpent. Be,
snaile. Man. Antimonie, mercury, marcasite. Common salt, nitre, vitriol.
Bezoarstone, ostracites. Skin white to make, see Face. Sleep procuring, see
Rest to cause. Sleep hindering, see Watching to cause. Smelling sweet.
Musk-cat, sivet-cet. Speech lost to restore. Camel. Sperme or seed to increase.
Goat, heart, musk-cat, scinck. Cock, crane, duck, heath-cock, turtle. Eele,
umber, yard. Pearl. Spermes corruption to help. Bezoar-stone. Sperm to dry up.
Mullet. Sphacelus to cure. Mercury. Spider's poison to resist. Beaver,
crocodile, tortise. Coote. Mullet. Achates, astroites. Spider's of the fields
poison to resist. Beaver, sheep. Cock. Pismire, spanish-flies. Spitting of
blood etc. to stay. Ass, Badger, boar, bull, cow, hare, heart, hee-goat, kid,
mouse, sow. Cock. duck. Crab. Snaile, spider. Bole armoniack, earth of Lemnos,
earth of Samos, sealed earth. Sinople. Allume. Arsnick. Granate, sapphire,
boodstone, moroctus. Spittle to provoke. Be. Antimonie, mercury. Spirits to
strengthen, and quicken. Beaver, mule, muskcat. Cock, hathcock, pigeon. Crab.
Pismire, silke-worme. Gold, silver. Amber-griece. Bezoar-stone, coral, pearl,
ruby, topaz, astroites, prasius. Spleens diseases to cure. Ass, boar, camel,
cow, dog, fox, goat, hare, heart, hedg-hog, hyena, mule, sheep, sow, tortise.
Gormorant, crow, pigeon. Dolphin, flounder. Be, leech. Man. Gold, iron.
Antimonie, mercury. Brimstone, oil of Peter. Coral, azure-stone, whet-stone,
lodestone. Spleens hardness, obstructions and swellings to cure. Ass, camel,
cow, goat, heart, horse, kid, sheep. Crane, ostrich. Flounder. Man. Iron, lead.
Mercury. Allume, common salt, nitre, vitriol. Spleens windiness to cure. Sow.
Man. Spleen stopping. Bear, cow. Peacock. Eele, blatta byzantina. Be. Spleen
wasting. Camel. Coral, fier-stone. Splinters, thorns, broken bones, etc. to
extract. Boar, cat, cow, fox, goat, hare, hedg-hog, hee-goat, mouse, sow,
carygueja. Crab, shrimp, sturgian. Lizard. Be, cheeselippe, moth,
spanish-flies, worm. Vitriol. Lodestone. Spots, freckles, pimples, etc. to
remove. Ass, bear, bull, calf, cow, crocodile, dog, goat, hare, heart,
hee-goat, lion, roe-buck, scinck, seahorse, sheep, sow, toad. Blackbird.
Cuttle, pike, murex. Lizard, serpent. Spider. Man. Earth of Melos. Silver.
Nitre. Fier-stone, talch, melitites. Squinancy, see Quinsey, Stingings to cure.
Cow. Stitches to case, see Sides pains. Stomach to help. Beaver, camel, cow,
elephant, goat, hedg-hog, porcupine. Cock, cormorant, duck, eagle, goose,
heath-cock, partridg, pheasant, sparrow, snite, wood-pecker, picicitli,
chicuatli. Anchovae, cramp-fish, crevisse, maids, oister, pike, purple,
black-tail, lupus, murex, sparus, urticae marinae. Be. Copper, iron, silver.
Antimonie. Allume. Jasper, lynx-stone, myexis, malachites, heliotropium.
Camphire. Stomach cold, moist, and weak to strengthen. Cat, cow, heart,
musk-cat, woolfe. Cock, cuckoe, goose, partridg, pheasant, sparrow, turtle,
vulture. Anchovae, bream, cocks, cockles, crevisse, mullet, oister, yards. Be.
Copper, iron. Antimonie. Ammoniack, common salt, vitriol. Amber. Coral,
marble. Stomachs heat to cool. Cow, sheep. Cock. Eele, sturgian, umber.
Chalk. Vitriol. Stomachs pains and gnawings to ease. Ass, beaver, cow, dog,
elephant, hyena, sheep, tortise, woolfe. Cock, cuckoe, goose. Be, scorpion.
Amber. Bezoarstone, jasper, nephritick-stone, pearl, alabaster. Stomachs wind
to break. Beaver, heart, sheep, woolfe. Oister. Stomach to cleanse. Cow. Copper.
Antimonie. Vitriol. Stomachs flux to stay. Partridg, ringdove, wood-pecker.
Pike, glaucus, loligo. Worm. Iron. Amber. Bezoar-stone, samos-stone. Stomach
hurtful to. Ass, bear, heart, hee-goat, horse, musk-cat. Quail. Barbel, eele,
lamprey, mackrel, pike, porpaise, sea-calfe, shrimp, sturgian, tench, tunie,
whale, sword-fish, cannes, citharus, urticae marinae. Asp, myllet, salamander.
Be, burn-cow, spanish-flies. Copper, silver. Antimonie. Common salt, nitre.
Brim-stone. Stone and gravel to expel. Ass, badger, boar, capricerve, cat,
dor-mouse, elephant, fox, goat, hare, heart, hedghog, hee-goat, horse, ibex,
linx, mouse, rock-goat, sheep, sow, carygueja, Cock, cuckoe, goose, lark,
ostrich, pigeon, sparrow, swallow, turtle, woodcock, tit-mouse, wag-taile,
wren, offrifrage. Carp, crab, crevisse, cuttle, herring, lobster, pike,
scorpion-fish, whale, urticae, marinae, pulmo marinus, Be, beetle, cheselippe,
glowworme, gras-hopper, kind, locust, pismire, scorpion, snaile, wall-louse,
worm. Man. Sand, sealed earth. Antimonie, mercury. Allume, ammoniack, common
salt, nitre, vitriol. Bezoarstone, coral, nephritick-stone, crystal, flint,
jewes-stone, limestone, lynx-stone, man's bladder stone, marble, spunge-stone,
myexis, gecolitus, ammytes, heliotropium. Stone in the bladder to help. Ass,
boar, elephant. Snake. Man. Nitre. Bezoarstone, jewes-stone, spunge-stone,
tiburones, gelolitus, trochites. Stone in the kidneys and reins. to expel.
Elephant, lamb, sow, Sparrow. Crow-fish, perch, ruffs. Man. Antimonie. Nitre.
Bezoarstone, spunge-stone, gecolitus, trochites. Stone and gravel breeding.
Cocks, cockles, eele. Stones to dissolve. Vitriol. Limestone. Strains to
help. Serpent. Stranglings of the mother, see Mothers suffocation. Strangury to
help. Ass, boar, goat, heart, hedghog, hee-goat, weasel. Goose, pigeon, pie,
wren, ossifrage, harp. Crab, urchin. Viper. Kind. Amber. Coral. Strangury
causing. Eele. Strengthening. Bore, hare, heart, musk-cat. Cock, duck, goose,
ostrich, turkey. Flounder, gudgin, lobster, perch, perwinckles, shrimp,
smelts, whiting, pagrus, sarachus, Be. Man. Bole armoniack. Gold, iron. Common
salt, nitre. Amber, Achates, berill, bezoarstone, coral, jacinth, pearl,
sapphire, topaz, chelidonius. Stupidity helping. Musk-cat. Cock. Brimstone.
Berill. Chrysolite. Stupidity causing. Cat. Crocodile, mule. Aspe, dryine,
Vitrioll. Styptick, see Astringent. Sunburning to cure. Ass, kid.
Suppurations, see Ulcers. Surfeiting to prevent, and cure. Amethist. Surfeits
causing. Lamprey. Salmon. Sweating to cause. Ass, heart, horned-snout,
unicorne, tatus. Concha. Viper. Be, scorpion, worm. Man. Sealed earth. Gold,
lead. Antimonie, mercury. Sinople. Allume, ammoniack, common-salt, nitre,
vitriol. Amber, arsnick, brimstone. Bezoar-stone, unicorne-stone. Sweating to
hinder. Goat, Be. Earth of Samos, fullers earth. Allume, nitre. Brimstone.
Jasper, sapphire, plaster. Swellings causing. Adder, boas, seps. Hornet, wasp.
Silver. Swellings to consume. Ass, bear, bugil, bull, calfe, camel, cow, fox,
goat, sheep, sow, toad. Cock, crane, goose, pigeon, vulture. Anthias, murex,
musculus. Viper. Be, cheselippe, leech, locust. pismire, spanish flies. Man.
Fullers earth. Litharge. Common salt, nitre. Brimstone. Corneol, fierstone.
Swellings hard to cure. Bear, beaver, bull, cow, dog, goat, heart, sheep. Crane,
goose, ostrich, pigeon, sparrow, lupus. Man. Oker, sand. Lead. Mercury,
tuttie. Common salt, nitre. Brimstone, lithanthrax, Bezoarstone, alabaster,
fier-stone. Swellings soft and oedematous to cure. Oister. Allume. Swellings
hot to cure. Cow. Carp, frog. Leech. Earth of Samos. Swellings cold to help.
Lion. Frog, Agath, oil of Peter. Swellings hard in the privy parts to cure.
Calf, ram, sheep, sow. Fullers earth. Nitre. Pumice-stone. Swellings and
inflammations in the testicles to help. Sheep. Purple. Earth of Samos. Geodes.
Swownings and faintings to cure. Capricerve. Vitriol. Arsnick. Bezoar-stone,
pearl, azure-stone. Swownings and faintings causing. Tatus. Barbel. Adder.
Leech, spanish-flies.
T.
TAbes to cure. Ass, bear, cow. Crab, crampfish, fork-fish, skate. Louse,
snaile. Man. Bole armoniack. Nitre. Topaz. Tasting well. Cock, cuckoe, goose,
hawk, heath. cock, moorehen, nightingale, peacock, pheasant, ringdove, turkey,
turtle, clot-bird, gluts, hickwall, plover, parret, railes, red-shanks, snite,
stone-chatters, teale. Anchovae, barbel, bream, carp, dace, eele, gudgin,
guilt, head, hornbeak, lamprey, mackrel, mullet, mussels, poulp, roche, ruffs,
salmon, sheath-fish, sole, sturgian, thornback, umber, loche, millers, thumbs,
minoes, old-wives, shads, anthias, atherina, amia, cantharus, faber, huso,
lupus, lavaretus, pagrus, sargus. Tasting ill. Barnicle, crane, poole snite,
puffins, sea pie, sea mew, titmouse, yellow-hammer, aura. Cramp-fish, dog-fish,
frog, keeling, sea-calfe, skate, starr-gazer, tunie, whale, zygaena.
Spanish-flies. Ammoniack. Teeth breeding to facilitate. Cow, dog, goat, hare,
horse, sheep. Cock. Crab, dog-fish, lamprey. Be. Teeth loose to fasten. Ass,
bull, cow, goat, heart, horse, mole, porcupine, sheep, sow, woolfe. Dog-fish.
Silk worm. Sinople, sorry. Common salt. Agath. Coral. Teeth to whiten. Goat,
hare, heart, sheep, sow. Cock. Oister, purple, concha, murex. Nitre. Pearl.
Teeth to cleanse. Bear, cow, dog, goat, heart, horse, sow. Cock, Crab, cuttle,
dog-fish, oister, purple, concha, murex. Silke-worme, Corneol, pearl, flint,
pumice-stone, smyris, spectacle-stone, arabicus. Teeth hollow and aching good
for. Bear, mouse. Vitriol. Coral. Teeth hurtful to. Mercury. Teeth to draw
out. Dog. Lizard, serpent. Caterpiller, cheselippe. Man. Toothache to ease.
Bear, beaver, bull, dog, fox, frog, hare, horse, hyena, lion, mole, mouse,
roe-buck, seahorse, sheep, cajotl. Cock, crow, sparrow. Cuttle, dog-fish,
dragon, forkfish, frog, tunie, sargus. Lizard, serpent. Leech, worm. Sorry.
Allume, common-salt, nitre, vitriol. Agath, naphth. Tenesmus to cure. Ass,
cow, goat, sheep, sow. Cock, pigeon. Oister, tethyia. Serpent. Terms of women,
see Courses. Tetanos to help. Beaver, fox. Pheasant. Tetters to heal. Calfe,
mouse, sheep. Lamprey. Spanish-flies. Man. Marcasite. Arsnick, asphalt.
Cleaving-stone. Thirst to quench. Horse, oryx. Cock. Carp, crab, sturgian. Be.
Gold, Common salt, nitre. Achates, crystal, cocks gizard-stone. Thirst
causing. Beaver, camel. Mullet, mussels. Dipsas, dryine, viper. Lead. Arsnick.
Thorns to draw forth, see Splinters Throats almonds to help. Dog. Throats
kernels and swellings to help. Cow, heart, linx, weasel. Vulture. Sprat. Throats
soreness and diseases to cure. Cat, cow. Swallow. Sprats. Agath. Berill.
Throats roughness to lenifie. Cow. Cock, eagle. Eele. Cheselippe. Throats
inflammation to assuage. Cow, dog, Cock. Crevisse. Cheselippe Man. Tigres to
tame. Tigre. Tinctures to draw. Common salt, vitriol. Tympany to cure. Hyena.
Ringdove, sparrow. Toads poison to resist. Heart, toad. Viper. Tongues
roughness to lenify. Cock. Be. Common salt. Tongue inflamed etc. to help.
Cow, dog, goat. Swallow. Crevisse. Sapphire. Tongues palsy to cure. Beaver.
Nitre. Tonsils inflamed to help. Cow, dog, fox, goat, kid, lion, sheep. Cock,
pigeon, swallow, vulture. Be, kind. Chalcite. Common salt. Tormina see
Colic, and bowels griping pains. Travail of women, see Childbirth.
Traumatick or vulnerary, see Wounds. Tumors, see Swellings. Tremblings.
Beaver, bull, dog, fox, hare, hyena, musk-cat. Cock, pigeon. Viper. Mercury.
Nitre. Brimstone.
V.
Vapors, see Fumes. Varices to help. Ass. Sparrow. Veins to open.
Grasshopper. Iron. Veins phlegm and choler to purge. Be. Veins swollen to
help. Calfe, cow, panther. Venery, see Lust. Venim, see Poison. Venoming. Rat.
Vines hurtful to. Spider. Vines to preserve. Bear, cow. Alanian earth. Vipers
bitings to cure. Goat, heart. Duck, eagle, swallow, percnopter. Crab. Scorpion.
Bezoarstone. Ulcers causing. Leech, spanish-flies, Copper. Ulcers and sores to
heal. Beaver, camel, cow, dog, hee-goat, mule, sheep, sow, tortise. Cock,
crane, bowlet, cozquau^tli. Frog, oister, Moth, snaile, spanish-flies, spiders,
woodworme, Man. Chalk, clay, marle. Copper, lead, silver. Mercury, cadmia.
Allume nitre. Arsnick, brimstone, lithanthrax. Azure-stone, limestone, talch,
unicorne-stone, galactites, ostracites. Ulcers or sores eating, running, and
spreading to cure. Ass, boar, bull. Calf, camel, cow, dog, goat, heart, sheep,
sow. Goose, vulture. Frog, sturgian, tunie. Dragon. Be, cheselippe, moth,
spanish-flies, spiders, woodworme. Man. Earth of Lemnos, earth of Samos, sealed
earth, selenuntine earth. Copper, gold, iron, lead, tin. Antimonie, mercury,
chalcite, marcasite, misy, cadmia, diphryges, tuttie. Allume, common salt,
nitre, vitriol. Arsnick. Pearl, ostracites, malachites. Ulcers old and foul to
heal. Ass, bull, calfe, crocodile, dog, hare, hedghog, lamb, ram, sheep,
toad. Swallow. Herring, pike, purple, tunie, urchin, liver-fish. Viper. Be,
kind, snaile, worm. Earth of Lemnos, lead, tin. Antimonie, mercury,
diphryges, litharge, tuttie. Allume, nitre, vitriol. Bezoarstone, limestone,
phrygian-stone. Ulcers hollow and fistulous to cleanse. Ass, bear, beaver,
buck, bull, cow, goat, heart, hedghog, horse, mole, mule, sheep, sow, toad.
Cock, crane. Serpent. Be. Man. Alanian earth. Tin, mercury, chalcite,
marcasite, misy, cadmia, litharge, plumbage. Arsnick. Limestone, pumice-stone,
spectacle stone. Ulcers hollow to fill with flesh. Bear, heart, sheep. Clay,
earth of eretria, oker. Lead, silver. Coral, calaminare, cleaving-stone,
pumice-stone. Ulcers inward to cure. Cow, dog. Brimstone. Sapphire. Ulcers
burning to cool. Goat, hyena, sheep, sow. Earth of Samos. Ulcers in the privy
parts to cure. Calfe, cow, dog, goat, mule, roebuck, sheep, sow. Cock, goose.
Pike, purple, tuttie, murex, smaris. Be. Copper. Allume. Ulcers hurtful to.
Lion. Voice to clear. Cock, crane, duck. Eele, sturgian. Be. Arsenick.
Calcedonie. Vomica, see Impostume. Vomiting to provoke. Boar, panther, tatus,
Cock. Pike. Aspe, viper. Be, pismire, spider. Man. Copper. Antimonie, sinople,
sorry, vitrioll. Arsnick. Borax, calaminare. Vomiting to repress. Heart. Cock.
Mullet. Earth of Lemnos. Vomiting of blood to stop. Hee-goat, lamb. Ureters to
help. Carygueja. Cuttle. Be. Urine to provoke. Boar, camel, cony, goat, hare,
heart, hedghog, hee-goot, horse, mouse, sow. Cock, goose, ringdove, swallow,
thrush, turtle, ossifrage. Cockles, crab, crevisse, cuttle, herring, mussels,
oister, pike, alderling, centrina, julis, murex, musculus, orphus, pinna,
sparus, urticae marinae. Be, beetle, burn-cow, butter-fly, cheselippe,
gally-worme, grasshopper, kind, locust, louse, spanish-flies, wal-louse, worm.
Man. Antimonie. Allume, ammoniack, common salt, nitre, vitriol. Agath, amber,
brimstone. Bezoar-stone, boodstone, jewes-stone, samos stone, tiburones,
trochites, entrochos. Urin stopping. Ass, dog, goat, hare, hee-goat, hyena,
kid, sow. Cock, eagle, goose. Hornbeak, sea serpent, orphus, orphidion. Dipsas,
dryine. Be. Iron, silver. Common salt. Spectacle-stone. Urines heat and
sharpness to help. Hedghog, kid. Cock. Uvula fallen to help. Ass, dog, hare.
Eagle. Allume. Uvula inflamed to help. Lamb. Eagle. Uvula swollen to help.
Lamb. Eagle, swallow. Man.
W.
WArts to take away. Bull, calfe, camel, dog, dormouse, hedghog, hee-goat,
horse, mouse, ram, sheep, sow. Eagle. Eele, glaucus, smaris. Locust. Moth,
snaile, spanish-flies. Copper. Common salt. Wasps, see Bees and flies. Wasting
and corroding. Horse, mouse, rat. Bat, hawk, pigeon, swallow. Salamander.
Burn-cow, spanish flies. Oker. Antimonie, mercury, chalcite, cobalt. Arsenick.
Azurestone, borax, limestone, smyris, thyites. Watching to cause. Hare. Bat,
crow, kings-fisher, nightingale. Amethist, granate. Camphire. Watery humors to
purge. Crab. Antimonie. Marcasite. Weariness to help. Sow. Goose. Common salt.
Nitre. Agath. Weariness causing. Fork-fish. Weather showing. Kid. Coot,
cormorant. Duck, houpe, peacock, swallow, swan, Hornet, pismire, spider.
Jacinth. Wenns and excrescencies to consume. Boar, bull, camel, cow, dog, fox,
goat, heart, hedghog, horse, mole, sheep. Cock. Anthias. Adder, lizard. Man.
Oker, Copper, lead, silver. Antimonie, mercury, cadmia, diphryges. Common
salt, vitriol. Arsnick. Coral. Wheales and pushes to cure. Goat, heart,
hee-goat, horse, sheep. Oister, perch, anthias, ichthiocolla. Serpent.
Pismire. Copper, iron. Antimonie, sinople, tuttie. Nitre. Arsnick. Bezoar st.
marble, melitites. Wheals of the night to cure. Boar, goat. Wheesing to cure.
Bear, camel, fox, hare, heart, horse, sheep. Cock, eagle. Crab, cuttle. Viper.
Be, cheselippe. Man. Iron, lead. Antimonie. Nitre. Brimstone. Chrysolite,
topaz. Wheesing hurtful to. Copper, lead. Whites in women to stop. Elephant.
Cock. pike, tench. Iron. Amber. Coral, amianth, crystal, unicorn st.
Whitlows to cure. Dog, goat. Swallow. Be. Moth. Iron. White scald to cure.
Crow. Wholesome. Nightingale, pigeon, quail, ringdove, turkey, mavisse, railes,
yellow hammer. Bleye, cock-fish, grailing gudgin, mullet, mussels, oister,
roche, ruffs, salmon, whiting, loche, millers thumbs, nunfishes, oldwives,
faber, membras Wind to expel. Bear, beaver, bull, calfe, hyena, musk-cat.
Cock, duck, percnopter. Mussels, tethyia. Pismire. Man. Copper. Nitre.
Brimstone. Bezoarstone. Camphire. Wind engendring. Cow, goat, sow, tatus.
Barbel, groundlin, lamprey, skate, tunie, pinna. Be, burncow, pismire,
scorpion. Wine good to know. Locust. Wine to preserve. Allume. Wit and
understanding to help. Ape, ram. Cock, goose, hawk, heath-cock, swallow.
Turtle. Achates, amethist, berill, chrysolite, corneol, jacinth, topaz. Womb
hurtful to. Musk-cat. Gold. Womb, see Mother. Womb to open and cleanse. Bull,
heart. Goose. Be, spanish-flies. Iron. Antimonie. Nitre. Amber. Wombs pain
after childbirth to ease. Goat, sow. Parmaceti. Women's watery diseases to cure.
Goat, hare, heart, mule, sheep. Goose, ringdove. Crab, cuttle, mussels,
sea-calfe. Allume. Worms to kill. Bull, capricerve, cow, dog, elephant, goat,
heart, horse ichneumon, mouse, roe-buck, sow, unicorne. Houpe, lapwing. Serpent.
Scorpion, spanish-flies, woodworm, worm. Man. Chalk, earth of Lemnos, earth
of Melos, rubric, sealed earth. Antimonie, mercury. Common salt, vitriol.
Brimstone. Bezoarstone, coral, amianth, glossopetra, astroites. Wounds to
heal. Boar, bull, camel, dog, heart, ram, sheep, sow. Cock. Crevisse, eele,
grailing, horn-beak, purple. Lizard. Be, betle, silkworme, snaile, spider,
tike, worm. Man. Bole armoniack, chalk, earth of Eretria, rubric, sealed
earth. Copper, iron, lead. Antimonie, mercury, litharge. Allume, common-salt,
vitriol. Brimstone, oil of Peter. Corneol, lime st. load st. lynx st. Wounds
green to heal. Bull, cow, dog, sheep, sow, spider. Earth of Lemnos, Antimonie.
Wounds inward to heal. Cow, dog. Worm. Sapphire. Wounds bleeding to stop.
Frog, horse, sow. Frog. Be, silkworme, Earth of Eretria. Chalcite. Nitre.
Wounds impostumes to help. Hyena. Wounds and ulcers inflammation to assuage.
Calfe, cow, sheep. Man. Vitriol. Toadstone. Wounds venom to extract. Pigeon.
Be. Man. Earth of Lemnos, sealed. earth. Arsnick. Bezoarstone, loadstone,
myexis, toad-stone. Wrinckles to take away. Ass, cow. Goose, swan. Earth of
Chios. Silver. Spectacle-stone. see Skin to smooth. Writing in the night to
read. Glow-worme.
Y.
YArds excrescencies to wast. Cow, goat, lamb. Cock, pie. Youthfullnesse to
preserve. Serpent. Gold. Bezoar-st. load-st.
FINIS.

