A VINDICATION OF FREE GRACE: IN Opposition to this Arminian Position,
[Naturall Men may do such things as whereunto God has by way of Promise
annexed Grace and Acceptance.]

First Preached, after Asserted At Stephens Coleman-steete London, BY Mr JOHN
GOODWIN.

Also an Appendix proving the souls enjoying Christ after death, before the
Resurrection, against some errors hereafter specified.

Published for the justification of Truth BY S. L.

13. Article of the Church of England. Works done before the Grace of Christ
and the inspiration of his Spirit, do not make men meet to receive Grace.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Michael Spark junior, and are to be sold
at the Blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1645.

To the much esteemed the Auditory of Master John Goodwin, increase of grace be
multiplied to the completing of Christ's stature in you.
Greatly beloved in Christ,
SUch is the peculiarity of mine obligements to that person so Worthy, who
under God has the immediate power over me as would not tolerate my seeking out
any besides, to whom to commend this ensuing Treatise, were it not for this
reason, because I would not seem in the least to engage a person so eminent, in
a business so personal. And amongst you who may seem, and that rightly, in
the eyes of others to be as a Garden of many excellent flowers, whereof it is
hard to pick the fairest: so choice are mine engagements to some, as would
render my personal choice most easy to whom in special to recommend the
same. But as I have shunned advice from any one, or more, that have been, or
are of the whole Auditory, so I choose humbly to tender it to the whole
promiscuously; that so without least prejudice all may unanimouny conspire in
this design of propagating the truth. Wherein, that I suffer not through your
mis-construction, I have next hereto annexed a Breviat of the grounds of my
publishing hereof. Concerning which matter, as I humbly crave your excusing the
rudeness and prolixity of the former Letter ensuing, the rather, because
(though 'twas framed very suddenly) I choose to print the exact Copy of that
which I gave in to Mr. Goodwin, thereby to prevent suspicions of wrong or
mistake, rather then make an amendment thereof. So touching my Reply I also
crave pardon for my boldness, in undertaking an enterprise so weighty; because
(all other ways and means of vindication assayed being frustrated) I deem it
meet for truth to be in some measure vindicated, though in a weak and unworthy
manner, by that very rude pen which has unwittingly been rendered injurious
thereunto. And though I must needs acknowledge this work of mine to be limited
by most unhappy confines, not only as it singles out unto me that person to
deal with, whom I highly respect; but also as it points out an Auditory so
able and judicious to whom to commend it: (which I speak not out of flattery but
to the glory of Gods grace in you) yet as on the one hand the competition being
not between man and man, but man and truth according to that impartial verdit
Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas; it is no hard matter to
determine which of the twain to prefer: so on the other hand, for as much as
there is now no sure or probable way left, standing in competition with this
made choice of; I thence conclude a necessity of prosecuting this way, though
so unworthy of your acceptance. Wherein you may please further to consider that
I trouble you not with needless disputations: but this high question whether
the terms of the Gospel be free or mercenary, which being the foundation of
our faith, is a controversy justified, Jude 3. After which I have in the close
alleged some reasons against three errors there specified; which I the rather
humbly commend to your view; because there be that conceive the substance of
the two former, was publicly delivered in Crooked-Lane London, in a Funeral
Sermon diverse months ago: and that probably before many of you, but by whom
I shall not so much as name, supposing the known mischief of these errors to
be a sufficient motive to this work: Through all which, that God would guide
you to weigh this matter in the balance of the Sanctuary; that rightly
dividing this work to the judgment and affections, both may perform their
respective offices without usurpation, and so conduct you to the desired Goal;
the truth, is the prayer of him who remains,

Yours in humble meekness, truth, and love, S. L.

A Breviate of such special proceedings with Mr John Goodwin as may
sufficiently evince the necessity of publishing the sequel.
NOt to mention the former passages being Epitomized in the beginning of the
ensuing Reply; I diverse months past, desired him to take some time to examine
this matter, and having his promise that I should have notice of his first
leisure, I contented my self her with for sundry months: after which I renewed
my former request, Jan. 2. 1644. whereto receiving this Answer, that I should
have notice of his first leisure, by Mr John Price, I contented my self with
this also, till necessity forced me to commend to him this following Motion.

Sir,
THe drift of your last words to me (Jan. 2. 1644.) being to put me in
expectation of your pre-fixing a time for your perusing my Reply to your
Sermon, which time you promised to make known to my Loving friend Mr John
Price, I accordingly expected the same, and notwithstanding my knowledge of his
long absence from London, I was desirous to forbear the renewing of my desire
till his return; but there is such an alteration now in hand, touching my
proper conditiou, as that I am necessitated without any delay to address my
self to you, humbly desiring your perusal of the said Reply: And that both
because the next week will be inconvenient because of the Fast, and also that I
conceive that my condition afterward will not permit any longer delay. My
desire therefore is, That you would be pleased to take some time this week for
view thereof, that I may know your mind concerning this matter; Of which I pray
be pleased to return a certain Answer to my loving friend Mr William Milner,
whom I make bold withal at the present, because I have a business of much
importance to transact this day; and if I may understand that you will pick out
a time this week, so as that I may know your mind in it, I shall this morning
bring or send the Reply to you, sealed up: Otherwise I conceive I must
necessarily consider upon some way of Vindicating the truth, whether by
publishing, or otherwise, whereto craving your Answer, I rest

Coleman-street Feb. 18. 1644.
for Mr John Goodwin.
Yours in humility, truth, and love. SAM. LANE.


IN Answer whereto he prefixed next Thursday's Even, Feb. 20. the day before
which I meeting him desired him to dispense with mine absence the time
prefixed, because of some special occasions, and in lieu of my coming, to
accept of some friends to be with him, whereto he willingly consenting;
accordingly Mr. Thomas Weaver and another special friend of mine were present,
and read a good part of the Reply: whereto the substance of his Answer was, The
he did not hold, nor go about to prove that God is bound to give g^^^ upon man's
endeavors.

Which Answer so expressly denying the direct tendency of the first error
opposed, and of the following Sermon (both strictly concerning natural men's
power toward attaining grace) puts me out of all expectation of his public
Vindication of that truth, which he thus denies to have at all opposed. Now
forasmuch as the first ensuing Letter, though privately commended, has
occasioned the public preaching of the Sermon following, wherein the Covenant
of Free Grace is bitterly reproached; there appears hence a great necessity of
public vindication thereof. And yet for a more orderly justification, I shall
declare, first, such testimonies as evidence Mr John Goodwins maintaining that
error: secondly, why his maintaining thereof should be publicly mentioned.

The first of which particulars refers to two things, 1. The Testimonies
concerning his first delivery of that error. 2. Those that concern his
Preaching of the ensuing Sermon.


For the former sort of which Testimones, I refer in special to the three
manual Testimonies subscribed to the extract next ensuing. Which extract twice
together contains that error. Besides which I commended two Coppies more of
the same extract to the perusal of Mr Thomas Weaver, and Mr Thomas Ruddyard,
two known exact writers, who both testified, That they found those Coppies to
be the substance of what he then delivered. Yea Mr Goodwin himself immediately
after his Preaching the following Sermon told me he had read the first letter
ensuing, (which charge him with that error) not disclaiming any jot thereof.
All which Testimonies may be looked upon not merely as sufficient, but also as
superfluous, if we observe the ensuing Sermon, in which the same error is
three times repeated, as in the Reply is after declared.

And touching the Testimonies concerning the ensuing Sermon; Though I could not
obtain Mr Goodwins own Coppie, which I desired of him, yet I obtained a Coppie
from Mr Tho. Ruddyard; one, who by Mr Goodwins Testimony to me, was affirmed to
be a very exact writer: Of which Coppie though I could not obtain Mr Goodwins
Examination, which I also desired; yet I obtained the examinaned of two exact
writers, whose subscribed Testimonies are hereafter affixed to that Sermon:
Yea, I had also the verbal Testimonies of Mr John Price, and Mr Henry
Brandrift, who upon perusal affirmed, that they found it to be the same that
Mr Goodwin delivered.

The second thing to be proved is the necessity of publishing his maintaining
the same. For which, I am not to declare how necessary it is that the following
errors should be publicly declaimed against, too sadly known to be now most
rife in this City; but more strictly to show how needful it is to declare
according to the ensuing Testimonies, Mr Goodwins maintaining the same.

First, because his disputings upon this matter have been highly approved of by
many: whereof diverse give this Testimony, That he has cut the hair between
other Divines and the Arminians. Yea, Mr Goodwin told me he was much desired to
Print his disputes against the Arminians, so highly are they esteemed; in the
last of which disputes, the ensuing error was pleaded for.

But secondly, and specially whereas there are (as it is conceived) thousands
now amongst us, who hold that grand error, That God has promised grace upon
man's doing; two of that Sect, discoursing with a Reverend Divine of this City,
told him, That in holding this Tenent, they held but that which Master John
Goodwin maintains, in whom they greatly glory. Now it is not easy to conceive
how great mischief the Preaching and arguing of so eminent a person for that
error may do to the confirming of men therein, especially if we consider how
highly he has gratified the maitainers thereof in another way also; as namely,
by his earnest pleading for a tolleration of any Sect whatsoever.

Thirdly, I might add the consideration of his so often pressing that error,
not only thee several Lords days, on the last of which the ensuing Sermon
was wholly spent to maintain it; but also in some of his last exercises against
the Arminians, in the last whereof the said error was pleaded for, both by
that grand Argument, That God cannot in justice destroy man for not doing that
which is altogether out of his power to do, and also that of Adams not having a
power to believe. Which two Arguments are a great part of the Sermon ensuing:
yea further it has been often acknowledged by a known member of Mr Goodwins
Church that about 7. years ago, he Preached the same matter, and that then
diverse able Divines of this City did affirm to Mr Goodwin that he Preached
Arminianism. Seeing then this error together with its defensive Arguments have
been with great zeal so often inculcated for a more sure and through distilling
the same into the minds of the hearers, hence its necessary not only to
declaim against it, but tanquam digito monstrare, so distinctly and directly to
point it out, as that all such hearers may have peculiar admonishment hereof,
and that by mentioning the publisher of it. Besides which, other grounds might
be urged, but I desire to shun further prolixity herein, which nevertheless I
thought needful to glance at, hereby to show that it has been mine endeavor
so to fulfill the Law of truth, as not to transgress the Law of that Christian
reverence and respect which is due unto him.

S. L.

An extract of some particulars in a Sermon of Mr John Goodwin, of April 12.
1644. which are scrupled.
ONe particular whereof was a third motive he gave to natural men on that Text
1 Cor. 1.3. Which motive was, that if natural men will but engage themselves
withal within them to seek for this grace, they shall surely find it, they
shall not miscarry in it; but certainly this grace shall be vouchsafed to them;
which for proof were alleged two Texts, Mat. 7.7. and John 6.37. Which was
further prosecuted, by answering an Objection touching man's being dead in sins
and trespasses: the fi^th part of which answer was this. Fifthly, That men that
are in such a sense dead in sins and trespasses, have a natural life of
reason, judgment, understanding, conscience, etc. in them: by reason of which
excellent principles of nature, reason, etc. Men are able to ponder upon such
ways and means propounded, and conceive them probable for that work; they are
not so dead, but if they will gave out themselves to do, they may do such
things whereunto God has been graciously pleased to annex a promise of grace,
there is a power in men to do such things (if they will give it forth and
employ it accordingly) as unto which things God has by way of promise annexed
grace and acceptance: for which, besides those Texts forementioned, see Prove.
2.1, 2, 3. and 10.6.27. and strive to enter in at the strait gate.

One Copy whereof sent Mr. Richard Atkins is thus subscribed.

Sir, For the sum and substance you have drawn a true draught of that which
Master Goodwin did deliver.

Yours to command Rich. Alkins.


A second Copy commended to Mr. Laurence Steel is thus subscribed.

I find nothing in substance differing from my Copy, save only I find not the
two first Scriptures in this Sermon, but I suppose I have them in that before.

L. Steel.


A third Copy commended to Mr. John weeks, is thu^ subscribed.

Sir, I have perused this, and find it in the main to agree with mine, only it
was delivered in more full expressions.

Yours John Weeks.


Which 3. Testimonies, as also those two affixed to the ensuing Sermon, are
left with Michael Spark senior, least any calumniate the truth in the Authors
absence.

Errat.
Page 56. line 7. for Gospel read grossest.

The first Letter to Master J. G.
Much Honored Sir,
WHether or no I possess honorable and eminent thoughts of your self, I shall
refer you to those expressions, which my Conscience commanded me to dictate to
you, before my going into the Army, whereby you may judge; and because the
ground on which those expressions of mine to you ward, was that of God which I
saw in you; I know no better way whereby to endeavor my retaining entirely my
due esteem of you, then to desire; That by, and in you, the ground thereof may
continue firm, and immovable; which in mine eye seems at present much to flag
and stagger, and that from some assertions, which specially the last Sabbath
being April 14. 1644. I received from you therefore to prevent the least
besieging such an adversary, whose heart lies fair and open to me, as I well
know by experience from that utterly undeserved respect, I have found from you;
I shall in the strength of this presumption adventure rudely upon the work
intended.

Wherein I must necessarily content my self, with signifying to you some
particulars, which to me seem evidently liable to exception, suspending the
least taking notice of such things, which possibly, on due consideration may be
found to require more exact scrutiny. Whereof as touching what I shall at
present mention, I must satisfy my self to hint things in an indigested, and
disorderly manner; having been prevented by the intervening of other unexpected
occurrences, therefore for most concisenesse therein, though I count it my best
course, to have extracted the substance of all, wherein I am unsatisfied, first
entirely by it self, yet I may not attempt that, but must only name such
particulars of that kind, Immediately before what I shall affirm in order,
touching each one respectively: wherein not desiring to depend on mine own
Judgment only, least I might have mistaken you, I by conference, find some
others do conceive you so to have delivered your self in those particulars, as
I my self conceive thereof.

You may therefore remember, that the substance of your third motive to
natural men, in reference to their accepting of Grace, according to what you
insisted upon, 1 Cor. 1.3. was to this effect, That if such will but engage
themselves, and all within them, according to their natural power, to seek for
this Grace, they shall not miscarry, but stirring up themselves in good earnest
to seek this Grace, they shall surely find it: Which after your glancing at
the Antinomians, you pressed more largely, and that by backing this motive with
two Texts, John 6. v. 37. and Mat. 7. v. 7.

Which Scriptures you allege, to prove, That if men improve their Natural
abilities to the utmost (which is the strength of the motive) in seeking Grace,
they shall find it.

Concerning which Texts I cannot as yet see any such thing proved by them, for
the former whereof, John 6.37. Whosoever comes, etc. This you understand
indefinitely, whosoever natural man comes; And in what manner must he come?
With, or in the strength of his natural abilities; such a one I Will in no wise
cast out; which you acknowledge, imports affirmatively, I will accept, which
might be proved to import so much from, John 5. v. 40. Where life is annexed to
coming. Now as touching this Text, it is true, that whosoever being a natural
man, shall through the full improvement of natural powers, so come to Christ,
as is here meant, that is, after a saving manner, even with saving says, which
kind of coming can only carry life, as this here does; Such a one assuredly
shall not be cast out by Christ, no more then he which does the Law perfectly
shall yet dye: for the Law will keep promise (though none can claim ought
thence) namely, That the man that does them, shall live in them; but this is
far from proving, that a man by improving his naturalls shall come to Christ
savingly by virtue thereof, no more then a man may do the Laws works, and live
in them; concerning which Paul peremptorily and rationally concludes in that
Gal. 3.11. That no man can live by virtue of his performing that Covenant: but
there will be further occasion ministered by what follows, whence to speak
further in reference to this place quoted, which was there but briefly touched
for a proof of that, which it seems not in the least to do.

The next alleged is Mat. 7. v. 7. and that for the same purpose to which must
refer, as above; concerning which place it is most clear, that that Text
importing commands pressed, and promises annexed, are laid down in most general
terms, therefore for the true understanding of the nature of our duty, or our
right manner of performance thereof, we must consult with other Scriptures
where it is laid down more particularly, and not understand the words in a
strict literal sense. That we must not understand it, as barely expressed,
without limitation or qualification, I prove from this; that other Scriptures
gainsay such a sense, ^s that Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, Why not? not
for want of asking, they did ask, yet 'twas not given: so then, To all that
ask it shall not be given; men may so ask as that their asking shall never be
given them, the default wherein may be double, from the end of their asking to
satisfy lusts. But is that all? No, another default is the want of a due
qualification in the asking, which is as necessary as Salvation it self, and
that is an asking in faith; so Iam. 1.6. in the fifth verse, he gives out a
promise indefinitely, If any of you: of whom? Natural improvers? No, of you
believers, for that he supposed in the third verse, the trying of your faith,
they had faith to try; let such ask in faith, acting that power of faith,
created by Gods Spirit in them; but let him ask in faith, let him not think it
enough to ask in any fash^on, but only in faith, which terms, but and faith,
exclude all other askings from receiving: which is plainly expressed in verse 7.
Let not that man think to receive, what man? that man whosoever, be he ever so
able to improve his natural abilities in asking, as long as he asks without
faith, let not such a one think to receive, for it is to think the Scrpture
lies: if then this place quoted, will prove that natural men improving
themselves in good earnest in asking, shall have, as you expressly affirmed,
then it follows (as I conceive) that a natural man may by improving his own
power, be enabled to ask in faith, for such an asking only is sure to
receive, but if we will take Paul's judgment, he affirms, Ephesians. 1.9. That the
power by which we believe, is not our own fully improved, but that exceeding
greatness of power, which raised Christ from the dead: faith is by grace, and
not natural improvement; but you will say this is granted, that it is wrought by
God; namely, upon natural improvements: to which I reply, It Is true you expressed
that, but yet in these two quotations, you apply or rather subject (as I
conceive) these promises under the power of natural men, whom you make to have
power in themselves, to put themselves under these Promises, and within the
Covenant, else they could not be so certain, touching Gods performing them to
themselves; which to prove, you directly alleged them; in which places
there is no tittle of any such promise, that upon their improvement, God will
give faith, and so they shall be accepted, and yet you undertake to prove, that
they may so perform the condition on their side, as reciprocally to make God
bound to receive them into his grace thereupon according to his promise.

Further in reference to that, Mat. 7.7. Ask, etc. but how shall we ask? John
15. verse 16. Whatsoever ye doke in my Name, the Father will give, Acts 4.
verse 12. No name under heaven whereby to be saved, or no other power,
Therefore no natural, how ever improved, A^sk in my Name, not your own, but so
long as we ask by the strength of our natural abilities, it is in our own name
and power, and therefore shall not avail, because not in Christ's Name.



in no wise, for then there is another name or power besides Christ's, which can
engage God, which would peremptorily contradict the Scripture.

Again, this injunction Ask and it shall be given, is chiefly directed to the
Disciples, for 'twas a part of that Sermon Preached to them in special, as
whereby they might the better know how to deal with the Jews, as the beginning
of it shows, chap. 5. verse 1, 2. Yea, the verse immediately foregoing this
under censure was primarily in reference to them; Give not that that is holy,
Nor cast your Pearls, etc. They were then such as had things that were holy,
and pearls, yea to give, and cast; therefore such who not only had those holy
things, but had them as Stewards of the Treasures of heaven, thereby directing
them, to whom to give them, to which the following promise, Ask and have,
fitly belongs: but this liberty befits not a carnal one, it is ill trusting
such with such large promises, who have no such holy things or pearls, to give
or cast.

But to proceed, you on a fourth sub-divided head, undertook to give out the
meaning of that term, of being dead in trespasses and sins, which you showed,
was meant of such, as were void of all knowledge of God, not as only being in
a state of condemnation, but in that they had no enjoyment of the Spirit of God
at all, nor of its workings, which works in some kind always wherever the
Gospel is preached, Dead, that is, said you, Sat in darkness, and shadow of
death, destitute of all means of knowledge, by hearing the Gospel, whereto you
added; But you are not so dead, for as much as you live under Gospel light.

As touching which, to me as yet, the main or entire design of the Apostle in
that Ephesians. 2. to verse 9. is to prove that more particularly, which he had
avouched, in chap. 1. verse 19. in general; namely, that we believe through
the working of that very exceeding great power, which raised Christ from the
dead, which he demonstrates from the difficulty of the work of faith; not at
all showing by what outward means that power wrought, or by what instrument
but the great difficulty of the work, in that it is no less than a quickening
from the dead, parallel to Christ's, which nothing but an Almighty power could
effect; and whether they had the Gospel preached along space to them, or the
contrary, that makes nothing to his purpose, for they were quickened by the
Gospel, as a means used, and whether God does it at first hearing as 3000. are
conceived to be at once, or whether afterward; still it is done by the same
Almighty power alone, improving that means (for faith comes by hearing) and
that in one instant, whether sooner or later. And that they here said to be
dead in sins, were such as sat in darkness, etc. seems very strange,
considering the persons so said to be dead: We were dead; Who? I Paul, and you
Ephesians. Whereof concerning Paul, what more controdictory, than to say, Paul
had not the light of the Gospel as we have, and therefore not so dead:
concerning whom it is most certain, from his own affirmation of what he did in
point of persecution, that 'twas out of zeal, he followed his light, therefore
he so long continued to hear the Gospel, before he persecuted it, as according
to his utmost power, to see whether it were falls or true, and after that
(seeing ground sufficient, by his light to justify, yea to require his zealous
persecution thereof) for a long time, he was engaged in a way of persecution,
bearing the Office of a Promooter or Informer, carrying letters, etc. to the
chief Counsels, and how pragmaticall he was in that design, might be proved
at large from Acts 7. the end, and Acts 8. verse 1.2. He must then needs live
in the time of the Gospel (when he might have had means of grace, but rejected
it all the time wherein he persecuted the Gospel: he could not persecute the
Gospel in a time wherein the Gospel was not preached, or professed: he would
not fight with his own shadow; Therefore he sat not in the shadow of death.

Yea, it seems easy to prove, he had the Gospel a long time before, and that
upon record, which was in great request with him, being written in the
Prophets, which he searched; and that in them he read Gospel, is clear from
Romans 1.17. For therein, In what? In the Gospel of Christ, is revealed faith,
etc. How proves he this? It follows, as it is written; What Is written shall
testify to what he asserts, and it is written, The just shall live by faith:
Where written? In the New Testament? No, that was not written when he spoke
this; Where then? In the Gospel preached by Habbacuck chap. 2. ver. 4. So this
Paul affirms, Romans 10.11. The Scripture says, who believes on him, even Jesus
Christ, shall not be ashamed; namely, notwithstanding all opposers, even by
virtue of his justification: and where does the Scripture say thus, which is
the sum of the Gospel, even in Esaias 28.11.

As touching the Ephesians, in what sense Paul was dead, so were they; We who
were dead, he makes his own and their condition jointly one; and that the
Ephesians distinctly considered, sat not in darkness, seems hence, in that
he directed that Epistle To the Saints at Ephesus, as being a place, where men
professed the Gospel, and therefore lived under it.

But hence, to proceed to the fifth particular, next ensuing the former, to
this effect.

Men that are so dead in sins, etc. have a natural life, of reason, Judgment,
understanding, conscience, etc. by virtue whereof men are able to weigh and
ponder such ways or means tendered to them, yea such a power they have in them,
as whereby (if they will put it forth, and employ it accordingly,) they may do
such things, as unto which God has by way of promise, annexed grace and
acceptance.

For which besides the places mentioned; namely, those already questioned, John
6.37. and Mat. 7.7. you further alleged, Prove. 2. verse 1, 2, 3. and Ioh.
6.27.

Now in reference to this fifth assertion, I cannot but as yet utterly deny
natural men, to be able so to improve natural power, as to engage God, etc.
according to the affertion prescript.

For which end, I shall first deny the same to be proved in the least, by those
other Texts alleged.

For that in Prove. 2. verse 1.2. etc. I yet see no reason at all, why it should
be understood as spoken to natural men, but good reason whence to conclude it
spoken positively of believers; My Son, Whose son? Wisdoms son, or the son of
Solomon, inspired with the spirit of Wisdom, or of him rather, typisied by
Solomon Jesus Christ, the wisdom of the Father; My Son, or thou who art
begotten again of Wisdom, and my reason why he means not Natural men, I
deduce out of the first chapter: a great part whereof, even from verse 8. to
20. is directed to beleavers, in opposition to Natural men, termed sinners,
(by which term such are most obviously pointed out in Scripture,) which I
gather from verse 7. where, having to the 7. verse, set forth the excellent use
of the book, To know Wisdom etc. in the 7. verse he declares to whom they
shall become so excellent, or on what terms men attain excellency by studdying
this book, expressed thus; The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge,
but fools, etc. So that the fundamental qualification, by virtue whereof men
come to be proficients in the School of Spiritual wisdom, is this, That they
have the fear of the Lord; that's the beginning of all saving knowledge, the
very first lesson, first of all to be learned, as fundamental.

But shall not natural men upon improving natural abilities, attain sound
knowledge? No, all besides such as have the groundwork of all laid in them,
even the fear of the Lord, are excluded so long from all spiritual and saving
knowledge, as in the term ensuing, But fools despise, etc. Who are those
fools? all without exception, that have not this fear; How is that proved?
Because that is the very beginning of knowledge; Therefore so long as they are
not as yet Ab^darians, having not the beginning of knowledge, they must needs
be fools; and that by fools is meant, All that have not the Lords fear in them,
and therefore must be a note of exclusion to all that have not this fear,
seems clear, because all are comprehended in these two, such as have fear,
and fools; and no medium between. According to which double position laid down
in verse. 7. showing who they were that learned wisdom by these Proverbs, and
and who not: He directs his Exhortation to him that could learn Wisdom;
namely, who is possessed with this fear, and that most peculiarly, by way of
excluding it from all others: My Son, if sins, verse 10. Again, verse 15. My
Son walk not thou in the way with them, so that the holy Ghost, that Spirit of
Wisdom, makes a mighty difference between him that is his Son, as one begotten
a new by him; who has Gods fear, and all others not having it.

The fear of the Lord.

verses, she directs her voice in general to all in the strees, simple ones,
scorners, and fools hating knowledge, etc. That they would turn from their
folly by Wisdoms reproofs, may not such qualify themselves by their natural
improvements, that they may assuredly attain saving Wisdom, or turn from
their folly at Wisdoms reproofs? No, for in verse 23. having in the first part
of it commanded, Fools, Turn ye at my reproof: to prevent an Objection, How
shall we turn? The holy Ghost declares how this work is wrought, undertaking it
himself; Behold, or take notice how this great overture is brought about, even
thus: I Will pour out my Spirit to you, I Will make known my words to you: First,
pour out my Spirit, whereby possessing you with the fear of the Lord, and so
will make known, etc. after; laying first the foundation of all saving
knowledge.



Behold, I Will pour out my spirit to you; to whom? you who have improved your
natural abilities, so as to engage me? No: to whom then? To you simple ones
that love simplicity, scorners delighting in scorning, and to you fools hating
knowledge; by which we may judge whether they qualified themselves, or engaged
God by Natural improvements: How is the work done then? even by the Spirits
overpowring of such that's the only ground of the difference between persons in
themselves alike qualified; and therefore no precedent improvement, though ever
so transcendent, for the latter sort from whom the Spirit will for ever with
hold the saving operation, are expressed to have the selfsame qualifications,
to hate knowledge, etc.

Or if by Son you mean men improving their natural abilities, as that to them
the promise is certainly made, it shall be granted you, that be he what he
will, Whosoever asks as is there required, he shall have his desire granted;
but it follows not therefore that natural men can so ask: The thing promised
on asking you acknowledge to import acceptance with God: but shall it be had
upon every asking? No, It Is Wisdom whereof James tells us in the place
forenamed, in express terms, it cannot be had but upon asking in faith; so
that whosoever be meant by Son here, he must ask in faith; without which his
natural improvements engage not God at all. Not but that such must improve
natural abilities, for it is their duty, but yet thereupon it is not Gods duty
to confer Grace.

Again, for I decline exact method, as not becoming me; the manner after which
this duty is to be done, appears expressly to be with greatest attention and
intention; Apply thy heart etc. If thou cryest after, liftest up thy voice,
seek her as silver, etc. Now according to that known saying, Ignoti nulla
cupido, it is impossible mere natural men, not possessed with the fear of God,
which is the very beginning of all saving knowledge; should be able so to apply
their hearts, cry after it, seek etc. Taking pains as one digging in a mine for
hid Treasures: swine are not wont to take such pains for pearls. As yet
therefore I cannot conceive this exhortation to be chiefly directed to
natural men, as having a power so to perform the duty, as to engage God to
instate them in the promise, which to prove you bring it, but in strictness
and propriety, as it is a promise it is only absolutely given to them that have
faith, though the condition on our part so concerns natural men, as to inform
them what their duty is, as all other of Gods Commands do, with making known of
which, God is not bound to enable all that know their duty to do it; so that
while natural, it is impossible for them to keep any one savingly.

The next Text alleged is, John 6.27. Labor, etc. For that meat which endures
to eternal life, which the son of man shall give to you; namely, (said you)
Upon laboring, even Natural men's Laboring, to whom you direct the
exhortation, and that to prove the fifth assertion prescribed, to which refer;
so that by Labor you understand a man's improving his Naturalls with greatest
diligence; on which, God according to his promise will give everlasting meat,
or saving Grace, whereby to interest them into Christ, who is life everlasting.
But that by Laboring here Christ means not their own full improvement of
Natural abilities, only or chiefly, as whereunto annexing a promise seems
evident; because by Laboring he means true believing, which I prove from 28.
and 29. verses, Christ having exhorted them to Labor, etc. Thereupon they
perceiving the Exhortation to import Everlasting life, were inquisitive in
verse 28. What shall we do, that we might so labor, for the word for Labor in
the 27. verse. (...), and that in 28. verse following (...), translated might
work, are the same, so that their question propounded was in reference to the
duty enjoined before, that they might understand the nature of that Command,
whereto Christ answers, telling them what labor or work 'twas he required of
them; where the word translated work (...), answers the Verb, whence also the
Verb is derived, and so jointly import Labor in all three verses, which work
then is to believe in Jesus Christ, as is directly laid down in express
terms, verse 29. If then laboring imports the saving work of believing, then
it is more then utmost improvement of Naturalls, because by such improvement, we
cannot work the great work of faith: so then by Labor he commands more then
Natural improvement. And because it is a work far above the reach of man's
Natural improvements, he that giv^s it in command undertakes to work his own
will, or command in them, which follows, Which the Son of man shall give unto
you. So as it is here granted, Christ requires them to improve their natural
abilities, but yet withal, that also which is infinitely above them all, how
fully soever improved, even saving faith, Which the Son of man shall give, they
must impove, etc. but yet after all, must rest in nothing but Christ's gift,
they were so to labor by natural improvement, as to submit to, or rather
close with the Spirits exceeding great inspiring power, whereby it works faith.



Labor, though to utmost improving natural abilities, which I prove thus
clearly, because they did labor according to their power, for they took as
good a course as natural reason could prescribe: First, they desired to
understand what their duty expressed by the term Labor did import; next they
desired in a most rational way, some good ground whereon to stablish, or
bottom this their duty of believing even by some sign, which was an ancient
manner of confirming great matters, in answer whereto he declares himself to
be the true sign from heaven, the bread of God; whereupon according to the
strength of natural understanding imprinting in them a desire of happiness,
because it is again, and again affirmed to be the bread of life, they put forth
the utmost of their Natural abilities in this great request; Lord ever more
give us this Bread, whence Christ again declares himself to be that Bread, and
further tells them who should partake thereof, even he that comes to me, or
believes in me, (not every coming, for these came, yet to them he says, ye
believe not) shall never hunger, etc. whereby alluring them to come, and yet
after their improvement of natural abilities in affectionate askings, Christ
tells them, Ye come not so, as to have life.

But is not their not improving Naturalls given as the reason thereof?

verse 41. and 42. but does Christ hereupon tell them; Ye have not yet fully
improved your naturalls, therefore it is you believe not? or does he express by
way of promise, that because you have improved, etc. in reasoning, disputing,
begging, etc. Therefore according to my sure promise, engaging me, I Will second
your improvement with grace, I will give it you? No, but contrarily, the reason
why they cannot come to life, or believe, which he had said in verse 36. he
gives them in verse 44. No man can, or has power to come, Except the Father
draw him, which act he was not engaged to put forth on them, notwithstanding
their most rational improvements; Except the Father draw him, not except he
draws, or surely ingages the Father by improvements, but there will be
necessity of further inlargements on this from what follows; we see here, that
instead of being engaged by promise by natural improvements, we have the
contrary; he says not because you have employed Naturalls, therefore according
to my promise, I will second it with grace, but contrarily notwithstanding your
utmost improvements; Yet No man (be he ever so accurate in natural
improvements) can come, except the Father draw him, which to do, no
improvements can draw God.

You next alleged another Scripture, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in; but as
touching this I find no absolute promise of Grace annexed, from Gods being
engaged by natural improvements, therefore not as yet seeing any thing
considerable therein, whereof to take notice, shall step over to what appears
to be of greater moment.

Wherein, though I conceive it sufficient to have deposed what I conceive,
against the proofs whereon you ground your fifth assertion, yet I shall with
great presumption on your patience, and candid construction, give my grounds
for the contrary; namely, to prove that Natural men, dead, etc. have not such
a power of Reason, Judgment, etc. as whereby if they will accordingly put it
forth, they may do such things, as whereunto God has by promise annexed Grace,
which I conceive might be clearly made out from sundry Scriptures, whereof to
Name, 2. or 3.

One is, John. 5. verse 39. Search the Scriptures, concerning which, though the
first word be usually rendered, as the Imperative Mood, Search ye as a Command
given to search, yet for my part, as yet (with Submission to the judicious) I
find not, how it may be read with good sense any other way, then as the
Indicative Mood, ye do search; which I ground not only on my own Judgment
(though I find this that the Original Word (...), Scrutamini, may as properly
be so rendered) for as I remember, it is the Judgment of Doctor Homes, as in
his book Of new Heavens and new Earth, I have seen, though not since diverse
months bygone: and that it may most properly be thus rendered, may (as I
conceive) be most clearly proved from the context: the occasion of all Christ's
discourse, from the 19. verse of that 5. chap. seems chiefly to arise, from
what is expressed in verse 18. where this is given as one reason, why they sought
to kill Christ, because he had said, God was his Father, making himself equal
with God, etc. Whereupon Christ all along forward, in a most convincing manner,
proves the truth of that for which the Jews would needs have slain him, to
which purpose telling them, God sent not Christ only to bear witness of
himself, but sent his forerunner John, to bear witness, which John ye sent
to your selves, verse 33. who accordingly bave witness of me; and he was once
a man in great credit with you, therefore why might not his Testimony carry it?
Yea, after he had named other grounds of testimony from his Works done, and the
Fathers own Testimony that sent him, he adds yet a further ground of
confirmation in this 39. verse, even from their own practice, as before, in
sending to know John's judgment; so here, from their own diligent inquiry into
the Scriptures, ye do search, even your selves do; the scriptures, namely the
writings of the Prophets which alone were then written, as of Moses
particularly insisted on.

Again, that they did search them is clear from what follows, Moses shall
accuse you, verse 45. whose Accusation shall be a sufficient witness against
them without Christ's: Why? Because they perused his writings, and so were
rendered inexcuseable: yea further clear from the concluding clause of that 45.
verse, In whom, (viz. Moses) ye trust, or, (...), in whom ye hope: now had they
not searched diligently, and conformed to his writings, they would not have
built such hope thereon; knowledge must precede confidence. Which acception
supposed to be most warrantable, seems considerable toward the proof of what is
affirmed. Ye search which word imports exact and accurate scrutiny, and no
marvail, for therefore ye search, (...) because in them, ye think to have
eternal life, upon this very ground they searched, and therefore with all
their utmost care and diligence, as conceiving to find life in them; which
Paul himself, that strict Pharisee searched so into, as that he thought, he had
found life in them, but yet was dead, whiles so alive, Romans 7, 8, 9. and they
are they that testify of me, those Scriptures which ye think to have life by
from the letter of them, testify of me: what? it must have reference (as I
conceive) to what they sought for: namely, eternal life, they testify then
that what life ye think to have in them, must be had in me, they send you from
themselves to the Messia, pointed at by them, as John sent such as he baptized
with water, to Christ, to be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Notwithstanding your
searching, ye will not come to me that ye might have life, which proves that
men's natural improvements do not engage God to give them saving faith, without
which, through utmost improvements they could only look on the Scripture while
pointing to a Messia, but as a covenant of works and learned by all, but to be
self Justiciaries; which sanctuary of justification by works we most obviously
find was the strongest one, which the profoundest wisdom of the Jews could
erect, Romans 10.8.

Verse 40. charges them with this, Ye will not come to have life, or in faith;
does it not hence seem that they might have power to believe or to engage God
to to give faith, which power they did not put forth as they might; and that is
the reason why ye believe not?

Chap. 6. from Verse 28 to 45. Wherein, the whole discourse most inevitably
demonstrates that they did as it were put all their natural powers of reason,
judgment, etc. on the wrack, as is before showed by propounding questions,
rational discussing them, praying for, etc. But all this did not make Christ
confess, I see you have done your utmost, therefore I Will perform mine
engagements to give saving faith: no, he terms their strongest reasonings but
murmurings, adding no promise thereunto, and therefore not engaged thereby so
to do; and consequently their not improving naturals is not the reason of Gods
not giving faith, which I prove plainly from Chap. 6. Verse 44. where after he
had said in Chap. 40. ye will not come, that is in faith, being to life, and
repeated it more plainly in Chap. 6. Verse 36. ye believe not, after their
great reasoning on the matter, Christ tells them the reason of their not
believing, to put an end to their murmurings and disputings, murmr not, etc.
think not so to prevail by your reasonings, as if God were bound thereon to
give you saving knowledge, or thereby surely to attain faith: why so? it is
added Verse 44. because Gods free dispensation is the great reason, No man can
come to me except the Father draw him: not, ye cannot come because of not
improving naturals. Notwithstanding which, ye come not, because the father must
draw, before ye can come savingly, which God is not bound to do by virtue of
your improvements, still continuing a free agent in dispensing grace. No man
can come, etc. No man whosoever, under which indefinite term he comprehends
all howsoever qualified, or improved, concluding the ground of all men's being
not able, or not having power to come to God, to be Gods not drawing them: Gods
suspending grace, which he may do from whom he pleases, is given as the ground
of the defect of faith in every man whomsoever that wants it, therefore not the
want of natural improvements, he tells them, no man can come, by which term
of exclusion he debars all without exception, that are not drawn, that so
these that were most inquisitive according to natural light, might not wonder
at their exemption, though they had proceeded in a probable way, and course in
order thereto. Non-improvement cannot (as I conceive) be a true ground of not
believing, because utmost improvement cannot procure believing, and therefore
is no true, or certain ground, or reason of our believing, which you make it
(as I conceive) and that by making it to engage God to give faith; whereas the
Fathers not drawing is given as the only reason of it, and not a want of being
engaged by us: Publicans and Sinners were as capable of faith as the learned
Scribes, and did as much engage God, though it be commendable for natural men
to do their utmost, yea, and most hopeful, for as much as they are in Gods way.

Romans 11.7. Israel has not obtained grace, but did he seek for it? yes, for
it is said, what Israel sought for he obtained not: did he not, what God
required in order thereto?

Math. 7. v. 7. fore touched on, Seek, etc. that Israel is said to have done
here, in respect of the outward performance as natural men; the command, Seek,
in Matthew is of the simple Verb (...), the duty here acknowledged to be done
by them, is of the compounded Verb (...), requiro, as if they had sought with
such earnestness and confidence, as one requiring or commanding, which they
might justly have commanded, if by their seeking they could engage God to
accept them, as according to a promise made; for God by the law of his
faithfulness is bound to perform the law of his promises. Yes, the word here
being the compound Verb seems to import, if it might be, greater inteation in
seeking then that in Matthew, therefore elsewhere translated expeto, as Matthew.
12.39. it appears' then they sought with utmost intention, according to
natural power: but whence is it they failed of their end? we shall find the
ground of the difference evidently to be Gods free dispensation, and that from
a double demonstration from the ground given, why others obtained grace, but
the election has obtained; what is the reason why some above others, seeing all
are said to have sought for it, even by virtue of their election? which is put
in opposition to such as attained not, though careful seekers alike, showing,
it is not seeking (for he was found of them that sought him not) but Gods free
election, that diversified their conditions in respect of grace, who in respect
of natural endeavors, sought one as well as another.

But what is the reason the non-election obtained not? it is added, the rest were
blinded: how blinded? that's showed by rehearsing, a sore judgment of
spiritual blindness which God poured on them, denounced in Esaias 29.10. God
has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, etc. or
God has suspended the saving discovery of faith, without which they have only
their own natural wisdom to improve, which is but as eyes, that cannot see,
we find no other ground given for the clearing of the matter: which place now
alleged being so plainly pertinent for expedition sake, I shall commend to
your consideration for a more rational and methodicall concluding thence,
what is proved thereby, especially, as it may most aptly be considered in
opposition to what was asserted from Matthew. 7.7. for as much as we here see,
there is a seeking which shall never find. But declining this, shall proceed to
another proof; wherefore I might as I conceive as fitly allege that in Matthew.
11.25. Christ blesses the Father, for that he hid from the wise and prudent,
what was revealed to babes: what is the reason? is it because the prudent were
less able, or diligent? no, that were strange; but the reason is added, even
so Father. Why is it so? for it seemed good in thy sight: or thus; because it
pleased thee, 'twas the good pleasure of his will; who suspending grace from
men most probably capable in the eye of reason, dispended it to Babes, which
were in no probable way of attaining it, thereby to honor his own freedom;
nothing is said to make the difference between each party but Gods revealing,
and that with infinite perfection of freedom, because 'twas agreeable to the
good pleasure of his will.

Again, Matthew. 13.10. said the Disciples, Why speak thou to them in
parables? i.e. to the Jews: Christ answers, Because, to you is given to know
the mysteries, and not to them. Christ uttered himself in a dark mystical way
to them; because, God who is a free giver of free grace suspended the gift of
his grace, whereby to magnify his freedom; and he shows, he does this in
answer to the prophecy of Esaias 6.9.10. where it is, Go tell them, hear ye
indeed, and understand not, etc. make their hearts fat, and their ears heavy,
etc. According whereto he speaks here mystically, leaving them to their own
natural blindness; so that it seems clear, the ground of the difference was
from Gods free dispensation, ye understand they not; because to you, is given,
to them not.



Matthew, that utters this; who was so far from improving naturals, whereby
to engage Christ to call him, as that he was called sitting at the receir of
custom, Mat. 9.9. Which as is generally concluded, was a very injurious
oppressing office, or service; and as touching him self a general, he was a
Publican, and such we most obviously find in Scripture ranked with sinners, as
the most nefarious and profane; so far short of the Pharisees in point of
natural improvements, as that they counted it unlawful for Christ to eat with
persons so vile, so Matthew. 9.11. It Is clear then, that in Matthew it must needs
be of free gift, without reference to any engagement, upon his improvement; and
if so, then whatsoever was the reason, why grace was given to Matthew, from the
same ground or reason it is given to all the rest; for there Christ gives one
reason, for, and concerning, all the Disciples at once; which reason being
double, has no respect to ought done by them, to whom it is given, as whereby to
be engaged, no nor induced: not to ought undone by them, to whom it is not given.

Matthew. 13. verse. 12. Whosoever has, etc. This seems to have relation to
some thing in the persons, but in reference to this, as likewise the next
foregoing; and what may be objected against each, I shall not in the least
attempt ought now; because, as I remember, the maine of what may be objected
against them, may be collected out of your last Exposition-exercise save one;
concerning which, as likewise the last of all, I cannot but as yet much dissent
from; though since that, have had no opportunity of perusal at all, though
upon nearing, I could not but immediately purpose by your savor humbly to
crave some satisfaction, which now shall totally decline, yea, and yet for some
season.

Yet another proof, Romans 10.1, 2, 3. Paul there utters himself in Isreal's
behalf, as having his bowels ^ouled within him, for them; expressing his
pitiful desires, etc. for their salvation: and what is the reason, he is so
exceeding desirous of their good? it immediately follows, for I bear them
record, etc. But why is he so confident of their zeal as to attest it so
peremptorily? Doubtless, because he knew it in himself before conversion, as
he affirms. And why not according to knowledge? for they were ignorant of Gods
righteousness, which is of faith: he here solemnly testifies in the behalf of
Israel in general, they had a zeal of God; which must import most ardent
affection in them, according to their power: but were they not sparing of their
labor (...) were they in earnest? Yea doubtless, zeal must import great
ardency, as far as their natural knowledge could carry them, but not according
to use knowledge: all their fault was, they had not saving knowledge, which is
all he charges them with, after he had attested them, to have a zeal of God, or
those zealous endeavors after righteousness, which God required; only th^^
wanted the saving eye of faith, to guide their zeal, for they did endeavor
also; therefore it is said, going about to stablish, etc. They went about it, or
settled to it as their work. And this was the ground of his hearts desire and
prayer to God (who had already pardoned Paul's misguided zeal, in persecuting
the Church) for them, as putting themselves in Gods ordinary way; yet in the
end of the Chapter, he shows, most of them miscarried, the reason whereof, the
8 Verse of the succeeding Chapter shows, was Gods suspending grace, as it is
dilated on before.

How undeniably might it be proved by the example of Paul, if time would
permit, who parallel to us, had the Gospel preached as well as written in the
Prophets, to improve, how rational a man was he, how strict in studying and
conforming himself to the writings of the Prophets, the rule of life
prescribed? so exact therein, as that he affirms himself as touching the
righteousness, which was by the Law blameless, so that he was able to
justify himself, after his most rational and diligent searching the Law, and
inviolable observing thereof, concluding himself to be alive to the law in the
letter, in respect of his own natural judgment and account, he could learn no
better lesson thence, till the spirit of the Law, or by the law, slew him.



the righteousness of Christ; and therefore God smote him in such a wonderful
manner in order to his conviction: and if Paul's improvement could not engage
God to add grace, which is most undeniable, then neither shall any man's else,
while the world stands: for as much as Paul was as arch an improver as can be
imagined, which might be abundantly confirmed, but shall not dare; specially,
because it would be but a superfluous labor in a thing so obvious; nor yet to
enlarge further on this argument at present, though much might be, as I
conceive, needfully added, to signify the dangerous conseqeunces inevitably
deduceable from these assertions, which seem much to abridge or confine free
grace, as dispensed on more free terms to some, then to others: as also the
poison which Formalists may suck out of this, who having improved their
naturals (as who not in such time of great knowledge, and countenancing of
Religion?) may conclude they believe, because God is bound thereon to add it,
and will perform his engagements; but I shall at present only insert this
following opinion.

Facienti quod in se est, in viribus naturalibus, Deus tenetur dare gratiam
sufficientem adsalutem.

Which, and that not long since was expressed by an able Divine, to be a main
maxim of the Arminians, and how to distinguish between the importance of your
fifth assertion, and this sentence, I must profess I am utterly unable.

But afterward you gave a distinction by way of caution: namely, that it
follows not, that men have a power in them without Gods assistance to believe.
Wherefore you added, they have a power, but not a disposition, and that we must
distinguish between having a power and an inclination; to which, I at present
say one word: he that has not a will, has not a power, and so wants an
executive power; by which I conceive you mean a power whereby to execute, which
you affirm a natural man has. That such want a power, I prove from John 6.
verse 44. and 65. where it is expressed that a mere natural man, without the
Fathers drawing (...) non potest, has not power; to do what? to come to life,
or in faith: so that it is clear, as I conceive, that such want a (...), a power
whereby to execute, for he that has not power to will, has not power to do,
therefore God being said to do all in us, is said to work in us both to will
and to do of his good pleasure, 2 Phil. 13. as if the willing an act were the
all in all, requisite to produce an act* which want of power in man you
contradicted, in affirming, All that was wanting in the Jews, or the reason of
their not believing is placed in their will, ye will not come, he says not, ye
have no power, ye cannot come, which cannot come is expressly affirmed twice in
John 6.44. and 65. But I must most abruptly desist further enlargement as yet,
praying the LORD to prosper it for the end intended, even the propagating of
truth.

Whereto yet to add one word; if in any particular here mentioned, any
assertion of yours may suffer, blame not me, but your self; of whom I may
justly say, if any such cause may be found for it. Tu te ipsum, tuis ipsis
armis visisti, for that God has communicated much of my strength, by the way
of your Ministry.

A Sermon, in Answer to the foregoing Letter, preached by Mr. J. G. April 28.
1644. taken after him exactly in Characters by M. THO. RUDYARD, a Member of his
Church, and by him read over to SAMUEL LANE to Copy out, whose Copy exactly
follows.
WE desire to look back a litttle to one passage that was delivered the last
day, for the satisfaction of some, who it seems did not clearly understand it:
the tenor of the motive whereby we persuaded and pressed on men not truly
converted to God, to seek for the grace of God, was this; That if they would
give out themselves in good earnest in the search, and seek for it with all
their hearts, they should find it, having a while insisted on the
amplification and inforcement of this motive and cleared the difficulty, how
and in what sense God may be said to love or be gracious to men before
believing, and in what not; we came to ponder the motive, wherein we put this
to consideration, of how great concernment 'twas to them to have fellowship
with the Saints of God in the great business of salvation, giving them
assurance, that whatsoever their sins had been, and how great soever their
present guilt may be; yet, if they were but truly willing to come under the
wing of Christ, not a hair of their heads should fall to the ground. In
prosecution whereof, we propounded and answered this Objection.



means whereof, they are able to consider of terms and means proposed, etc.
though happily not able fully to comprehend them, as to debate, whether faith
in Christ, or the works of the Law, or their own righteousness, be likely to
carry it in Gods sight, wherein they may not be able to come to any certain
issue, to comprehend the difference between each, and to resolve in themselves,
this is the means that will do it, and that not; or suppose they find no
satisfaction in way of reason in either of those means, yet are able to work it
on in a way of reason, whether there be any other way besides more likely. Now
though it is not to be supposed, that they have power to come to such firm
bottom, whereon to build without doubtings; yet they are able, and have a
scale and balance of reason and judgment, whereby to weigh one reason against
another, to see which is most hopeful, without all question men may go thus
far; and here re-inforcing the argument: we declared to such, that if they
would be willing to do unfeinedly and impartially, what God has appointed them
in a way of nature to do; God has promised success and acceptance in this
way; and this was that passage by name, which it seems some could not so well
understand or comprehend, fearing lest it should comply with the Arminian
tenent, in point of Free Will; or that I should magnify natural abilities
above the line of excellency belonging to it. If they will but please to
consider for the clearing of the whole business but two arguments, you will
clearly see that there is an absolute necessity for maintaining such an
assertion for a truth, as this is; namely, that if natural men will put forth
themselves to the utmost to what they are able to do to comply with God in the
Gospel they shall find an answerable success, and that there is an absolute
necessity to maintain it for a truth; for otherwise, we shall expose the truth
of God, the covenant of grace, the do^t^i^e of free grace, which we profess to
maintain, we shall expose both the one and the other to an inexpiable and
unanswerable reproach and dishonor; and such indeed, as cannot be redeemed by
any reason or distinction; or project one or other, that men are able to devise
for the relief of it; for that on this 'twill follow, that the assertion we
speak of, that men putting forth themselves according to what God has in^bled
them to do in a way of nature, that God will meet them with grace and
acceptance, if the former be clearly proved, then this will follow upon it,
that this has no consistence with the opinion of Free Will, but does indeed
entrench on the best foundation that that opinion stands upon. We know 'twas an
order Christ gave for men to deal between Caesar and God, Give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God, etc. And indeed no man can give to God the
things that are Gods, except he give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and
that because this is one of Gods things, even our subjection to the lawful
governor set over us by God, in things lawful; and man's foot may soonest
slide here, even on a pretense of giving all to God liberally, to take away
from him by far more then we give; and then we give only in conceit, and take
away from him in reality: for the like order here is to be observed by us, in
making distribution, between Nature Gods Handmaid, and creature, and God
himself: We must give to Nature the things that are Natures, as to God the
things that are Gods: and as in the other case, so here it is most true, That
when men think to be most bountiful to God, and take away all from Nature, and
cast all on God; men may here dash their foot, and and take away from God while
thinking to give him. A man may so far oppress Nature for Gods cause, till
he leave not so much to Nature as to bear the charge of its own condemnation;
and then if men leave not to Nature sufficient to bring the guilt on it of its
own condemnation, then it must necessarily reflect upon God. But if we will
consider two Arguments in general, we shall see that the assertion mentioned,
that if men do what is in their power, etc. they shall find acceptance with
God, must be maintained. Consider this reason, if men must labor for the bread
which endures to everlasting life, which Christ is said to give them, and he
not give it, then God of necessity must destroy men for not doing that, which
is altogether out of their power to do: for, as for actual believing, it is a
work so far out of the power of the creature, as that it requires Gods power
Omnipotent to effect. Now to say God should destroy his creature for want of
such an action, as cannot be done by any power inferior to Gods own, which is
infinite; this is so hard a saying, and so contrary, and rises up with that
fiery contestation against what the Scripture delivers concerning the
gratiousnesse of the covenant of God, and mercy by Jesus Christ; yea, it so
rises up against all reason and all principles of common sense, that there is
no Oil that will mollify it, no reason, nor argument, nor consideration, that
is able to make atonement for it, or to reconcile it with any of these, either
with any expression in Scripture concerning the tenor of the grace of God
toward the world, nor otherwise with the principles of reason and common
sense: 'twere as good reason to say, that God destroys the creature for not
being God, or for not making another Heaven and Earth like to these he has
made, as to say, he destroys them for not doing that which they have no more
power to do, then they have to make themselves God, or an Heaven and Earth.

Neither will it at all here avail to say, that men had power in Adam, while
as yet in the state of Innocence, then to believe in Jesus Christ; this will
not all ease the business; as if God might in a way of justice, equity, and
righteousness, condemn men for not doing that which sometimes they had power
to do, namely, in their first Parents though now they have not.

I answer, 'twill not at all ease the business. First, because it is not a
truth. Secondly, though it were, yet it would not salve the sore.

First, that men never had power in Adam to believe in Jesus Christ, especially
to justification, may evidently appear by these reasons: that which Adam and
himself never had in the state of Innocence, that certainly his posterity could
never have: but certain it is, that Adam himself had never such power of
believing in Christ in innocence, neither therefore can his posterity be
supposed to have such a power.

Now that he had no such power, is evident hence, because there was no
necessity, use, or occasion of such a power as this to have been given to Adam
in that state; we all know and look on God as the most wise Agent, that ever
acted: now it is inconsistent with his wisdom and dispensation, that he should
create such an excellent power as this of believing is, when there was no
necessity nor use thereof. That there was no occasion thereof is evident,
because during the time of innocence, he was in a state of righteousness and
justification on other terms, and in another way, so that he had no necessity
of a power to believe to justification: because as Paul says, Gal. 2. If
righteousness be by the law, than Christ dyed in vain: so it had been in
vain, Adam being under a righteousness by the Law, then for him to believe
that Jesus Christ was dead or alive for his justification. What Is the reason
man had no wings put upon him in the time of innocence, but only that he was
well enough in that state; for this is reason enough to prove that Adam had no
such power of believing, because well enough without, even in a state of
righteousness.

Secondly, if Adam during his innocence had a power to believe, either for his
own, or for any of his posterity their justification and salvation, then he had
a power also to foresee his fall; because justification presupposes sin,
because it is from sin, and consequently a power to believe, presupposes a
sight and a sense of sin: but that he had no such principle in him, whereby to
foresee his fall in time of innocence, is evident hence; because had he had a
power for to foresee his fall before he fell; then he had a power or principle
out of which he might have been made miserable, before he sinned; because it
cannot be imagined, but that the foresight of his sin and fall, and posterity
with him, and the whole world, that should come out of his loins would have
been a very tormenting consideration to him: and therefore it being altogether
against the righteousness of God, that man should be miserable before he
sinned; hence it is clear he had no power then to believe in Christ, because not
able to foresee his fall.

Thirdly, if Adam in innocence had power to believe in Christ, then had he a
power to foresee the incarnation, death, and resurrection of Christ; because
none can have a power to believe in Christ savingly but on knowledge of these:
now if Adam had a power to belive, etc. It must be supposed he had such a
knowledge of Christ's Incarnation, etc. but that he had nor the least whispering
of this great Mystery concerning Christ during his innocence, is evident, as
from other Scriptures, so especially from that 2 Cor. 2.8, 9. Now certainly if
there were any of the deep things of God that were of the deepest mystery, that
of Christ's Incarnation was the most deep of all things deep, out of the sphere
of the minds of Men and Angels; therefore it is certain Adam had no knowledge of
this mystery till after his fall. But another Objection.

been revealed, he had been enabled by a principle within him to have believed.

Adam had any power to believe any thing, but what was some way necessary and
sitting for him to believe, whether revealed or not, this reflects on the
wisdom of God.

Now first, that it was not necessary for him to believe in Christ, was touched
before, being in a state of justification, so that it had been impertinent; but
had it befitted him, then certainly such a revealing should not have been with
held by God; it is not to be believed that any thing should have been denied
Adam especially in point of knowledge, to hinder him from acting any thing
convenient for him to do; and therefore doubtless there was no such power in
Adam to believe in Christ, no nor on this supposition, That Christ had been
revealed to him on that condition.

Fourthly, this is a demonstrative Argument to prove that Adam in innocence had
no power to believe in Jesus Christ, because then Christ was not given as a
covenant to mankind, and till Christ be declared as Gods covenant for
justification, for Adam to have believed in him for justification; this had
been so far from being a likely means to justify, that it had been a
presumption, and more likely to have condemned him: for as it is with the world
since the covenant of Christ has been revealed; as it would be a very high and
fearful presumption for any man to wave this covenant, and to betake
themselves to the Laws righteousness, or the first covenant; so on the
contrary, during the state of innocence, it had been like presumption for Adam,
to have deserted that covenant of works the righteousness of the Law, the only
covenant then for justification, and to have raised up another covenant, which
he knew nothing of the mind of God, whether believing on him should be
justification or no.

Secondly, suppose it granted, that Adam had such a power as we speak of, yet
this will not heal the offensiveness^ of that opinion against which we argue;
namely, That God destroys man for not doing that, which requires an infinite
strength to perform. For first, we know God has made a new covenant of life
with man since the transgression and breach of that covenant, wherein Adam, and
consequently all his posterity stood in him, when that power of believing is
supposed to have been in him. Now for God to deprive man of the benefit and
blessing of that new covenant, and to dash him as it were in pieces upon the
pikes of the old, merely for a misprision or sin committed against the other,
and that such an one which was impossible for the creature to remedy or redeem
himself from; this is such a saying as is wholly inconsistent and destructive
to the very nature and essence of the covenant of grace, as for instance. A
Noble Family is attainted with High Treason against the Prince, whereby they
are at his mercy for life, liberty, honor, and in this case the Prince
professes much love to them, and tenderness, and that he is far from taking
advantage against them, he has no desire to destroy this Family, yet
nevertheless he will not discharge them of the attainture, but only upon such
and such terms; now if they were such terms that neither the Family nor other
for them could procure, and yet the Prince professes great care and
tenderness, etc. Can any man look on such proceedings as any way gracious:
nay, will it not rather expose such a Prince to the harder thoughts of men, and
had he not better have made use of an advantage against them, saying they have
so and so behaved themselves against him; and he will take the advantage then
thus to profess love, and that he desires not to take advantage, if they will
be redeemed on such and such terms, which yet are impossible for them to
perform: as to demand of them to catch all the fishes in the sea, and all the
fowls of the air, and make a present of them to him; alas all the world will
easily see, here is not the least touch of any such gracious disposition in
him, what ever he pretends. So those that will make the saving terms of the
Gospel so hard and impossible to be performed by men, that though they should
strive, and endeavor, and rise to the utmost pitch of all that they are able
to perform; yet they that say they may do all these and yet God no way accept
of them, nor they never the nearer the grace and favor of God, doubtless they
represent this new covenant of grace and mercy which God has made with the
world, with as much disadvantage and reproach, as those terms which we speak
of, of the Prince would be.

If I were of the judgment of Arminius about the point of Free Will, and were
to debate the point before men any whit ingenious. I would desire no greater
advantage against him that is mine Adversary, be he who he will, if he would
maintain his judgment in a way of opposition to me thus, That let men do
their utmost all their lives, yet they are never the nearer, nor have the more
assurance of grace and favor; howsoever happily I should be never the nearer
any demonstrative proof, yet I could have this advantage, to put my opinion
into a dress ten times more plausible and consistent with the understanding of
reasonable men, then that opinion with all the colors or arguments that may be
put upon it.

Secondly, that power in Adam to believe (supposing 'twere granted he had such)
can be no sufficient ground to justify God in point of equity in the
condemnation of them that do their utmost that they are able, because Justice
and Equity stands in a Geometrical and not Arithmeticall proportion, as for
instance. We know our Savior says, the Widow that cast in her two Mites, cast
in more then all, who yet are said to cast in great sums, and matters of great
value, because they cast in out of their superfluity, but she casting in two
Mites, cast in all her substance: how cast she in more then they all? that is
in a Geometrical proportion; that is, more in consideration, all things
considered; that is, more for her to cast in, then those great sums for men of
estate to cast in; more for commendation, not more absolutely and simply. So
the Parable of the Talent, Matthew. 25.22. the Master putting forth his Talents
to his Servants, gave the same commendation to the Servant that gained but two
Talents, as to him that gained five; and the reason was Geometrical; there was
as much reason why he that had but two Talents to gain withal, should be
commended for gaining two more, as he that had fire for gaining other five;
because there was as much diligence required in him to gain two Talents more,
as for the other to make five more by way of increase: and the general rule in
Scripture in such cases as these and the like is, that where much is given,
much is required, where little given, little required, where nothing at all
given, nothing at all required: so that God accepts a man according to what he
has, and not what he has not. Now suppose it granted, that Adam, and in him
all his posterity during the time of Innocence, had a power to have believed in
Christ; yet in a Geometrical consideration of justice and equity it may be
more for a man now, though he has not the like power of believing in Christ,
yet to do the utmost that he is able toward believing; this may be of more
value and consideration in the sight of God, then the putting forth an act of
believing in Christ, where such a power was.

Alas, granting a power in Adam in innocence to have believed, his believing
had been but like the casting in of the rich men, he had done it out of his
abundance; but for men in their lapsed condition under the pressure of so many
indispositions, yet notwithstanding to give out the utmost of their strength
and power to believe, and that by conflicting with encumbrances; this had been
more inconsideration, then a believing right-down in Adam: and so we have the
first reason; if God should destroy men after doing all that is in their power
to do, he should destroy them for not doing a work peculiar to his own Arm.

Another reason in a word; if men may put forth themselves in their utmost
power to close with God in the Gospel, and yet not find grace with him, so far
as to be endued with strength from on high to believe, then a man may
everlastingly be destroyed of God, for want of an executive power, or of a
principle or power whereby to act, without any miscarriage or sinfulness at
all in the will; whereas the Scripture from place to place, places the cause
of the equity of Gods proceedings in condemnation still upon the will of man,
or on some corruptions found therein, or on the frowardness, perverseness,
and pride in the will, Luke 13.34. Oh Jerusalem, etc. thon would not; it is
not cast on any impotency in them, not upon any want of power, but the cause is
in the depravation of their will.

John 5.40. Ye will not come, etc. He charges not the Jews with not having
power, but they had no will or mind to do it, they stood off in fiery
opposition against believing in Christ, and coming to him for justification.

So Acts 7.51. A stiff-necked generation, ye have always resisted the Holy
Ghost: now how did they resist the Holy Ghost which he charged as the main
article of their condemnation; they resist not by any defectivenesse of power,
but by frowardness and desperateness of will, and resolution in that kind.

Jer. 8.12. and again Jur. 44. We will walk after our own devices, etc. This
shows Gods judgment on them was from the frovvardnesse of their will; so,
Why will ye dye O ye house of Israel.

Esaias 44.17. But we will do, etc. And Christ says, The works of your Father ye
will do: ye shall still see that the partition-vvall arising betvveen the
creature and his peace and acceptance with God, still lies in the
crookedness and perverseness of the heart and will.

Arminian Tenent of Free Will, or how will you answer those Scriptures, denying
a power to come to Christ. John 6.44. No man can come, etc. Again verse 65. No
man can come, etc. John 12.39. Therefore ye do not believe because Esaias
prophesied, etc.

Arminian opinion of Free Will does not only differ, and that all the Heaven
over, from the one end to the other, from all that has been asserted but it
opposes it, and that in two particulars of main consequence.

For first of all, that places not only a sufficiency of executive power in a
man, to do all things in a saving manner toward his believing, but likewise a
sufficiency of power in the will, whereby man by the ordinary concurrence of
Gods providence may draw out that power to the utmost of it.

That opinion of Free Will does not assert a sufficiency of executive power to
do such things unto which grace is annexed by promise, but they place that
whole in such a power in the will, which is able to produce this executive
power into action, and that to the utmost.

Secondly, it not only places an executive and willing power to do what they
conceive requisite on man's part toward believing in Christ, but further places
such a power in man in both kinds, as without any supernatural assistance, is
able to produce a saving act of faith in the soul.

Now the thing asserted clearly denies both these. For first though it affirms
a sufficiency of power for such things as are requisite on man's part, so far to
proceed and meet with grace and acceptance, yet nevertheless it denies any
such power in the will to produce this executive power into act.

Secondly, it places neither one kind of power or other, whereby the creature
is enable without a supernatural assistance from God, to raise any saving act
in the soul; so that here are too main and most considerable differences
betvveen the one and the other.

But what difference make we, between that we call an executive power and
vvilling power, or a principle in man to dravv out that other power.

The difference betvveen these is not hard at all to conceive, because in
ordinary discourse we use to make such a distinction between a man's power to
do such a thing, and his willingness and inclination. There are many rich men
that have power and ability to contribute largely to the public cause of the
Kingdom, yet nevertheless are far from acting that power, because they have
that malignancy in their will, and gainsayingnesse against that action, that
that executive power does them little service in this kind, toward the safety
of the State.

Prove. 17.16. Why is there a price in the hand of a Fooll, and no heart to
improve it: what is that price, it is the opportunity or executive power to do
such a thing whereby he might interest himself in the grace of God; and what is
the heart he wants, nothing else but an inclination or gracious and holy
disposition in the will to give that price; that is, to act those things which
he has a power in his hand to do: so likewise a carnal covetous, voluptuous
man, has an executive power to foregoe his sensual courses and set up
religious duties in his family, and to attend the means of grace as diligently
as any; but what hinders them that they are never the nearer doing, even
because there is a malignancy and averseness in their will against such
purposes.

Arminians, hold and maintain, that covetous and voluptuous persons have a
disposition and inclination in their will to abandon and leave those courses
wherein they are engaged, and frame themselves to better: this seems so
unreasonable, that we cannot conceive that they should have an an inclination
in their will to relinquish them, and turn to the contrary.

with other inclinations, such as are meet to comply with spiritual and holy
things. Whereas the opinion pleaded for, acknowledges no such power in men,
whereby the will being desperately evil, should be able without any
extraordinary hand of God to turn head on it self, and to slay those sinful
propensions now reigning, and to set up the contrary.



John 6.44. No man can come, etc. The meaning is, no man has or can have any
such principle of desire, or any such inclination wrought in him, which will so
far carry and prevail with him to put forth himself in any such way, or hold
on in any such course, wherein God has determined and promised to meet men
with his grace, except it be given him from on high; except my Father, etc.
interpose with some greater power then ordinary, no man can come to me, no man
has any foresight of any complete power of coming to me, except my Father
interpose in it; for that is one thing would be taken special notice of, that
there may be said to be a double power in a man in reference to such and such
effects.

The first we may call a perfect and complete power; that is, such a power that
has all things as it were by it to reduce it self into act; that we call a
complete and perfect power of the will: the other is an incomplete and
imperfect power; which is this: that though there be a sufficiency of power in
relation to such an effect in one kind, yet nevertheless there is a
defectivenesse of power in another kind, and this is called a power to do a
thing, because there is a sufficiency of power to do the thing in one kind, yet
nevertheless called a defective incomplete power, because it has not all
things at hand, which are requisite to reduce it into act. As for example, when
a man has a large estate, he has wherewith to live generously, but yet this
is but an incomplete power, if he has no other; for it is not a fullness of
estate that will help him to do it; if he has a penurious disposition in him:
alas he is never the nearer to such a complete life: but if together with a
full estate, he has an ingenuous disposition; now there is a complete and
perfect power in a man to live freely; and so we know there are many such
expressions in Scripture.

If thou will thou can make me clean: now there is a plain difference
between Christ's will and power: and it is very considerable that the Scripture
it self uses both kind of expressions, speaking both ways; sometimes giving
the n^me of power to a mere executive power, when as there is no will in
conjunction to reduce to act, And again, another while there is not a will
suitable to an executive power, he denies the very name of a power to him, and
this it does both speaking of God and Man.

Matthew. 3. verse. 9. God is able of these stones to raise up children: here John
asserts a power to God to raise up etc. But yet there was no will in God to do
it. Again, when there is not a willingness in God to do a thing, there the
Scripture denies so much as a power to him: as it is said of Christ, he could do
no great works there, because of their unbelief. Now there was an executive
power in Christ, rich and full; whereby to have wrought any great miracle
there; but because he had no will, therefore it is said he had not power,
meaning no compleatnesse of power, which requires a sufficiency of executive
power, and a sufficiency of will and inclination to put that power into act.
And so we see the like expressions used, when the Scripture speaks of men,
sometime it calls that by the name of power to do a thing, which is only an
executive power. Genesis 13.29. It Is in the power of mine hand to do thee hurt,
that is, a sufficiency of strength. Prove. 3.17. Have not I power to eat and
drink, etc. that is, we are provided with an executive power.

But in other places we shall see where there is a sufficiency of power in this
kind the Holy Ghost denies a sufficiency of power. John 1.3, 9. Cannot sin.
Now he that is most born of God and deepest baptized in the Spirit of Grace and
holiness, has an executive power to commit sin as well as any; but because he
has no disposition thereto, therefore the Scripture denies he has power to do
it, he has no complete power to reduce that power into act.

2 Cor. 13.8. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for it; they had an
executive power to have uttered words of excommunication, but we can do
nothing, etc. That is, his will was averse from making any such use of his
power, thereby to act any thing that might hinder the couse of the Gospel.

Numb. 22.38. Said Balaam, Have I any power to do any thing; that is, have I
any will or any ground or reason, to be willing to say any evil which thou
would have me: for otherwise he had power enough to pronounce any curse; any
evil speaking against Gods children, but no ground or reason to incline him.

And so we see in the close of all, in what consideration the assertion laid
down is necessary to be maintained; without maintaining whereof, we shall
represent Gods proceedings in the Covenant of grace; as a most unreasonable and
hard saying; as such a Covenant that has neither truth, nor grace, nor
uprightness in it; but that men should be destroyed without any malignancy at
all in their wills, merely for a bare impotency or want of power in them, to do
that which is out of their power to do.

'Twas the saying of Augustine long since, take away men's wills and take away
Hell and all; so that it must be some sin committed against this second
Covenant of grace after the breach of the first, which must dash men in pieces
upon the point of their will. Now there can be nothing that has the nature of
sin in it, but that which has the influence and concurrence of the will in it.
Many other things relating hereto have been spoken of in a dispute lately.

Now the use of what has been spoken is this; That since it is so easy to
expose the ways of God, and his proceedings in ways of condemnation, to the
reproaches and calumnies of those that are enemies to the truth, by hard,
unquoth, and unwarrantable expressions; though perhaps for the substance of the
thing, that which is said and asserted, is no more but the truth; we should be
very careful to study all manner of expressions, and consult with all manner
of Scriptures, if any thing may any way mollify as it were, that in the
proceedings of God, which is apt to seem grievous and harsh in the eyes of
flesh and blood.

And if so be we cannot come to express our selves, but that still we shall
leave the business very hard and obnoxious to the Adversary, we shall rather
excuse our selves after some such manner as this is, that God has not given us
that ability of utterance and expressions, and that we conceive the business
better in our minds, then we are able to give account of to others, but we
shall mightily disadvantage the truth, and cause the enemies to lift up their
Horn on high, if so be we shall maintain or profess any truth of God in any
such ^ea^ me, and hard and gift vou^ expressions, as make an unacceptable found
in the ears of men.

Doubtless the Scriptures, if so be God would but acc^^^^ (...) with those
that are proper for such an occasion and service as this is, it speaks of all
the ways and dealings of God with men, even those that seem so hard to flesh
and blood, so as to stop the mouths of all Adversaries, that are ready to take
advantage from them, and cry out against the truth; and therefore they that
desire to stand up in the cause of God, and to plead the truth of God, they
must be careful, and take pains how to express themselves in such points,
except they be able some way to qualify and soften the hardness of it;
otherwise they shall disadvantage more then advantage it.

A second Copy of which Sermon commended by SAM. LAN^ to the perusal of Mr.
LAURENCE STEEL, is thus subscribed: I have perused it over, and find nothing
contrary to my own Copy.

A third Copy also is subscribed by Mr. JOHN WEEKS thus* Sir, I have perused
this Copy, I find it to be the same with (...) for the mains, only it is
taken more largely.

The Second Letter to Mr. J. G. In Reply to the SERMON.
Much respected Sir,
UPon failing in my expectation, of your perusing that Copy of your Sermon,
preached April 28. 1644. being the Sabbath next after my giving you in two
Sheets of writing (which Copy I left at your house the night before your
journeying, about May 15.) I since have commended Copies thereof to the strict
view of some of your known hearers and writers; who upon comparing it with
their Noats, find it exactly to agree with what you delivered: which the
rather I took care to do, because (as I signified in my Noat left for you, with
that Copy the night forementioned) I found by the mere reading, and writing
that Copy (which alone I had then done) that 'twas mainly intended by way of
answer to the Objections in those two sheets presented; and upon further
perusal, I find you intend it for a full and perfect answer: wherein you give
two Arguments, which you affirm, are for the clearing of the whole business,
being for vindication of your fifth assertion opposed, and afterward you
endeavor to clear it from the opinion of Free Will, and that because it is
charged there to be the same with a maine maxim of the Arminians there
expressed, yea, I can conclude no less from your very next Sermon following,
preached May 5. wherein, without the least intimation of any Objections behind
not cleared. You intimated your clearing the matter from all Objections, and
ther^upon proceeded to new matter; and that notwithstanding the Friday before;
being May 3. upon my speech with you about those Obje^^ions, you informed me,
that in perusal you were much straightened in time, and thereupon, at my desire,
you seemed to promise further consideration.

And for as much as I find, that mine end in that discourse given you in being
wholly for the truths advantage, instead of being accomplished is perverted, in
that you have thence taken occasion after a grievous manner to defame that
truth, which is there grounded on sundry Scriptures against your error: I
count (...) meet to wards the attaining that first end, to endeavor the
^^^^^cation thereof against all aspersions cast upon it; else will my former
endeavor continue very injurious to that truth, which it was intended to
advantage.

Wherein, before my vindicating the main matter, I cannot but take notice of
one passage; that whereas upon your inlargements about your fifth Assertion,
you gave such an exposition upon Ephesians. 2.5. Dead in sins, etc. as is at
large proved contradictory to evident reason: yet about the beginning of that
clearing Sermon, you rehint the same, in these words [Dead in sins, etc. in
such a sense, as was formerly explained,] and that without the least title for
its vindication.

Another thing to be observed, is your expression touching your fifth
Assertion, which you say in the beginning of that Sermon, is [one passage which
it seems some did not so clearly understand] and afterward [which some could
not so well understand or comprehend;] by which you make the ground of all the
Controversy, to be a misunderstanding; whereas you repeat the same in these
very expressions wherein 'twas opposed, as namely, thus.

That if men will be willing to do unfeinedly what God has appointed them in a
way of nature, God has promised success and acceptance in this way: yea,
soon after recited thus, Men putting forth themselves to do according to what
God has enabled them to do in a way of nature, God will meet them with grace
and acceptance. Yea, most plainly reitrerated in your after showing the
difference between this, and the opinion of Free Will, in these words. Their
opinion asserts not a sufficiency of executive power to do such things as
whereto grace is annexed by promise. By which you diversifie your opinion from
theirs, clearly showing, that Your opinion asserts a power to do such things,
as whereto grace is annexed by promise, which are the very terms opposed; now
it is hard to conceive, how I should mis-understand, in opposing your
expressions so often given: whereof you give one various expression; namely,
That if men do their utmost, etc. they shall have answerable success: which
expression directly overthrowes your Tenent, That man may so do, as to engage
God to give grace; for if upon improvement God gives answerable success, then
certainly he gives not saving-grace; for there is an infinite disproportion and
unanswerablenesse between man's natural improvement, and Gods superadding
supernatur all grace: such shall have answerable success; namely, in respect
of natural indowments, they shall have the use of their naturals continued,
augmented, and shall not be given up to vile affections, which Romans 1.26. is
the punishment of abusers of naturals, but this is far short of saving-grace,
which you make to be but success answerable. Having therefore received
abundant confirmation that I no way mis-understood the error, I shall now take
boldness to proceed; wherein, as God shall assist me, I shall endeavor to
sound the depths of those two grand clearing Arguments, supposing, that if God
shall enable me to level those Mountains lying in the way of mine assertion
alleged against your error, there will need no further atonement for that
which you make utterly incurable by any mediation of reason, consideration,
distinction, project, etc. one or other: Toward vindication of which mine
assertion, (namely, That men naturally have not power to do such things, as
whereto God has promised grace;) I conceive it very meet here to premise a
very pertinent Observation, which I received from your self, in a Sermon
preached June 12.1639. at Caple; on John 20.31. wherein, when you came to
answer Objections, you premised this consideration, When men have a truth well
grounded on Scripture, though they should meet with a thousand objections,
which they could not answer, yet they must not therefore cast away the truth,
if they can see it through them all, because it is easier to obscure and shadow
many truths by objections, then to clear one truth from all objections. Seeing
therefore the tenent to be vindicated, has been bottomed on many Arguments
from Scripture, I may not in the least question that truth, till those
Scripture-grounds be destroyed, and whether you do not rather shadow a truth
then oppose an error, in that you destroy not one Argument of many, though
from Scripture, but only produce two remote Arguments to prove the necessity of
your error, this I commend to any impartial trial: as also whether two
Arguments alleged, to arraign and condemn the equity and righteousness of
Gods proceedings according to his Word (though not to all cross reasonings) be
sufficient to destroy the truth of his Word.

Which being premised, I shall in Gods Name make (...) against those two
Arguments, at least, as they oppose the (...) pleaded for.

First then, for the first reason; If men must labor, etc. Then God must
destroy man for not doing that which is altogether (...) of his power to do:
which consequence you count most absurd, senseless, etc.

Touching which consequence so exploded, That God destroys, etc. that this is
fully agreeable with Gods justice, grace; etc. which you say, it so opposes, I
shall prove clearly from your (...) words in your second reason following, viz.

That the Scripture places the cause of the equity of Gods proceedings in
condemnation still upon man's will, or on some corrupt^^, frowardness, or
perverseness found therein.

Whence it thus follows; if it be equity in God no condg^^^ man for the
sinfulness of his will, then God may in equity condemn man for not doing that
which is altogether out of his power to do; but the former you hold and prove
true from Scriptures the latter therefore, that God may in equity condemn man,
for not doing that which is altogether out of his power to do, inevitably
follows, because to purify or rectify man's will, is altogether out of man's
power to do; which thing you peremptorily aff^^^ against the tenent of Free Will:
so then, that God destroys men for not doing that, which is altogether beyond
their power to do (which here you make so absure, unjust, etc.) this is a
direct consequent upon your own ensuing reason; yea, this very reason proves,
that Gods destroying man to, is an act of justice and equity.

That God destroys man, not so much for not willing savingly, as for the
obstinacy of his natural will.

(...) wi^^i^g savingly, and obstinacy of will, on which you ground the
Objection, is of no force at all: for he that wills not savingly, is obstinate
in his will: so Romans 8.7. The carnal minds, or the minding of the flesh, is
enmity against God: which term flesbly wind, being there opposed to the
spiritual minds, takes in every mind that is not spiritual; yea, it includes
the will, being a chiese part of the mind: and so every natural will without
exception, is en^^^y, or obstinacy and perverseness, all which, the term
enmity imports; so then God destroying man for not willing savingly, does
destroy for obstinacy of will.

Or secondly, whither God destroy for enmity of mind, and so of will, or
whether for not willing savingly, or according to the expression in that Text,
for not subjecting it self to the Law of God; still he destroys man for not
doing that, which is altogether out of his power to do, which is clear from the
end of that seventh Verse; where the reason of the minds, and therein of the
wills obstinacy, and of its not becoming subject to Gods law is added, in these
words, because it cannot, or because it has not power, namely to become
subject, or to subject it self to Gods Law: It must therefore be concluded,
that God destroying man upon any of your terms, whether for not willing
savingly, or for obstinacy, perverseness, etc. does destroy man for not doing
that which is altogether out of his power to do; and consequently, that
according to your own grounds, you inevitably plunge your self into that very
pit of absurdity, which you dug; yea, into such an Abyss, as whereout you
conclude, No mediation of reason, project, etc. can redeem: yea, by your very
terms, the justice and equity of God, in such a destroying of man, is
undeniably confirmed: By which reasons, striking so directly the root of your
first Argument, I conceive it is clearly removed: nevertheless because there are
such strong holds raised to stand by it, I shall according to what power God
shall vouchsafe me, assault those also.

Wherein, for those high aspersions cast upon the consequent of that opinion,
which opposes yours, which you make so contrary to the tenor, truth of the
Gospel, etc. comparing these with what you say after in the conclusion, that
[perhapse for the substance of it, it is no more then the truth] which you give
as your final sentence past upon the same opinion, I cannot but judge that
here you little thought what you should speak after, and at the conclusion, you
quite forgot what you had said before. But that such a saying rises up with
such contradiction against Gods justice, grace, etc. as no principles of
reason, common sense, etc. can reconcile, etc. this shall, yea must be granted
you, yet all so far from the least disparaging its truth, as that it shall have
meat out of this eater: for could the heights and depths of Gods justice in
ways of condemnation be compast about by the reason and comprehensions of men,
yea or Angels, they could not be themselves incomprehensible, whose judgments
are past finding out; therefore to say they are without the line or sphere of
the largest created understanding, is to give them their due valuation:
whereas, to say that cannot be justice in God, which no reason can reach, this
is to make his justice comprehensible, and that we must believe nothing of Gods
ways above our reason.

And whereas you affirm, ^t were as good reason to say, God destroys man for
not being God, etc. as for not believing, because man can no more do the one,
then the other, etc.

First if it be granted, that man has no more power to believe, then to become
God, etc. it follows not therefore, that us as good reason to destroy man for
not being God, or for not creating, as for not believing; for in Adam ( in whom
you after-say, all his posterity stood) man, in order to his perfect
happiness, had a power to perform what ever might have been by God commanded
(for without such a power mankind, in Adam, could not have had power to stand
happy, but had at best bin siable to misery, by disobedience, and that through
impotency seeing therefore, that while he could have stood in a state of life,
he prophanly changed it for a state of death, with most reason might God
require him, to do as much for recovering his happiness, after lost by his own
transgression, as before for continuing it, and so may require any act from him
(whether faith or any other) who was at first created with a power
correspondent; but contrarily, man never had power to be God, nor to create,
etc. Therefore it is not a like reasonable, to require him to become God, for
his recovery, as to believe. Again, it is denied, that man has no more power at
all to believe, then to make himself God, etc. For there is such a power in man
as may be made a meet subject to receive, and close with Gods work of faith;
but man is not made a subject capable of the Godhead, nor of the supremacy of
creation.

Next then, to proceed to the chief question, whether Adam in innocence had a
power of believing, or not. Touching which controversy it seems most necessary
to consider strictly, what 'twas for him to have such a power, or wherein it
truly consists, that we confound not our selves by compounding it with some
other thing; because if we consider not what it is simply in it felt, we may
conceive it not to be, where it is; because some other power or thing, taken, or
indeed mistaken for it, may not be there also: Concerning which, a power of
believing (according to your own definition) may be said to be that, whereby
the soul is enabled cordially to assent to, or entirely to close, with what
God shall reveal to be believed. Which cordial assenting you expound to be an
act which the whole heart closes with, even the understanding, will, and
affections, as in your Sermon forementioned, preached at Caple, o^ John 20.31.
Which act of closing, whether it may be taken in, without an act of recumbency,
which you then understood to be immediately, and as it were inseparably
following, or else, as essentially comprehending an act of recumbency; this
needs not be questioned here, both agreeing in this, that a power of believing
is a power of entire closing with things revealed, and whether only to be
closed with, as true, or with relying also, this rather concerns the manner
of propounding or revealing, though to follow your definition would be greater
advantage to me; which laid down, may be very useful toward the matter in
doubt.

As first, for your first reason against Adam having such a power, because no
necessity thereof, etc. suppose it granted, that he had no need to believe; yet
this proves not his not having a power, for the use or need of a power given
not essence to it, nor is it the essence thereof; there may be a power to do
where no need is, else a man has not power to do any thing whereof he has
not, need; as not a power to walk, speak, etc. because no need: whereas a
man has power to do thousands of acts needless, and God has a power to
raise of stones children unto Abraham, though it be a needless work. So that
power is here mis-understood in making power and need to believe, which are
two evidently distinct things to be in one individual.

But secondly, by way of exception against your Argument, that because he
needed not to believe to justification, therefore he needed not a power to
believe. This consequence may be denied thus.

If there may be need and use of believing this mystery, in or among such as
have no need, nor use thereof unto justification; then Adams not having need or
use of believing to justification, cannot prove his not needing to have
believed at all. But the former is true, witness the Angel Gabriel, Luke.
1.26. Who having no need, nor use of believing to justification, had yet need
and use thereof for the testifying the truth of this mystery, which he could
not have done without a true believing it himself. The like might be proved
from that company of Angels solemnizing CHRIST'S birth, with a song so befitting
it, Luke 2.15. The litter therefore plainly follows, that Adams not having
need to believe this mystery unto justification, cannot prove that he could not
have need to have believed for some other end.

Yea thirdly, and that partly by way of concession, and partly by way of
exception, if it be granted, that Adam needed not to have believed this
mystery to justification, nor for any other end; yet this proves not that he
needed not a power to have believed this mystery: because such a power so
excellent might be needful and useful to the producing of other acts
needful, though altogether useless for this; and that it was needful so,
appears from the next particular.

Therefore in the fourth place, the thing to be proved is, that he had both
need and use of such a power for other ends; that, what you say against Gods
Wisdom, in giving man such a power, may thereby be overthrown; and that he
needed such a power, I prove from this your own Argument alleged to evince
the contrary, and that thus: Adam standing righteous by the Law of works (which
is your Argument) that he might so do, could not but need a power of true
closing with the righteousness, holiness, etc. of God, in every work or
command required; for without a right apprehending and acknowledging the
excellencies of God, in his commands, he could not have rightly obeyed God in
any one command: whence it follows, that in having need of a power of closing
with the holiness, etc. of God in any command, he therein had need of a power
of closing with the truth, and faithfulness of God in any promise, whether of
Christ, or any other; because the self-same power would necessarily have
enabled him to each of those acts a-like; for it had been impossible for Adam
to have had a power to have acknowledged God in his holiness, and not by the
same to close with his truth and faithfulness; both which go together so
inseparably, as that we find God himself most frequently ratifying the
promulgation o^ great promises by the Prophets, by declaring himself the holy
One, Thus says the Lord the holy one of Israel, clearly intimating, that the
true apprehending of Gods holiness is such a prevailing argument, as will
enforce men to close with his truth and faithfulness touching the performance
of all his promises.

Yea, for further clearing, Adam had not only need, but use of a power of
believing, as appears from Gods method, in stating man in that high office of
dominion over the whole creation; wherein, after God had given him command to
bear dominion over all creatures, Genesis 1.28. he proceeds in the two following
verses to confirm to him that office, by promises as large as that command,
Behold I have given to you every Herb, etc. Which shall be to you for meat:
which words are a direct promise, in answer whereto Adam needed a power to
believe; because, as God added to the command a promise answerable, and all as
needful for the settling of the dominion upon him, so was it as needful for
Adam actually to believe that promise, that thereby he might undertake that
office, not with doubting, but with assurance of success, which could only
be confirmed to him, by a promise from the sole Creator, and Lord over all.
Yea, contrarily, if he had not regarded that promise he had thereby profaned
Gods wisdom in exhibiting it, and not believing he had oppugned Gods truth and
faithfulness touching performance. Seeing then that Adam had both need and use
of a power, whereby to believe the truth, yea, the rich grace of God also, in
that great promise, which confirmed his universal Sovereignty over the whole
creation, hence it follows that Adam had both need and use of such a power, as
whereby he could have believed the mystery of Christ (though he needed not, by
that power to believe that mystery) which may be fully proved from this reason,
because Adam being then upright or perfect, could not but believe that first
promise of dominion, from a right principle; namely, from a true apprehension
and knowledge of the faithfulness and grace of God, which knowledge (being
that spring or fountain, whence a true believing in Christ does always, and
can alone flow) Adam being furnished with, could not but have believed the
mystery of Christ; because hereby all the Saints have believed: and indeed God
acts so fully like himself, that so far as a man knows, and believes Gods
excellencies, he cannot but know and believe his revealed acts and contrivances
what ever they be: but above all others, the mystery of compassing salvation
by Christ, holds forth so lively a representation of God, in all his
excellencies of Wisdom, grace, righteousness, etc. as would have enforced
Adam to have believed it, who before had a knowledge of Gods excellen^^^^, in
being created in Gods own image, which consisted in knowledge, as also in
righteousness and holiness. By which Arguments, I conceive, that both Adams
having need, and use of (...) power, as could have produced a believing in
Christ, is evinced; and the Wisdom of God therein vindicated, the vindication
whereof is a work of such concernment as will I hope, excus^^y largeness
herein.

But to proceed both to the second and third reason, which are one and the
same; The first, because he had not power to foreknow his fall, nor secondly
Christ's death, etc. which Argument may be thus destroyed.

If the essence of a power of believing consists not at all in the knowledge of
Gods Will, before revealed by God, then Adam not having power to know the
mystery of Christ, before revealed by God, does no way prove his not having a
power of believing that mystery; but the former is true, That the essence of a
power of believing consists not, etc. Because according to your definition ^^is
a power of cordial assenting to the truth of a promise of God, that is to say,
a promise revealed, or propounded, which must be presupposed; now a power of
closing with the truth of what God reveals is far different from a power of
fore-knowing Gods Will before revealed: for the one, namely the knowledge of
the secrets of God belongs only to God, while his revealed will belongs to
men: And so God gives a power of believing to many thousands, and yet reserves
his secret Council from them all; the latter also, That Adams not having power
to foreknow, etc. follows inevitably, because when two faculities differ in
kind, then the absence of one proves not at all the absence of another.

Next after, you propound an Objection against your self, for Answer whereto,
you first refer to your foregoing argument against Gods Wisdom, which is
already answered at large, afterward you close up your answer after this
manner of reasoning.

First, you say, Christ could not be revealed, because not convenient, etc. And
thence you infer, that Therefore doubtless Adam had not a power to have believed
in Christ; no, not on this supposition, That Christ had been then revealed to
him. Which Argument is indeed most contradictory, yea utterly destructive to it
self: For first, you ground Adams not having such a power upon this reason,
because Christ could not be revealed, and afterward, you quite destroy that
very reason, by supposing, or granting Christ to have been revealed: so that in
Answer to a main and most considerable objection, you only repeat a former
reason, already answered, and add one new, which you immediately destroy by
your own contra-supposition, and so the Objection remains altogether
unanswered.

Next follows your fourth reason, against Adams having such a power, because
Christ was not revealed, which may be destroyed thus.

If the want of an outward means, though necessary to concur in producing an
act, cannot prove the want of the intrinse call power necessary to that act,
then it follows, That Adams wanting the Revelation of the object to be
believed, cannot prove his wanting an inward power to believe: But the former
is true, that the want of an outward means, etc. cannot prove the inward power
wanting, because the outward means, and the inward power are two distinct
things: for instance; food, the outward means of feeding is one thing, and the
appetite, the inward faculty of receiving food, is another; and therefore the
having of either may well consist with the want of either; one man may have an
inward faculty of appetite, and want outward food; and another may have outward
food, and want an inward receptive faculty: The latter therefore inevitably
follows, that Adams wating the Revelation, etc. proves not his wanting an
inward power, etc. because the Revelation of the object by promise, the outward
means of believing, being one thing; and faith the inward power of receiving it
another thing, distinct from the former: hence it comes to pass, that either
of them may be, where either of them is wanting; Adam then might have a power
of believing, and want the word of faith, though now faith comes by hearing
even as he was created in Gods image, perfectly at once, though Saints now are
transformed into the same image gradually and that by means of the Word, 2 Cor.
3.18. and contrarily many now have the Word, and not that power, the Word being
not of the essence of that power.

Secondly, another Argument may be this, if Adam had not power to believe a
thing, or object, because the object was not revealed, then 'twill follow that
Adam had not a power of sta^^^^ righteous by the Law of works, for if he had
not power to bel^^ve a thing, because 'twas not revealed, then by the same
reason, he had not power at first to obey any command, because 'twas not
revealed, for the Revelation of a command is as much necessary to obeying ^s
the Revelation of a promise is necessary to the believing thereof; and the mere
Revelation of a promise would have infused into Adam no more power of
believing, then the mere Revelation of a com^^nd would have infused power of
obeying: whence it follows, that Adam in his first perfection was so far from
having power to stand righteous, by a Law of works, by performing any thing to
be commanded, as that indeed, when he was at first created, according to this
your reason, he had not then power to obey any command whatsoever, because his
creation was fully finished, before any command was revealed: yea, from that
time forward when ever any command had been revealed, he had stood in ^eed of
supply of new power to obey, because before 'twas revealed he had not power to
obey. Which consequences utterly overthrow that perfect power by standing
righteous by works, which you expressly affirm, Adam had, making him unable to
perform any work, by his first created power.

Thus much in Answer to your reasons alleged against Adams having power of
believing, etc. which are all grounded upon a misunderstanding of, and
swerving from, the true definition of such a power, and so are made up of an
indi^tinct, and consuled conjumbling of other things with it; for neither the
need, use thereof, nor the foreknowledge, or Revelation of an object, are at
all essentially necessary to make up such a power, as has been proved.
Touching which matter I must add one word, viz. that it must needs be
dangerous presumption to charge such a person with weakness before trial, who
for excellency and perfection of nature, is avouched again and again by God
himself to be created after Gods own Image and likeness, Genesis 1. and to be
made upright, or righteous, Eccles. 7.29. Yea, especially to ground that charge
against him upon such reasons, as wholly tend to prove, that he was not in a
capacity of being tried; whether he had such a power of believing or not, by
which act the grand Masterpiece of Gods whole Creation is without all ground
vilified.

Against all which, that I may yet add one passage; I shall endeavor to state
the question in most cle^^ and full terms, which question being, Whether.
Adam had a power of believing in Christ; (the essence of which power consists
in a power to believe an object revealed) cannot be truly framed, except with
this supposition, That Christ had been revealed, so that to go about to
examine, much more to determine, what his power was to believe an object,
without supposing that object to be revealed; this is a course inconsistent
with the nature of this power, which necessarily presupposes the revelation of
an object, for the trial thereof: for though such a power may be without an
outward Object yet there can be no trial of its being without it, as a man may
have an inward appetite, but we cannot rightly examine his having it, but by
giving him outward food, which question therefore may be fairly propounded
thus, Whether Adam had a power of believing Christ, supposing, Christ had been
revealed? Answer whereto must be this, That he could not but have such a power,
it being essentially necessary to his state of perfection, as appears by these
three consequences.

First, because without it, upon the revealing of Christ (which is here
supposed) Adam must have been miserable by opposing the truth of God in that
promise, and that through want of power. Or secondly, if upon the revelation of
this mystery, he had not had power to have believed it, then necessarily he
must have, needed supply of new power, whereby to have believed, and so upon
this revelation (supposed) his condition, would have been the very condition of
unbeleevers now, who upon the revealing of this mystery need new power to
believe it; both which consequences are utterly inconsistent with the nature of
his first complete power of standing happy. Yea thirdly, supposing that Mystery
to have been revealed to Adam, to be believed, the very revelation hereof would
have required, and commanded him to have believed it, and his believing would
have been a proper act of Obedience to the Law of that promise requiring faith;
If therefore he had not a power to have obeyed the law of that promise by
believing, then it follows, That his first power could not have enabled him to
stand by a Law of Works, by perfect obedience, which (as you expressly grant) he
was fully able to do.
And yet, before passing from this question, I mi^t (...) word to prevent the
mistaking mine and in answering it, (...) is, That I have not endeavored to
prove Adams ^aving (...) power, from this reason, because without it God could
not ^^^^stice destroy mankind; for whether he had a power of believing or no,
is a Question needless and impertiment, touching the ^^^ring of Gods justice
in man's destruction, as may be made ^^^^fest thus.

If Adam, in whom (as you acknowledge) all his posterity stood, had such a
power, under the first Covenant, as was su^^^^^ent to justify God in the death
or destruction of man disobeying then to examine, whether Adam had power to
believe a second Covenant is altogether ^^^iceess^ry to clear Gods Justice, in
^^stroying man, disobeying; But the former is true, this Adam had etc. because
God after stating him in his first power, (...) thereupon as a righteous Judge,
fore, pass or denounce the ^^^^ning or sentence of death or destruction upon
him, if he sho^^^ disobey, Genesis chap. 2. verse. 17. Thou shall surely ^ye. W^^^^
threatening could not have been justly denounced against (...) except his first
power and perfection, had such an answerable proportion thereto, as might
justify that threatening. The latter also, That to examine, etc. is a needless
question for clearing Gods justice, etc. follows inevitably, because seeing the
est^^ce of Adams first power was sufficient to justify God in destroying man,
disobeying; it is therefore needless to inquire, what (...) power could
produce. Yea, seeing you understand a power of believing, as having relation to
the second Covenant only, t^^ therefore could not be at all necessary to the
clearing of Gods justice in man's death or destruction, because the threatening
of death was denounced against him; only with relation to the t^a^^^ of the
first Covenant, which alone he know; which threa^^ing was as just before Gods
promising Christ in a second Covenant, upon man's fall, as afterward, because
God made not that promise to clear his justice.

To proceed now to the second sort of reasonings, being on supposition, That
Adam had such a power, yet that this would not avail, because God having made a
new Govenant, etc. to which I reset. Touching which it must be affirmed. 1.
That for God to daprive man of the blessing, etc. As you there express, this
is wholly (...) with and destructive ^o the ^ss^^^^ of a Cove^^^^ of Univ^^s^ll
goo^^, (...) enyes that all ^^^e power to obtain Grace or intere^^e thou^^^lves
therein, but if we speak of the Covenant of Free Grace, them the truth is for
God that he might not deprive any man of the ob^ssing of it, therefore to hold
it forth on such terms, as are attainable by man's improvement, as upon which
Go^^^gagi^ ^^^^^^ly by (...) of th^s Covenant, to grant acceptance and grace,
(which you assir^^ to uphold the freedom of his grace) this is (...) and
destructive to the very (...) and ^outh of that Covenant of grace, which
con^^^ws saving grace peculiardy (...) so^^^ for 'twould be impossible for God
(...) not to fa^^fi^^e s^^^ a Covenant, as should both promise grace to some
^^ely, and not to there, (which the Covenant of grace does) and yet also should
promise the same grace, after the s^^e manner, (...) all (...). It must
therefore be (...), that the (...) of the second Covenant are utterly (...) by
(...) utmost power, but yet this no way destroys the freedom of Gods (...) in
that Covenant, for though God therein ^^^^^^ds ^^^tai^^ble conditions from all,
yet his promise wherein (...) work those conditions in some, is of Free grace.
Gods (...) do ^^^t make hi^ promises of none effect. And touching your instance
of a Noble f^^^ly, it is wholly impertinent, for all it shows is ^^t this: That
the conditions required in the Covenant Gr^^ce, are such as cannot tender all,
no, n^r any one capable of grace, by his ^st endeavor, which is ^^^d enviably
(...), ^^^g th^^ (...) of God, to work such conditions in (...), i^ (...) of
Free Grace, this is still to be proved. By which instance you deny the Gospel
to pro^^sse any peculiar thing to some, making it only to (...) the same
conditions from all, whereas i^^^^ed its promises and as large to some, as the
command (...).

It Is then most ground le^^t (...), because the Covenant of Grace is not common
to all (...) g^^^^lly upon improvement, that therefore it is not of grace to
some, for grace in i^^ own nature is more free and transcend (...), because to
some only and not to others, Which (...) may be p^^^ll^^^ed to the ^^so thus,
viz. suppose a Prince (...) a No^^^ (...) guilty of high (...) so as that
without (...) of justice, he cannot but condemn them, if now lie will give
(...) only son, (...) be ^^c^^ficed, (...) random for part of them, from the
condemnation, because ^e finds nothing in them to satisfy his justice without
their destruction: this betokens abundance of grace; y^^ further, to work also
in them that necessary condition, which he requires; because they cannot attain
thereto of themselves: this is also a high strain of Free Grace.

Next follows your applying that instance, They that make the s^ving terms of
the Gospel, etc. Concerning which it must be affirmed, that in respect of
obtaining grace to salvation, man by his utmost improvement, cannot tread as
much as one sure or steady step in that way; so that his utmost improvement
shall of it self at best be successelesse therein. And this is so far from
rendering the Gospel reproach, as that Paul establishes the freedom of Gods
dispensation upon this very ground, Romans 9.16. Where after examples given to
set our the freedom of Gods grace, Verse* 11. in choosing and refusing,
according to his good pleasure, without any regard had to any improvement or
work done, be lays down this as a sure conclusion, Verse* 16. So then, it is not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that s^emeth mercy*
where Paul, that he might lay down and declare the sure ground of salvation,
like a wise builder, he first destroys the rotten ground of the Arminians, and
that by ^utting off all manner of intailement or engagement of grace, on man's
willing, yea, and running; which terms cannot but import greatest intention
and ext^ntion of abilities: he says not, upon willing or running, God has
promised mercy or grace, but it is not of him, etc. but of God, etc. The Apostle
most emphatically expresses it by the rearme (but) a known particle of
opposition; thereby cutting off any binding of the latter, Gods mercy to the
former, man's improvement. The reason of which method is clear: because if it
were of him that wills or runs, so as that to, and upon it, grace is
^^nexed, then it could not be free, and without respect to man's improvement;
which thing Paul is proving, Verse* 11. but must then have been of Grace,
engaged upon running.

Touching your next expression, Were I of the judgment of Arminius, I could,
etc. I must with grief of heart say thus much; I fear your left hand has
learned too much of this cunning; and indeed there in that enmity in the
understanding of reasonable man against the truth, that is may be more easy to
represent many e^^ours plansible to them, then one truth.

Next follows your second reason, upon supposing Adams having a power of
believing etc. which will not justify God, etc. because justice stands in a
Geometrical proportion, etc.

Which Argument reaches far higher then the tenent it should prove; yea, makes
it void: For this proves not that God is engaged by promise, etc. but which is
far more intolerable, this makes it but an act of justice in God, to give men
life, or save them from condemnation upon improvement. For if after man's
falling from his perfect power God cannot in equity condemn^ man, doing his
utmost, and that because justice stands in a Geometrical proportion, or in
taking an exact account or consideration of the persons present power and
improvement, in answer to their power lost; which (according to your instances
produced, and your direct application of all to Adams case) you understand by
those expressions of Geometrical proportion: hence then it follows, that Gods
engaging himself by promise to improvement, is no necessary ground of man's
salvation; but Gods justice beholding them and their improvements, is made a
necessary engagement on God to save such improvens: so that without salvation
of such his justice cannot be salved, and consequently his grace needs not act
in their salvations but for the right improvement of your Argument, I add
this. Man's losing his first perfect power of obedience, etc. cannot but in
equity justify God in his condemning man, doing his utmost according to his
power now remaining; and that from your very reason, Because justice stands in
a Geometrical proportion; or in a strict consideration of persons, their
conditions, abilities, etc. For if Gods justice stands in judging acts
according to the abilities, where with the person is entrusted, then it must in
reference hereto, count what abilities have been given him: whereupon finding
man in Adam, to have been entrusted with a fullness of power; to believe (which
power throughout your second reason you suppose and grant) it cannot but
require an act correspondent: for as much therefore as man after utmost
improvement cannot but fall infinitely short of such an act (which you also
grant) Gods justice, upon computing both together, must needs be so far from
rewarding it with grace; as that it cannot but condemn man, for acting no way
answerable to the power given; and that in greatest equity, because of the
infinite disproportion between each, which ^ight (...). If Gods justice in
judging the (...), be so ^^ri^t (...) comp^^ng the (...), given (...) person in
relation to the act, as that a great sa^^^^ from a m^^ied (...) then two ^^iter
from a widow, and that because it judges according to their respective
abilities; then certainly justice weighing spiritual actions, with the power
given (...) Ad^^ (which you suppose) cannot but condemn (...), because his
actions ^^^ct utmost improvement, hold a vast disprop^^tion with that power.

Again, according to the parable of the talent, ^f justice so exactly requires
by way of ^^ta^iation, (...) for ^alout, two for two, five for five, then open
r^qui^ing acts, answerable to the power, here supposed to be given man in Adam,
it m^st needs (...) man falling (...) short ^t best.

So that indeed there is no congruity between the reason and the instances. For
first, your reason is mainly grounded on this suppostion, That man had power in
Adam, (...) so (...) it. But the instances import not the least ^ittle of my
power, which (...) the Widd^w or Lords servants had and lost.

Again, the instances prove it a matter of equity to accept of the endeavors
of such as act propo^ti^nably to their (...), but fall infinitely short of
proving the acceptance of such as act no way answerable to their talents.

Which instances can only be paralleled to your second reason, th^^, That (...)
the Widow been in^^^sted with a great (...) and ^ewdly spet^^ all but two
(...), yet those m^st in justice have been co^^ted us much as the large
contributions of others; because she has now no more left. And the Lords
s^rva^^ after ^osing ten talents, being entrusted with one more, upon his
improving that to his power, (though not well) his Lord in justice must (...)
such improvement, and not require satisfaction for the (...); whereas in just
sevei^ty, h^^ust his other servant (...) darkness, o^^ly for not making profit
of ^m single ^alent, though (...) misspent it not, but (...) it up.

Yet I would not here be mista^e^, as if I conceived it matter of mo^^nt to
show your mis-application of there insta^^^^; for could they be proved to be
answerable to (...) would no way advantage it; for though you (...) by way of
proof, yet in so doing you pervert the use of instances, which may indeed
illustrate a matter, but cannot prove it, according to that approved sentence
-- Theologia parabolica non est argumentativa; or thus, parabolae illustrant
non probant.

And touching your applying all to Adams posterity, that, though it be supposed
they had a power of believing, etc.

'Twould indeed be tedious work it to reckon up the least part of all the
dangerous confequences thereof; for if Adams fallen posterity may do that,
which may be of more consideration in point of equity, etc. as you express.
Then it follows, that man's fall is no prejudice at all, but matter of
advantage rather.

Again, hence 'twill follow, that God has no respect to the state of the
person acting, whether he be in a state of acceptance with God, or of
rejection; but only to the action done, in that man full of enmity, may do
that, which may be of greater consideration in the eye of Gods justice, then
what spotless Adam could do. Whereas touching the acceptance of the person,
in relation to the acceptance of acts, it is evident from the general current
of Scripture, that the acceptance or non-acceptance of acts, principally
depends on the acceptance or non-acceptation of the person; hence, the prayer
of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, while the prayer of the upright is
his delight, Prove. 15.8. so God accepted Abel and his offering; Whence was his
offering accepted? even from Gods free accepting the person, and not the person
for the offerings sake. But here you make God bound by equity, as much, yea
more, to accept an accursted man for his improvements sake, then Adam a
righteous man, and his righteous works: which argument directly maintains
justification by works and merit, in that you say, Man may now do what is as
good or better in val^^ then Adam, who then stood by works.

To add yet one word against the force of all your Arguing, upon supposition
of Adams having a power to believe, etc. viz. Man beinging death on himself by
breach of the first Covenant, the work of justice hereupon is to inflict death,
what ever terms therefore are tendered to prevent death, these are all fruies
of free grace: though then those terms are unatta^^able by man fallen; God
may, notwithstanding without any injustice, suspend the gift of a power
answerable to them, though man perish thereby. God was not bound in justice to
offer any terms beside those to Adam, Do thus, else thou shall surely dye,
much less is he bound, to give a power correspondent to new terms.

Next follows your second reason, If men putting forth themselves, etc. and
not find grace, etc.

Touching which, I must affirm, that though in my former discourse I gave you
no ground to think I feared your opinion to comply with the opinion of
Free Will in the Gospel sense, yet am I constrained to affirm, that the force
of this second reason, is that very opinion which may thus be proved.

If mercy putting forth their utmost power, and not finding grace with God,
etc. may be destroyed for want of an executive power, without any miscarriage
or sinfulness at all in the will, then men may so far put forth themselves by
their own power without grace, as whereby, they may be without any sinfulness
at all in the will, which is indeed to have full power of Free Will. The former
whereof is the express force of your reason; the latter also plainly follows;
for he that can by his own power attain to a freedom from all sinfulness in
his will, cannot but have Free Will to close with God; because without such a
free closing with God, the will cannot be free from all sinfulness: so than
man by his own power rendering himself free from, or without any sinfulness at
all in his will, thereby removes all that kept him from a power of Free Will;
which you afterward grant in owning that of Augustine, Take away man's will,
and take away Hell and all.

Again, from the conclusion of that your second reason, compared with the
former part of it, this dangerous consequence unavoidably proceeds, viz. that
man is able of himself to remove all the ground of his condemnation, which
appears thus.

If the Scripture places Gods justice in condemnation always, upon some
sinfulness in the will, and man himself by improvement be able to free himself
from all such sinfulness; then man is able of himself to remove all the ground
of his condemnation, or to save himself from destruction by his own
improvement, not needing grace to salvation. The former, that Gods justice is
cleared from the sinfulness of the will, you prove from Scripture. Again,
that man can render himself free from all such sinfulness; this is the main
strength of your reason. The conclusion therefore necessarily follows, that
man has power to take away or remove the ground of his condemnation. For if
God in justice can only destroy man for such sinfulness; then man freeing
himself from all such sinfulness, takes away thereby all just ground of
condemnation; and so lays a sure ground for salvation, which is only opposed
by sin.

And touching those many Texts ensuing, what they prove is granted, which is,
that man's condemnation is laid upon some sinfulness in the will; but these are
all far from proving, that man has power to free himself from all the
sinfulness of the will, the scope of all which is to set out the obstinacy of
the will, in the wicked actings thereof, which is a point distinct from that of
showing the main ground of its continuing so perverse: For, there is no
necessity of showing, that man wants power to subdue the perverseness of his
will in every place, where that perverseness is spoken of: the grounds
therefore of such perverseness must be sought for there, where the Holy Ghost
distinctly expresses it: one special place for which, John 6.36. compared
with Verse 44. and 65. was proved to be in the discourse given you. But yet
among those many Scriptures, I shall take notice of one, which you mainly
ground upon; which is Acts 7.51. which you thus allege and open.

Ye have always resisted; now how did they resist, etc. not by any
defectivenesse of power, etc.

Whereas it is clear that the former part of the Verse lays down the ground of
their perverseness first, as the precedent article of their condemnation, in
this clause, ye uncircumcised in heart; whence indeed their resisting arose; so
that the question is, whether they had power to take away this main obstacle,
the uncircumcision of their hearts; but it is certain they cannot; for this is
peculiarly within Gods power, as Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise
thy heart. Seeing then they resist from the uncircumcision thereof, it
follows, that they resist through want of power, for that they need power from
above to circumcise their hearts.

And so all those other Texts prove not at all man's not wanting a power, etc.
From all which you would force in this tenent, That man wants no power to
reduce his will to Gods, which is to say he has a power of Free Will, as
appears from that, Acts 7.51. whence you say, Man resists not from any want of
power; the selfsame from John 5.40. Ye will not come, they wan^^^ not power
to come: though it be proved in the discourse given you, that the reason
thereof is declared to be a want of power, in Chap. 6.44.

Next you raise a Quere, how your opinion differs from the opinion of
Free Will? Which Quere I find you make from this ground, because your opinion
is feared to comply with the Arminian tenent of Free Will, as you express soon
after the beginning of this clearing Sermon. Touching which, what I did, and do
fear and find is this; that your fifth and main assertion impleaded, is the
same with that Arminian Maxim, there expressed, facienti quod in se est, etc.
Which opinion you take to be that of Free Will; and so indeed you may, for both
are the same in effect: For if man may so do as to engage God to give grace
(which you affirm) he does thereby that which is as surely effectual to
salvation; as Free Will to act savingly: for God cannot but perform what he
has p^^mised to man upon doing. And that this your opinion is the grand tenent
of the Arminians, may be proved by the testimony of Doctor Robert Sanderson, in
his first Sermon, ad populum, on 3 Kings 21.29. 26. where he has this passage.

It appears from the premises, that Gods thus dealing with wick^d etc. gives no
warrant or strength at all, either to that popish or currupt doctrine of
Meritum congrui, in deserving the first grace, by the right use of naturals, or
to that rotten principle and foundation of the whole frame of Arminianisme,
facienti quod in se est, Deus non potest, non debet denegare gratiam.

Which latter is your very opinion; for, if man may do such things as whereupon
God has promised to give grace (which you affirm) then man may so do, as
whereupon God neither ought nor can deny grace; because God for his truth and
faithfulness sake, neither can, not ought to violate his own engagements; so
that by maintaining your fifth assertion, as a tenent so necessary, you uphold
the rotten foundation of the whole frame of Arminianisme.

The same also may be further proved out of Dr. Twisse his dispute about Mr.
Perkins and Arminius, where Sect. 2. lib. 3. upon the sixth error, Mr. Perkins
charges the Arminian School^men, with this very tenent thus, Si faseret, De^
adjuvants, quod in se est, Deus illum illuminaret supernaturali gratia.

Yea further, lest it be thought, the Arminians may be wronged, Arminius
himself repeats this very tenent, more plainly, in his reply immediately
following; yea, which is very considerable, he labors to prove it after that
very manner, as you do, by making God engaged by promise, as in these words.

Annon isto dicto Christi, babenti dabitur, promissio ista contin^atur, qua
Deus spondet se gratia supernaturali illuminaturum, qui lumine naturali recte
utetur, a^t salt^ utetur minus male.

Which text, to him that has shall be given, Arminius produces, instead of
those Texts of yours, ask and you shall have, etc. whence he affirms the same
with you, saying, that by that promise, to him that has shall be given; God
ingages himself to enlighten with supernatural grace, such as rightly use
natural light, or at least; who will use it, as much as he can, less evilly.

So that touching the great difference you make between your opinion, and that
of Free Will, as if yours were not Arminian, it is plain, Arminius holds the one
as strongly as the other: yours opposed, he plainly holds, and labors so to
prove it, as you do; for instead of perfect free will, he acknowledges some
defect in the will, as by that his expression, less evilly, whereby granting
some sinfulness therein.

Yea, that Arminius holds both opinions; how contradictory soever to each
other, I find expressly in Doctor Twisse, in his third book and first
digression, touching the sense of that Text, to him that has shall be given,
as appears by this sentence. Quamvis requirant gratiam ad r^^te ^^^dum
naturalibus, ^amque supernaturalem, tam^u i^rerd^^^ diser^e d^ce^^, bo^^inem
ista natura vipra^^are posse, which he there proves from C^rvinu^: It appeats
therefore from these testimonies, that your opinion of engaging God to give
grace, etc. which you go about to quit them from, is most usual amongst them,
being more plausible; and that which denies a necessity of supernatural grace,
is but rarely found among them.

And touching your compliance with both these opinions, as their former is your
fifth assertion, so the latter of Free Will in the gro^^st sense, is directly
maintained, by the force of your second reason, as is before proved.

Furthermore, seeing you profess your and in all, to be the prev^ning of such
(...) p^essions, (...) are given by the most against the Arminians ((...)
discourse, (...) in the ^^d of this Sermon (...) intimated) it seems meet to
^^quaint you, ^ow greatly you have crossed your own design, and that by the
second and maine point of difference, which you make between your opinion and
theirs. For whereas you there charge them with this, as their main and only
tenent, viz. That man has power to produce a saving act, without any
supernatural assistance, it appears from those words prescript; Quamvis
requirant gratiam, etc. supernaturalem; that when they are their
Crafts-masters, they do, and that generally, require supply of supernatural
grace; so that you seem uncharitably to take them always at the worst.

In which alleging of these testimonies, though I cannot but acknowledge my
prolixity, yet must I partly justify it, from the necessity thereof, even to
establish that truth by the mouth of two or three witnesses, which being only
affirmed before, you did so lightly put by.

And yet must I add one word, to mind you of your politic method, used about
denying your tenent to be Arminian; that whereas their opinion of Gods being
engaged, etc. (given in those words, facienti quod in se est, etc.) is directly
yourfifth assertion; and their main maxim you wholly neglect to prove, wherein
your opinion differs from that maxim, contenting your self only to show how it
differs from another Arminian opinion, which you were not at all charged with:
so that still your opinion lies under this heavy charge, of being the main^
foundation of the whole frame of Arminianisme, which is now made good by clear
evidence.

Next you raise a question touching the difference between an executive and
willing power, or a principle drawing out that power into act, etc.

The occasion of your opening which distinction, I find to be from a passage
in my discourse given you; where it is denied, that man has an executive power
to believe, which now you would farther prove.

In opening of which power you seem to contradict yourself, for you take it to
be a power, whereby to act, and yet by those instances, you understand that to
be an executive power, which cannot enable to act: you say A rich man has an
executive power to be liberal, whilst of a penurious disposition, though by
that power he is never the nearer being liberal: but how contradictory is it
to say, A man by means of such a thing, has power to ex^^^^^ such a work,
though by that thing be is never the nearer execution thereof; by this you seem
to nullify that power in respect of inabling to an act, which you call a power
to act.

Again, you say he has an executive power to do, though that power be
defective touching doing, but that which is defective in order to an act,
cannot be a power to act, for a power to act is inconsistent with
defectivenesse, or want of power; power and want of power are contraries.

But for brevity sake, I shall endeavor to grant the utmost extent of your
instances, viz. A penurious rich man has such a power in him, in order to acts
of liberality, as an Infant has principles of reason and understanding, which
may of themselves in an ordinary way of nature, become executive to answerable
acts, without any super-naturall infusion; so a rich penurious man has such
principles as by consideration, council, etc. may be inclined to liberality,
without a super-naturall change of those principles, but yet whilst penuriously
disposed, he is as far, or farther, from an executive power, as a willing; as a
child is in the case given.

And thus may the rest be understood, As that Genesis 31.^9. it is in the power,
etc. that is, he had a sufficiency of outward strength and such a natural
principle of revenge, as might act revenge, if not hindered by an extraordinary
hand, and so, have not I power to eat, etc. man has a natural receptive
faculty for that end.

The tenor of which instances being thus considered, the maine is to examine;
what is in them to serve your purpose, which is to prove, that a man has an
executive power to believe: Between which instances, and the things you would
prove, there is as vast a dis-proportion, as between natural and supernatural
acts, for all that these prove, is but that men have an executive power to
perform such acts, as may be done without supernatural influence, as to be
liberal, to frequent the Ordinances, or (to speak in your own language) to
sin, revenge, eat, drink, etc. Now 'twere most unadvised to conclude, because
men have an executive power to the external acts of Religion, frequenting the
Ordinances; to acts natural, eating, drinking; moral, as to be liberal, etc.
that therefore they have a like power to supernatural acts. Of all which
instances, the most genuine scope, is to prove man's free will to believe, for
the main Argument of both your Sermons, is touching man's power toward
attaining faith, which power you call executive, which so called, you
demonstrate by making it like that power which those instances hold forth^ but
to all those several acts, the persons respectively have a power of free will;
those concerning men have, because all those acts may be done by man in his
pure naturalls, those which concern God are much more within his power to will,
as they are acts requiring power, for God is not capable of receptive power
(though God wills not ^^^^se^^ring acts) therefore in making man's executive
power to come to Christ, or believe, to be such as those instances have, you
necessarily make man to have Free Will ^o believe, else all those instances are
to no purpose.

In brief thou a man cannot be said to have an executive power to any act, but
what he can voluntarily do, and is within the li^e of that power, so as to
stand in need of no ext^^ordinary divine assistance; it is contradictory to say
an executive power cannot execute of it self, for if a supernatural power
must cooperate to execution, then the other power cannot be executive, but the
work of faith cannot be executed, without a divine power infused (which you
elsewhere grant) therefore man cannot have an executive power to believe, till
he be so inspired; instead therefore of a willingness to draw out an executive
power to act faith which you speak of there must be a putting in a new power,
before any drawing out to act can be.

To and this therefore, I desire to know directly what this power is by name,
which you call executive, for it forms not imaginable, that the name executive
should be any other then a nick name of such a power as cannot execute. Who
ever then can distinguish between an executive power, or a principle whereby to
act, (^syo^^^pl^mit) and such a principle as (...) produce a^^act, such a one
will doubtless out the hair indeed.

But yet between your unfolding the distinction of powers, you insert two
particulars, one is a quaere about Ar^^^^^ T^^^^^s, which is for substance the
same with your opening the dis^^^^ce, between your opinion, and that of free
will, which being already ^^ale with, I pass over.

The other particular is an Objection from Joh^^^: 44. Which in the ^i^^o^^^^
given you, is ^llendged, (...) through was of power; which for answer, you
(...); Now (...) come* (...) put forth himself in any such way, wherein God
has promised to meet him with grace.

By which expression, No man can come, you understand can proceed so far in a
way of nature, in order to grace, as wherein God has promised to meet him with
grace; but this destroys the sense, for it is most evident, that the expression
comes imports a coming to life with saving grace, which might be proved from
many other Texts, some whereof are given in that discourse, as John 5.40. so
John 6.37. He that comes to me, which imports coming with saving faith; which
place you have understood so. Now there is a great contrariety between these,
for man's doing that wherein God has promised to meet him with grace, is a
doing by himself without grace; upon which doing, you say, God meets with
grace; but the coming here is a saving coming, or unto life by saving grace;
therefore not a coming in the course of natural abilities, to meet with grace
thereupon.

Again, there appears not the least ground for such an interpretation, because
here is never a word spoken of pawing forth in a course of nature, but of
coming to Christ, or believing (which in the discourse given, are proved to be
terms equivalent) nor yet is there the least tittle of a promise of meeting
man with grace upon coming.

And for that clause, except my Father draws, which you expound, except be
interpose with some greater power then ordinary's that you understand thereby,
Gods inabling to improve naturals to the utmost, in order to grace, is plain,
in that you make Gods interposing to be a carrying of man so far in a course of
nature, as wherein God has promised to meet him with grace, and so you make
Gods drawing to be, but by way of preparation unto grace, promised thereupon;
against which it is evident, it is such a drawing as whereby man comes unto
Christ, or believes both being one; therefore drawing is an act of divine
power, working saving-grace, and not a carrying of man so to do, as upon which
doing, God will afterward meet him with the gift of grace. Afterward you add
another Exposition, no man has any foresight of any complete power of coming;
which implies, man has in himself a power to come to Christ, before Gods
drawing; so that by drawing; God only gives him sight of that power: But this
directly opposes the words which are, no man can or has a power to come; he
says not, no man has a sight that he can come.

For establishment of which exposition, you reassume your distinction of
powers already dealt with; by opening of which executive power to come to
Christ, you make man's power of coming to Christ, or believing, to be a power
of Free Will, as is before proved from the instances.

After that, you expressly conclude from what is delivered in that Sermon, The
necessity of your fifth assertion, touching Gods promising grace, etc.

Concerning all which, to speak truly supposing these two Arguments (which you
say are for the clearing of the whole business) were unanswerable, yet would
they be far from such a clearing; for all the arguing of Men or Angels shall
never prove this, without bringing a promise of God for it; which throughout
this Sermon you no where attempt, though all your former texts pretended to
contain such promises alleged in your former Sermon, are prowed wholly
impertinent, in that discourse given in. The thing you would prove by these
Arguments is, That God is engaged by promise to natural improvers; but if this
promise be such as God has been graciously pleased to make (which you affirm)
then you cannot prove such a promise by Argument, but only from express
exhibition; because what God does of Free Grace, can proceed from no ground or
reason, but his own freeness, for which, being Gods essence, no reason can be
given.

Yes, of all grounds, that whereon you build the strength of all your
Arguments; namely, the vindication of Gods justice, must needs be most weak: it
seems of all reasonings most absurd, to say God cannot but freely promise
grace, because his justice binds him to it. And seeing you express your
maintaining that assertion to be of so great necessity for upholding the truth,
etc. of the Gospel. I wonder you omit, both the justifying it, by any one
Scripture, after all the Scriptures alleged are proved contrary; and likewise
the vindicating it from those pernicious consequences, which in the discourse
given you, are showed to be most inevitably deduceable thence; because in what
degree that suffers, whereon you make the truth, grace, etc. to depend; so much
must the truth, grace, and uprightness of the Gospel, etc. suffer.

And touching that of Augustine, take away, etc. if it be compared with a
passage immediately foregoing, which is, that men may be destroyed without any
malignancy in their wills, both put together, plainly make man to have power of
Free Will; for you make taking away all malignancy of will to be within man's
power, which being taken away, nothing hinders from Free Will.

Next you further refer this controversy to your disputes against the
Arminians; diverse things, wherein especially in the two last Exercises, seem
justly liable to exception, but I shall decline further dealing there with on
this ground, because the substance thereof is repeated in this Sermon: and
though I intended to have added a word about that Text, To him that has shall
be given, I shall wholly omit it, referring to that learned discourse of Doctor
Twisse upon the sense thereof, in his Third Book forecited.

Touching the use you make of all, in which is employed your great care in all
this, to study out mollifying, and to prevent harsh expressions, which (as you
intimated in discourse) are given out by most against the Arminians; I may not
unfitly insert a passage which you used against the Arminians, being here fitly
applicable, viz. While you go out of the Kings highway in relation to
Free Grace, and seek out by-ways of man's engaging God by improvement,
censuring Gods justice, the freeness of his grace, etc. you hereby fall into
worse ways, though you endeavor so to pave them, that they may seem most
smooth.

And whilst you profess great care against harsh unsavory expressions, etc.
I know not what expressions can be more harsh then such, as belch out such
calumny against the justice of God, the freeness of his grace, etc. of which
it may fitly be said, who art thou that reply against God? nor know I with
whom such expressions can be savoury after trial, except with the Arminians
themselves.

And touching your Apology, I commend this Quare to serious consideration,
whether it would not be a more ingenuous way of Apologizing to disclaim your
own error, and with that mouth to justify that truth whereby you have
condenmed it, rather then to please your self with this saying. If so be we
cannot come to express our selves, etc. We shall content our selves with some
such manner of excuse as this is, That God has not given us that ability and
faculty of utterance and expressions, and that we conceive the business better
in our minds, then we are able to give account of to others? Which I the
rather refer to consideration, because of that fluency of utterance and
expression, which God has vouchsafed you above many.

And seeing you conclude, The Scripture affords suitable expressions for this
matter, and that such are here most necessary, I wonder you omit searching out
such from Scripture; and instead thereof take upon you so hard a task, as to
create or frame Gospel, or promise of grace, out of reason and argument,
without any Scripture Proof.

And touching your advice, closing up all; seeing in my former discourse I
endeavored to plead for the truth of God. I have in this endeavored
(according to Gods assistance vouthsafed) to quallifie that hardness, which
your Arguments have attempted to cast upon it.

Yet one word more, touching your scope in propounding and maintaing your fifth
assertion, seeing you hold it so necessary for the encouraging of natural men,
I wonder you wholly omit to teach them what particular duties are to be done by
them in this way of improvement: For whilst you tell them, If they put forth
themselves to do what God has enabled them in a way of nature, they may do
such things as whereunto God has promised grace, you neglect to tell them what
those things are. Now you know, Dolus latet in generalibus, deceit lies in
generals; and therefore in the issue such general terms must needs become
snares of deceit to natural men, who after doing ever so much, are still left
to seek out what actions they be, upon which God has promised grace, which
terms (to retort upon you with your own language) are indeed like to the
demanding to catch all the fishes in the sea, or fowls of the air; or like
the leading men into a Laby^inth, o^ into the middle of the boundless Ocean,
and there leaving them: For you give natural men a boundless task of doing
such things as whereto God has annexed grace by promise; but what or how many
those things are, is not at all showed, but is left to their own judgment;
which being wholly erroneous, must necessarily lead them to presumption or
despair. Much like in some respect to the doctrine of many heretofore, urging
in general a necessity of legal terrou^s, before any true comfort could be
had, by which means multitudes have laid lo^ds of per^^^^ upon themselves one
after another; and after all, find^ no more ground comfort then at the
beginning, because they can sin^e not Scripture Standard to measure such
qualifications by. Seeing then you count this doctrine (of natural men's doing
such things as whereupon God has promised grace) so necessary; you may do well
in a matter so weighty, not to lead and leave them to be beguiled by generals;
but let them know in particular, what, and how many actions they are to do,
upon doing whereof God has promised grace; that so after they have finished
such a tale, they may sing a Quietus est to their souls through confidence of
their happy state, as the Papists do, upon their Opus aperatum, after they have
mumbled over the full tale of their prayers, according to the number of their
Beads.

And now in answer to your method, I should shut up all with a word of use,
which may be first for caution to such as take upon them to promote the truth
of God, viz. forasmuch as error is of so bewitching a nature, as that men are
apt to maintain one error by the broaching of others worse, rather then to
relinquish and disclaim the first, this should provoke such persons in
special, to great jelousie against every error, least one error received
prove an inlet to more and worse.

Or secondly, by way of direction to men, both in improving the means of
grace, and in trial of their state.

First, then for direction in improving; first negatively, let no man because
he labors, in the strength of his naturalls, to improve the outward means of
grace, therefore address himself to God, with this confidence; Lord I have
endeavored with utmost intention, etc. Therefore do thou, according to thy
promise made to these improvements, give me saving grace, for this is to mist
in lying vanities, and to go to God with a lie in steed of a promise, because
God has made no such promise; but contrarily, in all thine improvements,
acknowledge with thankfulness Gods long suffering, and freedom of
dispensation, who might in justice have hurld thee from out of the womb, the
place of thy sinful conception, into hell the place of endless woe, as he
has done multitudes; and may now justly leave thee in all thy improvements, to
go with the five foolish Virgins to the gate, through which the wise Virgins
entered in, and yet shut thee for ever out of the bride chamber; nevertheless
wait thou in Gods prescribed way, abhorring thy self in all thine endeavors,
as being so far from engaging God to give grace, as that the loathsomenesse of
them all may justly provoke God for ever to suspend his grace from thee.

Again, in point of trial, sing not this requiem to thy soul, I have earnestly
labored to reach the terms of the Covenant of Grace, therefore certainly God
has added thereto the work (...) faith, because otherwise the Gospel could
not be a Covenant of Free Grace; but contratily, examine whether the powers of
nature in thee, be so carried up above themselves, by divine operation as that
they renounce, and abhor thy most choice improvements, as having no worth, no
comfort in them, and in steed thereof do cleave vigorously, and entirely unto
Christ, as the only fountain of all true comfort; yea, all this done so, as in
steed of finding matter of self-boasting in thine own improvements, thou
find great ground of admiring the free dispensation of Gods over-powring
grace, working such a change in thee, contrary to, and above thy self; this
being found may afford much comfort. But I must totally, though most abruptly,
decline further progress.

Sir,
Post Script.
HAving laid by this Work of Vindication for diverse months, and that in hope
of commending it, in some most convenient time, to your perusal, and finding
after so long expectation, multiplicity of occasions, more and more flowing in
unto you to the greater disappointment of such your convenient leisure, as I
hoped for, poudring withal the so great importance of this matter, so greatly
concerning the doctrine of the Gospel, to which as supreme, subordinate matters
of order and discipline, ought to give the right hand of pre-eminence: I count
it my duty without further delay, to crave both your perusal thereof, as also
your impartial care and zeal to vindicate a truth so choice and fundamental,
so far forth as it has been defamed, that so after my being made by accident,
an occasioner of your defaming truth, viz. by my former discourse, I may by
this be made the occasioner of your vindicating the same; and that you also
(who after your most solemn under-taking to destroy the Arminian doctrines,
have laid again the main foundations thereof, and so according to Paul's
expression, have made your self a transgressor) may no longer continue so to
be, by upholding those rotten principles. Which service for truth, in all
bumility, and respect committing to your timely performance, as you are a
pr^mover of truth, I devote my self steafastly to continue.

Tuus usque ad Aras veritatis SAMUEL LANE.

Certain Reasons alleged to prove the Souls enjoying CHRIST after death,
before the Resurrection, And that against these three ensuing errors.
1. That the Scripture speaks nothing of the state of the Souls from Death to
the Resurrection. 2. That it no where declares the Souls happy (...) glorious
state from Death to the Resurrection. 3. That the Soul is mortal and dies
with the body.
ABout which, I shall only allege one proof, viz. 2 Cor. 5. v. 6, 7, 8.
Whereof a word touching the coherence. The Apostle having in the four first
Verses spoken of (...) eternal house in Heaven, and of their gor^ing to be
clothed upon therewith, laying down v. 5. two grounds to prove that they shall
be clothed therewith, and testifying that assurance, v. 6. Therefore we are
always confident; he proceeds in the middle of v. 6. to discuss the happiness
of the soul after death, as also his desire thereof. Knowing that being
present in the body we are absent from the Lord, and consequently that our
presence therein is matter of disadvantage, which he proves by the reason
annexed, v. 7. For we walk, etc. viz. whilst in the body: by faith, or by
believing the glory to come, the things not seen, as in cap. 4. v. ult. And not
by sight, i. e. a beatificall vision of glory. And thus the teams walk
describes glory to come, Rev. 3.4 Shall walk with me in white. Yea thus also
our being with, and beholding God, are put together, John 17.24. May be with me
and behold, etc. Implying, that when our state is changed from being present in
the body, and absent from the Lord, as v. 7. into an absence from the body, and
presence with God, as v. 8. then we shall walk by sight. And that this is fully
employed appears, because the not walking by sight is alleged to prove absence
from God, and therefore contrarily, presence with him must argue walking by
sight. Next in v. 8. he further inlarges upon the former, beginning thus,
(...), which may well be rendered we are confident therefore: or from those
grounds foregoing, namely, the disadvantage of our present state expressed, and
the advantage of the future employed. And thus the conjunction (...) is
elsewhere used, for which of many places see especially 1 Ioh. 4.18. where it is
(...) the therefore that fears; for though some translations omit therefore,
yet the sense necessarily requires it; because that last clause is a conclusion
drawn^ from the major, or main proposition beginning the Verse; There is no
fear in love, therefore he that fears, etc. It follows, And we are willing
or approve rather, to be absent out of the body and present with the Lord, of
two states preferring the better: And so he does Phil. 1.23. Destring to depart
and to be with Christ, which is far better? better then what; see v. 22. then
^o live in the flesh (...) All which may be summed up thus; as we know that in
stead of our earthly house dist^lved, we shall be clothed upon with one
eternal, which we gr^^^ after^, so we know that in the mean time, that is to
say, the time of the souls absence from the body, we shall be (...) with the
Lord, (...) (...) in the ^o^y. Which being t^u^ opened, (...) shall (...) Frist
against the first error, viz. That the Scripture speaks nothing of the state of
the soul from death to the resurrection, and that (...): If the (...) the state
of the soul when absent from the body, then the Scripture declares what the
state thereof shall be after death unto the Resurrection. But the former is true,
that the Scripture declares the state of the soul when a^^ent from the body,
for Paul confidently concludes, it shall then be present with the Lord. The
Fat^er therefore, that the Scripture declar^ what the state of the soul shall be
after death, etc. is as evident; because there being no time wherein the soul
can be absent from the ^ody, besides the time between death and the
Resurrection; therefore what the Scripture speaks of the soul as ^^sent from
the body, can concern only the state of the soul between death and the
Resurrection, at which resurrection the soul becomes present in the ^ody
again.

The second error following upon the former, viz. That the Scripture (...)
where declares the happy or glorious state of the soul from death to the resu^;
may be thus destroyed. If the Scripture does determine the state of the st^t^
from death to the resurrection, to be more desirable the^ the sta^^ of the soul
before death, living by faith, then it is certain that the Scripture declares
the state of the soul happy after death. But the former, that the Scripture
does determine the state of the soul, etc. i^ true: for the Apostle expressly
desires that state, which shall be when the soul in absent from the body,
rather then the life of faith in the body. The latter the^, that the Scripture
concludes the state of the soul to be happy after death follows inevitably;
because as the state thereof when absent from the body by death, could not be
more desirable then living in the body by faith, except it were more happy; so
being the more happy of the two, ^s therefore tran^ly happy in it self; because
that state which is less happy, even the life of faith, is throughout the
Scripture declared a happy and bl^^^ed state in it self.

Secondly, if the soul from death to judgment shall be present with God, the
certainly the state thereof shall be a state of glory. But the former, that the
soul shall be then present with God, Paul is most con^ident of. The latter
therefore, that this shall be a state of glory, follows clearly, because the
state of glory is throughout the Scripture described to be a being present with
the Lord, or walking with, or being with the Lord, or with the Lamb, as
frequently throughout the Revelation, so 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Io^. 7.14.

Yea thirdly, if the soul after death shall see that glory, the things
eternal, etc. which in the body it only apprehends by faith, then certainly
the state thereof after death shall be a state of glory. But the former is
fully employed as is before clearly proved. The latter therefore, that the state
thereof after death shall be a state of glory, follows necessarily; because
the Scripture frequently makes the seeing or beholding Gods glory, to be the
special and eminent effect of the state or glory: for which, besides John
17.24. forementioned, see Matthew. 1^.20 Heb. 12.14. Rev. ^2.4. Yea further,
because the seeing of his glory cannot but transform the beholders into a
state of glory according to that, 1 I^^^ 3.2 We shall be like him, s^ we shall
see (...) as he is: So 2 Cor. 3.2^. upon beholding (by faith) we (...) changed
much more seeing God as he is.

And whereas it may be here objected, and that truly, That the Scripture
alleged in the two last reasons, do refer to the state of glory at the
Resurrection, and not to any state preceding; yet because the state of the soul
when absent from the body is here described by these very ^ea^^^ of seeing and
being with the Lord, which elsewhere describe the perfect state of glory,
therefore both states must needs be the same in nature or quality, (though not
in degrees) both having the self same description.

The third error, That the soul is mortal and dy^^ with the body, must f^ll,
if the Arguments against the former error be avail^able: for if the soul be
happy after death, then not mor^all. But yet I shall add one Argument against
this third error, viz.

If the soul when absent from the body shall be present with the Lord, as
really as it is present in the body before death, then certainly the soul dies
not with the body.

But the former, that the soul when absent, etc. is true; for the Apostle
expresses the presence of the soul with the Lord, by that very word whereby he
expresses the presents of the soul in the body, both which therefore ^^port a
like real presence. The la^er therefore, that the soul dies not with the body,
follows necessarily; because as the soul cannot have existance or be present
in the body except it lives there, so much les^e can it be present with God,
that quickneth all things (1 Timothy 6.13) except it lives with him. Seeing then
the soul is present with the Lord as living (after absent from the body)
therefore it dies not with the body.



v. 6. We being present in the body; wherein is expressed both the body, and we
present in it. And again v. 8. there is a body, and then we to be absent from
it, and present with the Lord; which we being to express Paul and other
Believers, must of necessity be understood of their personal essence; but
their corporal essence it cannot be, for the body is expressed besides in both
Verses: by we therefore must needs be meant the soul, as appears undeniably;
because there is nothing besides the body that can be of the essence of man but
the soul alone. And therefore when the Scripture speaks distinctly of an humane
person, it divides him into these two parts, Soul and Body; so Matthew. 10.28.
or into mind and flesh, so Romans 2. ult.

Secondly, another Argument might be urged from that clause, we w^lk by faith,
if compared with the Context; which clause by faith holds forth the proper act
or state of the soul before death ( for with the heart man believes, Romans
10.10.) though soul be not expressed; and so v. 8. holds forth the act and state
of the soul to come after death, though soul be not expressed there.

viz. That the (...) the set day of recompensing every man according to what he
has done, a^ 2 Cor. 5.10. and many like places; and therefore it seems
contradictory, that the soul should at all partake of that recompense before
the set time.

For answer, though the Scripture denominate the day of judgment to be the
great day of recommence; yet this proves not that the s^^^^ of men are
altogether excluded from glory and wrath till then, because (...) Scripture
does frequently ascribe the p^o^er denomination of a work (...) the last
accomplishmention, or finishing of it though much of the work be^^^^ before: to
clear which, for brevity lake, I will only instance in the ^^^^^sions of
Scripture touching this very day of recompense. which is called Ephesians. 4.30.
the day of redemption: now as that cannot be understood ^^^^sively, as if the
Saints receive no part of their redemption till th^^ (...) most evident 1 Pet.
1.1^. that the Saints do in a degree pa^^^^ really (...) redemption here, by
being (...) their vains ^^^^^sation through the precious blood of Christ; but
it is therefore called the day of redemption, because then shall be the
consummation thereof, both in soul and body, the body being then raised, which
therefore is called distinctly in R^^. 2.^3. the redemption of the body. So is
it also the day of recompense, not exclusively, as if God conferred no
happiness on the soul till th^n, but because then the happiness shall be
perfected; ye^ the glory of that rec^^p^^ce, th^^ shall be so transcendent, as
that the ^ec^mp^^^e which the soul shall receive in the ^ean time, may in
comparison of that m^st perfect re^^^pence, be counted as no recompense,
according (...) that parallel expression 2 Cor. 3.10. Even that which was made
glorious, had (...) glory, etc. In the manner this day of redemption is called
the ad^pti^^, as in that R^^. ^.^^. Waiting for the adoption, the redemption of
our body; not that the Saints (...) not of adoption till the redemption of
their bodies, for in verse. ^6.^5. (...) ^^^^fore, they are expressly showed to
be the ad^^ted s^^s of God (...) ^^^ving the spirit, and 1 I^^^. 3.^. Now (...)
the sons of God, that (...) present privilege. So that the perfect possession
of that ^^^^^^ance of Gods sons, whereto they are adop^ted in called adoption,
as it act^ally accompl^sheth the privileges of adoption, though they be really
adopted before.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.


