A SPEECH made by Sr. THOMAS LUNSFORD, COLONEL, When he was Apprehended.

WITH, A FULL RELATION, WHERE, WHEN, AND HOW, HE WAS TAKEN;

By the Courage, Magnanimity, and wise care of one Master John Benham, Officer
to the Honorable House of COMMONS.

As may appear by diverse both in Windsor, and Maidenhead; of whom it is held
in Admiration.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini, 1642.

A full Relation, where, when, and how, Sir Thomas Lunsford was apprehended.
A Warrant Issuing forth out of the Honorable house of Commons, for the
apprehending, and bringing in of Sir Thomas Lunsford Colonel, before the
House. And being directed to Mr. John Hunt Esquire, Sergiant at Arms to that
Honorable House; to his Deputy, or Deputies: Requiring the Assistance of all
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Cunstables, and other Officers, for aid therein
with all possible diligence

This Warrant (as it appears) was committed to the Charge, and care of one
Mr. John Benham, an Officer to the said House on Friday the 14. of Iannuary,
1641. Whose care herein, whose stout Courage, Discretion, and diligence, is
had in admiration of those whose eyes, and ears both saw and beheld the same;
who being come Winsor, the place where Sir Thomas Lunsford then was, he
repaired to the Magistrates of Winsor aforesaid, and declared to them his
Message, requiring their aid and Assistance, who being very forward to do what
lay in them, entertained the Message with all respect that could be; but after
debate upon the matter, conceiving that great danger might ensue of doing of
his Office there at that time, both because in every Inn in the Town there
was so many cavilers, And many other respects which they drew up in a
Certificat directed to the Honorable house of Commons, and after many
disswasions of People thereabout, the said Officer forbore that night; but
using all the care and diligence that could be, he laid wait about the Town
to have knowledge in case he should go away from thence: himself being much
sought to, to keep himself as private as possibly he could, for fear of
danger.

The next day being Saturday, it was told to the said Officer about Noone that
Sir Thomas Lunsford was gone away in his Coach, as it was imagined toward
Bilinsbeare, because his Coach was seen to go into the Forest: which way the
said Officer hasted after him: who leaving the Rode some two mile, chanced to
come to Maydstone, in which Town been juired for the Cunstables: but they were
at a Market from home, at that time; but the chief Officer that was then at
home there, was called the Warden, of whom he required aid, and producing the
warrant was by him read; and after he had taken the said Officer Mr. John
Benham his name, and read the Warrant; he was very ready to do him what
assistance he could.

The People in the Town they came forth in multitudes to enquire the
business, So the Warden with a Petty Cunstable, and with some other of the
Town, being partly resolved for the business; some of them (by the way)
demanded of the Officer: If in case either loss of Life or of Limbs, or the
like should befall them: they being poor men, what recompece should be made to
them, their Wives; or Children.

But the said Officer answered them to this effect. Friends.

Consider the cause? Fear not to venture both Limbs, and life in a good cause,
can you undertake a bettor work then for God your King, and Country, let me
tell you one thing, I speak unfainedly? There has not yet any man that has
undertaken any thing for the House, but were well rewarded for it; you shall
fare no worse then my self; I will lead you on by the help of God, what
danger soever can befall you; my self shall first meet with; neither will I
by Gods help leave you till as I shall bring you on, so also, I shall bring
you off again, therefore be of good courage, trust in God, and fear not.

Then they would needs know whether they must go, which he being unwilling
that any of the Town should know, for diverse reasons, was nevertheless
constrained to tell them; before they would consent to go: yet had they still
noe agillity in them to hasten about the work, so he spoke to them again to
this effect.

M. Warden.
This is not a business to be delayed I assure you; if you will not go, I
must be forced to complain to the House of Commons, of your negligence and
disesteeme of their Warrant in a business of so great concernement; if you
doubt of any thing, wherein you are not resolved, take Sir Edward Sowyers in
your way; and speak with Him; it may be then you will be better satisfied.

Hereupon they were all resolved to go, to the number of about 24. of whom 5.
or 6. Rid along with him, the rest went on foot. First to Sir Edword Sawyers
about a mile and an half, outward of the way, who so soon as he understood
the business, endeavored to forward the business with all speed, annimated
them on, and furnished them with Halberts and petervells, as well as he could;
and sent some of his own Servants along with them: encouraging them all to do
the best Service they could, and in case they should want Aid to raise more
with all speed.

From thence they departed, toward Billinsbeare aforesaid, which is a Remote
Place, in the Parish of Laurance Walton in the County of Barks, and the Waters
being then high they were constrained in some places to pass over with much
difficulty, and danger; especially in one Place where they were all carried
over on Horseback by turns, on the Lustiest, and greatest Horses.

Coming into the Forest, the Officer perceived the tracke of a Coach, which
seemed to him that it was newly made, which tracke they followed, till they
came to Billinsbeare. And so soon as they came in full sight of the House,
they all stayed one for another, for the Horses was before those that came on
Foot, then all being together, the Officer thus ordered the business.

1. Those that rid should ride up to the House First. 2. So soon as they were
rid up just against the House, that then the Foot should March up after them to
the House. 3. Whilst the Foot were coming up, these that rid to be placed at
several corners about the House, to see that in case any man should come out,
notice might be given; which was done according to the direction of the
Officer.
By that time they were rid up, and placed; and the Officer had rid about the
House, the Foot were come up, and stood together under an high hedge.

The Officer alighted from his Horse, and called them to him, desiring them to
be of good courage and to follow him.

Having entered through a great Gate, and over a wide Court, they came into the
Hall, where the Officer appointed one part of them to stay, commanding them to
let no man pass by, either one way or other: the other part he led with him
through another door, and came into the kitchen, where there were diverse
Servingman, Footmen, and whose swords lay up and down the Kitchen; which swords
the officer took up presently; and delivered them to his own guard, who made
use of them, to supply where most need was.

The Officer stayed not there when he had taken the weapons; and speaking very
little, returned into the Hal; knowing that to be no place probable to meet
with him for whom he came.

The officer only demanded of an ancient man whom he met, where Sir Thomas
Lunsford was? who answered as if he knew not whether he was there, or not. Then
the Officer turning himself about, perceived a stout fellow coming along with
his sword under his arm, as if he intended to pass through the Hall; but he
was discerned, and stopped. In the mean time, the ancient man slipped away through
a door on the right hand, at the upper end of the Hall; which the Officer
perceiving, followed after him; which brought him into a long entry with many
turnings: But the Officer chanced to look in at that very door where Sir Thomas
Lunsford was sitting in a Parlor by the fire side, with some other Gentlemen
with him.

The officer went in with an undaunted courage close up to him; and before them
all spoke to this effect.

Noble Colonel Lunsford, here is a Warrant from the Honorable House of
Commons, to apprehend and take you, and to bring you before them; which, I
hope, you will not disobay, nor, I hope, none of these Noble Gentlemen will
offer to resist.

Then he taking the warrant, read it; and returned it into his hand again: and
spoke to this effect.

I have read the Warrant, I do willingly obey it; being only sorry that such a
guard came along with you; for I protest unto you, as I am a Gentleman, That I
would have obeyed it, had it been served on me at Winsor; therefore I shall
only desire this favor from you.

1 That you will discharge your guard. 2 That your self will stay here with me
until to Morrow Morning, when (as I am a Gentleman) I will go along with you
as quietly, and peaceable as you desire: believe it, you shall not need to
doubt of what I say.
This promise was confirmed by the rest of the Gentlemen that were with him.

Then the Officer desiring the watchmen to take notice of what had past,
discharged them, and gave them ten shillings, promising them a better reward
after his return to the House. Colonel Lunsford also came into the Hall, and
spoke before them all, promising as he did before in the Parlor so they
departed.

The Officer he stayed there till next day, which being the Sabbath day; they
came but to Windsor and stayed there that night (where the Officer was advised
by such who tendered his safety) that as he respected his life, he must be
careful to look to himself there; for he little thought what danger he was
in.

But, God blessing him; and being his protector, such was the courteous, modest,
and careful carriage of the said Officer; that the next day, being Monday, he
safely brought him to London; and he remains under the custody of the Sargeant
at Arms.

At Windsor there was then thought to be about five or six hundred Cavilleres;
and one hundred and fifty Horse.

About fifty or threescore of which, well armed, marched out of the Town
presently after; but they met not with him.

A Deo, non a Homine vim suam erat. Herein Gods power was wonderfully seen,
they say; Not Man, but God did work to bring him thus away.

FINIS.

