Vindiciae contra Tyrannos: A Defense of Liberty against Tyrants.

OR, Of the lawful power of the Prince over the people, and of the people over
the Prince.

BEING A Treatise written in Latin and French by Junius Brutus, and translated
out of both into ENGLISH.

Questions discussed in this Treatise.
I. Whether Subjects are bound, and ought to obey Princes, if they command that
which is against the Law of God. II. Whether it be lawful to resist a Prince
which does infringe the Law of God, or ruin the Church, by whom, how, and how
far it is lawful. III. Whether it be lawful to resist a Prince which does
oppress or ruin a public State, and how far such resistance may be
extended, by whom, how, and by what right, or law it is permitted. IV. Whether
neighbor Princes or States may be, or are bound by Law, to give succors to
the Subjects of other Princes, afflicted for the cause of true Religion, or
oppressed by manifest tyranny.
LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, and Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near
the Queens-head Tavern. 1648.

THE Emperors, Theodosias and Valentinian TO VOLVSIANVS, Great Provost of the
Empire.
IT is a thing well-becomming the Majesty of an Emperor, to acknowledge
himself bound to obey the Laws. Our authority depending on the authority of the
Laws, and in very deed to submit the principallity to Law, is a greater thing
then to bear rule. We therefore make it known unto all men, by the Declaration
of this our Edict, that We do not allow Our selves, or repute it lawful to
do any thing contrary to this.

Justine in the second Book, speaks thus of Lycargns, Lawgiver to the
Lacedaemonians, He gave Laws to the Spartans which had not any: and was as much
renowned for his diligent observing of them himself, as for his discreet
Inventing of them: For he made no Laws for others, to the obedience whereof he
did not first submit himself. Fashioning the people to obey willingly, and the
Prince to Govern uprightly.

The first Question. Whether Subjects are bound and ought to obey Printes, if
they command that which is against the Law of God.
THIS question happily may seem at the first view to be altogether superfluous
and unprofitable, for that it seems to make a doubt, of an axiom allways held
infallible amongst Christians, confirmed by many testimonies in Holy Scripture,
diverse examples of the histories of all ages, and by the death of all the Holy
Martyrs, for it may be well demanded wherefore Christians have endured so many
afflictions, but that they were always persuaded, that God must be obeyed
simply, and absolutely, and Kings with this exception that they command not that
which is repugnant to the law of God. Otherways wherefore should the Apostles
have answered, that God must rather be obeyed than men, and also Act. 4. 19.
seeing that the only will of God is always just, and that of men may be, and
is, oftentimes unjust, who can doubt but that we must always obey Gods
commandments without any exception, and men's ever with limitation. But for so
much as there are many Princes in these days, calling themselves Christians,
which arrogantly assumes an unlimited power, over which God himself has no
command, and that they have no want of flatterers, which adore them as Gods
upon earth, many others also, which for fear, or by constraint, either seem,
or else do believe, that Princes ought to be obeyed in all things, and by all
men. And withal, seeing the unhappines of these times is such, that there is
nothing so firm, certain, or pure, which is not shaken, disgraced, or
polluted; I fear me that whosoever shall nearly, and thoroughly consider these
things, will confess this question to be not only most profitable, but also,
the times considered, most necessary. For my own part when I consider the
cause of the many calamities, wherewith Christendom has been afflicted, for
these late years, I cannot but remember that of the Prophet Hosea, The Princes
of Judah were like them Hos. 5. 10. 11.
that remove the bounds: wherefore I will power out my self like water. Ephraim
is oppressed, and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the
Commandment. Here you see the sin of the Princes, and people dispersed in
these two words. (...) The Princes exceed their bounds, not contenting
themselves with that authority which the Almighty, and all good God has given
them, but seek to usurp that sovereignty, which he has reserved to himself
over all men, being not content to command the bodies, and goods of their
Subjects at their pleasure, but assume license to themselves to enforce the
Consciences, which appertains chiefly to Jesus Christ, holding the earth not
great enough for their ambition, they will climb and conquor heaven it self.
The people on the other side walks after the commandment, when they yield to
the desire of Princes, who command them that which is against the law of God,
and as it were burn incense to, and adore these earthy Gods; and instead of
resisting them, if they have means and occasion; suffer them to usurp the place
of God, making no conscience to give that to Caesar, which belongs properly and
only to God. Now is there any man that sees not this, if a man disobey a Prince
commanding that which is wicked and unlawful, he shall presently be esteemed
a Rebel, a Traitor, and guilty of High Treason, our Savior Christ, the
Apostles and all the Christians of the Primitive Church were charged with these
Calumnies. If any after the example of Ezra, and Nehemiah, dispose himself to
the building of the Temple of the Ezra. 4. Nehe. 5 7.
Lord, It will be said he aspires to the Crown, hatches innovations, and seeks
the ruin of the State, then you shall presently see a million of these
Minnious, and flatterers of Princes tickling their ears with an opinion, that
if they once suffer this Temple to be re-builded, they may bid their Kingdom
farewell, and never look to raise impost or taxes on these men. But what a
madness is this? There are no estates which ought to be esteemed firm and
stable, but those, in whom the Temple of God is built, and which are indeed the
Temple it self, and these we may truly call Kings, which reign with God,
seeing that it is by him only that Kings reign: On the contrary what beastly
foolishness is it to think, that the State and Kingdom cannot subsist if God
Almighty be not excluded, and his Temple demolished. From hence proceeds so
many Tyrannous enterprises, unhappy and tragic death of Kings, and ruins of
people. If these Sicophants knew what difference there is between God and
Caesar, between the King of Kings, and a simple King, between the Lord, and the
Vassal, and what tributs this Lord requires of his Subjects, and what authority
he gives to Kings over those his Subjects, certainly so many Princes would not
strive to trouble the Kingdom of God, and we should not see some of them
precipitated from their Throns by the just instigation of the Almighty,
revenging himself of them, in the midst of their greatest strength, and the
people should not be so sacked and pillaged, and trodden down.

It then belongs to Princes to know how far they may extend their authority,
and to subjects in what they may obey them, lest the one incroaching on that
jurisdiction, which no way belongs to them, and the others obeying him which
commands further then he ought, they be both chastised, when they shall give
an account thereof before another Judge: Now the end and scope of the question
propounded, whereof the Holy Scripture shall principally give the resolution,
is that which follows. The question is, if subjects be bound to obey Kings,
in case they command that which is against the Law of God: that is to say, to
which of the two (God or the King) must we rather obey, when the question shall
be resolved concerning the King, to whom is attributed absolute power, that
concerning other Magistrates shall be also determined.

First, the Holy Scripture does teach, that God reigns by his own proper
authority, and Kings by derivation, God from himself, Kings from God, that God
has a jurisdiction proper, Kings Prove. 8. Job 12. Wisd. 6. 3.
are his delegates: It follows then, that the jurisdiction of God has no
limits, that of Kings bounded, that the power of God is infinite, that of Kings
confined, that the Kingdom of God extends it self to all places, that of Kings
is restrained within the confines of certain countries: In like manner God
has created of nothing both heaven, and earth; wherefore by good right he is
Lord, and true Proprietorie, both of the one, and the other: All the
Inhabitants of the earth hold of him that which they have, and are but his
tenants, and farmers; all the Princes and Governors of the world are his
stipendaries, and vassals, and are bound to take and acknowledge their
investitures from him. Briefly, God alone is the owner and Lord, and all men of
what degree, or quality soever they be, are his servants, farmers, officers,
and vassals, and owe account, and acknowledgement to him, according to that
which he has committed to their dispensation, the higher their place is, the
greater their account must be, and according to the ranks whereunto God has
raised them, must they make their reckoning before his divine Majesty, which
the Holy Scripture teaches in infinite places, and all the faithful, yea, and
the wisest amongst the Heathen have ever acknowledged: The earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof, (so says King David) And to the end that Psalm. 24.
men should not sacrifice to their own industry; the earth yields no increase
without the dew of heaven: Wherefore God commanded that his people should offer
unto him the first of their fruits, and the Heathens themselves have
consecrated the same unto their gods; to the end, that God might be
acknowledged Lord, and they his grangers and vine dressers; the heaven is the
Throne Isay 66. 1. 1 Kings 1. 8
of the Lord, and the earth his footstool. And therefore seeing all the Kings
of the world are under his feet; it is no marvail, if God be called the King of
kings, and Lord of lords; all Kings be termed his Ministers established to
judge rightly, and govern justly Prove. 8. 15
the world in the quality of Livetenants. By me (so says the divine Wisdom)
Kings reign, and the Princes judge the earth: If Job 1^. 18.
they do it not he loses the bonds of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a
girdle. As if he should say, it is in my power to establish Dan. 2. 21.
Kings in their Thrones, or to thrust them out, and from that occasion the
Throne of Kings is called the Throre of God. Blessed be the Lord thy God (says
the Queen of Sheba) to King Solomon) 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.
which delighted in thee to set thee on his Throne to be King for the Lord thy
God, to do judgment and justice. In like manner we read in another place,
that Solomon sat on the Throne of the 2 Chronicles. 2^. ^3. 1 Samuel 9. 1^. and 10. 1.
Lord, or on the Throne of the Lords Kingdom. By the same reason the people is
always called the Lords people, and the Lords inheritance, and the Kings
Governor of this inheritance, and Conductor or Leader of his people of God,
which is the title given to David, to Solomon, to Ezechias, and to other good
Princes; 2 Samuel 6. 21. 2 Kings ^0. 5. 2 Chronicles. 1 9. 2 King. 11. 2 Chronicles. 33.
16. 2 Chronicles. 20. 6.
when also the Covenant is passed betwixt God and the King, it is upon
condition that the people be, and remain always the people of God, to show
that God will not in any case despoyle himself of his propriety, and
possession, when he gives to Kings the government of the people, but establish
them to take charge of, and well use them, no more nor less then he which
makes choice of a Shepherd to look to his flocks, remains notwithstanding
himself still Master and owner of them. This was always known to those good
Kings, David, Solomon, Jehosaphat, and others which acknowledged God to be the
Lord of their Kingdoms and nations, and yet lost no privilege that justly
belongs to real power; yea, they reigned much more happily in that they
employed themselves cheerfully in the service of God, and in obedience to his
Commandments. Nebuchadnezer, although he were a Heathen, and a mighty
Emperor, did yet at the end acknowledge Dan 2. 3^. and 4. 14.
this, for though Daniel called him the King of Kings, to whom thee King of
Heaven had granted power and Royal Majesty above all others: Yet on the
contrary, (said he) Thy God O Daniel is truly the God of Gods, and Lord of
Lords giving Kingdoms to whom he pleases, yea, to the most wretched of the
world. For which cause Zenephon said at the Coronation of Cyrus; let us
sacrifice to God. And profane Writers in many places do magnify God the most
mighty and Sovereigne King. At this day at the Inaugurating of Kings, and
Christian Princes, they are called the servants of God, destinated to govern
his people. Seeing then that Kings are only the Leiutenants of God, established
in the Throne of God, by the Lord God himself, and the people are the people
of God, and that the honor which is done to these Leiutenants proceeds from
the reverence which is borne to those, that sent them to this service: it
follows of necessity that Kings must be obeyed for Gods cause, and not
against God, and then, when they serve and obey God, and not otherwise. It may
be Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
that the flatterers of the Court will reply, that God has resigned, his power
unto Kings, reserving Heaven for himself, and allowing the Earth to them to
reign, and govern there according to their own phancies; briefly that the
great ones of the World hold a divided Empire with God himself. Behold a
discourse proper enough for that impudent Villain Cleon the Sicophant of
Alexander, or for the poet Martial which was not ashamed to call the Edicts of
Domitian, the Ordinances of the Lord God. This discourse I say is worthy of
that execrable Domitian who (as Suetonius recites) would be called God and
Lord: But altogether unworthy of the ^ares of a Christian-Prince, and of the
mouth of good Subjects, that sentence of God almighty must always remain
irrevocably true, I will not give my glory to any other, that is, no man shall
have such absolute Isa. 48. 11.
authority, but I will always remain sovereigne. God does not at any time
disvest himself of his power, he holds a Scepter in one hand to repress and
quell the audatious boldness of those Princes which mutiny against him, and in
the other a balance to control those that administer not justice wi^h equity
as they ought, then these, there cannot be expressed more psa. 2. 9. Wisd. 6, 4.
certain marks of sovereigne command. And if the Emperor in creating a King,
reserves always to himself the imperial sovereignty, or a King as he of
France in granting the government or possession of a Province to a stranger, or
if it be to his Brother or Son reserves always to himself appeals, and the
knowledge of such things as are the marks of royalty and sovereignty, the which
also are always understood of themselves to be excepted, although they were
altogether omitted in the grant of investiture, and fealty promised, with much
more reason should God have sovereign power and command over al Kings being his
servants and Officers, seeing we read, in so many places of Scripture, that
he will call them to an account, and punish them, if they do not faithfully
discharge their duties. Then therefore all Kings are the Vassals of the King of
Kings, invested into their Office by the sword, which is the cognizance of
their royal authority, to the end, that with the sword they maintain the Law
of God, defend the good, and punish the evil: Even as we commonly see, that he
which is a sovereigne Lord, puts his Vassals into possession of their fee, by
girding them with a sword, delivering them a buckler, and a standard, with
condition that they shall fight for them with those arms if occasion shall
serve. Now if we consider what is the duty of Vassalls, we shall find that what
may be said of them, agrees properly to Kings. The Vassal receives his fee of
his Lord with right of justice, and charge to serve him in 1 Samuel 8. and 9 20.
his wars. The King is established by the Lord God, the King of Kings; to the
end he should administer justice to his people and defend them against all
their enemies. The Vassal receives law and conditions from his Sovereigne: God
commands the King to observe his laws and to have them always before his eyes,
promising that he and his successors shall possess long the Kingdom, if they
be obedient, and on the contrary, rebellious to their Sovereigne King. The
Vassal obliges that their reign shall be of small continuance, if they prove
himself by Oath unto his Lord, and swears that he will be faithful, and
obedient: In like manner the King promises solemnly to command, according to
the express Law of God. Deu. 17. 19.
Briefly the Vassal loses his fee, if he commit felony, and by law
forfeiteth all his privileges: In the like case the King loses his Right,
and many times his Realm also, if he despise God, if he complot with his
enemies, and if he commit felony against that Royal Majesty, this will
appear more clearly by the consideration of the Covenant which is contracted
between God and the King, for God does that honor to his servants to call them
his confederats. Now we read of two sorts of Covenants at the Inaugurating of
Kings, the first between God, the King, and the People, that the people might
be the people of God: The second between the King and the people, that the
people shall obey faithfully, and the King command justly, we will treat
hereafter of the second, and now speak of the first:

When King Joas was crowned we read that a Covenant was contracted between God,
the King, and the People: or, as it is The Alliance between God and the Kings.
2 King. 11. 2 Chro. 23. 16. 2 king. 23.
said in another place between Jehojada the High Priest, all the People, and
the King, That God should be their Lord. In likemanner we read that Josias and
all the people entered into Covenants with the Lord: we may gather from these
testimonies, that in passing these Covenants the High Priest did Covenant in
the name of God in express terms, that the King and the people should take
order that God might be served purely, and according to his will, throughout
the whole Kingdom of Juda, that the King should so reign that the people were
suffered to serve God, and held in obedience to his law: That the people should
so obey the King, as their obedience should have principal relation to God. It
appears by this that the King and the people are jointly bound by promise and
did obleige themselves by solemn Oath to serve God before al things. And indeed
presently after they had sworn the Covenant, Josias and Joas did ruin the
Idolatry of Baal and re-established the pure service of God. The principal
points of the Covenants were chiefly these.

That the King himself, and all the people should be careful to honor and
serve God according to his will revealed in his word, which if they performed,
God would assist and preserve their estates: as in doing the contrary, he would
abandon, and exterminate them, which does plainly appear Deuteronomy. 29. 30. 31.
Deuteronomy. 31. 26.
by the conferring of diverse passages of holy writ. Moses somewhat before his
death propounds these conditions of Covenant to all the people, and at the same
time commands that the Law, which be those precepts given by the Lord should be
in deposito kept in the Arc of the Covenant. After the decease Josh. 1.
of Moses, Joshua was established Captain, and Conductor of the people of God,
and according as the Lord himself admonished, if he would have happy success
in his affairs, he should not in any sort estrange himself from the Deuteronomy. ^7.
2^. Jos. 5. and 24.
Law: Joshua also for his part, desiring to make the Israelites understand upon
what condition God had given them the Country of Canaan, as soon as they were
entered into it, after due sacrifices performed, he read the Law in the presence
of all the people, promising unto them in the Lords name all good things if
they persisted in obedience; and threatening of all evil if they wilfully
connived in disobedience. Sommarily, he assures them all prosperity, if they
observed the Law; as otherways, he expressly declared, that in doing the
contrary they should be utterly ruined: Also at all such times as they left
the service of God, they were delivered into the hands of the Canaanites, and
reduced in to slavery, under their Tyranny. Now this Covenant between God and
the people in the times of the Judges, had vigor also in the times of the
Kings, and was treated with them. After that Saul had been anointed, chosen,
and wholly established King, Samuel speaks unto the people in these terms;
Behold the King whom you have demanded 2 Samuel 12.
and chosen, God has established him King over you, obey you therefore and
serve the Lord, as well you, as your King which is established over you,
otherwise you and your King shall perish. As if he should say, you would have
a King and God has given you this here, notwithstanding think not that God
will suffer any encroachment upon his right, but know that the King is as well
bound to observe the Law as you, and if he fail therein, his delinquency shall
be punished as severely as yours: Briefly, according to your desires Saul is
given you for your King, to lead you in the wars, but with this condition
annexed, that he himself follow the Law of God. After that Saul was rejected,
because he kept not 2 king. 2. 4. and 6. 12.
his promise, David was established King on the same condition, so also was his
Son Solomon, for the Lord said, If thou keep my Law, I will confirm with thee
the Covenant which I contracted with David. Now concerning this Covenant, it is
inserted into the second book of the Chronicles, as follows. There shall not
fail there a man in my sight, to sit upon the Throne of Israel: yet so that
thy children take heed 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. and 7. 17. 2 king. 33. 2. Deuteronomy 17. 18 1 Samuel 10. 25.
to their way to walk in my Law, as thou have walked before me. But if they
serve Idols, I will drive them from the Land whereof I have given them
possession. And therefore it was that the book of the Law was called the book
of the Covenant of the Lord, (who commanded the Priests to give it the King)
according to which Samuel put it into the hands of Saul, and according to the
tenure thereof Josias yields himself soedetarie and vassal of the Lord. Also
the Law which is kept in the Ark, is called the Covenant of the Lord with the
children of Israel. Finally, the people delivered from the captivity of
Babylon, do renew the Covenant with God, and do acknowledge 2 Chronicles. 6 11.
Nehem. 9 38.
throughout that Chapter, that they worthily deserved all those punishments for
their falsifying their promise to God. It appears then that the Kings swear as
vassals to observe the Law of God, whom they confess to be Sovereign Lord over
all, Now according to that which we have already touched, if they violate their
Oath, and transgress the law, we say that they have lost their kingdom, as
vassalls loose their fee by committing felony. We have said that there was the
same covenant between God and the Kings of Judah, as before, between God and
the people in the times of Jud. 2. 24 and 4. 2. etc. and 9. 33. 1 Samuel 13. 13.
and 15. 26.
Joshua and the Judges. But we see in many places, that when the people has
despised the Law, or made covenants with Baal, God has delivered them into the
hands of Eglon, Jabin, and other Kings of the Canaanites: And as it is one and
the same Covenant, so those which do break it, receive like punishment. Saul is
so audacious to sacrifice, infringing thereby the Law of God, and presently
after saves the life of Agag, King of the Amalekites, against the express
Commandment of God, for this occasion he is called Rebel by Samuel, and
finally is chastized for his Rebellion. Thou have sacrificed, says he, but
thou had done better to obey God, for, obedience is more worthy than
sacrifice. Thou have neglected the Lord thy God, he also has rejected thee,
that thou Reign no more over Israel. This has been so certainly observed by
the Lord, that the very children of Saul were deprived of their paternall
inheritance, for that he having committed high Treason, did thereby incur the
punishment of Tirants, which affect a Kingdom that no way appertains unto them.
And not only the Kings, but also their children and successors have been
deprived of the Kingdom by reason of such felony. Solomon revolted from God
to worship Idols. Incontinently the Prophet Abijah foretells that the Kingdom
shall be divided under his Son Rehoboam. Finally, the word of the Lord is
accomplished, and ten Tribes which made the greatest portion of the Kingdom,
do quit Rehoboam, and adhere to Jeroboam his servant. Wherefore is this? for
so much (says the Lord) that they have left me to go after Astoroche, the God
of the Sidoniens and Chamos the God of the Moabites, etc. I will also break in
pieces their Kingdom: as if he should say, they have violated the Covenant,
and have not kept promise, I am no more then tied unto them, they will lessen
my majesty, and I will lessen their Kingdom: Although they be my servants, yet
notwithstanding they will expel me my Kingdom; but I will drive them out
themselves by Jeroboham which is their servant. Furthermore, for so much as
this servant, fearing that the ten tribes for the cause of Religion should
return to Jerusalem, set up Calves in Bethel, and made Israel to sin,
withdrawing by this means the people far from God, what was the punishment of
so ingratfull a Vassal and wicked Traitor toward his Lord? First, his son
died, and in the end all his race, even unto the last of the males was taken
from the face of the earth by the sword of Baasa, according to the judgment
which was pronounced against him by the Prophet, because he revolted from the
obedience of the Lord God: this then is cause sufficient, and often times also
propounded, for the which God does take from the King his fee, when he opposes
the Law of God, and withdraws himself from him to follow his enemies, to wit
Idols, and as like crimes deserve like punishments, we read in the holy
Histories that Kings of Israel and of Juda which have so far forgotten
themselves, have in the end miserably perished. Now although the form both of
the Church, and the Jewish Kingdom be changed, for that that which was before
enclosed within the narrow bounds of Judea, is now dilated throughout the whole
World, notwithstanding the same things may be said of Christian Kings, the
Gospel having succeeded the Law, and Christian Princes being in the place of
those of Jury: There is the same Covenant, the same Conditions, the same
Punishments, and if they fail in the accomplishing, the same God Almighty
revenger of all perfidious disloyalty; and as the former were bound to keep the
Law, so the other are obliged to adhere to the doctrine of the Gospel, for the
advancement whereof these Kings at their anointing, and receiving, do promise
to employ the utmost of their means.

Herod fearing Christ, whose reign he should rather have desired, sought to put
him to death, as if he had affected a Kingdom in this World, did himself
miserably perish, and lost his Kingdom. Julian the Apostate did cast off
Christ Jesus to cleave unto the Impiety and Idolatry of the Pagans: but within
a small time after he fell to his confusion, the force of the arm of Christ,
whom in mockery he called the Gallilean. Ancient histories are repleate with
such examples, neither is there any want in those of these times. Of late
years diverse Kings drunk with the liquor which the Whore of Babylon has
presented unto them, have taken arms, and for the love of the Wolf, and of
Antichrist, have made War against the Lamb of God, which is Christ Jesus, and
yet at this day some amongst them do continue in the same course, we have
seen some of them ruined in the deed, and in the midst of their wickedness,
others also carried from their triumphs to their graves, those which survive
and follow them in their courses have little reason to expect a better issue of
their wicked practices, this sentence remains always most certain, That
though all the psa. 2. 2. psa. 1 10 2. Apoc. 19: 16.
Kings of the earth do conjure and conspire against Christ and endeavor to
cut in pieces our Lamb, yet in the end they shall yield the place, and maugre
their hearts, confess that this Lamb is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
But what shall we say of the Heathen Kings? Certainly although they be not
anointed and sacred of God, yet be they his Vassalls and have received their
power from him, whether they be chosen by lot or any other means whatsoever.
If they have been chosen by the voices of an Assembly, we say that God governs
the heart of man, and addresses the minds and intentions of all persons whether
he pleases: If it be by lot, the lot is cast in the lap, says the wise man,
but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. It is God only that in all ages
establishes, and takes away, confirms, and overthrows Kings pro. 16, 33.
according to his good pleasure; In which regard Isay calls Cyrus the anointed
of the Lord, and Daniel says that Nebuchadnezer Esa. 45. 1. Dan. 2. 21 and 4.
24. Romans 13. 1^.
and others have had their Kingdoms committed unto them by God; as also Saint
Paul maintains that all Magistrates have received their authority from him: For
although that God has not commanded Pagans in express terms to obey him as
he has don those that have knowledge of him: yet notwithstanding the Pagans
must needs confess that it is by the sovereigne God that they reign, wherefore
if they will not yield the tribute that they owe to God in regard of
themselves, at the least let them not attempt nor hinder the Sovereigne to
gather that which is due from those people which are in subjection to them; nor
that they do not anticipate, nor appropriate to themselves divine Jurisdiction
over them, which is the crime of high treason and true tyranny, for which
occasion the Lord has grievously punished even the Pagan Kings themselves. It
then becomes those Princes that will free themselves from so enormious a
mischief, carefully to distinguish their jurisdiction from that of Gods, yea,
so much the more circumspectly for that God and the Prince have their right of
authority over one and the same Land, over one and the same man, over one and
the same thing; man is composed of body and soul, God has formed the body and
infused the soul into him, to him only then may be attributed, and
appropriated the commands both over the body and soul of man. If out of his
mere grace and favor he has permitted Kings to employ both the bodies and
goods of their subjects, yet still with this Proviso and charge, that they
preserve and defend their subjects; certainly Kings ought to think that the
use of this authority is in such manner permitted, that notwithstanding the
abuse of it is absolutely forbidden: First, those which confess that they hold
their souls and lives of God, as they ought to acknowledge, they have then no
right to impose any tribute upon souls. The King takes tribute and custom of
the body, and of such things as are acquired or gained by the industry and
travail of the body, God does principally exact his right from the soul,
which also in part executes her functions by the body. In the tribute of the
King are comprehended the fruits of the earth, the contributions of money and
other charges, both real and personal; the tribute of God is in Prayers,
Sacraments, Predications of the pure word of God; briefly, all that which is
called divine service, as well private as public; these two tributes are in
such manner diverse and distinguished, that the one hurts nothing the other, the
Exchequer of God takes nothing from that of Caesar, but each of them have their
right manifestly apa^t. But to speak in a word, whosoever confounds these
things, does heaven and earth together, and endeavors to reduce them into
their first chaos, or later confusion. David has excellently well
distinguished these affairs, 1 Chronicles. 26. 29. 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
ordaining officers to look to the right of God, and others for that of the
King. Josephat has followed the same course, establishing certain persons to
judge the causes that belonged to the Almighty, and others to look to the
justice of the King; the one to maintain the pure service of God, the other to
preserve the rights of the King. But if a Prince usurp the right of God, and
put himself forward after the manner of the Giants to scale the Heavens, he is
no less guilty of high treason to his Sovereign, and commits fellonie in the
same manner, as if one of his vassals should seize on the rights of his Crown,
and puts himself into evident danger to be dispoyled of his estates, and that
so much the more justly, there being no proportion between God and an earthly
King, between the Almighty and a mortal man; whereas yet between the Lord and
the vassell there is some relation of proportion. So often therefore as any
Prince shall so much forget himself, as insolently to say in his heart I will
ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit
also upon the mount of the congregation in the sides of the Nor^h; I will
ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the most high. But on
the contrary, will the Almighty say I will rise up more high, I will set my
self against Esaias 14. 13. 14.
thee; I will raze out thy name and all thy posterity, thy counsels shall
vanish into smoke, but that which I have once determined Exo. 5. and 8. etc.
shall remain firm, and never be annihilated. The Lord said unto Pharaoh, let
my people go, that they may serve me, and offer sacrifice unto me, and for
that this proud man answered, that he knew not the God of the Hebrews,
presently after he was miserably destroyed. Dan. 3. 5. and 4. 25. etc.
Nebuchadnezar commanded that his statue should be adored, and would be
honored as God, but within a short time the true God did deservedly chastise
his unruly boldness, and desiring to be accounted God, he became a bruit
beast, wandering through desert places like a wild ass, until (says the
Prophet) that he acknowledged the God of Israel to be the Sovereign Lord over
Dan. 5. 2.
all, his son Belshaser abused the holy vessels of the Temple in Jerusalem,
and put them to serve his excess and drunkenness, for that therefore he gave
not glory to him, that held in his hands both his soul and his counsels, he
lost his Kingdom, and was slain in that very night of his feasting Alexander
the great took pleasure in the lies of his Flatterers, who termed him the son
of Jupiter, and not only approved, but pro-cur'd his adoration, but a sudden
death gave a sad period to those tryumphs, being blinded through his excess of
conquests, began with too much affection, to delight in Antiochus, under color
of pacifying and uniting his subjects, commanded all men to forsake the Laws
of God, and to apply 1 Macha. 1. 43.
themselves in obedience to his: he profaned the Temple of the Jews, and
polluted their Altars, but after diverse ruins, defeats, and loss of battles,
dispoyled, and disgraced, he dies with grief, confessing that he deservedly
suffered those miseries, because he would Mac. 6. 12. 13.
have constrained the Jews to leave their Religion. If we take into our
consideration the death of Nero, that inhumane Butcherer of Christians, whom he
unjustly slandered with the fiering of Rome, being the abhorred act of his
detested self. The end of Caligula, which made himself to be adored, of
Domitian which would be called Lord and God, of Commodus, and diverse others
which would appropriate to themselves the honors due to God alone, we shall
find that they have all and always according to their deceits miserably
perished; when on the contrary, Trajan, Adrian, Antonius the courteous and
others, have finished their days in peace, for although they knew not the true
God, yet have they permitted the Christians the exercise of their Religion.
Briefly, even as those rebellious vassals which endeavor to possess
themselves of the Kingdom, do commit fellonie by the testimony of all Laws,
and deserve to be extirpated; in like manner those are as really guilty which
will not observe the Divine Law, whereunto all men without exception owe their
obedience, or which persecute those that desire to conform themselves
thereunto, without hearing them in their just defenses; now for that we see
that God invests Kings into their Kingdoms, almost in the same manner that
vassals are invested into their fees by their Sovereign, we must needs
conclude, that Kings are the vassals of God, and deserve to be deprived of the
benefit they receive from their Lord if they commit felony, in the same fashion
as rebellious vassals are of their estates. These promises being allowed, this
question may be easily resolved; for if God hold the place of Sovereign Lord,
and the King as vassal: who dare deny but that we must rather obey the
Sovereign, then the vassal? If God commands one thing, and the King commands
the contrary, what is that proud man that would term him a rebel which
refuses to obey the King, when else he must disobey God. But on the contrary
he should rather be condemned, and held for truly rebellious, which omits to
obey God, or which will obey the King when he forbids him to yield obedience
to God. Briefly, if God call us on the one side to enrole us in his service,
and the King on the other, is any man so void of reason as he will not say we
must leave the King, and apply our selves to Gods service, so far be it from
us to believe, that we are bound to obey a King, commanding any thing contrary
to the Law of God, that centrally in obeying him we become Rebels to God; no
more, no^ (...) then we would esteem a country man a Rebel, which for the
love he bears to some rich and ancient inferior Lord, would bear Arms against
the Sovereign Prince, or which had rather obey the writs of an inferior Judge
then of a superior, the commandments of a Lieutenant of a Province, then of
the Prince; to be brief, the directions of an officer rather then the express
Ordinances of the King himself. In doing this we justly incur the Mich. 6.
16.
malediction of the Prophet Micha, which does detest and curse in the name of
God all those which obey the wicked and perverse Ordinances of Kings. By the
Law of God we understand the two Tables given to Moses, in the which, as in
unremoveable bounds the authority of all Princes ought to be fixed. The first
comprehends that which we owe to God, the second that which we must do to our
Neighbors; briefly, they contain piety and justice conjoined with charity,
from which the preaching of the Gospel does not derogate, but rather authorize
and confirm: The first Table is esteemed There is a certain Politician of our
time so detestable, that he has dared to condemn Papinian, and to write in
his books full of errors in matter of state, that Papinian because he would not
excuse the paracide of Caracalla did bring irreparable damages to the affairs
of the Empire.
the principal, as well in order as in dignity. If the Prince commands to cut
the throat of an innocent, to pillage and commit extortion, there is no man
(provided he have some feeling of conscience) that would execute such a
commandment. If the Prince have committed some crime, as Adultery, Parricide,
or some other wickedness, behold amongst the Heathen the learned Lawyer
Papinian which will reprove Caracalla to his face, and had rather die then
obey, when his cruel Prince commands him to lie and palliate his offense; nay,
although he threaten him with a terrible death, yet would he not bear false
witness; what shall we then do, if the Prince commands us to be Idolaters, if
he would have us again crucify Christ Jesus, if he enjoins to blaspheme and
despite God, and to drive him (if it were possible) out of Heaven, is there not
yet more reason to disobey him, then to yield obedience to such extravagants
commands: Yet a little further, seeing it is not sufficient to abstain from
evil, but that we must do good, instead of worshipping of Idols, we must
adore and serve the true God, according as he has commanded us, and instead of
bending our knees before Baal, we must render to the Lord the honor and service
which he requires of us; for we are bound to serve God for his own sake only:
but we honor our Prince, and love our Neighbor, because and for the love of
God. Now if it be ill done to offend our neighbor, and if it be a capital
crime to rise against our Prince, how shall we entitle those that rise in
rebellion against the Majesty of the Sovereign Lord of all Manking; briefly,
as it is a thing much more grievous to offend the Creator, then the creature,
man, then the Image he represents; and as in terms of Law, he that has wounded
the proper person of a King, is much more culpable, then another that has only
broken the statue erected in his memory: so there is no question, but a much
more terrible punishment is prepared for them, which infringe the first Table
of the Law, then for those which only sin against the second; although the
one depend of the other; whereupon it follows (to speak by comparison) that
we, must take more careful regard to the observation of the first, then of the
second. Furthermore, our Progenitors examples may teach us the rule we must
follow in this case. King Ahab at the instigation of his wife Jesabel, killed
all the Prophets, and servants of God that could be taken, notwithstanding
Abdias Steward of Ahabs house did both hide and 1 King. 18. 4.
feed in a Cave a hundred Prophets, the excuse for this is soon ready; in
obligations, oblige they never so nearly, the divine Majesty must always be
excepted. The same Ahab enjoined all men to sacrifice to Baal: Elias instead of
couling or relenting did reprove more freely the King, and all the people,
convinced the Priests of Baal of their impiety, and caused them to be executed.
Then in dispite of that wicked and furious Jesabel, and manger that uxorious
King, he does redress and reform with a divine and a powerful endeavor the
service of the true God. When Ahab reproached 1 King. 18. 17.
him (as the Princes of our times do) that he troubled Israel, that he was
rebellious, seditious, titles wherewith they are ordinarily charged, which are
no way culpable thereof; nay, but it is thou thy self, answered Elias, which
by thy Apostasy has troubled Israel, which has left the Lord the true God,
to acquaint thy self with strange gods his enemies, in the same manner and by
the Dan. 3. 18 and 6. lo. 13
leading and direction of the same spirit did Sidrac, Misack, and Abednego
refuse to obey Nebuchadnezar, Daniel Darius, Eleazar Antiochus, and infinite
others. After the coming of Jesus Christ, Act. 4. 19.
it being forbidden the Apostles to preach the Gospel. Judge ye, (said they)
whether it be reasonable as in the sight of God to obey Phi^o I^^e^s in his
discourse of his Embassage to Cyrus. S. Ambros. in the Ep^st. 33.
men, rather then God; according to this the Apostles, not regarding neither
the intendments nor designs of the greatness of the world, addressed
themselves readily to do that which their Master Jesus Christ had commanded
them. The Jews themselves would not permit that there should be set up in the
Temple at Jerusalem the Eagle of silver, nor the statue of Caligula: what did
Ambrose when the Emperor Valentinian commanded him to give the Temple at
Millan to the Arrians? Thy Counselors and Captains are come unto me, said he,
to make me speedily deliver the Temple, saying it was done by the Authority and
command of the Emperor, and that all things are in his power. I answered to it,
That if he demanded that which is mine, to wit, mine inheritance, my money, I
would not in any sort refuse it him, although all my goods belong properly to
the poor, but the things divine are not in subjection to the power of the
Emperor. What do we think that this holy man would have answered, if he had
been demanded whether the living Temple of the Lord should be enthrawled to the
slavery of Idols. These Examples, and the constancy of a million of Martyrs,
which were glorious in their deaths, for not yiedling obedience in this kind,
according as the Ecclesiastical Histories, which are full of them, do
demonstrate, may sufficiently serve for an express Law in this case. But for
all this we have no want of a Law formerly written: For as often, and ever as
the Apostles admonish Christians to obey Kings and Magistrates, they do first
exhort, and as it were by way of advice, admonish every one to subject himself
in lik^ manner to God, and to obey him before and against any whatsoever, and
there is no where to be found, in any of their writings, the least passage for
this unlimitted obedience, which the flaterers of Princes do exact from men of
small understandings. Let every soul, says Saint Paul, be subject to the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God: he makes mention of every
soul, to the Romans 13. 1.
end it may not be thought, that he would exempt any from this subjection; we
may easily gather by diverse such speeches, that we must obey God rather than
the King: For if we obey the King, because, and for the love of God certainly
this obedience may not be a conspiracy against God, But the Apostle will stop
the gap to all ambiguity in adding that the Prince is the servant of God for
our good, to wit, to do justice; from this necessarily follows that which we
come from touching, that we must rather obey God then him who is his servant:
This does not yet content Saint Paul for he adds in the end, Give tribute,
honor, and fear to whom they appertain, as if he Math. 22. 21. 1 pet. 2.
17. 18.
should say, that which was alleged by Christ, Give to Caesar that which is
Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods: To Caesar tribute, and honor; ^o God
fear. Saint Peter says the same, fear God, honor the King; Servants obey
your Masters not only the good and kind, but also the rigorous, we must
practice these precepts according to the order they are set down in: to wit,
that as servants are not bound to obey their Masters if they command any thing
which is against the laws and ordinances of Kings: Subjects in like manner owe
no obedience to Kings which will make them to violate the Law of God.

that even in the things themselves that concern the Conscience we must obey
Kings, and are so shameless as to produce for witness of so wicked an opinion
the Apostle Saint Peter and Saint Paul, concluding from hence, that we must
yield obedience to all that the King shall ordain, though it be to embrace,
without reply, any Superstition he shall please to establish. But there is no
man so grossly void of sense, that sees not the impiety of these men. We reply:
that Saint Paul says in express terms, we must be subject to Princes, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. In opposing conscience to wrath,
it is as much as if the Rom 1. 35.
Apostle had said, that the obedience of which he speaks ought not to proceed
for fear of punishment, but from the love of God, and from the reverence which
we are bound to bear unto the word, in the same sense Saint Paul enjoyneth
servants in such manner to obey their Masters, that it be not with eye service
for fear of stripes, but in singleness of heart, fearing Col. 3. 22.
God, not simply, to acquire the favor of men, whom they may delude, but to
bear the burden laid on their shoulders, by him whom no man can deceive.

In brief there is manifest difference between these two manners of speech, to
obey for conscience sake, and to obey in those thing which concern the
conscience: otherwise those which had much rather loose their lives with
infinite torments then obey Princes which command them things contrary to the
will of God, would have taught us that which these seek to persuade us to.
Neither do they express themselves Samuels reprehension of King Saul, for 1 Samuel 15. 22.
his disobedience to the Commandment of God, in sacrificing unfittingly. If
then Saul although he were a King ought to obey God, it follows in all good
consequence that subjects are not bound to obey their King by offending of God.
Briefly, those (which after the barbarous manner of the men of Calcut) seek to
inthrall the service of God with a necessary dependence on the will of a
mutable man, and Religion of the good pleasure of the King, as if he were some
God on earth, they doubles little value the testimony of holy Writ. But let
them (at the least) yet learn of a Heathen Orator. That in every public
state, Cicero in the first book of offic.
there is certain degrees of duty, for those that converse and live in it, by
which may appear wherein the one are obliged to the other. Insomuch that the
first part of this duty belongs to the immortal God, the second concerns the
Country, which is their common Mother, the third, those which are of our blood,
the other parts leading us step by step to our other Neighbors. Now although
the crime of High Treason be very heinous, yet according l. 2. ad leg. Jul.
majest. Digest.
to the Civilians, it always follows after sacrilege, an offense which
properly pertaines to the Lord God and his service, insomuch that they do
confidently affirm, that the robbing of a Church, is by their rules esteemed, a
greater crime, than to conspire against the life of a Prince. Thus much for
this first Question, wherein we persuade our selves, that any man may receive
satisfaction, if he be not utterly void of the fear of God.

The second Question, Whether it be lawful to resist a Prince which does
infringe the Law of God, or ruin his Church, by whom, how, and how far it is
lawful.
THis Question seems at the first view to be of a high and difficult nature,
for so much as there being small occasion to speak to Princes that fear God: On
the contrary, there will be much danger to trouble the ears of those which
acknowledge no other Sovereign but themselves, for which reason few or none
have meddled with it, and if any have at all touched it, it has been but as it
were in passing by. The Question is, If it be lawful to resist a Prince
violating the Law of God, or ruinating the Church, or hindering the restoring of
it? If we hold our selves to the tenure of the holy Scripture, it will resolve
us. For, if in this case it have been lawful to the Jewish people (the which
may be easily gathered from the books of the Old Testament) yea, if it have
been enjoined them, I believe it will not be denied, that the same must be
allowed to the whole people of any Christian Kingdom or Country whatsoever. In
the first place it must be considered, that God having chosen Israel from
amongst all the Nations of the Earth, to be a peculiar people to him, and
covenanted with them, that they should be the people of God. This is written in
diverse places of Douteronomy: the substance and tenor of Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2.
this alliance was, That all should be careful in their several lines,
tribes, and families in the land of Canaan, to serve God purely, who would have
a Church established amongst them for ever, which may be drawn from the
testimony of diverse places, namely that which is contained in the 27 Chap. of
Deuteronomy, there Moses and the Levites covenanting as in the name of God,
assembled all the people, and said unto them: This day Oh Israel art thou
become the people of God, obey you therefore his voice, etc. And Moses said,
when thou have passed the River of Jordan, thou shall set six Tribes on the
mountain of Gerizzim on the one side, and the six other on the Mountain of
Eball, and then the Levites shall read the Law of God, promising the observers
all felicity, and threatening woe and destruction to the breakers thereof, and
all the people shall answer, Amen. The which was afterward performed by
Joshua, at his entering into the Land of Canaan, and some few days before his
death. We see by this that all the people is bound to maintain the law of Jos.
5. 24. and 24. 20. etc.
God to perfect his Church: and on the contrary to exterminate the Idols of the
land of Canaan, a Covenant which can no ways appertain to particulars, but
only to the whole body of the people. To which also it seems the incamping of
all the Tribes round about the Ark of the Lord, to have reference, to the end
that all should look to preservation of that which was committed to the custody
of all. Now for the use and practice of this Covenant we may produce examples,
the Inhabitants of Gabaa of the Tribe of Benjamin ravished the wife of a
Levite, which died through their violence. Judge. 19, 20.
The Levite divided his wife into twelve pieces and sent them to the twelve
Tribes, to the end that all the people together might wipe away this so
horrible a crime committed in Israel. All the people met together at Mizpah and
required the Benjamites to deliver to be punished those that were culpable of
this enormious crime, which they refused to perform, wherefore with the
allowance of God himself, the states of the people with an universal consent
renounce and make war against the Benjamites, and by this means the authority
of the second Table of the Law was maintained by the detriment and ruin of one
entire Tribe which had broken it in one of the precepts. For the first we have
an example sufficiently manifest in Joshua. After that the Rubenites, Gadites,
and Manassites were returned into their dwellings beyond Jordan, they
incontinently built a goodly Alter near unto the river, this seems Jos. 22
to contrary the commandment of the Lord, who expressly forbids to sacrifice
any where but in the land of Canaan only, wherefore it was to be feared least
these men intended to serve Idols. This business being communicated to the
people, inhabiting on this side Jordan: the place assigned for the meetings of
the States was at Silo where the Ark of the Lord was. They all accordingly
met, and Phineas the High Priest the son of Eleazer was sent to the other to
treat with them concerning this offense committed against the Law: And to the
end they might know all the people had a hand in this business, they sent also
the principal men of every Tribe to complain that the service of God is
corrupted, by this devise, that God would be provoked by this rebellion, and
become an enemy, not only to the guilty, but also to all Israel, as heretofore
in Beelphegor. Briefly that they should denounce open war against them if
they desisted not from this their manner of doing: There must of necessity have
followed much mischeife, if those Tribes beyond Jordan had not protested, that
they erected that Alter only for a memorial that the Israelites both on the
one and the other side of Jordan, both did and do profess one and the same
Religion: and at all times whenever, they have showed themselves negligent in
the maintenance of the service of God, we have seen that they have ever been
punished: This is the true cause wherefore they lost two battles against the
Benjamites according as it appears in the end of the book of Judges, for in
so carefully undertaking to punish the rape and outrage don to a particular
person, they clearly convinced themselves of much negligent profaneness in the
maintenance of Gods right, by their continually negligence, omission to punish
both corporal and spiritual whoredoms, there was then in these first times
such a Covenant between God and the People.

Now after that Kings were given unto the people, there was A covenant between
God the king and the people. 2 king. 11. 17. and 23. 3.
so little purpose of disannulling or disbanding the former contract, that it
was renewed and confirmed for ever. We have formerly said at the Inaugurating
of Kings, there was a double Covenant treated of, to wit, between God, and the
King; and between God, and the People. The agreement was first passed between
God, the King, and the People: Or between the High Priest the People, (which is
named in the first place in the 23 Chapter in the 2 book of the Chronicles)
and the King. The intention 2 chronicles. 23 16.
of this was, that the people should be the people of God, (which is as much as
to say) that the people should be the church of God, we have showed before to
what end God contracted Covenants with the King: Let us now consider wherefore
also he allies himself with the people. It is a thing most certain, that God
has not done this in vain, and if the people had not authority to promise, and
to keep promise, it were vainly lost time to contract or Covenant with them. It
may seem then that God has done like those creditors, which having to deal
with not very sufficient borrowers, take diverse jointly bound for one and the
same sum, insomuch as two or more being bound one for another and each of them
apart, for the entire payment of the total sum, he may demand his whole debt
of which of them he pleases. There was much danger to commit the custody of
the Church to one man alone, and therefore God did recommend, and put it in
trust to all the people: The King being raised to so slippery a place might
easily be corrupted, for fear least the Church should stumble with him, God
would have the people also to be respondents for it. In the Covenant of which
we speak, God, or (in his place) the High Priest, are stipulators, the King and
all the people, to wit, Israel, do jointly and voluntarily assume, promise,
and oblige themselves for one and the same thing. The High Priest demands if
they promise that the people shall be the people of God, that God shall always
have his Temple, his Church amongst them, where he shallbe purely served, The
King is respondent, so also are the people (the whole body of the people
representing as it were the office and place of one man) not severally, but
jointly, as the words themselves make clear, being incontinent, and not by
intermission or distance of time the one after the other. L. Mortuo 22. D. de
fidei com. L. si non singuli C. si cert. Pet. I. penult. D. de duo reis 2 and
3. sect. 1. D. eodem.
We see here then two undertakers, the King and Israel, which by consequent are
bound one for another and each for the whole. For as when Cajus and Titius have
promised jointly to pay to their Creditor Seius a certain sum, each of them
are bound for himself and his companion, and the Creditor may demand the sum
of which of them he pleases. In the like manner the King for himself, and
Israel for it self are bound with all circumspection to see that the Church be
not damnified, if either of them be negligent of their Covenant, God may justly
demand the whole of which of the two he pleases, and the more probably of the
people then of the King, and for that many cannot so easily slip away as one,
and have better means to discharge the debts then one alone. In L. cum pos. D.
de censib. and ibi doct^res.
like manner, as when two men that are indebted, especially to the public
Exchequer, the one is in such manner bound for the other, that he can take no
benefit of the division granted; by the new Constitutions of Justinian: So
likewise the King and Israel promising to pay tribute to God, which is the King
of Kings, for accomplishment whereof, the one is obliged for the other. And as
two Covenanters by promise, especially in contracts, the obligation whereof
exposes the Obligees to forfeitures and hazards, such as L. cum apparebit, D.
locati. L. si divisa. C. eodem.
this is here, the failings of the one indammageth the other: so that if Israel
forsake their God, and the King makes no account of it, he is justly guilty of
Isreal's delinquency. In like manner, if the King follow after strange gods, and
not content to be seduced himself, seeks also to attract his Subjects,
endeavoring by all means to ruin the Church, if Israel seek not to withdraw
him from his rebellion, and contain him within the limits of obedience, they
make the fault of their King, their own transgression. Briefly, as when there
is danger that one of the debtors by consuming his goods may be disabled to
give satisfaction, the other must satisfy the creditors who ought not to be
endamaged, though one of his debtors have ill husbanded his estate, this ought
not to be doubted in regard of Israel toward their King, and of the King
toward Israel in case one of them apply himself to the service of Idols, or
break their Covenant in any other sort, the one of them must pay the
forfeiture and be punished for the other. Now that the Covenants of which we at
this time treat, is of this nature, it appears also by other testimonies of
Holy Scripture. Saul being established King of Israel, Samuel Priest 1 Samuel 12.
14. 25.
and Prophet of the Lord, speaks in this manner to the people. Both you and
your King which is over you serve the Lord your God, but if you persevere in
malice (he taxes them of malice for that they preferred the government of a
man before that of God) you and your King shall perish, He adds after the
reason, For it has pleased God to choose you for his people. You see here both
the parties evidently conjoined in the condition and the punishment: In like
manner Asa King of Judah, by the counsel of the Prophet Azarie, assembleth all
the people at Jerusalem, to wit, Juda and Benjamin, to enter into Covenant with
God. Thither came also diverse of the Tribe of Ephraim, Manasses, and Simeon,
which were come thither to serve the Lord according to his own ordinance After
the sacrifices were performed according to the Law, the Covenant was contracted
in these terms, Whosoever shall not call upon the Lord God of Israel, be he
the least or the greatest, let him dye the death. In making mention of the
greatest, you see that the King himself is not excepted from the designed
punishment.

But who may punish the King (for here is question of corporal 2 king. 23. 2.
and temporal punishment?) If it be not the whole body of the people to whom
the King swears and obliges himself, no more nor less, than the people do
to the King, we read also that King Josias being of the age of twenty and 2 Chronicles. 4. 29.
five years, together with the whole people, does make a Covenant with the
Lord, the King and the People promising to keep the Laws, and Ordinances of
God, and even then for the better accomplishing of the tenor of this
agreement, the Idolatry of Baall was presently destroyed. If any will more
exactly turn over the holy Bible, he may well find other testimonies to this
purpose.

But to what purpose should the consent of the people be required, wherefore
should Israel or Juda be expressly bound to observe the Law of God? for what
reason should they promise so solemnly to be for ever the people of God? If it
be denied, by the same reason that they had any authority from God, or power to
free themselves from perjury, or to hinder the ruin of the Church. For to what
end should it serve to cause the people to promise to be the people of God, if
they must, and are bound to endure and suffer the King to draw them after
strange Gods. If the people be absolutely in bondage wherefore is it commanded
then, to take order that God be purely served? if it be so that they cannot
properly oblige themselves to God, and if it be not lawful for them by all to
endeavor the accomplishment of their promise, shall we say that God has made
an agreement with them, which had I. quod att^net. 32. 1. D. de reg. jur.
no right neither to promise, nor to keep promise? But on the contrary, in this
business of making a Covenant with the people, God would openly and plainly
show, that the people has right to make, hold, and accomplish their promises
and contracts. For, if he be not worthy to be heard in public Court that will
bargain or contract with a slave, or one that is under tutillage, shall it not
be much more shameful to lay this imputation upon the Almighty, that he should
contract with those which had no power to perform the conditions covenanted?
But for this occasion it was, that when the Kings had broken their Covenants,
the Prophets always addressed themselves to the house of Juda and Jacob, and to
Samaria, to advertise them of their duties. Furthermore, they required the
people that they not only withdraw themselves from sacrificing to Baal, but
also that they cast down his Idol, and destroy his Priests and service; yea,
even maugre the King himself. For example, Ahab having killed the Prophets of
God, the Prophet Elias assembleth the people, and as it were convented the
Estates, and does there tax, reprehend, and reprove every one of them; the
people at his exhortation do take and put to death the Priests of Baal. And
for so much as the King neglected his duty, it behoved Israel more carefully to
discharge theirs without tumult, not rashly, but by public authority, the
Estates being assembled, and the equity of the cause orderly debated, and
sufficiently cleared before they came to the execution of justice. On the
contrary, so often, and always when Israel has failed to oppose their King,
which would overthrow the service of God, that which has been formerly said of
the two Debtors, the inability and ill husbandry of the one does ever prejudice
the other, the same happened to them; for as the King has been punished for his
Idolatry and Disloyalty, the people have also been chastised for their
negligence, connivencie, and stupidity, and it has commonly happened, that the
Kings have bin much more often swarved, and drawn others with them then the
people, for so much as ordinarily the great ones mould themselves into the
fashion of the King, and the people conform themselves in humors to those
that govern them: to be brief, all more usually offend after the example of
one, then that one will reform himself as he sees all the rest. This which we
say will perhaps appear more plainly by examples; what do we suppose to have
been the cause of the defeat and overthrow of the Army of Israel with their
King Saul. Does God correct the people for the sins of the Prince? Is the
child 1 Samuel 31.
beaten instead of the Father? It is a discourse not easily to be digested, say
the Civilians, to maintain that the children should bear the punishments due
for the offenses of their Fathers; the Laws do not permit that any one shall
suffer for the wickedness of another. Now God forbid that the Judge of all the
world (says Genesis 18. 25. Deuteronomy. 24. 16. 2 King. 14 6. Ezech. 18. 20.
Abraham) should destroy the innocent with the guilty: On the contrary (says
the Lord) as the life of the Father, so the life of the son is in my hands;
the fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the
children be put to death for the fathers; every man shall be put to death for
his own sin, That overthrow then, did it not proceed for that the people
opposed not Saul, when he violated the Law of God; but applauded that miserable
Prince when he wickedly persecuted the best men, as David and the Priests of
the Lord. Amongst many other examples let us only produce some few. The same
Saul to enlarge the possessions of the tribe of Judah broke the public faith
granted to the Gibeonites, at the first entry of the people into the land of
Canaan, Sam. 21. 1.
and put to death as many of the Gibeonites as he could come by. By this
execution Saul did break the third Commandment, for God had been called to
witness this agreement, and the sixth also, in so much as he murdered the
innocent, he ought to have maintained the authority of the two Tables of the
Law; and thereupon it is said, that Saul and his house have committed this
wickedness. In the mean time, after the death of Saul, and David being
established King, the Lord being demanded, made answer, that it was already the
third year that the whole country of Israel was afflicted with famine,
because of this cruelty, and the hand of the Lord ceased not to strike, until
that seven men of the house of Saul were given to the Gibeonites, who put them
to death; seeing L. crimen. 26. D. de pae^is
that every one ought to bear his own burden, and that no man is esteemed the
inheritor of another crime; wherefore they say, that all the whole people of
Israel deserves to be punished for Saul, who was already dead, and had (as it
might seem) that controversy buried in the same grave with him, but only in
regard that the people neglected to oppose a mischief so public and apparent,
although they ought and might have done it: Think you it reason, L. Sancimus c.
de paenis.
not any be punished unless they deserve it? And in what has the people here
failed, but in suffering the offense of their King. In like manner when David
commanded Ioab, and the Governors of 1 Samuel 24. 2. 2 Chronicles. 21. 2.
Israel to number the people, he is taxed to have committed a great fault; for
even as Israel provoked the anger of God in demanding a King, one in whose
wisdom they seemed to repose their safety: even so David did much forget
himself, in hoping for victory through the multitude of his subjects; for so
much as that is properly Abacuc. 1. 16.
(according to the saying of the Prophet) to sacrifice unto their net, and burn
incense unto their drag, a kind of abominable Idolatry; for the Governors, they
seeing that it would draw evil on the people, a little drew back at the first;
afterward, as it were, to be rid of the importunity they made the enrolement:
in the mean season all the people are punished, and not David alone, but also
the ancients of Israel, which represented the whole body of the people, put on
sackcloth and ashes, the which notwithstanding was not done nor practiced
when David committed those horrible sins of murder and adultery. Who sees
not in this last act, that all had sinned, and that all should repent; and
finally that all were chastised, to wit David that had provoked God by so
wicked a commandment, the Governors (as Peers and Assessors of the Kingdom,
ought in the name of all Israel to have opposed the King) by their connivencie,
and over weak resistance; and all the people also which made their appearance
to be enroled. God in this respect did like a chief Commander, or General of
an army, he chastised the offense of the whole camp, by a sudden alarm given
to all, and by the exemplary punishments of some particulars to keep all the
rest in better awe and order. But tell me wherefore 2 King 24. 4. 2 Chronicles. 33.
10. Ier. 15. 4.
after that the King Manasses had polluted the Temple at Jerusalem, do we read
that God not only taxed Manasses, but all the people also? was it not to
advertise Israel one of the sureties, that if they keep not the King within the
limits of his duty, they should all smart for it; for what meant the Prophet
Jeremy to say, the house of Judah is in subjection to the Assirians, because of
the impiety and cruelty of Manasses? but that they were guilty of all his
offenses, because they made no resistance: wherefore S. Austin S. August. upon
Psalm. 82. Ambro. in offic.
and S. Ambrose said, Herod and Pilat condemned Jesus Christ, the Priests
delivered him to be crucified, the people seem to have some compassion,
notwithstanding all are punished; and wherefore so? for so much as they are all
guilty of his death, in that they did not deliver him out of the hands of those
wicked Judges, and Governors, there must also be added to this, many other
proofs drawn from diverse Authors for the further explication of this point,
were it not that the testimonies of holy Scripture ought to suffice Christians.
Furthermore, in so much as it is the duty of a good Magistrate, rather to
endeavor to hinder and prevent a mischief, then to chastise the delinquents
after the offense is committed, as good Physicians that prescribe a diet to
allay and prevent diseases, as well as medicines to cure them: In like manner a
people truly affected to true religion, will not simply consent themselves to
reprove and repress a Prince that would abolish the Law of God, but also will
have special regard, that through malice and wickedness he innovate nothing
that may hurt the same, or that in tract of time may corrupt the pure service
of God; and instead of supporting public offenses committed against the divine
Majesty, they will take away all occasions wherewith the offenders might cover
their faults; we read that to have been practiced by all Israel by a decree of
Parliament in the assembly of the whole people, to remonstrate to those beyond
Jordan, touching the Altar they had builded, and by the King Ezechias, which
caused the brazen Serpent to be broken. It is then lawful for Israel to resist
the King, which would overthrow the Law of God, and abolish his Church, and not
only so, but also they ought to know that in neglecting to perform this duty,
they make themselves culpable of the same crime, and shall bear the like
punishment with their King.

If their assaults be verbal, their defense must be likewise verbal, if the
sword be drawn against them, they may also take arms, and fight either with
tongue or hand, as occasion is: yea, if they be August. in Josh. 23. q. 2.
assailed by surprisalls, they may make use both of ambuscadces, and
countermines, there being no rule in lawful war, that directs them for the
manner, whether it be by open assailing their enemy, or by close surprising,
provided always, that they carefully distinguish between advantageous
stratagems, and perfidious Treason, which is always unlawful.

But I see well, here will be an objection made, what will you say? That a
whole people, that beast of many heads, must they run Dominus l. 1. D. de dolo
malo
in a mutinous disorder, to order the businesses of the Commonwealth? What
address or direction is there in an unruly and unbridled multitude? what
counsel or wisdom, to manage the affairs of State?

When we speak of all the people, we understand by that, only What is to be
understood by this word people.
those which hold their authority from the people, to wit, the Magistrates,
which are inferior to the King, and whom the people has substituted, or
established, as it were Consorts in the Empire, and with a kind of Tribunitiall
authority, to restrain the encroachments of Sovereignty, and to represent the
whole body of the people. We understand also, the Assembly of the Estates,
which is nothing else but an Epitomy, or brief collection of the Kingdom, to
whom all public affairs have special and absolute reference, such were the
Seventy Ancients in the Kingdom of Israel, amongst whom the High Priest was as
it were president, and they judged all matters of greatest importance, those
seventy being first chosen by six out of each Tribe, which came out of the land
of Egypt, then the Heads or Governors of Provinces; In like manner the Judges
and Provosts of Towns, the Captains of thousands, the Centurions and others
which commanded over Families, the most valiant noble and otherways notable
personages, of whom was composed the body of the States, assembled diverse times
as it plainly appears by the words of the holy Scripture. At the election of
the first King which was Saul, all the Ancients of Israel assembled together at
1 Samuel 1. 4.
Rama. In like manner and all Israel was assembled, or all Judah and Benjamin,
etc. Now it is no way probable that all the people one by one met together
there. Of this rank there are in every well governd Kingdom, the Princes, the
Officers of the Crown, the Peers, the greatest and most notable Lords, the
Deputies of Provinces, of whom the ordinary body of the Estate is composed, or
the Parliament, or the Diet, or other Assembly according to the different names
used in diverse Countries of the world, in which Assemblies the principal care
is had both for the preventing and reforming either of disorder or detriment in
Church or Commonwealth. For as the Counsels of Basil and Constance have decreed
(and well decreed) that the universal Council is in Authority above the Bishop
of Rome. As in like manner the whole Chapter may overruled the Bishop, the
University, the Rector, the Court, the President: Briefly he whosoever he is
that has received authority from a Company, is inferior to that whole
company, although he be superior to any of the particular Members of it. Also
is it without any scruple or doubt, that Israel which demanded and established
a King as Governor of the Public must needs be above Saul established at their
request, and for Isreal's sake as it shall be more fully proved hereafter. And
for so much as an orderly proceeding is necessarily required in all affairs
discreetly addressed, and that it is not so probably hopeful that order shall
be observed amongst so great a number of people; yea, and that there oftentimes
occurs occasions which may not be communicated to a multitude, without manifest
danger of the Commonwealth. We say, that all that which has been spoken of
privileges granted, and right committed to the people, ought to be referred to
the Officers and Deputies of the Kingdom: and all that which has been said of
Israel, is to be understood of the Princes and Elders of Israel, to whom these
things were granted and committed as the practice also has verified.

The Queen Athalia after the death of her son Ahazia King of ^ Chron. 23.
Judah, put to death all those of the royal blood, except little Joas, which
being yet in the cradle was preserved by the piety and wisdom of his Aunt
Iehoshabeah. Athalia possesses her self of the government, and reigned six
year over Judah. It may well be the people murmured between their teeth, and
durst not by reason of danger express what they thought in their minds.
Finally, Jehoida the High Priest the husband of Jehoshabeah, having secretly
made a league and combination with the chief men of the Kingdom, did anoint and
Crown King his Nephew Joas, being but seven year old, And he did not content
himself to drive the Queen Mother from the royal Throne, but he also put her to
death, and presently overthrew the Idolatry of Baal. This deed of Jehoiada is
approved, and by good reason, for he took on him the defense of a good Cause,
for he assailed the Tyranny, and not the Kingdom. The Tyranny Barto^ de
Tirann^d. Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
(I say) which had no Title, as our modern Civilians speak. For by no Law were
women admitted to the government of the Kingdom of Judah. Furthermore, that
Tyranny was in vigor and practice: For Athalia had with unbounded mischief and
cruelty invaded the Realm of her Nephews, and in the administration of that
Government committed, infinite wickedness, and which was the worst of all, had
cast off the service of the the living God to adore and compel others with her
the Idol of Baal. Therefore then was she justly punished, and by him which had
a lawful calling and authority to do it. For Jehoida was not a private and
particular person, but the High Priest, to whom the knowledge of civil causes
did then belong: And besides he had for his Associats the principal men of the
Kingdom the Levites, and being himself the Kings kins-man and ally. Now for so
much as he assembled not the estates at Mizpah according to the accustomed
manner, he is not reproved for it, neither for that he consulted and contrived
the matter secretly, for that if he had held any other manner of proceeding,
the business must probably have sailed in the execution and success. Bartol. in
tract. de Guelph. and Gibel.


A combination or conjuration is good or ill according as the end whereunto it
is addressed is good or ill; and perhaps also according as they are affected
which are the managers of it. We say then that the Princes of Judah have done
well, and that in following any other course they had failed of the right way.
For even as the guardian ought to take charge and care that the goods of his
pupil fall not into loss and detriment, and if he omit his duty therein, he
may be compelled to give an account thereof: In like manner, those to whose
custody and tuition the people have committed themselves, and whom they have
constituted their Tutors and defenders ought to maintain them safe and entire
in all their rights and privileges. To be short as it is lawful for a whole
people to resist and oppose Tyranny; Vlp. l. 260. D. de reg. ^^ui.
so likewise the principal persons of the Kingdom, may as heads and for the
good of the whole body confederate and associate themselves together, and as in
a public State, that which is done by the greatest part is esteemed and taken
as the act of all, so in like manner must it be said to be done which the
better part of the most principal have acted, briefly that all the people had
their hand in it.

But here presents it self another question the which deserves to Whether part
of a Kingdom may make resistance.
be considered, and amply debated in regard of the circumstance of time. Let us
put the case that a King seeking to abolish the Law of God, or ruin the
Church, that all the people or the greatest part yield their consents, that all
the Princes or the greatest number of them make no reckoniug; and
notwithstanding, a small handful of people, to wit, some of the Princes and
Magistrates desire to preserve the Law of God entirely and inviolably, and to
serve the Lord purely: what may it be lawful for them to do? if the King seek
to compel those men to be Idolaters, ot will take from them the exercise of
true religion? We speak not here of private and particular persons considered
one by one, and which in that manner are not held as parts of the entire body;
As the planks, the nails, the pegs, are no part of the Ship, neither the
stones, the rafters, nor the rubbish are any part of the house: but we speak of
some Town or Province, which makes a portion of a Kingdom, as the prow, the
poop, the keel and other parts make a Ship: the foundation, the roof, and the
walls make a house. We speak also of the Magistrate which governs such a City
or Province. If we must make our defense with producing of examples, although
we have not many ready by reason of the backwardness and carelessness of men
when there is question to maintain the service of God: notwithstanding, we have
some few to be examined and received according as they deserve. Libna, a Town
of the Priests withdrew it John 21 13. 1 Chronicles. 6. 17. 2 Chronicles. 21. 10.
self from the obedience of Joram King of Judah, and left that Prince, because
he had abandoned the God of his Fathers whom those of that Town would serve,
and it may be they feared also lest in the end they should be compelled to
sacrifice to Baal. In like manner when that the King Antiochus commanded that
all the Jews should embrace his religion, and should forsake that which the God
Almighty had taught them, Mattathias answered, we will not 1 Mac 1. 43. and 2.
22. and 3. 43.
obey, nor will we do any thing contrary to our religion, neither did he only
speak, but also being transported with the zeal of Phineas, he killed with his
own hands a Jew, which constrained his fellow Citizens to sacrifice to Idols;
then he took arms and retired into the mountain, gathered troops, and made war
against Antiochu, for Religion, and for his Country with such success, that he
regained Jerusalem, brok and brought to nothing the power of the Pagans which
they had gathered to ruin the Church, and then reestablished the pure service
of God. If we will know who this Matthias was, he was the Father of the
Machabees of the Tribe of Levi; insomuch as it was not lawful for him
according to the received custom and right of his race to restore the Kingdom
by arms from the Tyranny of Antiochus. His followers were such as fled to the
mountains together, with the inhabitants of Modin, to whom had adjoined
themselves diverse neighboring Jews, and other fugitives from sundry quarters of
Iudeah; all which solicitously desired the re-establishment of the Church.
Almost all the rest, yea, the principals obeyed Antiochus, and that after the
rout of his army, and his own miserable death: Although there were then a fair
1 Mac. 6. 21. etc.
occasion to shake off his yoke, yet the Jews sought to the son of
Antiochus, and entreated him to take on him the Kingdom, promising him fidelity
and obedience. I might here produce the example of Debora. The Lord God had
subjected Israel to Iabin King of Canaan, and they had remained in this
servitude the space of twenty years, which might seem in some sort to have
gained a right by prescription over the Kingdom; and together also that almost
all Israel followed after strange gods. The principal and most powerful Tribes,
to wit, Reuben, Ephraim, Benjamin, Dan, Asher, and some others adhered wholly
to Iabin. Yet notwithstanding the Prophetess Debora which judged Israel, caused
the Tribes of Zebulon, Nephthalie, and Issachar, or at the lest some of all
those Tribes, to take arms under the conduct of Barac, and they overthrew
Sisera the Lieftenant of Iabin, and delivered Israel, which had no thought of
liberty, and was content to remain in bondage; and having shaken off the yoke
of Canaaniets they re-established the pure service of the living God. But for
so much as Debora seems to have an extraordinary vocation, and that the
Scripture does not approve in express terms the doings of them of Libna,
although that in not disallowing of their proceedings, it may seem in some sort
to allow them, and for that the History of the Machabees has had no great
authority in the ancient Church and for that it is commonly held that an
assertion must be proved by laws and testimonies, not by examples, let us
examine by the effect what we ought to judge according to the right of the
matter now in question. We have formerly said that the King did swear to keep
the Law of God, and promise to the uttermost of his power to maintain the
Church: that the people of Israel considered in one body covenanting by the
High Priest, made the same promise to God. Now at this present we say, that all
the Towns, and all the Magistrates of these Towns which be parts and portions
of the Kingdom, promise each of them in his own behalf, and in express terms
the which all Towns and Christian Communalties have also done, although it have
been but with a tacit consent. Joshua being Iosuah ^4.
very old and near to his death, assembled all Israel at Sichem in the presence
of God, to wit, before the Ark of the Covenant which was there. It is said that
the Ancients of the people, the Heads of the Tribe, the Judges and Governors,
and all which had any public command in the Towns of Israel met together
there, where they swore to observe and keep the Law of the Lord. and did
willingly put on the yoke of the Almighty God: whereby it appears that these
Magistrates did oblige themselves in the names of their Towns and Communalties
which did send them to take order that God should be served throughout the
whole Country, according as he had revealed in his Law. And Joshuah for his
part having passed this contract of agreement between God and the people and
inregistred the whole according as it was done, for a perpetual memorial of the
matter he incontinently set up a stone.

If there were occasion to remove the Ark of the Lord, The 1 Chronicles. 1^. 2 Chronicles. 3. 1 Kings 7. 1 Chronicles. 2^. 2 Kings ^^. 2 Kings 23. 2 Chronicles. 23.
principals of the Country and Towns, the Captains the Centurions, the
Provosts, and others were summoned by the Decree and Commandment of David, and
of the Synagogue of Israel, if there be a purpose of building the Lords Temple,
the same course is observed. And to the end it be not supposed, that some
alteration has been inserted after the creation of Kings: In the times of Joas
and Josias, when there was question of renewing the Covenant between God and
the People, all the Estates met together, and all were bound and obliged
particularly. Also not only the King, but the Kingdom, and not only all the
Kingdom, but also all the Pastors of the Kingdom promise each of them for
their selves, fidelity and obedience to God. I say again, that not only the
King and the People, but also all the Towns of Israel, and their Magistrates,
oblige themselves to God, and as homagers to their liege lord tie themselves to
be his for ever, with and against all men, for further proof of the aforesaid,
I would entreat the Reader to diligently turn over the holy Bible, especially
in the books of the Kings and the Chronicles. But for a yet more ample
explication of this matter, let us produce for example what is in practice at
this day. In the Empire of Germany, when the Emperor is to be crowned, the
Electors and Princes of the Empire, as well Secular as Ecclesiastical, meet
together personally, or else send their Ambassadors. The Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, and all the Deputies of the Imperial Towns, come thither also, or else
send special Proxies; then do they their homage to the Emperor; either for
themselves, or for them whom they represent, with and under certain conditions:
Now let us presuppose that one of these which has done homage voluntarily, do
afterward endeavor to depose the Emperor, and advance himself into his place,
and that the Princes and Barons deny their Sovereign the succors and tribute
which they owe him, and that they have intelligence with that other which
conspired and sought to possess himself of the Imperial Throne: Think you that
they of Straesborgh or of Nurembergh, which have bound themselves by faith unto
the lawful Emperor, have not lawful right to repress and exclude this
traiterous Intruder? Yea, on the contrary, if they do it not, if they give not
succors to the Emperor in this his necessity, think you that they have
satisfied or performed their fealty and promise, L. 3. l. Omned elict. Sect.
ult. D. de re^mil.
seeing that he which has not preserved his Governor when he had means to do
it, ought to be held as culpable and guilty, as he which offered the violence
and injury unto him. If it be so (as every one may sufficiently see it is) is
it not then lawful for the men of Libna and of Modin? and does not their duty
enjoin them to do as much as if the other Estates of the Kingdom have left God
to whose service and pleasure they know and acknowledge themselves to be bound
to render obedience. Let us imagine then some Ioram or Antiochus which
abolisheth true Religion, and lifts up himself above God, that Israel connives
and is content, What should that Town do which desires to serve God purely?
First, they should say with Joshua, for their parts, look whom you desire
rather to Josh. 14. 15.
obey, the living God, or the Gods of the Amorites, for our parts we and our
Families will serve the Lord. Choose you then I say, if you will obey in this
point him, which without any right usurps that power and authority which no way
appertains unto him, for my part, hap what may, I will keep my faith to him to
whom I promised it. I make no question but that Joshua would have done the
uttermost of his endeavor to maintain the pure service of the living God in
Thamnathe Serathe, a Town of Ephraim, where his house and estate lay; if the
Israelites besides had so much forgot themselves as to have worshipped the god
of the Amorites in the land of Canaan. But if the King should pass yet further,
and send his Lievtenants to compel us to become Idolaters, and if he commands
us to drive God and his service from amongst us; Shall we not rather shut our
gates against the King and his Officers, then drive out of our Town the Lord
which is the King of kings? Let the Burgesses and Citizens of Towns, Let the
Magistrates and Governors of the People of God dwelling in Towns, consider
with themselves that they have contracted two Covenants, and taken two Oaths:
The first and most ancient with God, to whom the People have sworn to be his
people: the second and next following, with the King, to whom the people has
promised obedience, as unto him which is the Governor and Conductor of the
people of God. So then, as if a Viceroy conspiring against his Sovereign,
although he had received from him an unlimitted authority, if he should summon
us to deliver the King whom he held besieged within the enclosure of our walls,
we ought not to obey him, but resist with the uttermost of our power and means
according to the tenor of our oath of Allegiance: In like manner think we that
it is not a wickedness of all most detestable, if at the pleasure of a Prince
which is the vassal and servant of God, we should drive God from dwelling
amongst us, or deliver him (as far as in us 10 Collat de forma Fidei, etc. 1.
de ^ nova fidel. form.
lies) into the hands of his enemies. You will say, it may be that the Towns
appertain to the Prince. And I answer, that the Towns consist not of a heap of
stones, but of that which we call people, that the people is the people of God,
to whom they are first bound by oath: and secondly, to the King. For the Towns,
although that the Kings have power over them, notwithstanding the right of
inheritance of the Soil belongs to the Citizens and Owners, for all that which
is in a Kingdom, is indeed under the Dominion of the King, but not of his
proper Patrimony: God in truth is the only Lord propriator of all things, and
it is of him that the King holds Senec. l. 7. de Benef. c. 6, 7. etc.
his royalties, and the people their Patrimony. This is as much as to say, you
will reply, that for the cause of Religion it shall be lawful for the subjects
to revolt from the obedience of their King, if this be once granted, it will
presently open a gap to rebellion? But hearken I pray you patiently, and
consider this matter more thoroughly: I might answer in a word, that of two
things, if the one must needs be done, it were much better to forsake the King,
then God; or with S. Augustine in his fourth book of the City of God, chap. 4.
and in the nineteenth book, and chapter the 21. That where there is no Justice,
there is no Commonwealth. That there is no Justice, when he that is a mortal
man would pull an other man out of the hands of the immortal God, to make him a
slave of the devil, seeing that Justice is a virtue that gives to every one that
which is his own, and that those which draw their necks out of the yoke of such
Rulers, deliver themselves from the Tyranny of wicked spirits, and abandon a
multitude of robbers, and not the Commonwealth. But to reassume this
discourse a little higher, those which shall carry themselves as has been
formerly said, seem no ways accusable of the crime of revolt. Those are said
properly to quit the King or the Commonwealth, which with the heart and
purpose of an Enemy withdraw themselves from the obedience of the King or the
Commonwealth, by means whereof they are justly accounted adversaries, and are
oftentimes much more to be feared then any other enemies. But those of whom we
now speak, do nothing resemble them. First they do in no sort refuse to obey,
provided that they be commanded that which they may lawfully L 5. D. de cap.
minut.
do, and that it be not against the honor of God. They pay willingly the
Taxes, Customs, Imposts, and ordinary payments, provided that with these they
seek not to abolish the tribute which they ow unto God. They obey Caesar while
he commands in the quality of Caesar: but when Caesar passes his bounds, when
he usurps that Dominion which is none of his own, when he endeavors to assail
the Throne of God, when he wars against the sovereign Lord both of himself and
the people; they then esteem it reasonable not to obey Caesar: and yet after
this to speak properly, they do no acts of hostility. He is properly an enemy
which stirs up, which provokes another, which out of military insolency
prepares and seteth forth parties to war. They have been urged and assailed by
open war, and close and treacherous surprisalls: when death and destruction
environs them round about, then they take arms, and wade their enemies
assaults: you cannot have Place with your enemies when you will; for if you lay
down your weapons, if you give over making War they will not for all that
disarme themselves, and loose their advantage. But for these men, desire but
place and you have it, give over but assayling them, and they will lay down
their Arms, cease to fight against God, and they will presently leave the
lists, will you take their Swords out of their hands? absteyne you only then
from stricking, seeing they are not the assaylants, but the defendants, sheath
your Sword, and they will presently cast their Buckler on the ground, which
has been the reason that they have been often surprised by perfideous
atribuscadoes, whereof these our times have afforded over frequent examples.
Now as we cannot call that servant stuborne or a fugitive, which puts by the
blow, which his Lord stricks at him with his Sword, or which withdrawes or
hides himself from his Masters fury, or shuts his Chamber door upon him,
until his cole^ land heat be passedover, much less ought we to esteem those
seditions, which (holding the name and place of Servants and subjects) shut the
gates of a City against their Prince, transported with anger, being ready to do
all his just Commanddements, after he has recovered his judgment, and related
his former indignation; we must place in this rank, David Commander of the Army
of 1 Samuel 21. 22. 2 Samuel 25. 28.
Israel, under Saul, a furious King. David oppressed with Calumnies and false
Taxations, watched and way-layed from all parts, he retired unto, and defended
himself in unaccessible Mountains, and provided for his defense to oppose the
walls of Ceila against the fury of the King, yea, he drew unto his party all
those that he could, not to take away Saules life from him, as it plainly
appeared afterward; but to defend his own Cause: see wherefore Jonathan the
Son of Saul, made no difficulty, to make alliance with David, and to renew it
from time to time; the which is called the Alliance of the Almighty. And
Abbigall says in expresso words, that David was wrongfully assailed, and that
he made the War of God. We must also place in this rank the Machabees; which
having Macha. 6. 60. etc.
good means to maintain Wars, were content to receive peace from King
Demetrius, and others, which Antiochus had offered them before, because by it,
they should be secured in the free profession and exercise of their Religion.
We may remember that those which in our times have fought for true Religion
against Antichrist, both in Germany and France, have laid down Arms as soon
as it was permitted them to serve God truly according to his Ordinance, and
oftentimes having fair means and occasion to advance and continue the War to
their much advantage: as had David and the Machabees, where the Philistines
constrained Saul to leave David to look to his own defense, and those Clouds
of neighboring enemies in Antiochus, saw ready to dissclue upon his head,
hindered him also from further pursuing the Machabees. See then the marks
which distinguish and separate sufficiently, those of whom we speak from Rebels
or seditions.

But let us yet see other evident Testimonies of the equity of their cause; for
their defection is of that nature, that take but away the occasion, if some
extreme necessity compel not the contrary, they presently return to their
former condition, and then you cannot properly say, they separated themselves
from the King, or the Communality; but that they left Ioram, and Antiochus, or
if you will, the Tyranny and unlawful power of one alone, or if diverse
particulers, which had no authority nor right to exact obedience in the same
manner, as they commanded. The Sorbonists Doctors have taught us the like
sundry times: whereof we will allege some examples.

About the year 1300. Pope Boniface the 8 seeking to appropriate to his Annals
Franciae. Archiva Camerae Ratiocimorum. Lutetiae.
Sea, the copalties that belonged to the Crown of France: Philip the fair, the
then King, does taunt him somewhat sharply: the tenor of whose care letters are
these.

Philip by the Grace of God, King of the French, to Boniface, calling himself
Sovereign Bishop, little or no health at all.

Be it known to the great foolishness and unbounded rashness, that in
temporal matters we have only God for our superior, and that the vacancy of
certain Churches, and pretends belongs to us by copall prerogative, and that it
appertains to us only to gather the fruits, and we will defend the
possession thereof against all opposers, with the edge of our Swords,
accounting them fools, and without brains that hold a contrary opinion. In
those times all men acknowledged the Pope for Gods Vicar on earth, and head of
the universal Church: Insomuch, that (as it is said) common error went instead
of a Law, notwithstanding the Sorbonists being assembled, and demanded, made
answer, that the L. Parber, Philip D. de Senate.
King and the Kingdom might falsely without blame or danger of schism, exempt
themselves from his obedience, and flatly refuse that, which the Pope demanded;
for so much as it is not the separation: but the cause which makes the schism,
and if there were schism, it should be only in separating from Boniface, and
not from the Church, nor from the Pope, and that there was no danger nor
offense in so remaining until some honest man were chosen Pope. Every one
knows into what perplexities, the consciences of a whole Kingdom would fall,
which held themselves separated from the Church, if this distinction be not
true. I would demand now, if it be not yet more lawful to make use of this
distinction, when a King invades and incroacheth on the jurisdiction of God,
and oppresses with hand servitude, the scales dearly bought with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ. Let us add another example.

In the year of our Lord 2408. when Pope Benedict the 13. did oppose the French
Church by tributes, and exactions, the Clergy assembled; by the Command of King
Charles the 6. decreed: that the King and Inhabitants Annals of France
monstrelet.
of the Kingdom, ought not to obey Benedict, which was an Heritick, a
schismatic, and altogether unworthy of that dignity: the which the Estates of
the Kingdom approved, and the Parliament of Paris confirmed by a decree. The
same Clergy also ordained that those which had been excommunicated by that
Pope: as forsakers and enemies of the Church, should be presently absolved,
nullifying all such excommunications, and this has been practiced not in
France only, but in other places also: as Histories do credibly report. The
which gives us just occasion ^ost perspicuously to see and know, that if he
which holds the place of a Prince do govern ill, there may be a separation from
him without incurring justly the blame of revolt; for that they are things in
themselves directly contrary, to leave a bad Pope, and forsake the Church, a
wicked King, and the Kingdom. To return to those of Lobna, they seem to have
followed 2 Kings 19. 8.
this before remembered expedient; for after the reestablishment of the service
of God, they presently became again the subjects of King Ezekias. And if ti is
distinction be allowed place, when a Pope incroacheth on the rights of any
Prince, which notwithstanding in some cases acknowledges him for his
Sovereign: Is it not much more allowable, if a Prince which is a Vassal in
that respect, endeavors to assure and appropriate to himself the rights of
God. Let us conclude then to end this discourse, that all the people by the
authority of those, into whose hands they have committed their Power, or diverse
of them may, and ought to Extrau. de majo. and obed.
reprove and repress a Prince, which Commands things against God. In like
manner, that all, or at the least, the principalls of Provinces or Towns, under
the authority of the chief Magistrates, established first by God, and secondly
by the Prince, may according to Law and reason, hinder the entrance of
Idolatry, within the enclosure of their walls, and maintain their true
Religion: yea further, they may extend the Confines of the Church, which is but
one, and in failing hereof, if they have means to do it: they justly incur the
penalty of High Treason against the Divine Majesty.

Whether private men may resist by Arms.
It remains now that we speak of particulers which are private persons. First,
particulars or private persons, are not bound to take up arms against the Prince
which would compel them to become Idolaters. The L. sicut 7, 5. 1. D. qu^d
cujusque ^nivens.
Cove-nant between God and all the people who promise to be the people of God,
does not in any sort bind them to that; for as that which belongs to the whole
universal body, is in no sort proper to particulars: so in like manner that
which the body owes and is bound to perform, cannot by any sencible reason be
required of particular persons: neither does their duty any thing obliege them
to it; for every one is bound to serve God in that proper vocation, to which
this called. Now private persons they have no power, they have no publik
command, nor any calling to unsheath the sword of authority; And therefore as
God has not put the sword into the hands of private men: so does he not require
in any sort that they should strike with it. It is said to them, put up thy
sword into thy scabberd. On the contrary the Apostle says of Majestrates, Mat.
26 52. Romans 13. 4.
they carry not the sword in vain; If particular men draw it forth, they make
themselves Delinquents; If Majestrates be slow and negligent to use it when
just occasion is offered, they are likewise justly blameable of negligence in
performing their duties, and equally guilty with the former. But you will say
unto me, has not God made a Covenant, as well with particular persons as with
the generality, with the least as well as the higest? To what purpose was
Circumcision, and Baptism ordained? What means that frequent repetition of
the Covenant in so many passages of holy writ? All this is true, but the
consideration hereof is diverse in their several kinds; For as all the subjects
of a good and faithful Prince, of what degree soever they be are bound to obey
him; but some of them notwithstanding have their particular duty, as
Magestrates must hold others in obedience, in like manner all men are bound to
serve God; bnt some as they are placed in a higher rank, have received
greater authority in so much as they are accountable for the offenses of
others, if they attend not the charges of the Communalty carefully.

The Kings, the Communalties of people, the Majestrates into whose hands the
whole body of the Commonwealth has committed the sword of authority, must and
onght to take care that the Church be maintained and preserved, particulars
ought only to look that they render themselves members of this Church. Kings
and popular Estates are bound to hinder the pollution or ruin of the Temple of
God, and ought to free and defend it from all corruption within, and all injury
from without. Private men must take order that their bodies the Temples of of
God, be pure, that they may be fit recptacles for the Holy-ghoast to dwell in
them. If any man defile the Temple of God, says the Apostle, him 1 Cor. 3. 17.
and 6. 19.
shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, to the
former he gives the sword, which they bear with authority: to the other he
recommends the sword of the spirit only, to wit, the word of God, wherewith St.
Paul arms all Christians, against the assaults of the Ephesians. 6. 17.
Devil, what shall then private men do? if the King will constrain them to
serve Idols? If the Magistrates into whose hands the people has consigned
their authority, or if the Magistrates of the place, where these particulers
dwell, do oppose these proceedings of the King: let them in Gods name obey
their leaders, and employ all their means (as in the service of God) to aid
the holy and commendable enterprises of those, which oppose themselves
lawfully, against his wicked intention. Amongst others, they have the examples
of the Centurions, and men at arms, which readily and cheerfully obeyed the
Princes of Judah, who stirred up by Iehoydas, purged the Church from all
profanation, and delivered the Kingdom from the tyranny of Athiliah. But if
the Princes, and Magistrates, approve the courses of an outrageous and
irreligious Prince, or if they do not resist him, we must lend our ears to the
Council of Jesus Christ, to wit, to retire Mat. 10. 23.
our selves into some other place; we have the example of the faithful mixed
amongst the 10. Tribes of Israel, who seeing the true service of God abolished
by Jeroboam, and that none made any account of it, they retired 2 Chronicles. 11.
13. and 15. 9. Heb. 6. 6. Mat. 10. 28. Exodus 12. etc. Iud. 3. 16. 2 Kings 9.
themselves into the territories of Judah, where Religion remained in her
purity: let us rather forsake our livelihoods and lives, then God, let us
rather be crucified our selves, then crucify the Lord of life: fear not them
(says the Lord) which can only kill the body. He himself, his Apostles, and
an infinite number of Christian martirs, have taught us this by their examples;
shall it not then be permitted to any private person to resist by Arms? what
shall we say of Moses, which lead Israel away in despite of King Pharaoh? And
of Ehua, which after 10. years servitude, when Israel might seem to belong by
right of prescription, to him which held the possession thereof, he killed
Eglon, the King of Moab, and delivered Israel from the yoke of the Moabites,
and of Iohu, which put to death his Lord the King Ioram, exterpated the race of
Ahab, and distroyed the Priests of Baall, were not these particulers? I answer,
that if they be considered in themselves, they may well be accounted particular
persons, insomuch as they had not any ordinary vocation; But, seeing that we
know that they were called extraordinarily, and that God himself has (if we
may so speak) put his sword into their hands, be it far from us to account them
particular or private persons, but rather let us esteem them by many degrees,
excelling any ordinary Magistrates whatsoever. The calling of Moses is approved
by the express word of God, and by most evident miracles, it is said of Ehud,
that God stirred him up to kill the Tyrant, and deliver Israel; for Iehu, he
was anointed by the Commandment of the Prophet Elizeus, for to root out the
race of Ahab, besides, that the principal men saluted him King, before he
executed any thing. There may as much be said of all the rest, whose examples
are propounded in holy writ. But where God Almighty does not speak with his own
mouth, nor extraordinarily by his Prophets, it is there that we ought to be
exceeding cautious, and to stand upon our guards; for if any supposing he is
inspired by the Holy Ghost, do attribute to himself the before mentioned
authority, I would entreat him to look that he be not puffed up with vain
glory, and least he make not a God to himself of his own fancy, and sacrifice
to his own inventions, let him not then be conceived with vanity, least instead
of fruit he bring forth deluding lies. Let the people also be advised on their
parts, least in desiring to fight under the Banner of Jesus Christ, they run
not to their own confusion to follow the Army of some Gallilean Thendas, or of
Barcezha: as it happened to the Pesants and Anabaptists of Munster, in Germany,
in the year 1323. I will not say, notwithstanding that the same God which to
punish our offenses, has sent us in these our days, both Pharoes and Ahabs,
may not sometimes raise up extraordinary deliverances to his people: certainly
his justice and his mercy continue to all ages, firm and immutable. Now if
these visible miracles appear not as in former times; we may yet at the least
full by the effects that God works miraculously in our hearts, which is when
we have our minds free from all ambition, a true and earnest ^eale, a right
knowledge, and conscience; least being guided by the spirit of error or
ambition, we rather make Idols of our own immaginations, then serve and
worship the true and living God.

Whether it be lawful to take Arms for Religion.
Furthermore to take away all scruple, we must necessarily answer, those which
esteem, or else would, that others should think they hold that opinion, that
the Church ought not to be defended by Arms. They say with all that, it was
not without a great Mystery, that God did forbid in Exodus 20. 25. Deuteronomy. 27. 3.
1 Kings 6. 7
the Law, that the Alter should be made or adorned with the help of any tool
of Iron; in like manner, that at the building of the Temple of Solamon: there
was not heard any noise of Axe or Hammer, or other tools of Iron; from whence
they collect that the Church which is the lively Temple of the Lord, ought not
to be reformed by Arms; yea, as if the stones of the Alter, and of the Temple,
were ^ewed and taken out of the quarries without any instrument of Iron, which
the text of the holy Scripture does sufficiently clear. But if we oppose to
this goodly Allegory, that which is written in the fourth Chapter of the book
of Nehemiah, that one part of the people, carried mortar, and another part stood
ready with their weapons, that some held in one hand their swords, and with the
other carried the materials to the workmen, for the rebuilding of the Temple:
to the end, by this means to prevent their enemies from ruining their work, we
say also that the Church, is neither advanced, nor edified by these material
weapons; but by these arms it is warranted, and preserved from the violence of
the enemies, which will not by any means endure the increase of i^. Briefly,
there has been an infinite number of good Kings and Princes, (as Histories do
testify, which by Arms: have maintained and defended the service of God
against Pagans. They reply readily to this, that Wars in this manner were
allowable under the Law* but since the time that grace has been offered by
Jesus Christ, who would not enter into Jerusalem mounted on a brave horse; but
meekly sitting on an ass: this manner of proceeding has had an end, I answer
first, that all agree with me in this, that our Savior Christ during all the
time that he conversed in this world, took not on him the Office of a Judge,
or King; but rather of a private person, and a Delinquent by imputation of our
transgressions: so that it is an allegation besides the purpose, to say that he
has not managed Arms. But I would willingly demand of such exceptionists:
whether they think that by the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh, that
Magistrates have lost their right in the sword of Authority? If they say so,
Saint Paul contradicts them, who says that the Magistates carries not the
sword in vain, and did not refuse their assistance Romans 13 4. Acts 23. 17.
and power, against the violence of those which had conspired his death. And if
they consent to the saying of the Apostle to what purpose should the
Magestrates beat the sword, if it be not to serve God, who has committed it
to them, to defend the good and punish the bad? Can they do better service
then to preserve the Church from the violence of the wicked, and to deliver the
flock of Christ, from the swords of murderers? I would demand of them yet,
whether they think that all use of Arms is forbiden to Christians? If this be
their opinion, then would I know of them, wherefore Christ did grant to the
Centurian his request? Wherefore did he give Matt. 8. 9. 13. Luc. 3. 14. Act.
10. 47.
so excelent a testimony of him? wherefore does St. John Baptist command the
men at Arms to content themselves with their pay, and not to use any extortion
and does not rather persuade them to leave their ^^^ing? Wherefore did Saint
Peter Baptize Cornellus the Centurian who was the first fruits of the Gentiles?
From whence comes it that he did not in any sort whatsoever council him to
leave his charge? Now if to bear arms and to make war be a thing lawful, can
there possibly be found any war more just, then that which is taken in hand by
the command of the superior, for the defense of the Church, and the
preservation of the faithful? Is there any greater tirany, then that which is
excercised over the soul? Can there be imagined a war more commendable then
that which suppresseth such a tyrany? For the last point, I would willingly
know of these men, whether it be absolutely prohibited Christians, to make war
upon any occasion whatsoever? If they say that it is forbidden them: from
whence comes it then that the men at Arms, Captains, and Centurions, which had
no other employment; but the managing of Arms were always received into the
Church? wherefore do the ancient Fathers, and Christian Historians make so
horrible mention, of certain legions composed wholly of Christian Soldiers,
and amongst others of that of Malta, so renowned; for the victory which they
obtained, and of that of Thebes, of the which St. Mauricious was General, who
suffered martirdom together with all his Troops, for the confessing of the
name of Jesus Christ? And if it be permitted to make war (as it may be they
will confess) to keep the limmits and Towns of a Country, and to repulse an
invading enemy: Is it not yet a thing much more reasonable, to take Arms to
preserve and defend honest men, to suppress the wicked, and to keep and
defend the limmits and bounds of the Church, which is the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ? if it were otherwise, to what purpose? should St. John have foretold,
that the whore of Babylon, shall be finally ruined by Apoc. 27. 26.
the 10. Kings, whom she has bewitched? furthermore, if we h^ld a contrary
opinion, what shall we say of the wares of Constantine, against Maxentius, and
Licinius, celebrated by so many public orations, and approved by the Testimony
of an infinite number of learned men, what opinion should we hold of the many
voyages, made by Christian Princes, against the Turks and Sarazins to conquer
the holy Land, who had not, or at the least, ought not to have had, any other
end in their designs; but to binder the enemy from ruining the Temple of the
Land, and to restore the integrity of his service into those Countries.
Although then that the Church be not increased by Arms, notwithstanding it may
be justly preserved by the means of Arms; I say further, that those that dye
in so holy a war, are no less^ the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, then their brethren
which were put to death for Religion; nay, they which dye in that war seem to
have this inadvantage, that with a free will and knowing sufficiently hazard,
into which they cast themselves, notwithstanding, do courageously expose their
lives to death and danger, whereas other do only not refuse death, when it
behooves them to suffer. The Turks strive to advance their opinion by the
means of Arms, and if they do subdue a Country, they presently bringin by
force the impieties of Mahomet; who in his Alcoran, has so recommended Arms:
as they are not ashamed to say it is the ready way to Heaven, yet do the Turks
constrain no man in matter of conscierce. But he which is a much greater
adversary to Christ, and true Religion, with all those Kings whom he has
enchanted, opposes fire and fagots, to the light of the Gospel, to^tures the
word of God, compelling by wracking, and torments, as much as in him lies: all
men to become Idolaters, and finally is not ashamed, to advance and maintain
their faith and law by perfideous disloyalty, and their traditions by
continual traysons. Now on the contrary, those good Princes and Magistrates,
are said properly to defend themselves, which invirone and fortify by all
their means and industry the vine of Christ, already planted, ^o be planted in
places where it has not yet been, least the wild boore of the Forest should
sp^yl^ or devour it: They do this (I say) in covering with their Buckler, and
defending with their sword, those which by the preaching of the Gospel have
been converted to true Religion, and in fortifying with their best ability, by
^avelin^, ditches, and rampers the Temple of God built with lively stones,
until it Have attained the full height, in despite of all the furious assaul^s
of the enemies thereof, we have lengthened out this discourse thus far, to the
end, we might take away all scruple concerning this question. Set then the
Estates, and all the Officers of a Kingdom, or the greatest part of them, every
one established in authority by the people: know, that if they contain not
within his bounds (or at the least, employ not the utmost of their endeavors
thereto) a King that seeks to corrupt the Law of God, or hinders the
reestablishment thereof, that they offend grievously against the Lord, with
whom they have contracted Covenants upon those conditions: Those of a Town, or
of a Province, making a portion of a Kingdom, let them know also, that they
draw upon themselves the judgment of God, if they drive not impiety out of
their walls and confines, if the King seek to bring it in, or if they be
wanting to preserve by all means, the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, although
for the defense thereof, they suffer for a time bannishment, or any other
misery. Finally, more private men must be all advertised, that nothing can
excuse them, if they obey any in that which offends God, and that yet they have
no right nor warrant, neither may in any sort by their private authority take
arms, if it appear not most evidently, that they have extraordinary vocation
thereunto, all which our discourse will suppose we have confirmed by pregnant
Testimonies drawn from holy writ.

THE THIRD QUESTION. Whether it be lawful to resist a Prince which does
oppress or ruin a public State, and how far such resistance may be extended,
by whom, how, and by what right, or law it is permitted.
FOr so much as we must here dispute of the lawful authority of a lawful
Prince, I am confident that this question will be the less acceptable to
Tirants, and wicked Princes; for it is no marvel if those which receive no
law, but what their own will, and fancy dictates unto them, be deaf unto the
voice of that law which is grounded upon reason. Bu^ I persuade my self that
good Princes will willingly entertain this discourse, insomuch as they
sufficiently know that all Magistrates, be they of never so high a rank, are
but an inanimated and speaking law, neither though any thing be pressed home
against the bad, can it fall within any inference against the good. Tirants and
Kings, as also good and bad Princes are in a direct diametre opposi^e and
contrary; therefore that which shall be urged against Tirants, is so far
from detracting any thing from Kings, as one the contrary, the more Tirants are
laid open in their proper colors, the more glorious does the true worth, and
dignity of Kings appear: neither can the vicious imperfections the one be laid
open but it gives addition of perfections, and respect to the honor of the
other. But for tirants let them say and think what they please, that shall be
the least of my care; for it is not to them, but again them that I write; for
Kings I believe that they will readily consent to that which is propounded, for
by true proportion of reason they ought as much to hate Tirants and wicked
governors. as Shepeards hate wolves, Physicians, Impoysoners, true Prophets,
false Doctors for it must necessarily occur that reason infuseth into good
Kings as much hatred against Tirants, as nature imprinteth in dogs against
wolves, for as the one lives by rapine and spoil, so the other is borne or
bred to redress and prevent all such outrages. It may be the flatterers of
tirants will cast a supercilious aspect on these lines; but if they were not
past all grace they would rather blush for shame I very well know that the
friends and faithful servants of Kings will not only approve and lovingly
entertayn this disconrse but also with their best abilities defend the contents
thereof accordingly then as the render shall find himself moved either with
content or dislike in the reading hereof, let him know that by that he shall
plainly discover either the affection, or hatred that he bears to Tirants, let
us now enter into the matter.

Kings are made by the People.
We have showed before that it is God, that does appoint Kings, which chooses
them, which gives the Kingdom to them: now we say that the people establish
Kings, puts the Scepter into their hands, and which with their suffrages,
approves the election. God would have it done in this manner, to the end, that
the Kings should acknowledge, that after God they held their power and
Sovereignty from the people, and that it might the rather induce them, to apply
and addres the utmost of their care and thoughts for the profit of the people,
without being puffed with any vain immagination: that they were formed of any
matter more excellent then other men; for which they were raised so high above
others: as if they were to command over slocks of sheep, or herds of Cattle;
but let them remember and know, that they are of the same mould and condition
as others, raised from the earth by the voice and acclamations: now as it were
upon the shoulders of the people unto their thrones, that they might afterward
bear on their own shoulders the greatest burdens of the Commonwealth. Diverse
ages before that, the people of Israel demanded a King. God gave and appointed
the Law of royal governmen^ contained in the 17. Chapter. ver. 14. of Deuteronomy.
when says Moses, thou art come unto ^he Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell therein, and shall say, I will set
a King over me like as all the Nations that are about me, thou shall in any
wise set him whom the Lord thy God shall choose from amongst thy brethren, etc.
You see here, that the election of the King is attributed to God, the
establishment to the people: now when the practice of this law came in use, see
in what manner they proceeded. The Elders of Israel which presented 1 Samuel 8. 5.
the whole body of the people, (under this name of Elders, are comprehended the
Captains, the Centurions, Commanders over fifties and tenns, Judges, provosts;
but principally the chiefest of tribes) came to meet Samuel in Ramah, and not
being willing longer to endure the government of the sons of Samuel, whose
ill carriage had justly drawn on them: the peoples dislike, and withal
persuading themselves that they had found the means to make their wars
hereafter with more advantage they demanded 1 Samuel 9. 16.
a King of Samuel, who asking Council of the Lord, he made known that he had
chosen Saul for the Governor of his people. Then Samuel anointed Saul, and
performed all those rights which belong to the election of a King required by
the people. Now this might perhaps have seemed sufficient, if Samuel had
presented to the people the King that was chosen by God, and had admonished
them all to become good and obedient subjects. Notwithstanding to the end, that
the King might know that he was established 1 Samuel 20. 18. etc.
by the people, Samuel appointed the Estates to meet at Mispah, where being
assembled as if the business were but then to begin, and nothing had already
been done, to be brief as if the election of Saul were then only to be treated
of, the lot is cast and falls on the Tribe of Benjamin, after on the family of
Matri, and lastly on Saul, born of that family who was the same that God had
chosen; Then by the consent of all the people Saul was declared King. Finally,
to the that Saul nor any other might attribute the aforesaid 1 Samuel 11. 14.
business to chance of lot, after that Saul had made some proof of his valor
in raising the siege of the Ammonites in Iabesh Gilead: some of the people
pressing the business he was again confirmed King in a full assembly at
Gilgal; ye see that he whom God had chosen, and the lo^ had separated from all
the rest, is established King by the suffrages of the people.

And for David, by the Commandment of God, and in a manner more evident ^ Sam.
^6.
then the former, after the rejection of Saul, Samuel anointed for King over
Israel David chosen by the Lord, which being done the spirit of the Lord
presently left saul, and wrought in a special manner in David; But David
notwithstanding raigns not, but was compeled to save himself in deserts and
rocks, oftentimes falling upon the very brim of destruction, and never reigned
as King till after the death of Saul: for then by the suffrages of all the
people of Judah he was first chosen King of Judah, and seven years after by
the consent of all Israel, he was inaugurated King of Israel in Hebron. So
then he is anointed first by the Prophet at the commandment of God, as a
token he was chosen, secondly by the commandment of the people when he was
established King. And that to the end that Kings may always remember that it
is from God; but by the people, and for the peoples sake that they 2 Samuel 2.
do raignt, and that in there glory they say not (as is there custom) that
they hold their Kingdom only of God and there sword, but withal add that it
was the people which first girt them with that sword. The same order offered in
Solomon, although he was the Kings son God has chosen Solomon, to sit upon
the Throne of his Kingdom, and by express words 2 Samuel 7. 13. 1 Kings 3.
Chron. 28. 5 1 Kings 2. 32. 1 Chronicles. 28. 1. and 20. 22. 24.
had promised David to be with him and assist him as a Father his soon. David
had with his one mouth designed Solomon to be successor to his Crown in the
presence of some of the principal of his Court. But this was not enough and
therefore David assembled at Jerusalem the Princes of Israel, the heads of the
Tribes the Captains of the Soldiers and ordinance officers of the Kings, the
centurions and other Magistrates of Towns together with his sons, the noble men
and worthiest personages of the Kingdom, to consult and resolve upon the
election. In this Assembly after they had called upon the name of God, Solomon
by the consent of the whole congregation proclaimed and anointed for King, and
sat (so says the text) upon the Throne of Israel then and not before the
Princes the Noblemen his brothers themselves do him homage, and take the Oath
of Allegiance. And to the end, that it may not be said, that that was only
done to avoid occasion of difference, which might arise amongst the brothers
the sons of David about the succession, we read 2 Kings 20. 2 Chronicles. 20. 36.
and 22. 1. and 36, 1.
that the other following Kings have in the same manner been established in
their places it is said, that after the death of Solomon, the people assembled
to create his son Rehoboam King. After that Amaziah was killed, Ozias his
only son was chosen King by all the people, Och^sias after Ioram, Ioachim,
the son of Josias, after the disease of his Father, whose piety might well
seem to require that without any other solemnity, notwithstanding both he and
the other were chosen and invested into the royal Throne by the suffrages of
the people. To which also belongs, that which Hushai said to Absolam, nay; but
2 Samuel 16. 18.
whom the Lord and this people, and all the men of Israel choose, his will I be,
and with him will I abide, which is as much as to say, I will follow the King
lawfully established, and according to the accustomed order; wherefore although
that God had promised to his people a perpetual Lamp, to wit, a King, and a
continual successor of the Line of David, and that the successor Psalm. 132.
11. 12.
of the Kings of this people were approved by the word of God himself.
Notwithstanding, since that we see that the Kings have not reigned, before the
people had ordained and installed them, with requisite Ceremonies: it may be
collected from this, that the Kingdom of Israel, was hereditary, if we consider
David and the promise made to him, and that it was wholly elective, if we
regard the particular persons. But to what purpose is this, but to make it
apparent, that the election is only mentioned, that the Kings might have
always in their remembrance, that they were raised to their dignities by the
people, and therefore they should never forget during life, in what a strict
bond of observance they are tied to those from whom they have received all
their greatness. We read that the Kings of the Heathen have been established
also by the people; for as when they had either troubles at home, or wars
abroad, some one in whose ready valor, and discreet integrity, the people
did principally rely and repose their greatest Herodi. lib. 1. Cicero. 1. de
offici. Tit. Livi. lib. 1.
confidence, him they presently with a universal consent constituted King.
Cicero says, that amongst the Medes, Deioces from a Judge of private
controvercies was for his uprightness, by the whole people elected King, and
in the same manner were the first Kings chosen amongst the Romans. Insomuch,
that after the death of Romulus, the interrayde and Government of the hundred
senators, being little acceptable to the Quiutes it was agreed that from thence
forward, the Kings should be chosen by the suffrages of the people, and the
approbation of the senate. Forquius Superbus was therefore esteemed a tyrant,
because being chosen neither by the people nor the senate, he intruded himself
into the Kingdom only by force and usurpation; Wherefore Julius Caesar long
after though he gained the Empire by the sword, yet to the end he might add
some shadow or pretense of right to his former intrusion, he caused himself to
be declared both by the people and senate perpetually dictator. Augustus his
adopted son would never take on him as inheriter of the Empire, although he
were declared so by the testaments of Caesar; but always held it as of the
people and senate. The same also did Tiberius, Caligula and Claudius, and the
first that assumed the Empire to himself without any color of right, was Nero
who also by the senate was condemned. Briefly for so much as none were ever
born with Crowns one their heads, and sceptes in their hands, and that no man
can be a King by himself nor reign without people; whereas on the contrary the
people may subsist of themselves, and were long before they had any Kings, it
must of necessity follow that Kings were at the first constituted by the
people, And although the sons and dependants of such Kings inheriting their
fathers virtues, may in a sort seem to have rendered their Kingdom heriditary
to their offsprings and that in some Kingdoms and Countries the right of free
election seems in a sort buried; yet notwithstanding in all well ordered
Kingdoms this custom is yet remaining, the sons do not succeed the fathers,
before the people first have as it were a new established them by their new
approbation; neither were they acknowledged in qual^ity as inheriting it from
the dead; but approved and accounted Kings then only when they were invested
with the Kingdom, by receiving the Scepter and Diadem from the hands of those
who represent the Majesty of the people. One may see most evident marks of this
in Christian Kingdoms, which are at this day esteemed heriditary; for the
French King, he of Spain and England and others are commonly sacred, and as it
were put into posession of their authority by the Peers, Lords of the Kingdom,
and Officers of the Crown which represent the body of the people; no more nor
less then the Emperors of Germany are chosen by the Electors, and the Kings
of Polonia, by the yavvodes and Pallatines of the Kingdom, where the right of
Election is yet in force. In like manner also, the Cities give no royal
reception, nor entries unto the King but also their inauguration, and anciently
they used not to count the times of their reign but from the day of their
coronation, the which was strictly observed in France. But least the continued
course of some successions should deceive us, we must take notice that the
estates of the Kingdoms have often preferred the cosen before the son, the
younger brother before the Elder as in France Lewis was preferred before his
brother Robert Earl of Eureux: [Annalos Gill^j] in like manner Henry before
Robert nephew to Cap^t. Nay which is more by authority of the people in the
same Kingdom, the Crown has bin transported (the lawful inheritors living)
from one lineage to another as from that of Meroue to that of the Charlemaint,
and from that of the Charlemains to tha^ of the Capets, the which has also
been done in other Kingdoms as the best Historians testify; But not to wander
from France the long continuance and power of which Kingdom may in some sort
plead for a ruling authority, and where succession seems to have obtained most
^^putation. We read that Pharamond was chosen in the year 419 Pepin in the year
751. Charles the Great and Carleman the son of Pepin in the year 768 without
having any respect to their Fathers former estate. Carleman dying in the year
772. his portion fell not presently into the posession of his brother Charles
the great, as it ordinarily happens in the succession of inheritances, but by
the Ordinance of the people and the estates of the Kingdom he is invested with
it. the same author witnesses that in the year 812 Lewis the Courteous
although he were the son of Charles the great was also elected: and in the
Testament of Charlimane inserted into the history written by Nanclere,
Charlemane does entreat the people to choose by a geuerall assembly of the
Estates of the Kingdom which of his Grandchildren or Nephews the people
pleased, and commanding the Uncles to observe and obey the Ordinance of the
people, by means whereof Charles the bald nephew to Lewis the courtious and
Judith, does declare himself to be chosen King, as Aimonius the French
historian recites.

To conclude in a word, all Kings at the first were altogether elected, and
those which at this day seem to have their Crown and Royal authority by
inheritance, have or should have first and principally their confirmation from
the people. Briefly although the people of some Countries have been accustomed
to choose their Kings of such a lineage which for some notable merrits have
worthily deserved i^; yet we must believe that they choose the stock it self and
not every branch that proceeds from it neither are they so tied to that
election, as if the successor degenerate they may not choose another more
worthy, neither those which come and are the next of that stock are borne Kings
but created such, nor called Kings but Princes of the blood royal.

The whole body of the people is above the King.
Now seeing that the people choose and establish their Kings, it follows that
the whole body of the people is above the King; for it is a thing most evident
that he which is established by another is accounted under him that has
established him, and he which receives his authority from an other is less
then he from whom he denies his power. Potiphar the Egyptian sets Joseph
over all his House, Nebuchadoezzar Danniel over the Province of Babylon, Darius
the sixscore governors over the kingdom. It is commonly said that Mrs.
establish their servants, Kings their officers: In like manner also the people
establish the King as administrator of the Commonwealth. G^od kings have not
disdained this title; yea, he had ones themselves have affected it: insomuch, as
for the space of diverse Ages no Roman Emperor (if it were not some absolute
tyrant, as Nero, Domitian, Caligula) would suffer himself to be called Lord;
Furthermore, it must necessarily be that Kings were instituted for the peoples
sake, neither can it be, that for the pleasure of some hundred of men, and
without doubt more foolish and worse then many of the other, all the rest were
made, but much rather that th^se hundred were made for the us^ and service of
all the other, And reason requires that he be preferred above the other, who
was made only to and for his occasion: so it is, that for the ships sa^e, the
owner appoints a pylot over her, who sits at the he^m, and looks that she keeps
her course, nor run nor upon any dangerous sheilf: the pylot doing his duty is
obeyed by the Mariners; yea, and of him himself that is owner of the vessel,
notwithstanding, the p^lot is a servant as well as the least in the ship from
whom he only differs in this that he servs in better place then they do. In a
Common-wea^th common^y compared to a ship the King holds the p^nce of pylot,
the people in general are owners of the vessel, obeying the pylot whilst he is
^a^e^ull of the public good a^though this pylot neither is nor ought to be
esteemed other then servant to the public, as a Judge or General in war
differs little from other officers, but that he is bound to bear greater
burdens, and expose himse^f to more dangers. By the same reason also which the
King gains by acquist of arms, be (...) possesses himself of Frontier places
in warring on the enemy, or that which he gets b^ esch^ats or consistations, he
gets it to the Kingdom and not to himself; to wit, to the people, of whom the
Kingdom is composed; no more, nor less, then the servane does for his master,
neither may one contract or ob^iege themse^vs to him, but by and with reference
to the authority derived from the people. Furthermore, there is an infinite
sort of people which ^ive with out a King; but we cannot imagine a King without
people, And those which have bin raised to the Royal dignity, were not advanced
because they excel^ed other men in beauty and come^iness, nor in some
excellency of nature to govern them as shepherds do their flocks, but rather
being made out of the same mass with the rest of the people, they should
acknowledge that for them, they as it were borrow their power and authority,
The ancient custom of the French represents that exceeding wel^, for they used
to lift up on a buckler, and sa^ute him King whom they had chosen. And
wherefore is it said, I pray you that kings h^ve an infinite number of eyes, a
million of ears, with extreme long hands, and feet exceeding swift? is it
because they are like to Argos, Gerion, Midas, and diverse others ^o celebrated
by the Poets? No truly, but it is said in regard of all the people, whom the
business principal^y concerns, who lend to the king for the good of the
Commonwealth, their eye^, their ears, their means their facu^ties. Let the
people forsake the king, he presently falls to the ground, although before his
hearing and sight seemed most excellent, and that he was strong and in the best
disposition that might be, yea that he seemed to triumph in all magnificence,
yet in an instant he will become most vi^e and contemptible, to be brief,
instead of those divine honors wherewith all men adored him, he shall be
compe^ed Dionisius for his Ti^a^^ie driven o^t of C^cil^e was fo^s^d to ta^e
that course of lif^ upon him.
to become a Pedant, and whip children in the schoo^ at Corinth. Take away but
the basis, to this Giant, and l^^e the Rodian Colosse he p^esently tumbles on
the ground, and falls into pieces. Seeing th^n that the King is estab^ished in
this degree by the people and for their sake, and that he cannot subsist
without them, who can think it strange then for us to conclude, that the people
are above the King. Now that which we speak of al^ the people universally,
ought also to be understood as has been delivered in the 2. question, of those
which in every Kingdom or town do ^^^wfully represent the body of the people,
and which ordinarily (or at lest should be) ca^ed the officers of the Kingdom,
or of the crown, and not of the King; For the officers of the ^ing it is he
which places and displaceth them at his pleasure, yea, after his death they
have no more power, and are accounted as dead. On the contrary, the officers of
the Kingdom receive their authority from the people in the general Assembly of
the states (or at the least were accustomed so anciently to have done) and
cannot be disauthorised but by them, so then the one depends of the King, the
other of the Kingdom, those of the sovereign officer of the ^ingdom which is
the King himself, these of the sovereignty it self, that is of the people, of
which sovereignty both the King, all his officers, and all his officers of the
^ingdom, ought to depend, the charge of the one has proper relation to the
care of the ^ings person: that of the other to look that the commonwealth
receive no damage, the first ought to serve and assist the King, as all
domestique servants are bound to do to their masters the other to preserve the
rights and privileges of the people, and to carefully hinder the Prince that
he neither omit the things that may advantage the state, nor commit any thing
that may endammage the public.

Briefly, the one are Servants and domestiques of the Kings, and received into
their places to obey his person: the other, on the contrary, are as Associates
to the King in the administration of justice, participating of the Royal power
and authority, being bound to the utmost of their power, to be assisting in the
managing of the affairs of State, as well as the King who is as it were
President amongst them, and principal only in order and degree.

Therefore, as all the whole People is above the King, and likewise taken in
one entire body are in authority before him; yet being considered one by one
they are all of them under the King. It is easy to know how far the power of
the first Kings extended, in that Ephron King of the Hittites could not grant
Abraham the Sepulcher, but in the presence and with the consent of the People:
neither could Hemor the Hevite Genesis 34.
King of Sichem contract an alliance with Jacob, without the Peoples assent,
and confirmation thereof; because it was then the custom to refer the most
important affairs to be dispensed and resolved in the general Assemblies of
the People. This might easily be practiced in those kingdoms, which were then
almost confined within the circuit of one town.

But since that Kings began to extend their limits, and that it was impossible
for the People to assemble together all into one place because of their great
numbers, which would have occasioned confusion the Officers of the kingdom
were established, which should ordinarily preserve the rights of the People, in
such sort notwithstanding, as when extraordinary occasion required the People
might be assembled, or at the least such an abridgement as might by the
principallest Members be a Representation of the whole Body. We see this order
established in the kingdom of Israel, which (in the judgment of the wisest
Politicians) was excellently ordered. The King had his Cupbearers his Carvers,
his Chamberlains and Stewards. The kingdom had her Officers, to wit, the 71.
Elders, and the heads and chief chosen out of all the Tribes, which had the
care of the Public Faith in Peace and War.

Furthermore, the kingdom had in every town Magistrates, which had the
particular government of them, as the former were for the whole kingdom. At
such times as affairs of consequence were to be treated of, they assembled
together, but nothing that concerned the public state could receive any solid
determination. David assembled the Officers of 1. Chron. 29. 1 1. Chron. 13. 1.
his kingdom when he desired to invest his Son Solomon with the Royal Dignity;
when he would have examined and approved that manner of policy, and managing of
affairs, that he had revived and restored, and when there was question of
removing the Ark of the Covenant.

And because they represented the whole people, it is said in the History, that
all the people assembled. These were the same Officers that delivered Jonathan
from death, condemned by the sentence of the King, by which it appears, that
there might be an appeal from the King to the People.

After that the kingdom was divided through the pride of Reoboam, ^ Sam. ^^.
45.
the Council at Jerusalem composed of 71. Ancients, seems to have such
authority, that they might judge the King, as well as the King might judge
every one of them in particular.

In this Council was President the Duke of the house of Judah, to wit, ^ Chron.
1^. Neh. 11. 9.
some principal man chosen out of that Tribe; as also, in the City of
Jerusalem there was a Governor chosen out of the Tribe of Benjamin residing
there. This will appear more manifest by examples, Jeremy sent by God to
denounce to the Jews the destruction of Jerusalem, was therefore condemned
first by the Priests and Prophets, in whose hands was ^or. 16. 9 (...).
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction afterward by all the people of the City;
that is, by the ordinary Judges of Jerusalem, to wit, the Milleniers, and the
Centurions: Finally, the matter being brought before the Princes of Judah, who
were the 71. Elders assembled, and set near to the new Gate of the Temple, he
was by them acquitted.

In this very Assembly, they did discreetly condemn, in express terms, the
wicked and cruel act of the King Ichoiakin, who a little before had caused the
Prophet Vriah to be slain, who also foretold the destruction of Jerusalem.

We read in another place that Ledechias held in such reverence the authority
of this Council, that he was so far from delivering of Jeremy (...) 37. 38.
from the dungeon, wherein to the 71. had cast him that he durst scant remove
him into a less rigorous prison. They persuading him to give his consent to
the putting to death the Prophet Jeremy, he answered, that he was in their
hands, and that he might not oppose them in my thing. The same King fearing
least they might make information against him, to bring him to an account for
certain Speeches he had used to the Prophet Jeremy, was glad to fe^gn an untrue
excuse It appears by this, that in the kingdom of Judah this Council was above
the King, in this kingdom, I say not fashioned or established by Plato or
Arictotle, but by the Lord God, himself being Author of all their order, and
supreme Moderator in that Monarchy. Such were the seven Magi or Sages in the
Persian Empire, who had almost a paraleld dignity with the King, and were
termed the ears and eyes of the King, who also never dissented from Arist. in
Pol. lib.^. c. 11. l. 3. c. 7.
the judgment of those Sages.

In the kingdom of Sparta there was the Ephori, to whom an appeal lay from the
judgment of the King, and who, as Aristotle says, had authority also to judge
the Kings themselves.

In Egypt the people were accustomed to choose and give officers to the King, to
the end they might hinder and prevent any incroachment, or usurpt authority,
contrary to the Laws. Now as Aristotle does ordinarily term those lawful
Kings, which have for their Assistants, such officers Arist. in pol. l. 5. c.
11.
or Counselors: so also makes he no difficulty to say, that where they be
wanting, there can be no true Monarchy, but rather a tyranny, absolutely
barbarous, or at the least such a Dominion, as does most nearly approach
tyranny.

In the Roman Commonwealth, such were the Senators, and the Magistrates
created by the people the tribune of those which were called Celerees, the
Preter or Provost of the City, and others, insomuch as there lay an appeal from
the King to the People, as Seneca declares by diverse testimonies drawn from
Ciceroes books of the Commonwealth, and the History of Oratius sufficiently
shows, who being condemned by the Judges for killing his sister, was acquitted
by the people.

In the times of the Emperors, there was the Senate the Consults, the Pretors,
the great Provosts of the Empire, the Governors of Provinces, attributed to
the Senate and the People, all which were called the Magistrates and Officers
of the people of Rome. And therefore, when that by the decree of the Senate,
the Emperor Maximinus was declared enemy Herodi. ^ 8.
of the Commonwealth, and that Maximus and Albinus were created Emperors by
the Senate, the men of war were sworn to be faithful, and obedient to the
people of Rome the Senate, and the Emperors. Now for the Empires and public
States of these times (except those of Turquie, Muscovie, and such like, which
are rather a rapsody of Robbers, and barbarous intruders, then any lawful
Empires) there is not one, which is not, or has not heretofore been governed
in the manner we have described. And if through the connivency and sloth of
the principal Officers, the successors have found the business in a worse
condition, those which have for the present the public Authority in their
hands, are notwithstanding bound as much as in them lies to reduce things into
their primary estate and condition.

In the Empire of Germany which is conferred by election, there is the Electors
and the Princes both secular and Ecclesiastical, the Countess, Barons, and
Deputies of the Imperial Cities, and as all these in their proper places are
Solicitors for the public good likewise in the Diets do they represent the
Majesty of the Empire, being obliged to advise, and carefully foresee, that
neither by the Emperors, partiality, hate nor affection, the public State do
suffer, or be interressed. And for this reason, the Empire has its
Chancellor, as well as the Emperor his, both the one and the other have their
peculiar Officers and Treasurers apart. And it is a thing so notorious, that
the Empire is preferred before the Emperor, that it is a common saying, That
the Emperor does homage to the Empire.

In like manner, in the Kingdom of Polonia, there is for Officers of the Crown,
the Bishops, the Palatins, the Castellains, the Nobility, the Deputies Speculum
saxonicum.
of Towns and Provinces assembled extraordinarily, before whom; and with whose
consent, and no where else, they make new Laws, and determinations concerning
wars. For the ordinary Government there, is the Councillors of the kingdom,
the Chancellor of the State, etc. although notwithstanding, the king have his
Stewards, Chamberlains, Servants and Domestiques. Now if any man should demand
in Polonia who were the greater, the King or all the people of the kingdom
represented by the Lords and Magistrates; he should do as much, as if he asked
at Veni^e, if the Duke were above the Seigniory. But what shall we say of
Kingdoms, which are said to go by hereditary succession? We may indeed conclude
the very same. The kingdom of France heretofore preferred before all other,
both in regard of the excellency of their Laws, and Ai^oni. lib. 5. c. 26. in
Carolo ^^lv^.
majesty of their Estate may pass with most as a ruling case. Now although
that those which have the public commands in their hands, do not discharge
their duties as were to be desired, it follows not though, that they are not
bound to do it. The King has his high steward of his Household his
Chamberlains, his Masters of his games, Cup-bearers, and others, whose o^^^ces
were wont so to depend on the person of the King, that after the death of their
Mast^r, the ro^^ces were void. And indeed at the Funeral of the King, the Lord
high Steward in the presence of all the officers and servants of the
household, breaks his staff of office, and says, Our Master is dead, let
every one provide for himself. On the other side, the kingdom has her
officers, to wit, the Mayor of the Palace, which since has been called the
Constable, the Marshals, the Admiral, the Chancellor or great Referendary,
the Secretaries, the Treasurers and others, which heretofore were created in
the Assembly of the three Estates the Clergy, the Nobility, and the People.

Since that, the Parliament of Paris was made Sedentary, they are not thought
to be established in their places, before they have been first received and
approved by that course of Parliament, and may not be dismissed nor deposed,
but by the authority and consent of the same. Now all these officers take their
oath to the Kingdom, which is as much as to say, to the people in the first
place, then to the King which is protector of he Kingdom, the which appears by
the tenor of the oath. Above all, the Constable, who receiving the Sword from
the King, has it girded unto him with this charge, That he maintain and defend
the Commonwealth, as appears by the words that the King then pronounces.

Besides, the kingdom of France has the Peers (so called either for S. Filius
fam. instit. quib. mod. jus patriae pot. solvitur.
that they are the Kings companions, or because they are the Fathers of the
Commonwealth) taking their denominations from the several Provinces of the
kingdom, in whose hands the King at his inauguration takes his oath, as if all
the people of the kingdom were in them present, which shows that these twelve
Peers are above the King. They on the other side swear, That they will preserve
not the King, but the Crown, that they will assist the Commonwealth with their
council, and therefore will be present with their best abilities to council
the Prince both in peace and war, as appears plainly in the Paitentee of their
Peership.

And they therefore have the same right as the Peers of the Court, Renatus
ch^pinus' lib. 3.
which according to the Law of the Lumbards, were not only associates to the
Lord of the Fee in the judgment of cau^es, but also did take an ^ccount, and
judge the differences that happenod between the Lord and his vassal.

We may also know, that those Peers of France did often discuss suits and
differences between the King and his Subjects: Insomuch, that when Charles the
6. would have given sentence against the Duke of Britain they opposed it,
alleging that the discussing of that business belonged properly to the
Peers, and not to the king, who might not in any (...) derogate from their
authority.

Therefore it is, that yet at this day the Parliament of Paris is called the
Court of Peers, being in some sort constituted Judge between the king and the
people; yea, between the king and every private person, and is bound and ought
to maintain the meanest in the kingdom against the kings Attorney, if he
undertake any thing contrary to law.

Furthermore, if the king ordain any thing in his Council, if he treat any
agreement with the Princes his neighbors, if he begin a War, or make peace,
as lately with Charles the 5. the Emperor, the Parliament ought to interpose
their authority, and all that which concerns the public State must be there
inregistred; neither is there any thing firm and stable which the Parliament
does not first approve. And to the end, that the Councillors of that
Parliament should not fear the king, formerly they attained not to that place,
but by the nomination of the whole body of the Court; neither could they be
dismissed for any lawful cause, but by the authority of the said Body.

Furthermore, if the Letters of the King be not subsigned by a Secretary of the
Kingdom, at this day called a Secretary of State, and if the Letters Pattents
be not sealed by the Chancellor, who has power also to cancel them, they are
of no force or value. There is also Dukes, Marquesses, Earls. Vicounts, Barons,
Seneschabs, and in the cities and good towns Mayors, Baylistes, Lieutenants,
Capitols, Consuls, Sindiques, Sheriffs, and others which have special
authority through the Circuit of some countries or towns to preserve the people
of their jurisdiction. Time it is, that at this day some of these dignities ere
become hereditary. Thus much concerning the ordinary Magistrates.

The Assembly of the three Estates.
Besides all this, anciently every year, and since less often, to wit, when
some urgent necessity required it, the general or three Estates were
assembled, where all the Provinces and Towns of any worth, to w^t, the
Burgesses Nobles, and Ecclesiastical persons, did all of them send their
Deputies, and there they did publicly deliberate and conclude of that which
concerned the public state. Always the authority of this Assembly was such,
that what was there determined, whether it were to treat peace, or make war, or
create a Regent in the Kingdom, or impose some new tribute, it was ever held
firm and inviolable; nay, which is more by the authority of this Assembly, the
Kings convinced of loose intemporancy, or of insufficiency, for so great a
charge or tyranny, were disthronized; yes, their whole Races were for ever
excluded from their succession to the Kingdom, no more, nor less, as their
Progenitors were by the same authority formerly called to the administration of
the same Kingdom. Those whom the consent and approbation of the Estates had
formerly raised, were by the dissent and disallowing of the same afterward
cast down. Those which tracing in the virtuous steps of their Ancestors were
called to that dignity, as if it had been their inheritance, were driven out
and dis-inherited for their degenerating ingratitude, and for that being
tainted with insupportable vices, they made themselves incapable and unworthy
of such honor.

This shows, that succession was tolerated to avoid practices, close and
underhand canvasing, discontents of persons refused; contentions, interraines,
and other discommodities of elections. But on the other part, when successiou
brought other mischiefs more pernicious, when tyranny trampled on the
Kingdom, and when a Tyrant possessed himself of the Royal Throne, the
Medicine proving much worse then the Disease: then the Estates of the Kingdom
lawfully assembled in the name of all the people, have ever maintained their
authority, whether it were to drive out a Tyrant, or other unworthy King, or to
establish a good one in his place. The ancient French had learned that of the
Gauses, as Caesar shows in his Commentaries. For Ambiorix King of the Eburons,
or Leigeons confesses, That such were the condition of the Gaulish Empire,
that the people lawfully assembled, had no less power over the King, then the
Caes. l. 5. and 7. de bello Gal. lico.
King had over the people. The which appears also in Vircingentorix, who gives
an account of his actions before the Assembly of the people.

In the kingdoms of Spain, especially Aragon, Valentia, and Catalonia, there is
the very same For that which is called the Iustitia Major in Aragon has the
Sovereign authority in it self. And therefore, the Lords which represent the
people proceed so far, that both at the inaugaration of the King, as also at
the Assembly of the Estates, which is observed every t^ird year, to say to the
King in express words that which follows, We which are as much worth as you,
and have more power then you, choose you King upon these and these conditions,
and there is one between you and us which commands over you, to wit, the
Iustitia Major of Aragon, which oftentimes refuses that which the King
demands, and forbids that which the King ^njoynes.

In the kingdoms of England and Scotland the Sovereignty seems to be in the
Parliament, which heretofore was held almost every year. They call Parliaments
the Assembly of the Estates the kingdom, in the which the Bishops Earls,
Barons, Deputies of Towns and Provinces deliver their opinions, and resolve
with a joint consent of the affairs of State, the authority of this Assembly
has been so sacred and inviolable, that the King durst not abrogate or alter
that which had been there once decreed.

It was that which heretofore called and installed in their charges all the
chief officers of the kingdom; yea, and sometimes the ordinary councellers of
that which they call the Kings privy Councels. In sum, the other christian
Kingdoms, as Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark, Swedea, and the rest, they have their
officers apart from the Kings; and Histories, together with the examples that
we have in these our times, suff^ciently demonstrate that these Officers and
Estates have known how to make use of their authori^y, even to the deposing
and driving out of the tyrannors and unworthy Kings.

We must nor therefore esteem that this cuts too short the wings of Royal
authority, and that it is as much as to take the Kings head from his shoulders.

We believe that God is Almighty, neither think we it any thing diminishes his
power, because he cannot sin: neither say we, that his Empire is less to be
esteemed, because it cannot be neither shaken, nor cast down: neither also
must we judge a King to be too much abused, if he be withheld by others from
falling into an error, to which he is overmuch inclined, or for that by the
wisdom and discretion of some of his Counselors, his kingdom is preserved
and kept entire and safe, which otherwise, happily by his weakness or
wickedness might have been ruined. Will you say that a man is less
healthful, because he is environed with discreet Physicians, which council
him to avoid all intemperance, and forbid him to eat such meats as are
obnoxious to the stomach, yea, and which purge him many times against his will
and when he resists? which will prove his better friends, whether these
Physicians which are studiously careful of his health, or those Sicophants
which are ready at every turn to give him that which must of necessity hasten
his end? We must then always observe this distinction. The first are the
friends of the King: The other are the friends of Francis which is King. The
friends of Francis are those which serve him: The friends of the King are the
officers and servants of the kingdom. For seeing the King has this name,
because of the kingdom, and that it is the people which give being and
consistence to the kingdom, the which being lost, or ruined, be must needs
cea^e to be a King, or at the least not so truly a King, or else we must take
a shadow for a substance.

Without question, those are most truly the Kings friends, which are most
industriously careful of the welfare of his kingdom, and those his worst
enemies which neglect the good of the Common, wealth, and seek to draw the King
into the same lapse of error.

And as it is impossible to separate the kingdom from the people, nor the King
from the Kingdom, in like manner, neither can the friends of the King be
dis-joyned from the friends of the people, and the Kingdom.

I say further, that those which with a true affection love Francis, had rather
see him a King then a Subject. Now seeing they cannot see him a King, it
necessarily follows, that in loving Francis, they must also love the Kingdom.

But those which would be esteemed more the friends of Francis, then of the
kingdom and the people, are truly flatterers, and the most pernicious enemies
of the King and public State.

Now if they were true friends indeed, they would desire and endeavor that the
King might become more powerful, and more assured in his estate according to
that notable saying of Theopompus King of Sparta, after the Ephores or
Controllers of the Kings were instituted, Tkemore (said he) are appointed by
the People to watch over, and look to the affairs of the Kingdom, the more
those that govern shall have credit, and the more safe and happy shall be the
State.

Whether prescription of time can take away the right of the people.
But peradventure, some one will reply, you speak to us here of Peers, of Lords
and Officers of the Crown. But I for my part see not any, but only some shows
and shadows of antiquity as if they were to be represented on a stage I see not
for the present searce any tract of that ancient liberty, and authority, nay
which is worse a great part, if not all, of those officers take care of nothing
but their particular affairs, and almost, if not altogether, serve as
flatterers about those Kings who jointly toss the poor people like ^ennice,
bals: hardly is there one to be found that has compussion on, or will lend a
helping hand to the miserable subjects, fleaed and scorched to the very bones,
by their insolent and insupportable oppression: If any be but houth to have
such a desire, they are presently condemned as Rebels and seditious, and are
constrained either to fly wi^h much discommodity, or else must run hazard both
of life and liberty. What can be answered to this? the business goes thus. The
outragiousnesse of Kings, the ignorance of the party, together with the wicked
connivence of the great ones of the kingdom, has been for the most part such
throughout the World, that the licentious and unbridled power wherewith most
kings are transported and which has made them insupportable, has in a manner
by the length of continuance gained right of prescription, and the people for
want of using it has incitely quit, if not altogether lost their just and
ancient authority. So that it ordinarily happens, that what all men's care ought
to attend on, is for the most part neglected by every man; for what is committed
to the generalty, no man thinks is commended to his custody. Notwithstanding,
no such prescription nor praevarication can justly prejudice the right of the
people: It is commonly said that the Exchequers do admit no ^ale of
prescription against it, much less against the whole body of the people, whose
power transcends the Kings, and in whose right the King assumes to himself that
privilege; for otherwise, wherefore is the Prince only administrator, and the
people true proprietor of the public Exchequer, as we will prove here
presently after. Furthermore, it is not a thing resolved on by all, that no
tyrannous intrusion or usurpation, and continuance in the same course, can by
any length of time prescribe against lawful liberty. If it be objected, that
Kings were enthronized, and received their authority from the people that lived
five hundred years ago, and not by those now living. I answer, that the
Commonwealth never dies, although Kings be taken out of this life one after
another; for as the continual running of the water gives the River a
perpetual being; so the alternative revolution of birth and death renders the
people (quoad hunc mundum) immortal.

And further, as we have at this day the same Seine and Tiber as was 1000.
years ago: in like manner also is there the same people of Germany, France,
and Italy (excepting intermixing of Colonies, or such like) neither can the
lapse of time, nor changing of individuals, alter in any sort the right of
those people. Furthermore, if they say the King receives his kingdom from his
Father, and not from the people, and he from his Grandsa her, and to one from
another upward.

I ask, could the Grandfather or Ancestor, transfer a greater right to his
Successor, then he had himself? If he could not (as without doubt Vlpian de
reg. juris l. 54.
it must need be so) is it not plainly perspi^uous that what the Successor
further arrogates to himself, he may usurp with as sare a conscience, as what a
Thief g^^s by the highway side. The people on the contrary have their right
of eviction entire and whole; although then that the officers of the Crown have
for a time lost or left their ranks, this cannot in any true right prejudice
the people, but rather clear otherwise as one would not grant audience, or show
favor to a slave which had long time held his master prisoner, and did not
only vant himself to be free, but also presumptuously assumed power over the
life and death of his master: neither would any man allow the excuses of a
those, because he had continued in that grade 30. years, or for that he had
been bred in that course, of life by his Father, if he presumed by his long
continuance in that function to prescribe for the lawfulness, but rather the
longer he had continued in his wickedness, the more grievous should be his
punishment: in like manner, the Prince is altogether unsupportable, which
because he succeeds a Tyrant, or has kept the people (by whose suffrages he
holds the Crown) in a long slavery, or has suppressed the Officers of the
kingdom (who should be protectors of the public liberty) that therefore
presumes, that what he affects is lawful for him to effect, and that his will
is not to be restrained or corrected by any positive Law whatsoever. For
prescription in tyranny detracts nothing from the right of the people; nay it
rather much aggravates the Princes on rages. But what if the Peers and
principal officers of the Kingdom makes themselves parts with the King? Wha^ if
betraying the Public, cause the yoke of tyranny upon the peoples neck? shall
it follow, that by this prevatication and treason the authority is devolved
into the King? Does this detract any thing from the aight of the peoples
liberty, or does it add any licencious power to the King? Let the people thank
themselves, say you, who relied on the distoyall loyalty of such men.

But I answer, that these officers are indeed those Protectors whose principal
care and study should be that the people be maintained in the free and absolute
fruition of their goods and liberty. And therefore, in the same manner as if a
treacherous Advoca^e for a sum of money should agree to betray the cause of his
Client into the hands of his Adversary, which he ought to have defended, has
not power for all that to alter the course of justice, nor of a bad cause, to
make a good one, although perhaps for a time he give some color of it.

In like manner this conspiracy of the great ones, combined to ruin the
inferiors cannot disanull the right of the people; in the mean season, those
great ones incur the punishment that the same asors against Prevaricators: and
for the people, the same Law allows them to choose another Advocate, and afresh
to pursue their cause, as if it were then only to begin.

For if the people of Rome condemned their Captains and Generals of their
Armies, because they capitulated with their Enemies to their disadvantage
(although they were drawn to it by necessity, being on the point to be all
overthrown) and would not be bound to perform the Soldiers capitulation: much
less shall a free People be tied to bear the yoke of thraldom, which is cast
on them by those who should and might have prevented it; but being neither
forced nor compelled did for their own particular gain willingly betray those
that had committed their liberty to their custody.

Wherefore Kings were created.
Now seeing that Kings have been ever established by the people, and that they
have had Associates joined with them to contain them within the limits of their
duties, the which Associates considered in particular one by one, are under the
King and altogether in one entire Body are above him. We must consequently see
wherefore first Kings were established, and what is principally their duty. We
usually esteem a thing just and good when it attains to the proper end for
which it is ordained.

In the first place every one consents, That men by nature loving liberty, and
having servitude, born rather to command, then obey, have not willingly
admitted to be governed by another, and renounced as it were the privilege of
nature, by submitting themselves to the commands of others; but for some
special and great profit that they expected from it. For as Esope says, That
the horse being before accustomed to wander as his pleasure, would never have
received the bit into his mouth, nor the Rider on his back, but that he hoped
by that means to overmatch the Bull: neither let us imagine, that Kings were
chosen to apply to their own proper use, the goods that are gotten by the sweat
of their Subjects; for every man loves and cherishes his own, They have not
received the power and authority of the People to make it serve as a Pandar to
their pleasures. for ordinarily, the inferiors hate, or at least envietheir
superiors.

Let us then conclude, that they are established in this place to maintain by
justice, and to defend by force of Arms, both the public State and particular
persons from all damages and outrages, wherefore Saint Augustine says, Those
are properly called Lords and Masters A^ig lib. 16 de civit. dei, c. 15.
which provide for the good and profit of others, as the husband for the wife,
Fathers for their children. They must therefore obey them that provide for
them; although indeed to speak truly, those which govern in this manner, may
in a so^t be said to serve those, whom they command over.

For, as says the same Doctor, they command not for the desire of dominion,
but for the duty they owe to provide for the good of those that are subjected
to them: nor affecting any Lord like domineering, but with charity and singular
affection, desiring the welfare of those that are committed to them.

Seneca in 81 Epistle says, That in the Golden Age, wise men only governed
Kingdoms, they kept themselves within the bounds of moderation, and preserved
the meanest from the oppression of the greatest. They preserved and dissuaded,
according as it advantaged or disadvantaged, the public profit; by their
wisdom, they furnished the Public with plenty of all necessaries, and by
their diser^ion preventes scarcity, by their valor and courage they expelled
dangers by their many benefits they increased and enriched their Subjects, they
pleaded not their duty, in making pompeous shows, but in well-governing their
People. No man made trial what he was able to do against them, because every
one received what he was capable of from them, etc.

Therefore, then to govern is nothing else but to provide for. These proper
ends of commanding, being far the Peoples commodity; the only duty of Kings and
Emperors is to provide for the peoples good, The Kingly dignity to speak
properly is not a Title of Honor, but a weighty and burden some offices It is
not a discharge or vacation from affairs, to run a licentions course of
liberty, but a charge and vocation to all endustrious employments, for the
service of the Commonwealth, the which has some glimpse of honor withit,
because in those first and Golden Ages, no man would have tasted of such
continual troubles, if they had not been sweetened with some relish of honor:
insomuch, as there was nothing more true, then that which was commonly said in
those times. If every man knew with what turmoyles and troubles the Royal
wreath was wrapped withal, no man would vouchsafe to take it up, although it lay
at his feet.

When therefore that these words of mine and thine entered into the Meum and
tuum.
world, and that differences fell amongst fellow Citizens, touching the
propriety of goods and wars amongst neighboring people about the right of
their Confines, the people bethought themselves to have recourse to some one,
who both could and should take order that the poor were not oppressed by the
rich, nor the Patriots wronged by strangers.

Now as wars and suits increased, they chose some one, in whose wisdom and
valor they reposed most confidence. See then wherefore Kings were created in
the first Ages to wit, to administer justice at home, and to be Leaders in the
Wars abroad, and not only to repulse the incursions of the Enemy but also to
reprosse and hinder the devastation and spoiling of the Subjects and their
goods at home; but above all, to expel and drive away all devices and
debanchments far from their Dominions.

This may be proved by all Histories, both divine and profane For the people
of God they had at first no other King but God himself, who dwelt in the
midst of them, and gave answer from between the Cherubins, appointed
extraordinarily Judges and Captains for the wars, by means whereof, the
people thought they had no need of Lieutenants, being honored by the
continual presence of their Sovereign King.

Now when the people of God began to be a weary of the injustice of the Sons of
Samuel, on whose old age they durst no longer rely, they demanded a King after
the manner of other people, saying to 1 Samuel 8 5. ^ and. 20.
Samuel Give us a King as other people have that he may judge us. The^e is
touched the first and principal point of the duty of a King, a little after they
are both mentioned We will have (said they) a King over us like other Nations.
Our King shall judge us, and go in and out before us, and lead our Armies. To
do justice is alwaps set in the first place, for so much as it is an ordinary
and perpetual thing: but wars are extraordinary, and happen as it were
casually.

Wherefore, Aristotle says that in the time of the Herold, all Kings Arist. de
pol. l. 3. c. 11.
were Judges and Captains. For the Lavedemonian Kings, they in his time also
had Sovereign authority only in the Army, and that confined also to the
commandments of the Ephores.

In like manner, the M^des who were ever in perpetual quarrels amongst
themselves, at the length chose Deo^ces for their Judge, who Herod. l. 1.
had carried himself well in the deciding of some particular differences;
presently after they made him King, and gave him Officers and Guards, that he
might more easily suppress the powerful and insolent.

Cicero says, that anciently all Kings were established to administer justice,
and that their institution and that of the Laws, had one and the same end,
which was, that Equity and Right might be d^ly rendered to all men the which
may be verified by the propriety of the words almost in all languages. Kings
are called by the Latins, Reges a regen^^, for that they must rule and govern
the limits and bounds, both of the public and particulars. The names of
Emperors, Princes, and Dukes have relation to their conduct The English word
KING is derived from the Ronigen, which signifies either for^itude or wisdom.
in the wars, and principal places in Combats, and other places of Command.
Likewise the Greeks call them in their Language, Basiles, Archa, Hegemones,
which is to say, props of the people, Princes, Conductors. The Germans and
other Nations use all significant names, and which express, that the duty of a
King consists not in making glorious Paradoes: but that it is an office of a
weighty charge and continual care. But in brief, the Poet Homer calls Kings
the Judges of Cities, and in describing of Hom. lib. 1. Head. Ovid. l. 6 meta.
Agamemno^, he calls him wise, strong, and valiant. As also, Ovid speaking of
Erichtheus, says, that Iustia elubi^^^ ^alid^sne p^^enti^s armis.
it was hard to know, whether Justice or Valor were more transparent in him:
in which these two Poets seems exactly to have described the duties of Kings
and Princes. You see what was the Custom of the Kings of the Heathen Nations;
after whose examples, the Jews demanded and established their Kings.

The Queen of Sheba said also to S^lomon, that God had made him 2 chronicles. 9. 8.
Wisdom, 9. 7.
King over them to do judgment and Justice.

And Solomon himself speaking to God, says. Thou have chosen me to be a King
over thy People, and a Judge of thy Sons and Daughters.

For this cause also the good Kings, as David, Iosephar, and others, being not
able in their own persons to determine all the suits and differences of their
Subjects (although in the causes of greatest importance they received an appeal
always to themselves, as appears in Samuel) 2 Samuel 15. 2. 1 chrou. 23. 4. and
26, 29 2 Chronicles. 19. It Romans 13.
had ever above all things a special care, to establish in all places just and
discreet Judges, and principally still to have an eye to the right
administration of justice, knowing themselves to carry the sword, as well to
chastise wicked and unjust Subjects, as to repulse foreign Enemies.

Briefly, as the Apostles says, The Prince is ordained by God for the good and
profit of the people, being armed with the sword to defend the good from the
violence of the wicked, and when he discharges his duty therein all men owe
him honor and obedience.

Seeing then that Kings are ordained by God and established by no people, to
procure and provide for the good of those which are commit^ed unto them, and
that this good or profit be principally expressed in two things, to wit, in the
administration of justice to their subjects, and in the managing of arms for
the repulsing their ennemies: certainly, we must infer and conclude from
this that the Prince which applies himself to nothing but his peculiar profits,
and pleasures, or to those ends which most readily conduce thereunto, which
contemnes and perverts all laws, which uses his subjects more cruelly then
the barbarest enemy would do, he may truly and easly be called a Tyrant, and
that those which in this manner govern their Kingdoms, be they of never so
large an extent, are more properly unjust pillagers and boose-haiers then
lawful governors.

Whether the Kings be above the law.
We must here yet proceed a little further: for it is demanded whether the
King which presides in the administration of justice have power to resolve and
determine business according to his own will and pleasure? most the Kings be
subject to the law, or does the law depend August. 1. 4. c. 4. and 6. to ^ivita
Dei.
upon the King; the law (says an ancient) is respected by those which
otherwise contemn virtue for it inforceth obedience and ministers conduct in
warfaring and gives viger and luster to justice and equity. Pausanias the
Spartane will answer in a word, that it becomes laws to direct, and men to
yield obedience to their authority, Agositaus King of Sparta says that all
commanders must obey the commandments of the laws, But it shall not be amiss
to cla^^ume this matter a little higher, when people began for justice to seek
to determine their differences, if they met with any private man that did
justly appoint them they were satisfied with it, now for so much as such men
were rarely and with much difficulty met withal, and for that the judgments
of kings received as laws were oftentimes found contrary and difficult, then
the Magistrates and others of great wisdom invented laws, which might speak
to all men in one and the same voice. This being done it was expressly enjoined
to kings that they should be the gardiens and administrators, And sometimes also
for so much as the laws could not fore, see the perticularities of actions to
resolve exactly it was permitted, the king to supply this defect, by the same
natural equity by which the laws were drawn, and for fear least they should
go against law the people appointed them from time to time associates,
counselors, of whom we have formerly made mention, wherefore there is nothing
which exemples the King from obedience which he owes to the law, which he ought
to acknowledge as his Lady and Mistress esteeming nothing can become him worse
then that feminine of which Iurinall speaks; Sic volo, Sic jubeo, sic pro
ratione voluntas. I will, I command, my will shall serve instead of reason,
neither should they think their authority the less because they are confind to
laws, for seeing the law is a divine gift coming from above, which human
societies are happily governed and adddressed to their best and blesseddest
end; those Kings are as ridiculous and worthy of contempts, which repute it a
dishonor to conform them selves to law, as those surveyors which think
themselves disgraced, by using of a rule, a compass, a chain, or other
instruments, which men understanding the art of surveying are accustomed to do,
or a Pilot which had rather sail, according to his fantasy and imagination,
then steer his course by his needle and Sea lard, who can double, but that it
is a thing more profitable and co^venie^t to obey the law, then the King who is
but one man? the law is the soul of a good king it give him motion sense and
life. The King is the Organ and as it were the body by which the Law displays
her forces exercises her function, and expresses her conceptions; now it is a
thing much more reasonable to obey the soul, then the body, the law is the
wisdom of diverse sages; recollected in few words, but many see more clear and
further then one alone, It is much better to follow the Law then any one man's
opinion be he never so acute, the law is reason and wisdom it self, ^ee from
all perturbation, not subject to be moved with choler, ambition, hate, or
acceptances of person^; Entreaties nor threats cannot make it bow nor, bend on
the contrary a man though inducd with reason suffers him self to be lead and
transported with anger, desire of revenge, and other passions which perplex him
in such sort, that he loses his understanding because being composed of
reason and disordered affections he cannot so con^aine himself but some times
his passions becomes his Master Accordingly we see that Valentinian a good
Emperor, permits those of the Empire to have low wines at once, because he was
misled by that impure affection. Because Cambises the son of Gyms became
inamored of his own sister he would therefore have marriages between brother
and sister, be approved and held lawful Cabades King of the Persians
prohibites the punnishment of adulteries we must look for such laws every day
if we will have the law subjects to the King. To come to our purpose the law is
an, understanding mind or rather an obstacle of many understandings the mind
being the seal of all the intelligence faculties is (if I may so term it) a
parcel of divinity: in so much as he who obeys the law seems to obey God, and
receive him for Arbitrator of the ma^^ets in controversy.

But on the contrary, insomuch as man is composed of this divine:
understanding, and of a number of unruly passions; so losing himself in that
brutishness, as he becomes void of reason: and being in that condition, he is
no longer a man, but a beast; he then which desires rather Aristo. lib. de
mundo and lib 3 poli. ca^.
to obey the King, then the Law, seems to preser the commandment of a heast
before that of God.

And furthermore, though Aristotle were the Tutor of Alexander, yet he
confesses, that the divinity cannot so properly be compared to to any thing of
this life, as to the ancient Laws: of well-governed States: he that prefers
the Commonwealth applies himself to Gods Ordinance: but he that leans to the
Kings fancies, instead of Law, prefers brutish sensuality before well-ordered
discretion. To which also the Prophers seems to have respect, who in some
places describe these great Empires, under the representation of ravening
Beasts. But to go on, is not he a very Beast. who had rather have for his guide
a blind and mad man then he which sees both with the eyes of the body, and
mind, a beast rather th^n god. Whence it comes, that though kings as says
Aristotle, for a while, at the first, commanded without restraint of Laws, yet
presently after civilized people reduced i^ ^^em to a lawful condition, by
bi^ding them to keep and observe the Laws: and for this unruly absolute
authority i^ remained only amongst, those which commanded over barbarons
Nations.

He says afterward, that this absolute power was the next degree to plain
tyranny, and he had absolutely called it tyranny, had not these beasts like
Barbarians, willingly subjected themselves unto it. But it will be replied,
that it is unworthy the majesty of Kings, to have their wills bridled by Laws:
but I will say that nothing is more royal then to have our unruly desires
ruled by good laws.

It is much pity to be restrained from that which we would do, it is much
more worse to will that which we should not do, but it is the worst of all to
do that which the Laws forbid.

I hear me thinks a certain Furionius tribune of the people which opposed the
passing of a Law that was made against the excess which then reigned in Rome,
saying. My Masters you are bridled, you are idle and settered with the rude
bonds of servitude, your liberty is lost, a Law is laid on you, that commands
you to be moderate: to what purpose is it to say, you are free, since you may
not live in what excess of pleasure you like. This is the very complaint of
many Kings at this day, and of their Mignior and Flatterers.

The Royal Majesty is abolished, if they may not turn the kingdom tops^e
turvie at their pleasure Kings may go shake their ea^es, if Laws must be
observed.

P^radventure, it is a miserable thing to live, if a mad man may not be
suffered to kill himself when he will.

For what else do those things which violate and abolish Laws, without which,
neither Empires, no nor the very Societies of freebooters Cicero I. ^. ossicii.
can at all subsist?

Let us then reject these de^estable falsinesse and impious vanities of the
Court-Marmonsists, which make kings gods, and receive their sayings as Oracles,
and which is worse are so shameless, as to persuade Kings, that nothing is
just or equitable of it self, but takes its true form of justice or
injustice, according as it pleases the King to ordain, as if he were some god,
which could neither err nor sin at all. Certainly, all that which Gods will
is just, and therefore, suppose it is Gods will, but that must be just with the
Kings will, before it is his will. For it is not just because the King has
appointed it, but that King is just which appoints that to be held for just,
which is so of it self.

We will not then say as Anaxarchus did to Alexander, much perplexed for the
death of his friend Clitus, whom he had killed with his own hands, to wit, that
Themis the Goddess of Justice, fits by Kings sides, as she does by Jupiters,
to approve and confirm whatsoever to them (...) seem good: but rather, she
sits as President over kingdoms, to severely chastise those Kings which wrong
or violate the majesty of the Laws, we can no ways approve that saying of
Thrasimacus the Chaldoncan, That the profit and pleasure of Princes, is the
rule by which all Laws are defined: but rather, that right must limit the
profit of Princes, and the Laws restrain their pleasures. And instead of
approving that which that vil^ainous woman said to Caracalla, that whatsoever
he desired was allowed him: We will maintain that nothing is lawful but what
the law permits.

And absolutely rejecting that detestable opinion of the same Caracalla, that
Princes gives Laws too hers, but receive none from any; we will say that in all
kingdoms well established, the King receives the Laws from the people, the
which he ought carefully to consider and maintain, and whatsoever, e^ther by
force or fr^ud he does, in prejudice of them must always be repu^ed unjust.

Kings receive Laws from the people.
These may be sufficiently verified by examples. Before there was a King in
Israel, God by Moses prescribed to him both sacred and evil Deuteronomy. 17
Ordinances, which he should have perpetually before his eyes. but after that
Saul was elected and established by the people, Samuel delivered it to him
written, to the end, he might carefully observe it neither were the succeeding
Kings received before they had sworn to keep those Ordinances.

The Ceremony was this, that together with the setting of the crown on the
Kings head, they delivered into his hands the Book of the Testimony, which some
understand, to be the right of the people of the Land, others the Law of God,
according to which he ought to govern the people. Cirus acknowledging himself
conservator of his Countries Laws, obliegeth himself to opposE any man that
would offer to infringe them: and at his mauguration ties himself to observe
them, although some flatterers tickled the ears of his Son Cambises, that all
things were lawful for him.

The Kings of Sparta whom Aristotle calls lawful Princes, did every month
renew their oaths, promising in the hands of the Ephori, Zeneph. de Reb. Laced.
procures for the kingdom, to rule according to those Laws which they had
from Lieurgus.

Hereupon it being asked Archidamus, the Son of Zeuxidamus, who were the
Governors of Sparta, he answered the Laws, and the lawful Magistrates. and
least the laws might grow into contempt, these people bragged. that they
received them from heaven, and that they were inspired from above, to the end
that men might believe that their determinations were from God and not from
man, the Kings of Egypt did in nothing vary from the tennour of the laws, and
confessed that their principal ^elicity consisted in the obedience they
yielded to them. Romulus at the institution of the Roman kingdom made this
agreement with senators, the people should make laws and he would take both
for himself and others to see them observed and kept Antiochus the third of
that name King of Asia writ unto all the Cities of his (...) of lib 5. ca. 6.
kingdom, That if the letters sent unto them in his name there were any thing
found repugnant to the laws, they should believe they were no act of the
Kings, and therefore yield no obedience unto them. Now although some Citizens
say, that by decree of Senate the Emperor Augustus was declared to be exempt
from obedience to Laws: yet notwithstanding Theodosius, and all the other good
and reasonable Emperors, have professed that they were bound to the Laws,
lest what had been extorted by violence, might be ^cknowledged and received
instead of Law. And for Augustus Caesar in so much as the Roman Common wealth
was en thralled by his power and violence she could ^ay nothing freely but that
she had lost her freedom. And because they durst not call Augustus a tyrant
the senate said he was exempt from ^ll obedience to the laws, which was in
effect as much as if they plainly should have said, ^he Emperor was an
outl^w. The same right ^^^h ever been of force in all well governed states and
Kingd^mes of Chr^st^ndome.

For neither the Emperor the King of France, nor the Kings of Spain, England
Polander, Hungary, and all other lawful Princes, as the Areh Dukes of
Austriae Dukes of Brabante, Earls of Flanders, and Holland, nor other Princes
are not recreated to the government of their estates before they have promised
to the Electours, Peers, Pala^ins, Lords, Barons, and Governors, that they
will render to every one right according to the laws of the Country, yea so
strictly that they cannot alter or innovate any thing contrary to the
privileges of the countries without the consent of the ^ownes and provinces,
If they do it, they are no less guilty of rebellion against the laws then ^he
people is in their kind if they refuse obedience, when they command according
to law; briefly lawful princes receive the laws from the people as well as
the crown in lieu of honor, and the scepter in live of power, which they are
bound to keep and maintain and therein repose their chiefest glory.

If the Prince may make new laws.
What then? shall it not be lawful for a Prince to make new laws and abrogate
the old? seeing it belongs to the King not only to advise that nothing be done
neither against nor to defraud the laws: but also that nothing be wan^ing to
them or any thing to much in them; briefly that neither age nor lapse of time
do abolish or entombe them: i^ there be any thing to abridge, added, or taken
away from them, ^t is his duty to assemble the estates, and to demand their
advise and resolution, without presuming to publish any things before the whole
have been, first du^y examined and approved by them, after the l^w is once
ennacted and published, there is no more dispute to be made above it, all men
owe obedience to it, and the prince in the first place to teach other men their
duty, and for that all men are ca^i^ier led by example then by precep^s, the
prince must necessarily express his willingness to observe the laws or else
by what equity can he require obedience in his subjects to that which he
himself con^^mnes.

For the disterence which is betwixt Kings and subjects ought not to consist in
impurity, but in equity and justice. And therefor although Augustus was
esteemed to be exempt by the d^cree of the S^nate, notwithstanding reproving of
a young man that had broken the Julian law concerning adultery, he boldly
replied to Augustus that he himself had transgressed the same laws which
condemns adul^eries, the Emperor acknowledged his fault and for grief forbore
to late. So convenient a thing it is in nature to practice by example Demoth in
oration con. Timocrat.
that which we would teach by precipt.

The Lawgicer Solon was wont to compare laws to money, for they m^^n^ain human
societies as many preserves traffic, neither improperly then if they Kings may
not law^ully or at the least heretofore could not mannace or imbase good money
without the consent of the Common wealth: much more ^ei^e can he have power to
make and Innocen. 3. ad regem. Fam. in ca. quado d^ ^ure juando.
unmake laws, without the which, no^ Kings, nor subjects, can coha bite in
security bu^ must befor^^ to live brut^shly in caves and deserts like wild
beast, wherefore also the Emperor of Germany esteem it needful to make some
law for the good of the empire, first he demands the advice of the estates if
it be there approved the Princes Barons and Deputies of the towns signei^ and
then the law is ratified for he solemnly swears to keep the laws already made,
and to introduce no new ones without a general consent. There is a Law in
Poloniae, which has been renewed in the year, 1454. and also in the year
1538. and by those it is decreed, that no new Laws shall be made, but by a
common consent, nor no where else, but in the General Assembly of the Estates.

For the Kingdom of France, where the Kings are thought to have greater
authority, then in other places, anciently all Laws were only made in the
Assembly of the Estates, or in the ambulatory Parliament. But since this
Parliament has been Sedentary, the Kings ed^cts are not received as
authentically, before the Parliament has approved them.

Whereas on the contrary, the decrees of this Parliament, where the Law is
defective, have commonly the power and effect of Law. In the Kingdoms of
England, Spain, Hungary, and others, they yet enjoy in some sort their ancient
privileges.

For, if the welfare of the Kingdom depends of the observation of the Laws, and
the Laws are enthralled to the pleasore of one man? is it not most certain,
that there can be no permanent stability in that government? Must it not then
necessarily come to pass, that if the King (as some have been) be infected
with Lunacie, either continually or by intervales, that the whole State fall
inevitably to ruin? But if the Laws be superior to the King, as we have
already proved, and that the King be tied in the same respect of obedience to
the Laws, as the Servant is to his Master who will be so senseless, that will
not rather obey the Law, then the King? or will not readily yield his best
assistance against those that seek to violate or infringe them? Now seeing that
the King is not Lord over the Laws, let us examine how far his power may be
justly extended in other things.

Whether the Prince have power of life and death over his Subjects?
The Minnions of the Court hold it for an undeniable Maxim, That Princes have
the same power of life and death over their Subjects, as anciently, Masters had
over their slaves, and with these false imaginations have so bewitched Princes,
that many, although they put not in ure with much rigor this imaginary right,
yet they imagine, that they may lawfully do it, and in how much they defist
from the practice thereof, insomuch, that they quit and relinquisite of their
right and due.

But we affirm on the contrary, that the Prince is but as the Minister and
Executor of the Law, and may only unsheath the Sword against those whom the Law
has condemned; and if he do otherwise, he is no more a King, but a Tyrant; no
longer a Judge, but a Malefactor, and instead of that honorable Title of
Conservatour, he shall be justly branded with that foul term of Violator of
the Law and Equity.

We must here first of all take into our consideration the foundation on which
this our disputation is built, which we have resolved into this head, That
Kings are ordained for the benefit and profit of the public State; this being
granted, the question is soon discust: For who will believe that men sought and
desired a King, who upon any sudden motion might at his pleasure cut their
throats: or which in color or revenge might when he would take their heads
from their shoulders.

Briefly, who (as the wise man says) carries death at his tongues end we must
not think so idely.

There is no man so vain, which would willingly that his welfare should depend
of another pleasure; Nay, with much difficulty will any man trust his life in
the hands of a friend ^r a brother, much less of a stranger be he never so
worthy. Seeing that Envy, Hare, and Rage did so far transport Athanas and Ajax
beyond the bounds of reason, that the one killed his children, the other
failing to effect his desire in the same kind against his friends and
companions, turned his sury and murtherous intent, and acted the same revenge
upon himself. Now it being natural to every man to love himself, and to seek
the preservation of his own life.

In what assurance I pray you would any man rest to have a Sword continually
hanging over his head by a small thread, with the point toward him? Would any
mirth or jollity relish in such a continual affright? Can you possible make
choice of a more slender thread then to expose your life and welfare into the
hands and power of a man so mutable that changes with every puffed of wind.
Briefly, which almost a thousand times a day, shakes off the restraint of
reason and discretion, and yields himself slave to his own unruly and
disordered passions.

Can there be hoped or imagined any profit or advantage so great or so worthy,
which mig^t equalize or counterpose this fear or this danger? Let us conclude
then, that it is against Delinquents only, whom the mouth of the Law has
condemned, that Kings may draw forth the Sword of Authority.

If the King may pardon those whom the Law condemns?

But because life is a thing precious, and to be favored peradventure it will
be demanded, whether the King may not pardon and absolve those whom the Law
has condemned.

I answer, no Otherwise this cruel pity would maintain Thieves, Robbers
Murderers Ravisters, Poysoners Sorcerers, and other plagues of Mankind, as we
may read Tyrants have done here before in many places, and to our woeful
experience, we may yet see at this present time; And therefore, the Beast of
Law in this kind, will by impurity much encreise the number of offenders.

So that he which received the Sword of Authority from the Law to promise
offense; will arm offenders therewith against the Laws, and put himself the
Woolfe into the Fold, which he ought to have warran^ed from their ravenous
outrages.

But for so much that it may chance in some occasions, that the Law being mute,
may have need of a speaking Law and that the King being in some cases the
aptest Expositor, a king for the Rule of his actions Equity and Reason, which
as the soul of the Soul may so clear the intention thereof, as where the
offense is rather committed against the words, then the intendment of the Law,
he may free the innocent Offender from the guilt thereof, because a just and
equitable Exposition of the Law may in all good reason be taken for Law it
self, as nearest concurring with the intention of the Law makers.

Notwithstanding least passion should preposse the place of reason I. Nomims
and res S. verbum ex l^ge. D. de verb signif.
Kings should in this fashion themselves to the ordinary practice of the
Emperor, severns not to determine absolutely any thing before it were maturely
discussed by upright and discreet men in that faculty.

And so the King may rigorously punish the Murderer; and yet notwithstanding
pardon him, which casually, and without any such purpose kills one. He may
put to death the Thief, and yet pardon that man which in ^is own defense
kills him that would have robbed him. Briesly in all other occurrences he
may distinguish, as being established Aroitrator and Newter, Chance medly from
malice, forethought a good purpose from the Rigor of the Law, without
favoring at any time Malice or Treason, Neither can the omission of this duty
gain to him any true esteem of merciful: for certainly that Shepherd is much
more pitiful which kills the Woolf, then he which lets him escape: the
clemency of that King is more commendable which commits the malefactor to the
hangman, then he which delivers him; By pu^^ing to death the murderer, many
Innocents are delivered from danger: whereas by suffering him escape, both he
and others through hope of the like impunitie, are made more audacious to
perpetrate farther mischief, so that the immediate act of saving one
Delinquent, arms many hands to murder diverse Innocents; there is therefore
both truly mildness in putting to death some, and as certainly cruelty in
pardoning of others. Therefore as it is permitted the King, being as it were
Custos of the Law, in some cases to interpret the words thereof: so in all well
ordered Kingdoms, it is enjoined the Counsel of State, and their duty obliges
them to examine the Kings interpretation, and to moderate both his seleritie
and facilitle. If through the corruption and weakness of men this have not been
so really and thoroughly observed as it ought: yet notwithstanding the right
always remains entire, and there wants only integrity and courage in the
parties to make it effectual.

But not to heap up too many examples in a matter so manifestly clear, it has
been in this manner practiced in the Realm of France. For we have there
oftentimes seen those put to death, to whom the King had granted his Charter of
pardon: and those pardoned, whom He commanded should be put to death. And
sometimes offenses committed in the Kings presence remitted, because there was
no other witness but himself. The which happened in the time of Hen: 2. to a
certain stranger, who was accused by the King himself of a grievous offense. If
an offender by the intercession of friends have his pardon granted by the king,
the Chancellor upon sufficient cause may cancel it: if the Chancellor connive,
yet m^^t the crimined present it before the Judges, who ought not only
carefully to consider, whether the Pardon were gotten by sur^eptitious or
indirect means, but also if it be legal, and in due form: neither can the De
inquent that has obtained his Cha^ter of Pardon make use of it, until first
he appeal in public Court-bare headed, and on his knees plead it, submitting
himself prisoner until the Judges have maturely weighed and considered the
reasons that induced the King to grant him his pardon: If they be found
insufficient, the offender must suffer the punishment of the Law, as if the
King had not granted him any pardon: but if his pardon be allowed, he ought not
so much to thank the King, as the equity of the Law which saved his life. The
manner of these proceedings was excellently ordained, both to contain the King
within the limits of equity, lest being armed with public Authority, he
should seek to revenge his own particular spleen, or out of fancy or
partiality remit the wrongs and outrages committed against the public
safety: as partly also to restrain an opinion in the Subject, that any thing
could be obtained of the King which might prejudice the Laws. If these things
have been ill observed in our times, notwithstanding that which we have
formerly said, remains always certain, that it is the Laws which have power
over the lives and deaths of the Inhabitants of a Kingdom, and not the King
which is but Administrator and Conservator of the Laws.

Subjects are the Kings Brethren, and not his slaves.
For truly neither are the Subjects, as it is commonly said, the Kings slaves,
or bond men: being neither prisoners taken in the wars, nor bought for money:
but as considered in one entire body they are Lords, as we have formerly
proved; so each of them in particular ought to be held as the Kings Brothers
and kinsmen. And to the end that we think not this strange, let us hear what
God himself says when he prescribes a law to Kings; That they lift Deuc. 17.
15. 20. Barto. in tract. de regi^n. civit.
not their heart above their brethren from amongst whom they were chosen.
Whereupon Bartolus a famous Lawyer, who lived in an age that bred many Tyrants,
did yet draw this conclusion from that Law, that Subjects were to be held and
used in the quality and condition of the Kings brethren, and not of his
slaves. Also King David was not ashamed to call his Subjects his brethren. 1 Chronicles 28. 2
The ancient Kings were called Abimelech, an Hebrew word which fignifies, My
father the King. The Almighty and all good God, of whose great gentleness and
mercy we are daily partakers, and very seldom feel his severitie, although we
justly deserve it, yet is it always mercifully mixed with compassion; whereby
he teaches Princes, his Lieutenants, that Subjects ought rather to be held in
obedience by love, than by fear.

But lest they should except against me, as if I sought to trench too much upon
the Royal Authority, I verily believe it is so much the greater, by how much
it is likely to be of longer continuance. For says one, servile fear is a bad
guardian, for that Authority Cicer. l, 2. offic.
we desire should continue; for those in subjection hate them they fear, and
whom we hate, we naturally wish their destruction: on the contrary, there is
nothing more proper to maintain their Authority then the affection of their
subjects, on whose love they may safeliest and with most security lay the
foundation of their greatness. And therefore that Prince which governs his
Subjects as brethren, may confidently assure himself to live securely in the
midst of dangers: whereas he that uses them like slaves, must needs live in
much anxietie and fear, and may well be resembled to the condition of that
Master which remains alone in some desert in the midst of a great troop of
slaves; for look how many slaves any has, he must make account of so many
Enemies, which almost all Tyrants that have been killed by their Subjects have
experimented: whereas on the contrary, the Subjects of good Kings are ever as
solicitously careful of their safety, as of their own welfare.

To this may have reference that which is read in diverse places Plato lib. 8.
de repub. Seneca. Aliud est servire, aliud obedire: aliud libertas, aliud
licentia. L. 5. D. de parricid. L. 2. ad leg. Corneliam de sicar. vbi vlp. L.
1. c. de parricid.
of Aristotle, and was said by Agasicles King of Sparta, That Kings command as
fathers over their children, and Tyrants as masters over their slaves, which we
must take in the same sense, that the civilian Martianus does, to wit, that
paternall authority consists in piety, and not in rigor, for that which was
practiced amongst the men of the accorne age, that fathers might sell, and put
to death their children at their pleasure, has no authority amongst
Christians, yea the very Pagans which had any humanity, would not permit it to
be practiced on their slaves. Therefore then the father has no power over the
sons life, before first the Law have determined; it, otherwaise he offends the
Law, Cornelius against privy murderers, and by the Law Pompeius against
Parricides, the father is no less guilty which kills the son, then the son
which murders the father: for the same occasion the Emperor Adrian banished
into an Island which was the usual punishment for notorious offenders, a
father which had slain his son, a hurting of whom he had entertained a jealous
opinion for his mother in Law, concerning servants or slaves, we are admonished
in holy writ to use them like brethren, and by humane constitutions as
hierlings, or mercinaries.

By the Civil Law of the Egyptians, and Romans, and by the Ecclesiast. 33.
Cicer. lib. 3. offici. Diod. Sic. lib. 2. C. 2. L. 1 D. de his qui sunt sui,
vel. al. juris.
constitutions of the Antonims, the Master is as well liable to punishment which
has killed his own slave, as he which killed another man's. In like manner the
Law delivers from the power of the Master the slave whom in his sickness he
has altogether neglected, or has not afforded convenient food, and the
infranchilde slave whose condition was somewhat better, might for any aparent
injury bring his action against his Patron. Now seeing there is so great
difference between slaves, and lawful children, betwixt Lords and fathers, and
notwithstanding heretofore it was not permitted amongst the heathen, to use
their slaves cruelly: What shall we say, pray you, of that father of the
people, which cries out tragically with Aireus, I will devour my Children? In
what esteem shall we hold that Prince which takes such pleasure in the
massacring his Subjects, (condemned without being ever heard) that he
dispatched many thousand of them, in one day, and yet is not glutted with
blood: Briefly who after the example of Caligula (surnamed the Phaeton of the
world) wishes that all his people had but one head that he might cut it off at
one blow? Shall it not be lawful to implore the assistance of the Law against
such furious madness, and to pull from such a Tyrant the sword which he
received to maintain the Law, and defend the good, when it is drawn by him
only for rapine and ruin?

Whether the goods of the people belong to the King,
But to proceed, let us now see whether the King whom we have already proved,
has not power over the lives of his Subjects; is not at the least Lord over
their Goods. In these days there is no language more common in the Courts of
Princes, then of those who say all is the Kings. Whereby it follows, that in
exacting any thing from his Subjects he takes but his own, and in that which he
leaves them, he expresses the care he has that they should not be altogether
destitute of means to maintain themselves; and this opinion has gained so
much power in the minds of some Princes, that they are not ashamed to say that
the pains, sweat and industry of their Subjects is their proper revenue, as
if their miserable Subjects only kept beasts to till the earth for their
insolent masters profit, and luxury. And indeed, the practice at this day is
just in this manner, although in all right and equity it ought to be contrary,
now we must always remember that Kings were created for the good and profit of
the people, and that those (as Aristotle says) which endeavor and seek the
commodity of the people, are trusty Kings: whereas those that make their own
private ends and pleasures, the only butt and aim of their desirers are truly
Tyrants.

It being then so that every one loves that which is his own, yea that many
covet that which belongs to other men, is it any thing probable that men should
seek a master to give him frankly all that they had long labored for, and
gained with the sweat of their brows? may we not rather imagine, that they
chose such a man on whose integrity they relied for the administering of justice
equally both to the poor and rich, and which would not assume all to himself,
but rather maintain every one in the fruition of his own goods? or who like an
unprofitable Drone should suck the fruit of other men's labors, but rather
preserve the house, for those whose industry justly deserved it? briefly, who
instead of extorting from the true owners their goods, would see them defended
from all ravening oppressors? What I pray you skills it says the poor
Country man, whether the King, or the enemy make havok of my goods, since
through the spoil thereof I and my poor family die for hunger? what imports
it whether a stranger or homebred caterpiller ruin my estate, and bring my
poor fortune to extreme beggary? Whether a foreign Soldier, or a Sicophant
Courtier by force or fraud, make me alike miserable? Why shall he be accounted
a barbarous enemy, if thou be a friendly Patriot? Why he a Tyrant if thou be a
King? Yea certainly by how much parracide is greater then manslaughter, by so
much the wickedness of a King, exceeds in mischief the violence of an enemy.

If then therefore in the creation of Kings, men gave not their own proper
goods unto them, but only recommended them to their protection; by what other
right then, but that of free booters, can they challenge the property of other
men's goods to themselves? Wherefore the Kings of Egypt were not (according to
Law) at the first the Lords of particular men's estates, but were only then
when they were sold unto them for corn, and yet may there well be question
made of the validity of that contract. Ahab King of Israel could not compel
Naboth to sell him his Gen 45. 1 Kings. 21. 1. etc.
vineyard; but rather if he had been willing, the Law of God would not permit
it. The Roman Emperors which had an unreasonable power, could neither by right
have done it. At this day there is with much difficulty any Kingdom to be
found, where the meanest Subject may not sue the King, and where many times the
L. venditor. 13. D. de com. praed. divid.
King is not cast in the suit, which succeeding he must as well as others
satisfy the judgment. And to this is not contrary, although at the first veiw
it seem so, that which some of their most familiars have written of the
Emperors. That by the civil Law all things were the Kings, and that Caesar was
absolute Lord of all Seneca lib. de benef. 7. C. 4. 5. 6.
things, they themselves expound this their opinion in this manner, that the
dominion of all things belongs to the King, and the propriety to the
particular persons, insomuch as the one possesses all by the right of
commanding, the other by the Law of inheritance: We know, that it is a common
saying amongst the Civilians, that if any make claim to a house, or a Ship, it
follows not therefore that he can extend his right to all the furniture L.
nave. 36. D. de evictionibus.
or lading. And therefore a King may challenge and gain right to the Kingdom
of Germany, France and England* and yet notwithstanding he may not lawfully
take any honest man's estate from him, but by manifest injustice, seeing that
they are things diverse, and by Law distinguished, to be possessors of the
whole, and of all the particular parts.

Whether the King be the proper owner of the Kingdom.
But the King, is he not Lord proprietor of the public Revenue? We must handle
this point somewhat more exactly then we did the former. In the first place, we
must consider that the revenue of the public Excheaquer is one thing, and the
proper patrimony of the Prince an other, of different nature are the goods of
the Emperor, King, or Prince; to those of A^tonius, Henry, or Philip, those
are properly the Kings, which he injoyes as King, those are Antonious his which
he possesses, as in the right of Antonius, the former he received from the
people, the latter from those of his blood, as inheritor to them.

This distinction is frequent in the books of the civil Law, where there is a
difference ever made, between the patrimony of the Empire, and that of the
Emperor, the treasury of Caesar is one L. been a Zenone. C. de quod. praesc.
C. unde quaest. Mag ib. 12. C. l. fiscus. D. de jurefisci.
thing, and the Exchequer of the Commonwealth another, and both the one and
the other have their several procurers, there being diverse dispensers of the
sacred and public distributions, and of the particular and private expenses,
insomuch as he which as Emperor is preferred before a private man, in a grant
by deed or chartell, may also sometime as Antonius give place to an inferior
person.

In like manner in the Empire of Germany, the revenue of Ferdinand of Austria
is one thing, and the revenue of the Emperor Ferdinand is another: the Empire,
and the Emperor have their several treasurers: as also there is difference in
the inheritances which the Princes derive from the houses of their ancestors,
and those which are annexed to the Electorall dignities. Yea amongst the Turks
themselves, Selimus his gardens and patrimoniall lands are distinstuished from
those of the public, the one serving for the provision of the Sultans table,
the other employed only about the Turquish affairs of State. There be
notwithstanding Kingdoms as the French and English, and others in which the
King has no particular patrimony, but only the public which he received from
the people, there this former distinction has no place. For the goods which
belongs to the Prince as a quaere. of what nature the ancient demean is in
England.
private person there is no question, he is absolute owner of them as other
particular persons are, and may by the civil Law sell, engage, or dispose of
them at his pleasure. But for the goods of the Kingdom, which in some places
are commonly called the demeanes, the Kings may not be esteemed nor called in
any sort whatsoever, absolute Lords Proprietors of them. For what if a man for
the flocks sake have made thee Shepherd, does it follow L. cum servus 39. Sec
vlt. D. de leg. 1. l. universi. 9. and ^. seq. C de fundo patrim.
that thou have liberty, to flea, pill, sell, and transport the Sheep at thy
pleasure? Although the people have established thee Judge, or Governor of a
City, or of some Province, have thou therefore power to alienate, sell, or
play away that City or Province? And seeing that in alienating or passing away
a Province, the people also are sold, have they raised thee to that authority
to the end thou should separate them from the rest, or that thou should
prostitute and make them slaves to whom thou please? Furthermore I demand if
the Royal dignity be a patrimony, or an Office? If it be an Office, what
Community has it with any propriety? If it be a Patrimony, is it not such a
one that at least the paramount propriety remains still in the people which
were the doners? Briefly if the revenue of the Exchequer, or the demeanes of
the Kingdom, be called the dowry of the Commonwealth, and by good right, and
such a dowry whose dismembring or wasting, brings with it the ruin of the
public State, the Kingdom and the King, by what Law shall it be lawful to
alienate this dowry? Let the Emperor Wencislaus be infatuated, the French King
Charles the sixth lunatic, and give or sell the Kingdom, or part of it to the
English, let Malcolme King of the Scots, lavishly dissipate the demeanes and
consume the public treasure, what follows for all this? Those which choose
the King to withstand the invasions of foreign enemies, shall they through his
madness and negligence be made the slaves of strangers, and those means and
wealth, which would have secured them in the fruition of their own estates and
fortunes? Shall they by the election of such a King be exposed to the prey and
rapine of all comers, and that which particular persons have saved from their
own necessities, and from those under their tutorship and government, (as it
happened in Scotland) to indew the Commonwealth with it, shall it be devoured by
some Pandar or Broker, for unclean pleasures.

But if as we have often said, that Kings were constituted for the peoples use,
what shall that use be, if it be perverted into abuse? What good can so much
mischief, and inconvenience bring, what profit can come of such eminent and
irreparable damages and dangers? If (I say) in seeking to purchase my own
liberty and welfare, I engage my self into an absolute thraldom, and
willingly subject my self to another Yoke, and become a fettered slave to
another man's unruly desires, therefore as it is imprinted in all of us by
nature, so also has it by a long custom been approved by all Nations, that it
is not lawful for the King by the counsel of his own fancy and pleasure, to
diminish or waste the public revenue; and those which have run a contrar^e
course, have even lost that happy name of a King, and stood b^^^^ded with the
infamous title of a Tyrant.

I confess that when Kings were inst^uted, there was of n^cessity means to be
assigned for them, as well to maintain their Royal dignity, as to furnish the
expense of their teaine and Officers. Civility, and the welfare of the public
State, seem to require it, for it was the duty of a King to establish Judges
in all places, who should receive no presents, nor sell Justice: and also to
have power ready to assist the execution of their Ordinances, and to secure
the ways from dangers, that commerce might be open, and free, etc. If there
were likelihood of wars to fortify and put Garrisons into the frontier
places, and to hold an Army in the field, and to keep his Magazins well stored
with munition. It is commonly said that peace cannot be well maintained without
provision for wars, nor wars managed without men, nor men kept in discipline
without pay, nor money gotten without Subsidies, and Tributes.

To discharge therefore the burden of the State in time of Peace, was the
demean appointed, and in time of wars the tributes and imposts, yet so as if
any extraordinary necessity required it, money might be raised by Subsidies or
other fitting means. The final intendment of all, was ever the public
utility, in so much as he which converts any of these public Revenues to his
own private purposes, much more he which mispends them in anyunworthy or loose
occasions, no way merits the name of a King, for the Prince (says the Apostle)
is the minister of God for the good of the people: and for that cause is
Tribute paid unto them. Romans 13.


This is the true original cause of the customs, and imposts of the Romans,
that those rich merchandises which were brought The same reason is recorded for
all our imposts in England, with which a Navy was wont to be maintained at Sea.
from the Indies, Arabia, Ethiopia, might be secured in their passage by land
from thieves and robbers, and in their transportation by Sea from Pirates,
insomuch as for their security, the Commonwealth maintained a Navy at Sea. In
this rank we must put the Custom which was paid in the red Sea, and other
Imposts of gates, bridges, and passages, for the securing of the great road
ways, (therefore called the Pretorian consular, and the Kings highways,) from
the spoil of thieves and free-booters. The care also of the reparation of
bridges was referred to Commissaries deputed by the King, as appears Archi in
Ca^. fi qois Romi p^^^s and pereg. 24. q 3. B^lam c^^. Sect. conventicula, de
pace iure iurfir l. 2. D. ne quid in loto publ. viarum.
by the Ordinance of Lewis the Courteous, concerning the 12. bridges over the
River of Seyne, commanding also boats to be in a readiness, to ferrie over
passingers, etc.

For the tax laid upon Salt there was none in use in those times, the most of
the Salt pits being enjoyed by private persons, because it seemed that that
which nature out of her own bounty presented unto men, ought no more to be
inhaunsed by sale then either the light, the air, or the water, as a certain
King called L. magis puto D. de ^ebus little.
Lycurgus in the lesser Asia, began to lay some impositions upon the Salt pits
there, nature as it were impatiently bearing such a restraint of her
liberality, the springs are said to dry up suddenly. Inv. Sat 4. Si quid
palphurio, si credimus Armillato, Quicquid conspicuum palchrum q^ex aequo^e
to^o est, Res fisci est ubicunque natat.
Now although certain Marm^usets of the Court would persuade us at this day,
(as Juveral complained in his time) that the Sea affords nothing of worth, or
good, which falls not within the compass of the Kings Prerogative.

He that first brought this taxation into Rome, was the Censor Livius, who
therefore gained the surname of Salter, neither was it done but in the
Commonwealths extreme necessity. And in France King Philip the long, for the
same reason obtained of the Estates the imposition upon Salt for five years
only, what turmoiles and troubles the continuance thereof has bred every man
knows. To be b^eife, all Tributes were imposed, and continued for the
provision of means and stipends for the men of war, so as to make a Province
stipendarie or tributarie, was esteemed the same with military.

Behold wherefore Solomon exacted Tributes, to wit, to fortify 1 King. 9. 15.
the Towns, and to erect and furnish a public magazine, which being
accomplished, the people required of Reholoam to be freed Post^l li. 3 de rep
Turc.
from that burden. The Turks call the Tribute of the Provinces, the Sacred
blood of the people and account it a most wicked crime to impl^y it in any
thing but the defense of the people. Wherefore by the same reason all that
which the King conquers in war belongs to the people, and nor to the King,
because the people bore the charges of the war, as that which is gained by a
factor accures to the account of his master. Yea and what advantage he gains
by marriage, if it belongs simply and absolutely to his wife, that is acquired
also to the Kingdom, for so much as it is to be presumed that he gained not
that preferment in marriage in quality of Philip or Charles, but as he was
King. On the contrary, in like manner the Queens have interest of indowment in
the estates which their husbands gained and enjoyed before they attained the
Crown, and have no title to that which is gotten after they are created Kings,
because that is judged as the acquist of the Common purse, and has no proper
reference to the Kings private estate, which was so determined in France,
betwixt Philip of Valoys, and his wife Jedne of Burgundy. But to the end that
there be no money drawn from the people to be employed in private designs, and
for particular ends and purposes; the Emperor swears, not to impose any Taxes
or Tributes whatsoever, but by the authority of the Estates of the Empire. As
much do the Kings of Polonia, Hungary, and Denmark promise: the English in
like manner enjoy the same unto this day, by the Laws of Henry the third, and
Edward the first.

The French Kings in former times, imposed no Taxes but in the Assemblies, and
with the consent of the three Estates; from thence sprung the Law of Philip of
Valoys, that the people should not have any Tribute laid on them but in urgent
necessity, and with the consent of the Estates. Yea and anciently after these
moneys were collected they were locked in coffers through every Diocese and
recommended to the special care of selected men (who are the same which at
this day are called Esleus) to the end that they should pay the soldiers
enroled, within the Towns of their Diocesses: the which was in use in other
Countries, as namely in Flanders and other neighboring Provinces. At this day,
though many corruptions be crept in, yet without the consent and confirmation
of the Parliament, no exactions may be collected, notwithstanding there be some
Provinces which are not bound to any thing, without the approbation of the
Estates of the Country, as Languedoke, Brittannie Province, Daulphinie, and
some others. All the Provinces of the Low Countries have the same privileges:
finally lest the Exchequer devour all, like the spleen which exhales the
spirits from the other members of the body. In all places they have confined
the Exchequer within its proper bounds and limits. Seeing then it is most
certain that what has been ordinarily and extraordinarily assigned to Kings,
to wit, Tributes, Taxes, and all the demeanes which comprehe^d all customs
both for importations, and exportations, forfeitures, amercements, royal
escheates, confiscations, and other dews of the same nature, were configned
into their hands for the maintenance and defense of the people, and the State
of the Kingdom, insomuch as if these sinews be cut, the people must n^eds fall
to decay, and in demolishing these foundations the Kingdom will come to utter
ruin. It necessarily follows, that he which lays impositions on the people
only to o^presse them, and by the public detriment seeks private profit, and
with their own swords kills his subject he truly is unworthy the name of a
King: Whereas concrarily, a true King as he is a careful mannager of the
public affairs, so is he a ready protector of the Common welfare, and not a
Lord in propriety of the Commonwealth, having as little authority to alienate
or dissipate the demeans or public Revenue, as the Kingdom it self. And if he
mis-govern the State, seeing it imports the Commonwealth that every one make
use of his own talent, it is much more requisite for the public good, that he
which has the mannaging of it, carry himself as he ought.

And therefore if a prodigal Lord by the authority of justice, be committed to
the tuition of his kinsmen and friends, and compelled to suffer his revenues
and means to be ordered, and disposed of by others; by much more reason may
those which have interest in the affairs of State, and whose duty obliges them
thereto, take all the Administration and government of the State out of the
hands of him which either negligently executes his place, ruins the
Commonwealth, if after admonition he endeavors not to perform his duty. And
for so much as it is easily to be proved, that in all lawful Dominions the
King cannot be held Lord in propriety of the demean; without searching into
those elder times, whereof we have an apt representation in the Genesis 23.
person of Ephron King of the Hittites, who durst not sell the Field to Abraham
without the consent of the people. This right is at this day practiced in
public States: the Emp: of Germany before his Sleyd. l. 1. and bulla aurea.
Coronation does solemly swear that he will neither alienate, dismember, nor
engage any of the rights or members of the Empire. And if he recover, or
conquer any thing with the Arms and means of the public, it shall be gained to
the Empire, and not to himself. Wherefore when Charles the 4th. promised each of
the Electors an hundred thousand Crowns to choose his Son Wencislaus Emperor,
and having not ready money to deliver them, he morgaged Customs, Taxes,
Tributes, and certain Towns unto them, L. 1. and passim c. de con. re. alien.
naucler. in Chron.
which were the proper appurtenances of the Empire: whereon followed much and
vehement contestation, most men holding this engagement void. And questionless
it had been so declared, but for the profit that those reaped thereby, which
ought principally to have maintained and held entire the rights and dignities
of the Empire. And it followed also, that Wencislaus was justly held incapable
of the government of the Empire, chiefly because he suffered the rights of the
Empire over the Duchy of Millen to bewrested from him.

There is a Law very ancient in the Kingdom of Polonia, which prohibits the
alienating of any of the Kingdoms Lands; the which also C intellecto de jure
jurando in Decretal. Polidor. Virgil. In cod. His. part 5. 1. 5. constis. 9.
was renewed by King Lewis in the year 1375. In Hungary in anno 1221. there was
a complaint made to Pope Honorius, that King Andrew had engaged the Crown Lands
contrary to his oath. In England was the same by the Law of King Edw: in the
year 1298. Likewise in Spain by the Ordinance made under Alphonsus, and
renewed in the year 1560. in the Assembly of the Estates at Toledo. These Laws
were then ratified, although long time before Custom had obtained the vigor
and effect of Law. Now for the Kingdom of France whereto I longer confine my
self, because she may in a sort pass as a pattern to the rest, this right has
ever remained there inviolable. It is one of the most ancient Laws of the
Kingdom, and a right born with the Kingdom it self, that the Demain may not be
alienated: the which Law in anno 1566. (although but ill observed) was renewed.
There is only 2. cases excepted, the portions or Apennages of the children and
brothers of the King, yet with this reservation, that the right of Vassallage
remains Papon Arestor. l. 5. ^^. 10. Act. 4.
always to the Crown: in like manner if the condition of War require
necessarily an alienation, yet it must be ever with power of redemption.
Anciently neither the one nor the other were of validity, but by the
commandment of the States: at this day since the Parliament has been made
sedentarie, the Parliament of Paris which is the Sect 5. 11. and 16. legis
regiae 1566.
Court of the Peers, and the Chamber of Accounts, and of the Treasury, must
first approve it: as the Edicts of Charles the sixth and ninth do testify. This
is a thing so certain, that if the ancient Kings themselves would endow a
Church (although that was a work much favored in those days) they were
notwithstanding bound to have an allowance of the Estates: witness King
Childebert, who might not endow the Abbey of St. Vincent at Paris before he had
the French and Newstrafians consent. Clovis the 2d. and other Kings have
observed the same. They Aimonius l. 4. cha. 41 etc.
might neither remit the regalities by granting infranchisements, nor the
nomination of Prelates to any Church. And if any of them have done it, as Lewis
11. Philip 4. and Philip surnamed Augustus, did in favor of the Churches of
Senis Auxera, and Nevers, the Parliament has L. peto. 69 Sect praedium. D. de
leg. 2. An. 1329. 1360. 1374. 1401. 1583.
declared it void. When the King is anointed at Reims, he swears to observe
this Law: and if he infringe it, that Act has as much validity with it as if
he contracted to sell the Empires of the great Turk, or Sophie of Pe^sia. From
this spring the Constitutions or Ordinances of Philip 6. of John 2d. of Charles
5th. 6th. and 8th. by which they revoke all alienations made by their
Predecessors.

In the Assembly of the Estates at Tours, where King Charles the 8th. Anno
1483. 1522. 1531. 1549 1560. by diverse Decrees of the Court of Parliament.
was in person, diverse alienations made by Lewis 11. were repealed, and
annihilated, and there was taken away from the Heirs of Tancred of Chastel his
great Minnion, diverse places which he had given him by his proper Authority.
This was finally ratified in the last Assembly of the Estates held at Orleans.
Thus much concerning the Kingdoms Demean. But to the end that we may yet more
clearly perceive that the Kingdom is preferred before the King, and that he
cannot by his own proper Authority diminish the Majesty he has received from
the people, nor infranchise or release from his Dominion any one of his
Subjects; nor quit or relinquish the Soveraigntie of ^he least part of his
Kingdom. Charlemayn in former times endeavored to subject the Kingdom Paulus
Aemilius, lib 3.
of France to the German Empire: the which the French did courageously oppose
by the mouth of a Prince of Glasconnie; and it Charlemayn had proceeded in that
business, it had come to the trial of the Sword. In like manner when any
portion of the Kingdom was granted Anno 1195. 1^60. 1269. 2297. 1303. 1325.
1330. Anno 1360.
to the English, the soveraigntie was almost always reserved. And if sometimes
they obtained it by force, as at the Treaty of Bretignie, by the which king
John quitted the Sovereignty of Glasconnie and Poyton that agreement was not
kept, neither was he more bound to do it, then a Tutor or Guardian is being
prisoner (as he was then) which for his own deliverance should engage the
estate of his Pupils. By the power Anno 1465.
of the same Law the Parliament of Paris made void the Treaty of Confl^us by
the which Duke Charles of Burgundy had drawn from the king A^niens, and other
Towns of Picardie. In our days the same Parliament declared void the Agreement
made at Madrid, between Anno 1525.
Francis the 1. then prisoner, and Charles the 5. concerning the Duchy A^^^
1420. M^u^^^let. chap. 225.
of Bu^gundie. But the donation made by Charles the 6. unto H^n: king of
England of the kingdom of France after his decease is a sufficient testimony
for this matter, and of his madness, if there had been no other proof. But to
leave off producing any further testimonies, examples, or reasons, by what
right can the King give or sell away the kingdom or any part of it: seeing it
consists of people, and not of earth or L. liber homo 10^ D. de ver. obl^.
liem^t^. 34 ^^ct. ^. D. de co^te. ^mp l^^e^^^lt C de op^r. libert.
walls; and of Free men there can be made no sale, nor traffic: yea, and the
Patrons themselves cannot compel the infranchisde servants to make their
habitations in other places then themselves like. The which is the rather to be
allowed, in that Subjects are neither slaves, nor intra^ch^^de servants, but
brothers: and not only the Kings brethren taken one by one, but also
considered in one body, they ought to be e^^e^n^ed absolute Lords, and owners
of the Kingdom.

Whether the King be the usufruictuor of the Kingdom.
But if the King be not Lord in propriety, yet at the least we may esteem him
usufruictuor of the Kingdom, and of the Demean: nay truly we can allow him to
have the usufruit, for being usufruictuor though the propriety remain in the
people, yet may he absolutely dispose of the profits, and engage them at his
pleasure. Now we have already proved, that Kings of their own Authority cannot
engage the Revenues of the Exchequer, or the Demain of the Kingdom. The
usufroictuor may dispose of the profits to whom, how, and when he pleases.
Contrarily the excessive gifts of Princes are ever judged void, his unnecessary
expenses are not allowed, his superfluous to be cut off, and that which is
expended by him in any other occasion, but for the public utilitie, is justly
esteemed to be unjustly extorted. And is no less liable to the Law Cincea,
then the meanest Roman Citizen formerly was: In France the Kings gifts are
never of force, until the Chamber of Accounts have confirmed them. From hence
proceed the postils of the ordinary Chamber in the giving up of the Accounts
in the Reigns of prodig all kings, Trop done: soyt repele, which is, excessive
gifts must be recal^ed. The Judges of this Chamber solemnly swear to pass
nothing which may prejudice the Kingdom, or the public State, notwithstanding
any letters the King shall write unto them: but they are not always so
mindful of this oath as were to be desired.

Furthermore, the Law takes no care how a usufruictuor possesses, and governes
his revenues, but contrariwise she prescribes unto the King, how and to what
use he shall employ his. For the ancient Kings of France, were bound to divide
their royal revenues into four parts. The first was employed in the
maintaining of the Ministers of the Church, and providing for the poor: The
second for the Kings table: The third for the wages of his Officers and
household servants: The last in the repairing of bridges, castles, and the
royal Palaces. And what was remaining was laid up in the treasury, to be
bestowed Monstrel in Car. 6.
on the necessities of the Commonwealth. And Histories do at large relate the
troubles and tumults, which happened about the year 1412 in the Assembly of the
Estates at Paris, because Charles the sixth had wasted all the money that was
raised of the revenues and demean, in his own and his minnions loose pleasures,
and that the expenses of the Kings household which before exceeded not the sum
of 94000. francks, did amount in that miserable estate of the Common wealth to
five hundred and forty thousand francks. Now as the demean was employed, in
the before mentioned affairs: so the aids were only for the war and the
taxes assigned for the payment of the men at arms, and for no other occasion.
In other Kingdoms the King has no greater authority, and in diverse less,
especially in the Empire of Germany, and in Poland. But we have made choice of
the Kingdom of France, to the end it be not thought this has any special
prerogative above others, because there perhaps the commonwealth receives the
most detriment. Briefly as I have before said, the name of a King signifie^ not
an inheritance, nor a Propriety, nor a usufruict, but Ex council. Valem. in c.
1. ^e his quae fiunt a praelat. abque consenlucapit.
a charge, office, and procuration. As a Bishop is chosen to look to the
welfare of the soul, so is the King established to take care of the body so
far forth as it concerns the public good: the one is dispensor of the heavenly
treasure, the other of the secular, and what right the one has in the
Episcopal revenues, the same has the other, and no greater in the Kingdoms
demean. If the Bishop alien the goods of the Bishopric, without the consent of
the Chapter, this alienation is of no value, If the King alien the demean
without the approbation of the Estates, that is also void; one portion of the
Eclesiasticall goods ought to be employed in the reparation of the Churches,
the second in releiving of the poor, the third for the maintenance of the
Churchmen, and the fourth for the Bishop himself: We have seen before, that
the King ought to divide into four parts the R^venues of the Kingdoms demean.
The abuse of these times cannot infringe, or annihilate the right, for although
the most part of the Bishops steal from the poor that which they profusely
cast away on their pandars, and ruin and destroy their lands and woods, the
calling of the Bishop is not for all that altered. Although that some Emperors
have assumed to themselves an absolute power, that cannot invest them with any
further right, because no man can be judge in his own cause. What if some
Caracalla vaunt, he will not want money whilst the sword remains in his
custody: The Emperor Adrian will promise on the contrary, so to discarge his
office of Principality, that he will always remember that the Commonwealth
is not his, but the peoples: which one thing almost distinguishes a King from
a Tyrant. Neither can that act of A^talus King of Pergomus designing the Roman
people for heirs to his Kingdom, nor that of Alexander for Egypt, nor P^olom:
for the Cyrenians, bequeathing their Kingdoms to the same people nor
Praesutagus King of the Icenians, which left his to Caesar, draw any good
consequence of right to those which usurp that which by no ^ust title belongs
to them, nay by how much the intrusion is more violent; by so much the equity,
and justice of the cause is more perspicuous: for what the Romans assumed under
the color of right, they would have made no difficulty if that pretext had
been wanting to have taken by force: we have seen almost in our days how the
Venetians possessed themselves of the Kingdom of Ciprus, under pretense of an
imaginary adoption which would have proved rediculous if it had not been
seconded by power and arms. To which also may be not unfitly resembled the
pretended donation of Constantine to Pope Silvester, for that straw of the
decretist Gratian, was long since consumed and turned to ashes, neither is of
more validity, the grant which Lewis the courteous made to Pope Paschal of the
City of Rome, and part of Italy, because he gave that which he possessed not,
no man opposed it. But when his Father Volater. l. Geogr. 3.
Charlemain would have united and subjected the Kingdom of France to the
Germane Empire, the French did lawfully oppose it: and if he had persisted in
his purpose, they were resolved to have hindered him, and defended themselves
by arms. There can be to as little advantage alleged that act of Solomon's,
whom we read to have delivered 1 Kings 9. 11.
twenty Towns to Hiram King of Tire: for he did not give them to him but for
the securing of the Talents of gold which Hiram 2 Chronicles. 8. 2.
had lent him, and they were redeemed at the end of the term, as it appears
by the Text. Further, the soil was barren, and husbanded by the remaining
Canaanites: But Solomon having redeemed it out of the hands of Hiram, delivered
it to the Israelites to be inhabited and tilled. Neither serves it to much more
purpose to alleadg that in some Kingdoms, there is no express agreement
between the King and the people: for suppose there be no mention made, yet the
law of nature teaches us that Kings were not ordained to ruin, but to govern
the Commonwealths, and that they L. 2.. jus reipub. D. de administral. rer. ad
Civit. pert. l. (...). 27. D. de admut. tut.
may not by their proper authority alter or change the rights of the public
State, and although they be Lords, yet can they challenge it in no other
quality, then as Guardians do in the tuition of their pupills; neither can we
account him a lawful Lord, which deprives the Commonwealth of her liberty,
and sels her as a slave. Briefly, neither can we also alleadg, that some
Kingdoms are the L. si fundum sect. si tut. D. depositi et expr^ssuis.
Extravag. de rejudicata, c. intellecto.
proper acquists of the King himself, insomuch as they were not conquered by
their proper means and swords, but by the hands, and with the wealth of the
public; and there is nothing more agreeable to reason, then that which was
gained with the joint faculties, and common danger of the public, should not
be alien'd disposed of, without the consent of the States which represent the
Commonwealth: and the necessity of this law is such, that it is of force
amongst robbers and free-booters themselves. He which follows a contrary
course, must needs ruin humane society. And although the French conquered by
force of arms, the Countries of Germany and Gaul, yet this before mentioned
right remains still L. 2. et passi^. C. de interd. Com. rer. alie^^t.
entire.

To conclude we must needs resolve, that Kings are neither proprietors, nor
usu-fructuaries of the royal patrimony: but only administrators: and being so,
they can by no just right attribute to themselves the propriety, use or profit
of private men's estates, nor with as little reason the public revennues,
which are in truth only the Commonwealths.

But before we pass any further, we must here resolve a doubt. The people of
Israel having demanded a King, the Lords said to Samuel: hearken unto the voice
of the people: notwithstanding, 1 Samuel 8. 7. etc.
give them to understand what shall be the manner of the King which shall
reign over them: he will take your fields, your vineyards, your olive trees,
to furnish his own occasions, and to enrich his servants: briefly, he will
make the people slaves. One would hardly believe in what estimation the
Courtiers of our times hold this Text, when of all the rest of the holy
Scripture they make but a jest. In this place the Almighty and all good God,
would manifest to the Israelites their Levite, when that they had God himself
even present with them, who upon all occasions appointed them holy Judges, and
worthy Commanders for the Wars, would notwithstanding rather subject themselves
to the disordered commandments of a vain mutable man, than to the secure
protection of the omnipotent and immutable God. He declares then unto them in
what a slippery estate the King was placed, and how easily unruly authority
fell into disordered violence, and Kingly power was turned into tyrannous
wilfulness. Seeing the King that he gave them, would by preposterous violence
draw the sword of authority against them, and subject the equity of the laws
to his own unjust desires: and this mischief which they wilfully drew on
themselves; they would happily repent of, when it would not be so easily
remedied. Briefly, this Text does not describe the right of Kings, but what
right they are accustomed to attribute to themselves: not what by the
privilege of their places they may justly do: but what power for the
satisfying of their own lusts, they unjustly usurp. This will manifestly
appear from the 17. Chapter of Deuteronomy, where God appoints a law for
Kings. Here says Samuel the King will use his Subjects like slaves: there God
forbids the King to lift his heart above his brethren: to wit, over his
Subjects, whom he ought not to insult over, but to cherish as his kinsmen. He
will make Chariots, leavy horsemen, and take the goods of private men, says
Samuel: on the contrary in Deutronomy, he is exhorted not to multiply
horsemen, nor to heap up Deuteronomy. 17.
gold and silver, nor cause the people to return into Egypt, to wit, into
bondage. In Samuel we see pictured to the life wicked Ahab, which 1 Kings 21.
by pernicious means gets Naboths Vineyard: there David, who held it not
lawful to drink that water which was purchased with 2 Samuel 23. 16.
the danger of his Subjects lives. Samuel fortels that the King demanded by the
Israelites, in stead of keeping the laws, would govern all according to his
own fancy: on the contrary, God commands that his Law should by the Priests be
delivered into the hands of the King, to copy it out, and to have it
continually before his eyes. Therefore Samuel being high Priest, gave to Saul
the royal law contained in the 17. of Deutronomy, written into a book, which
certainly had been a frivolous act if the King were permitted to break it at
his pleasure. Briefly, it is as much as if Samuel had said. You have asked a
King after the manner of other Nations, the most of whom have Tyrants for their
Governors: You desire a King to distribute justice equally amongst you: but
many of them think all things lawful which their own appetites suggests unto
them; in the mean season you willingly shake off the Lord, whose only will is
equity and justice in the abstract.

In Heroditus there is a history which plainly expresses, bow apt the royal
government is to degenerate into tyranny, whereof Samuel so Herod. l. 2.
exactly forewarns the people. Deioces much renowned for his justice, was first
chosen Judge amongst the Medes: presently after, to the end he might the
better repress those which would oppose justice, he was chosen King, and
invested with convenient authority, then he desired a guard, after a Citadell
to be built in Eebatana the principal City of the Kingdom, with color to
secure him from conspiracies and machinations of Rebels; which being effected,
he presently applies himself to revenge the least displeasures which were
offered him with the greatest punishments.

Finally, no man might presume to look this King in the face, and to laugh or
cough in his presence, was punished with grievous torments. So dangerous a
thing it is, to put into the hands of a weak mind (as all men's are by nature)
unlimited power. Samuel therefore teaches not in that place, that the
authority of a King is absolute: on the contrary he discreetly admonishes the
people not to enthrall their liberty under the unnecessary yoke of a weak and
unruly Master: he does not absolutely exclude the royal authority, but would
have it restrained within its own limits: he does not amplify the Kings right
with an unbridled and licentious liberty: but rather tacitly persuades to put
a bit into his mouth. It seems that this advice of Samuels was very
beneficial to the Israelites, for that they circumspectly moderated the power
of their Kings, the which most Nations grown wise, either by the experience of
their own, or their neighbors harms, have carefully looked unto, as will
plainly appear by that which follows.

We have showed already, that in the establishing of the King, An alliance or
covenant between the K. and the people. Deuteronomy. 17. 1 Samuel 10. 27. 2 Samuel 5. 3.
there were two alliances or convenants contracted: the first between God, the
King, and the people, of which we have formerly treated: the second between
the King and the people, of which we must now say somewhat. After that Saul
was established King, the royal Law was givne him, according to which he ought
to govern. David made a Covenant in Hebron before the Lord, that is to say,
taking God for witness, with all the ancients of Israel, which represented the
whole body of the people, and even then he was made King. Joas 1 Chronicles. 11. 3.
also by the mouth of Jehoiada the High Priest, entered into Covenant with the
whole people of the land in the house of the Lord: And 2 King. 11. 17. and 12.
2 Chronicles. 23. 3.
when the Crown was set on his head, together with it was the law of the
Testimony put into his hand, which most expounds to be the law of God: likewise
Josias promises to observe and keep the Commandments, Testimonies and
Statutes comprised in the book of 2 King. 23. 3.
the Covenant: under which words are contained all which belongs to the duties
both of the first and second Table of the law of God. In all the before
remembered places of the holy story, it is ever said that a Covenant was made
with all the people, with all the multitude, with all the Elders, with all the
men of Juda: to the end that we might know, as it is also fully expressed, that
not only the principals of the Tribes, but also all the Milleniers, Centurions,
and subalterne Magistrates should meet together, each of them in the name, and
for their Towns and Communalties, to covenant and contract with the King. In
this assembly was the creating of the King determined of: for it was the people
that made the King, and not the King the people.

It is certain then, that the people by way of stipulation, require a
performance of covenants, the King promises it. Now the condition of a
Stipulator is in terms of law more worthy than of a promiser. The people
asks the King, whether he will govern justly and according to the laws? He
promises he will. Then the people answers, and not before, that whilst he
governes uprightly, they will obey faithfully. The King therefore promises
simply and absolutely, the people upon condition: the which failing to be
accomplished, the people rest according to equity and reason, quit from their
promise.

In the first covenant, or contract, there is only an obligation to piety: in
the second, to justice. In that the King promises to serve God religiously: in
this, to rule the people justly. By the one he is obliged with the utmost of
his endeavors to procure the glory of God: by the other, the profit of the
people. In the first there is a condition expressed, If thou keep my
commandments: in the second, If thou distribute justice equally to every man.
God is the proper revenger of deficiency in the former, and the whole people
the lawful punisher of delinquency in the latter, or the Estates, the
representative body thereof, who have assumed to themselves the protection of
the people. This has been always practiced in all well-governed Estates.
Amongst the Persians, after the due performance of holy Rites, they contracted
with Cyrus in manner following.

Thou, O Cyrus, in the first place, shall promise, That if any make war
Zenophon lib. 8. Paed.
against the Persians, or seek to infringe the liberty of the Laws, thou will
with the utmost of thy power defend and protect this country. Which having
promised, they presently add, And we Persians promise to be aiding to keep all
men in obedience, whilst thou defendest the country. Zenophon calls this
agreement, A Confederation; as also Isocrates calls that which he writ of the
duties of subjects toward their Princes, A Discourse of Confederation. The
alliance Zenoph. in tract. de repub. Lacede.
or confederation was renewed every month between the Kings, and Ephores of
Sparta, although those Kings were descended from the line of Hercules. And as
these Kings did solemnly swear, to govern according to the Laws, so did the
Ephores also to maintain them in their authority, whilst they performed their
promise. Likewise in the Roman Kingdom there was an agreement between Romulus
the Senate, and the people, in this manner: That the people should make Laws,
and the King look they were kept: The people should decree war, and the King
should manage it. Now although many Emperors rather by force and ambition,
than by any lawful right, were seas'd of the Roman Empire, and by that which
they call a Royal Law, attributed to themselves an absolute authority;
notwithstanding by the fragments which remain both in books, and in Roman
Inscriptions, of that Law, it plainly appears, that power and authority was
granted them to preserve and govern the Commonwealth, not to ruin and
oppress it by tyranny. Nay, all good Emperors have ever professed, that they
held themselves tied to the Laws, and received the Empire from the Senate, to
whose determination they always referred the most important affairs, and
esteemed it a great error without their advice to resolve on the occasions of
the public State.

If we take into our consideration the condition of the Empires, Kingdoms and
States of times, there is not any of them worthy of those names, where there is
not some such covenant or confederacy between the people and the Prince. It is
not long since that in the Empire of Germany, the King of the Romans being
ready to be crowned Emperor; was bound to do homage, and make oath of Fealty
to the Empire, no more nor less than as the vassal is bound to do to his
Lord when he is invested with his fec. Although the form of the words which he
is to swear, have been somewhat altered by the Popes, yet notwithstanding the
substance still remains the same. According to which we know that Charles the
fifth of the house of Austria, was under Specul. Saxon. lib. 3. Vrtic. 54.
certain conditions chosen Emperor, as in the same manner his successors were,
the sum of which was, that he should keep the Laws already made, and make no
new ones without the consent of the Electors, that he should govern the public
affairs by the advice of the general Estates, nor engage any thing that
belongs to the Empire, and other matters which are particularly recited by the
Historians. When the Emperor is crowned at Aquisgrave, the Archbishop of
Cullen requires of him in the first place, Sleyd. lib. 2. and 2.
If he will maintain the Church, if he will distribute justice, if he will
defend the Empire, and protect Widows, Orphans, and all other worthy of
comp^ssion: The which after he has solemnly sworn before the Altar, the
Princes also which represent the Empire, are asked, if they will not promise
the same; neither is the Emperor anointed, nor receives the other Ornaments of
the Empire, before he have first taken that solemn oath. Whereupon it follows,
that the Emperor is tied absoutely, and the princes of the Empire, under
condition. That the same is observed in the Kingdom of Polonia, no man will
make question, who had but seen or heard of the ceremonies and rites wherewith
Henry of Anjoy was lately chosen and crowned King of that Country, and
especially then when the condition of maintaining of the two Religions, the
Reformed and the Roman, was demanded, the which the Lords of the kingdom in
express terms required of him three several times, and he as often made
promise to perform. The same is observed in the Kingdoms of Bohemia, Hungary,
and others; the which we omit to relate particularly, to avoid prolixity.

Now this manner of stipulation is not only received in those Kingdoms where
the right of election is yet entirely observed; but even in those also which
are esteemed to be simply hereditary, When the King of France is crowned, the
Bishops of Laon and Beauvois, Ecclesiastical Peers, ask all the people there
present, whether they desire and command, that he which is there before them,
shall be their King? Whereupon he is said even then in the style of the
inauguration, to be chosen by the people: and when they have given the sign of
consenting, then the King swears that he will maintain all the rights,
privileges, and laws of France universally, that he will not aliene the
D^meane, and the other Articles, which have been yet so changed and accomodated
to bad intentions, as they differ greatly from that copy which remains in the
Library of the Chapter of Beauvois, according to which it is recorded, that
King Philip, the first of that name, took his Oath at his Coronation; yet
notwithstanding they are not unfitly expressed: Neither is he girded with the
sword, nor anointed, nor crowned by the Peers (who at that time wear Coronets
on their heads) nor receives the Scepter and rod of Justice, nor is proclaimed
King, before first the people have commanded it: neither do the Peers take
their oaths of allegiance before he have first solemnly sworn to keep the
Laws carefully.

And those be, that he shall not waste the public revenue, that he shall not
of his own proper authority, impose any taxes, customs, or tributes: that he
shall not make peace or war, nor determine of State-affaires, without the advice of the Council of State. Briefly, that he should leave to the
Parliament, to the States, and to the Officers of the Kingdom, their
authority entire, and all things else which have been usually observed in the
Kingdom of France. And when he first enters any City or Province, he is bound
to confirm their privileges, and swears to maintain their Laws and
Customs. This is straightly observed in the Cities of Toulouse, and Rochel, and
in the Countries of Daulphinie, Province, and Britain: The which Towns and
Provinces have their particular and express Covenants and agreements with the
Kings, which must needs be void, if the condition expressed in the Contract be
not of force, nor the Kings tied to the performance.

There is the form of the Oath of the ancient Kings of Burgundy In Annal.
Burgund.
yet extant in these words: I will protect all men in their rights, according
to Law and justice.

In England, Scotland, Sweden, and Denmark, there is almost the same custom
as in France: but in no place there is used a more discreet care in their
manner of proceeding, than in Spain. For in the Kingdom of Arragon, after the
finishing of many Ceremonies, which are used between him, which represents the
Justitia major of Arragon, which comprehends the majesty of the Commonwealth,
seated in a higher seat, and the King, which is to be crowned, who swears
fealty, and does his homage: and having read the Laws and conditions, to the
accomplishment whereof he is sworn.

Finally, the Lords of the Kingdom use to the King these words in the vulgar
Language, as is before expressed, page 60. Nos qui valemos tanto como vos, y
podemos mas que vos, vos elegimos kei con estas e y estat conditiones, entra
vos y nos un que manda mas que vos.
We which are as much worth as you, and have more power than you, choose you
King upon these and these conditions, and there is one between you and us,
which commands over you. But least the King should think he swore only for
fashion sake, and to observe an old custom, every third year in full
assembly of the Estates, the very same words, and in the same manner are
repeated unto him.

And if under pretext of his royal dignity he become insolent, violating the
Laws, and neglect his public faith and promise given, then by the privilege
of the Kingdom, he is judged, excommunicated, as execrable as Julian the
Apostata was by the primitive Church: which excommunication is esteemed of that
validity, that instead of praying for the King in their public oraysons, they
pray against him, and the subjects are by the same right acquit from their oath
of Allegiance: as the vassal is exempted from obedience and obligation by
oath to his Lord which stands excommunicated; the which has been determined
and confirmed In Council. Tolet. 4. c. 74. and in Tolet. 6. lib. 2. feud. tit.
28. sect. 1.
both by act of Council and Decree of State in the Kingdom of Arragon.

In like manner, in the Kingdom of Castile in full assembly of the Estates,
the King being ready to be crowned, is first in the presence of all advertised
of his duty: and even then are read the Articles discreetly composed for the
good of the Commonwealth, the King swears he will observe and keep them
carefully and faithfully; which being done, then the Constable takes his oath
of allegiance, after the Princes and Deputies for the Towns swear each of
them in their order; and the same is observed in the Kingdoms of Portugal,
Leon, and the rest of Spain. The lesser principallities have their institution
grounded on the same right. The contracts which the Brabancers and the rest of
the Netherlanders, together with those of Austria, Carinthia, and others, had
with La Joyeuse entree.
their Princes, were always conditional. But especially the Brabancers, to
take away all occasion of dispute, have this express condition: which is that
in the receiving of their Duke, there is read in his presence the ancient
Articles, wherein is comprised that which is requisite for the public good;
and thereunto is also added, that if he do not exactly and precisely observe
them, they may choose what other Lord it shall seem good unto them; the which
they do in express words protest unto him. He having allowed and accepted of
these Articles, does in that public assembly promise and solemnly swear to
keep them. The which was observed in the reception of Philip the second King
of Spain. Ludovicus Guicciard. in Discript. Belgiae.
Briefly, there is not any man can deny, but that there is a contract mutually
obligatorie between the King and the Subjects, which requires the people to
obey faithfully, and the King to govern lawfully, for the performance whereof
the King swears first, and after the people.

I would ask here wherefore a man does swear, if it be not to declare, that
what he delivers he sincerely intends from his heart? Can any thing be judged
more near to the law of nature, than to observe that which we approve?
Furthermore, what is the reason L. 1. D. Acpact. l. non minorum 20. D. de
transact
the King swears first, and at the instance, and required by the people, but
to accept a condition either tacit or expressed? Wherefore is there a
condition opposed to the Contract, if it be not that in failing to perform the
condition, the contract according to law remains void? And if for want of
satisfying the condition by right, the contract is of no force: who shall dare
to call that people perjured, which refuses to obey a King which makes no
account of his promise, which he might and ought to have kept, and wilfully
breaks those laws which he did swear to observe? On the contrary, may we not
rather esteem such a King perfidious, perjured, and unworthy of his place? For
if the Law free the vassal Lib. 2. feudor. tit. 26.. 24. and tit. 47. Dionys.
Halic. lib. 2.
from his Lord, who dealt felloniously with him, although that to speak
properly the Lord swears not fealty to his vassal, but he to him: if the
Law of the twelve Tables does detest and hold in execration the protector that
defraudeth him that is under his tuition: if the civil Law permit an
infranchised servant to bring his action against his patron, for any grievous
usage: if in such cases the same Law delivers the slave from the power of his
Master, although the obligation be natural only and not civil: is it not
much more reasonable that the people be loosed from that oath of allegiance
which they have taken, if the King (who may be not unfitly resembled by an
Attorney sworn to look to his Clients cause) first break his oath solemnly
taken? And what if all these ceremonies, solemn oaths, nay sacramental
promises had never been taken? Does not nature her self sufficiently teach
that Kings were on this condition ordained by the people, that they should
govern well? Judges that they should distribute justice uprightly? Captains
in the war, that they should lead their Arms against their enemies: If on
the contrary, they themselves forage and spoil their subjects, and instead of
governors become enemies, as they leave indeed the true and essential
qualities of a King, so neither ought the people to acknowledge them for
lawful Princes. But what if a people (you will reply) subdued by force, be
compeld Cicer. 1. Offic.
by the King to take an oath of servitude? And what if a robber, pirate, or
tyrant, (I will answer) with whom no bond of humane society can be effectual,
holding his dagger to your throat, constrain you presently to become bound in
a great sum of money? Is it not an unquestionable Maxim in Law, that a promise
exacted by violence cannot bind? especially if any thing be promised against
common reason, or the law of nature? Is there any thing more repugnant to
nature and reason, than that a people should manicle and fetter themselves; and
to be obliged by promise to the Prince, with their own hands and weapons to be
their own executioners? There is therefore a mutual obligation between the
King and the people, which whether it be civil or natural only, whether
tacit, or expressed in words, it cannot by any means be annihilated, nor by
any Law be abrogated, much less by force made void. And this obligation is of
such power, that the Prince which wilfully violates it, is a tyrant: and the
people which purposely breaks it, may be justly termed seditious.

Hitherto we have treated of a King, it now rests we do somewhat more fully
describe a Tyrant. We have showed that he is a Who may truly be called tyrants?
King, which lawfully governes a Kingdom, either derived to him by succession,
or committed to him by Election. It follows therefore that he is reputed a
tyrant, which as opposite to a King, either Aristo. lib. 5. polit. c. 10.
gains a kingdom by violence, or indirect means, or being invested therewith
by lawful election or succession, governes it not according to law and
equity, or neglects those contracts and agreements, Bartol. in tract. de
tyrannide.
to the observation whereof he was strictly obliged at his reception. All
which may very well occur in one and the same person. The first is commonly
called a tyrant without title: the second a tyrant by practice. Now it may well
so come to pass, that he which possesses himself of a kingdom by force, to
govern justly, and he on whom it descends by a lawful title, to rule
unjustly. But for so much as a kingdom is rather a right than an inheritance,
and an office than a possession: he seems rather worthy the name of a tyrant,
which unworthily acquits himself of his charge, than he which entered into his
place by a wrong door. In the same sense is the Pope called an intruder which
entered by indirect means into the papacy: and he an abuser which gover^s il in
it.

Pithagoras says, That a worthy stranger is to be preferred before an unworthy
Citizen, yea though he be a Kinsman. Let it be lawful also for us to say, that
a Prince which gained his Principality by indirect courses, provided he
govern according to law, and administer justice equally, is much to be
preferred before him, which carries himself tyrannously, although he were
legally invested into his government with all the Ceremonies and R^tes
thereunto appertaining.

For seeing that Kings were instituted to feed, to judge, to cure the d^seases
of the people: Certainly I had rather that a T^iefe should feed me, than a
Shepherd devour me: I had rather receive justice from a R^bber, than outrage
from a Judge: I had better be healed by an Empirick, than poisoned by a Doct^^
in Physic. It were much more profitable for me to have my estate carefully
managed by an intruding Guardian, than to have it w^sted and dissipated by one
legally appointed.

And although it may be that ambition was his first solicitor, to enter
violently into the government, yet may it perhaps appear he affected it the
rather to give testimony of his equity and moderation Zenophon. Pluta^chus in
Alexand. in Aemi^co, Caesare. Live us, lib. 1. Su^conius in Caesare, c. 75.
in governing, witness Circus, Alexander, and the Romans, which ordinarily
accorded to those people they subdued, permission to govern themselves
according to their own laws, customs, and privileges, yea sometimes
incorporated them into the body of their own state: on the contrary, the
Tyrant by practice seems to extend the privilege of his legal succession,
the better to execute violence and extortion, as may be seen in these days,
not only by the examples of the Turks and Moscovites, but also in diver^
Christian Princes: therefore the act of one which at the first was ill, is in
some reasonable time rectified by justice: whereas the other like an inveterate
disease, the elder it grows, the worse it affects the Patient.

Now if according to the saying of Saint Augustine, those kingdoms August. in
lib. 4. c. 4. de c. vi. ^es.
where justice has no place, are but a rapsodie of freebooters; they are in
that, both the Tyrant without title, and he by practice alike, for that they
are both thieves, both robbers, and both unjust possessors, as he certainly is
no less an unjust detayner which takes another man's goods against the owners
will, than he which employes it ill when it was taken before.

But the fault is without comparison, much more greater of him which possesses
an estate for to ruin it, than of the other which made himself Master of it
to preserve it.

Briefly, the Tyrant by practice vainly coloring his unjust extortions with
the justice of his title, is much more blameable then the Tyrant without title,
who recompenceth the violence of his first intrusion in a continued course of a
legal and upright government.

But to proceed, there may be observed some difference amongst Tyrants without
title.
Tyrants without title: For there are some which ambitiously invade their
neighbors Countries, to enlarge their own, as Nimrod, Minus, and the
Canaanites have done. Although such are termed Kings by their own people, yet
to those on whose confines they have encroached without any just right, or
occasion, they will be accounted Tyrants.

There be others which having attained to the government of an elective
Kingdom, that endeavor by deceitful means, by corruption, by present, and
other bad practices, to make it become hereditary. For witness whereof, we
need not make search into elder times; these are worse than the former, for so
much as secret fraud, as Cicero says, is ever more odious than open force.

There be also others which are so horribly wicked, that they seek to enthrall
their own native Country like the viperous brood which goaw through the
entralls of their mother: as be those Generals of Armies created by the people,
who afterward by the means of those forces make themselves masters of the
State, as Caesar at Rome under pretense of the Dictatorship, and diverse Princes
of Italy.

There be women also which intrude themselves into the government of those
kingdoms which the laws only permit to the males, and make themselves Queens
and Regents, as Athalia did in Judab, Semiramis in Assyria, Agripina in the
Roman Empire in the Reign of her son Nero, Mammea in Alexander Severus his
time, Semiamira in Heliogabalusses; and certain Brunichildes in the kingdom
of France, who so educated their sons [as the Queens of the house Medicis in
these latter times] during their minority, that attaining to more maturity,
their only care was to glut themselves in pleasures and delights: so that the
whole management of affairs remained in the hands of their Mothers, or of
their Minions, servants, and Officers. Those also are Tyrants without title,
who taking advantage of the floath, weakness, and dissolute courses of those
Princes which are otherwise lawfully instituted, and seeking to enwrap them in
a sleepy dream of voluptuous idleness (as under the French Kings, especially
those of the Merovingian line, some of the Mayres of the Palace have been
advanced to that dignity for such egregious services) transferring into their
own command all the royal authority, and leaving the King only the bare name.
All which Tyrants are certainly of this condition, that if for the manner of
their government they are not blameable: Yet for so much as they entered into
that jurisdiction by tyrannous intrusion, they may justly be termed Tyrants
without title.

Concerning Tyrants by practice, it is not so easy to describe Tyrants by
practice.
them as true Kings. For reason rules the one, and self-will the other: the
first prescribes bounds to his affections, the second confines his desires
within no limits, what is the proper rights of Kings may be easily declared,
but the outrageous insolences of Tyrants cannot without much difficulty be
expressed. And as a right angle is uniforme, and like to it self one and the
fame. so an oblique diversifies it self into various and sundry species: In
like manner is justice and equity simple, and may be deciphered in few words:
but injustice and injury are diverse, and for their sundry accidents not to be
so easily defined; but that more will be omitted then expressed. Now although
there be certain rules by which these Tyrants may be represented (though not
absolutely to the life:) yet notwithstanding there is not any more certain
than by conferring and comparing a Tyrants fraudulant sleights with a Kings
virtuous actions.

A Tyrant lops off those ears which grow higher then the rest of the corn,
especially where virtue make them most conspicuously eminent, oppresses by
calumnies, and fraudulent practices, the principal officers of the State,
gives out reports of intended conspiracies against himself, that he might have
some colorable pretext to cut them off, witness Tiberius, Maximinius, and
others, which spared not their own kinsmen, cozens, and brothers.

The King on the contrary does not only acknowledge, his brothers to be as it
were consorts unto him in the Empire: But also holds in the place of brothers
all the principal Officers of the Kingdom, and is not ashamed to confess that
of them (inquality as deputed from the general Estates) he holds the Crown.

The tyrant advances above and in opposition to the ancient and worthy
Nobility, mean and unworthy persons; to the end that these base sellowes being
absolutely his creatures, might applaud and apply themselves to the fulfilling
of all his loose and unruly desires. The King maintains every man in his Rank,
honors and respects the Grandies as the Kingdoms friends, desiring their good
as well as his own.

The tyrant hates and suspects discreet and wise men, and fears no opposition
more than virtue, as being conscious of his own vicious courses, and esteeming
his own security to consist principally in a general corruption of all
estates, introduces multiplicity of Tavernes, Gaming-houses, Maskes,
Stageplayes, Brothel-houses, and all other licencious superfluities, that might
effeminate and bastardize noble spirits, as Cyrus did, to weaken and subdue the
Sardiens: The King on the contrary allureth from all places honest and able
men, and encourages them by pensions and honors; and for seminaries of
virtue, erects Schools and Universities in all convenient places.

A tyrant as much as in him lies, prohibites or avoids all public Machiavil in
principe.
Assemblies, fears Parliaments, Diets and me^tings of the general Estates,
flies the light, affecting (like the B^t) to converse only in darkness; yea,
he is jealous of the very gesture, countenance, and discourse of his subjects.
The King because he converses always as in the presence of Men and Angels,
glories in Arist. lib. 5. c. 11. polit.
the multitude, and sufficiency of his Counselors, esteeming nothing well done
which is ordered without their advice, and is so far from doubting or
distasting the public meeting of the general Estates, as he honors and
respects those Assemblies with much favor and affection.

A tyrant nourishes and feeds factions and dissen^ions amongst his subjects,
ruins one by the help of another, that he may the easier vanquish the
remainder, advantaging himself by this division, like those dishonest Surgeons
which lengthen out their cures. Briefly after the manner of that abominable
Vitellius, he is not ashamed to say, that the karkasse of a dead enemy,
especially a subjects, yields a good savor. On the contrary, a good King
endeavors always to keep peace amongst his subjects, as a father amongst his
children, choakes the seeds of troubles, and quickly heals the scarre; the
execution even of justice upon rebels, drawing tears from his compassionate
eyes; yea, those whom a good King maintains and defends against a foreign
enemy, a tyrant (the enemy of nature) compels them to turn the points of their
swords into their own proper intrails. A tyrant fills his Garrisons with strange
Soldiers, builds Citadels against his subjects, disarmes the people, throws
down their forts, makes himself formidable with guards of strangers, or men
only fit for p^llage and spoil, gives pensions out of the public Treasury to
spies and calumniating informers, dispersed through all Cities and Provinces.
Contrariwise, a King reposeth more his safety 1. vi. lib. 2 c. 1. Dionys.
^^ai^^. l. 5. de Arunte filio Porsennae.
in the love of his subjects, than in the strength of his Fortresses against
his enemies, taking no care to inroll Soldiers, but accounts every subject as
a man at arms to guard him, and builds forts to restrain the irruptions of
foreign enemies, and not to constrain his subjects to obedience, in whose
fidelity he puts his greatest confidence. Therefore it is that tyrants,
although they have such numberless guards about them to drive off throngs of
Prove. 14. 28.
people from approaching them, yet cannot all those numbers secure them from
doubts, jealousies and distrusts, which continually afflict and terrify their
timorous consciencese yea in the midst of their greatest strength, the
tyrannizer of tyrants, fear, mamaketh prize of their souls, and there triumphs
in their affliction. A good King in the greatest concourse of people, is freest
from Bartol. in tract de tyrannide.
doubts or fears, nor troubled with solicitous distrusts in his solitary
retirements, all places are equally secure unto him, his own conscience being
his best guard. If a tyrant want civil broils to exercise his cruel
disposition in, he makes wars abroad; erects idle and needless trophies to
continually employ his tributaries, that they might want leisure to think on
other things, as Pharaoh did the Jews, and Polierates the Samiens; therefore he
always A^gid. Romans de reg. prin.
prepares for, or threatens war, or at least seems so to do, and so still
rather draws mischief on, than puts it further off. A King never makes war, but
compeld unto it, and for the preservation of Cicero de offic. lib. 1.
the public; he never desires to purchase advantage by treason, he never
enters into any war that exposes the Commonwealth to more danger than it
affords probable hope of commodity.

A Tyrant leaves no design unattempted by which he may fleece his Subjects of
their substance, and turn it to his proper benefit, that being continually
troubled in gaining means to live, they may have no leisure nor hope how to
regaine their liberty: On the contrary, the King knows that every good
Subjects purse will be ready to supply the Commonwealths occasion, and
therefore believes he is possessed of no small treasure, whilst through his good
government his Subjects flow in all abundance.

A Tyrant extorts unjustly from many to cast prodigally upon two or three
Minions, and those unworthy; he imposes on all: and exacteth from all, to
furnish their superfluous and riotous expenses: he builds his own, and
followers fortunes on the ruins of the public: he draws out the peoples
blood, by the veins of their means, and gives it presently to carouse to his
Court-leeches. But a King cuts off from his ordinary expenses, to ease the
peoples necessities, neglects his private state, and furnishes with all
magnificence the public occasions; briefly is prodigal of his own blood,
to defend and maintain the people committed to his care.

If a Tyrant as heretofore Tiberius, Nero, Commodus and others, did suffer his
Subjects to have some breathing time from unreasonable exactions, and like
spunges to gather some moisture, it is but to squeese them out afterward to
his own use: on the contrary, if a King do sometimes open a vain, and draw
some blood, it is for the peoples good, and not to be expended at his own
pleasure in any dissolute courses. And therefore as the holy Scripture compares
the one to a Shepherd, so does it also resemble the other to a roaring Prove.
8. 15.
Lion, to whom notwithstanding the Fox is oftentimes coupled. For a Tyrant as
says Cice, is culpable in effect of the greatest injustice that Cicer. de
offic. lib. 1.
may be imagined, and yet he carries it so cunningly, that when he most
deceives, it is then that he makes greatest appearance to deal sincerely.
And therefore does he artificially counterfeit Religion and devotion, wherein
says Aristotle, he expresses one of the most absolute Arist. lib. 5. polit.
c. 11.
subtleties that Tyrants can possibly practice: he does so compose his
countenance to piety, by that means to terrify the people from conspiring
against him; who they may well imagine to be especially favored of God,
expressing in all appearance so reverently to serve him. He fains also to be
exceedingly affected to the public good; not so much for the love of it, as
for fear of his own safety.

Furthermore he desires much to be esteemed just, and loyal in some affairs,
purposely to deceive and betray more easily in matters of greater consequence:
much like those thieves which maintain themselves by thefts and robberies,
cannot yet long subsist in their trade, without exercising some parcel of
justice in their proceedings. He also counterfeits the merciful, but it is in
pardoning of such malefactors, in punishing whereof he might more truly gain
the reputation of a pitiful Prince.

To speak in a word, that which the true King is, the Tyrant would seem to
be, and knowing that men are wonderfully attracted with, and inamoured of
virtue, he endeavors with much subtilty to make his vices appear yet masked
with some shadow of virtue: but let him counterfeit never so cunningly, still
the Fox will be known by his tail: and although he fawn and flatter like a
Spannell, yet his snarling and grinning will ever bewray his currish kind.

Furthermore, as a well-ordered Monarchy partakes of the principal Tho. Aquin.
in secund. secund. q. 12. a^t. 11.
commodities of all other governements: So on the contrary, where tyranny
prevails, there all the discommodities of confusion are frequent.

A Monarchy has in this, conformity with an Aristocraty, that the most able
and discreet are called to consultations: Tyranny and Oligarchy accord in this,
that their counsels are composed of the worst and most corrupted. And as in the
Council Royal, there may in a fort seem many Kings to have interests in the
government, so in the other on the contrary, a multitude of Tyrants always
domineers.

The Monarchy borrowes of the popular government the assemblies of the Estates,
whither are sent for Deputies the most sufficient of Cities and Provinces, to
deliberate of, and determine matters of State: the tyranny takes this of the
Ochlocracie, that if she be not able to hinder the convocation of the Estates,
yet will she endeavor by factious subtilties and pernicious practices, that
the greatest enemies of Order and Reformation of the State be sent to those
Assemblies, the which we have known practiced in our times. In this manner
assumes the Tyrant the countenance of a King, and tyranny the semblance of a
Kingdom, and the continuance succeeds commonly according to the dexterity
wherewith it is managed: yet, as Aristotle says, we shall hardly read of any
tyranny that has out-lasted a hundred yearee: briefly the King principally
regards the public utility, and a Tyrants chiefest care is for his private
commodity.

But seeing the condition of men is such, that a King is with much difficulty
to be found, that in all his actions only agrees at the public good, and yet
cannot long subsist without expression of some special care thereof, we will
conclude that where the Commonwealths advantage is most preferred, there is
both a lawful King and Kingdom; and where particular designs and private
ends prevail against the public profit, there questionless is a Tyrant and
tyranny.

Thus much concerning Tyrants by practice, in the examining whereof we have
not altogether fixed our discourse on the loose disorders of their wicked and
licentious lives, Bartol. in. tract. de tiranct de regim. Civt.
which some say is the character of a bad man: but not always of a bad Prince.
If therefore the Reader be not satisfied with this description, besides the
more exact representations of Tyrants which he shall find in histories: he may
in these our days behold an absolute model of many living and breathing
Tyrants: whereof Aristotle in his time did much complain. Now at the last we
are come as it were by degrees to the chief and principal point of the
question. We have seen how that Kings To whom it belongs to resist and
suppress Tyra^ts without title.
have been chosen by God, either with relation to their Families or their
persons only, and after installed by the people: In like manner what is the
duty of the King, and of the Officers of the Kingdom, how far the authority,
power, and duty both of the one and the other extends, and what and how sacred
are the Covenants and contracts which are made at the inauguration of Kings, and
what conditions are intermixed, both tacit and expressed; finally who is a
Tyrant without title, and who by practice, seeing it is a thing unquestionable
that we are bound to obey a lawful King, which both to God and people carries
himself according to those Covenants whereunto he stands obliged, as it were
to God himself, seeing in a fort he represents his divine Majesty: It now
follows that we treat, how, and by whom a Tyrant may be lawfully resisted,
and who are the persons that ought to be chiefly actors therein, and what
course is to be held, that the action may be managed according to right and
reason: we must first speak of him which is commonly called a Tyrant without
title. Let us suppose then that some Ninus having neither received outrage nor
offense, invades a people over whom he has no color of pretension: that
Caesar seeks to oppress his Country, Otto Frising. Chron. l. 3. c. 7.
and the Roman Commonwealth: that Popiclus endeavors by murders and treasons
to make the elective Kingdom of Polonia to become hereditary to him and his
posterity: or some Brunichilde draws (...) lib. ^. c. 1. (...) T^u^on. lib. 4.
c. 51. lib. 5. c. 1^. lib. 8. c. 29.
to her self and her Protadius the absolute government of France: or Ebroinus
taking advantage of Theodericks weakness and idleness, gains the entire
administration of the State, and oppresses the people, what shall be our
lawful refuge herein?

First, The law of nature teaches, and commands us to maintain and defend
our lives and liberties, without which life is scant worth the enjoying,
against all injury and violence. Nature has imprinted this by instinct in Dogs
against Wolves, in Bulls against Lions, betwixt Pigeons and Spar hawks, betwixt
Pullen and Kites, and yet much more in man against man himself, if man become
a beast: and therefore he which questions the lawfulness of defending ones
self, does as much as in him lies question the law of nature. To this must be
added the law of Nations, which distinguishes possessions, and Dominions,
fixes limits, and makes our confi^^s, which every man is bound to defend
against all invaders. And therefore it is no less lawful to resist, Alexander
the great, it without any right or being justly provoked, he invades a Country
with a mighty Navy; as well as Diomedes the Pirate which scoures the Seas in a
small vessel. For in this case Alexanders right is no more than Di^medes his,
but only he has more power to do wrong, and not so easily to be compeld to
reason as the other. Briefly, one may as well oppose Alexander in pillaging a
Country, as a Thief in purloining a cloak, as well him when he seeks to
batter down the walls of a City, as a robber that offers to break into a
private house. There is besides this, the civil law, or municipial laws of
several Countries which governs the societies of men, by certain rules, some
in one manner, some in another; some submit themselves to the government of one
man, some to more; others are ruled by a whole Communalty, some absolutely
exclude women from the Royal Throne, others admit them, these here choose their
King descended of such a family, those there make election of whom they please,
besides other customs practiced amongst several Nations. If therefore any
offer either by fraud or force to violate this law, we are all bound to resist
him, because he wrongs that society to which we owe all that we have, and
would run our Country, to the preservation whereof, all men by nature; by
law and by solemn oath are strictly obliged: insomuch that fear or
negligence, or bad purposes, make us omit this duty, we may justly be
accounted breakers of the Laws, betrayers of our Country, and contemners of
Religion. Now as the Law of Nature, of Nations, and the civil commands us to
take Arms against such Tyrants: so is there not any manner of reason that
should persuade us to the contrary; neither is there any oath, covenant, or
obligation, public or private, of power justly to restrain us: therefore the
meanest private man may resist and lawfully L. ult. D. ad leg. Jul. Majestatis.
oppose such an intruding tyrant. The Law Julia which condemns to death those
that raise rebellion against their Country or Prince, has here no place: for
he is no Prince which without any lawful title invadeth the Commonwealth, or
Confines of an other: nor he a rebel which by arms defends his Country: but
rather to this had relation the Oath which all the youth of Athens were
accustomed to take in the Temple of Aglaura: I will fight for Religion, for the
Laws, for the Altars, and for our possessions, either alone or with others,
and will do the utmost of my endeavor, to leave to posterity our Country,
at the least in as good estate as I found it. To as little purpose can the
Bartol. in trac. de Guelph. and Gibellin.
Laws made against seditious persons be alleged here; for he is seditious
which undertakes to defend the people, in opposition of order and public
Discipline; But he is no raiser, but a suppressor of sedition, which
restrains within the limits of reason, the subvertor of his Countries
welfare, and public Discipline.

On the contrary to this, has proper relation the Law of Tyranacides, Plin.
lib. 4. Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 6. cap. 4.
which honors the living with great and memorable recompenses, and the dead
with worthy Epitaphes, and glorious Statues, that have been their Countries
Liberators from Tyrants; as, Harmodius and Aristogiton at Athens, Brutus and
Cassius in Greece, and Aratus of Sycione. To these by a public Decree were
Ziphilm. in vita August.
erected Statues, because they delivered their Countries from the tyrannies of
Pisistratus, of Caesar, and of Nicocles. The which was Plutarch. in Arato.
of such respect amongst the Ancients, that Zerxes having made himself Master
of the City of Athens, caused to be transported into Persia the Statues of
Harmodius and Aristogiton: afterward Valor. Maxim. lib. 2, c. ultim.
Selcucus caused them to be returned into their former place: and as in their
passage they came by Roades, those famous Citizens entertained them with
public and stupendous solemnities, and during their abode there, they placed
them in the choicest sacresties of their gods. But the Law made against
forsakers, and traitors, takes absolutely hold on those which are negligent and
careless to deliver their Country oppressed with tyranny, and condemns them
to the same punishment, as those cowardly Soldiers, which when they should
fight, either counterfeit sickness, or cast off their Arms and run away.
Every one therefore both in general and particular, ought to yield their best
assistance unto this: as in a public fire, to bring both hooks, and buckets,
and L. 3. and l. Omne delictum.. ult. D. de remilit.
water: we must not ceremoniously expect that the Captain of the Watch be
first called, nor till the Governor of the Town be come into the streets; but
let every man draw water and climb to the housetop; it is necessary for all
men that the fire be quenched. For if whilst the Gauls with much silence and
vigilancie seek to scale and surprise the Capitol, the Soldiers be drowsy
with their former pains, the Watch buried in sleep, the dogs fail to
bark: then must the geese play the Sentinells, and with their gagling noise
give an alarm. And the Soldiers and Watch shall be degraded, yea, and put to
death: the geese for perpetual remembrance of this deliverance, shall be
always sed in the Capitol, and much esteemed.

This of which we have spoken, is to be understood of a tyranny not yet
firmly rooted, to wit, whilst a tyrant conspires, machinates, and lays his
plots and practices. But if he be once so possessed of the State, and that the
people being subdued, promise and swear obedience: the Commonwealth being
oppressed, resign their authority into his hands, and that the Kingdom in
some formal manner, consent to the changing of their Laws: for so much
certainly as then he has gained a title which before he wanted, and seems to
be as well a legal as actual possessor thereof, although this yoke were laid
on the peoples neck by compulsion, yet must they quietly and peaceably rest in
the will of the Almighty, who at his pleasure transferres Kingdoms from one
Nation to another. Otherways there should be no Kingdom whose juridiction
might not be disputed: and it may well chance that he which before was a tyrant
without title, having obtained the title of a King, may free himself from any
tyrannous imputation by governing those under him with equity and moderation.
Therefore then as the people of Jurie under the authority 2 Kings 24. and 25.
Ierem. 37.
of King Ezechias did lawfully resist the invasion of Senacherib the Assyrian:
So on the contrary was Zadechias and all his subjects worthily punished,
because that without any just occasion after they had done homage and sworn
fealty to Nebuchadnezzar, they rise in rebellion against him. For after
promise of performance it is too late to repent: and as in battles every one
ought to give testimony of his valor, but being taken prisoner, must
faithfully observe Covenants: so it is requisite that the people maintain
their rights by all possible means: but if it chance that they be brought into
the subjection of another will, they must then patiently support the dominion
of the Victor. So did Pompey Cato, and Cicero, and others, perform the parts
of good Patriots then when they took arms against Caesar, seeking to alter
the government of the State; neither can those be justly excused whose base
fear hindered the happy success of Pompey and his partakers noble designer.
Augustus himself is said to have reproved one who rayled on Cato, affirming
that he carried himself worthily and exceedingly affected to the greatness of
his Country in courageously opposing the alteration which his contraries
sought to introduce in the Government of the State, seeing all innovations of
that nature are ever Authors of much trouble and confusion.

Furthermore, no man can justly reprehend Brutus, Cassius, and the rest, who
killed Caesar, before his tyrannical authority had taken any firm rooting.
And so were there Statues of brass erected in honor of them by public decree
at Athens, and placed by those of Harmodius and Aristogiton, then when after
the dispatching of Caesar they retired from Rome, to avoyde Mar: Antonie and
Augustus their revenge. But Cinna was certainly guilty of sedition, who after
a legal transferring of the peoples power into the hands of Augustus, is said
to conspire against him. Likewise when the Pepins sought to take the Crown of
France from the Merovingians; as also when those of the line of Capet
endeavored to supplant the Pepins, any might lawfully resist them without
incurring the crime of sedition: but when by public counsel and the
authority of the Estates, the kingdom was transferred from one family to
another, it was then unlawful to oppose it. The same may be said if a Woman
possess her self of the Kingdom, which the Salick Law absolutely prohibites,
or if one seek to make a Kingdom merely elective, hereditary to his
offspring, while those Laws stand in force, and are unr^pealed by the
authority of the general Estates, which represent the body of the people.
Neither is it necessary, in this respect, to have regard whether faction is the
greater, more powerful or more illustrious. Always those are the greater
number who are led by passion, than those that are ruled by reason, and
therefore tyranny has more servants than the Commonwealth. But Rome is there
according to the saying of Pompey, where the Senate is, and the Senate is where
there is obedience to the Laws, love of liberty, and studious carfulness
for the Countries preservation. And therefore though Brennus may seem to be
master of Rome: yet notwithstanding is Rome at veies with Camillus, who
prepares to deliver Rome from bondage. It behooves therefore all true Romans to
repair to Camillus, and assist his Enterprise with the utmost of their power
and endeavors. Although Themistocles, and all his Plutarch. in vita Themist.
able and worthiest companions leave Athens, and put to Sea with a navy of two
hundred Galleys, notwithstanding it cannot be said that any of these men are
banished Athens. But rather as Themist^cles answered; These two hundred Galleys
are more useful for us than the greatest City of all Greece: for that they
are armed and prepared for the defense of those which endeavor to maintain
and uphold the public State.

But to come to other examples; it follows not that the Church of God must
needs be always in that place where the Arc of the Covenant is: for the
Philistines may carry the Arc into the Temples of their Idols. It is no good
argument, that because we see the Roman Eagles waving in Ensigns, and hear
their Legions named, that therefore presently we conclude that the Army of
the Roman Commonwealth is there present: for there is only and properly the
power of the State where they are assembled to maintain the liberty of the
Country against the ravenous oppression of Tyrants, to infranchise the people
from servitude, and to suppress the impudency of insulting flatterers, who
abuse the Princes weakness by oppressing his Subjects for the advantaging of
their own fortunes, and contain ambitious minds from enlarging their desires
beyond the limits of equity and moderation. Thus much concerning Tyrants
without title. What may lawfully be done against Tyrants by practice.


But for Tyrants by practice, whether they at first gained their authority by
the sword, or were legally invested therewith by a general consent: It
behooves us to examine this point with much wary circumspection. In the first
place we must rememher, that all Princes are born men, and therefore reason and
passion are as hardly to be separated in them, as the soul is from the body
whilst the man lives: We must not then expect Princes absolute in perfection,
but rath^r repute our selves happy if those that govern us be indifferently
good. And therefore although the prince observe not exact mediocrity in
State-affaires, if sometimes passion overruled his reason, if some careless
omission make him neglect the public utility, or if he do not always
carefully execute justice with equality, or repulse not with ready valor an
invading enemy; he must not therefore be presently declared a tyrant. And
certainly, seeing he rules not as a God over men, nor as men over beasts, but
is a man composed of the same matter, and of the same nature with the rest: as
we would questionless judge that prince unreasonably insolent, that should
insult over and abuse his subjects, as if they were bruit beasts; so those
people are doubtless as much void of reason, which imagine a prince should be
complete in perfection, or expect divine abilities in a nature so frail and
subject to imperfection. Put if a prince purposely ruin the Commonweal, if
he presumptuously pervert and resist legal proceedings, or lawful rights, if
he make no reckoning of faith, covenants, justice nor piety, if he prosecute
his subjects as enemies; briefly, if he express all or the chiefest of those
wicked pr^ctsces we have so merly spoken of; then we may certainly declare him
a tyrant, which is as much as an enemy both to God and men. We do not
therefore speak of a prince less good, but of one absolute bad; not of one
less wise, but of one malicious and treacherous; not of one less able
judiciously to discuss legal differences, but as one perversely bent to
pervert justice and equity; not of an unwarlick, but of one furiously disposed
to ruin the people, and ransack the State. For the wisdom of a S^nate, the
integrity of a Judge, the valor of a Captain, may peradventure enable a weak
prince to govern well: But a tyrans could be content that all the Nobility, the
Counselors of State, and Commanders for the wars, had but one head, that he
might rake it off at one blow: those being the proper objects of his distrust
and fear, and by consequence the principal subjects on whom he desires to
execute his malice and cruelty. A foolish prince, although (to speak according
to right and equity) he ought to be deposed, yet may he perhaps in some sort be
born withal: But a tyrant the more he is tolerated, the more he becomes
intolerable.

Furthermore, as the Princes pleasure is not always law, so many times it is
not expedient that the people do all that which may lawfully be done: for it
may often times chance, that the medicine proves more dangerous than the
disease. Therefore it becomes wise men to try all ways before they come to
blows, to use all other remedies before they suffer the sword to decide the
controversy. If then those which represent the body of the people, foresee any
iunovation or machination against the State, or that it be already embarked
into a course of perdition, their duty is, first to admonish the Prince, and
not to attend, that the disease by acc^ssion of time, and accidents, becomes
unrecoverable. For tyranny may be properly resembled unto a Fever Hectic, the
which at the first is easy to be cured, but with much difficulty to be known;
but after it is sufficiently known, it becomes uncurable. Therefore small
beginnings are to be carefully observed, and by those whom it concerns
diligently prevented.

If the Prince therefore persist in his violent courses, and contemn frequent
admonitions, addressing his designs only to that end, that he may oppress at
his pleasure, and effect his own desires without fear or restraint, he then
doubtless makes himself liable to that detested crime of Tyranny: and
whatsoever either the law, or lawful authority permits against a tyrant, may
be lawfully practiced against him. Tyrany is not only a will, but the chief
and as it were the complement and abstract of vices. A Tyrant subverts the
State, pillages the people, lays stratagems to entrap their lives, breaks
promise with all, scoffs at the sacred obligation of a solemn oath, and
therefore is he so much more vile than the vilest of usual malefactors, by how
much offenses committed against a generality, are worthy of greater punishment
than those which concern only particular and private persons. If Thieves and
those that commit sacrilege, be declared infamous; nay, if they justly suffer
corporal punishment by death, can we invent any that may be worthily
equivalent for so outrageous a crime?

Furthermore, we have already proved, that all Kings receive their Royal
authority from the people, that the whole people considered in one body, is
above and greater than the King: and that the King and Emperor are only the
prime and supreme governors and ministers of the Kingdom and Empire; but the
people the absolute Lord and owner thereof. It therefore necessarily follows,
that a tyrant is in the same manner guilty of rebellion against the Majesty of
the people, as the Lord of a see which felloniously transgress the conditions
of his investitutes, and is liable to the same punishment, yea and certainly
deserves much more greater than the equity of those laws inflict on the
delinquents. Therefore as Barclus says, He may either be deposed by In tract.
de tyran. and in tract. de Regim. civit.
those which are, Lords in Sovereignty over him, or else justly punished
according to the Law Julia, which codemnes those which offer violence to the
public. The body of the people must needs be the Sovereign of those which
represent it, which in some places are the Electors, Palatines, Peers; in
other, the Assembly of the general Estates. And if the tyranny have gotten
such sure footing, as there is no other means but force to remove him; then is
it lawful for them to call the people to Arms, to inroll and raise forces, and
to employ the utmost of their power, and use against him all advantages and
stratagems of war, as against the enemy of the Commonwealth, and the
disturber of the public peace. Briefly, the same sentence may be justly
pronounced against him, as was against Manlius Capitolinus at Rome. Valerius
lib. 6. c. 3.
Thou wast to me Manlius, when thou did tumble down the Ganles that sealed
the Capitole: But since thou art now become an enemy, like one of them, thou
shall be precipitated down from the same place from whence thou formerly
tumbledst those enemies.

The Officers of the Kingdom cannot for this be rightly taxed of sedition: for
in a sedition there must necessarily concur but two parts, or sides, the
which peremptorily contest together, so that it is necessary that the one be in
the right, and the other in the wrong: That partundoubtedly has the right on
their side, which defends the Laws, and strives to advance the public profit
Bart. in tract de Guclph. and Gibell. arg. l. 3. Sect. cum igitur D. de vi and
vior.
of the Kingdom. And those on the contrary are questionless in the wrong,
which break the Laws, and protect those that violate justice, and oppress
the Commonwealth. Those are certainly in the right way, as says Bartolus,
which endeavor to suppress tyrannical government, and those in the wrong
which oppose lawful authority. And that must ever be accounted just, which is
intended only for the public benefit, and that unjust, which aims chiefly at
private commodity. Wherefore Thomas Aquinas Tho. Aquin. s^c s^cand. q. 12 ^^t.
11. in s^re.
says, That a tyrannical rule having no proper address for the public
welfare, but only to satisfy a private will with increase of particular profit
to the ruler, cannot in any reasonable construction be accounted lawful, and
therefore the disturbance of such a government cannot be esteemed seditious,
much less traitors; for that offense has proper relation only to a lawful
Prince, who indeed is an inanimated ^^^^ D. ad leg. (...) j^st.
or speaking law; therefore seeing that he which employes the utmost of his
means and power to annihilate the laws, and quell their virtue and vigor,
can no ways be justly entitled therewith: ^. ^c. p^^ad. 4.
So neither likewise can those which oppose and take arms against him, be
branded with so notorious a crime. Also this offense is committed against the
Common wealth: but for so much as the Commonwealth is there only where the
laws are in force, and not where a Tyrant devoures the State at his own
pleasure and liking, he certainly is quit of that crime which ruins the
Majesty of the public State, and those questionless are worthily protectors
and preservers of the Commonwealth, who confident in the lawsulness of their
authority, and summoned thereunto by their duty, do courageously resist the
unjust proceedings of the Tyrant.

And in this their action we must not esteem them as private men and
Subjects, but as the representative body of the people, yea and as the
Sovereignty it self, which demands of his Minister an account of his
administration. Neither can we in any good reason account the Officers of the
Kingdom disloyal, who in this manner acquit themselves of their charge.

There is ever, and in all places, a mutual and reciprocal obligation
between the people and the Prince, the one promises to be a good and wise
Prince, the other to obey faithfully, provided he govern justly. The people
therefore is obliged to the Prince under condition: the Prince to the people
simply and purely. Therefore if the Prince fail in his promise, the people is
exempt from obedience, the contract is made void, the right of obligation of no
force. Then the King if he govern unjustly is perjured, and the people
likewise forsworn if they obey not his lawful commands: but that people is
truly acquit from all perfidiousnesse, which publicly renounce the unjust
dominion of a Tyrant, or he striving unjustly by strong hand to continue the
possession, do constantly endeavor to expulse him by force of arms.

It is therefore permitted the Officers of a Kingdom, either all, L. 106. D.
de reg. jur.
or some good number of them to suppress a Tyrant; And it is not only lawful
for them to do it, but their duty expressly requires it: and if they do it
not, they can by no excuse color their baseness. For the Electors Palatines
Peers and other Officers of State must not think they were established only to
make pompeous paradoes and shows, when they are at the Coronation of the King,
habited in their robes of State, as if there were some Masque or Interlude to
be represented, or as if they were that day to act the parts of Roland Oliver,
or Remaldo and such other personages on a Stage, or to counterfeit and revive
the memory of the Knights of the round Table: and after the dismissing of that
days assembly, to suppos^ they have sufficiently acquit themselves of their
duty, until a recesse of the like solemnity. Those solemn Rites and
Ceremonies were not instituted for vain ostentation, nor to pass as in a
dumme show to please the spectators, nor in childrens sports as it is with
Horace, to create a King in jest, but those Grandees must know, that as well
for office and duty as for honor, they are called to the performance of those
Rites, and that in them the Common wealth is committed and recommended to the
King, as to her supreme and principal tutor, and protector, and to them as
Coajutors and assistants to him. And therefore as the Tutors or Guardlans (yea
even those Vlp. l. 3. D. de adm. et peric. tut. et curat.
that are appointed by way of honor) are chosen to have care of, and observe
the actions and importments of him which holds the principal rank in the
tutor-ship, and to look how he carries himself in the administration of the
goods of his pupil: so likewise L. 27. D. cod.
are the former ordained to have an eye to the courses of the King, for with an
equivolent authority as the others for the pupil, so are they to hinder and
prevent the damage and detriment of the people, the King being properly
reputed as the prime Guardian, and they his Coadjutors.

In like manner as the faults of the principal tutor who manages L. 14. D. de
administ. ct peric. tut. l. 3. D. de suspec. tut. et cur.
the affairs, are justly imputed to the coadjoynt^ in the tutorship, if when
they ought and might, they did not discover his errors, and cause him to be
deposed, especially failing in the main points of his charge, to wit, in not
communicating unto them the affairs of his administration, in dealing
unfaithfully in his place, in doing any thing to the dishonor or detriment of
his pupil, in imbessilling of his goods or estate, or if he be an enemy to
his pupil: briefly, if either in regard of the worthlessenesse of his person,
or weakness of his judgment, he be unable well to discharge so weighty a
charge. So also are the Peers and principal Officers of the Kingdom
accountable for the government thereof, and must both prevent, and if occasion
require, suppress the tyranny of the Prince, as also supply with their care
and diligence his inability and weakness.

Finally, If a Tutor omitting or neglecting to do all that for his pupil,
which a discreet Father of a family would and might conveniently perform,
cannot well be excused, and the better acquitting him self of his charge, has
others as concealers and associates, joined with him to oversee his actions:
with much more reason may and ought the Officers of the Crown restrain the
violent irruptions of that Prince, who instead of a father, becomes an enemy
to his people; seeing to speak properly, they are as well accountable for his
actions wherein the public has interests, as for their own.

Those officers must also remember, that the King holds truly l. 10. ct 33. D.
de adm. et peric. tutor et Cur.
the first place in the administration of the State, but they the second, and
so following according to their ranks; not that they should follow his courses,
if he transgress the laws of equity and justice, not that if he oppress the
Commonwealth, they should connive to his wickedness. For the Commonwealth
was as well committed to their care as to his, so that it is not sufficient for
them to discharge their own duty in particular, but it behooves them also to
contain the Prince within the limits of reason. Briefly they have both jointly
and severally promised with solemn oaths, to advance and procure the profit of
the Commonwealth: although then that he forswear himself, yet may not they
imagine that they are quit of their promise, no more then the Bishops, and
Patriarks if they suffer an heretical Pope to ruin the Church: yea they
should esteem themselves so much the more obliged to the observing of their
oath: by how much they find him wilfully disposed to rush on in his perfidious
courses. But if there be collufion betwixt him and them, they are
prevaricators, if they dissemble they may justly be called forsakers, and
traitors: If they deliver not the Commonwealth from tyranny, they may be truly
ranckt in the number of Tyrants: as on the contrary they are protectors,
tutors, and in a sort Kings, if they keep and maintain the State safe and
entire, which is also recommended to their care and custody.

Although these things are sufficiently certain of themselves, yet may they be
in some sort confirmed by examples. The Kings of Canaan which pressed the
people of Israel with a hard, both corporal and spiritual servitude
(prohibiting them all meetings and use of arms) were certainly Tyrants by
practice, although they had some pretext of title. For, Eglon and Jabin had
peaceable reigned almost the space of twenty years, God stirred up
extraordinarily Judge. 4. and 3.
Ehud, which by a politic stratagem killed Eglon, and Debora which overthrew
the Armle of Jabin, and by this service delivered the people from the servitude
of Tirants, not that it was unlawful for the ordinary Magistrates, the Princes
of the Tribes, and such other Officers to have performed it, for Debora does
reprove the sluggish idleness of some, and flatly detests the disloyalty of
other^ for that they failed to perforforme their duty herein. But it pleased
God, taking commiseration of the distress of his people, in this manner to
supply the defects of the ordinary Magistrates.

Reboboam the son of Solomon refused to disburthen the people 1 King. 12. 6,
etc.
of some unnecessary imposts and burdens: and being petitioned by the people
in the general Assembly of the States, he grew insolent, and relying on the
counsel of his Minions, arrogantly threatens to lay beavier burdens on them
hereafter. No man can doubt, but that according to the tenor of the contract
first passed between the King and the people, the prime and principal
Officers of the Kingdom had authority to repress such insolence They were
only blameable in this, that they did that by faction and division, which
should more properly have been done in the general Assembly of the States: in
like manner in that they transferred the Scepter from Juda (which was by God
only confined to that Tribe) into another lineage: and also (as it chances in
other affairs) for that they did ill and disorderly manage a just and lawful
cause. Profane histories are full of such examples in other Kingdoms.

Brutus General of the Soldiers, and Lueretius Governor of the City of
Rome, assemble the people against Tarquinius Superbus, Titus Livi. lib. 1.
and by their authority thrust him from the royal Throne: Nay, which is more,
his goods are confiscated: whereby it appears that if Tarquinius had been
apprehended, undoubtedly he should have been according to the public laws
corporally punished.

The true causes why Tarquinius was deposed, were because he altered the
custom whereby the King was obliged to advise with the Sena^e on all weighty
affairs, that he made War and Peace according to his own fancy, that he
treated confederacles without demanding counsel or consent from the people or
Senate: that he violated the Laws whereof he was made Guardian: briefly that
he made no reckoning to observe the contracts agreed between the former Kings,
and the Nobility and people of Rome. For the Roman Emperors, I am sure you
remember the sentence pronounced by the Senate against Nero, wherein he was
judged enemy to the Commonwealth, and his body condemned to be ignominiously
cast on the dunghill: and that other pronounced against Vitellius, which
adjudge him to be shamefully dis-membred, and in that miserable estate trayled
through the City, and at last put to death: another against Maximinius who was
dispoild of the Empire, and Maximus and Albinus established in his place by the
Senace. There might also be added many others drawn from unquestionable
Historians.

The Emperor Trajan held not himself exempt from laws, neither desired he to
be spared if he became a Tyrant: for in delivering the Sword unto the great
Provost of the Empire, he says unto him; If I command as I should, use this
sword for me: but if I do otherwise, unsheath it against me. In like manner
the French by the authority of the States, and solicited thereunto by the
Officers of the Kingdom, deposed Childerick the first, Sigisbert, Theodoricke,
and Childericke the third, for their tyrannies, and chose others of another
Family to sit on the Royal Throne. Yea they deposed some because of their
idleness and want of judgment, who exposed the State in prey to Panders,
Curtesans, Flatterers, and such other unworthy mushromes of the Court, who
governed all things at their pleasure: taking from such rash Phaetous the
bridle of government, left the whole body of the State and people should be
consumed through their unadvised folly.

Amongst others, Theodoret was degraded because of Ebroinus Dagobert for
Plectude and Thiband his Pander, with some others: the Estates esteeming the
command of an effeminate Prince as insupportable as that of a woman, and as
unwillingly supporting the yoke of tyrannous Ministers managing affairs in the
name of a loose and unworthy Prince, as the burden of a tyrant alone. To be
brief, no more suffering themselves to be governed by one possessed by a
Devil, than they would by the Devil himself. It is not very long since the
Estates compeld Lewis the eleventh (a Prince as subtle, and it may be as
wilful as any) to receive thirty six Overseers, by whose advise he was bound
to govern the affairs of State. The descendants from Charlemaine substituted
in the place of the Merovingiens for the government of the kingdom, or those
of Capet, supplanting the Charlemains by order of the Estates, and reigning at
this day have no other nor better right to the Crown, than what we have
formerly described; and it has ever been according to Law permitted the whole
body of the people represented by the counsel of the Kingdom, which are
commonly called the Assembly of the States, to depose and establish Princes,
according to the necessities of the Commonwealth. According to the same rule
we read that Adolph was removed from the Empire of Germany Anno 1296. because
for covetousness without Anno 1296.
any just occasion, he invaded the Kingdom of France, in favor of the
English, and Wenceslaus was also deposed in the year of our Lord 1400. Yet
were not these Princes exceeding bad ones, 1400.
but of the number of those which are accounted less ill. Elizabeth the wife
of Edward the second King of England, assembled the Parliament Froisard. li. 1.
cap. 1.
against her husband, who was there deposed, both because he tyrannized in
general over his Subjects, as also for that he cut Read the manner of the
deposing of Richard the second.
off the heads of many noble men, without any just or legal proceeding. It is
not long since Christierne lost the Crown of Denmark, Henry that of Sweden,
Mary Steward that of Scotland, for the same, or near resembling occasions: and
the most worthy Histories relate diverse alterations and changes which have
happened in like manner, in the Kingdoms of Polonia, Hungary, Spain,
Portugal, Bohemia, and others.

But what shall we say of the Pope himself? It is generally held Ant: de But.
confil quod positum est inter consil. Paul. de Castro, vel antiq. nu. 412.
incip viso puncto.
that the Cardinals because they do elect him, or if they fail in their
duty, the Patriarkas which are next in rank to them, may upon certain
occasions maugre the Pope, call a Council, yea, and in it judge him: As when
by some notorious offense he scandalizeth the universal Church: if he be
incorrigible, if reformation be as necessary in the head as the members, if
contrary to his oath he refuse to call a general Council. And we read for
certain that Mar. Laud^ns. in tract. de Card. 1. l. 2. q. 35. Ph^lip. Deci^s
in quodan. co. ^i^o cujus verbs suerunt. Andr. B^^h. in d. con^^ 1. lib. 1.
(...). 6. (...) de major. and obed.
diverse Popes have been deposed by general Counsels. But if they obstinately
abuse their authority, there must (says Baldus) first be used verbal
admonitions; secondly, herball medicament^ or remedies; thirdly, stones or
compulsion; for where virtue and fair means, have not power to persuade,
there force and terror must be put in ure to compel. Now if according to the
opinions of most of the learned, by decrees of Councels, and by custom in like
occasions, it plainly appears that the Council may depose the P^pe, who
notwithstanding vaunts himself to be the King of Kings, and as much in
dignity above the Emperor, as the Sun is above the Moon, assuming to
himself power to depose Kings and Emperors when he pleases. Who will make
any doubt o^ question, that the general Assembly of the Estates of any
kingdom, who are the representative body thereof, may not only degrade and
disthronize a tyrant: but also even disauthorize and depose a King, whose
weakness or folly is hurtful or pernicious to the State.

But let us suppose that in this our Ship of State, the Pilot is Simile.
drunk, the most of his associates are asleep, or after large and
unreasonable tippling together, they regard their imminent danger in approaching
a rock with idle and negligent jollitie; the Ship in the mean season in stead
of following her right course, that might serve for the best advantage of the
owners profit, is ready rather to split her self. What should then a
Masters-mate or some other under-Officer do, who is vigilant and careful to
perform his duty? Shall it be thought sufficient for him to pinch or poule
them which are asleep? without daring in the mean time to put his helping
hand to preserve the Vessel, which runs on a course to destruction, least he
should be thought to intermeddle with that which he has no authority nor
warrant to do? What mad discretion, nay rather notorious impiety were this?
Seeing then that Tyranny, as Plato says, is a drunken frenfie or frantic
drunkenness, Plato lib. 8. and 9. de repub.
if the Prince endeavor to ruin the Commonwealth, and the principal
Officers concur with him in his bad purposes, or at the least are luld in a
dull and drowsy dream of security, and the people (being indeed the true and
absolute owner and Lord of the State) be through the pernicious negligence and
fraudulent connivency of those Officers brought to the very brim of danger and
destruction, and that there be notwithstanding amongst those unworthy Ministers
of State, some one that does studiously observe the deceitful and dangerous
encroachments of tyranny, and from his soul deteste it. What opposition do
we suppose best befits such a one to make against it? Shall he consent
himself to admonish his associates of their duty, who to their utmost
ability endeavor the contrary? Besides, that such an advertisement is
commonly accompanied with too much danger, and the condition of the times
considered, the very soliciting of reformation will be held as a capital
crime: so that in so doing he may be not unfitly Simile.
resembled to one that being in the midst of a desert, environed with
thieves, should neglect all means of defense, and after he had cast away his
Arms, in an eloquent and learned discourse commend justice, and extol the
worth and dignity of the Laws. This would be truly according to the Proverb,
To run mad with reason. What then? Shall he be dull and deaf to the groans
and cries of the people? Shall he stand still and be silent when he sees the
thieves enter? Shall he only hold his hands in his bosom, L. 3. and l. Omne
delictum ^^ult. D. de re milit.
and with a d^mure countenance, idly bowaile the miserable condition of the
times? If the Laws worthily condemn a Soldier, which for fear of the
enemies counterfeits sickness, because in so doing he expresses both
disloyalty and treachery. What punishment can we invent sufficient for him,
who either maliciously or basely betrays those whose protection and defense he
has absolutely undertaken and sworn? Nay rather then let such a one
cheerfully call one, and command the Mariners to the performance of their
duty: let him carefully and constantly take order that the Commonwealth be
not indamaged, and if need so require, even in despite of the King, preserve
the Kingdom, without which the kingly title were idle and frivolous, and if by
no other means it can be effected, let him take the King and bind him hand
and foot, that so he may be more conveniently cured of his frenzy and
madness. For as we have already said, all the administration of the Kingdom,
is not by the people absolutely resigned into the hands of the King; as neither
the Bishopric, nor care of the universal C. Nullus in Carthagin. Council.
Doctores pontificii.
Church, is totally committed to the Pope: but also to the care and custody of
all the principal Officers of the Kingdom. Now for the preserving of peace
and concord amongst those which govern, and for the preventing of jealous^^s,
factions, and distrusts amongst men of equal rank and dignity, the King was
created as prime and principal Superintendent in the government of the
Commonwealth. The King swears that his most special care shall be for the
welfare of the Kingdom; and the Officers of the Crown take all the same oath.
If then the King, or diverse of them falsifying their faith, ruin the
Commonwealth, or abandon her in her greatest necessity, must the rest also
fashion themselves to their base courses, and quit all care of the States
safety; as if the bad example of their companions, absolved them from their
oath of fidelity? Nay, rather on the contrary, in seeing them neglect their
promise, they shall best advantage the Commonwealth In carefully observing
theirs: chiefly because for this reason they were instituted, as in the steads
of Ephori, or public Controllers, and for that every thing gains the better
estimation of just and right in that it is mainly and principally addressed to
that end for which is was first ordained.

Furthermore, if diverse have jointly vowed one and the same thing, is the
obligation of the one annihilated by the perjurie of the other? If many become
bound for one and the same sum, can the banquerouting of one of the obligees
quit the rest of their engagement? If diverse tutors administer ill the goods of
their pupil, and that there be one amongst them that makes conscience of his
actions, can the bad dealing of his companions acquit him? Nay rather on the
contrary, he cannot free himself from the infamy of perjurie, if to the
utmost of his power he do not truly dilcharge his trust, and perform his
promise: neither can the others defalliancy be excused, in the bad managing of
the tutorship, if they likewise accuse not the rest that were joined with them
in the administration, for it is not only the principal tutor that may call
to an account those which are suspected to have unjustly L 3. D. de administ.
and peric. tutor. and cur. lib. 3. D. de suspect. tus. and cura.
or indiscreetly ordered the affairs of their pupil, but even those which
were formerly removed, may also upon just occasion discharge and remove the
delinquents therein. Therefore those which are obliged to serve a whole Empire
or Kingdom, as the Constable, Marshals, Peers, and others, or those which
have particular obligations to some Provinces, or Cities, which make a part or
portion of the Kingdom, as Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Sheriffs, Mayors, and
the rest, are bound by the duty of their place, to succor the Commonwealth,
and to free it from the burden of Tyrants, according to the rank and place
which they hold of the people next after the King. The first ought to deliver
the whole Kingdom from tyrannous oppression: the other as tutors, that part of
the Kingdom whose protection they have undertaken: the duty of the former is
to suppress the Tyrant: that of the latter, to drive him from their confines.
Wherefore Mattathias being a principal man in the State, when some basely
connived, others pernitiously consorted with Antiochus the tyrannous oppressors
of the Jewish Kingdom, he courageously opposing the manifest oppression, both
of Church and State, incourageth 1 Machab. 3. 43.
the people to the taking of Arms, with these words; Let us restore the
decayed estate of our people, and let us fight for our people, and for the
Sanctuary. Whereby it plainly appears, that not for Religion only; but even
for our Country, and our possessions, we may fight, and take arms against a
tyrant, as this Antiochus was. For the Machabites are not by any questioned, or
reprehended for conquering the Kingdom, and expelling the tyrant, but in that
they attributed to themselves the royal dignity, which only belonged by Gods
special appointment to the tribe of Juda.

Humane Histories are frequently stored with examples of this Justin. lib. 1.
Diodor. lib. 2. cap. 37.
kind. Arbactus Governor of the Medes killed effeminate Sardanapalus,
spinning amongst women, and sportingly distributing all the treasures of the
Kingdom amongst those his loose companions. Vindex and Galba quit the party
of Nero, yea though the Senate connived, and in a sort supported his tyranny,
and drew with them Gallia, and Spain, being the Provinces whereof they were
Governors.

But amongst all, the Decree of the Senate of Sparta is most notable, and ought
to pass as an undeniable Maxim amongst all Nations. The Spartans being Lords
of the City Bizantium, sent Olearchus thither for Governor and Commander for
the wars; who took Corn from the Citizens, and distributed it to his
Soldiers. In the mean time the families of the Citizens died for hunger:
Anaxilaus, a principal man of the City, disdaining that tyrannous usage,
entered into treaty with Alcibiades to deliver up the Town, who shortly after
was received into it. Anaxilaus being accused at Sparta for the delivery of
Bizantium, pleaded his cause himself, and was there acquit by the Judges: for
(said they) wars are to be made with enemies, and not with Nature. Nothing
being more repugnant to Nature, than that those which are bound to defend a
City, should be more cruel to the inhabitants, than their enemies that besiege
them.

This was the opinion of the Lacedaemonians, certainly just Rulers, Neither can
he be accounted a just King, which approves not this sentence of absolution:
for those which desire to govern according to the due proportion of equity and
reason, take into consideration as well what the Law inflicts on tyrants, as
also what are the proper rights and bounds both of the Patritian and Plebeian
orders. But we must yet proceed a little further: There is not so mean a
Mariner, but must be ready to prevent the shipwreck of the vessel, when
either the negligence or wilsulnesse of the Pilot casts it into danger. Every
Magistrate is bound to relieve, and as much as in him lies, to redress the
miseries of the Commonwealth, if he shall see the Prince, or the principal
Officers of State his associates, by their weakness or wickedness, to hazard
the ruin thereof. Briefly, he must either free the whole kingdom, or at least
that portion especially recommended to his care, from their imminent and
incroaching tyranny. But has this duty proper relation to every one: Shall it
be permitted to Hendonius Sabinus, to Ennus Suranus, or to the Fencer
Spartanus; or to be brief, to a mere private person, to present the bonnet to
slaves, put Arms into the hand of subjects, or to join battle with the
prince, although he oppress the people with tyranny? No certainly: The Common
wealth was not given in charge to particular persons considered one by one; but
on the contrary, particulars even as Papists, are recommended to the care of
the principal Officers and Magistrates; and therefore they are not bound to
defend the Commonwealth, which cannot defend themselves. God nor the people
have not put the sword into the L. 2. de Sedi^^^sis.
hands of particular persons: Therefore if without commandment they draw the
sword, they are seditions, although the cause seem never so just.

Furthermore, the prince is not established by private and particular persons,
but by all in general considered in one entire body; whereupon it follows,
that they are bound to attend the commandment of all, to wit, of those which
are the representative body of a kingdom, or of a Province, or of a City, or
at the least of some one of them, before they undertake any thing against the
prince. For as a pupil cannot bring an action, but being avowd L. 8. l. 9. D.
de aucto. and constict. and cur.
in the name of his Tutor, although the pupil be indeed the true proprietor of
the estate, and the tutor only owner with reference to the charge committed
unto him: so likewise the people may not enterprise actions of such nature, but
by the command of those, into whose hands they have refigned their power and
authority, whether they be ordinary Magistrates, or extraordinary, created in
the Assembly of the Estates; whom, if I may so say, for that purpose, they have
girded with their sword, and invested with authority, both to govern and defend
them, established in the same kind as the Praetor at Rome, who determined Sencea
lib. 1. de Benefic.
all differences between masters and their servants, to the end that if any
controversy happened between the King and the subjects, they should be Judges
and preservers of the right, lest the subjects should assume power to
themselves to be judges in their own causes. And therefore if they were oppressed
with tributes, and unreasonable imposts, if any thing were attempted contrary
to covenant and oath, and no Magistrate opposed those unjust proceedings, they
must rest quiet, and suppose that many times the best Physicians both to
prevent and cure some grievous disease, do appoint both letting blood,
evacuation of humors, and lancing of the flesh; and that the affairs of this
world are of that nature, that with much difficulty one evil cannot be
remedied without the adventuring if not the suffering of another, nor any good
be achieved, without great pains. They have the example of the people of
Israel, who during the reign of Solomon, refused not to pay those excessive
taxes imposed on them, both for the building of the Temple, and fortifying of
the Kingdom, because by a general consent they were granted for the
promulgation of the glory of God, and for an ornament and desence of the
public State.

They have also the example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who though he
were King of Kings, notwithstanding because he conversed in this world in
another quality, to wit, o a private and particular man, paid willingly
tribute. If the Magistrates themselves manifestly favor the tyranny, or at the
least do not formally oppose it; let private men remember the saying of Job,
That for the sins of the people God permits bypocrites Job. 34.
to reign, whom it is impossible either to convert or subvert, if men repent
not of their ways, to walk in obedience to Gods commandments; so that there is
no other weapons to be used, but bended knees and humble hearts. Briefly, let
them bear with bad princes, and pray for better, persuading themselves, that an
outrageous tyranny is to be supported as patiently, as some exceeding damage
done by the violence of tempests, or some excessive overflowing waters, or
some such natural accidents unto the fruits of the earth, if they like not
better to change their habitations, by retiring themselves into some other
countries. So David fled into the mountains, and attempted nothing against the
Tyrant Saul, because the people had not declared him any public Magistrate of
the Kingdom.

Jesus Christ, whose kingdom was not of this world, fled into Egypt, and so
freed himself from the paws of the Tyrant. Saint Paul teaching of the duty of
particular Christian men, and not Romans 13.
of Magistrates, teaches that Nero must be obeyed. But if all the principal
Officers of State, or diverse of them, or but one, endeavor to suppress a
manifest tyranny, or if a Magistrate seek to free that province, or portion of
the kingdom from oppression, which is committed to his care and custody,
provided under color of freedom he bring not in a new tyranny, then must all
men with joint courage and alacrity, run to Arms, and take part with him or
them, and assist with body and goods, as if God himself from heaven had
proclaimed wars, and meant to join battle against tyrants, and by all ways
and means endeavor to deliver their Coun^rey and Commonwealth from their
tyrannous oppression. For as God does oftentimes chastise a people by the
cruelty of tyrants: so also does he many times punish tyrants by the hands of
the people. It being a most true saying, Ecclus 10.
verified in all ages: For the iniquities, violences, and wickednesses of
Princes, Kingdoms are translated from one Nation to another: but tyranny was
never of any durable continuance.

The Centurians and men at arms did freely and courageously execute the
commandments of the High Priest Jehoiada, in suppressing the tyranny of
Athalia. In like manner all the faithful and generous Israelites took part
and joined with the Machabites, as well to re-establish the true service of
God, as also to free and deliver the State from the wicked and unjust
oppression of Antiochus, and God blessed with happy success their just and
commendable enterprise. What then? cannot God when he pleases stir up
particular and private persons to ruin a mighty and powerful tyranny? He
that gives power and ability to some even out of the dust without any title or
colorable pretext of lawful authority to rise to the height of rule and
dominion, and in it tyrannize and afflict the people for their transgressions?
cannot he also even from the meanest multitude raise a liberator? He which
enthralled and subjected the people of Israel to Jabin, and to Eglon, did he
not deliver and enfranchise them by the hand of Ebud, Barac and Debora, whilst
the Magistrates and Officers were dead in a dull and negligent ecstasy of
security? What then shall hinder, you may say the same God who in these days
sends us Tyrants to correct us, that he may not also extraordinarily send
correctors of tyrants to deliver us? What if Adab cut off good men, if Jezabel
subborn false witnesses against Naboth, may not a Jehu be raised to exterminate
the whole line of Arab, to revenge the death of Naboth, and to cast the body of
Jezabel to be torn and devoured of dogs? Certainly as I have formerly
answered, the Almighty is ever mindful of his justice, and maintains it as
inviolably as his mercy.

But for as much as in these latter times, those miraculous testimonies by
which God was wont to confirm the extraordinary vocation of those famous
Worthies, are now wanting for the most part: let the people be advised, that in
seeking to cross the Sea dry foot, they take not some Impostor for their
guide, that may lead them headlong to destruction (as we may read happened to
the Jews:) and that in seeking freedom from tyranny, he that was the
principal instrument to dis-inthrall them, became not himself a more
insupportable Tyrant than the former: briefly, lest endeavoring to advantage
the Commonwealth, they introduce not a common misery upon all the undertakers,
participating therein with diverse States of Italy, who seeking to suppress the
present evil, added an accession of greater, and more intolerable servitude.

Finally, that we may come to some period of this third question; Princes are
chosen by God, and established by the people: As all particulars considered one
by one are inferior to the Prince: so the whole body of the people and
Officers of State which represent that body, are the Princes superiors. In the
receiving and inauguration of a Prince, there are Covenants and contracts
passed between him and the people, which are tacit and expressed, natural or
civil: to wit, to obey him faithfully whilst he commands justly, that he
serving the Commonwealth, all men shall serve him, that whilst he governs
according to law, all shall be submitted to his government, etc. The Officers
of the Kingdom are the Guardians and Protectors of these Covenants and
contracts. He that maliciously or wilfully violates these conditions, is
questionless a Tyrant by practice. And therefore the Officers of State may
judge him according to the laws: and if he support his tyranny by strong
hands, their duty binds them, when by no other means it can be effected, by
force of arms to suppress him.

Of these Officers there be two kinds, those which have generally undertaken
the protection of the Kingdom: as the Constable, Marshalls, Peers, Palatines,
and the rest, every one of which, although all the rest do either connive or
consort with the tyranny, are bound to oppose and repress the Tyrant: and
those which have undertaken the government of any Province, City, or part of
the Kingdom, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Consuls, Mayors, Sheriffs, etc.
they may according to right expel and drive tyranny and Tyrants from their
Cities, Confines, and governments.

But particular and private persons may not unsheath the sword against Tyrants
by practice, because they were not established by particulars, but by the whole
body of the people. But for Tyrants which without title intrude themselves for
so much as there is no contract or agreement between them and the people, it
is indifferently permitted all to oppose and depose them; and in this rank of
Tyrants may those be ranged, who, abusing the weakness and sloth of a
lawful Prince, tyrannously insult over his Subjects. Thus much for this, to
which for a more full resolution may be added that which has been formerly
discoursed in the second question.

The fourth question. Whether neighbor Princes may, or are bound by law to
aid the Subjects of other Princes, peasecuted for true Religion, or oppressed
by manifest tyranny.
We have yet one other question to treat of, in the discussing whereof there
is more use of an equitable judgment then of animble apprehension: and if
charity were but in any reasonable proportion prevalent amongst the men of this
age, the disputation thereof were altogether frivolous: but seeing nothing in
these days is more rare nor less esteemed than charity; we will speak
somewhat of this our question. We have already sufficiently proved that all
Tyrants, whether those that seek to captivate the minds and souls of the
people with an erroneous and superstitious opinion in matter of Religion, or
those that would enthrall their bodies and estates with miserable servitude and
excessive impositions, may justly by the people be both suppressed and expulst.
But for so much as Tyrants are for the most part so cunning, and Subjects
seldom so caucelous, that the disease is hardly known, or at the least not
carefully observed before the remedy prove almost desperate, nor think of
their own defense before they are brought to those straights: that they are
unable to defend themselves, but compeld to implore the assistance of others:
Our demand therefore is, if Christian Princes lawfully may and ought to succor
those Subjects which are afflicted for true Religion, or oppressed by unjust
servitude, and whose sufferings are either for the kingdom of Christ, or for
the liberty of their own state? There are many, which hoping to advance their
own ends, and encroach on others rights, that will readily embrace the part of
the afflicted, and proclaim the lawfulness of it: but the hope of gain is
the certain and only aim of their purposes: And in this manner the Romans,
Alexander the great, and diverse others, pretending to suppress Tyrants, have
oftentimes enlarged their own limits. It is not long sin^^, we saw King Henry
the Second make Wars on the Emperor Charles the Fifth, under color of
defending and delivering the Protestant Princes. As also Henry the Eighth King
of England was in like manner ready to assist the Germans, if the Emperor
Charles should molest them. But if there be some appearance of danger, and
little expectance of profit, then it is that most Princes do vehemently
dispute the lawfulness of the action. And as the former cover their ambition
and avarice with the veil of charity and piety: so on the contrary do the
other call their fear and cowardly baseness integrity and justice, although
that piety (which is ever careful of another good) love no part in the
counsels of the first: nor justice (which affectionately desires the easing of
a neighbors grief) in cooling the charitable intendments of the later.
Therefore without learning either to the one side or the other, let us follow
those rules which piety and justice trace us out in matter of Religion.

First, All accord in this, That there is one only Church, whereof Jesus Christ
is the head, the members whereof are so united and conjoined together, that if
the least of them be offended or wronged, they all participate both in the harm
and sorrow, as throughout holy Scripture plainly appears. Wherefore the Church
is compared to a body: Now it oftentimes happens that the body is not only
overthrown by a wound in the arm, or thigh, but even also much endangered, yea
and sometimes killed by a small hurt in the little finger. Vainly therefore
does any man vaunt that this body is recommended to his care and custody, if he
suffer that to be dismembered and pulled in pieces which he might have preserved
whole and entire. The Church is compared to an edifice: on which side soever
the building is undermined, it many times chances that the whole tumbles down,
and on what rafter or piece of timber soever the flame takes hold, it indangers
the whole house of burning, he must needs be therefore worthy of scome who
should defer to quench the fire which had cautht his house top, because he
dwells most in the Cellar: would not all hold him for a mad man which should
neglect by countermining to frustrate a mine, because it was intended to
overthrow that wall there, and not this here.

Again, the Church is resembled to a ship, which as it sails together, so
does it sink together: insomuch that in a tempest, those which be in the
forecast, or in the keele, are no more secure than those which remain at the
st^^n or on the deck: so that the proverb commonly says, when men run the
like hazard in matter of danger, that they venture both in, one bottom. This
being granted, questionless whosoever has not a fellow-feeling in
commiserating the trouble, danger and distress of the Church, is no member of
that body, nor domestic in the family of Jesus Christ, nor has any place in
the Ark of the covenant of grace. He which has any sense of Religion in his
heart ought no more to doubt whether he be obliged to aid the afflicted members
of the Church, than he would be assisted to himself in the like distress: for
the union of the Church unites us all into one body, and therefore every one
in his calling must be ready to assist the needy, and so much the more
willingly, by how much the Almighty has bestowed a greater portion of his
blessings on us: which were not conferred, that we should be made possessors of
them, but that we should be dispensers thereof according to the necessity of
his Saints.

As this Church is one, so is she recommended, and given in charge to all
Christian Princes in general, and to every one of them in particular: For so
much as it was dangerous to leave the care to one alone, and the unity of it
would not by any means permit, that she should be divided into pieces, and
every portion assigned unto one particular: God has committed it all entire to
particulars, and all the parts of it to all in general, not only to preserve
and defend it, but also to amplify and increase it as much as might be.
Insomuch that if a Prince which has undertaken the care of a portion of the
Church, as that of Germany and England, and notwithstanding neglect and forsake
another part that is oppressed, and which he might succor, he doubtless
abandons the Church, Christ having but one only Spouse, which the Prince is so
bound to preserve and defend that she be not violated or corrupted in any part
if it be possible. And in the same manner as every private person is bound by
his humble and ardent prayers to God to desire the restoring of the Church: So
likewise are the Magistrates tied diligently to procure the same with the
utmost of their power and means which God has put into their hands. For the
Church of Ephesus is no other than that of Colossus: but these two are portions
of the universal Church, which is the kingdom of Christ, the increase and
prosperity whereof ought to be the continual subject of all private men's
prayers and desires; but it is the duty of all Kings, Princes, and Magistrates,
not only to amplify and extend the limits and bounds of the Church in all
places, but only to preserve and defend it against all men whatsoever.
Wherefore there was but one Temple in Judea built by Solomon, which represented
the unity of the Church. And therefore ridiculous and worthy of punishment
were that Churchwarden which had care only of some small part of the Church,
and suffered all the rest to be spoiled with rain and weather. In like manner,
all Christian Kings when they receive the sword on the day of their Coronation,
solemnly swear to maintain the Catholic or universal Church, and the
ceremony then used does fully express it, for holding the sword in their
hands, they turn to the East, West, North, and South, and brandish it, to the
end that it may be known that no part of the world is excepted. As by this
ceremony they assume the protection of the Church, it must be questionless
understood of the true Church, and not of the false: therefore ought they to
employ the utmost of their ability to reform and wholly to restore that which
they hold to be the pure and truly Christian Church, to wit, ordered and
governed according to the direction of the Word of God. That this was the
practice of godly Princes, we have their examples to instruct us. In the time
of Ezechias King of Juda, the Kingdom of Israel had been a long time 2 Chronicles
30.
before in subjection to the Assyrians, to wit, ever since the King Osea his
time; And therefore if the Church of Juda only, and not the whole universal
Church had been committed to the custody of Exechias: and if in the
preservation of the Church the same course were to be held, as in the dividing
of lands, and imposing of tributes, then questionless Ezechias would have
contained himself within his own limits, especially then when the exorbitant
power of the Assyrians lorded it every where. Now we read that he sent
express Messengers throughout Israel, to wit, to the subjects of the King of
Assyria, to invite them to come to Jerusalem to celebrate the paschall feast:
yea and he aided the faithful Israelites of the tribes of Ephraim and
Manasses, and others the subjects of the Assyrians, to ruin the high places
which were in their quarters.

We read also that the good King Josias expeld Idolatry, no^ 2 Kings 22. 2 Chronicles. 34. and 35.
only out of his own Kingdom, but also even out of the Kingdom of Israel,
which was then wholly in subjection to the King of Assyria. And no marvel, for
where the glory of God, and the kingdom of Christ are in question, there no
bounds or limits can confine the zeal and fervent affection of pious and godly
Princes. Though the opposition be great, and the power of the oppos^rs greater,
yet the more they fear God, the less they will fear men. These generous
examples of diverse godly Princes have since been imitated by sundry Christian
Kings, by whose means the Church (which was heretofore restrained within the
narrow limits of Palestine) has been since dilated throughout the universal
world. Constantine and Licinius governed the Empire together, the one in the
Orient, the other in the Occident, they were associates of equal power and
authority. And amongst equals, as the Proverb is, there is no Par in parem
non babet imperium.
command. Notwithstanding, because Licinius does every where banish, torment,
and put to death the Christians, and amongst them diverse of the nobility, and
that for and under pretense of Religion. Constantine makes war against him,
and by force compels him to give free liberty of Religion to the Christians,
and because he broke his faith and relapsed into his former cruelties, he
caused him to be apprehended and put to death in the City of Thessalonica.
This Emperors piety was with so great an applause celebrated by the Divines
of those times, that they suppose that saying in the Prophet Isaiah, to be
meant by him; That Kings shall be Pastors and nursing Fathers of the Church.
After his death the Roman Empire was divided equally between his sons,
without advantaging the one more than the other. Constans favored the orthodox
Christians, Constantius being the elder, learned to the Arrians, and for that
cause banished the learned Athanasius from Alexandria; the greatest professed
adversary of the Arrians. Certianly, if any consideration in matter of confines
be absolutely requisite, it must needs be amongst brethren. And notwithstanding
Constant threatens to war on his brother, if he restore not Athanasius, and
had without doubt performed it, if the other had long deserred the
accomplishment of his desire. And if he proceeded so far for the restitution
of one Bishop: had it not been much more likely and reasonable, for him to have
assisted a good part of the people, if they implored his aid against the
tyranny of those that refused them the exercise of their Religion, under the
authority of their Magistrates and Governors? So at the persuasion of Atticus
the Sozo. lib. 7. cap. 18.
Bishop, Theodisius made war on Cosroes King of Persia to deliver the
Christians of his Kingdom from persecution, although they were but particular
and private persons. Which certainly those most just Princes, who instituted so
many worthy Laws, and had so great and special care of justice, would not
have done, if by that fact they had supposed any thing were usurpt on another
man's right, o^ ^he Law of Nations violated. But to what end were so many
expeditions undertaken by Christian Princes into the holy Land against the
Saracens? Wherefore were demanded and raised so many of those Saladine tenths?
To what purpose were so many confederacies made, and croysadoes proclaimed
against the Turks, if it were not lawful for Christian Princes, yea those
furthest remote, to deliver the Church of God from the oppression of tyrants,
and to free captive Christians from under the yoke of bondage? What were the
motives that led them to those wars? What were the reasons that urged them to
undergo those dangers? But only in regard of the Churches union, Christ
summond every man from all parts with a unanimous consent, to undertake the
defense thereof? For all men are bound to repulse common dangers with a joint
and common opposition: all which have a natural consent and relation with this
we now treat of. If this were lawful for them against Mahomet, and not only
lawful, but that the backward and negligent were ever made liable to all
infamous contempt, and the forward and ready undertakers always recompensed
with all honorable respect and reward, according to the merit of their
virtues: wherefore not now against the enemy of Christ and his Saints? If it be
a lawful war to fight against the Greeks (that I may use that phrase) when
they assail our Troy: wherefore is it unlawful to pursue and prevent that
incendiary Sinon? Finally, if it have been esteemed an heriocall act to deliver
Christians from corporal servitude, (for the Turks enforce none in point of
Religion) is it not a thing yet much more noble to infranchise and set at
liberty souls imprisoned in the mists of error?

These examples of so many religious Princes, might well have the directive
power of Law. But let us hear what God himself pronounces in many places of
his Word by the mouth of his Prophets, against those which advance not the
building up of his Church, or which make no reckoning of her afflictions. The
Gadites, the Reubenites, and half tribe of Manasses, desire of Moses Numb. 32.
Josh. 4. 12. Deuteronomy. 3. 20.
that he would allot them their portion on the other side of Jordan. Moses
grants their request, but with this proviso and condition: That they should not
only assist their other brethren the Israelites to conquer the land of Canaan,
but also that they should march the first, and serve as vauntgard to the rest,
because they had their portions first set them forth, and if they fail to
perform this duty, he with an anathema, destines them to destruction, and
compares them to those which were adjudged rebels at Codisbarnea. And what?
says he, your brethren shall fight, and you in the mean season rest quiet at
home? Nay on the contrary, you also shall pass Jordan, and not return into
their houses, before first the Lord have driven his enemies out from before his
face, and granted place to your brethren as well as you, then shall you be
innocent before the Lord and his people Israel. He shows by this that those
which God first blesses with so great a benefit, if they help not their
breth^en, if they make not themselves shares in their labors, companions in
their travells, and leaders in their dangers, they must questionless expect a
heavy punishment to fall upon them.

Likewise when under the conduct of Debora, the Nephtalites and Judges 5.
Zabulonites took arms against the tyrant Jabin: and that in the mean season
the Reubenites which should have been first in the field took their ease and
played on their pipes, whilst their flocks and herds fed at liberty: the
Gadites held themselves secured with the rampire of the river; the Danites
gloried in their command at Sea; And Ashur, to be brief, was confident in the
difficult access of their mountains: The Spirit of the Lord speaking by the
Prophetess, does in express terms condemn them all; Curse ye Meros Judges
5. 23.
(said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof:
because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. But blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the
Kenite be, who though she might have alleged the alliance which her husband
had with the Canaanites, did notwithstanding kill Sisera the General of the
enemies army. And therefore Vriah spoke religiously, and like a true
Patriarch, when he said, The Ark of the Lord, and Israel, and Judah abide in
tents, and my Lord 2 Samuel 11. 11.
Joab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields; Shall I
then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? a
thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing. But on the
contrary, impious and wicked were the Princes of Israel, who supposing
themselves secured by the craggy mountains of Samaria, and strong
fortifications of Sion, took liberty to loose themselves in luxurious seasts,
loose delights, drinking delicious wines, and sleeping in persum'd beds of
Ivorie, despising in the mean season Amos 6.
poor Joseph, to wit, the Lords flock tormented and miserably vexed on all
sides, nor have any compassion on their affliction. The Lord God has sworn by
himself, says the Lord God of Hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate
his palaces: therefore will I deliver up the City, with all that is therein,
and those that wallow thus in pleasures, shall be the first shall go into
captivity. Wickedly therefore did those Ephraimites, who in stead of
congratulating and applauding the ^udg. 8 and 12.
famous and notable victories of Gideon and Jephta, did envy and traduce them,
whom notwithstanding they had forsaken in dangers.

As much may be said of the Israelites, who seeing David overcome the
difficulty of his affairs, and remain a peaceable King, say aloud, We are thy
flesh and thy bones: and some years after, seeing 2 Samuel 5. 2. 2 Samuel 20. 1.
him imbroil'd again in troubles, cried out, We have no part in David, neither
have we inheritance in the son of Jesse. Let us rank also with these all those
Christians in name only, which will communicate at the holy table, and yet refuse
to take the cup of affliction with their brethren, which look for salvation in
the Church, and care not for the safety and preservation of the Church, and the
members thereof. Briesly, which adore one and the same God the ^ather,
acknowledge and avow themselves of the same household of faith, and profess to
be one and the same body in Jesus Christ, and notwithstanding yield no succor
nor assistance to their Savior afflicted in his members. What vengeance do
you think will God inflict on such impiety? Moses compares those which abandon
Numb. 32.
their brethren to the rebels of Cadeshbarnea: Now none of those by the decree
of the Almighty, entered into the land of Canaan. Let not those then pretend any
interest in the heavenly Canaan, which will not succor Christ when he is
crucified, and suffering a thousand times a day in his members, and as it were
begging their alms from door to door. The Son of God with his own mouth
condemns them to everlasting fire that when he was hungry gave him no meat;
when he was thirsty gave him no drink; when he was a stranger, lodged him not;
naked, and clothed him not; sick, and in prison, and visited him not. And
therefore let those expect punishments without end, which lend a deaf ear to
the compla^nts and groan of our Savior Jesus Christ, suffering all these
things daily in his members; although otherwise they appear both to others and
themselves to be jolly Christians, yet shall their condition be much more
miserable than that of many Infidels. For why; were they the Jews only, and
Scribes and Pharisees, to speak properly, that crucified Christ? or were they
Ethnicks, Turks, or some certain p^^nitious Sects of Christians, which
crucify, torment, and persecute him in his members? No certainly, the Jew^^
hold him an imposter, the Ethnic a malefactor, the Turks an Infidel, the
others an heretic, insomuch as if we consider the intention of these men, as
the censuring of all offenses ought to have principal relation thereunto, we
cannot conclude that it is properly Christ that they persecute with such
hatred, but some criminal person, which in the^r opinion deserves this usage:
But they do truly and properly persecute and crucify Christ Jesus, which
profess to acknowledge him for the Messiah, God and Redeemer of the world, and
which notwithstanding fail to free him from persecution and vexation in his
members, when it is in their power to do it. Briefly, he which om^ts to deliver
his neighbor from the hands of the murderer, when he sees him in evident
danger of his life, is questionless guilty of the murder, as well as the
murderer. For seeing he neglected when he had means to preserve his life, it
must needs necessarily follow, Aug. in Psa. 32 Amb. lib. 1. dc Offic. Gratian
in Decret.
that he desires his death. And in all crimes the will and intendment ought
principally to be regarded. But questionless these Christian princes which do
not relieve and assist the true professors, which suffer for true religion, are
much more guilty of murder than any other, because they might deliver from
danger an infinite number of people, which for want of timely succors, suffer
death and torments under the cruel hands of their persecuters: and to this may
be added, that to suffer ones brother to be murdered, is a greater offense
than if he were a stranger. Nay, I wi say further, those forsakers of their
brethren in their time of danger distress, are more vile, and more to be
abhorred than the tyrants themselves that persecute them. For it is much more
wicked, and worthy of greater punishment to kill an honest man that is innocent
and fea^ing God (as those which consent with them in the faith must of
necessity know the true professors to be) than a thief, an imposter, a
magician or an heretic, as those which persecute the true Christians do
commonly believe them to be, it is a greater offense by many degrees to strive
with God than man. Briefly, in one and the same action it is a much more
grievous crime persidiously to betray, than ignorantly to offend. But may the
same also be said of them which refuse to assist those that are oppressed by
tyranny, or defend the liberty of the Commonwealth against the oppression of
tyrants? For in this case the conjunction or confederacy seems not to be of so
strict a condition between the one and the other, here we speak of the
Commonwealth diversely governed according to the customs of the countries, and
particularly recommended to these here, or those there, and not of the Church
of God, which is composed of all, and recommended to all in general, and to
every one in particular. The Jew says, our Savior Christ is not only
neighbor to the Jew, but also to the Samaritan, and to every other man. But we
ought to love our neighbor as our selves; and therefore an Israelite is not
only bound to deliver an Israelite from the hands of thieves, if it be in his
power, but every stranger also; yea, though unknown, i^ he will righely
discharge his duty: neither let him dispute whether it be lawful to defend
another, which believe, he may justly defend himself. For it is much more just,
if we truly consider the concomitants, to deliver from danger and outrage
another than ones self; seeing that what is done for pure charity, is more
right and allowable, than that which is executed for color, or desire of
revenge, or by any other transport of passion: in revenging our own wrongs we
never keep a mean, whereas in other men's, though much greater, the most
intemperate will easily observe moderation. Furthermore, the heathens
themselves may teach us what humane society, and what the law of nature
requires of us in this business; wherefore Cicero says, That Nature being the
common mother of mankind, prescribes and ordaines, (...) 3.Offic.
that every man endeavor and procure the good of another whatsoever be be,
only because he is a man: otherwise all bonds of society, yea and mankind it
self must needs go to ruin. And therefore as Justice built on these two
Basis, or pillars, First, that none be wronged: secondly, that good be done to
all if it be possible. So also is there two sorts of injustice; the first, in
those which offer injury to their neighbors; the second, in them which when
they have means to deliver the oppressed, do notwithstanding suffer them to
sink under the burden of their wrongs: For whosoever does wrong to another,
either moved thereunto by anger, or any other passion, he may in a sort be
truly said to lay violent hands on his companion; but he which has means and
defends not the afflicted, or to his power wards not the blows that are struck
at him, is as much faulty, as if he forsook his parents, or his friends, or his
country in their distress. That which was done by the first, may well be
attributed to choler, which is a short madness; the fault committed by the
other, discovers a bad mind, and a wicked purpose, which are the perpetual
tormentors and tyrants of the conscience. The fury of the first may be in some
sort excused, but the malice of the second admits no color of defense.
Peradventure you will say, I fear in aiding the one, I shall do wrong to the
other. And I answer, You seek a Cloak of justice wherewith to cover your base
remissness: and if you lay your hand on your heart, you will presently
confess, that it is somewhat else, and not justice, that with holds you from
performing your duty. For as the same Cicero says in another place, Either
thou will not make the wrong-doer thine enemy, or not take pains, or not be at
so much charge, or else negligence, sloth, or the hindering of thine own
occasions, or the crossing of other purposes, takes thee off from the defense
of those who otherwise thou art bound to relieve. Now in saying thou only
attends thine own affairs, fearing to wrong another, thou fallest into another
kind of injustice: for thou abandonest humane society, in that thou wile not
afford any endeavor either of mind, body, or goods, for the necessary
preservation thereof. Read the Directions of the heathen Philosophers and
Politicians who have written more divinely herein, than many Christians in
these days. From hence also proceeds, that the Roman law designs punishment
to the neighbor which will not deliver the slave from the outrageous fury of
his master.

Amongst the Egyptians, if any man had seen another assailed Diodor. Siculus,
l. 2. c. 2.
and distressed by thieves and robbers, and did not according to his power
presently aid him, he was adjudgd worthy of death, if at the least he
discovered or delivered not the delinquents into the hand of the Magistrate. If
he were negligent in performing this duty for the first mulct, he was to
receive a certain number of blows on his body, and to fast for 3. days
together. If the neighbor be so firmly obliged in this mutual duty of
succor to his neighbor, yea to an unknown person in case he be assailed by
thieves: shall it not be lawful for a good Prince to assist, not slaves to an
imperious Master, or children against a furious Father; but a Kingdom against
a Tyrant, the Commonwealth against the private spleen of one, the people (who
are indeed the true owners of the State) ^^ainst a ministering servant to the
public. And if he c^^elesly or wil^ully omit this duty, deserves he no^
himself to be esteemed a Tyrant, and punished accordingly, as well as the
other a sobber, which neglected to assist his neighbor in that danger?
Theucidides Theucid. lib. 1.
upon this matter says, that those are not only Tyrants which make other men
slaves, but much more those who having means to suppress and prevent such
oppression, take no care to perform it. And amongst others, those which
assumed the title of Protectors of Greece, and defenders of the Country: and
yet sti^re not to deliver their Country from oppression of strangers, and
truly indeed. For a Tyrant i^ in some sort compeld to hold a straight and
tyrannous hand over those, who by violence and tyranny, he has constrained to
obey him, because as Tiberius said, he holds the Wolf by the ears, whom he
can neither hold without pain and force, nor let go without danger and death.
To the end then that he may blot out oue sin with another sin, he files up
one wickedness to another, and is forced to do injuries to others, lest he
should prove by remissness injurious to himself. But the Prince which with a
negligent and idle regard looks on the outragiousnesse of a Tyrant, and the
massacring of Innocente, that he might have preserved, like the barbarous
spectacles of the Roman sword-playes is so much more guilty than the Tyrant
himself, by how much the cruel and homicidious directers and appointers of
these bloody sports, were more justly punishable by all good laws than the
poor and constrained actors in those murdering tragedies: and as he
questionless deserves greater punishment, which out of insolent jollity
murders one, than he which unwillingly for fear of a further harm kills a
man. If any object that it is against reason and good order to meddle in the
affairs of another: I answer with the old man in Terrence, I am a man, and I
believe that all duties of humanity are fit and convenient for me. If others
seeking to cover their base negligence, and careless unwillingnesse, Pompon.
de reg. ju^. l^g. 36.
alledg that bounds and jurisdictions are distingnisht one from another, and
that it is not lawful to thrust ones sickle into another harvest. Neither am
I also of that opinion, that upon any such color or pretense, it is lawful
for a Prince to encroach upon another jurisdiction or right, or upon that
occasion to usurp another country, and so carry another man's corn into his
b^rne, as diverse have taken such shadows to maeke their bad intentions. I will
not I say, that after the manner of those arbitrators which Cicero Ciccr. 2.
offic.
speaks of, thou adjudge the things in controversy to thy self. But I require
that you repress the Prince that invades the kingdom of Christ, that you
contain the Tyrant within his own limits, that you stretch forth your hand of
compassion to the people afflicted, that you raise up the Commonwealth lying
grovelling on the ground, and that you so carry your self in the ordering and
managing of this, that all men may see your principal aim and end was the
public benefit of humane society, and not any private profit or advantage of
your own; For seeing that justice respects only the public, and that which
is without, and injustice fixes a man wholly on himself: it doubtless becomes
a man truly honest so to dispose his actions, that ever private interests give
place, and yield to public commodity.

Briefly to epitomize what has bin formerly said if a Prince outragiously
over-pass the bounds of piety and justice. A neighbor Prince may justly and
religiously leave his own Country, not to invade and usurp another, but to
contain the other within the limits of justice and equity: and if he neglect
or omit his duty herein, he shows himself a wicked and unworthy Magistrace.
If a Prince tirannize over the people, a neighbor Prince ought to yield
succors as freely and willingly to the people, as he would do to the Prince
his Brother if the people mutined against him: yea he should so much the more
readi^y succor the people, by how much there is more just cause of pity to see
many afflicted, than one alone. If Porsenna brought Tarquinius Superbus back
to Rome, much more justly might Constantine, requested by the Senate, and Roman
people, expel Marentius the Tyrant from Rome. Briefly, if man become a Wolf
to man, who hinders that man (according to the proverb) may not be instead of
God to the needy? And therefore the Ancients have ranckt Hercules amongst the
gods, because he punished and tamed Procrustes, Busiris, and other Tyrants, the
plagues of man kind, and monsters of the earth. So whilst the Roman Empire
retained her freedom, she was truly accounted the safe guard of all the world
against the violence of Tyrants, because the Senate was the port and refuge of
Kings, people, and Nations. In like manner Constantine, called by the Romans
against Mixentius, had God Almighty for the leader of his Army: and the whole
Church does with exceeding commendations celebrate his enterprise, although
that Maxentius had the same authority in the West, a^ Constantine had in the
East. Also Charlemaine undertook War against the Lombards, being requested to
assist the Nobility of Italy: although the Kingdom of the Lombards had been of
a long continuance, and he had no just pretense of right over them. In like
manner when Charles the bald, King of France, had tyrannously put to cleath the
Governor of the Country between the River of Saint and Loyre, with the Duke
Lambert, and another Nobleman called Jametius, and that other great men of the
Kingdom were retired unto Lewis King of Germany, brother, (but by another
mo^her) unto Charles, to request aid against him, and his mother called
Juclith, one of the most pernicious women of the world, Lewis gare them
audience in a full Assembly of the German Princ^s, by whose joint advice it was
decreed, that Wars should be made against Charles for the re-establishing in
their goods, honors, and estates, those whom he had unjustly dispossessed.

Finally, as there has ever been Tyrants dispersed here and there, so also all
histories testify that there has been neighboring Princes to oppose tyranny,
and maintain the people in their right. The Princes of these times by imitating
so worthy examples, should suppress the Tyrants both of bodies and souls, and
restrain the oppressors both of the Commonwealth, and of the Church of
Christ: otherwise they themselves may most deservedly be branded with that
infamous title of Tyrant.

And to conclude this discourse in a word, piety command^ that the Law and
Church of God be maintained: Justice requires that Tyrants and destroyers of
the Commonwealth be compelled to reason: Charity challenges the right of
relieving and restoring the oppressed. Those that make no account of these
things, do as much as in them lies to drive piety, justice and charity out of
this world, that they may never more be heard of.

FINIS.

