A word in Season: BEING THE COMMENTARY OF Dr. Martin Luther, ON Three SELECT
PSALMS: VIZ. The CXXIVth, CXXVth, and CXXIXth.

WITH His Commentary on some part of the Fourth and Fifth Chapters of the First
Epistle of St. Peter.

Being of special Use for the present Times.

ECCLES. XII. 11. The Words of the wise are goads, and as nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.

LONDON: Printed by George Larkin at the lower End of Broad-street, next to
London-Wall. 1685.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT would be an unaccountable Presumption for me to commend to thy good Opinion
the Author of the Commentary on the Psalms, and that part of St. Peter's First
Epistle, presented to thee in the following Sheets. If thou art a Protestant
Christian, and indifferently acquainted with Authors, thou must acknowledge Dr.
Martin Luther, a Worthy of the First Rank next the Apostles, if not the First
also in that Rank; or stand by thy self, as some odd single Exception, from the
stream of thy Profession. But if thou art a Roman Catholic, and so of a
Denomination as contradictory to it self, as thy Papal Principles are to Truth,
Reason, Sense, and Humane Society, I must not hope the Authors Name (than
which, to those of thy Profession, none is more abhorred) will commend his Work
to thy Perusal, much less thy Embraces.

That mighty Opposition which this Worthy met with in his Successful Attempts
of pulling down the Papal Power, was an Exercise for such a Faith and Courage
as the God of all Grace had filled him withal: And the Commentaries following
express as much of both, as any of his Numerous Tracts. And this considered,
with the sad Parallel of our Present Confusions, and their Causes, with those
of his Days; Those very Remedies (animated with the same Spirit) are with much
reason proposed for thy Support, under our present Calamities; if not also, as
of some Tendency toward a Cure.

I doubt not but such who have not prostituted their Souls to their Sensuality,
and their Religion to those who bid most, and the Church of Christ to the Lusts
of Antichrist, will Accept and Approve of these Flowers out of Luther's Garden,
as Eminently Seasonable, and to a Spiritual Palate, no less Savoury.

I have no further to acquaint thee with, but that this Commentary is according
to the English Translation out of the Latin, Printed in the year 1615.

THE COMMENTARY OF Dr. MARTIN LVTHER, Upon the CXXIV PSALM.
Verse. 1. If the Lord had not been on our side, etc.
THis Psalm is a Thanksgiving to God for his great mercy in preserving his
People, placed (as the stories do show) in the midst of the Gentiles and
Heathen People, The Argument of the Psalm.
as a flock of Sheep in a wild Forest, or in respect of the multitude, as a
City compared to a mighty Kingdom, The People of Israel as a flock of Sheep
among many Wolves.
being compassed on every side with the Kings of the Assyrians, the Egyptians,
the Ammonites, the Ismaelites, the Moabites; whom Satan had stirred up with
deadly hatred, to vex and persecute them, seeking by all means to root them out
from the Earth, that thereby he might utterly deface and abolish the Word and
Worship of the Lord. This danger David saw, and thanked God which had preserved
his People from the rage of so many Lions and Dragons, which notwithstanding
that they never ceased to seek their Destruction, yet all that they went about
was in vain. And what a miracle was this, that this People could so long
continue, notwithstanding the malice and rage of so many Devils? David
therefore in this Psalm exhorts his People to be thankful to the Lord their
God so mightily preserving, defending and delivering them from the violence of
so many Nations and Kingdoms, hating and persecuting them on every side.

Which Psalm we also do sing, not only against our adversaries which hate and
persecute the Word, but also against spiritual Wickedness. For we are taught by
the Gospel that there are now seven Devils which lie in wait for us, (whereas
we were before in danger but of one) which cease not to stir up the whole World
against us. Yea our Case were more tolerable if we had but only the World, and
not Satan also with all his Angels and the gates of Hell, wholly bent against
us. But yet further to molest and vex us; besides all these, we have also the
third Enemy, which we carry always about with us, which we nourish also and
foster at home with us, and even within us, the flesh I mean, which gives us
no rest, but continually tempts us to Sin, fights against Faith, and
striveth in our members against the Spirit.

Forasmuch then as the Church of God is never free from these dangers, let us
also sing to the praise of Christ this Psalm: that he preserves us his members
from all these Enemies. For it were extreme ingratitude not to acknowledge this
miracle, that notwithstanding all these, the Church does yet continue, and that
there be some which truly teach and confess Christ, and believe in Christ, tho
Satan rage, the World and false Brethren conspire against us, and the flesh (as
an untamed Beast) fight against the Word and Faith never so much. This is the
benefit then that David so highly extolleth, and wishes that his People would
understand and give thanks to God for the same.

Verse 1. If the Lord had not been on our side, may Israel now say:

Verse 2. If the Lord had not been been on our side, when men rose up against
us,

Verse 3. They had then swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled
against us.

Here the Prophet David exhorts the People to consider how mercifully God
has delivered them from the hands of their Enemies, and how miraculously he
had preserved that Kingdom, and also to praise God with him for the same. Which
words are not to be restrained to David's time only. For the Heathen People had
oftentimes before warred against them with such Force and Power as was like to
the rage of most huge and terrible floods of Water (whereof he speaks here)
ready to overflow them. Therefore seeing he mentions here no one kind of
deliverance, it seems that he means in these words of Thanksgiving to set
forth whatsoever God had done for the succor and deliverance of his People at
any time before. Wherein he shows (as it were in a glass) the dangerous state
of the Church from the beginning, that the faithful may learn to know that it
has not been preserved by the strength and policy of man, but by the
miraculous power and hand of God, and therefore in their troubles and
afflictions should always fly to God for help and succor.

Israel signifies the People of God. Let us acknowledge then that there is no
way for Gods People to escape the hands of their Enemies, but by the help and
power of God, and that he will have the glory and praise thereof to be given to
him alone. This praise can none give unto God, but the true Israel, having
experience both of their own weakness, the force and power of their Enemies,
the dangers past, and of the merciful help and Protection of the Lord.

Verse 2. If the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up against us.
This repetition is not in vain. For whilst we are in danger, our fear is
without measure: but when it is once past, we imagine it to have been less then
it was indeed. And this is the delusion of Satan, to diminish and obscure the
Grace of God. David therefore with this repetition stirs up the People to
greater thankfulness unto God for his gracious Deliverance and amplifieth the
dangers which they had passed. Whereby we are taught how to think of our
troubles and afflictions past, least the sense and feeling of Gods Grace vanish
out of our minds. And here note, how God deals with his People in their
distress, who suffers their Enemies so far to prevail over them, and
deferreth his help so long, till it seem impossible for them to escape: so that
they are compelled to confess and acknowledge, that they must needs have
perished if the mighty hand of God had not delivered them. These two things
then we see the Israelites here to acknowledge: first, That the Lord was on
their side, that is, succored and delivered them; then also that it had not
been possible but they must utterly have perished, if God had not preserved and
defended them.

By men is here understood whatsoever is great and mighty in the world; as if
he said: We are counted as abjects and out casts of the world. The Princes, the
Rulers, the Wise, the Rich of the world rise up against us, to destroy us and
to root us out from the face of the earth. If ye behold with how great and how
many Kingdoms we are compassed about, which bear a deadly hatred against us, we
may seem like to a silly Sheep compassed about with a multitude of cruel
Wolves, every moment ready to devour it. That we live in safety therefore, and
that our Enemies prevail not against us, acknowledge it to be the great mercy
of God, O Israel, which so miraculously preserves and defends so small a
flock.

In like manner we are compelled to say and confess at this day, that if God
did not miraculously defend and preserve his Church, the Power of Satan is so
great, that one of his Angels is able in one moment to destroy us all, that
either teach or profess Christ, and to fill the World with bloodshed and
slaughter. We see the Princes, the Pope, the Prelates, the mighty and wealthy
of the World, yea the whole world in a manner bent to destroy us. Against whom
what have we to defend us, but that the Lord of Hosts has stretched out his
mighty arm over us, which as a brazen wall, defends us against all the cruel
darts which both Satan and the world do daily cast against us? That we live
then, that we teach, and you hear the word, that we have place and liberty in
the Church so to do, these things Satan cannot abide, and therefore he raises
the gates of Hell against us; notwithstanding he is compelled to suffer all
these things through the power of Christ our King, who sits at the right
hand of God; for by man's strength and power these things could not be retained
and defended. If Satan then at any time have his will in troubling the Church,
in murdering the people of God, and such like, therefore it is, because God
would show what Satan is able to do every moment if he were not resisted by the
almighty power of God, to the end that we should walk in the fear of God, and
acknowledging this inestimable benefit, continually pray unto God for the same.
Let us learn then to sing with David: If the Lord had not been on our side,
etc. whose mighty hand has defended us, whose power alone has preserved us.
And although the world rage against us, though Satan vex us never so sore, they
cannot hurt us. Be of good comfort (says Christ our Savior) for I have
overcome the world. Again; I give unto them everlasting life, and none shall
take them out of my hand.

Verse 3. They had then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled
against us.
In these words he expresses, not only the strength, rage, and cruelty of the
enemies: but also how weak and unable the Israelites were to withstand them.
And here he uses a similitude taken of fierce and outrageous beasts, whose
property is, when they have taken their Preys, to swallow them up alive.
Likewise when we would express the cruelty or malice of any toward us, we are
wont to say: He hates me so deadly, that he could find in his heart to eat me,
or swallow me up quick. The Prophet means then that their enemies were so
many and so mighty, that they needed no armor or weapons to destroy them, but
were able, like fierce and cruel beasts, to swallow them up alive, being so
weak and so little a flock.

Verse 4. Then the Waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our soul.
Terrible is the rage of fire, but much more terrible is the violence and rage
of water, for that no power can resist. Now, says David, like as huge and
mighty floods of water carried with great power and violence, do suddenly
overthrow and bear down whatsoever they meet withal: even such is the rage of
the enemies of Gods Church, which no power of man is able to withstand.
Therefore let us learn to trust to the Lords defense and succor. For what else
is the Church, but as a little boat tied by a River fide, and by violence of
the water soon carried away? Or as a Reed which by force of the stream is
easily plucked up and carried away? Such was the people of Israel in David's
time, being compared to the Gentiles round about them. Such is the Church
likewise at this day, compared to the adversaries. Such is every one of us in
respect of the force and power of the malignant spirit. We are like a Reed
which is easily plucked up: and he like a raging flood which with great might
and violence overthrows and carries away all things. We are like a withered
leaf, soon blown from the tree; and he like a mighty wind or tempest, not only
blowing down leaves, but plucking up and overthrowing trees and all. What are
we then poor wretches able to do of our own power and strength for our defense?
We must learn therefore by faith wholly to rest upon the word. For what is our
victory but even our faith? Albeit that armor and munitions have their place,
yet can they nothing help at all, unless we have a trust and affiance in the
Lord, who has promised to be our God, our strength, and our defense: whose
power is such, whose mighty arm also is stretched out for the defense of his,
that albeit never so great a tempest or violent rage of water should invade the
poorest and simplest cottage that can be, it forces not. Let this be then our
assured trust, let this be the rock of our safety, help and succor, that God
will be our defender and keeper, that the great floods and mighty waters carry
us not away. This sure defense and mighty protection of our God, the wicked
neither know nor believe; for they attribute all their success and welfare to
their own strength, wisdom, and riches. But Solomon, albeit he was a King
abundantly endued with all these things, yet says he: Except the Lord build
the house, the builders labor in vain: Except the Lord keep the City, they
watch in vain that keep it.

Verse 5. Then had the swelling waters gone over our soul.
He sets out yet more lively and as it were before their eyes, the great
danger from the which God had delivered them. And this vehement kind of speech
which he uses here, had as great force to make the faithful to feel from what
terrible destruction they were delivered by the mighty hand of God, as if their
danger had been present before their eyes, and so to become more thankful to
God for the same. Note who are most thankful.
For he is thankful to God indeed for his deliverance and safety, which does
acknowledge that before his deliverance he saw nothing else but utter
destruction.

Thus David sets out the afflictions. and calamities of the Church and of
the godly, whom the world does not only hate, but cruelly Persecute. Whereby we
may see that it has not only a greedy desire, but also power to hurt, murder
and destroy. Satan likewise goes about like a raging Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. Besides these, there are great and horrible sins sticking in our flesh.
That we fall not therefore every moment into desperation, or otherwise perish,
it is because he is greater which is in us, then he which is in the world, or
the whole world besides, as David says: If God had not been with us, our
enemies had swallowed us up alive. Now he adds a notable similitude,
wherewith he amplifieth the danger of the godly, and power of the wicked.

Verse 6. Praised be the Lord, which has not given us as a Prey unto their
Teeth.
He exhorts the faithsul to be thankful for their deliverance, and expresses
unto them, how and (as it were) with what words they should declare this
thankfullness. Wherein he sets forth yet further by another similitude, that
it could not be but they must utterly have perished, if God had not
miraculously defended them. For they were, says he, no otherwise preserved,
then as if a man should violently take a Prey out of the jaws of a raging and
cruel beast. As if he said, We were indeed like silly sheep, and as a Prey
ready to be devoured of cruel beasts: but praised be the Lord our God, which
would not suffer us so to perish. He says not: which has delivered us: albeit
he did indeed mightily deliver them: but, which has not given us as a Prey,
etc. For this is it which specially the Holy Ghost here sets forth, that the
wicked cannot hurt the godly, be they never so many, mighty, furious, cruel
and terrible, like to raging and violent waters, like to cruel and outrageous
beasts, falling upon them with open mouth, except the Lord give them into their
hands. Let us therefore with David sing praises unto the Lord our God, which
keeps and defends us, that the raging and cruel beasts which have sharpened
their teeth to devour us, cannot hurt us. Without this merciful protection of
our God, there is no way to stand against Satan and his cruel members the
space of one moment.

Verse 7. Our Soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the Fouler:
The snare is broken, and we are delivered.
He amplifieth yet further by a third similitude, the great perils and dangers
of the faithful, being in the hands of their enemies, as a bird that is taken
in the snare is in the hands of the fouler; and yet notwithstanding they
escaped by the mighty power of God, no otherwise then the bird that is
delivered out of the snare of the fouler. By the snare is here to be understood
as well the fraud and subtilty of the enemies, whereby the Israelites were
brought into thraldom and captivity, as also the strength and power wherewith
they were long oppressed. So that they had not only to do with Bloody and
Cruel Enemies, but also were entrapped and snared by fraud and subtilty, and
with might and power miserably oppressed. Thus being unable both in Strength
and Policy to withstand their Enemies, they were every way in danger of Death
and Destruction: whereby it appears that they were miraculously delivered.

And here have we an Image of our spiritual Thraldom and Captivity under Satan,
in whose snares we were once most miserably wrapped. Now therefore that we are
delivered by the inestimable benefit of Christ, let us acknowledge both our
former Calamity, and the Liberty of this Grace wherein we stand, and let us
beware that we cast not our selves into the snares of servile Bondage any more.
For Satan sleeps not, but lies continually in wait for us, ready to draw us
into those snares again, out of the which by the great mercy of God we were
delivered: yea and sometimes is suffered to hurt either our Bodies or Souls,
not only to show us that he is able likewise to destroy both Body and Soul, if
God did so permit: but also to stir us up to Faith and Prayer, that we should
call upon him for Aid and Succor against these perilous Snares, and being
delivered, should give him thanks and praise for the same.

Moreover, every Tentation is a Snare, whether it be of the Flesh or Spirit.
Persecution, Torments, Imprisonment, Slander, diseases and infirmities of the
Body, be snares; which as they are permitted of God to exercise and strengthen
our Faith: so by the malice of Satan they are wrought to afflict and to vex
men, that he may bring them to infidelity and desperation, and so into the
Snares of eternal Death. From the which Snares, but by the special Grace of
God, there is no way to escape.

Thus our life lies always open to the Snares of Satan, The Snares of Satan.
and we as silly Birds are like at every moment to be carried away.
Notwithstanding the Lord makes a way for us to escape. Yea when Satan seems
to be most sure of us, by the mighty Power of God the Snares are broken, and we
are delivered. Experience hereof we have in those which are inwardly afflicted,
and with heaviness of Spirit grievously oppressed; that when they seem to be in
utter Despair, and ready (as you would say) now to perish, yet even at the last
pinch, and in the uttermost Extremity, comes the sweet Comfort of Gods holy
Spirit, and raises them up again. When we are most ready to perish, then is
God most ready to help. Psalm. 94.
Except the Lord had helped me (says David) my Soul had almost dwelt in
silence.

Verse 8. Our help is in the Name of the Lord who has made both Heaven and
Earth.
This is the Conclusion of Thanksgiving, containing a worthy sentence of great
Comfort, that against Sin, the horror of Death, The Name of the Lord is our
only Sanctuary and succor in all afflictions.
and other Dangers, there is no other help or safety but only the Name of the
Lord. If that were not (says he) we should fall into all manner of Sin,
Blasphemy, Errors, and into all kind of Calamities. But our help is in the Name
of the Lord, which preserves our Faith and our Life against the Devil and the
World. And as ye heard in the other Verses before, so he shows in this verse
also, that God suffers his Saints to be tempted, and in their Tentation to
fall into great Distress, as even now ready to be drowned and swallowed up
presently with great floods of Water: yet notwithstanding this Comfort he
shows them, that he will not utterly forsake them. By the which Examples we
may learn to know the Will of the Lord, and to seek our help and safety at his
hands, which suffers his People to be exercised in the Furnace of Egypt, not
to their utter Destruction, but only to kill the old man with his vain hope and
confidence which he has in his own strength. This is the cause why God
suffers his People to be exercised. For it is not hearing, reading, talking,
or teaching, nor Speculation only which makes a Christian man, but Practice is
that which specially is required in a true Christian, that is to say, the
Cross, to pluck down the flesh and bring it to nothing; That man, despairing of
his own strength, and seeing no succor in himself, should resign himself
wholly unto the Lord, looking with Patience and Hope for help at his hand: for
this is the Will of God. Neither must we imagine to our selves any other God
then such an one as will help the afflicted and oppressed with Desperation and
other Calamities. To know this Doctrine is one piece of the victory. For they
that know it not when Tentation assaileth them, either do despair or seek other
helps. Let us learn then out of this Psalm, that it is the Will of God to
exercise his Saints with troubles and afflictions: Who suffers great floods
of Water to run over their heads: who also permits them to fall into the
Snares of the Wicked, and tries every Way, not to destroy them, but to show
them what they are of themselves, and so to teach them to trust in his saving
health. But the flesh looks to the power and multitude of the Adversaries,
and her own infirmity: but to look unto God, and to hope for his help and
succor, it is not able.

Wherefore this is a necessary Conclusion: Our help is in the Name of the Lord.
It is a short-Sentence, but it sets forth most worthy Doctrine and
Consolation: whereof specially in these latter days we have great need, seeing
the Pope, together with the greatest part of the Princes and Rulers of the
World, so cruelly do persecure the Doctrine of the Gospel. In respect of these
huge Mountains, what are we small Molehils? Yea tho there were no Force nor
Power of man for us to fear, how are we able to stand against, not only so many
Devils, but even the very gates of Hell also? And yet this Experience we have
of the great Mercy and Goodness of the Lord our God, that when we are even in
their hands, and never so much oppressed, yet are we not forsaken, but are safe
through our Confidence and trust in his Help. The fruit of afflictions.
But to this Wisdom it is impossible for us to attain without continual
afflictions: whereby it is necessary that the confidence of all worldly
succors should be beaten down. For vexation and trouble brings Understanding
(as Isaiah says,) whereby we are compelled to cry; Help Lord, for else we
perish. So in the last hour when Death approaches, there is nothing wherein
man's Heart can repose it self or find Comfort, but his trust and confidence in
the help of the Lord; There is rest and quietness, there is perfect Peace. He
that can then say, My Help is in the Name of the Lord, dies happily, and is
out of all danger. Thus we may learn what it is to have and enjoy God, even to
rest in the sure trust of his merciful help and succor in all dangers. These
are the Words therefore of a victorious and triumphing Faith: Our help is in
the name of the Lord which made Heaven and Earth. As if he said: The maker of
Heaven and Earth is my God and my helper. Show me a God (O ye my Adversaries)
like unto him. What are your snares and your trains then, compared unto this
God? What are your threatenings, your Power, your Policies? etc.

Thus he sets the Eternal God, the maker of Heaven and Earth, against all
terrors and dangers, against the floods and overflowings of all tentations,
and swalloweth up as it were with on breath, all the raging furies of the whole
World, and of Hell it self, even as a little drop of Water is swallowed up of a
mighty flaming fire. And what is the World with all his Force and Power, in
respect of him which made Heaven and Earth? Let the World fret then, let it
rage, so that this succor never fail us. And if it be the Will of God that we
shall suffer trouble and affliction, yet in him we shall overcome at length.

THE COMMENTARY OF Dr. MARTIN LVTHER, Upon the CXXV PSALM.
They that trust in the Lord, etc.
THE Psalm going before, The argument of the Psalm.
is a Thanksgiving or a Sacrifice of Praise, because the Godly see, and by
experience feel that the Lord is faithful and helps them in the time of need.
This Psalm following contains also, in a manner, the same matter: For it
pertains to the Doctrine of Faith, and exhorts the Faithful likewise to a
sure trust and assiance in the help of the Lord in all their necessities:
Whereunto he stirs them up with great and excellent promises. It may also be
easily understood by that which we have said before. For herein consists all
this Heavenly Wisdom, that we do utterly remove out of our sight, whatsoever
flesh can comprehend, and believe that which the Word only tells us, even
against all that which either we know, feel, or see: And therefore this Wisdom
is against all humane Wisdom and Reason. For by Reason, and all that Reason can
comprehend, we feel, see, and conceive all things contrary to that which Faith
leads us unto.

He that lies sick at the point of Death, can by Reason conceive nothing else
but the imagination of Death. But a Christian man leaving his imagination,
knows that in Death there is true Life. But thou will say: He sees and
feels Death indeed, but Life he cannot feel. I Answer, that because he
rests upon the Word, and after it he judges, and not after his own feeling,
therefore even in Death he sees nothing but Life, and in the midst of Darkness
most clear light. For like as God makes all things of nothing, and of darkness
light: so he works by his Word, that in Death there is nothing but life. The
power of the Word. Psalm. 33.
They then which stick to the Word and Promise of God, and follow the same, do
find it true which David says, He spoke the Word and it was done, etc. But
before we can come to this experience, we must abide some trouble, and
therefore have need of such exhortation as this Psalm here sets forth.

Verse 1. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be
removed, but remains for ever.
The Prophet uses here a similitude of Mount Sion, because Jerusalem wherein
Sion stood, when the Temple was builded had most ample and notable promises of
God (as appears in very many places of the Prophets) that it should stand
sure and invincible for ever against all troubles and Calamities, for that the
Lord had his abiding and dwelling there; according to that promise where he
says, Here is my rest, here will I dwell, etc. And therefore David in another
Psalm glories on this wise: Lo, the Kings were gathered and went together,
when they saw it, they marvelled; They were astonished and suddenly driven back.
As we may see it came to pass under Ezechias in the great Destruction of the
Assyrians and other Kings, as the stories witness; which show that Jerusalem
remained safe in all dangers, not by strength and Policy of the inhabitants,
but by the miraculous Work of God dwelling in it, and thus mightily preserving
and beautifying his own Commonwealth.

Now therefore, says he, like as Mount Sion and our Holy City Jerusalem is
never moved, but remains sure and safe by the mighty protection of the Lord
in all Extremities: so he that trusts in the Lord shall be defended against
the furious Rage of the World and the Gates of Hell for ever Note how he
commands no Work here to be done, as in Popery, in the time of trouble men
were taught to enter into some kind of Religion, to fast, to go on Pilgrimage,
and to do such other foolish Works of Devotion, which they devised, as an high
Service unto God, and thereby thought to make Condign Satisfaction for Sin, To
hope and trust in the Lord, is tke greatest Service that we can do to him.
and merit Eternal Life; but simply he leads us the plain Way unto God,
pronouncing this to be the chiefest Anchor of our Salvation, only to hope and
trust in the Lord, and that this is the greatest Service that we can do unto
God. For this is the Nature of God (as I have said) to create all things of
nothing. Therefore he creates and brings forth in Death Life; in Darkness,
The Nature of Faith.
Light: And this to believe, is the very Nature and most special Property of
Faith. When God then sees such a one as agrees with his own Nature, that is,
which believes to find in Danger, Help; in Poverty, Riches; in Sin,
Righteousness; and that for Gods own Mercies sake in Christ alone; him can God
neither hate nor forsake. For he serves and worshipeth God truly which puts
his whole trust in the Mercy of God. With this Service God is highly pleased,
because he delights of nothing to make something. So he made the World of
nothing: so he raises up the Poor and Oppressed; so he justifies the Sinner;
so he raises the Dead; and so he saves the Damned. Who so then consents to
Gods Nature, and obeys his Will, there hoping sor something where nothing is,
he it is that pleases God, and shall never be moved.

But thou must beware that thou imagine not to thy self a false Hope, contrary
to the Word of God and thy Vocation. Whereof if thou be certain, and abide in
the same, if troubles rise, trust in the Lord; and if he help not in his good
time, take me and David also for Liars. Satan will trouble, vex and discomfort
thee, yea and peradventure make thee to believe that thou art utterly forsaken;
but if thou trust in the Lord, thou shall feel his help with joyful Victory. So
in the Council of Auspurge when the Princes were bent against us with one
consent, our cause seemed to be utterly overthrown. Notwithstanding yet we live
and enjoy such Peace and Liberty as we would wish, maugre the Rage and Malice
of the Pope and all the Adversaries of the World. With such Conflicts we must
be exercised least we be discouraged when we see our cause begin to quail. But
the greater the danger is, the more steadfastly we must trust. So shall it come
to pass that when we are overcome, yet we shall overcome, and the Conqueror
shall yield unto us Triumph and Victory.

This is it that the Psalm here sets forth: They that trust in the Lord
shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but remains for ever. And
here we have a singular promise, whereby we are assured that we shall stand and
abide for ever If then we do not continue, it is our own fault, because we
abide not firm and stable in our Faith: For this promise must needs remain sure
and infallible. Yea as it is impossible that God should deny himself, and not
be God: so is it impossible that he should forsake those that put their trust
in him. But we may not think the time long, but patiently abide the Lords
Leisure. For Gods power takes no place in us until we be utterly (to speak
after the manner of the Scripture) exininated, that is, stripped naked of all
Worldly Hope and Helps that man has in himself, and brought to nothing: like
as when he saves a ship from drowning, now ready to perish, and past all
Remedy; As the two Stories of the Gospel, one of the Ship, the other of the
danger of Peter, do testify.

Verse 2. As the Mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his
People, from henceforth and for ever.
Where many hundred thousands of men are, there are scarcely seven thousand
which know God, or believe in God, and yet for their sakes the whole Multitude
is called God*s people, Even so was it in Jerusalem. Jerusalem called holy by
the figure Synecdoche where a part is taken for the whole.
Albeit the greater part was Wicked and Godless, yet was Jerusalem called Holy,
not only in Respect of a small Nnmber of the Godly; but also because God had
his abiding there. So when there was not one just person in Sodom but Lot with
his two Daughters, yet could not the Angel destroy Sodom with fire so long as
Lot was in it. Likewise where four or five or ten godly Persons are to be
found, for their sakes the whole City is called Holy. For these are the Elect
corner stones, these are the precious Pearls which God so highly esteems, and
for whose sakes he spares the Wicked. Therefore says David, As Jerusalem is
compassed about with Mountains, so does the Lord compass his People and
mightily defend them on every side. In like manner Zachary Prophecyeth of a
City whose Wall is of fire. These Similitudes do set forth unto us the Safety
of Gods People, that weak and little poor Flock, against all Dangers. Upon this
promise if we also do rest, which at this day enjoy the inestimable Benfit of
Gods Holy Word, we shall be defended against the Rage of Satan and the whole
World, not by fiery and brazen Walls, but by the Lord himself. These things
albeit we cannot comprehend, yet should we believe them so certainly as if we
did see them with our bodily Eyes. If we should see our selves compassed about
with brazen and fiery Walls, we would be without all fear, and Triumph against
Satan. But it is a matter of Faith, not to trust unto that which the Eyes see,
but which the Word offers and promises. This one thing therefore is lacking
in us, that we have not eyes of the Spirit, but we judge according to the eyes
and sense of the Flesh. For else we should be no more afraid then they which
being closed within the Walls of an invincible Castle, fear not the force and
power of their Enemies, be they never so terrible. We must not doubt therefore,
but if we believe, we are compassed about with fiery and brazen Mountains, that
is to say, we abide for ever invincible against the Rage of Satan and all the
Powers of Darkness. Blessed therefore is he that believes.

These Mountains are the Angels, which compass us on every side, that Satan
with his Angels and Ministers cannot hurt us as he would; Whose Malice and
Power is such, that if they did not continually behold us, continually defend
us and watch over us, he would destroy us every moment. This can all they
testify which know that Satan is a Murderer and a Liar, which cannot abide to
see the godly prosper, and therefore he seeks by all means to root them out
from the face of the Earth. That we are not then utterly consumed, it is the
benefit of these Mountains, by whom we are so compassed and defended. Sometimes
Satan hurleth his Darts at us as it were through the window, to destroy us, and
works us indeed some sorrow, but he cannot move us.

This similitude seems to be taken out of the Story of Helizeus in the second
book of the Kings, where the servant of Helizeus saw the Hills about him full
of fiery Chariots, and Horsemen compassing Helizeus round about, and mightily
defending him. This succor which the Servant of Helizeus saw, and the Prophet
believed, when he saw nothing, is says the Prophet, round about all them which
trust in the Lord: as also the 34. Psalm witnesses; The Angel of the Lord
pitcheth round about them that fear him. But our eyes are shut up and see not
these miracles, whereof not with standing we have daily experience.

This promise then will never deceive us; only let us not deceive our selves.
If therefore we did believe, no doubt, we should sleep, we should live, we
should die, yea (that more is) we should suffer what soever Satan and the world
can do against us, without all fear. For thus should we think, if I suffer any
thing, it is not without the Will of God, nor without good cause, well known,
though not unto me, yet unto God. Therefore although Satan break through the wall
in one place, yet shall he never be able utterly to overthrow it altogether.
Thus should we think in our troubles and afflictions, and comfort our selves
with the good Will of God. But we are afraid when any trouble comes, and never
feel that security which Faith brings. Thus do we worthily suffer the
punishment of our infidelity which we nourish within us, although we be called
away from it by so many notable places of Scripture.

Besides all this, it is not enough that we are compassed about with fiery
Walls, that is, with the sure Custody, the continual Watch and Ward of the
Angels, but the Lord himself is our Wall: so that every way we are defended by
the Lord against all Dangers. Above us he is a Heaven, on both sides he is as a
Wall, under us he is as a strong Rock whereupon we stand: so are we every way
sure and safe. Now, if Satan through these munitions cast his darts at us, it
must needs be that the Lord himself shall be hurt before we take harm. But
great is our incredulity, which hear all these things in vain. Yet must they be
taught and learned, least the time come that we be destitute of all Counsel and
Comfort in these matters. For certain it is that the hour shall come when we
must have experience of these things, or else utterly perish.

Where he adds, From henceforth and for ever. By these words he shows that
this vigilance of the Lord our God over us, is not temporal, but eternal,
according to that which he said before in the first verse of this Psalm. They
shall remain for ever. Let us learn therefore out of this Psalm, that our
Constancy and perseverance consists in this, that we are defended by the
Power and Providence of the Lord on every side.

Verse 3. For the rod of the Wicked shall not rest on the lot of the Righteous,
least the Righteous put forth their hand unto Wickedness.
Here the Prophet plainly declares, that the People which rest under this
Defense and Protection, are afflicted and subject to all Miseries and
Calamities as touching the flesh; although they be compassed about with such high
and mighty Mountains as touching the Spirit, as Satan can never surmount, yet
touching the Flesh and the Old man, they lie open on every side to the Darts of
Satan and the World; For God by these means will afflict and exercise the
Flesh, that Sin and the foolishness of the Flesh may be mortified in them, and
that spiritual Wisdom and the inward man may increase. This is the cause why we
are according to the Flesh, as a broken Hedge, and as a City whose Walls are
cast down, and so lies open to the Enemies on every side. Wherefore there is
no sort of men so vile and abject which do not think that they may do what they
list against the true Professors of the Gospel. Hereof come such intolerable
injuries, horrible blasphemies, cruel torments and bloody slaughters of the
Saints of God. For the Flesh has no Walls, no Munitions to defend it, but the
Spirit. Therefore the flesh is in danger to all Storms and Tempests, broken and
trodden down of the wicked, as Isaiah says, Chap. 51. Which have said unto thy
Soul, Bow down that we may go over. Thou have laid thy Body as the ground, and
as the street to them that went over. These afflictions we must needs suffer
and by patience overcome them, and withal we must beware that by these outward
afflictions the inward man be not weakened or overcome; resting in this assured
hope and trust, that the Lord will never forsake us, but that we are in the
bosom of the Father, and are closed within most sure and strong holds. So that
now, although our Goods, our Wives, our Children, yea and our Lives also be taken
from us, yet we shall never be spoiled of our Christ, by whom we are so surely
defended, that in the midst of all our Tentations he will make a way for us to
escape, or else give us strength to bear them.

Thus we see what Consolations the Holy Ghost sets forth unto them which
believe the Word. For unto such as look for a better Life then this, all things
are here full of Calamities and Miseries. Death follows Death, as Paul says,
and we continually die. One Tentation follows another, until at the length by
the Death of the Flesh all miseries shall cease and have an end. This verse
therefore makes much for our Comfort, admonishing us that we must suffer many
troubles; yet so, that at the length we shall be safe and set at Liberty from
them all, though not in this Life, yet in the Life to come, and in Eternal
Life. And why should we not thus boldly promise unto our selves, remaining
under this diligent Custody of the Angels, yea of the Lord himself, which is
always round about his People? But here (as before I said) we have need of
Faith, that we may judge herein, not according to our present troubles and
tentations, but according to the Word of Promise. And what should we need any
promises if there were no tentations? which tentations whether they be within
in the Spirit, or without in the flesh, the time shall come when we through
Christ shall have full victory hereof, as this verse full of sweet Consolation
does promise unto us.

Notwithstanding this promise seems incredible both to us which suffer, and
also to them which persecute and afflict us. For if we behold the same with our
outward eyes, what can be more false? yea the contrary seems to be most true.
Behold our Savior Christ, was he not so forsaken, hanging upon the Cross, that
the Rod or Scepter of the wicked rested upon him? Did it not rest likewise upon
the Prophets, the Apostles, and other holy Martyrs? This matter then, if we
consider it with our outward eyes, has another meaning then the Words do
import. For they promise that the Scepter of the wicked shall have no power
over the godly, and yet all stories and examples do teftify the contrary.
Therefore the Holy Ghost calls us back to the purpose and Counsel of God
revealed in his Word, and commands us to weigh and consider, not what we
suffer and with our outward eyes behold, but what is decreed with the Lord in
Heaven. And he that can so sequester himself from the beholding of his
afflictions and tentations, and yield himself wholly over to the Will of God,
and there rest, is a right Divine; yea he that is ignorant hereof, in true
Divinity knows nothing at all. For what knows he which is ignorant that God
is such a God as will not suffer the godly to be oppressed of the wicked? For
seeing he has said, I am the Lord thy God, he will never suffer that which is
his own, to be wrested either by the World or by the gates of Hell out of his
hands. If he then abide and continue, they shall also continue for ever which
are his. Thus to believe, and thus to lay hold on things invifible, is true
Divinity and true spiritual Wisdom indeed, whereupon we may ground this
Proposition out of the invisible Counsel of God; God hates the wicked, and
loves the just, ergo he will damn and destroy the wicked, and will deliver and
save the just. And here we see that which is the chiefest thing in all the
Psalms and Prophets, to spring of the first Precept: I am the Lord thy God.

Now have we to learn how we may apply this verse rightly and to our Comfort.
For true Divinity consists in use and practice. We are vexed on every side
with cruel Bishops, wicked Princes, and others which hate the Word of God and
the doctrine which we profess. But these are very trifles, if ye compare them
with those vexations which Satan, Sin, and our own infirmity raise up in our
Consciences. We must learn therefore thus to judge of all these things, that
they are the Rod and Scepter of the wicked, and to set the Lord against them,
revealing his Will here in his Word, and pronouncing that he will not suffer
the Scepter of the wicked to rest upon the godly. Seeing then the same Prince
promises thus much unto us which has all things in his hand, what can we
require more? For the will of God is certain, that though he suffer us to be
afflicted, yet will he not see us trodden under foot or perish. Thus must we
apply these sweet Consolations.

What the rod signisieth in the Scripture it is well known. Children when they
are young, are corrected with a rod; and when they wax bigger, with a Wand or
Cudgel; and if they will not so amend, then follows the Iron rod. Hereof it
comes that the rod signifies all Power and Rule, which is for the Amendment
and Correction of such as do offend. So it is taken in the 110 Psalm. The Lord
shall send forth the rod of thy Power out of Sion: That is to say, thy Kingdom;
For there he signifies such a rod whereby Kingdoms and People are governed. On
this wise the holy Ghost permits here to the wicked, Dominion and Tyranny
over the godly, which they are compelled to suffer. Like as we are compelled
not only to see but also to suffer the Tyranny of Antichrist and the Power of
his Kingdom, persecuting, destroying and murdering the Christians, and raging
against them with all kind of Tyranny. Yea we are Compelled moreover to suffer
the Tyranny of Satan vexing and terrifying my Heart and the Hearts of the
Brethren which believe in Christ. This Dominion or Tyranny the Holy Ghost
calls the rod of the wicked; and comfort us, that as the Lord lives,
their Tyranny shall fall, and shall not rest upon the Lot of the godly.

The lot of the just is as much to say as the Portion, that is, the Number or
Congregation of the just. Like as Christ calls them the Little Flock, and
Paul, The poor Saints. Over these, says he, although the Tyrants do rule, yet
shall not their power endure. Although the Persecutors of the Church do oppress
the faithful, yet shall they not do so always, neither shall their Counsels
have the success which they desire. For they think to root out this Doctrine
for ever; but that shall they never be able to do: Therefore albeit ye suffer
in the mean time, says the Holy Ghost, yet know ye, that my will is, That they
which believe in me shall never perish, but shall be preserved to Life
Everlasting. Here then have ye whereunto ye may trust in all your Tentations.

But behold the reason which the Holy Ghost here uses to prove that the
Scepter of the wicked shall not rest upon the just. God is moved says he, to
help and defend the just. For else it might so come to pass that God should
have no Church at all, and the just should put forth their hands to Wickedness.
So we find in Jeremiah, that before the People were delivered into the hands of
the Babylonians, they had promise that after seventy years they should return
again to Jerusalem, because they should not be brought into doubt of Gods
Mercy, and so utterly despair, and falling away from God should turn to
Gentilism; as it is in the Psalm, least the godly should turn to foolishness,
that is to say, should blaspheme and become impatient, This is the cause why
God joyneth the promise of the Word with the Execution and Performance of the
Deed; or else the godly should be driven to Desperation. We see how many are
cast down with Adversity by the loss of Goods, Wife, Children, and other things
which are dear unto them. Except therefore their minds were raised up again and
comforted, first, with the Word and Promise, and then, with the Performance and
Execution of the same, many would say there were no God. Therefore God must
needs show himself to be a God, not only in Word but also in Deed.

David had great promises of God, and yet by his own Son he was driven out of
his Kingdom, and so persecuted that he was compelled to fly away barehead and
barefoot. This was a sore Tentation. Wherefore the great and ample Promises
made unto him could never have raised him up and comforted him again, except
God had indeed delivered him out of this great misery and affliction. Even so
if we had no more but the promises of God to support us against the Papists and
Adversaries of the Word, yea if God did not indeed fight for us and defend us
against their Tyranny, we should be swallowed up with sorrow, and brought even
to Desperation. God therefore works both ways; he raises up with the Word
and Promise, and delivers out of troubles and afflictions by Execution of the
deed, that according to the saying of St. Paul, the tentation should not be
above our strength, but should have an end, and we learn by our own Experience
that the first Commandment, I am the Lord thy God, is most certain and
infallible Therefore when he says, Least the just should put forth their hand
to Wickedness, it is as much as if he should say, Least the just should turn
away from God and fall to Gentilism. For God has a double care over the
Faithful; first, that they be not overcome, but may overcome the tentation; and
this he does by the Word and Promise. The second is that the tentation be not
perpetual. Even so must we be undoubtedly persuaded, that besides the
infallible promises which we have of the good Will of God toward us, and in
the end of Everlasting Life, we shall be also delivered, and our Adversaries
destroyed, albeit we can see no manner of way or possible means how it may be
done. This is it then that this verse here sets forth, that God is so
careful for the safety of his People, that he seems to fear least they should
put forth their hand to Wickedness, and fall away from him, whereby it might
come to pass that he should have no People, and so there should be no God. For
God is the God of the living, and therefore he must needs have a People.
Wherefore there must ever be some remaining which may praise and worship Him.
If there must needs be such a Number remaining, God must of necessity make an
end also of tentations.

But here we must beware that we do not appoint the time of this deliverance.
For before that come, God will have us tried to the uttermost, and brought to
that Extremity, that all our hope and trust shall be utterly spent, and we at
the point of Desperation. Now, when we are brought into this case that we can
see nothing but Desperation, then, even then God sends Comfort, in Death, he
shows Life; and even in Damnation, he brings Salvation: briefly, of nothing
he makes all things, and when all hope of Remedy is past, then begins he to
work, and frames all new again in most perfect wise. Thus cannot the God of
this World do. This is the fingular work of God therefore, that when thou
think thy self clean cast away and utterly forlorn, even then thou should
be most sure and safe, and most gloriously shine as the day Star in the
Firmament. These things are easily taught, but by Experience we find and feel
how far they pass all Reason and Power of man, and how hardly we can believe
that God makes all things of nothing, that he is careful tor us, whether we be
afflicted in the Flesh or in the Spirit, and that he is more mindful of our
deliverance then we our selves can be. These things therefore must be often and
diligently taught, that we may learn that Heavenly Wisdom which the first
Commandment sets forth unto us, Old things are passed away; behold all
things are become new.
namely, that our God is such an one as of old things is wont to make new; of
poor, to make rich; of despised, glorious. And this last we would all gladly
have, but that will not be, except Contempt and Poverty go before.

Here have we then a siugular Promise and Consolation. As if he should say, The
Rod of the wicked grieveth you, but be of good Comfort my People, and patiently
endure it, for I will not suffer the tentation so far to prevail over you that
your Confidence and trust in me shall utterly fail you. Storms and Tempests
shall arise, and your Dangers shall seem so great as tho the Waves should
presently swallow you up: but I will not suffer you to perish. I will bridle
their Rage and make an end of the rod of the Wicked and Unrighteous, yet will I
not leave you destitute of my Righteousness. Thus do Tentations teach us the
true use and meaning of the first Commandment, the which none without
afflictions and tentations shall rightly know or understand.

Moreover we are here admonished of the great danger that follows these
afflictions and tentations, which they that through impatiency forsake the Word
and Faith, do fall into. Therefore the Lord here shows himself so careful for
his People, least they should fall into this danger. For their state which have
once forsaken the Word, is much more perilous then it was before; and into
such (as our Savior Christ pronounces in the Gospel) do enter seven Spirits
much more wicked then the first. We must therefore patiently suffer and
persevere in all tentations, and rather abide all Extremities then once shrink
from the Word of Life, least we be possessed with seven Spirits more wicked
then the first. And moreover we must assuredly trust (as we are taught it this
verse) that so long as we have a desire and purpose so to do, the Lord will
never for sake us or suffer us to fall into this impiety. For here have we a
manifest promise and a lively description of the Lords singular care and
providence over us, namely that he is mindful of the end of our tentations and
afflictions, so that we only continue constant and patient unto the end. And if
the Heathen Poet said, Endure and reserve your selves for more happy things,
how much more should Christians diligently stir up themselves with mutual
Exhortations to Patience and Perseverance, whether they outwardly suffer in
things pertaining to the Body and to this present life, or inwardly in
Conscience. For we have a God which even in Death, in Hell, and in the midst of
all our Sins, can save and deliver us.

Verse 4. Do well O Lord unto them that be good and true of heart.
The Prophet says not here: Do well Lord to the perfect, and such as offend in
nothing: but, to the good and true of Heart. The good and true of Heart, are
they which are of a single, sincere and upright Heart. For these are they which
are most accepted of God, although they also through infirmity do sometimes
offend. Now where he prays that God will do well to the good and godly, he
means also and secretly complains that the godly are in misery and
affliction, and that the ungodly do abound with all worldly felicity: As we see
at this day the Enemies of the Gospel to enjoy great Riches and Dignities,
whereby they vex and oppress the godly. This is a great offense and
stumbling block to the godly, and therefore the Church has need of this
Prayer, That God would do well unto the godly, which trust in him, and seek his
Glory with their whole Heart, that they by stumbling at this offense do not
fall away to impiety. This Prayer contains in it a Prophecy with a promise,
that like as he prays for the Blessing, Welfare and Prosperity of the just,
so at the length it shall also come to pass.

Verse 5. But those that turn aside by their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead
with the workers of Iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.
He says not simply, such as turn aside, but such as turn aside by their own
Wickedness. For to give place to tentations by infirmity of the Flesh, or
weakness of Mind, or else of Faith, and so to decline from the right way,
(which comes to pass sometimes even in the Saints, as the Example of Peter
teaches) is one thing, and to fall away through wickedness and perverseness of
Heart, is another: which cannot be in the children of God, but properly
belongs to the wicked and godless. This sort of men has ever corrupted the
Church from the Apostles time, and with a show of holiness has deceived the
simple, which because God punishes them not, but spares them and suffers
them to prosper in this World, become so proud that they will be counted
amongst the holiest, and of the World are so commonly taken. We see that not
only the godly are mixed with the wicked in this World, but in the Lords floor
also the Wheat lies hidden under the Chasse. We must pray therefore that God
would bring these Hypocrites to light, and give unto them their just Punishment
with the workers of Iniquity. Then shall peace ensue to the Church of God. For
whilst the Lord pours forth his vengeance upon the wicked which vex and
persecute his true members, he gathered together the good and upright of Heart,
and openly declares his fatherly good will and tender love toward them.

The Commentary of Dr. Martin Luther, upon the CXXIX Psalm.
They have oftentimes afflicted, etc.
THis Psalm consists of two parts. The Argument of the Psalm.
In the former he gives thanks to God for the defense and continual
deliverance of the People of God. In the latter part he makes his Prayer
against the Adversaries, and in praying he prophesies withal. Both these serve
for our instruction, and also contain an Exhortation to patience under the
Cross, which pertains not to one age or time, but as the continual History of
the Church does show, to all times, and to the whole life of man. Moreover we
do here comprehend both Churches, of the Jews, and of the Gentiles, as Paul
also in a manner joyneth them both together, when he says, First to the Jew,
and then to the Grecian. For as touching the Church or People of the Jews, it
appears by the Histories, that they were placed in the midst of their
Enemies, as a goodly Rose in the midst of Thorns. On the East side, the
Ismaelites, the Arabians, and other cruel People vexed them. On the South part,
the Egyptians, the Ethiopians, the Troglodites, the Philistines, and other
like. On the North side, the Assyrians, etc. So the Church after the
destruction of the Synagogue, is compassed every way with Enemies, and Christ,
according to the Psalm, reigns in the midst of his Enemies. Thus were they
oftentimes and many ways afflicted. But herewithal God showed this miracle,
that when they were so afflicted, he always delivered them. And thus was the
Kingdom of Israel a miraculous Kingdom, in that the Lord when he would correct
and chastise them, suffered the Philistines, Edomites, Moabites, Assyrians and
Babylonians to have victory over them. Again, when they seemed to be utterly
oppressed, they victoriously prevailed against their Enemies. So continued this
Kingdom in despite of the cruel Nations round about it, and of Satan himself:
as is to be seen in the Books of the Kings and also of the Chronicles. Now,
because this People had both threatenings and promises set before them, as
touching their afflictions and deliverance, this was unto them a great
Consolation, even when they were afflicted and spoiled, that they knew that all
these things came to pass not by the Will or Power of their Enemies, and
much-less by their Righteousness or Deserts, but only by the Will of God thus
punishing and chastising his People, yea threatening and forewarning them by the
Prophets, that he would so punish the disobedient. This is no small
Consolation, that in thy Affliction and Calamity thou may be able to say;
This is the scourge of God, thus correcting me, and visiting my Sins; It is not
the Wrath of God, or the merit and deserving of my Adversary.

These things must we apply unto our selves also, to the end that when we be
oppressed, we may comfort our selves that we are not oppressed by the power of
Death, Sin, Hell, or any creature, but by the will of God our Creator,
afflicting us and punishing our Sins and ingratitude; and yet so, that he
leaves unto us this fatherly promise, that he will not forsake us. And such a
figure of the whole Kingdom of Christ is set forth in the Apocalypse. For how
much does it speak of evil Angels, of cruel beasts, and such other Plagues of
the Church, which should enter into the Church and the Kingdom of Christ, God
so permitting? Notwithstanding Consolation follows afflictions and
calamities, and though the Church be never so sore afflicted, yet shall it
continue and endure, and at the length shall overcome and victoriously triumph.

But this Psalm agrees especially unto our time, wherein the Church has been
most grievously afflicted both under the Turks and also under the Romish
bishops, yea and as it were utterly abolished: So that if ye weigh the matter
well, it may appear that the Condition of the Jews in Babylon was better then
the state of the Church under Antichrist; where the true use of the Sacraments
was taken away, the benefit of Christ darkened, faith extinguished, no true
service of God used, no true good works exercised; gnerally, all things which
pertain to true Religion were clean abolished, or most miserably deformed and
defaced. Wherefore, like as the Jews in Babylon were put from the sight and use
of the Temple, the Sacrifices, the Ceremonies, and all politic Government: so
the Church under Antichrist had no true ministry, no true service of God, not
her own Kingdom and Government, but was constrained to observe and keep the
Heathenish Rites and Ceremonies of the Papists. Thus was the Wrath, and thus
have been the Punishments of God in a manner all one, in the Church of the Jews
and the Gentiles.

Wherefore it is most necessary that we lay hold upon this Consolation, that,
as the Psalm says, We are afflicted, we are cast down, we are trodden under
foot, but we are not overcome. For the Church shall stand and remain
invincible, notwithstanding that through great incredulity and incredible
infirmity, the victory thereof is hidden and cannot be seen. As it was under
the Pope, where all Schools and all Churches taught nothing else but the
blasphemous Doctrine of the Romish Bishops, and doting Dreams of the Monks.
This was the very same thing that the Psalm 73. complains of, where it says,
We see not our signs: and yet God had even then his Church, although it was
very little, obscure, and miserably deformed. Before the Kingdom of the Romish
Antichrist, what a swarw of Heretics sprang up? Of whom also the Church was
sore vexed and afflicted, even as the Jews were afflicted of the Nations which
dwelled near unto them. And like as the Captivity followed that affliction of
the Jews, so the Kingdom of the Romish Bishops was that Captivity which
followed the out ragious fury of the Heretics, and out of the which also have
flowed all the evils, and plagues which have been ever since in the Church, as
out of a foul sink, and filthy puddle. But now by the great mercy of God the
Captivity begineth to be turned, the Temple is repaired, and the true Service
of God restored.

This Psalm after my judgment, speaks generally of all such troubles and
afflictions of the Church, as have been at all times and in all ages; As first,
that the Kingdom of the Jews when they were yet under good Kings, was mightily
assailed, but yet not utterly overcome; And that the people afterward were
spoiled of the Assyrians and Babylonians, and carried away Captive, but not
clean forsaken. For they were again delivered out of Captivity, and in their
own land enjoyed the promise concerning Christ. Thus speaks the Psalm first
of the Jewish Church. Afterward it comprehends as a Prophecy, the State and
Condition of the Church of the Gentiles; to wit, that God would preserve and
defend it against all Heretics, against all the rage and fury of the World,
against the Kingdom of the Romish Antichrist, and moreover against all the
tentations of Sin, which vex and oppress the Conscience. Thus must we apply
this Psalm to all times and ages of the Church, to all changes and alterations,
all dangers of the World, the Flesh, Sin, the Law, Death, and the Gates of
Hell. For the World assaileth it with power and wisdom; the Devil, with
desperation and dubitation; Heretics with errors in Faith and Religion, and
the Conscience with Sins. In all these Perils we say, Blessed be the Lord God,
who suffers us not to be tempted above that we are able to bear. Indeed we
must be tempted and tried, but in the Tentation he will give an outscape;
besides this, that he gives us strength also to bear the Tentation until the
time of deliverance come. This benefit David here sets forth, and shows
unto us the state of his people, to the end we may thereby learn this Comfort,
that like as he preserved that People, even so will he also preserve us. For we
have one and the same God, the same Spirit, the same Word, the same Promises,
and briefly all things else whatsoever. Wherefore we may say and sing with
David;

Verse 1. They have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:
Verse 2. They have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth, but they could not
prevail against me.
He names no certain Enemy, to the end he may comprehend all. Where he says,
from my youth, he understands all the time from their primitive Church (as we
call it) until Israel began first to be the People of God. For albeit we ever
praise those things which are most ancient and of greatest antiquity (as the
primitive Church is indeed worthy to be praised) yet God regards not this
difference. For in all times, and even in the last ages of the Church he gave
notable Prophets, to the people of Israel; as before the Captivity, Isaiah of
all other the most excellent; after the Captivity, Aggaus, Zachary and others.
In the mean time between Moses and these, were Helias, Helizeus, etc. So we
see that the Primitive Church was more pure from Heretics and wicked Opinions.
But yet notwithstanding there were some notable Prophets and other excellent
men even in the latter times. And when the root of Jesse seemed now to be
withered, yet God raised up Anna, Simeon, Zachary and Elizabeth. For God
preserves his Church though it be never so much assailed and oppressed,
according to his promise. Only let us open our eyes that we may see from whence
this comes.

And here we may not look to those things which the World especially esteems
and magnifieth, but we must behold the Church as it is afflicted, oppressed,
and full of Calamity. For this is the true face of the Church of God, that it
is weak, environed with all deadly Engines, and compassed with all the furies
of the Devil, the World, the Flesh, Sin and Death. These things he that will
not behold, but flies and abhors them, shall never find out the true Church
indeed. For that is not the the true picture and image of the Church which the
Painters set forth, which paint her as a goodly Virgin, as a City well armed,
adorned and beautified. Indeed that is a true picture, but not according to the
Eyes of the Flesh. But spiritual Eyes do see this great Beauty, that Christ is
her Husband, and begot her unto himself by the Holy Ghost, beautified her and
made her glorious with his own blood, with his merits and with his
righteousness. Of all these things the flesh can see nothing, can judge
nothing, but sees rather the contrary, how she is subject to most bitter
hatred, malice, vexations and torments. Wherefore if it would paint her out in
such sort as he sees and beholds her, then must it paint and set her forth
as a deformed and poor maiden, sitting in a dangerous Wood or Desac, in the
midst of cruel and hungry Lions, Bears, Wolve, Swine, and Venomous Serpents:
also in the midst of outrageous and furious men, attempting with Sword, Fire
and Water to destroy her, and to root her out from the face of the Earth. As
there is in the Apocalypse set forth a goodly Picture, Chap. 12.
(then the which there is nothing more excellent in that book) that the Church
as a desolate woman, flies from the old Serpent or Dragon persecuting her and
her Child. Wherefore these words which David here uses, may very well be
applied to her: Many times have mine Enemies afflicted me, many times have they
vexed me.

But this affliction seems rather to be an utter Destruction, if we follow
the judgment of the flesh; As if the Enemies did so prevail and overcome, that
the Church were utterly oppressed and vanquished for ever: As we all find by
our own Experience in our Conflicts which privately we suffer in our Hearts,
when Satan terrifieth and confounds our Consciences. For then are raised up
such terrors, that no man can otherwise judge but that the victory is Satan's,
oppressing us with heavy and bitter Cogitations, with Tentations, Vexation, and
Anguish of Spirit, and spoiling us (as to the flesh it seems) of all the
sweet Consolations which by the merit of Christ and the Word are offered unto
us. According to this sense we may well say, Oftentimes have they afflicted me.
For this seems to be not only an affliction, but an utter Desolation and
Destruction. As we privately feel this every one in our own Hearts and
Consciences; so the whole body of the Church in all times does confess, that it
is vehemently assailed with strong and mighty Armies of most deadly Enemies of
all Nations, and oppugned with the Engines of all Tentations and Tribulations,
even from her youth, that is, from the time that when the People were delivered
out of Egypt, they began to be known from other Nations, and to be the people
of God.

But here the Church and the Children of God comfort and raise up themselves
again, having good Experience that in all these Calamities God showed forth his
Power, and not only remitted their Sin, but also turned away the punishment
thereof, so that still they remained a Church, and the practices of their
Enemies were brought to naught. Wherefore the Prophet here, not only repeateth
the danger and calamity of the Church, but with great joy he adds withal an
Exhortation, that every member of this body should praise the mercy and
goodness of the Lord, and say. They could not prevail against me. This is a
singular Consolation, not only for the whole Church of God, but also for every
one of us particularly, against the proud brags of our Enemies, and the great
hope which they have conceived, that they shall prevail against us. Heretics
and Sectaries do glory that they shall have the Victory. The Pope vaunting of
his own strength, and the power of Princes, cries out; We shall overcome.
Satan joyneth with them both, and raises up such troubles, that it seems
doubtful to whom the victory will fall. This oppresses, not only every man
privately, with great heaviness and sorrow, but also the whole Church. As we by
Experience did prove in the Assembly gathered at Augusta, where it seemed that
our Enemies should utterly have swallowed us up. But did not we there find
these words to be full of Consolation? They could not prevail. This Consolation
we must hold fast even when we are killed, as by the Examples of the primitive
Church we are taught. For the Church is as it were watered with the blood of
the faithful, that the greater inccrease may come thereof. Now, like as these
words of the Prophet are rightly applied to that persecution which is done with
the sword, so must they be applied also to the assaults of Heretics and
Enthusiasts For it is their property to boast and brag of the Conquest, and
always to triumph before the victory. But how soever our adversaries triumph
and glory, let us endeavor to hold fast the word, and whatsoever we do, let us
apply it wholly to the amplyfying of the Kingdom of Christ and his word. If
then (as needs it must be) assaults and battles do follow, yet let us sing with
David, They could not prevail. For albeit they kill us, yet neither the Pope,
nor any other heretics, nor the Turk, nor Satan himself, shall ever be able to
quench the Word: Neither yet shall they prevail against us if we steadfastly
abide in the Word. Indeed this will we grant unto Satan, that he is stronger
than we, and vexes us many ways. For many are the troubles of the just, but
God will deliver them out of all. And why? Because it is the word of God which
they profess and teach; and moreover it is Gods own cause which they defend.
Wherefore although the Pope attempt and practice never so much mischief, and go
about to stir up the whole world against us; although false brethren which walk
not in true and sound doctrine, continually vex us, although Satan himself
never cease to raise up the gates of hell against us, yet will we sing with
David even to the end, They could not prevail; yea and that only because of the
word.

Verse 3. The Plowers plowed upon my back, and they made long furrows.
See what unlike and almost contrary things he joyneth here together. Before he
comforted the faithful, that the enemies should never be able to do any thing
against the Church, because it is invincible and cannot be overcome: and here
he complayneth that they plow upon the backs of the Church, and make such
furrow, as seem to be of an infinite length. This is an offense therefore which
vehemently troubles the godly, that God suffers Satan and the world so long
to rage, so long to vex and afflict the Church, that he gives success unto
their wicked counsels and attempts; that he suffers the ungodly even then to
prosper when they are most worthy to be punished with all manner of torments,
and utterly consumed. On the oath other side, the godly, the more they pray,
and the more they hope, the less seems their prayer and their hope to take
effect: Every day are they more and more afflicted: every day there is less and
less hope left. Wherefore this similitude is well applied unto them in that
they are compared to a ground which is continually plowed; wherein such furrows
are drawn as seem to have no end; as though there were no God which either
sees their calamity, or the impiety and outrageous cruelty of the enemies of
the word. He signifies therefore that they have need of continual patience,
not for a day or two, but all the days of their life. So that they which have
the word, must assuredly purpose and determine, never to depart from God,
although they should suffer the same afflictions a thousand years together. How
many have we seen in these our days which have fallen away, (yea and such also
as sometime did stand) when the fruit of the word was hindered through
Persecution, like as the Sun dries up and withers the Corn that is sown in a
stony ground?

Wherefore we must learn that the patience of the faithful, as it is in this
verse described, is such as is ready to offer their backs unto the Plowers, and
to suffer not for a day nor for a year, but for the time of their whole life.
For he compares afflictions to the long plowing on the back of the faithful:
Like as our Savior Christ also signifies, when he says, He that continues
to the end shall be saved. For to begin is not enough. And that patience which
has her bounds and limits prescribed, may be found even among the Gentiles.
But the patience of Christians is perpetual, that is to say, such a patience as
seems to be infinite and without end; for the end thereof does not appear.
Like as on the other side, the end of their consolation appears not. So that
those things which seem to be most contrary, are here joined together; that is
to say, the length and the long continuance of the furrows on the back of the
faithful, and the victory of the faithful, singing of those which drive the
Plow, They could not prevail.

Morever, this great and long continuance of the furrows on the back of the
faithful, includes such an offense as no carnal wisdom is able to overcome;
namely that the wicked do not only prosper, but their felicity also continues
long, so that it seems to be as a reward of their Tyranny, their persecution
and malice against the Church. For if God would suffer their tyranny but for a
little time, and speedily reward them according to their deserts, we should all
then say that God is mindful of his children, and angry with the wicked. But
now, since impiety and Wickedness flourishes many years together, and the
wicked still continue and increase in great felicity, without punishment, the
same is verified of them which Diogenes said of Harpalus, That they seem to
give a lively testimony against the Gods. Yea the godly are so vehemently
tempted through this long continuance, and fall so far, that they think God has
no regard of them. Wherefore we must so arm our selves with Christian patience,
that albeit we feel the tedious and long continuance of these furrows, we be
not therefore offended, but when one tentation is overcome, we must prepare our
selves to another. For our backs must be always ready to bear the long
continuance of these furrows.

This is the first part of the Psalm, in the which he confesses the divine
miracles and miraculous power of God, whereby he preserves his children not
only against the world, but also against Sin, Death and the Devil, and
praises God for that he gives victory to those that are overcome, and puts
those to flight which do overcome. This joyful end and this success he wills
us to look and wait for, and exhorts us to patience. Now he turns himself
to prayer, and not only prays but also promises to the enemies of the
Gospel, that although they obstinately continue in afflicting the faithful
without check or punishment, yet shall their ruin and overthrow be such, that
they shall never rise again; as experience does show. For I pray you, what
Kingdom from the beginning of the world has always continued and prospered?
The places and spaces of the earth do remain void and desolate, and the
Kingdoms are gone as though they had never been. Again, the cruelty and tyranny
of the Kingdoms of the world was never so great, that it was able to oppress
the Church. For the Church still continues and shall continue to the end of
the world, as follvveth.

Verse 4. The Righteous Lord has cut the cords of the wicked.
These words are so full of consolation, that to the children of God in their
calamities and afflictions, nothing can be more comfortable. For they know that
no munitions, no furniture of war can be so strong. First of all therefore,
weigh and consider why he calls the Lord Righteous, and ye shall see that he
so does, because that, when a man considers according to the judgment of the
flesh, the things which are here done, and how God governs and rules the
same, it seems no otherwise but that he is unrighteous and unjust in
supporting the tyranny of the wicked with great riches, power, dignity, etc.
When reason sees this, it can judge nothing else, but that if there be a God,
he is unjust. For first of all thus does reason gather: If there be a God, he
is able to resist the wicked, and utterly to destroy them. For to be a God is
to be Almighty. Again, thus carnal reason argues: If there be a God, he must
needs know those things which are done in the world; for it cannot be said of
God, that he is ignorant of any thing. Now what else follows hereof, but that
if God know these things to be cruelly and unjustly done, and he is able to
resist them, he ought also to be no less willing to do the same. For if we
think that he will not do that which he knows and is able to do, it must
follow that he is not good, but evil; not just, but unjust. Now lay these
things together. If God have power, wisdom and goodness in him; if he be able
to help; if he know how, and also be willing to help; why are all these things
done and governed in the world in such sort, that the wicked have power, riches
and dignity, as a reward of their impiety? and contrariwise the godly for their
piety and godliness are many ways and most cruelly afflicted? All these things
are a lively testimony against God, as before we said of Diogenes. This
argument of Epicurus and such like Atheists, is to the flesh invincible.
Wherefore reason being altogether blinded and wrapped in these snares,
inclines to this opinion, That there is no God, or else that he regards not
the affairs of men.

Of this offense and stumbling block the holy Ghost warns us, when he
attributes this name unto God, that he is righteous, whom unrighteousness and
impiety pleases not. Therefore although he suffer the wicked to flourish for a
time, yet at the last he cutteth their cords, that is, he destroys both their
power and them, according to that saying, Psalm. 5.
Thou art not a God that loves wickedness. Wherefore let Christians learn to
judge, not by that which presently they feel, but by that which the Word of God
promises, and shall assuredly come to pass; to wit, That the wicked, when they
have long plowed upon the backs of the faithful, and many ways afflicted them,
shall perish at the length. For God is just, and his justice will not suffer
the righteous to be oppressed.

Verse 5. Let them that hate Sion be confounded and turned back.
This (as before I have said) is a Prayer. But ye know that in every Prayer
there is a Promise included, which Promise this word Righteous does express in
the former verse with a singular vehemence, to the end we should not murmur, or
blaspheme God, as though he were not mindful of us, or had not regard of us.
Now, where he says, Let them be confounded and turned back; it is an
exposition of that which he said before, that their cords should be cut, that
is to say, their Kingdoms, their Power, their Riches, their Laws, and finally
their whole politic body and common weal should be brought to naught: as it
befell to Babylon, Ninive, Jerusalem, Athens, Corinth, Thebes, Rome, and
briefly to all these Kingdoms and Commonweals, which did not submit
themselves to the Gospel. For when they proudly stretched out their necks and
set themselves against Christ their King, and by their power sought to oppress
him, they were destroyed. In like manner must we also pray, and certainly look
for the execution of Gods vengeance upon those which at this day have set
themselves against the Gospel; as the Pope and his Bishops, with all their
faction, and with all the Kings and Princes of the earth which maintain and
defend their impiety; for at the last they shall be confounded. But the Gospel
and the Word of the Lord shall endure for ever. For the name of Christ shall
never be oppressed, but being faithfully called upon, shall always be ready to
help the afflicted, and shall cut the cords now of the wicked man, and now of
that.

Thus the Holy Ghost comfort us sundry ways. For when we have learned that
Satan is such a Spirit as never cease to tempt and to vex us, (so that when
he cannot overcome us by the greatness and multitude of tentations, he goes
about to do it by the tediousness and long continuance thereof) he would have
us to comfort our selves herewith, that albeit these tentations continue long,
yet notwithstanding they shall have an end. And since we are forewarned both of
the continuance and of the end thereof, it is the more easy for as to bear
them. Here is to be noted also that he shows to whom he wishes evil, namely
to those which hate Sion. And that hatred which they bare against Sion, was an
hatred against God. For in that Satan hates the Church, he does it not only in
respect of men, but because he hates God himself, whom the Church praises and
magnifieth. Moreover, Sion was a place which God had chosen unto himself. Like
as therefore God had chosen that place to show his great love toward it; so
had Satan chosen the same to show his malice against it, and with all his power
to vex it. In like manner, not only Satan, but also the malignant Church of the
Pope, does persecute us; not because we are evil in the sight of the World; for
this they could well suffer, yea and would be glad if they might hear that we
are Whoremongers and Murderers as they are: But the true cause why they so
deadly hate and persecute us, is this, for that it grieveth them, that we in
their eyes are innocent as touching the second table, and also obedient to the
first; wherein we are commanded to honor, serve, and praise the Lord; to fear
him, and trust in his Mercy, etc.

Verse 6. Let them be as the grass on the tops of the houses, which withers
before it comes forth.
This is a goodly Psalm, for the sundry, excellent, and most apt similitudes
contained therein, whereby the Holy Ghost painteth out those great Majesty's
and Principalities of the World, which fight against the the Gospel. A little
before he compared them to plowers drawing out furrows of a mavelous length;
to whom he so compares them, not in this respect, as though it were granted
unto them so long to abuse their power, wealth; and riches; but in respect of
the great Tediousness, Grief, and anguish of those which suffer the Plowers,
the Furrows, the Wounds, and treading under foot; for unto them it seems a
tedious, a long, and as it were an infinite Plowing. Wherefore they desire to
be delivered, and never so little tarrying (through this tediousness and
anguish of heart) seems to them intolerable. Against this Weariness and thy,
Tediousness therefore, he comfort the faithful with this similitude, of
grass in the top of the house. As if he said, Why seems the time so long, and
tedious unto thee? Why do thou not learn to understand what these Plowers thy
Adversaries be? Did thou never see grass growing on the tops of houses? Who
did ever complain that the grass flourished so long? who ever went about to
pluck it up? As though it were not wont of it self to wither and vanish away.
Learn therefore that the very same is the state and condition of thine
Adversaries. Thus with one similitude he sighteth against another. He sets
the similitude of the grass in the house top, against the similitude of the
Plowers.
But if a man could effectually believe that this similitude was made and here
set down by the Holy Ghost, and close up the same fully in his heart; he should
fear neither the Turk dor the Pope, with all his cruel Prelates, nor the
Tyranny of Princes, but should contemn them all, and as little regard them as
the grass on the tops of the houses.

But behold the outward show of this grass. If any child should see it, he
would esteem it to be better then any Barley, (for to Barley it is most like)
since it grows not as other things do upon the Earth, but in an higher and
more notable place, and loadeth the tops of the houses. But take a man that
knows these things, and he will say it is nothing else but a goodly show and
resemblance without any fruit. Thus has the Holy Ghost chosen this similitude
to teach us, not to wish the Tyrants may be like grass, but to know that they
are indeed most like unto grass on the house tops, which withers away before
the harvest time come, or any man go about to cut it down. Senacherib who
besieged Jerusalem, did fly over Kingdoms, oppressed and trod down all things
under his feet: therefore he could not be counted of Ezechia and others like
unto grass; and yet before he achieved what he went about, he was compelled,
not without great fear, and also much slaughter of his soldiers, to raise his
siege, and he himself most miserably perished. So Pharaoh seemed mightily to
grow and increase, not upon the earth, but in the air and upon the house tops;
but the miserable Jews were oppressed and trodden under foot like mire in the
streets. This is a resemblance of grass, not withering but freshly flourishing.
But how quickly did it wither and vanish to nothing? For when Pharaoh did
verily think to oppress them, he was suddenly oppressed himself and perished in
the waters.

Such an image of Tyrants and Tyranny the Holy Ghost painteth out unto us in
this place. Why then should thou fear? Why should thou tremble? Why
should thou despair, as though thou had never seen most flourishing grass
within few days to wither away of its own accord, or did not know the nature
of it to be such as cannot long continue? Athanasius (when Julianus the
Emperor did many ways afflict both him and the whole Church, and fought, not
only with cruelty, but also with craft and subtilty against the faithful,
insomuch that others, as it were in a terrible tempest, were utterly
discouraged and past all hope of deliverance) said that this Persecution of
Julian was not a tempest but a little cloud. Indeed his heart was full of faith
which could believe, that Julianus was like, not to a terrible and a violent
tempest, not to a mighty black cloud wrapping all things in darkness, but unto
a very little cloud, which the Sun does quickly consume. In like manner must we
also extenuate and diminish the power of our adversaries, and set at naught all
their proud brags, and all their cruelty; not in respect of our own strength,
but because they are of themselves nothing else but a bubble in the water,
grass on the house tops, and a very shadow rather then men; besides this, that
they provoke God also against themselves; whose fury and cruelty compared unto
his power, is a thing more vain than grass on the house tops, or a bubble in
the water; for it is nothing but a bare and a naked show, which seems to be
something, when indeed it is nothing. So are all the attempts of the
adversaries; full of threatenings, but in the end they come to nothing.

This is the wisdom of Christians, to diminish the power of the adversaries,
and contrariwise to amplify the Word and the mighty protection of the Lord.
The Devil, Sin, Death, and other spiritual tentations are great; but a
Christian can make a distinction of greatness. For greatness is understood two
manner of ways: The one is according to the eye, which the eye judges after
the outward show; the other is according to the truth, which the truth judges
after the Word. The greatness therefore of Sin, Death, wicked Kings, Princes,
and Bishops, is that which is according to the eye only: For God which says,
Be of good comfort, I have overcome the World: Also, Fear not those which can
kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul, the same God alone (I say) is
the very true greatness, to which if you compare Satan, and all the fury of the
whole World, what are they else but a bubble? what are they else but grass? but
light straw and stubble? But when they are considered without God, then do they
terrify with a false fearful show, and seem to be great indeed.

Wherefore Christians must judge, not according to their opinion, but according
to the truth. For an opinion is that which Reason brings forth besides the
Word; but Truth is grounded upon the Word, which judges the fury and the
cruelty of the World raging against the faithful, to be like unto grass on the
house tops. This promise being settled and surely fixed in the mind, This
Judgment, that the enemies are like grass, and therefore shall perish, he
calls a promise.
confirms the godly against the great power (as to reason it seems) of the
World and Satan. Like as on the other side, where the word is not, the mind
deceived through a terrible show of Truth, and the judgment of Reason, is
oppressed with terror. These things must not so be taken, as though we did
utterly condemn the power of Princes, and of the World, which we count to be
the creature of God; but their presumption, and the abuse of their power is it
that we condemn, because they fight therewith against God and his Church. Let
them be Princes on the earth; Let them use their Power and Authority in the
World, but when they will needs make War in Heaven, and with their Power go
about to invade and oppress the word, this is horrible, this is execrable and
damnable. And who so compares them to bubbles, to grass, to stubble, yea and
to nothing, he says truly, he judges rightly. For why do they fight against
God? Think they that we know not what God is? and what man is? what the
Creature is, and what the Creator is?

Wherefore they are rightly compared to grass on the house tops; for more
contemptuously the Holy Ghost could not speak of them. For this grass is such,
that it soon withers away before the sickle be put unto it. Yea, no man
thinks it worthy to be cut down, no man regards it, every man suffers it
to brag for a while, and to show it self unto men from the house tops as though
it were somewhat when it is nothing. So the wicked Persecutors in the World,
which are taken to be mighty and terrible according to the outward show, are of
all men most contemptible. For Christians do not once think of plucking them
up, or cutting them down; they persecute them not, they revenge not their own
injuries, but suffer them to increase, to brag and glory as much as they list;
For they know that they cannot abide the violence of a vehement Wind. Yea
though all things be in quietness, yet as grass on the house tops, by little
and little withers away through the heat of the Sun, so Tyrants upon small
occasions do perish and soon vanish away. The faithful therefore in suffering
do prevail and overcome; but the wicked in doing, are overthrown and miserably
perish, as all the Histories of all times and ages do plainly witness.

Verse 7. Whereof the Mower fills not his hand, neither the Gleaner his Lap.
Here the Holy Ghost makes a comparison between Grass which yields no fruit,
and true corn which is fruitful; that thereby he may the better commend unto us
the former similitude, and withdraw our minds from the false dread and terror
which that vain and counterfeit show brings. Fruitful corn (says he) is
such, that he which moweth it shall fill his hand, and he that gathers the
sheaves shall have plenty to carry into his barn. Here ye see, is a truth, and
not a vain show. But grass on the house tops makes a show of that which is not
true, because it is fruitless. So the Pope and his Prelates, with other Tyrants
and Persecutors, have a resemblance and a counterfeit show that they are the
Church. They hold and enjoy Dignities, Prebends, Benefices, as grass has his
stalk and ear; but indeed they are none of the Chrrch, like as grass is no
Corn: for it withers away before it can bring forth fruit.

For this is the chiefest argument wherewith they fight against us, that for
this glorious show whereof I speak, they usurp and challenge to themselves the
title of the Church. But we are commanded to take heed that we be not deceived
by outward shows. Yea and we are admonished also that such shows are oftentimes
occasions of great calamities. Beware (says our Savior Christ) of False
Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps-cloathing. Also By their fruits ye shall
know them. Whereas then they challenge unto themselves the name of the Church,
and for a goodly show (which the grass also that grows on the house tops has
as well as they,) will be counted good Corn: this will not we grant them. For
if they be good Corn, let them fill the hand of the Mower, but this they do
not. They are unprofitable Grass, yea worse then grass. For in that filthiness
of their wicked lusts and fleshly pleasures wherewith they are horribly
polluted, and that cruelty which they exercise against the true Church, they
retain not so much as the outward show which they pretend. Wherefore, since
there is nothing to be found in our adversaries but a naked and an hypocritical
show, and the same also miserably and many ways deformed and defaced; since (I
say) there is nothing else in them but mere hypocrisy, we judge and denounce
them not to be the Church of Christ, but of Satan. Wherefore they are prepared
as chaff and stubble to the fire, although under a show and color of the
Church, they afflict and Persecute us never so much.

Verse 8. Neither they which go by say, We bless you in the name of the Lord.
This also commends and sets forth unto us the similitude of the grass.
For true Corn has this commendation, that it is the blessing of God. They
therefore which see it grow, vvish that God would bless and prosper it. This
(says David) shall not be said of that grass; that is to say, of the Tyrants
and the adversaries of the Church, but rather they shall be cursed of all men,
yea the malediction both of God and man shall be heaped upon them: Like as it
has also happened to the Church of Rome, which before our doctrine and preaching
most gloriously flourished. But now that the Gospel has plucked away her
visour, and shows that she is not without fruit, all her cursed hypocrisy is
bewrayed, and her memory is perished from among the godly. Thus the Prophet
comfort the faithful, and shows that the wicked (what glorious brag and
pretense soever they make) are indeed nothing, and because God blesses them
not, they shall inherit nothing but malediction, and shall be confounded, like
as Judas; the Pharisees, Corinthus, A^ius, and Pelagius, though they seemed to
slourish, most miserably perished with all their glory.

Wherefore let us, whose doctrine by the grace of God is sound and agreeable
with the holy Scripture, remember this similitude, that when we must suffer
hatred, slander, reproaches and all manner of injuries for the Gospels sake, we
are not afraid but may learn hereby to judge the Pope, the Bishops, the wicked
Princes, with the tormentors and executioners of their cruelty, to be nothing
else but grass on the house tops, which seems to be somewhat, when indeed it
is nothing, and therefore it is without all blessing. To such it shall be said
with the rich glutton in hell, Luke 16.
Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasures. For if we
consider the whole history of the Church even from the beginning of the world,
we shall see that God has always so wrought by his secret counsel, that as
grass on the house tops withers away before the harvest come: so Tyrants are
suddenly cut off and never come to their full time. Wherefore let us constantly
abide and endure with patience in all afflictions, until the end do show that
it was nothing but grass, and suddenly withered when it was most like to
increase and flourish. The wicked do enjoy all good things for the Churches
sake, like as the grass on the house tops has the benefit of the rain and of
the Sun as well as the Corn in the fields. But as they shall not live half
their days, and as they shall see their own counsels and devices to be but vain
and without success, so shall they be as a perpetual shame among men: insomuch
that no man shall wish any good unto them: As at this day the memory of Judas,
Pilate, the wicked Jews Dioclesianus, Maximinus and other Tyrants, is without
honor, yea most execrable and odious unto all men. This consolation is set
forth by the holy Ghost by these gross similitudes and examples, that we may
conceive in our minds some shadow or resemblance of Gods Works, since we cannot
rightly judge and esteem the things themselves according to the truth, but we
judge the enemies and Persecutors of the Church by their goodly show and
outvvard appearance, to be good Wheat, because they prosper and flourish so
long upon the earth. Wherefore we must rest wholy in the Word, which with
such similitudes painteth out these things; and we must with draw our senses
from all outward sights and shows, and judge no otherwise of the adversaries of
the word, then of most vile grass that grows on the house tops, and is
contemned of all men. For so says the Spirit of faith: though our senses say
otherwise.

In like manner must we do also in spiritual tentations; when our conscience
accuses us and gives testimony against us, as well in the agony and danger of
death, as in other conflicts. Here if we follow that which appears to reason
and our own senses to be true, it shall seem unto us that our enemies are
invincible and almighty, and that there is no remedy, but we must needs be
overcome and utterly perish. The sight and feeling of this greatness pertains
to the eyes and to the senses only, and rises of the judgment of reason, and
not of the truth. But when we look to the true greatness which the word sets
forth unto us, we are constrained to say, that Death, Sin, Satan, and the very
gates of hell are indeed nothing else but grass on the house tops, but stubble,
but a very bubble swimming upon the water, which with the least occasion
breaks and vanishes away. So must these things be amplified and set against
all kinds of tentations, whether they be Persecutors of the Word, as the
world and wicked Princes, or else Sin, Death and Satan. All which we must
learn to extenuate and lessen as much as we can, because Christ lives and we
have his word. This consolation is able to swallow up all terrors, and
makes us able to say, that all these things are in very deed but one thing.
But when we consider these things without the Word and Christ, in respect of
our selves, and of our own strength, then are they indeed, not grass, but such
high and mighty mountains as cannot be passed over. Where fore when we fight
against our enemies, we must fight, not as men consisting of Body and Soul,
but as Christians baptized in the name of Christ, having the gift of the Spirit
and the Word. Now therefore, when the Devil, Death, Hell it self, the World
and Cruel Princes, are compared to a Christian, they are but grass upon the
house tops, or if any thing can be said to be more vile and contemptible. For
he has the Word, which is almighty, and moreover he has Christ himself.
Christians therefore are invincible, 2 Cor. 12.9.
yea even then when they are overcome and trodden under foot. For the Power of
Christ is made perfect through weakness. Thus did the holy Prophets and Martyrs
comfort themselves against the World and the Kingdom of Satan, and therefore
they did so valiantly suffer all kinds of afflictions, being persuaded, not
that the grass, which vvithereth away of it sclf, without man's endeavor,
but the Word of God should have the victory. For true it is that Basilius
vvriteth when he comfort the people of Alexandria against the fury of
Arius, that through the Persecutions of the Enemies, the Church does more and
more increase and multiply. Which thing we also have proved, and God grant
that yve and our Posterity may still so do.

THE Duty of a Good Shepherd: BY Dr. MARTIN LVTHER: Being his COMMENTARY Upon 1
Pet. 4.11. and 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
1 PET. 4.11. If any mnn minister, let him do it, as of the ability which God
ministers.


WHosoever executes any function in the Church, or has the cure of Souls
committed unto him, may not deal as he list himself, or to overruled matters
according to his own sensual Will. Neither shall he say, Tush, I am a Prelate,
the people must all listen to that which I say, and observe my Laws,
Ordinances, and Injunctions without gainsaying. For God requires this, that no
man minister, or do any thing, contrary or repugnant to that which he
commands and appoints. A Prelate or Bishop (I say) ought to do nothing in
the Church, unless he be certain and sure of the warrantise thereof by Gods
Word. For God cannot abide to have his service jumbled and mingled at pleasure,
with every foolish Guegaw, and light trumpery. And therefore he ought to have
an assurance and certainty in his mind and Conscience, that even God both
speaks and works in him; and to stand upon so sure a ground for the verity
thereof, that his Faith dare boldly witness with him and say, Whatsoever I have
spoken, and whatsoever I have done, or dealt herein, I am so out of doubt, that
the same in each respect is consonant to the Word and Will of God, that I am
ready, and dare to seal the same with my blood, and to confirm it with my
Death. For otherwise, if I waver and totter this way and that way, not knowing
whose cause and business I have in hand, my Faith is builded upon the Sand, so
that the Devil mine Adversary, is able to shake and tumble it which way he
list. And therefore we are here straightly forbidden, not to rely unto, nor to
allow whatsoever Decree or Constitution these Bishops list to obtrude and
enjoin, unless they stand upon a sure ground, that the things which they do,
are allowed of God, yea done of God himself; and unless they be able to say, Do
this, for it is the Will and Commandment of God, and we have his express Word
and Commandment for our Warrant; If they be not able to say thus, they ought to
be accounted as Liars and Deceivers; much less ought any Christian to yield
unto them therein any Obedience or Subscription. For, the Lord has so
appointed, that our Consciences should not elsewhere be stayed, but upon the
most sure and infallible Rock. And thus much for public functions, wherein it
is not lawful for us at any hand, to follow our own wilful Devices, and sensual
Conceits; nor to prescribe any rule or order to be embraced, unless we be
undoubtedly assured, that it stands with the Will and Word of God. Wherein we
evidently see, how clean against the Kingdom of the Pope, and his mitred
Bishops (as things therein are now handled) Saint Peter's mind and Judgment was,
long before any Popes were known in the World, to rule the roste in such
Pontificality, as since they have done.

1 PET. V. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. The Elders which are among you I beseech, which am
also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ.


HEre Saint Peter teaches those that have any charge of feeding the Flock of
Christ, how they ought to behave themselves. In the Chapter before, he told that
none should presume to teach or preach any thing, unless he were certain and
assured that the same was the sincere and pure Word of God, upon which as upon
a firm and strong Rock, our Consciences may boldly stay. For this in Duty is
required of us Christians, that we should be certain and know thoroughly what
thing is allowed of Christ, and what is not: for they that waver in uncertainty
of this knowledge, are not to be taken as Christians. He adds also thus much,
that whosoever enters into any Office or Function, should so behave himself
therein, in each respect, as that he should not doubt but that God was the
Author thereof. But what he here says, peculiarly belongs to Bishops and
Ecclesiastical Pastors, wherein he teaches them how they are to demean
themselves in the Administration of their duties and charges, and what manner
of persons they ought to be.

We must here further be acquainted with the Phrase and Propriety of the
Tongue, wherein this Epistle was written, that we be not deceived through
ignorance of the signification and force of the Word. For this Greek name
Presbuteros, which St. Peter here uses, does signfiy An Elder: by which Word
they also are called that be Senators; that is, men excelling in Age, Gravity,
Virtue, Wisdom, and Experience. After the same sort, does Christ call his
Disciples, Ministers, and Senate, to whose Office it belongs to oversee and
govern his spiritual Empire (that is, to preach and to take care of the
Christian Congregation) by the name of Elders. And therefore marvail not a
whit, neither let any thing move thee, though they which be Elders, be now a
days called by other Titles or Names, whereof the Scripture makes no mention
at all; But not respecting the order, wherein things presently stand, weigh and
conceive the matter thus: When St. Peter or any other of the Apostles, came
into any City wherein Christians were, they ordained some one or other of them,
such as lived honestly and unblameable, and had Wife and Children, and also
skilful in the Scriptures of God, to have the Superintendency and charge over
the rest. And them they called Seniors or Elders, whom afterward both St.
Peter, and also St. Paul called Bishops, whereby we may note, that Bishops were
no other, then the very same that were Elders.

Touching this purpose, we read in the History of St. Martin, how a certain man
came unto a place in Africa, and there in a poor Cottage found an Elderly man,
whom they thought to have been some plain Countryman. Within a while, they saw
many people come flocking to him, to whom he Preached and Expounded the Word of
God, whereby they perceived that he was their Pastor or Bishop. For in those
days, there was no difference either in Apparel or manners between the Bishops,
and residue of Christians.

The Elders (says St. Peter) upon whom the charge lies, to feed the flock of
Christ with the Word of God, and to have care over them in the Lord, I exhort,
which am also an Elder. Whereby it manifestly appears, that they whom he here
names Elders, were such as labored in the Ministry of the Word, and
diligently preached the glad Tidings of the Gospel. For, such as he was that
calls himself their fellow Elder, such also appears it that they were. And
here we see, how far he humbles and abaseth himself, in that, he takes not
upon him the name of a Prelate, (which in respect that he was an Apostle of the
Lord he might have done) but calls himself a Fellow Elder, and also a witness
of the Sufferings of Christ. As if he had said, I do not only preach, but I am
also among those Confessors of Christ, that are exercised in daily Afflictions.
And withal he also shows that so many as be Christians, must be persecuted
and suffer affliction. And this is a true Apostle of Christ, unto whom if the
Pope and his Bishops were any thing like, (as they are shameless enough, to
challenge to themselves the same Title) we would not greatly stick, willingly
to kiss their feet.

Verse. 1. And also a Partaker of the Glory that shall be Revealed.
This part of the Apostles Style and Title, is of far more excellency, then any
that our Popish Bishops dare pretend to use. For thereby does St. Peter take
and reckon himself Holy, and a blessed Man. And although he perfectly knew, that
he should be a Partaker of the Glory to come, yet takes he no Pride therein,
he lifts not himself up in any swelling Glory, but modestly contains
himself within the bounds of temperate softness and courtesy.

V. 2. Feed the flock of God, which depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind.
Christ is the first and chiefest Pastor, who has many Pastors under him; as
he also has many Flocks: whom being dispersed in sundry quarters of the World,
he commits to the charge and oversight of their Shepherds and Pastors, as
in this Epistle of St. Peter, written into diverse Countries and Regions,
appears. But what is the charge of these Pastors to do? Forsooth, to feed
the Flock of Christ. This word (Feed) the Pope has raked and haled unto
himself, whereby he goes about to prove himself Lord and Prince of all, and
that it is in our own choice and Authority, to deal with the Sheep as he
lists himself. But alas, who is so ignorant that knows not what this word
(Feed) means: To wit, that the Pastors and Shepherds ought to provide
Pasture for their Sheep, and to see them have their meat in convenient and due
season, whereby they may grow to be fruitful: And moreover to watch that
devouring Wolves rush not in among them, and tear the Flock in pieces? This
word (Feed) signisieth nothing less then to kill and spoil.

Furthermore St. Peter calls it peculiarly the Flock of Christ, as though he
should say, Think not that the Flock is any of your own, ye are but only
Servants and Ministers to look unto it, ye are no Lords nor Masters over it.
Contrary to the bold practice and customable dealing of many Bishops, which
account and call every one within their Diocese and Jurisdiction, their Sheep.
We are the Sheep of Christ, for he said before, Ye are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls. Bishops are the Ministers of Christ, to keep
his Sheep, and to give them meat and pasture. And therefore to Feed, is nothing
else then to preach the Gospel, wherewith their Souls may be fed, fatted and
fructified, that so the Sheep may be nourished with the Gospel. This is the
only and proper Office of a Bishop.

So said Christ unto Peter; Feed my Sheep, Joh. 21. that is, the Sheep which I
commit unto thee to feed, are not thine but mine. Howbeit these words have been
so canvassed and wrested by my Lord the Pope, that he thereby usurpeth and
exercises an external Domination and Lordship over the Church of Christ,
whereas neither he, nor any of his sacrilegious Chaplains, preaches so much as
one word of the Gospel. They brag that they have their Succession from St.
Peter. If it were so, yet sear I, that it could scarcely be proved that any
Pope ever preached the Gospel; for none of them has left any thing behind him,
that is written and extant, wherein a man may read the Gospel. St. Gregory the
Pope was surely an holy man; and yet the things which he preached, are not to
be esteemed worth a straw; whereby it may appear, that the same See of Rome is
peculiarly and specially accursed of God. I deny not, but sundry of the Popes
suffered Martyrdom under cruel Tyrants, for the Gospels-sake, but yet there is
nothing extant that was written by any of them, which is Evangelical. And yet
they still brag and crack, that it is their charge to feed, whereas indeed they
do nothing else but entangle, and clogge men's Consciences with Laws of their
own, and make havoc and sale of men's Souls, never troubling themselves with
preaching one word of Christ his sacred Gospel.

True it is, that there are many to be found, as well Women as men, which are
able to preach, and that with no less Dexterity and sufficiency, then he unto
whom that charge and office is peculiarly committed. But because the greatest
number in the flock always is of weaklings, therefore it is expedient that some
be appointed to strengthen and confirm such, and to keep back the Wolf from
rushing in among them, and devouring them. For a Preachers Office and Duty is
not only to feed, that is, to teach his Sheep, how they ought to frame
themselves to become true and sincere Christians; but he has the charge also
to look that the Wolf be kept out, and that none of the Sheep be devoured, or
seduced by false Doctrine, and so drawn into error, which is the continual
drift and practice of the Devil. Now, there be many that can well enough abide
to have the Gospel preached, so that there might be no exclaiming, and speaking
against Wolves; I mean, so that Preachers in their Sermons, would forbear
railing and taunting against Prelates. But although I preach sound Doctrine,
and that which is true; and although I feed and teach (my charge) the Sheep,
well and rightly; yet is not that sufficient; for it is further required at my
hands, to keep the Sheep from danger, and to have a careful regard unto them,
that Wolves come not among them, to drive them away out of their fertile and
wholesome pastures. For to what purpose is my building, if when I have couched
and orderly laid my Stones, another straitways come and throw them down as fast
again, and I seeing him, forbid him not? The Wolf is well enough contented,
that the Sheep be well fed, and fatted in good pasture; because the fatter they
be, the pleasanter and daintier Prey thinks he to make of them. But that Dogs
should incessantly bark and baule at him, that can he not abide. And therefore
it is a matter of no small weight and charge, to feed well, according as God
has given in Commandment to do; and it behooveth each one in that function
carefully to consider his charge in this behalf.

The Flock (says he) which depends upon you, that is, over which ye have
charge, or which is among you, and not which is subject and lying at your feet.
Care for it, and that not by constraint, because you can no otherwise choose,
but willingly; not for filthy lucre sake, but of a ready mind. Here he
comprehends in one word, all that which the Prophet Ezehiel in the 34th
Chapter of his Prophesy, writes concerning Pastors or Bishops. The meaning of
this place is thus: Not only feed ye, but take ye care also and provide for
them, that they want nothing, and where any stands in necessity or need,
there see that ye relieve them: and in each respect, do the parts and duties of
right Episcopoi, that good Watchmen and faithful Espials. Look out, least
danger appear, stand always pressed and ready on your guard, and diligently
behold and espy out of your Watch Tower, what it is that is wanting, or what is
befallen unto every one within your charges. Hereby we may well perceive and
know, that a Bishop is even the same which is here meant by an Elder. And
therefore it is not true, which some say, that a Bishopric is a Dignity, and a
Bishop only he that wears a forked Mitre. Episcopacy is not a name of
Dignity, but of Office: for he that is invested with that name and title, ought
to look to his Flock, and to be careful for it, and to serve as a good
Watchman, to see abroad, and learn what things be amiss any where within his
charge. As if there be any that is weak, having his conscience wounded, him
ought he to confirm, comfort and heal: if any fall, him ought he to lift up
again, and so as other defects arise, to be ready to help, whereby
Christian-people may be safficiently looked unto and provided for, both in Soul
and in Body. This is the reason that has moved me therefore oftentimes to say,
that if we would institute a right Christian Commonwealth, it were necessary,
that in every City there should be three or four Superintendents, to take care
and regard over the Church and Congregation, and to reform and restore
whatsoever therein is amiss or wanting.

And here he touches two special Points, enough almost to terrify and
discourage any man from bearing Authority over the people, or to take this
great charge and burden upon him. First there be some virtuous and honest men,
who half unwillingly are drawn into the Ministry and function of Preaching; for
that, they see it to be a painful and laborious Office, to skout about every
where, to see how the Sheep live, to succor and help them that be in want, to
strengthen and raise up them that be wavering and ready to fall; and finally to
have such diligent care and continual watch over them, that the Wolf find no
entrance to invade and come rushing in among them; yea in that, he must not
stick to lay down his life for their preservation and safeguard, And also for
that it is such an hard matter of so great difficulty, truly to discharge the
office of a goodly Pastor: yea of so great danger it must be thoroughly
executed, and that not unwillingly, or as though it also, because were by
constraint. True it is, that no man ought to intrude himself into that Office;
but if he be thereunto called an required, he ought willingly to take it upon
him, and to discharge and perform as much as to his function and office
appertains.

For they that take this matter upon them upon necessity and constraint, and
have neither courage nor pleasure in the same, shall never with any profit
fruitfully discharge or execute their office.

Again, there be others worse then these, which take this Office upon them for
no other end but for filthy Lucre, to scrape and rake together wealth, and to
pamper and cram their bellies. These fellows seek only for the Wool and the
Milk of the Sheep, but as for good Pastures for them they care not; and with
this Scab is the Popish Clergy horribly infected. And this is a most hurtful,
dangerous noisome and filthy Vice, then which there cannot be any so
dishonorable or shameful for him that takes on him the name and charge of a
Christian Bishop or Pastor. Which was the thing that caused both the Apostles,
Petor and Paul, and also the Prophets, so often to record and inculcate it. This
caused Moses to say, Numb. 16. I have not taken so much as an Ass from them;
neither have I hurt any of them. And Samuel also; Ye know that I have not taken
any man's Ox, or Ass from him, nor done wrong to any, etc. 1 Samuel 12. For if he
that has this charge and function of feeding the Flock, be greedily given to
scraping together of riches and wealth, and to gape after filthy Lucre; such an
one (I say) is himself easily and soon changed from a Pastor into a Wolf.

Verse. 2. But of a ready mind.
That is, even with pleasure. Let the Pastor or Bishop apply his Office and
Vocation, and that with a ready willingness. They that thus cheerfully,
promptly and zealously discharge their function, are those, which as they do
their duties willingly, so do they not greedily pull the fleece from the Sheep.
There be therefore two sorts of false Pastors. The one sort occupy their room
grudgingly and unwillingly; the other willingly and gladly; but yet for gain
and filthy Lucre.

Verse. 3. Not as though yo were Lords over Gods heritage.
Sueh are they that are willing to take the office upon them, for dignity sake,
because they would live pompously and bear great sway and authority in the
World. He therefore exhorts Bishops, Eiders and Pastors, that they practice
not any Lordly Tyranny over the Flock, as though the people were their Slaves
and Underlings, or as though they had such authority and Lordship over them, to
command what they list. For we have but one Lord, which is Christ; and he it is
which governs our Souls. Elders and Pastors have no further charge then to
feed. And here in one word, Saint Peter utterly overthrows all the Ringdoms
of the Pope; and concludes that no Bishop has any authority, so much as in
one word to clog and tie the conscience of the faithful to the observation of
their Precepts. For they themselves ought to be Servants and Ministers, and to
say, Thus says the Lord, and these be the words of Christ; it is not we, the
words are none of ours; and therefore ye ought to do that which is here
commanded. According to that which Christ says; Luke 32. The Kings of the
Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over them, are called
gracious Lords, but ye shall not be so. Contrary whereunto the Pope boasts
and braggeth saying, We ought to be Lords, and to us only belongs to exercise
chief Rule and Supreme Authority.

Verse. 3. But that ye may be ensamples to the Flock. Verse. 4. And when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible Crown of Glory.
See that ye be the foremost in the battle, using such honest conversation, that
your life may be a Lanthorn to give light, and an example to the people, to
imitate you. But our Lord Shaveliugs use to tell the people another tale,
bidding them to do this and that, they themselves in the mean while leaning on
their soft Cushions, and taking their ease like Lordings; laying upon us great
and grievous burdens, which they themselves will not touch nor lift at with one
of their fingers; not traveling any whit in Preaching the true Word of God,
but rather commanding others to do that, which they themselves never did, nor
ever meant to do. And yet must no man tell them thereof, for if he do, he
should be sure quickly to feel the smart of it.

Again, to such Pastors Bishops, Elders and Superintendents, as here in this
world did their duties faithully, truly, sincerely, and holily; Saint Peter
assigns no temporal reward; as though he should say, your Office and Function
is of more excellency and dignity, then that in this life it can be requited
and recompensed; there is due and kept for you an Evelarsting Crown, that shall
be given unto you which faithfully and diligently feed the Flock of Christ. And
this is the exhortation wherewith Saint Peter encourages them, to whom the
charge and cure of Souls is committed. Whereby is manifestly concluded and
proved, that the Pope with his Cardinals and Bishops is the very Antichrist,
and and the professed Adversaries of Christ, for that they do nothing of all
these, which Saint Peter here requires. For they neither teach others, neither
do they any thing themselves, but are wholly and altogether in those devices
and by-matters, which are most opposite and contrary thereunto. They neither
feed the Sheep themselves, neither will they suffer others to feed them; but
rather place the ravening Wolves, devouring and murdering the Flock, and yet
brag they, that they be Christ's Vicar on Earth. Too truly (the more pity) are
they in the room and stead of Christ, being absent, after the manner and
example of the Devil: For wheresoever Christ is not in place, there they bear
sway, and as Butcherly Tyrants reign and command most imperiously.

It is therefore very expedient and requisite, that the Laity and simpler sort
should perfectly remember this and such like places; by the which they may be
able to answer against that Antichristian Kingdom of the Pope, whenever they
shall be called into question and examination as touching their Faith; yea,
thus may they well say, when they are brought unto such pinches. Behold Christ
says thus, and the Pope says the clean contrary. Christ says yea, the Pope
says nay. They therefore thus teaching contrary and repugnant doctrines, the
one of them must needs lie. Now, that Christ should lie, it is impossible, and
therefore it is the Pope, that is the lying Ruffian of the world, and not only
a Devilish Liar, but even Antichrist himself. Thus ought thou to be
furnished armed with the Scriptures, by the which thou may not only boldly
call the Pope Anticrist, but may also (when thou have so done) most plainly
and easily prove it, so that thou may surely by the Word of God persist in
thine opinion, even to the death, against the Devil and all his Infernal Army.

FINIS.

