An IMAGE OF OUR Reforming Times: OR, JEHV in his proper Colors; Displayed in
some EXERCITATIONS on 2 Kings 9 and 10 Chapters: Setting forth The Opportunity
was given him to do his Work in. Cause he had committed to him to manage.


ALSO, His POLICY, ZEAL, PROFESSION, HYPOCRISY:
With his SINS, and their Aggravations. REASON for all this.


In all which he is proved to be a particular Character of our Times: by which,
as in a Glass, we may see the state and condition we have brought our selves
into, by our Deviations.

CONCLUDING WITH A Word to Jehu, Jehonadab his Counselor, and the despised
persecuted People of God.

By Col. EDW. LANE of Ham-pinnulo.

Isai. 26.20.21. Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation (...) overpast. For behold, the Lord comes out of his place, to
punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall
disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

London, Printed for L. Chapman, at the Crown in Popes head-alley 1654.

A WORD from the PRISON, To the Reader.
UPon request, I have read (by a running eye) the ensuing Treatise in the
Copy; and I find it like a good Jewel in a plain Leathern Case: Although, as
B. Jewel once said, Against Harding.
Faults will escape betwixt a man's fingers, let him look to it ever so
narrowly; and be they never so few, yet the Sophisters of our Times can tell
how to multiply them in their Arithmetic. Therefore the Lord Jesus make us
watchful and wary, who is able to keep us from falling, (these times) and to
present us FAULTLESS before the presence of his glory, as Jude 24. For it is
too too true, that Piety does now dance attendance to Policy; and Iehu (cul
gravior est jactura Regionis quam Religionis) is gotten up again (by a mad
Metempsuchosis) upon the Stage in England, to act his part. Only in this we
are worse then Israel was: for we have many Idols which men adore, and evils
which they harbor; (Non unum tantum Vitulum, sed multos habemus) Not one Calf,
but many. And such as refuse, (for their conscience sake) must suffer
persecution; as they do, and will do. But though Israel play the harlot, yet
let not Judah offend. Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone. And hark!
hear! it is the sound of the seventh Trumpet (Rev. 11.) for which the Saints
are persecuted, imprisoned, and threatened (of their lives) at this day: and
shall the Trumpet give an uncertain sound? God forbid! O how alike is this Cup
to Christ's! (viz. traitor to Caesar, enemy to Government:) therefore Fear not,
little flock, Luke 22.33. and Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness sake; for theirs is the kingdom, Matthew. 5.10. Open your ears! O
ply your Oars! you that row against the stream! lose not one stroke! for ye
shall reap in due season, if ye faint not.

Nicolas of Ienvile (a young man) was condemned to die; and being set in a
Cart, his father came with a staff, and would have beaten him; but the Officers
would not suffer him: at which, the son cries to the Officers to let his father
alone, saying he had power over him to do in that kind what he would: but
Christ was dearer to him then his dearest friend on earth.

Hence it was, that Hierome said, that if his father were weeping on his knees
before him, his mother hung crying on his neck behind him, and all his
brethren, sisters, children, kinsfolks, howling on every side on him; he would
fling them all to the ground, despise all his kindred, run over his father,
tread under his mother, to run to Christ and his Cause, though on the Cross.

And what? shall our bowels be shut up to blessed Jesus, and his crucified
Cause, at this time of day? seeing the Rulers, Priests, and Soldiers, have got
him up upon the Cross once again, and that through the High treason of the
Iudas's of these times. Therefore up! Christians! up! with the Sword of the
Spirit! Declare! declare the Decree! Psalm. 2.7. March! march! under Christ's
banner! and bid de^^^^^e to the Apostates! and present enemies of King Jesus!
who sputum lingunt ^lick the very spittle of IEHU. The first Battle must he
begun by the sword of Christ's mouth, Rev. 19.15. Isai. 11.4. yet they only
shall overcome, who love nos their lives unto death, Rev. 12.11. (...). Like
sober! solid! sincere! holy! humble! heavenly-minded New-Nonconformists.

Thou that art ignorant of our danger in these days, may do well to learn
(with a little self-denial) as a Scholar ((...) signifies) that lies along in
the dust; and peruse this Treatise with an impartial eye; whereby I believe
thou will soon see, with Luther, that it is Policy does ruin true Religion,
and persecute the true seed and remnant at this day.

But be not troubled at these Trials, which are foretold, Mat. 24. Let us fear
none of these things we must suffer (for a short time:) behold, the devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that ye may be TRIED: Be faithful unto death, and
he will give you the crown of life, Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. So Dan. 11.35.
and 12.10. Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked
shall do wickedly: None of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall
understand. And Rev. 7.14. These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Out
of PRISON, he shall come to Reign, Eccles. 4.14. O Blessed prison! ( golden
privileges!) with the Lamb. Such bonds are become our best chains, through
which our souls are mounting into Christ's Paradise, and by which we take many
a turn every day in Christ's White Hall, where we have our life, liberty,
light, and the best air, (which no man can keep us from) where we see our King
in his beauty, and receive many a sweet visit from him, that others have not
the happiness of. Welcome Cross! welcome Crown! As Paul says, God forbid I
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6.14. And as Chrysostom says, on
Ephesians. 3.1. Non ita beatum Paulum puto, quod in coelum raptus, quam quod in
carcerem conjectus: I hold, Paul was not so happy in his rapture, as in his
captivity. Never so happy! heavenly, holy, and translated, as in a Prison! So
we! for we are in the Mount, and see all the world under us, and do daily view
the downfall thereof. Babylon is falling, is falling, with all her worldly
powers, Policies, and Abettors, (New and Old:) For out of Prison we see it, and
therefore say it, A dreadful day! a terrible day! a wonderful day of the Lord
is coming! and yet a little, little while, and he will avenge the blood of
Iezreel upon the house of JEHU, and cause his kingdom to cease.

From the mount of the Lord in my Prison (for my Christ) at Lambeth-house, 2
day 6 month. J. Rogers.

The Author to the Reader.
IT is as common as ancient a Custom, for Authors to beg a Boon of their
Readers, on behalf of the births of their Understanding the Press midwifes into
the world. All that I shall entreat of thee, courteous Reader, is, That thou
would take heed of Offenses; beware of being offended. We are too too apt to
stumble at Christ, his Truth, and the Dispensers of it, if they be not such as
are suitable to, and the Truth be not dressed up according to our fancies:
therefore says our Lord Jesus Matthew. 18.7.
, Woe to the world because of offenses. There is a time wherein the Lord will
lay stumbling blocks before a people: Jer. 6.21.
Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will lay stumbling blocks before this people,
and the fathers and the sons together shall fall upon them; the neighbor and
his friend shall perish. Offenses and stumbling blocks are perishing
Judgments; Vials full of wrath, that bring WOE upon the world.

It concerns us to enquire, whether the Age we live in be not one of those
times, wherein God is provoked to such great wrath, as to lay stumbling blocks
before our feet, that we may fall upon them, and perish: If so, then how
extraordinary wary ought we to be in all our ways, lest we take offense at
Christ and his Truth? Many times the Truth is not dispensed in such away nor
manner, nor by such persons as we expect; and then how ready are we to cast it
aside, and trample on it, and embrace a Lie (because it is suitable to us) in
stead of Truth? Because when Christ first came, the manner of his coming was so
contrary to their expectations; when they expected he should fill the Palaces
of this world with his glory, behold, he is born in a Stable; they are offended
at him, they stumble and fall, to the perishing of their souls. Yea, how few
were there, that at first saw the glory of his swadling-clouts! a Simeon, and
an Anna; two or three old doting people, in the worlds account, and a company
of shepherds: he came in a way they least dreamed on. And if we search the
Scriptures, we shall find that God has dispensed his Truth (mostly) in such
ways and by such instruments as were most despicable in the eye of man's
wisdom, a stumbling block to the Jew, foolishness to the Greek.

God has two great Ends in dispensing his Truth in such a way and manner, as
men will stumble at: Judgment upon the World, and Glory to himself.

1. Judgment upon the World. An Isaiah must go naked, an Ezekiel must pourtray
a city on a tyle, raise forts against it, lay siege to it, lie on his side, and
eat dung: a Hosea must take a common harlot to wife: an Amos must be called
from among the herds-men, gathering sycomore-fruit: others must be taken from
their Publicanes seat (in the Custom-house) and fishing trade. And the Truth
must be delivered in a dark uncouth manner, in such terms and phrases, under
such similitudes and figures, as are very hard to be understood, ridiculous to
the world; and sometimes in such a stammering weak manner, as gives
(seeming-just) occasion of stumbling and offense: and all to this end, that
having eyes, they may not see; Isai. 6.9, 10.
ears, and hear not; and having hearts, they may not understand, lest they
convert and be healed: God taking occasion hereby, to pour down the dregs of
his wrath upon the sons of men. Says God, Make the hearts of this people fat,
etc. And how long? Why until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, etc. And
Christ himself carries on this design of God, in his ministry speaking to the
people in Parables altogether, fulfilling this Prophecy of Isaiah in them. A
just and sore Judgment of God upon a rebellious people, for rejecting the Word
and Truth of God.

2. The end of all is, The glory of God; that God may have great glory out of
this confusion. How does it tend to the glory and honor of God, that such mean
despised men, as herds-men, gatherers of sycomore-fruit, fishermen, and
Publicanes, should be enabled by the Spirit of God to demonstrate and lay open
to men the invisible things of God, the deep mysteries and secrets of his love
and rich grace? The less of man, the more of God appears. When once God works
upon a man, to the giving of him a true knowledge of things, how glorious is it
in his eye? That God should condescend so low, to such mean creatures, and do
such great things by so unlikely means, wonderful does God then appear in the
glory of all his attributes.

If so, how much does it concern me and thee, to lie continually at the throne
of Grace, that not the First of these, but the Second may be wrought in us? O
then, let us take heed of Offenses, both of giving and taking offenses. Woe to
the world because of offenses: it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to
him by whom offenses come: it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. And what
great offense is it, both to the world, and to the lambs of Christ, for any who
have professed the Truth, to betray it, and flinch back from it, when they see
the sun likely to burn hot, loss and persecution in this world like to come?
But this is a digression: my Work is to entreat of my Reader to beware of
TAKING offense. Offenses may be soon taken, but they are not so soon gotten
away. It Is a hard and difficult thing to close with a Truth, when once we have
declared our offense at it. God will do Wonders in the world, such as never
were known nor heard of before, as will make men's ears to tingle: when we see
such things a doing, let us have a care of being offended, lest we stumble, and
fall, and perish, upon our own stumbling blocks, which by our offenses we lay
before our own feet.

If God should totally withdraw himself from, and lay aside (the present
self-seeking, apostatizing Clergy, as at Christ's first coming he cast off the
Clergy of the Jewish Church, that were grown depraved, and hypocritically
wicked) that generation of men, which he has used so long a time, to dispense
his Word and Will by, and go once more among the Publicanes, Fishermen, and
Mechanics, to seek out and take from among them fit instruments for his glory,
(the more contemptible and vile they are in themselves, the fitter for his use)
let us not be offended. Judge nothing before we have tried it: Try the spirits,
whether they be of God or no: To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they prove
not according to that Rule, then we may safely excommunicate them our hearts.
But have a care, take heed; there are many voices in the world; we may soon be
deceived. It Is a special character of Christ's sheep, That they now his own
voice from a strangers voice; and a stranger they will not follow. Christ is
raising his voice, and calls aloud to his people to prepare for his coming, and
gives many signs of his nigh ^pproach. And the devil raises his voice too, and
transforms himself into a glorious angel of light. If Moses do strange and
wonderful things, the Magicians will do so too. The cry and voice of the
kingdom of Christ is up, and begins to rise high; and Satan raises many
(confused) voices, to stifle that cry; that through the noise and din that he
makes about the ears of men's souls, they may not hear, and believe, and be
saved. Therefore now it behooves us to have a great care lest we be deceived, to
search and try every thing, ere we receive it as truth: but above all, take
heed of being offended, lest we prove offended at the Truth, and so perish; for
that is that, at which we are most apt to be offended. If there be one Truth
encumbered about with (through Antichristian fogs and mists) a hundred Errors,
a thousand to one (if we take not great heed) we shall pass all those errors
with a favorable construction, (at least) and be offended at that one Truth;
and so stumble, and fall foul on it: and what follows then? PERISHING, Woe.

As for this Treatise, I shall only say thus much: It might have been
enlarged, and many things further proved and illustrated; but I desired brevity
for thy accommodation: and knowing how well thou love thy money, I was loath
to entrench too much upon thy purse. Read it over considerately, and compare
one thing with another; and I suppose thou will see a line of truth going
through it, and something that may deserve laying up in our hearts, and
pondering. If we do hearken to the truth in it, we may possibly find the way
to get such a frame of heart, as may free us from the bitterness of that Cup,
which the Author of this book fears may be the porton of this generation to
drink the dregs of. Only, I entreat thee again, beware of offenses; they are
the ready way to destruction: there is no hope in that path, but that which is
perishing. And let me add this, That he that takes offense not given, is both
the giver and the taker of the offense; and then, what MILLSTONES OF WRATH may
he expect, to grind him to powder?

Now the good Lord teach thee and me to know the voice of Christ (the true
Shepherd) from a strangers voice, and follow him alone, and fully. Farewell.

An Image of (part of) our Reforming Times. OR, JEHV in his proper colors
displayed, In some EXERCITATIONS on 2 Kings, 9 and 10 Chapters.
2 Kings 10.29 31. Howbeit, from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who
made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from after them; to wit, the golden
calves that were in Bethel and that were in Dan.

But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with all
his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to
sin.


SOlomon the wisest of men upon his great experience tells us that there is no
new thing under the sun. Indeed every generation of men are but as new Editions
of their forefathers: one differs from the other only in circumstantials:
Perhaps other faces and shapes, but the same flesh and blood, the same humors
of the body the same faculties and passions of the soul. Now there being such
sameness and likeness in the fountain, there must needs follow the like in the
streams. Men's actions and ways are as their hearts and affections are. Likeness
in sin and wickedness, brings likeness in afflictions and publishments. Times
past seem to be a type or figure of the present, and the present to be a
re-acting or doing over again those things (either more clearly, or more
obscurely) that the former times brought forth. Vicissitudes and changes are
suitable to the mutable nature of Man. What one Age does or builds up, another
undoes or pulls down; a third comes, and would reform all if they could tell
how: yet still it is but like the hand of a Dyal, that goes from One to Twelve
and then to One again. There is no new thing under the sun. Nothing can
properly be said to be new, but the new creature: the works of God and of the
Spirit of God are new but the works and ways of men are old; at best, but new
images of old things: and all old things must pass away; nothing will be
durable, till all things become new; new heavens, new earth. These three parts
of time, past, present, and to come, are very nigh of kin: they are so like
each other, that they may well be taken for brethren. An indifferent Judgment
studying the times past, may cast the waters, and give a true Judgment of the
present; and a prudent eye may by the same rule be able to give a shrewd ghess
at the times to come, especially times nigh, or next at hand. Those who make
Cornelius Tacitus, Titus Livius or other Roman Stories, their Gospel, will
tell us, that Julius, Augustus, and Tiberius Caesar's parts are acting over
again in the world by other persons, and under another Vizard: and I could
heartily wish, that they had not so much ground as they have for their
conjecture.

But the Saints and people of God have a more sure Word of prophecy, The good
and unerring Word of God, and the promise of the Spirit to interpret it.

It was not for naught, that our Lord so sharply reprehended the Scribes and
Sadduces for not observing the signs of the times. And the men of Issachar are
characterized by the holy Ghost for their wisdom, having understanding in the
times. What though they be counted the half-witted men, the asses of the times?
it is no matter, seeing they have the holy Spirit to stand by them, and
encourage them. Christ our Lord rode to Jerusalem on an ass; and he will again
make use of the worlds asses, (the foolish things of this world) when he goes
up to his kingdom, to the shaking of the earth, and the heavens also.

I say, yet not I, but Solomon the wiseman says, That the present times are
but an Image of times past: there is nothing new under the sun. Is there any
thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? Eccles. 1.9, 10.
It has been already of old time which was before us; and there is nothing new
under the sun.

Ponder these things in your hearts, and you will not wonder nor be prejudiced
in your thoughts, if I tell you, that this story of Jehu is An exact
description of part of our Reforming times, or, of a great part of our times
Reformers.

Howbeit, from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin,
Iehu departed not from after them; to wit, etc.

But before we come to the opening of these words, which is our main
intendment, it is necessary that we should see what help the whole history of
Iehu will afford us, to the clearing up of our work. That which is requisite
for us to observe, as to our present business, may be brought under these six
Heads.

1. The time that God took to have this work done in. 2. The cause Iehu had
committed to him to manage. 3. His policy. 4. His zeal. 5. His profession. 6.
His hypocrisy.

First, The time, the opportunity or season, God gave Iehu to do his work in.
It was as wicked a time as ever was in Israel, wherein the poor people groaned
under all sorts of Oppressions in their outward man; as in the case of Naboth
may be seen. In things of a spiritual concernment in the Worship of God, Baal
and the Calves tell what a sad case the poor people of God were in then:
Prerogative and absolute Sovereignty advanced to the highest; the Kings will
and pleasure above Law; as in the case of Naboth's vineyard; and may be further
seen, in the complaint of good Obadiah: What have I sinned, that thou would
deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me? The King's will was
grown extreme boundless, that a man so near Ahab's person as Obadiah was,
(Governor over his house) so great and powerful a man, should be so subject to
the imperious fury of his Prince, that he should incur the danger of death for
a supposed telling of a lie: that was the case; if he should go and tell Ahab
that Elijah was there, and the Spirit of the Lord take him and carry him
elsewhere, and Ahab should not find him, he would slay Obadiah. Surely Ahab
was an absolute Sovereign, had scru'd up Prerogative to the higest pin. And
this man's wife (Iezebel) was more absolute then he: he ruled the Kingdom, but
she ruled the King: for she made him more wicked then he was before; that
Ieroboam's sins could not serve his turn, but he must have an Ahab's sins too.
She being a Sidonian brought him to worship her Idols, and submit to her
superstition, to serve her gods and her Priests: and who ruled the King now,
think you? Oppression and Superstition were brought up to the highest pitch,
and that by her means.

The times thus qualified, gave Iehu an easy entrance into this work. God
ordered it so, that the sense of the Oppressions and Superstitions of their
Rulers wrought so upon the Soldiers hearts, as made them of a willing mind to
follow Iehu; otherwise it would have been a difficult and hard matter for Iehu
to have engaged them against their King Who was a valiant man, for he was
wounded: his wounds spoke forth his valor; which virtue is mighty ravishing and
taking to the heart of a soldier.
. He had a fit season to do his work in: the harvest was ripe and he wisely
thrust in his sickle. How can he do amiss, that has God to direct him?

Now look back, and behold the countenance of our late times: consider our King
and Queen, the Prelates, the Friars, and Jesuitical Priests: view the temper of
the times, the ways and courses were taken, and you will presently be of my
mind and say These two times, though at so great a distance of time, are
complexion'd exceeding like each other; and with Solomon thou will cry out
There Is no new thing under the sun, but the present age many times commits the
same sins former ages have done, and fall under the same punishment, and
possess the same ruin: if they differ in any thing, it is but in the
circumstantial aggravations of their sin, and so may breed like difference in
the effects.

Secondly, for the Cause Jehu had in hand to manage: It was as excellent, as
noble a Cause as ever man had the prosecution of.
What was it, but the execution of God's wrath and vengeance upon his (and his
peoples) enemies, and the deliverance of his people from their bondage and
oppressions that lay upon them, both in matters of Worship, and their outward
concernments?

The people of Israel groaned under the hand of their oppressors as you may
read in the story of Naboth; and they were compelled to worship idols in stead
of the true God, the best whereof were Jeroboams calves, (characteristically
called his sins) and the more gross were Baal, and other the gods of the
heathens. Now the Prophet gives Iehu full commission to execute the vengeance
of God upon these Tyrants, the enemies of God and his people, as you may read
in 2 Kings 9.7, 8, 9, 10.

The other part of the Cause, to wit, deliverance and liberty for the people of
God to worship the true God, is plainly intimated in Chap. 10. verse. 31. But
Iehu took no heed etc. God expected he should walk uprightly before him, as
David did: wherefore did God give him commission to make the house of Ahab like
to the house of Jeroboam but to let him know that he expected his turning from
Ieroboam's sins as well as Ahab's; and that he should take away the peoples
oppressions and bondage in matters of Worship as well as in their outward
estate? Yea one reason why God would have Ahab thus dealt with is, that he
might avenge the blood of the prophets; which blood was shed in defense of the
true Worship of God. And what was it that made God so wroth with Jeroboam and
Baasha, but because they made Israel to sin by compelling them to forsake the
true God and his Worship? 1 King. 14.9 10. and 16.2.3. So that it is clear, that
the cause Iehu had the managing of, was, the execution of God's wrath, and
deliverance of his people from all bondage and oppressions.

What a near affinity there is between this Cause of God in these times of
Israel, and the Cause this present generation have had the managing of, for
these many years last past; yea, that it is one and the same is so obvious to
every serious eye, that it would be but time lost to bring arguments to prove
it.

Thirdly, Let us consider the policy of the man: view his intellectuals a
little, and we shall see, that (according to the received opinion of our times
that grace is but a secondary qualification in Rulers and Magistrates, natural
gifts and accomplishments to be sought after in the first place) he was as fit
for the Magistracy as any man (of that Judgment) would fix upon. A very
emblem of our times. This Policy of his discovers it self in diverse
particulars.

1. By a feigned humility: his companions without question read something in
his countenance, whereby they conceived that the matter which was communicated
to him was of some importance: upon which one of them demands, Wherefore came
this mad fellow to thee? He answers, The man you know, and his communication
you know. As much as to say, It Is no matter, let it alone, the thing shall die
with me: it seems you know the man; you say he is a mad fellow: and his
communication you know; what can be expected from a madman? though the matter
may never so much concern me, yet for my part, I shall bury it in my breast, and
think of it no more. By this answer, he did not only give them to understand
at present the humility of his mind, but also laid a groundwork, that when
they should hear the message, ^th not this (...) the practice some of the (...)
of our (...), to seem ^eny and strive ^inst those ho^s and digni^ which men
^uld cast up^ them? yet ^^en they see ^ir time, they (...) follow after ^^^m
with gree^ess.
they should admire the virtue in him, that would deny himself a Crown. And,
which sets forth his policy the more, he orders his speech so, as that it was
a close reproof of them, for calling the Prophet a madman; by which he sets
their desire on edge to know the business: their earnestness they express,
denying their former opinion, by professing their ignorance of him; It Is false,
tell us now. It Is true, we termed him a madman, but now we profess to thee, we
know him not: he may be a good and a wise man, for ought we know. Having thus
ordered the matter, he has a further shadow of humility, which is a

Second piece of his Politics: Engaging the soldier to himself by an If it be
your mind. O how tender is Iehu of seeming proud, to desire Sovereignty! He
will lead them on in the Lords battles, but do nothing that may displease, or
be grievous to any: If it be your mind. He will not stir a foot, nor go one
step, but by their advice and counsel: he would give them to understand, that
when he came to the throne, he would be as mere a lamb as ever was in the
world; have no absolute Sovereignty, no Prerogative, but be subject to their
Laws, only be their servant for their good: If it be your mind. But he had a
further reach in it, to engage them in the action as much as possible: Do you
do so and so, set the watch, keep a strict guard, make all things ready, and
let none go forth to tell it in Iezreel: If it be your mind.

^ to remem^ce the cours^e men took ^e first, and ^pare consi^tely that (...)
this, and (...) take your ^^^^ment from ^remises.
He knew well enough of what importance it was to have them engaged in this
voluntary sort, and how efficacious this manner of dealing with them would be,
to the unanimous binding of them to himself, as to his present work. Is it a
crime to think that Iehu had some project like Agitators, to accomplish his
ends by? O humble well-meaning Iehu! thou will not have the ordering of things
thy self alone, but lay the reins of government upon others, thy inferiors,
that the work of the Lord may go on with more speed strength and power: If it
be your mind. Publike-spirited Iehu, that proclaimest liberty in all thy
actions! Oh what a blessed change is here! whereas the people were wont to hear
nothing but This is Our will and pleasure; now their ears sound with an If it
be your mind. O happy Jehu! long live Jehu! we will help thee to pull down
Ahab, and Jezebel, with all her Priests, with their Baal too. Well, good
people, praise and dream on; but Jehu knows how, when he has made the place
empty for himself to stop your carreer, lest you overthrow the ancient
fundamental (Jeroboam 's) politic bounds, and so endanger the security of his
kingdom.

Jehu's Policy.
Thirdly, his policy appears in this, in that when he met with the King, at
the first he pretends the removal of the most gross evils of the State, to be
the ground of his quarrel. What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?

We will have no peace, so long as they remain. Have not o^ Jehu's steere^
their course (...) this point of the compass also?
What encouragement is here put into the hearts of his men of War, by such a
Declaration as this!

Righteous and holy Jehu! what, not have peace with the wicked? not put up thy
sword, till all the whoredoms and witchcrafts be removed, till all the
wickedness of the Land be done away, all oppressions and burdens taken off,
every yoke broken, and the people be set wholly free from those tyrannies that
they groan under? Surely now we shall go up to Jerusalem, to worship the true
God: the provocations of his wrath being done away, he will dwell with us, and
we shall enjoy the upper and the nether springs, by the blessing of our God
upon us. Stay, good people do not surfeit with hope and joy; Jehu will keep up
Jeroboam's calves in Dan and Bethel, for all this, and keep you within your old
bounds, lest you like rebels translate the kingdom to the son of David.

4. Iehu's policy appears, in the matter of Ahab's seventy sons. How
handsomely did he bring in the Rulers and chief men of the Kingdom to be
co-actors with him in the enterprise! Something o^ this nature hat^ been
alread^ attempted, an^ more is likely t^ follow.
Two kings stood not before him; how then shall we stand? This is a crowning
victory indeed. And see how the Fox improves this to his advantage: Ye be
righteous, (says he to the people) I conspired against my master, and slew
him: but who slew all these? See how he taunts now: I am the guilty man you
say, and you are righteous and innocent, free from blood: but who is most
guilty, I that slew one, or they that slew all these? By this act, Iehu
justified himself much in the eyes of the multitude, and weakened the hands of
his enemies. And so Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel.

5. His policy appears in this, in ingratiating himself into the most strict
and most holy societies of men; in getting to his side, and engaging to himself
the most eminent men for sanctity and holiness in that age: in verse. 15. He met
with Jehonadab the son of Rechab, etc. he made him to ride in his chariot, to
behold his zeal for God: and (as appears by the story) he would not suffer
Jehonadab to depart from him, but he must remain with him for counsel. And Jehu
went, and Jehonadab, into the house of Baal, and said unto the worshippers of
Baal, Search, and look, that there be with you none of the servants of the
Lord. So that it is clear, Iehonadab's counsel was in this matter. And who this
Iehonadab was Jeremiah tells us, Ier. 3 5. he was of the strictest sect of men,
like unto the Pharisees in Christ's time: they would not transgress the least
tittle of the Law of their tradition, and lived in outward contempt of the
world: there was none like unto them in all Israel, but here and there one of
the Prophets and people of the Lord that mourned for the sins of the Land. Yea,
so exemplary they were in their outward holiness and obedience, This piece of
^olicie is one of ^he chief recre^tions of our ^ehu's.
that the Prophet takes up a parable from them, to condemn the house of Israel,
in verse. 14. Now Iehu engages these holy men: and of what advantage is it to
him? Verily it is of exceeding great advantage to him. How acceptable is it to
the people, when the good men of their times are countenanced, nourished, and
exalted! Yea, does it not savor of much piety, that he will have the good and
holy men for his Counselors? Yea, they must be the men that must plead for
him: in case he slip, or discover his nakedneses, they with the credit of their
words with the people must cover all: they must trumpet out his excellencies,
and pray for him, and speak of him, as if he were the only Protector and
Deliverer of the Lord's people from their great oppressions. Yea, he is not
contented to have the Lords Prophets on his side from whom he had his
Commission; but, good man, he must have all good men satisfied, or he will not
be satisfied: not so much as a Iehonadab shall be dissatisfied, if he may have
his will. Iehu was a good and sweet-temper'd man now: it is true he was hot and
furious in the field like a Lion in God's work there; but is like a Lamb in his
Chamber and Palace: his words are smoothe as butter and oil; he will maintain
all good men's liberties, though of different opinions and profession, they are
all alike dear to him.

O heavenly Iehu! that have such a large heart to hold all good men in it:
wherewithal shall we honor thee? what service sh^^l we do thee? We will join
our selves to thee and make thy hands st^ong, to do whatsoever thou de^^est.
But stay, good soul, Iehu will turn separatist shortly, and let you know, when
you proceed to the taking away his golden Calves (his sins ^ounded on
State-pol^cy) that he can tell how to separate and divide y^u and keep only
those in his favor that will serve his turn although he turn from God.

6. And lastly, Iehu's policy appears in the matter of the worshippers of
Baal. Jehu was now at a stand; he knew not what to do, to root out all the
Priests and worshippers of Baal: he knew well enough, that he could not be
secure in his Throne, if they continued in the Land, and he forsake Baal; they
would remember their old friend Ahab, and avenge his death, if by any means
they could accomplish it: and he might think too, that if he performed not the
chief ends of God, God would remove him himself: and some sparks of light of
conscience might tell him, it was his duty, and one chief end why God had
anointed him King, that he might destroy Baal out of Israel. But it was his
corrupt and deceitful heart, that drew him to play the hypocrite, and
dissemble. Now Jehu's chief motive that carried him on in all his work, being
his own outward glory, and security in it, he thought himself not safe, unless
Baal and his worshippers were destroyed.

To take courage to himself, That this is an exact emblem of this present
season, a little time will discover.
and do it openly according to the command of the Lord by the voice of his
Prophets, his wisdom would not suffer him; no, that was too dangerous a course,
that would ruin all: but he must deal wisely, forsooth, use policy, and beat
the devil with his own staff. And what was this good piece of policy but to
play the hypocritical dissembler? In verse. 18. Ahab served Baal a little, but
Iehu shall serve him much. Jehu was acquainted with that Princely Maxim, Qui
nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare: He that knows not how to dissemble, knows
not how to reign. Ahab served Baal a little; he gave a little encouragement to
his worship, priests, and worshippers, small gifts and riches: it may be, to a
favorite, or here and there some eminent man, he would give largely. But I
will serve him much; I will have all to taste of my fatness, and feel of my
warmth, enjoy the benefit of my good will to Baal: they shall all be the better
for me: those that could not live on the short commons of their Tithes and
Oblations, shall now have more.

In this shameful business, Iehu had his Jehonadabs, his outwardly-holy men, to
assist and counsel him; but not one Prophet of the Lord appeared in it; they
were mourning (I Will warrant you) for the sins of the Land, for that black cloud
that was coming over them, which at best did foretell no likelihood of going up
to Jerusalem to worship, without more earthquakes first. And now he proclaims a
solemn assembly of all those idolatrous worshippers of Baal, and he sends
through all Israel, that none might be wanting; for he would make a great feast
for Baal. So that by this, he set them on such work, as fitted them for
slaughter and destruction: they must offer sacrifices to Baal; put on their
vestments, be in all their gallantry. They must take to themselves their full
power, not suffer one of the Lords people (not one against their op^nion) to be
among them.

Oh how zealous a King have we! Ahab was not to be compared to him, for zeal
for our God: we shall have happy days, we shall see no sorrow, we shall never
be removed: long live, Jehu; let thy days be as the sand of the sea for number.
But stay, Sir Priest, make not your selves drunk in the conceit of your Elysian
joys: your joy shall be turned into mourning: there is death in the pot, though
the broth seem never so pleasant: your sacrifices shall be dyed in your blood
and your Baal shall be bu^ied in your ruins. But Jehu did it in subtilty, to
the intent that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal. And thus he destroyed
Baal out of Israel.

Good God! what vicissitudes and changes are here! how mutable and uncertain is
the heart of man! This little world (man) ruling over the greater, makes false
deceitful, reeling work. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and take away this
sinful wicked mouldering, tottering world, and give us new heavens, and new
earth, that thy people may live to sing Hallelujahs to thee for evermore. But
in the

Jehu's Zeal.
Fourth place, Let us view Iehu, this mighty man, in his zeal.

O how gloriously zealous is he! full of zeal and good works: his heart seems
on fire for God and his glory: not one tittle of the word of the Lord shall
fall to the ground: he will slay all that belongs to the house of Ahab; not
leave a man to pass against the wall: and, as has been before observed, he
will deliver the people of God fully from their oppressions, and take off every
heavy yoke. But let us view the particulars wherein his zeal shows it self so
ominously.

First against the sins and wickedness of the times. When he met Joram, says
the King Is it peace Jehu? Peace? says he, What peace so long as the whoredoms
and witchcrafts of thy mother Jezebel are so many? Peace belongs not to thee;
no peace with thy abominations: I will not sheath my sword until I have
destroyed all those Oppressions in the State and Innovations in the Church, Was
not this our practice in our first motions?
that have provoked God to wrath against the Land, and hindered the people from
worshipping the true God. What peace with Ahab? peace with Iezebel? No: you
shall know I am raised up and inspired by God to avenge the blood of his
servants upon your heads correct your tyrannies and destroy the cause of them
out of the Land: I will not withdraw my hand, until I have purged the Land from
all those things that pollute it; and Cursed be he that withholdeth his hand
from shedding of blood. Well said, Iehu; thou art hot now, but thou will be
cool enough anon, when thine own turn is served: when thou have done as much as
is needful for thy own designs, then thou will let Gods work go whither it
will for thee: they are fools and asses that mind THEN any thing more, then
settling the State in peace and quiet, that they may enjoy the fruits of their
labors.

Secondly, his zeal puts forth it self in this: He would not have one to remain
alive of Baals priests; he would kill them all every mothers child: yea
whosoever let one of them escape his life should go for it. But have a care
Iehu, thou art not at last as furious against the Lords own Prophets, as thou
art now against Baals.

Thirdly, his zeal appears in this, These things have been done visibly before
our eyes.
That he brake down all the images of Baal, and brake down the house of Baal
and made it a draught house. How zealous was this man for God! one would have
thought that surely this man lived in heaven, and his thoughts were always upon
Jerusalem, and his heart thitherward. Can it be imagined how glad the hearts of
the unfeigned servants of the Lord were at the sight of this? Will it be
counted an error to think that their hearts, heads, mouths, were filled with
the thoughts of their going up to Jerusalem to worship, and behold the glory of
God in his Ordinances? But alas, poor hearts you are mistaken in Iehu the
golden Calves in Dan and Bethel will stop you; there is no passi^g those ancient
bounds founded upon so much State-wisdom. He departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

Jehu's Profession.
In the fifth place let us view him in his profession:

he professed himself to be one that studied much the mind and will of God to
regulate all his actions by that model he had received from God by his
Prophets: Thus says the Lord, This is the word of the Lord; as you may observe
all along the history. When he met the King, what was the profession he made,
but that his work was the rooting out all those abominations that had provoked
the Lord to anger? What peace, so long as the whoredoms and witchcrafts are so
many? When he had slain Ioram, he professed he did nothing but what he was
commanded of the Lord: Cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the
Iezreelite: for remember how that when I and thou rode together after Ahab his
father the Lord laid this burden upon him, etc. He would have a Word for all
his actions; and nothing would he seem to do, This is a true and complete
Character of some in these our reforming times.
but what was consonant to the mind and will of the Lord. Again, when he had
slain Jezebel, and she was eaten by the dogs, what application did he make? It
was the will of the Lord: This is the word of the Lord which he spoke by his
servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, etc. O heavenly man! whose tongue is tipped
with Scripture, the experiences of the Saints, and the Revelations of the
Prophets. When he had subtly caused the seventy sons of Ahab to be slain,
what was the conclusion? That the people should know, that nothing of the word
of the Lord should fall unto the earth, which he had spoken by Elijah,
concerning Ahab. And when he met with Iehonadab, what was his profession, but
to be zealous for God? What a profession of sincerity and plainness of heart in
the cause of God did he make? How curious was he of his associates and
companions? He would have none but such as were like himself, holy men in
appearance. If thy heart be right as my heart, come and see my zeal for the
Lord, (be my companions) otherwise not. By the way, observe how poor Iehu
praises himself: if thy heart be right, as my heart: he praises his own
sincerity his zeal ( come and see my zeal there is none like mine) his grace,
his conformity to the will of God, his performance of the Word of the Lord, the
effects of the Spirit upon his heart; O none like his! Surely he had forgot
Solomon's counsel, Let a stranger praise thee. And did not that Pharisee write
by this copy, that said, Lord I thank thee, that I am not as that Publicane
is? etc.

And Iehu was a great Preacher too: whether he were in the field, or in the
palace, or in the gate of the city, he was always preaching, as the story
mentions: This is the word of the Lord; Remember what the Lord said etc. He
seemed as if he could speak no other language but the words of God.
Notwithstanding all this, he walked not in the law of the Lord with all his
heart.

Jehu's Hypocrisy.
Sixthly, Let us view him in his hypocrisy:

How close a hypocrite was this seeming-heavenly Iehu! Who could discern him to
be counterfeit, till he came to the touch? He had as fair an outside as ever
man had: yet he was as a whited sepulcher, full of dead men's bones within;
nothing but corruption and deceit lodging in his heart.

This man's hypocrisy appeared clearly, in his dealing with Baal and his
priests, playing the counterfeit and dissembler with them. Now what a case may
we think the poor people of God were in, in this time of temptation and
trouble? what could they do, but make their complaints to their all-seeing God
and Father, who they knew would hear their sighs and groans, Is not this the
case now disputed in these our dissembling times?
and give an answer full of grace and love? Well, but when he had discovered
himself but to dissemble with Baal and his Priests, and to mean otherwise then
he at that time pretended, how could he shift off the guilt of hypocrisy
before the people of God, who knew, by the experience they had of their own
hearts, that it could not stand with a sincere spirit, with Watermen to look
one way and row another? Why he had his Iehonadabs with him, that had a great
reputation and esteem, for their holiness and sanctity among the people, to
plead his cause, and tell them. His meaning and end was good, and that it was a
wise course; for by this means he prevented further opposition that in all
likelihood would be made, (for many of the people, without question, did cleave
to them; and he knew he should find it a more difficult thing to root out Baal
and his Priests, then Ahab's posterity. Superstition makes the heart more
stout, and sets upon more hazardous and desperate attempts, then love to a King
or Prince will) and so, in the quarrel, the blood of some others of the people
might be shed, which were not appointed to destruction. It Is a good and
commendable thing, to prevent shedding of innocent blood; and it is a course of
quick dispatch too, drawing them into a snare altogether, doing that at once,
which would otherwise take up a great deal of time, trouble and difficulty to
do; and so, in stead of furthering the work of God, prevent it, and make it
longer in the birth, by creating new troubles and new disturbances among the
people: and if there were a failing in the way to the accomplishing that good
end, why failings are incident to the best of men, and nothing can be expected
perfect here in this world, to come from men. Excellently pleaded, Iehonadab!
thou shall have two Crowns (or a flap with a Fox tail) when Iehu is settled in
his kingdom, for thy great and faithful services. Thus they skin over the sore,
that it appears not to every eye. Well, Iehu, but this will not serve thy turn;
thy hypocrisy will be made evident by and by, and God will discover thy
nakedness, and thou shall know what it is to sin against and provoke the God of
heaven and earth to great jealousy and wrath, who has done so much for thee,
and exalted thee from the dust, to govern his people.

A full discovery of this man's hypocrisy and apostatizing heart, we have in
the words we have chosen mainly to insist upon, and that by undeniable
demonstrations. When the peoples expectations were full and high, and there
wanted nothing but a command or license for their going up to Jerusalem to
worship; behold! the golden Calves stood in the way, and hindered.

Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin,
Jehu departed not from after them; to wit, the golden Calves that were in
Bethel, and that were in Dan.

But Jehu took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all
his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to
sin.

Poor Jehu could go no further: in stead of going to the true God, he runs to
his golden Calves, and takes up his resting place there: Why? because that
notwithstanding all his glorious outward appearance, he had not the root of the
matter in him; and his heart not being of a heavenly nature, what should he do
there, or in the ways that lead effectually to it? Therefore it was most
suitable to him, to abide here below, amidst the vanities of a depraved world.

Jeroboam's sins, that Jehu departed not from.
That so we may be acquainted with the mind of God in this Scripture, it is
necessary for us to enquire and consider,

First, What these sins of Jeroboam are, that Jehu departs not from.

Secondly, The aggravations of this man's sins beyond those that went before him.

Thirdly, The reason why Jeroboam, and this Jehu, would not depart from their
sin.

For the first, What those sins of Jeroboam are, that Jehu answered not the
expectation of God in departing from.

We shall consider them, 1. More generally. 2. More particularly.


First, more generally, which relate to Jehu more particularly then to Jeroboam.

^s not this sin ^ritten in large ^haracters in ^ur foreheads?
1. Cleaving to the sins of his forefathers: He departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat: yea, though they were such as became national sins
through their imposition upon the people, yet from them he would not turn; and
this became a sin etc. because his predecessor Jeroboam had set up Political
bounds of his kingdom, beyond which the people should not go, to worship at
Jerusalem, that so he might secure the kingdom to himself; and because there
was so much reason of State for it, therefore he would run the hazard of the
hot displeasure and wrath of God against him, rather then venture the loss of
his kingdom in his carnal and unbelieving apprehensions. Says he, If the
Calves be taken away, those ancient Political bounds and fortresses of the
kingdom, then shall the kingdom return to the house of David: and I, what shall
I do? How then shall I reap the fruit of my labors and enjoy the purchase of
my hardships and dangers that I have run into, and blood that I have shed? No,
all will be lost, if once I go over this bank, and pull down this hedge.

Indeed, Iehu went as far as can be expected for a hypocrite to do: he went to
the very borders of heaven; there was but one thing wanting: he could not
overcome his worldly interest, and live by faith upon God for the disposal of
that; and so he made this world his god: all that provoked God should go down,
but that: Baasha's and Ahab's sins too; but when once Ieroboam's sin came to be
meddled with that touched him to the quick; it was of so near concernment (as he
thought) to his kingdom. Do any thing but that: I would please God, and do his
will; but I must not lose my kingdom: My outward worldly interest is very dear
to me; I pray spare that. Unbelief will carry a man, though he be never so
outwardly glorious in profession, to the greatest precipices of apostatizing
danger.

And is not this the very picture of our times? How zealous were we many years
for God! and pulled down all before us that stood in our way: we pulled down
and utterly destroyed Ahab and his whole house and left none remaining: but now
we are gotten to the Calves and alas, they are golden ones, have a great deal
of good (gold) in them; it is pity to destroy them. We pulled down King, and
House of Lords, yea, and Commons too; and pulled down many gross Tyrannies in
Worship and Commonwealth: yet now, how is our heat and zeal cooled, with
Iehu's! We can go no further; Oh if we do, we shall bring all things into
confusion: we say, The kingdom will be lost presently. And I could wish this
gall of bitterness were not at the bottom of many glorious professors hearts,
saying Lest the son of David come to reign over us. The sins of the generation
before us we explode; but the old sins of the Ancients, ( Ieroboam's sins)
those inventions they made to maintain their kingdom those foundations that
they laid for their children to build upon, (and which were so notably built
upon, as, had not an Almighty providence prevented, the seed of the Serpent had
utterly destroyed and devoured the seed of the woman in our Land) these are the
darlings; these would some in our days have pulled up by the roots, and so have
made thorow-work of it: but they are not permitted, and that upon strong
reasons of State too: You will then bring all into confusion presently: we must
go prudently and wisely to work, and do things more gradually, otherwise we
shall lose all. If you pull up the foundation, will not the building
necessarily fall to pieces? But does not this dilemma say, You would not have
the son of David to reign?

And is not this ^ur darling?
Secondly, Iehu's sin was cleaving to rules of State-policie; and he obeyed not
the mind and will of God in his present generation. It was policy of State
that set up those golden Calves, to secure the kingdom: and he made it appear
it was his opinion, That all the Laws of God and men were to stoop to Reason of
State, and that Princes have a latitude beyond all men, (given them by God)
that (as gods) they may (by the implicit Laws of their own breast) do their
will and pleasure; and although they break all the Laws of God and Nature, yet
they are righteous still: And why? Why, forsooth, they will tell you it is
reason of State, to prevent an extraordinary unpresidented evil that hangs over
our heads, ready to fall upon us: and such must have extraordinary and unusual
remedies, otherwise the Ant will be too hard for the Lion, and his power,
majesty, and great glory, will be tumbled into the dust.

But what became of all this policy? what was the fruit of it? why it brought
ruin upon him and his house, as the story evidences. He that seeks his life,
shall lose it: by the very same evil ways that men take to secure themselves in
their state, their ruin shall inevitably come; all their craft and cunning
shall not be able to prevent it. Iehu kept his kingdom for a while; but he was
not beholden one jot to his wicked policy for it, but to the abundant mercy of
God, who would not let him go unrewarded for his so great service, in
destroying the house of Ahab, and Baal out of Israel: Because thou have done
that which is right in mine eyes, etc. he should have the kingdom to the fourth
generation, a little while: and what comes then? nothing but utter ruin and
destruction. And the Lord said unto him, Hos. 1.4.
Call his name Jezreel: for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of
Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.

Consider this, O England's Princes, and tremble, lest God make you a byword
and a hissing to the Nations round about you. State-policie, reason of State,
ruined this (when time was) Saint-like Iehu. Give God your whole hearts, and he
will give you the whole possessions of the Lord Jesus, purchased by his blood.
But,

Secondly, more particularly to set down what those sins of Jeroboam are, that
Iehu would not depart from. We have a full description of them, in 1 King. 12.
verse. 28. to the end of the Chapter: and they were,

First, Idolatry; withdrawing the people from the true God, telling them that
the golden calves were their Gods that brought them out of the land of Egypt.
Secondly, Putting the true Priests from their service, and making Priests or
Ministers of the lowest of the people. Thirdly, Devising a new worship for
these calves, their golden Gods.

For the first, IDOLATRY; A sin so provoking unto God, as that it had cost the
Israelites their utter ruin at their first commission of it, had they not had
a faithful Mediator to plead their cause with God, Exodus 32.10, 11. a sin that
deprived them of the presence of God, Exodus 33.3. a sin against which there is
so much wrath of God pronounced by all the Prophets, and of which God had much
complained how it grieved his holy Spirit, and provoked him to anger; yet
nothing would warn Jeroboam nor Jehu, but for the love of this world, the
honors and vanities thereof, they would stick by it, and no persuasion would
move them to depart from it: Behold says Jeroboam, thy Gods, O Israel, etc. as
if he had said (and Jehu's actions spoke the same language) these Calves had
wrought those wonderful revolutions as had then happened to Israel; that there
was no more of a deity manifested in them then was in these calves: a profane
speech making it evident, Ieroboam's God was the God of this world; the Devil
having shown him the glory of this world he falls down and worships him, that
so it may be his portion to enjoy it: thus Jeroboam and so Iehu drew the people
from their God, by preaching to them (when their expectations were raised high
and great after their going up to Jerusalem to worship, and that upon
apprehensions of an Almighty and extraordinary providence of God, bringing
things so marvelously about and giving such extraordinary success to their
proceedings) that this apprehension of theirs was but a fancy; as great things
had been done for and by others as these, and as great revolutions had been
made in the world in times of old, and yet all things remain as you see, as at
the beginning; and by suchlike Arguments as these, persuade the people from
their belief of the Omnipotency and faithfulness of God in performing his
promises, and so bring them by this means to submit to their innovations and
usurpations, being thus blinded, not being able to see by faith God's making
bare his arm, bending his bow, sharpening his arrows, and whetting his sword to
fulfill his promises made to his chosen ones: And surely, it is too too evident,
that we are (after these men's example) running to our old Idolatry, only new
gilded over with specious pretenses, and under another form; the serpent the
old dragon having furnished us with a new mold to cast our Image in, and
helping us by his wisdom to bring our old calves into the new fashion: If we
have done all that God has commanded, what means this bleating of the sheep,
and lowing of the oxen? no: but in stead of pulling down and taking away the
remainders of Idolatry, we are setting up new Idols under other and more
specious pretenses: every way of our own invention, though it be never so good
in it self, to never so righteous an end, yet if it be not of Gods appointment,
it is Idolatry, it is superstition, will worship, and it may justly be asked, Who
required this at your hands? surely God did not, but your Idolatrous calvish
hearts, that are full of many inventions.

Secondly, Taking away the true Ministers of God in his worship, and making
other Priests of the lowest of the people; this was another of Jeroboams
heinous sins, that Jehu departed not from: having taken away the worship of
God, he takes away his Ministers too: he puts the Levites away from performing
that service God had appointed them to in his worship; and having instituted a
new worship of his own devising, he constitutes new Ministers and Priests to
serve in that worship.

Quest. If it be asked, How I can say this is a resemblance of our times?
surely we have learned and high-minded Ministers, that mind high things;

Answ. If ever there were a time wherein the lowest of the people were made
Ministers in the worship of God, it is now. I confess it (and that with joy)
there are many (considered by themselves) precious holy servants of the Lord,
true Ministers of the Gospel in this our Nation of England; but by that time
these great Kings, whoredom, drunkenness, swearing, lying, covetousness
(eating the poors bread) ignorance and pride, have ranged their subjects under
their banners from among the Ministers of England, the remaining number will be
so few, that (I fear) God will hardly have his Tithe duly set out: and if
these be not of the lowest of the people, I know not who are. The truth of
these things is so obvious to every man, that I suppose it is not required of me
to prove this great charge.

Thirdly, Another of Jeroboams sins, that Iehu would not depart from, was, his
devising new ways of worship; and that as like the true worship of God, as his
received worldly principles and interest would permit him, whereby to take the
hearts of the people, and draw them after him the more. Though he would have a
worship as like Gods worship as possible might be, yet Gods worship he would
not have, because he thought it contrary to his worldly interest: O, says he,
now shall the kingdom return to the house of David: if this people go up to do
sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the hearts of this
people return again unto their King even unto Rehoboam, and they shall kill me:
But, says Jeroboam, I will prevent that by my wisdom and policy, I will have
new Gods, and new Worship, and new Priests, and suffer not the people to go up
to Jerusalem to worship. If the peoples worshipping the true God according to
his own appointments, will in his apprehension hinder his enjoyment of his
outward worldly interest, then farewell Priests, worship, and God too; I will
find out new ways of my own devising, that shall be as bulwarks to secure my
state, and compel the people to walk in them; and if any dare rebuke my doings,
I Will venture the withering of mine arm by stretching it out against them. But
stay, for all your hasty fury, you may be glad to beg the Prophets prayers on
your behalf for mercy.

Something appears like this now in our days and it is to be feared more will
follow: this I am sure of, the people of God had gone a great way further then
they have in destroying the remainders of Babylon and Antichrist among us, and
had ere this time taken away the ancient political bounds that hindered the
people from going up to Jerusalem to worship, had not something hindered.
Cursed be those Achitophels, whose pernicious counsels have hindered the Son of
David from reigning; but this is our comfort, that whosoever they be, they
shall but hinder for a season; when the appointed time comes, will they, nill
they, they shall be removed, and Christ will take to himself his great power,
and reign in the midst of his people. But

Aggravations of Jehu's sin.
Secondly, consider the aggravations of this man's ( Iehu's) sin beyond those
that went before him: they are great and many.

1. Iehu had the example of the wrath of God upon three Kings before him, for
the same sins. Jeroboam first committed this sin, but had no presidents of the
warth of God to scare him: it is true, he had presidents good and many of the
wrath of God upon Idolaters; but the temptation under which he lay, the fear of
losing his Kingdom, made him to think that good and righteous end of securing
his Kingdom and making good the word of the Lord in establishing it to himself
would bear him out. But Iehu had no excuse at all, but the perverse unbelief of
his own hard heart, and the wicked tendency of his soul; for he saw that
notwithstanding the plausible (and in some measure righteous) pretense of
Jeroboam, the wrath of God consumed him and his house; he had the presidents of
the wrath of God upon Jeroboam the inventer, and Baasha the follower of these
sins, in such a terrible manner, as to cut them off from the face of the earth:
and he executes the severe vengeance of God upon the head of a third
transgressor of the same kind; and yet to provoke this jealous God to more and
greater wrath, who but a Iehu, a heart hardened by love and mercy, could or
durst do it?

Alas, how little does the bypast judgments of God move our hard and flinty
hearts in these our days! although the generation before us, (fresh in memory)
God has made them as dung upon the face of the earth, and scattered them that
they are not found, and brought them to nothing; yet we will not be warned, but
we have made that which was but as a mote in their eye, a beam in our own; we
have gotten into their places, and are fallen to commit adultery with their
sins; and we will not depart from those sins that have made God so terrible to
them and to do such wonders in our days, to the dying his garments red in
blood. Who durst do thus but those whose hearts are made fat, eyes blind, and
ears deaf, and that by mercy? as if indeed we were a people fatted for
slaughter, and prepared for utter destruction.

2. Another aggravation of this sin, was this he had an enlightened conscience:
so much light, as that he could bring the word of God to confirm every action
of his. And certainly he knew much of the mind of God, he was much acquainted
both with the promises and prophesies of God to and concerning his people, as
the story throughout sufficiently evidences; he had so much light and knowledge
that God did justly expect he should walk in his law with all his heart, verse.
31. (but his heart, his heart was faulty; O that little thing within us, has
more deceit in it, then a whole world of other creatures have) his light
enabled him to make the most glorious profession that ever any King of Israel
did (that we read of) since Solomon's days; his light made him bold,
courageous, and full of outward zeal; yet against all this he sins: when so
much of the work was done, as that he could sit down and taste the sweetness of
present enjoyments, though mutable and earthly; his heart waxes fat presently,
and could go no further; his light goes out, and he becomes blind at noonday:
the sight of the glory of an earthly kingdom (though none had more experience
of the uncertainty, vanity and vexation of spirit, that the greatest glories
here below yield; yet that) takes him, and he is overcome and besotted so, as
that he cannot stir one foot from it; his heart is glued to it, and he commits
Idolatry, worships the devil, that he may enjoy it: all his work now is to
endeavor to maintain what he has got. But Iehu, it is but for a little while
thou can keep it. Here he takes up his abiding place, and gives all to
understand he can live by faith no longer, he must now live by sense. How many
of such Jehu's have we in these our days? rather then the loss of their mammon
(their belly-gods) shall be hazarded by Christ's reigning over his people in the
world, they will fight with sword and buckler against him, and do what in them
lies to hinder him. Those that have formerly preached up the kingdom of Christ,
sounded the alarms to prepare for his coming, having now joined themselves to
the powers of this world turn their note, and begin to tell another tale;
Witness the letter sent to the Norfolk-Ministers.
headily and injuriously charging the people of God with things that are not
true, falsities; but their folly shall be made manifest to all men.

3. Another aggravation of Iehu's sin is this. That he had commission given him
from God and his people to execute the vengeance of God upon Ahab and Iezebel
for the very same sins that he now commits himself; only he keeps from he more
gross sins, as the worshipping Baal, and the like. For one man to execute the
judgments of God (written) upon another man, for breaking the Laws of God and
men, and then to do the same things himself, it is most heinous. Hosea 1.4.
Surely in the end there will be found an instrument to execute the same
vengeance upon thy head. O Iehu which thou have executed upon others, though
judgment linger out of mercy for a little while, to the fourth generation.
It Is evident, how guilty we are of the same sins our forefathers were; yea,
those very abominations for which God has cast out (and caused the Land to
spue out) that generation of men before us, are to be found rise amongst us;
worshipping the Mammon of this world, Pluralities Non-residents etc. with this
addition. The forsaking the Churches of Christ, and cleaving to this present
evil world, for filthy lucre's sake: Innovations both in State and in the
Worship of God; or, if you will, something like that course Jeroboam took to
establish the Kingdom to himself, is now taken in the things of a spiritual
concernment: what means else this new invention of Tryers? an Innovation, a
thing never heard of before, that men must have a Commission from humane hands,
upon a humane account, to preach the Gospel, or else no Wages. Is not this like
the proceedings of the Beast, (Antichrist) that would not suffer any to buy or
sell, but such as had his mark? Consider, I pray, how near this comes to
Antichrist's making merchandise of souls. Let our Jehu's look to it; God will
remember them in the day of his accounts, when he makes enquiry for blood; and
out of their own mouth they shall be condemned, in that they have condemned and
executed the judgments written against others, and committed folly with the
same sins themselves.

4. Another Aggravation of Iehu's sin lies in this, in that God did honor him
with that special anointing, by a special messenger, as he did none of the
Kings of Israel beside since Solomon's days; no, not Jeroboam. Indeed God sent
a messenger to Jeroboam, to tell him what he would do for him; but he was not
anointed, as Iehu was. One Tyrant slew another, and usurped the Kingdom to
themselves; but none was anointed but Iehu: he was anointed to do the Lords
work; yet, against this Anointing against this special testimony of God, did
Iehu sin. O ungrateful Iehu! But God will reward thee according to thy works.

Can we shift this Aggravation also off from our selves? What Anointings has
God anointed us with! What special and signal Testimonies has he given, of his
being with us, giving us Commission to do his work, and being well pleased with
us for obeying his voice? witness Naseby, Dunbar and Worcester, besides many
other. Read over the Story of our times, and see if ever God dealt so
signally-graciously with any people since Israel's time. Yet, against all this
do we sin: for the present, our hearts like the stony ground, received them
with joy; and how full of resolutions were we to do for God, and to the
glorifying of his Name, by following him fully whithersoever he would lead us;
but lo, how soon are we turned out of the way? we are sitting still, building
cieled houses for our selves, and making, sure the kingdom, that it return not
from us to the Son of David, though God has said, that though the heathen rag,
and the people imagine a vain thing and Kings and Rulers take counsel together
against his anointed, laughing them to scorn, and having them in derision, he
will yet set his King upon his holy hill of Sin on, and give him the utmost
ends of the earth for his possession: O kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish in the way when his wrath is kindled but a little. If a little wrath
will perish you, what ruin will that great wrath which you deserve bring
speedily upon you, if you prevent it not by a timely repentance?

5. A fifth aggravation of Jehu's sin was this: He was anointed King of the
people of the Lord. This people were the Lords people, and he was their God;
and God set this Iehu ruler over this his people. If they be the Lords people,
and the Lord be their God, then he only must he worshipped, and served, and
feared by them; they must bow down to no other Gods but him; they must serve
him in his own appointments, not by any inventions of their own; they must
worship him in the place where he will be worshipped, not upon the Altars of
men's devising at Dan and Bethel: If the people of the Lord, they must walk in
the Lords Ways, obey his Laws, Precepts and Commands, and no other. All this,
and much more, is intimated in these words, The people of the Lord. And this
manner of expression of the Prophet to Jehu, did intimate to him, that God did
expect that he should lead the people on to the performing of all this. God had
made him the leader of his chosen ones, and now he expected that he should lead
them in the ways God had chosen to communicate himself in.

Quest. Now, what benefit is this to Jehu to be King over the people of the
Lord, more then over any other people?

Answ. Truly it is a very great benefit: for,

1. He was in a very fair way to the fullest enjoyment of God (attainable) on
this side heaven, in his own appointments, his Ordidances; for being made ruler
over the Lords people, had he made Solomon's prayer, he should have had Solomon's
return and had been a ruler after Gods own heart as David was, and so have been
made partaker of David's full enjoyments of God in his Ordinances: But,

2. To be a ruler over the Lords people, it is of great advantage; for what was
he not able to do by their mighty power and force in faith and prayer? If we
look into the Scripture, and see what wonderful things have been done by the
faith and prayers of the Lords people, we cannot but say of a truth, Iehu had
as great an advantage to become a second Solomon for wisdom; (not State Policy)
a second David for valor and might in conquering enemies, as ever man had.
It Is more to be ruler over the Lords people, then to be Emperor of the whole
world besides: to be ruler over the Lords people, that have the mighty and
faithful God so nearly and strongly tied and bound to them, by so many, great,
irrevocable and infallible promises, as he has made to them in his word, and
has so often sworn the certainty and truth of them with the highest and
greatest oath: a people that have done (and are still able to do) such mighty
and wonderful things by faith and prayer, yea, had done such great wonders
before this Iehu's eyes: witness the acts of Elijah. Elisha, and many other of
the Lords Prophets in those days; to be ruler over such a people, what greater
thing could be done for a man on earth? what greater advantage over the world
could be given to him?

Yet against all this Jehu sins: though God made him ruler over his people, to
these and these ends and purposes, and thereby gives him so many and great
advantages, yet he steers a contrary course: in stead of leading the people to
Jerusalem to worship, he leads them to his calves at Dan and Bethel; instead of
pulling down all those inventions of their own, which provoked God to so great
wrath, he pulls down only those new and more gross inventions, which he could
with no credit, nor any the least shadow of conscience keep up: but the old,
ancient, fundamental bounds and limits of an Idolatrous kingdom, ( Jeroboam's
sins) they must stand still, and keep the people of God from going up to
Jerusalem to worship, from behaving themselves like the Lords people, when God
had carried himself so like a gracious God toward them; they must stand still,
for the same reason and upon the same account they were first invented.

All that God had done for Jehu, did not convince his dark mind, nor his hard
Idolatrous heart, of the folly of those things, and the reason on which they
were founded; nor of the equity safety, happiness, honor and glory, that there
was in (and to be found in) obeying the will of the Lord in leading his people
up to Jerusalem to worship, in Gods own appointments.

Now truly we need not Diogenes lantern and candle to find out that man, whom
God has made taller by the head and shoulders, then the rest of his brethren,
and made leader of his people in this our day; who has led the people of the
Lord on prosperously to the destruction of our Ahabs, etc. on whom the eyes of
the Lords people have been fixed, even to high and great expectations of the
performance of many vows and promises: and when we have found him, shall we not
see him taking up his station among the calves, those ancient inventions (that
our Forefathers found out to maintain an Idolatrous-kingdom) and making them
his own? and if so, will he not make that great wrath and punishment God has
so often entailed upon them, his own too? shall we not behold him leading the
people back again into those ways, to redeem his people out of which God has
made bare such a mighty arm of power and providence? and it is my prayer, that
our eager marching back toward Egypt may not hurry us to the brink of the
red sea, ere we make a stand.

A sixth aggravation of Jehu's sin was, His deceiving Gods expectations: But
Jehu took no heed to walk in the way of the Lord God of Israel with all his
heart. Says God, I have done thus and thus for Jehu, anointed him King over
Israel, honored him in executing my judgments upon mine enemies by him: and
because he has done all that was in my heart against the house of Ahab, mine,
and my peoples enemies; I have given him the kingdom, and now I expected he
should have brought forth fruit answerable to my kindness with all his heart:
But Jehu took no heed to that. Will not the loving kindness of thy God work
upon thee, O Jehu? what will then? Love in its effects is like the Sun, it
either softens or hardens; one of these two are the inseparable effects of its
influences. Whether will thou be hardened with Pharaoh, and drowned in the
Red Sea, or softened with Hezekiah, and have thy days prolonged? can thou
remember the goodness of God to thee, and bring forth no hearty fruit
answerable to his expectations, but deceive him totally? Well, Jehu, thou will
repent of this when it is too late, I fear.

How have we in our days been guilty of this deceiving the expectations of our
God, in not (in any measure) answering the mercies of our God? What returns
have we made to him for his mercy at Naseby, Dunbar, Worcester, and many other
places? Yea, such is the deceit and hypocrisy of our hearts, that we cannot
tell how to perform those LITTLE VOWS that the glory of those mercies extorted
from us in the present ravishment of our hearts with their glorious beauty. The

Seventh and last aggravation of Jehu's sin is necessarily implied in the
words, that it was against all the faith and prayers of the people of God. Can
it be supposed that such a man as Jehu was, so full of holy profession, so
outwardly zealous for God and the performance of his word, who would not have
one tittle of it fall to the ground; should not such a man as this have a
large-share in the hearts of Gods people, and so in their faith and prayer? and
yet to deceive them, and sin against these! What mighty sins were these sins of
Jehu's, guilty of such aggravations? surely the sins of Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, were but Pigmies to these Giants: if their sins opened the earth to the
swallowing them up alive; certainly the head of these reach heaven it self, and
cry aloud for veangeance and wrath.

And may not our Jehu's cry guilty here too? what faith, what confidence of
Gods performing his promises now to the latter ages of the world; what a spirit
of prayer has been amongst the people of God in these days, by beholding the
glorious outgoings of God in his providence, and his beginning to execute his
wrath upon Babylon the kingdom of the Beast? and have not you sinned against
these? consider it: have not you frustated and deceived the expectations of the
people of God? You by your professions have encouraged and perhaps raised their
expectations one peg higher then it may be otherwise they would have been; and
their hearts have been full of faith and prayer for you: upon the least motion
of yours to them to use their interest with their Father on your behalf, How
have their hearts been all of a flame presently? and the fire that issued out
of their mouth has consumed your enemies; yet against all this you have
sinned. As much as in you lies, you endeavor to smother and stifle the work of
that good Spirit by your sitting still and putting a stop to the work of God in
this our day: when they would have pulled up the ancient bounds of Antichrist,
both in his spiritual and civil state among us, you will not suffer them, but
the golden Calves must stand still, and that upon this account, lest the
kingdom depart from you; which you call (forsooth) a preventing all things
running into an abyss of confusion: sure I am, nothing would have been
confounded thereby, but the kingdom of Antichrist: but which is most true, will
appear ere long, when God shall come down to see whether indeed it be so with
you, as your sins report in heaven. But a

The reason why Jeroboam and Jehu would apostatize.
Third thing worthy your consideration, is, The reason why Jeroboam and Iehu
would not depart from their sins, their own inventions. Why truly all the
reason they can give, is this, Now the kingdom shall return to the house of
David, and the son of David; and this course they ran to prevent it, to make
the kingdom sure to themselves, that it return not from them. They had earthly
hearts, and so this earthen world, and the glory of it, was their God: their
fear of losing it, drove them into these irregularities and transgressions;
their love to this present world, and its fading glory, would not suffer them
to run but a seeming hazard of the loss of their kingdom, though such a hazard
was the certain way to the enjoyment of a better; yea, of the same in a better
and more certain surer way: for had they depended upon God by faith, he would
have established them for ever, according to his promise; they had God by his
promise engaged for their safe and sure enjoyment of their kingdom: but now
they forsaking that, thinking to make all fast and sure, lose all; according to
the saying of Christ, He that seeks his life shall lose it. What came of it?
what was Jeroboam or Iehu beholding to their policy for, more then their ruin?

Now the kingdom shall return to the house of David. They could look no further
then to what was present before their eyes of sense; faith was not to them the
evidence of things not seen, nor the substance of things hoped for: their
inordinate affection to the vain honors and glories of this world, brought
fears upon their hearts of being deprived of their Dalilah's; these fears
stupefied their understandings, blinded their eyes, that they ran into ways of
darkness, undermined themselves, and yet think themselves the wisest men under
the Sun, in making all as sure as it is possible for mortal man to do, against
the invasions of the Son of David: but what follows? THEIR RVINE, and that from
a hand, and by a way, which they little dreamed of; they had forgot there was a
God that sat in heaven and laughed them to scorn, and had them in derision,
and would call them to an account for their doings; but at last they felt his
power and wrath to their shame and confusion.

It argues unbelief (in the highest) of the faithfulness of God in the
performing of his promises: for says God, If thou will hearken and do all that
I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to
keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did, I will be with
thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David and give Israel unto
thee, 1 Kings 11.38. But they durst not (their unbelief was such) trust the
promise of a God, who was able to do whatever he pleased, which great power of
his they had evident, lively, pregnant examples of, before their eyes; but must
go to their State Policy, ways of their own devising. But did it not appear
their foundation was a sandy foundation? and when the storm came their fall was
very great.

Now the kingdom shall return to the Son of David: This is a very slender
account, or reason of thy deviations, (o Iehu) shall the fears of thy
unbelieving heart, of thy losing thy kingdom, thy outward cocernments that thou
art so much in love with; shall the fear of losing these, turn thee from God,
seeing God has made such a full promise, that if thou will do as David did, he
will build thee as sure a house as David had, the sure mercies of David should
be thy portion? is it possible that thou could conceive when thou art in thy
right understanding, that this account will carry thee out, and keep thee from
suffering loss and punishment in the great day of accounts, in the day of the
recompenses of Sion, when God shall judge thee?

Now shall the kingdom return to the house of David. Why? if the people go up
to Jerusalem to worship: if we prevent it not by our policy, and some wise
course; yea, by these courses we now resove upon; it will return to the house
of David. They thought by their own devisings to secure themselves in their
kingdom: but what followed? their ruin. They had a double evidence of the
certainty and sureness of the foundation God had set them on, as to their
outward concernments, their kingdom.

First, Gods justice upon the house of David for their sin: God sent his
Prophet, and makes known his decree, That for the sins of the house of David,
he would take ten parts of the kingdom from him, and give it to another, even
to Jeroboam. Here was evidence, an unalterable decree of God. A

Second evidence was this, The free and rich promise of God, mentioned even
now, yet neither of these would work on them to believe God and trust in him;
but they had their Calves ways of their own devising reason of State and
worldly-policy to secure them; and behold what came of it, TERRIBLE RV^NE.

Here is all the Reason they could give, as if this were the masterpiece of
their State Policy, That a Prince or Ruler must of necessity commit sin (the
greatest sin) or he cannot be secure in his State or Kingdom: Jeroboam must set
up Calves, and commit Idolatry, and forsake the true God otherwise he will not
sit safely and quietly in his throne. This is pure wisdom indeed. Yet such as
this, is the reason of State which is the King that rules all the Princes of
this world, the Idol which they fall down to and worship; it hurries them on,
and necessitates them to the commission of such things, as are abominable to
the least spark of honesty.

Application of this reason to our times.
Consider with your selves, I pray, you the Jehu's of our age; can you give a
better account then your great Grandfather Iehu has done before you? (for the
same reason of State that ruled him, rules you) surely your consciences upon a
strict examination will tell you, No: you may be more skilful in palliating
your sin, then he was; and have more cunning deceitful shifts, then he had to
blind the eyes of your own consciences, and others: you may have more specious
pretenses and cloaks for your sin, then he had; By how much the times and the
work of the times may afford you more matter to plead upon, and by how much
Satan your counselor has gotten more experience, and perhaps has found out
more wiles now, then he had then, and so may furnish you with three or four
shafts more in your quiver, then Iehu had. But in the end it amounts to one and
the same account, Lest the Son of David should reign: the fear of losing your
outward glory and kingdom, keeps you from submitting to the Son of David, to
his Scepter and command: the unbelief of your hearts, and your love to this
present evil world, will not suffer you to hazard (in Gods own way) the loss of
your outward concernments and kingdom for Christ's (the Son of David's) sake;
lest while you are doing Christ service, you lose your darlings; yea, that fear
hurries you on to the committing the worst of follies and vanities, provoking
him to the greatest anger.

And is it so? then take warning, Make your peace with him; while it is to day,
hearken to his voice, lest his anger be kindled, and when he comes he consume
you in his hot displeasure. Hear what he says, Bring hither those mine
enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, and I will slay them. I
tell you, The wrath of his kingdom, or the wrath he will manifest against his
enemies when he goes up to his kingdom, will be by many degrees more dreadful,
then the wrath he has manifested at any other time, or upon any other occasion.

You say indeed, You would have him reign and be King, you are for his kingdom
as much as any; but the time is not yet, Ezekiel. 12.27, 28. compare with 2 Pet. 3.
it is a great way off the vision is for many days: but hear what the Lord of
Hosts says to such Pleas as these are: Behold, they of the house of Israel
say, The vision that he sees is for many days to come, and he prophesies of
the times that are afar off: thus says the Lord God, There shall none of my
words be prolonged any more; but THE WORD WHICH I HAVE SPOKEN SHALL BE DONE,
SAYS THE LORD GOD.

Alas poor hearts! you are either afraid of rendering up an account too soon,
lest you be found light in the balance; or your hearts cleave so close to this
present world, that you are loath to leave these vanities yet; you would have a
little more sport with them: A little more sleep, a little more folding of the
hands, says the sluggard; or you are afraid lest you have not yet gotten the
wedding garment on, and so would fain have him stay long, that you may have
time enough to procure it because you apprehend it hard and difficult to come
by: if this be it, why go to Christ; you will find him a willing Savior, his
heart open to receive you, Ask and you shall have, knock and it shall be opened
to you, seek and you shall find; whosoever comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out, says Christ: or, is it because your conscience smites you, and tells you,
You are of the left handed companions of Christ, that must go into utter
darkness where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? Though you care
not much for Heaven, yet you would keep as long out of hell as you can; and
therefore put the evil day far from you, the day that will bring evil to you
though joy and glory to the Saints and people of God: if so, The Lord will come
in a time when you expect him not, Mat. 24.50, 51.
in a day when you look not for him, before you are aware, and cut you asunder
and appoint you your portion with the hypocrites.

You say indeed You are for Christ's kingdom, and that you long for it as much
as any; but his kingdom is within, in the heart in the inward man; not in the
outward man, over the world; of a spiritual nature, not of this world. Kind
subjects! you will divide the kingdom between your selves and your Sovereign;
but you have so much self-love, as to keep the greatest part for your own
share. If he rule not over the world, How can he have the utmost ends of the
earth for his possession, according to the promise of the Father? How shall the
Saints judge the world? ^f they believe ^he kingdom of Christ is only ^hus
spiritual in their sense, that is the reason the Jehona^bs of our time ^o not
keep to their place and ^ffice, in the ^uilding up of ^is kingdom; ^ut seek so
^uch after the ^u^t, and out^ard glory, and ^ammon of this ^orld? surely ^ey
either ^e^eve not what ^ey say, or their ^earts care not ^or, what they ^elieve
is the ^reatest happi^ess.
If he rule not over the world, methinks that would be an impertinent
expression, viz. When he shall surrender up the kingdom to his Father; can this
kingdom be only that over the heart? How can he give his people to possess the
gates of their enemies? How can he deliver them out of the hands of all the
enemies of their salvation? How can he give the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven to his people? If he rule not
over the world as King. How can he give his people the possession of the
promised land? (performing all the promises to them) for, that is such a gift
as he cannot fully give them till he is a King, and has received the kingdom
prepared for him, and promised to him by his Father, Then shall his people
behold him in his glory, and the day of his power shall seize upon them, and
make them as the chariots of Aminadab. Much more might be said in answer to
these Pleas, and to prove (and that without contradiction) that Christ has a
kingdom to enjoy over this world, and that he will reign amidst and among his
people, and in that over the world; when not a dog shall dare to bark or wag
his tail against any servant of the Lord. But I suppose I have said sufficient
for this place, and refer you to those elaborate discourses that are already
sent forth into the world on this subject: but thus much give me leave to say,
That it is too much to be feared, that the Pleas of these men against the
kingdom of Christ over the world, arise from their so much love of the world,
as they care not who gets the heart of man so they may have the world, and the
dominion thereof to themselves; disturb not them in the enjoyment of their
mammon and outward glory, and they care not who rules the heart, whether God or
the devil. This might be evidently demonstrated; but it is too too irksome to me
to rake into their rottenness.

But for a parting word know, that this kingdom of Christ over the world, is a
spiritual kingdom; so spiritual, as that it is apparent you are not acquainted
with it; and through your unbelief, though some of you may live to behold it,
yet you shall not taste the sweetness of it.

Now O (...) England (...) commune with your own hearts, bring them before the
judgment seat, and examine whether you are guilty or not; ask your
consciences, and if they be not feared they will tell you the truth of the
matter. Have not you gone a whoring after the sins of your Forefathers,
committed adultery with those State-policies, those inventions of their own,
which brought ruin upon them, and so have wrought folly in Israel? Have you
not withdrawn the peoples hearts from the Lord by your personal deviations from
that good profession you once made, by turning the wheel back again, and
unraveling that bottom which you have been winding up so many years, and many
other ways? Do you not endeavor to stifle the word of the Lord in the mouth
of the Prophets spoken to you in this your day? Are you not making new Priests
to serve your own turns, that will do your drudgery, serve your interests in
stead of the interest of the Lord Christ even men of the lowest of the people,
men of the most servile, base, serpentine nature, that will turn and wind
through the most Meandrous paths of darkness, to accomplish their ends, the
enjoyment of their earthly dunghil-mammon. (This I speak not of all: I say, God
fordid there should be this spirit in all the Ministers; no, there is some wheat
(good corn) amongst this great deal of chaff.) And God and your own hearts are
only able to tell you whether you intend to impose new devisings of your own,
in matters of the worship of God, upon the people of God. This is evident, that
you endeavor to keep up as much of the old, decayed, deformed, withered
worship, as with any credit you can. Yea, all these and other of your sins are
guilty of many high and great aggravations. Are there not such dreadful
circumstances accompanying your abominations, as raise their cry up to Heaven?
if your repentance prevent not provoked vengeance seizing upon you, will let
you know it to your cost. You have had many examples before your eyes of the
wrath of God sweeping away the generation before you for those sins, which now
you have made your own. Yea, have not you your selves executed the judgments
written against those very sins that now you make your darlings? Have you not
had the special Testimonies of God going along with you while ye were doing his
work; yea, to the filling of your hearts with a present joy? but you have
stony-hearts, and will sin still. Have you not deceived the just expectations
of your God? and lastly, Have you not had the faith and prayers of Gods people
going along with you to strengthen you in Gods work? yet against all this you
have sinned. And what reason can you give for these your whoredoms? God knows,
as wretched a foolish reason as ever poor soul (...) reign, lest the kingdom
return to the house of David. Can you give no other reason? No truly you
cannot; all your other Pleas are but sprigs that spring from this root; this is
the totum of all, Lest the Son of David should reign. Is it possible for you to
think this will bear you harmless in the day of Gods wrath? will this quit you
in the day of your accounts, and discharge you in the day of Gods judgments?
no, you will be found guilty; yea, you are found guilty already: and though in
mercy, the long sufferance and forbearance of God may be toward you for a
little season; yet you will know to your smart, though God has (if I may with
reverence use that similitude) woollen feet, he has leaden hands. Hearken to
your judgment and doom written of old, that has brought to the dust so many
mighty ones of the earth, for committing the same sins you have done, though
far less aggravated.

Jer. 4.19, 20, 30.
My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a noise in
me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of
the trumpet, the alarm of war: destruction upon destruction is cried; for the
whole land is spoiled: suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a
moment. And when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? though thou clothest thy
self with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou
rentest thy face with painting; in vain shall thou make thy self fair, thy
lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.

Isai. 1.4.
Ah sinful nation! a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children
that are corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy
one of Israel to anger, they are gone away backward.

Your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, Jer. 6.20, 21.
nor your sacrifices sweet unto me. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I
will lay stumbling blocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons
together shall fall upon them; the neighbor and his friend shall perish.

For the Pastors are become brutish, chapter 10.21.
and have not sought the Lord; therefore they shall not prosper, and all their
flocks shall be scattered.

Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people err, that
bite with their teeth, Mic. 3.5, 6, 7.
and cry, Peace; and he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare
war against him. Therefore night shall he unto you, that you shall not have a
division; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the Sun
shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Then
shall the see^s be ashamed, and the diviners confounded; yea, they shall all
cover their lips, for there is no answer of God.

Zach. 11.3.
There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is spoiled.

Lam. 4.13.
For the sins of her Prophets, and the iniquity of her Priests, that have shed
the blood of the just in the midst of her.

Isai. 9.14, 16.
Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in
one day; for the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are
led of them are destroyed.

Mic. 6.16.
For the statutes of O^ri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab; and
ye walk ^n their counsels, that I should make thee a disolation, and the
inhabitants thereof an l^ssing: therefore ye shall hear the reproach of my
people.

Jer. 11, 10, 11.
They are turned back to the iniquities of their Forefathers, which refused to
hear my words, etc. therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil
upon them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry
unto me, I will not hearken unto them.

Isai. 3.14, 15.
The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the
Princes thereof: for ye have eaten up (...) vineyard: the spoil of the poor is
in your ^ou^^s. What mean ye tha^ ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the
faces of the poor? says the Lo^d God of hosts.

Mic. 1.2.
^o to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the
morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand.

Behold, I am against thee, Jer. 50.31, 32.
O thou most proud, says the Lord God of hosts: for thy day is come, the time
that I will visit thee: and the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none
shall raise him up; and I will k^nale a fire in his cities, and it shall devour
all round about him.

For he brings down them that dwell on high: Isa. 26.5, 6.
the lofty city he lays it low, he lays it low even to the ground, he
brings it even to the dust: the foot shall tread it down, even the feet of
the poor, and the steps of the needy.

And I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, chapter 13.11, 12.
and will lay low the haugheiness of the terrible: I will make a man more
precious then fine gold; even a man, then the golden wedge of Ophir.

How is the faithful city become an harlot? it was full of judgment, chapter 1.21,
22, 23, 24. and 3.25, 26. and 4, 1.
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers: thy silver is become ^hoss, thy
wine mixed with water: thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves:
every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: ^^^y judge not the
fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore, thus
says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, Beware
the mighty one of Israel, Ah! I will case me of mine adversaries, and avenge
me of mine ^nemies. Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war,
and her gates shall lament and mourn, and she being de^olate, London.
shall sit upon the ground: and in that day, seven women shall take hold of one
man, saying, we will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us
be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.

^o unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, chapter 5 8, 9.
till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the
earth. In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be
desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.

chapter 30.1.9, 10, 12, 13, 27.
Woe to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel, his not of
me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit; that they may add
sin to sin; lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord,
which say to the seers, See not; and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us
right things; speak unto us smooth things; prophecy deceits. Wherefore thus
says the holy one of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in
oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon; Therefore this iniquity shall be
to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking
comes suddenly at an instant. Behold, the name of the Lord comes from far,
burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of
indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire.

chapter 6.9, 10, 11.
And he said, Go and tell this people: Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and
see ye indeed, but perceive not; make the heart of this people fat, and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed.
Then said I, Lord, How long? and he answered, Until the cities be wasted,
without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly
desolate.

I will send him against in hypocritical na^ion, chapter 10.6.
and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the
spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the
streets.

And when you spread forth your hands, chapter 1.15.
I will hide mine eyes from you, yea, when you make many prayers, I wll not
hear: your hands are full of blood.

Then said the Lord unto me, Jer. 15.1.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward
this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth.

Behold, Isa. 59.1, 2, 3.
the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy,
that it cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated between you and your
God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear; for your
hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have
spoken lies, your tongue has muttered perverseness.

Now therefore be ye not mockers, Isa. 28.22
lest your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord of hosts, a
consumption even determined upon the whole earth.

I shall close up this discourse with a word to these three parties, so nearly
concerned in it, Jehu, Jehonadab, and the people of God.
A word to Prince Jehu.
First to thou, O thou mighty man have I somewhat to say; thou have been curious
and lovely in thy apparel, and thy face has shined as if thou had been on
the mount with Christ; thy profession has been so excellent, that we have been
ravished with thee: we never had such hope of the satisfaction of our souls, in
the free service of our God, in the enjoyment of the promised land, in going up
to Jerusalem to worship in the highest of Gods appointments, as we have had in
thee; and will thou now deceive us? whither shall we go to complain, but to our
God who anointed thee, whose messenger we took thee to be? yea, and we are sure
thou wast, so long as thou did keep in his way. Thou (o Jehu) did run well,
who has hindered thee? who has bewitched thee?

But blessed be God, for anointing Jehu to do his work; and blessed be God, for
giving Jehu a heart to do so much of the work as he has done: but what reason
can be given why Jehu should play the hypocrite at the lattet end of the day?
Is this the reason; Jehonadab counseled him so to do, to take that wise
course? truly it looks like such a man's counsel, that compasses sea and land
to make a proselyte, and when he has so done, he makes him twofold more the
child of hell then himself. What Jehonadab has to say for himself, concerning
this matter, we shall see anon. But can this excuse the business? surely no:
such an excuse freed not our first parents from the curse, neither will it thee
Jehu (without repentance) from punishment.

Consider how hateful to God hypocrisy is; you may see it in Christ's hatred of
it, for he is the express image of his Father; how full of indignation is he
against the Scribes and Pharisees! why? because they were hypocrites. In all
his sermons and discourses none did he so complain of, and against none was so
violent as against hypocrites; yea, when he would express the wickedness of
that generation wherein he lived to the full, he calls them hypocrites; Ye
Scribes and Pharis^es, hypocrites. It Is a comprehensive appellation, it
comprehends all other sins in it: hyprocrisie is sin in the abstract, the
q^^n^^ssense of all depravity and contrariety to God. Hypocrisy it is most
offensive and loathsome to God, such that he will spue out of his mouth; so
offensive it is that God will bring upon the head of an hypocritical
generation, all the deserts of a former wicked and profane generation, Mat.
23.34 35 36. yea, the state of an hypocrite is made use of in Scripture, as a
signal term to set forth the dismal condition of the damned by: The Lord of
that servant shall come, Mat. 24.50, 51.
etc. and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites.

And yet will thou play the hypocrite Jehu? think upon it: will the counsel of
Jehonadab save thy back from inheriting the stripes of a fool for this thy
wisdom? Plead not the goodness of thy end, nor the uprightness of thy
intentions, That all is for the glory of God, and bringing about the will of
God; We must not do evil, that good may come of it. The goodness of an end,
will not sanctify an action; but the sinfulness of an action, may pollute and
defile the goodness of an end.

But why could not Jehu go through with his work, and pull down the Calves,
take away the ancient fundamental political bounds of the Idolatrous kingdom in
Israel, that so the people might go up without let or hinderance to Jerusalem
to worship?

O our kingdom would then be lost, nothing but ruin, confusion and loss would
come unto us. If any advantage be to be found in it, it would be another's
portion and inheritance, not ours; our kingdom would be lost, the son of David
would take it from us. O most miserable kingdom! that is upheld by such
abominable bounds and limits that provoke God to so great wrath, to the
consuming generations of men from off the earth; for is it possible that
inventions of men should be able to uphold that which God sets himself, yea,
all his glorious Attributes against? can it be supposed, that weak man, that is
but as the grass that withers, should uphold that which we fear the promises
of the great God cannot?

Suffer the children to cry Hosanna to the son of David, and exalt him as King?
no, that must not be tolerated; we must rebuke them, and stop their mouths,
imprison them, and hinder their going on in this course; otherwise, what shall
we do? our kingdom will be destroyed, and nothing but ruin and destruction
will be left us for an inheritance.

Iehu I beseech thee consider these few things.

First, The evil and wickedness of all State Policy, and so of thy
State Policy: it is a sin that destroys more Rulers, then all other sins does;
but particularly, the evil of it appears in these three things:

1. It withdraws from God. This is evident in this example of Jeroboam: his
State Policy and wisdom put a necessity upon him of leaving the true God, and
committing that great and devouring sin of Idolatry; Calves must be set up, and
must be called Gods, and must be worshipped, for if the people go up to
sacrifice at Jerusalem, the kingdom will return to the house of David. His
carnal reason dictates such strong and feasible Arguments to him, that it was
impossible for him to hold his kingdom, if that Rehoboam had that advantage of
the peoples going up to Jerusalem to worship: therefore he must either lose his
kingdom, or leave his God; No Idol, no King. Thus his reason of State turned
him from God.

And the same reason kept back all the Kings of Israel from going to God. Why?
if they did, they must lose their kingdom, and that they would not do; they
loved their outward concernments better then their God; and therefore rather
then hazard the loss of them, (although it was but in appearance to their dim
eyes) they would let God go whither he would for them; they would have none of
him. But this cost them dear at last, yea, this same reason wrought so strongly
upon Israel's Iehu (that enlightened man, whose eyes pierced the confines of
heaven, and saw glories, which are not the objects of every common eye) that it
blinded him so, that he could not step over the stumbling block, the fear of
losing his kingdom; yea, if this vanity take but a little place in the hearts
of the true children of God, it draws them at a distance from him, as is plain
the case of Asa: when through policy he would go and hire the Syrians it
smothered the faith that acted in him before, to the destruction of Zerah the
mighty Ethiopian, it drew him from his confidence and trusting in the Lord, as
the Prophet says; and many dishonorings of the Lord followed upon it, as the
story evidences.

2. It brings great affliction. What affliction did this State Policy bring
upon Asa! it brought that sore reproof from God by the Prophet, which so
enraged him; it brought great wars upon him: and surely every one will say,
they are afflictions. And it is more then probable, that his continuance in that
sin, brought that dismal disease upon his feet, that he could never walk
uprightly afterward. What affliction brought it upon good Iehosaphat, whose
policy made him join with Ahab! it brought him into great danger of his life,
and drew down wrath upon his own head.

3. It brings utter ruin. What ruin did this calvish State Policy bring upon
Jeroboam, Baasha, Ahab, Iehu, and all the Kings of Israel; yea, (by reason of
the peoples compliance therewith) the whole nation at last! they are carried
away, and their name rooted out from under heaven; yea, had it not been for
Gods promise to David, what ruin would it have brought upon Jerusalem it self,
and her Kings? How near ruin did it many times bring her? and God professes it
was for his promise sake that he had mercy on her.

When the scepter was departed from Judah, and so God not engaged to it by
promise, what effect had this State Policy upon that generation of men! among
whom Christ himself lived; their policy kept them from receiving Christ the
true God, caused them to reject him; for say they, If we receive him, IF WE LET
HIM THVS ALONE, ALL MEN WILL BELIEVE ON HIM, and the Romans will come, and take
away both our place and nation.

And what great afflictions and destructions it brought upon them, we see in
the story of the Macchabees; yea, what utter ruin at last overwhelmed them is
evident: have they not been as dung upon the face of the earth, for more then
1200 years? So that there is nothing more clear then this, That the ruin of
States and Kingdoms, is founded in, and bottomed upon their State Policy; at
one time or other, first or last, their walking by the rules and maxims of
this policy breaks them to pieces, and brings them to their utter ruin.

Secondly, consider, The pernicious loathsome abomination of Jehonadabs
counsel. Hypocrisy is most odious to God, most provoking; yet Iehonadab
counsels to that: the righteousness of thy counselors will not save thee, (o
Iehu:) although they have been exemplary for holiness, and as a beacon upon a
hill to show men the way of life, yet now they commit adultery with this grand
strumpet State Policy, God leaves them, and they are become abominable: by how
much the more close and spiritual their iniquities are, by so much the more
wicked and abominable they are to God: as the most excellent things, once
depraved are most vile, base and abject, most destructive; so these men now
going astray, no counsel so destructive, so contrary to God (in the
aggravations of it) as theirs.

But now, Iehu at parting I shall leave to your serious consideration some few
of the words of God; it may be you may get meat out of them.

(...) 15.^3, 28.
And Samuel said, Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, ^o obey is better then
sacrifice; and to hea^ken, then the sat of rams. (...) 6.14.
Because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has rejected thee from
being king. The Lord has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and
has given it to a neighbor of thine, that is better then thou

(...). ^3.
But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord
troubled him. So Saul died for his transgression, which he committed against
the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kep^ not.

And also by the hand of the Prophet Jehu, the son of Han^ni, 2 Kin. 16.7.
came the word of the Lord against Baasha and against his house, even for all
the evil that he did in the sight of the Lo^d in provoking him to anger with
the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam; AND BECAUSE HE
KILLED HIM

And he said unto him, 1 King. 20.42.
Thus says the Lord, Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I
appointed to utter destruction: therefore thy life shall go for his life, and
thy people for his people.

Hosea 1.4.
And the Lord said unto him, Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little while, and
I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to
cease the kingdom of the house of Israel.

Gal. 2.18.
For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor.

1 Chronicles. 28.3.
But God said unto me, Thou shall not build an house for my name; because thou
have been a man of war, and have shed blood.

2 Chronicles. 19.2.
And Jehu the son of Hanani the Seer, went out to meet him, and said unto King
Jehosaphat, Shall thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord?
therefore wrath is upon thee, from before the Lord.

2 Chronicles. 26.16.
But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction; for he
transgrest against the Lord his God.

chapter 32.25.
But Hezeki^h rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him; for his
heart was lifted up, therefore was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

chapter 28.10, 11.
And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem, for
bondmen and bond-women to you; but are there not with you, even with you, sins
against the Lord your God? now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives
again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren; for the fierce wrath of
God is upon you.

Wherefore it shall come to pass, Isa. 10.1 13.
that when the Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Sion and on
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria,
and the glory of his high looks; For, he says, By the strength of my hand I
have done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent, and I have removed the bounds
of the people, and have robbed their treasuries, and I have put down the
inhabitant like a valiant man.

The Lord of hosts has purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, chapter 23.9.
and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth.

And it came to pass, 2 Chronicles 25.16.
as he talked with him, that the King said unto him, Art thou made of the Kings
counsel? forbear, why should thou be smitten? then the Prophet forbear, and
said, I know that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done
this, and have not hearkened to my counsel.

Now the good Lord help thee, Iehu that upon reading this, the may understand
the mind and will of God, and repent, and do t^ first works, lest, etc. --

A word to Jehonadab Jehu's counselor.
In the second place: I have a word to speak to Iehonadab: h^ excellent have
thou been? how perspicuous has thy glory shined the face of men? insomuch that
the Princes have taken notice of the and have chosen thee for their
counselor, thinking surely they sho^ be happy, and prosper, if such
counselors as thou art, teach the^ Thou have been counted worthy to ride in
the chariots of the no^ of the earth, and thou have been so far taken and
ravished with t^ sight of worldly glories from those mounts, that thou have
fallen down and done worship to them; notwithstanding all thy excellencies and
perfections, thou art overcome and fallen. Repent, and do thy first works, or
else says the Lord, I will come quickly, and take that away that thou have;
take away thy candlestick. Thou have climed up the ascending steps to those
Altars, which are not of Gods appointment; and your feet have slipped, and you
are fallen, to the discovering of all your nakedness. Remedies against this,
thou thy self (O Jehonadab) have taught the people: but now the disease has
overtaken thy self, may we not justly say, Physician, cure thy self? but thy
unskilful dealing with, and carelessness toward thine own soul, and thy being
so slightly and so easily overcome, makes it appear thou art really ignorant
Words with^^^ practice (...) no more.
of the things of the day that belong to thy salvation, in this thy day;
notwithstanding those specious shows of light and knowledge which thy acquired
abilities have taught thee. Consider, Jehonadab, whither thy ways tend, if not
down to the gates of death, the wages of the hypocrite, where is nothing but
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. How have I heard thee in our
streets, crying out against those very things that thou now counsellest others
to! thou have gotten the Pharisees chair, and art thou not become a very
Pharisee? examine thy self: thou have gotten the mammon of Baals Priests, and
art thou not become a Priest to the golden Calves?

What is become of thy hopefulness? we had thoughts thou would have gone in
the front of the battle, and carried the Ark before us into the promised land;
^ur deviations (...) practice from (...) former ^achings have ^eady made ^e
Atheists by ^ousands, then ^er your Mystery made ^nverts, and it is no
ac^^dental, but natural effect your folly, for which you must ^^ve an ac^^unt.
but behold, thou drawest us back to Egypt: we had hopes thou would have
given us an example, of living by that faith, which thou have so affectionately
preached to us; but behold, the greatest hardness of unbelief: we thought thy
heart would have been as wax, ready to receive every impress of the seal of the
Spirit, that we might behold his glory in thee; but behold, what oppositions,
what quenchings, what grievings of the Spirit are evident in thee? how do
thou put out the light of the Spirit, which once did blaze in thee? how do
thou give that good profession the lie, which once thou made? how
diametrically contrary are the paths of thy prosperity, to the ways of thy
adversity? how heavenly then, but how earthly now? nothing but glory it self,
was then (in the time of adversity) thy pretension; but behold are not now thy
hands fastened upon the basest things of this earth? and is it not evident thy
stony-heart has found out it is center here in this world? who then a more
sheep-like, harmless, innocent creature, having no gall, no sting at all? but
now, who more like wolves, who more like the Princes of this world, Lording it
over the heritage of God? who then more against Baals Priests? but who now,
more for the golden calvish Priests, though the lowest of the people? and all
to maintain an interest, which is as contrary to God, as light is to darkness;
yet is grown so lovely in thy eyes (since thou have gotten a large share in it)
as thou dare to hazard the loss of thy soul for the maintenance of it.

But as if these things had been a light thing to thee, thou have taken the
eyes and heart of thy Prince, and have enticed him, and caused him to go a
whoring after thy Idolatries. Thou by thy wiles have ensnared him, and brought
him into danger, and that upon the pretense of maintaining Religion; but what
is it, I pray? it is no other then the worship of thy Calves, that thy kingdom,
and his kingdom (as thou perswadest him) may not be ruined and taken away. But
know, all shall avail thee nothing; the purposes of God shall stand: he has
decreed thy ruin if thou repent not, and it shall come upon thee irresistibly:
all thy policy, all thy wisdom, all thy superstitious sanctity will avail thee
nothing: Gods chosen ones, who are clothed with his holiness, shall tread thee
under their feet, and make thee as dung upon the earth: I have commanded my
sanctified ones: Isa. 3.2.
I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in MY
HIGHNESS: all thy mammon, all those good things that thou go a whoring
after, shall be the portion of others; yea, and thy lovers shall hate thee.

What can thou expect? when it shall be laid to thy charge, that through the
prevalency of thy counsel and advice, urged with such specious arguments and
pretenses, Jehu forsakes his God (his Leader) lets him go onward if he please,
but follow who will, Jehu for his part will go no further; and why? because
thou (Jehonadab) have fleshed his lust, and heightened his heart, by the
specious shows of thy reasons: That thou did fright Jehu from destroying the
golden Calves, by those dismal destructions, and fearful events, that thy
wisdom did in a lively manner represent unto him, would follow; and that thou
did hinder Jehu from taking away the ancient bounds and limits of an
Idolatrous kingdom, and from giving the people free liberty and authority to go
up to Jerusalem to worship, by representing to him the ruin that would follow;
telling him. These bounds keep all in order; take them away, and confusion
would seize upon all things, like an inundation of waters when the dams are
broken up; and that it is contrary to the foundation of Magistracy, to suffer
ruin to come upon a State or Nation, to please the fancy of a company of
fanatic fellows. Thus, Iehonadab thou bring upon thy own head the guilt of
all the transgressions and deviations of thy Prince and people, with all that
dreadful wrath and vengeance that hangs over their heads. When God came down
into his garden to see what our first Parents had done and called them to an
account for their deviations, they made the best excuse (poor hearts) they
could; they laid the fault on one another; but the Serpent, from whose advice
and temptation the mischief came, paid for all: and shall you fare any better?
judge ye: your transgressions are so circumstantiated, as that one day your
selves shall judge and condemn your selves; those mouths that are now so full
of words in your own defense, shall then be struck dumb and mute.

A word to the people of God.
The last word I have to write, is to the despised people of God: you may

First observe from hence, How far a man may go in the way of the Lord, and yet
be unsound at heart; at the bottom there may be nothing, but a love to an
interest destructive to yours. Your interest is to go up to Jerusalem to
worship, to exercise your selves in the high and pure appointments of God, and
to hold forth to the world, both by doctrine, and obedience to it, the whole
mind and will of God, the whole and every part of his truth, that so you may
possess the promises, and enjoy as much of God here, as possibly you can attain
to: but this must not be suffered (forsooth) for fear, etc. but an interest
must be carried on, contrary and destructive to this. When men have done so
much of the work of God, as they think will serve their turns, and bring about
their design; then are they for God nor his work no longer; but for their
Calves, their own devisings, and their interest which they have created to
themselves; and whatsoever opposes that, or is contrary to that, although it be
never so precious in the eyes of God, (as his people are, for he says, They
are as the apple of his eye) must be trampled upon and brought under. Let us
learn from hence, Not to trust to man whose breath is in his nostrils; but in
the living God who is only faithful and true to the end.

2. We may here observe, The utmost limits that a Iehonadab will go; he will
run on to the very gates of heaven, but he is so swollen with the venom of
self-righteousness, the honor and glory of this world, that he cannot enter
that straight gate: but in matters of the worship of God, the golden Calves,
the inventions of men's devising, will satisfy him well enough; that that will
please his Prince, will content him: he will be outwardly holy and zealous for
God, make good and wholesome Laws for the regulating of the outward man, he
will command his household and family to exercise the virtue of temperance, Ye
shall drink no wine, neither ye nor your sons for ever: He will not have a
drunkard in his house: he will go higher yet, command covetousness from among
his family and followers, they must not build houses, nor sow seed, nor plant
vineyards, nor have any: See how virtuous our Jehonadab is; where shall we
find his fellow? surely, there is none like him. Thus Jehonadab inherits the
praises of the earth, the reward of his virtue. But here is a spot in this
beautiful face, HIS END, which is only this, That they may live long in the
world, That ye may live many days in the land, etc. all his advantages could
raise him no higher then the world; notwithstanding all his seeming contempt of
the world, yet he places his happiness here below, for this is the end
wherefore he ordained his precepts, and That he would have his children and
followers aim at in their obedience to them, that they may live many days in
the land; and this end by their obedience they obtained, For thus says the
Lord, Iehonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for
ever. God gives them their desire and their aim in all their devotions, To live
long in the world, and their posterity not be rooted out, so long as there is a
being in the earth, for the generation among whom they live, that (I conceive)
is only meant by not wanting a man to stand before God for ever. Thus we see
Iehonadab's resting place, that all his endeavors and works follow after, Not
in God, but in the world.

But again, further, he will (in a measure) own the present cause of God, the
truth and work of the present generation. He comes to meet Iehu, [to meet him]
to congratulate him, and bid him, God speed: who can say now, Black is his eye?
Iehu could not. He Questions not the affection of his heart to the work, but TO
HIM, to his interest: Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? Here Is
a supposal, that Iehonadab's heart was right to the work, otherwise why should
Iehu say, As my heart is with thy heart? If he had not thought his heart right
to the work that was THEN doing, Iehu's heart could not be right with his, for
Iehu's heart was really set upon that present work of rooting out, and
destroying the house of Ahab and Baal; but Iehu knew Iehonadab's heart was
right to the work of reformation, and he professes his so too. And here lies
the Question, Is thy heart right FOR ME, for my person, my interest, my sitting
on the throne my governing the people in the place of Ahab, as my heart is
right with thy heart, for that which thou desire Reformation?

These Jehonadab's will rise up in judg^ment against the Jehonadab's of our
times, being men mo^^ righteous by far, th^^ ^ou^s, wa^^ing exactly up to their
prof^st principles, (...) ou^ Jehonadab's are as ^a^ from doing as the ^^st is
from the ^^st, ^^n ^d no (...) in any particular; he that has but h^^s^n^y,
cannot but ^ee it pl^^^y. If their g^ea^ g^a^d father (old) Jehonadab were
alive, how would he ^^dew his gray hairs with tears, ^o ^ee how un^^k him th^se
his children are? if so, then what can these m^n expect, but to have a heavier
weight of wrath laid upon them, by how much their sins have exceeded their
predecessors?
Now all Iehonadab's excellencies, virtues, righteousness and holiness; could
not preserve him from striking up the bargain, entering into covenant with
Iehu to be for him. And Iehonadab answered, It is; and upon this they strike
hands and ratify the covenant, If thou will be for me I am for thee: and he
gave him his hand, and he took him up to him into the chariot; they are become
one presently; and now Iehonadab is set on high, (in the chariot) made a privy
counselor, and entered into covenant with his King to be for him, and to
strengthen his hands; he becomes a LAWMAKERS, prescribes precepts and
directions for the ordering future ages, (as has been already mentioned) but
among all those Laws, there is not a word of going up to Jerusalem to worship,
and sanctifying Gods name in drawing nigh unto him in his most holy place, in
those sanctified appointments he has ordained to be worshipped in? no, that
would not stand with the (new-made) interest of his Prince; and therefore like
a good subject and friend he is silent as to that, leaves it for some other and
more fit season. But to satisfy his conscience, and to salve his reputation
among good men, he makes Orders for the outward deportment between man and man
and sets no such an end to be his scope, as has the face of a promise withit;
yea, is part of a promse, but it is but the outside; the bottom of the promise
his heart never dives into; it is not the enjoyment of God himself in a promise,
but of this world in a promise; that is the great aim and end of all his ways,
That your days may be long in the land; not, that you may enjoy God in his own
high appointments at Jerusalem; no that would offend his Prince, and alas,
tender heart! he is loath to grieve him, to whom he is so much beholden. Thus we
see how far a Jehonadab will go, no further then he can drag his Prince along
with him: if he stay at the Calves, and admire their golden glory, Jehonadab
will do so too: but the glory of a holy God in his own Ordinances he is a
stranger to ignorant of.

This consideration exhorts us to seek out other leaders, and not to follow
after any Iehonadab whatsoever; if we do, they will lead us to the Calves,
(into ways of their own invention) instead of Jerusalem. There Is not a
Iehonadab will venture his carkase for Christ: if the worldly powers will not go
along with him, he will stay with them, rather then run a hazard in going a
little onward alone to seek out the Lamb who is the faithful leader of his
people. But let us diligently seek after him and go up the mount toward him,
he will lead us to his Father, and make us partake of the same glory he
possesses at his right hand. Who would not follow such a leader, and venture a
little to seek him out, if at any time we lose sight of him, through the
terrible and uncouth shakings of earthquakes?

3. We have set before us the sins and iniquities of Iehu with their
aggravations; and it is evident how near these our times are allied to them.
It Is worthy our serious consideration, whether the differences between the
times, and the dispensations of God in the times, or any other circumstance
accompanying our deviations, may give us any good and sound ground to hope that
Iehu's punishment (the consuming wrath of that age) will not be the portion of
this generation; seeing they have so notoriously espoused his adulterous
deviations and apostasy. We find what sudden sad effects Iehu's apostasy
brought forth: In those days (in the days of Iehu's apostasy) the Lord began
to cut Israel short, and Hazael smote them in all the coasts of Israel. We
find already how our liberties begin to be cut short, witness the persecution
of the Lords people in Wales and other places. In the margin it is rendered, [to
cut off the ends:] if the ends of the body (the head and the feet) be cut off,
what is the trunk able to do, but roll in its own blood?

Come my people enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy doors about thee
^hide thy self as it were for a little moment, Isa 26.20. and 63.4.
until the indignation be overpast.

For the day of veangeance is in mine heart and the year of my redeemed is
come.

4 Again We here see the portion of those that join themselves to, and comply
with Iehu in his abominable deviations, RV^NE: as soon as ever Iehu had
accomplished his purposes, and through Iehonadab's help kept the people within
the ancient bounds and limits of the Idolatrous kingdom sad effects follow, The
Lord cuts Israel short, Hazael smites Israel in all their coasts eastward; and
by that time there came to be a general compliance of the people, and God had
given them a little time to fill up the cup of their iniquity full, then comes
UTTER RVINE, and behold they are not. Is it not a great dispute among the
learned what is become of them, where the ten Tribes are? the place of their
abode is hid from the whole earth. This is most certain, That all those that
cleave to, and comply with Iehu in his apostacies shall be partakers of that
great wrath, that God in due time will pour down from heaven upon the head of
Jehu and all his companions in inquity.

Rev. 18.4.
Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.

5. It Is worthy our observation, That Jehu never afterward made use (as we
read) of those Prophets of the Lord that anointed him, that first did his work
for him, and helped him to his power by which he got the throne. When they had
done so much (as he could expect from them knowing their principles were not
suitable to his design) farewell then, he had no more to say to them, their
hearts were too honest, and brains too shallow, for his deep politic designs;
they would walk answerable to their professions, (the glory of which affected
the peoples hearts) perform all their promises and engagements: but these
things stood not with Jehu's interest, therefore no more of them; adieu those
half-witted fellows, whose conscience cannot swallow a lie sealed with the
highest asseverations, that by such fine slights of State-wisdom we may clime
the steps of honor: But come thou, Jehonadab, thou art a righteous person, and
have more wisdom then Myriads of those Idiots. And indeed, what can you expect
more from a Jehu, who sets up an interest contrary to God's? never expect
friendship or friendly dealing from him, till God has changed his heart, and
of a Jehu made him a David; of a Saul a Paul. Consider Jehonadab a little
further, then judge. He was one that came to meet Jehu when he had made a sure
progress in his work; he was not at the beginning among the Prophets of the
Lord to strengthen Jehu's hand in the work; no, but when he had slain the King
and Jezebel, and by a wile destroyed the Kings seventy sons, and was going with
power sufficient to make a full end of all his enemies, Then comes (good)
Iehonadab, to congratulate Iehu, to have a finger in the pie before it is put
in the oven. And Iehu he strikes in with this holy man, and engages him (easily
enough, poor soul) to be on his side: Iehu knew full well, that this wary wise
man (that knew the way to sleep in a whole skin, till Iehu had almost made sure
work, and then comes and proffers his congratulatory service to his greatness)
would be a fitter instrument for his turn, then those hardy simple-hearted
fellows, (the Prophets of the Lord) that, to fulfill the mind of God, would run
through such hazards and dangers (as they did) to lift up Iehu into a capacity
to do the will of God. It Is this Iehonadab that Iehu is so eager to engage.
(The text says, he [lighted] on him, like a bird of prey, and with his tallons
he hoisted him up into the chariot, a high place, that diz'd poor Jehonadab's
brains so, as they could never get into their right posture again.) And what
sweet complements past between them? his whole discourse was about sincerity
and uprightness of heart, when (God knows) it was that he least cared for; but
Jehonadab understood him well enough, and knew what counsel would please (as
appears in the matter of Baals Priests.) It Is this Jehonadab that Jehu loves
and hugs in his bosom: for you, the Lords people, who have not a Jehonadab's
wisdom farewell: he will have no more to do with you, such fanatic silly
fellows, that are good for nothing, but to ruin a State. As we cannot find it
in the story that Jehu took any friendly notice of the Lords people (to whom he
was so much engaged) after he came to the Throne; so we shall never find it in
experience, that a Jehu will be a friend indeed, to those who in sincerity of
heart look Sion-ward.

6. From hence the Saints and people of God may see what their work is, To bear
the cross of Christ, in bearing witness against those deviations and
apostacies, that are too too likely to overrun this generation of men; and to
seek after the Lamb, the Lord Jesus Christ, for their Leader, and follow him
whithersoever he will lead them: there is no doubt nor Question to be made, but
his designs are right, and adequate to the will of his Father, who has
promised him the throne of his father David.

Much might be said to you (the children of the most High) of that full
redemption, and great glory which draws nigh to be given to you for an
inheritance; but I shall leave that, as the work of one more knowing in those
great and deep mysteries of the Fathers love, then my self, being one who has
more need to learn and to be taught of the meanest and weakest amongst you: and
indeed, none can make you sensible of these things, but the Spirit himself.
Only I have, out of that feast of far things, of marrow, and wine upon the
lees well refined, that God has prepared for his chosen ones; I say, Out of
that feast I have gathered a collation for you, made up of such dainties, as I
conceive most suitable to your present state and condition.

Mal. 3.16.
Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened, and heard it: and a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.

Mic. 4.13.
Arise and thresi^, O daughter of Sion; for I will make thy ^orn iron and I will
make thy hoofs brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many people: and I will
consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the
whole earth.

Isa. 17.13, 14.
The nations shall rush, like the rushing of many waters; but God shall rebuke
them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the
mountains before the wind, and as a rolling thing before the whirlwinde: and
behold, at evening-tide trouble, and before the morning he is not: this is the
portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.

Isa. 4.2, 3, 4, 5.
In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the
fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely, for them that are escaped of
Israel: and it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Sion, and he that
remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem: when the Lord shall have washed away the filth
of the daughter of Sion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the
midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning: and
the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Sion, and upon her
assemblies, a cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of flaming fire by
night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense.

Yea, the Lord will answer, Joel 2.19, 32.
and say unto his people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and
ye shall be satisfied therewith, and I will no more make you a reproach among
the heathen: and it shall come to pass, that whosover shall call on the name of
the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call,

For unto us a child is born, Isa. 9.6, 7.
unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his
name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of peace. Of the increase of his government and peace, there
shall be no end: upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it,
and to estabish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth, even for
ever.

Fear thou not, for I am with thee; chapter 41.10, 11.
be not thou dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen the, yea, I will help
thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness: Behold,
all they that were incensed against thee, shall be ashamed and confounded, they
shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish.

Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, chapter 43.4.
and I have loved thee: therefore I will give men for thee, and people for thy
life.

And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, Isa. 35.10.
and come to Sion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

The meek also shall increase their chapter 29.19, 20, 21.
joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the holy One of
Israel: for the terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed:
and all that watch for iniquity are cut off; that make a man an offender for a
word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the
just for a thing of naught.

chapter 54.17.
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that
shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn: this is the heritage
of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord.

Mal. 4.1, 2, 3.
For behold, the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea,
and all that do wickedly shall be stubble: and the day that comes shall burn
them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor
branch: but unto you that fear my name, shall the sun of righteousness arise
with hea^ing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the
stall, and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes under the
soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, says the Lord of hosts.

Fear not, O land, Joel 2.21.
be glad and rejoice; for the Lord will do great things.

The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. Isa. 9.7.


What shall one then answer the messengers of the nations? chapter 14.32.
that the Lord has founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.

Make have, my beloved, Cant. 8.14.
and be thou like to a roe, or to a young heart upon the mountains of spices.

I am come into my garden, Cant. 5.1.
my sister, my spouse; I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my
hony-combe with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends,
drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.

Zac. 12.3.
And in that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all
that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people
of the earth be gathered together against it.

Luke 21.34.
And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts he overcharged with
surfeting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares.

FINIS.

