Admirable good News AGAIN FROM IRELAND OR, The Copy of a Letter written
from Sir Thomas Lucas, one of the Commanders of our Army in Ireland, to a
Worthy Member of the House of Parliament here in England, bearing date,
Fbruary, 24. 1641.

Wherein is a Relation of two great overthrowes which was given to the Rebels
by the English and Scottish Forces.

The one before Tredarth within the Province of Munster, February 23. 1641.

The other great Victory was obtained by the English and Scots under the
command of the Earl of Dungarvin and General Lesley, and others, in the
Province of Cork, where 5000 Rebels were slain, 100 taken prisoners and
executed.

With the Estate of Ireland at this present.

Published by Authority.

London Printed by T. F. for I. Thomas. 1641.

A Copy of a Letter written from Sir Thomas Lucas, one of the Commanders of
our Army in Ireland, to a Worthy Member of the Parliament here in England
bearing date the 24 day of February, 1641.
SIR,
BEing ever engaged to you by the tie of mutual favors from time to time
received from you, in part of a small requital, I do send these few lines,
intimating to you thereby the present Estate of our Army and this Kingdom.

When we first arrived in this Kingdom we happily joined our Regiment to the
forces under command of that right valiant and worthy Captain Sir Simon
Harcourt near the City of Dublin, where many of the Rebels lay encamped, with
whom we had many skirmishes, and by the blessing of God came of with advantage
and loss to the adverse party; There came on Monday was a seven-night last 9.
Vessels from Dunkirke; Laden with Provision of Victuals, and Ammunition; which
was landed, and brought into Tredarth in the Province of Munster, for the
relief of that Town, where was by the Scots and English a great overthrow
given to the Rebels, in which skirmish was taken one Mr. White and his Son,
and about 60. more of the Rebels, which were immediately by the English
executed as Traitors; The whole Province of Munster is now revolted to the
Rebels, and they have proclaimed Philemy Oneale General of Jreland. There is
also lately revolted to the Rebels Lord Mountgarret, the Lord Nettersfield, and
his Son, whose other Son with Colonel Butler Brother to the Lord
Mountgarret, and Sir George Hamilton, are happily retained in England; I
believe it will prove very difficult to subdue the Rebels, and reduce this
Kingdom to their due Subjection to the King and Crown of England; without a
strong and speedy supply of more Men, and Ammunition from England; We Rejoice
much at the care of the High Court of Parliament, whose endeavors and hearty
affection are no ways wanting to assist and relieve us in time if possible it
can be effected; We also Rejoice with Thankfulness at the proffer of the City
of LONDON of Money, (which we are given to understand, toward our assistance
in subduing the Rebels.

There has been this last Week a Battle fought with the Rebels in the
Province of Cork by the English and Scots, under the command of the Lord
Dungarvan, General Lesley, and others; Wherein as we are informed were slain
5000. of the Rebels and about 200. of English and Scots, about 100. taken
Prisoners, the greatest part of them Executed, and of Ammunition and Provision
sufficient to mainetaine 500. Men for 3. Months; We have Notice of a Roman
Priest, that was sent from the Pope, that is landed in England, and has there
wrought with diverse English Catholics, for to prepare themselves in
readiness to put in Execution any design that shall be propounded to them,
for the defense of their Religion and destruction of the Protestants in that
Kingdom, which Priest is (as is reported) intended to come for Ireland, and in
his Journey did deal with a Papist skillful in making of Grenades, and all
sorts of Fire-workes, to practice the same Act, and to put the same in
Execution against the chiefest Cities of England, for Conquering the same when
the Rebels had Conquered Ireland, and landed their Forces in England, which
Papist and Priest, we wish may in time be discovered and apprehended, least
their Divelish designs may take effect, which God forbid, and grant peace to
his Israel under the lawful jurisdiction of our gracious Sovereign in all his
Majesty's Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the Savage cruelties and
inhumane Massacres of the Protestants by the Rebels, are notorious to all men,
I need no more to certify them, only stay, they still continue the same,
wheresoever they overcome any of the Protestants. We also return humble and
hearty thanks to the Parliament for their great care in the choice of able and
faithful Commanders for this service, that are good Protestants, for there be
but very few that are yet come over, that have any Alliance or friends in the
Rebellion, or favorers of their cause, but especially of that Religion, but
are either revolted unto them, or put forth publicly speeches in favor of
them, or are negligent and remiss in discharge of their duties to their King
and Country, in places of trust and command committed to their fidelity, by
which opportunity of advantage is many times given to the Rebels; and proves
great damage to their Soldiers by which many are disheartened and discouraged
in their particular Offices; which we heartily wish may be Amended, and by the
wisdom of the Parliament, for future time prevented, And thus worthy Sir, not
minding to be too tedious to you, but wishing you and yours all Health and
Happiness, both Spiritual and Corporal, and such good success to the
proceedings in Parliament, that it may prove the everlasting peace both of his
Sacred Majesty and all his Kingdoms.

Your affectionate friend, Thomas Lucas.
Dublin the 24. of Febr. 1641.
FINIS.

