THE WATCHMANS WATCHWORD. A Sermon preached at White Hall upon the 30 of March
last, being the fifth Wednesday in Lent, and the day of the monthly Fast:

By RICHARD LOVE D.D. Master of Corpus Christi College in Cambridge, and
Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

Published by command.

EZEKIEL. 33.6. If the Watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and
the people be not warned: if the sword come and take any person from among
them, he is taken away in his iniquity: but his blood will I require at the
Watchmans hand.

Printed by ROGER DANIEL Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1642.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Essex, Viscount of Hereford, etc. And
To the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Holland, Knight of the most noble Order
of the Garter, and Chancellor of the Universitie of CAMBRIDGE.
My Lords,
BY the command of the one of your Lordships, I was summoned to this
performance; and under the command of the other, I prepared it at my station in
Cambridge; and now at the command of both, I publish it to the world. Your
Lordshipse having thus had a joint influence into this poor, birth, pardon my
boldness if I entitle it to you both: that what worth it wants in it self,
it may borow from the luster of two such names. God and Nature have united your
Honors in consanguinity and affection; which makes me presume the more to
unite you here. Though to deal ingenuously, in this case I rather crave your
noble Testimony, then Patronage: It being best known unto your Lordships, that
this Edition is rather an act of my obedience, then choice. I know my self too
well to think that any thing of mine is worthy to be transmitted to an other
age: And no heart grieves more then mine, to see the boldness of the daring
Press. Yet if any spark of piety has been kindled in any breast by my
meditations, I beseech the God of heaven to cherish it. To that Almighty
Goodness I betake your Honors, and rest

Your Lordships most humble and obedient servant in the Lord, RICHARD LOVE.

ISAIAH 21.12. The Watchman said, The Morning comes, and also the Night: If
ye will inquire, inquire ye: return, come.


FOr coherence, we take our rise no higher then the foregoing verse: There this
particular prophecy begins, as in the Text it ends. It bears in title, (...),
The burden of Dumah. A short Prophecy, but full of obscurity: S. Hierome
styled it so of old, Hieron. in locum.
Loca difficilia quae secundum historiam minime patent. And of late judicious
Calvin has said as much, Calv. in locum, ex quo Junius, Haec Prophetia quo
brevior, eo obscurior.
Haec Prophetia, quod brevis sit, obscura est. And no marvel though it be
obscure and dark, since (as you see) there is a Night in the Text: And such a
Night, that if we call either to the ancient Expositours or the new, in the
words of the man of Seir in the foregoing verse, Watchman what of the Night?
Watchman what of the Night? Isa. 21.11.
they lend us but little light to guide our steps. Yea rather as men benighted
and in the dark themselves, each Interpreter almost wanders a several way.
Quae, Quando, Quibus: What night this is that is here prophesied: When this
night was to betide: Lastly, What people they are against whom it is threatened,
are still in the dark, still in tenebris, though long disputed. But thus much
(which may suffice our turn) is clear, and agreed on all hands; First, for the
Quae, What night soever it is, it is Nox atra, a night of horror and
confusion, a night of war and desolation: This redoubled calling to the
Watchman implies no less, Virg. Aen. 6.
Rebus nox abstulit atra colorem. Secondly, for the Quando, this sad night was
Nox propinqua, not far off, but hard at hand, a coming night, Nox ruit and
praeceps coelo devolvitur. Lastly, for the Quibus, the people here concerned,
they are Populus in vicinia: So much appears by this intercourse of speech,
they are a people within Isreal's call, a neighbor Nation, in the confines of
Judea, and of the seed of Abraham: and therefore here their sad doom is styled,
The burden of Dumah. Dumah, if (...) it be put for Idumea (as S. Hieron. in loc.
Hierome does understand it, and indeed the Septuag. (...).
Septuagint do so translate it) then the people here meant are the Idumeans, as
the Greeks call them, that is the Edomites, the posterity of Esau: who as for
his redness he was called (...), rubicundus, Genesis 25.24. and 30.
Edom, so for his roughness he was called (...), pilosus, ^su^us, Genesis 27.11.
Seir, the very word in the foregoing verse. There be some of the Rabbines that
instead of Pro (...), legunt (...), Hieron.
Dumah read it Roma, The burden of Rome, say they, telling us withal that the
Romans are not descended from Pius Aeneas and the Trojan race, but from these
very Edomites, and the stock of Esau. I will not warrant that pedigree, nor
indeed allow that reading: But sure I am that the present Church of Rome,
though it be the seat of his Holiness, and talk much of piety, though it has
the voice of Jacob yet their hands are the hands of Esau. Their Roughness and
their Redness, their bloody persecutions (witness this day) do show to all
the world of what house they come. Psalm. 137.7.
Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem; how they
said, Down with it, Down with it, even to the ground. But if Dumah here meant
be one of the sons of Ishmael, as most agree, for Genesis 25.14. amongst
Ishmaels sons are reckoned up Misma, and Dumah, and Massa; then the people
here aimed at in this Dumam pletique accipwat Synecdochice pro Jishmahhe^itis
abillo Duma, enjus fit men^ Genesis 25.14. J^m. in loc.
(...), are by a Synecdoche the Ishmaelites, the Hagarens, who have since
falsely called themselves the Saracens, that is, the Turks, and those whom we
now call Mahumetans.

Were my errand unto you this day concerning either of these two; were the
burden of this day in either of these senses the burden of Dumah, threatening or
relating a night of misery and desolation to the Edomites or Ishmaelites, to
the enemies of the Gospel, whether of old Rome or Constantinopolis olim dicta
nov a Roma, Ort.
new, whether Papisme or Turcisme; I should bear that burden with more ease,
and you might hear it with more alacrity. But, alas beloved! the burden of
this day is Onus Aetna gravius, it is The burden of Ireland; poor Ireland is
the burden of our sad ditty. Not Mahumetans, but Christians; nay not Papists,
but Protestants: and therefore their burden is a heavy burden unto us; even
Onus Dumah in another sense, The burden of similitude: so the word signifies
from (...), says S. Hierome. Hieron in locum.
And surely the burden of Ireland is a burden of similitude to us both in
regard of the sufferers, and also in regard of the sufferings. First, in regard
of the sufferers, is it not a burden of similitude? Are they not our brethren?
We and they children of the same father Abraham, and that not by Hagar, but by
Sarah; not by the bondwoman, but the free, Jerusalem that is above is free,
which is the mother of us both. Gal. 4.26.
Nay they and we children of the same father Jacob; not Edomites, but
Israelites, not rough and bloody Papists, but peaceful Protestants, true and
humble Catholics. We and they brethren in one God, of the same Religion:
brethren in one Prince, of the same subjection under our most Gracious
Sovereigne: and, for the most part, brethren in the same blood, of the same
extraction: are they not flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone? Then surely
this must make their burden a burden of similitude, even a heavy burden unto
us in regard of the sufferers, thus Naturally, Civilly, and Spiritually near
and dear unto us.

But this is not all; It is likewise to us Onus Dumah, a burden of similitude
in regard of the sufferings. Be not deceived; Whatsoever poor Ireland now
suffers in this cause, England has cause to fear the like, unless by Gods
great mercy, and our timely repentance, it be prevented. Jam proximus ardet
Vcalegon: Virg.
Ireland flameth, and is not England scorched? It is not all the water of the
intervening sea can keep that fire from us, so long as the same firebrands are
amongst us. The Authors and Actours of the Irish Tragedy who are they, but the
common enemies of us as well as them, yea of our God and our Religion? Even the
Ishmaelites and Edomites, the Romish shall I call them, or (for their cruelty)
the Turkish Priests and Jesuits. They own it now, nay (...), with open face
they proclaim it to the world: It is (say they) for Gods religion, and for the
Kings Prerogative. Thus they dare to spit their poison in the face of heaven;
to blaspheme the Lord and his Anointed. O ye unhallowed Priests, sacerrimi
sacerdotes! Is this your religion? Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum? Is
this the unbloudy sacrifice you so much talk of? to offer up whole hecatombes
of pious souls, by impious hands? To dishonor matrons, To ravish virgins, To
dash out the childrens brains before the parents eyes? God bless my soul from
such religion. And, O ye traitorous and rebellious Loyolists! Is this your
loyalty unto your King? Is this the maintenance of his Prerogative to torture,
to murder, to massacre his subjects, to surprise his castles, to fire his
Towns, to sack, to ransack, to ruin all? We were wont to say that no poisonous
creature could live in Ireland; but now, it seems, no other must. Now behold a
generation of vipers, that have even torn the bowels of their mother, laid that
poor land weltering in her blood, and brought a dismal night upon that Church
and State; even the night of the Text, a night of horror and confusion, a
night of war, yea of the worst of wars, and desolation.

Quis cladem illius Noctis, quis funera fando
Explicet, aut possit lacrymis aequare labores? Virg. Aen. 2.

O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of Ireland. Jer. 9.1.
And therefore are we met this solemn day, yea even all the congregations
throughout this Land are met, Ad exequias Hiberniae and parentalia, to
celebrate the funerals of so many thousands of our poor brethren slain and
made away in Ireland. If we be backward to send them other succors, yet let us
at least afford the succor of our sighs, our groans, our tears: If we forbear
timely to relieve the living, let us not forbear to bewail the dead: Or if we
have no sense of them, let us not be senseless of our selves. Here we are
gathered together as the Israelites in Bochim (in the valley of tears) to lift
up our voice and weep: Judges 2.4.5.
or as they were gathered unto Mizpeh, to draw water and pour it out before
the Lord, 1. Sam. 7.6.
to fast and to say, We have sinned against the Lord. We should weep for them,
but weep not for them only but our selves withal. England has Ishmaelites
and Edomites at home: I mean not only the Priests and Jesuits; but our own
distempers and distractions; our rents and our divisions, for the divisions of
Reuben there are great thoughts of heart. Judges 5.15.
Lord make up these breaches, and compose our differences, occasioned by our
sins. O these, beloved, are our homebred Ishmaelites and Edomites, even our
sins, our sins; our open and our secret sins; our national and our
personal sins; our common and our particular sins; even the sins of
every man's own heart. We are all ready enough to cry out against the times; and
indeed the times are bad: but they are the persons that infect the times; and
where is one of a thousand that reflects upon himself, that duly considers what
influence his particular has unto the public State; and whether his own
sins help not forward the common woe. Who abates a pleasure? who crucifies a
lust the more? Well, for all our fastings and our prayers, except we turn from
these, we cannot expect that God should turn to us, or turn away this dismal
night that threatens us. England and Ireland lie at stake this day, and thy
soul's engaged for their redemption: be not careless then in a business of so
great importance, but Inquire, yea Inquire while thou have light to see, while
it is yet morning, The morning comes says the Text. Be not obstinate to go
on, but Return, yea Return before it be too late, before it be full night, The
morning comes and also the night. And if I shall prevail with you so far as
to Inquire and to Return; behold I have commission from my Text to invite you
all; to invite you all this day to God; to bid you Come, Come with comfort,
Come with confidence, Come and welcome. There is not a man amongst us, I
presume, but sees himself in the dark, and the world in a night; he often
cries, O that Ireland were restored, and England safe, and my soul secure with
God: Come this day and secure thy soul with God, it is the best means that thou
can use for both the other. We are very inquisitive, What news, what news? I
do not come to stop your inquiries, but to direct them: Inquire on Gods name,
but inquire of God; Inquire of whom you should; Inquire of what you should; Ask
the question immediately before the Text, Custos, quid de nocte? Watchman, what
of the night? Watchman, what of the night? and behold there is a Watchman in
the Text shall answer you, The Watchman said, The morning comes, and also the
night; if ye will inquire, inquire; return, come.

In which words we may observe two generals, The Watchman, and The Watchword:
Or if you please Concionatorem and Concionem: To save my labor you have a
Preacher and a Sermon in the Text. The first general concerns the Preacher,
Who he is, and What he does. Who he is, His Charge and function: What he does,
his Discharge and execution. 1. For his Charge, he is (...) says the
Original, Custos says S. Hierome, a Keeper; Vigil, a Watcher, so says
Junius, and both say well; Nam and custodiendo vigilat, and vigilando custodit.
He is so a Watcher, that he keeps a continual watch, and therefore he is
called The Watchman. 2. For his Discharge and execution, (...) says the
Hebrew; Dixit, says S. Hierome; Dicit, says Junius; that is by an Hebraisme
for Dicet, says Vatablus: He has said, says the one; He does say, says the
other; He will say, says a third; and all say true; for he both has said it,
still does say it, and ever must: while he is (...) he must be (...), while he
is a Watchman he must be a Spokesman, The Watchman said.

That he said we see, What he said we must see, The watchword. If you will have
it in a word, in short (as watchwords for the most part are) it is the common
watchword of all Gods Watchmen from the beginning of his Church until this
day, Repent. Ad poenitentiam semper hortatus est, and prophetando, universorum
prophetarum emisit ora, Tertull. de poen. cap. 2.
So all the Prophets, praecones poenitentiae, all their prophesies were but so
many echoes of this word Repent. So he that was not only a Prophet but more
then a Prophet, John the Baptist, In those days came John the Baptist
preaching in the wilderness of Judaea and saying, what? Repent. Matthew. 3.1.
Nay so not only all the Watchmen, vigiles, but praefectus vigilum, the great
master of the watch Christ Jesus, From that time Jesus began to preach and to
say, what? Repent. Matthew. 4.17.
All true preaching begins, yea and ends in this: Repent is the sum of every
Sermon: I am sure it is the sum of our Preachers Sermon in the Text: so that
Repent is the Text, and the Text the Sermon. A plain Sermon consisting of a
Doctrine and the Use: The Doctrine or monition in these words, The morning
comes and also the night. The best motive to repentance is the consideration
of the motion of our time. It Is true in the general, it is true of all times,
of every Morning and of every Night; but especially of these times in the Text,
of this Morning and of this Night: If This Morning comes, and also this Night,
it is high time to fall to the Practice of Repentance, and that is the second
particular, the Use. The Practice of Repentance what is that? why, To Inquire,
to Return, to Come. Three exquisitely well ordered steps of true Repentance;
first Inquisition, secondly Conversion, and lastly Accession. He that is
perfectly penitent is Come, even come home to God: but no man can ever come
home to God, that does not first Return from his sins: and no man will return
from his sins that does not first Inquire into himself and his condition:
Therefore says our heavenly Watchman first Inquire, then Return, then Come,
The Watchman said, The morning comes and also the night; if ye will inquire,
inquire, return, come.

THese are the severalls whereon, by Gods assistance, I shall insist, so far as
your Honorable patience shall give way: all together do fit the season and the
occasion. you have a penitential Text in this twofold penitential day: The
day is not only a set day of Lent, a yearly fast; but a solemn day appointed
by the State, a monthly fast. I trust therefore that it will seem no solecisme
(though at Court) upon a double solemn fast, to give you (...) more then the
measure of a single Sermon: At least where your patience shall give me over,
endure the rest as penance for the day. The Text, just as the day, is full,
even full of tears: It is Domus luctus, an house of mourning, where there are
many rooms, but every room you will find to be hung with blacks. It is (...),
Repentance Tower against sin and Satan. Like David's tower from whence he
smote the Philistines: That there is called the tower of the Watchmen; He smote
the Philistines from the Tower of the watchmen. 2. Kings 18.8.
I am sure that ours is so, God grant that we may smite our enemies from hence.
Nay like mount Sion (and (...), says S. Hierome, Sion Arx Specula
interpretatur, Hieron. in Hierem. cap. 6.
signifies a Watchtower too) it is a strong castle consisting of many towers:
And therefore now, if you please, we will with David in the 48. Psalm, Psalm.
48.11.
Walk about Sion, and go round about her, and tell the Towers thereof. But not
about her only, but into her too; even into every Tower. And that we may get
in we must make our entrance by the Watchman, who stands Sentinel, you see,
even at the very gate of the Text, Custos dixit, The Watchman said: Where the
first particular is the consideration of his Charge and Function, The Watchman.

The Watchman who is that? Deus Custos die ac nocte, says S. Hierome, Hieron.
in locum.
on the Text, He makes this Watchman to be God. And most true it is that God
is Custos a Keeper, a Watchman to his Church: Nay Vigil, a perfect Watchman,
for he does neither dormire nor dormitare, Behold,he that keeps Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep; The Lord himself is thy Keeper: Psalm. 121.4.
An unspeakable comfort to every righteous soul in these times of danger. Was
there ever more danger? Are not these S. Paul's very (...), Hard times, so it is
in the Original: Perilous times, 2. Tim. 8.1.
as we translate it. In S. Paul's words in another place, Times full of perils,
perils of waters, perils of robbers, perils of our own Countrymen, perils of
the heathen, perils in the City, perils in the wilderness, perils in the sea,
perils among false brethren. 2. Cor. 11.26.
Why alas what comfort, what security can a pious soul have in such time of
peril? Surely none (that I know) but this, Deus Custos, The Watchman is the
Lord, The Lord himself is thy Keeper, the true Lord Keeper of his Church, and
every faithful member of it. And therefore as it is in the Psalm, The lying
lips shall be put to silence which cruelly, disdainfully, and despitefully
speak against the Righteous. Psalm. 31.20.
But for them, Thou, O Lord, shall hide them privily by thine own presence,
Thou shall keep them secretly in thy Tabernacle, from the strife of tongues.
Thou shall hide them by thine own presence: 23.
O blessed and secure condition! unadvised Jonah, he being troubled flies from
the presence of the Lord; Jonah 1.3.
but in the next verse, he falls into a storm; The Lord sent a great wind into
the sea, and there was a mighty tempest. How much better is it, with David in a
storm and tempest to fly for shelter into the presence of the Lord? Thou shall
hide them privily by thine own presence. Thou shall keep them secretly in thy
Tabernacle. The Chamber of Gods presence in their souls shall be their
protection; Gods Tabernacle shall be their Castle; and God himself shall be
Custos, the Keeper, the Watchman.

Though this be most true and comfortable, that God is a Watchman; yet, with
all reverence to S. Hierome, God (I take it) is neither the only nor indeed
the proper Watchman in the Text. And therefore in the second place, The
Watchman, that is Minister Dei, says Vrsine; Ursinus in Comm.
Propheta, says Junius on the place, Jun^us in Notis.
qui se custodem esse gloriatur and excubare pro salute populi, judiciaque Dei
explorare. The Prophets, the Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments, are Gods
Watchmen in his Church, who are there set by him to watch over the peoples
souls as they that must give account; Heb. 13.17.
and timely to blow their trumpet, Ezekiel. 33.31.
to descrie and discover Gods approaching wrath and judgments for the peoples
sins. These are the proper Watchmen of the Text; not excluding God; for he,
as you have heard, is Custos, nay Custos custodum, The Watchmens Watchman, Qui
custodit ipsos custodes, He keeps the Keepers; (...), says S. Peter, 1. Pet.
5.4.
The chief Shepherd, that is, the Shepherd of Shepherds; Curat oves, oviumque
magistros; He feeds the shepherds and their flocks too; he watches both over
the Watchman and the City too. And it is well it is so, for Except the Lord
keep the City, the Watchman watches but in vain. Psalm. 127.2.
But under God it is the Watchmans proper charge to watch; and no man must
serve in that charge, but who is there set by God; either immediately by
himself, in extraordinary cases; so God set Ezekiel, Son of man, I have made
thee a Watchman unto the house of Israel: Ezekiel. 3.17.
Or mediately, in a settled and ordinary way, by men authorized thereto from
God; as here at the sixth verse, Thus has the Lord said unto me, Go set a
Watchman. Isaiah 21.6.
The Apostles themselves were set as Watchmen immediately by God: And by
authority from God, they with their own hands (...) set their successors to
be Watchmen after them; that they should still lampada tradere, orderly succeed
in the several watches of the night, until the morning of the resurrection,
the great day, the day of the Lord: and so as it were from hand to hand
continue a successive watch by imposition of hands. And blessed be God, that so
it is still in this our Church. Let therefore no bold and common person without
a calling, dare to profane the ministry of Gods holy ordinances; O let them
not dare to sit in Moses chair, nor lay hands upon the Ark of Aaron. For
Laymen to teach and instruct their families at home, in the fundamental
grounds of piety and Religion, such as they understand, God forbid I should
open my mouth against it; nay let my mouth be for ever shut, when it shall not
be ready to open it self in approbation of it, and exhortation to it.
Vnusquisque paterfamilias est minister Christi, and erga suos Ecclesiasticus;
and quodammodo Episcopale officium implere debet: Aug. in Psalm. 50. Quomodo
pertinet in Ecclesia loqui vobis, sic ad vos pertinet in domibus vestris agere,
etc.
S. Augustine. Every man in this case is a Minister, nay if you will a Bishop,
so he keep his Diocese. But for the public charge, the Pulpit, that is the
chair of Moses: let Nadab and Abihu then take heed how they approach unto it;
there to offer up the strange fire of their preposterous zeal, lest fire come
down from heaven, and so devour them. Lev. 10.2.
The supper of the Lord is the Ark of the Covenant, committed to the charge of
Aaron and his sons: let then no over-officious Uzzah dare to put forth his
unhallowed hand and touch it, no, though happily he intends no harm, though
he think only to hold it when the oxen shake it; 2. Sam. 6.6.
Lest the anger of the Lord be kindled against Vzzah, and God smite him that he
die before the Ark. O then as we love our souls, let us learn to know our
selves, and know our charges: Let no man take this honor unto himself, but he
that is called of God as Aaron was. Heb. 5.4.
Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? 1. Cor. 12.29
are all Teachers? It is a known and admirable Climax of the Apostles: How then
shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10.14.
God is my witness, I speak not this out of any spirit of pride, or contempt
of the persons or gifts of others, be they never so mean; much less out of any
spirit of envy at their parts, be they never so great. I can say (I trust)
with Moses and in the spirit of Moses, that is in the spirit of meekness,
Would God that all the Lords people were prophets; and that the Lord would put
his spirit upon them. Numb. 11.29.
But we must give God leave to be the Orderer of his own Ordinances; who being
the God of order, 1. Cor. 14.33. (...).
will doubtless revenge the contemptuous breach of order. And we must take
leave to call upon men to keep their callings, Not to touch the mount lest they
die. Exodus 19.12.
Quam quisque norit artem: In the fear of God, let every man hold him to his
trade. Ne suitor ultra crepidam: Let not a taylour instead of a garment cut out
a Text; and it may be with some stolen shreds patch up a Sermon. Let him not
mistake the Lords Board for a shopboard. No, let not every man as he list
venture to be a Watchman, or meddle with the Watchmans charge. Surely if this be
suffered, we shall all suffer; God will never take it at our hands. He
quarrelled once that the meanest or lowest of the people were made Priests by
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.31.
though the truth is that service was only for calves, at the best but golden
calves: what is it then for the meanest of the people to make themselves
ministers of God? Nay, not themselves neither: Ministers of God they will be,
yet neither so made by God nor man: It is easy then to guess from whence they
come, and by what spirit they are led. These are not Vigiles but Noctambulones:
These are disturbers of the Watch, not Watchmen: These are not led by the
spirit, but scared with sprites. Like Acts 19.13,14.
the seven sons of one Sceva a vagabond Jew, that without commission would
needs conjure out evil spirits in the name of Jesus. Such there are still
amongst us of a vagabond and Jewish brood. Seven sons; I am sorry that
generation was so fruitful. It may be the superstitious Jews thought the
seventh son at least would do miracles, and cast out Devils: But you know
what happened, The evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I
know, sed qui vos? but who are ye? and the man in whom the spirit was leaped
upon them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them. Acts 19.15.
Jesus I know, and Paul I know: Heb. 5.5. Acts 9.4.
Jesus was called of his Father; and Paul of Jesus; both these had their
warrantable callings, you see the devil himself could not deny it. Sed qui
vos? Who are ye? ye that have no calling; ye that pretend the spirit of Jesus
against the ordinance of Jesus. O take heed lest the evil spirit, which you
would seem to cast out, do not ipso facto, even by this very means, enter into
you, overcome you, and prevail against you. Our Watchman here, as you may be
assured from the president in this chapter at the 5. verse, has a good
commission for his charge; even a commission to the same which we lay claim to;
Prepare a table, Watch in the Watchtower. Isa. 21.5.
The Pulpit, that is our Watchtower; The Lords Supper, that is our Table; The
officiating at these is ours, and we lay claim to it; procul, procul este
profani. For others, quoad hoc, hands off. If they will still presumptuously
rush upon God, and his holy ordinances; If they (which I beseech God to stop, I
say if they) without a warrant will still prepare the Table, and watch in the
Watchtower, I must go on with the rest of that verse, Arise ye Princes, and
anoint the shield. Isa. 21.5.
Let lawful authority force them to the obedience of the law of Christ. This
is the Watchmans charge, For thus says the Lord, Go set a Watchman. Isa. 21.6.
But then what follows? Let him declare what he sees. The Watchman that is
set, he must declare; and so does our Watchman in the Text. He was a Watchman,
that was his Charge; But The Watchman said, Custos dixit, That is his
Discharge, and our second particular.

His Discharge, Dixit, He said; So he Does; and so he ought to do. Go set a
Watchman, says the Lord, and let him declare what he sees. So then to make up
this full discharge, The Watchman must see, He must declare, and He must
declare what he sees, and all is employed in this He said. He must See, Away
then with all blind, ignorant, and unlearned Watchmen that cannot see. He must
Declare, Away then with all dumb, idle, and slothful Watchmen that will not
say. He must Declare what he sees, Away then with all false, all flattering,
and treacherous Watchmen, that see one thing, but say another.

Our Watchman must first see, or else (the truth is) he cannot say: He is a
madman that trusts a blind man to be a watchman. A minister of Christ must not
be ignorant of the mysteries of Christ; nor of those Arts and Sciences, of
those tongues and languages that are now required thereunto. If the blind lead
the blind, you know what becomes of both. The Prophets were of old called
Seers, and speculatores, (...); 1. Sam. 9.9.
Then they must (...), yea and (as their place may be) (...); not only See,
but Oversee, that is rule and govern. It is required there should be an order
even among the Watchmen, or else the Watchmen will soon be out of order. Jer.
37.13. we find a Captain of the Watch; Jer. 37.13.
and (...), the Captain of the Temple, Acts 4.1.
that is, of the watch of the Temple, as appears by S. Matthew. Matthew. 17.65.
And this Captain and his watch had their Watchtower too, even Turrem
Antoniam, Joseph. antiq. 18.16.
the Turret next the Temple, where the robes of the High Priest were kept,
which was called the Tower of Anthony. And in the fettled government of Gods
Church, both before and ever since our Saviors and his Apostles times, in the
time of the Law and the Gospel, it cannot be denied but as there was a Watch,
so in that Watch there was an order: Priests and chief Priests, (...) and
(...). The Bishops chait it is (...), the Watchmans Tower, Specula (...).
First, a Tower for strength against the adversary. Who, that pretends to
learning, dare gainsay that in all former ages the famous Bishops have been the
bulwarks of the Church of God; blessed Martyrs, holy Confessors, and the
profoundest Doctors. Witness their lasting monuments which shall outlive both
time and envy. Ideo altior locus positus est Episcopis, ut ipsi superintendant
and tanquam custodiant populum, Aug. in Psalm. 126.
Secondly, a Tower for eminency. It is most requisite that he who must see
far, should be placed high; the advantage of the place does help the sight.
God has set the eyes which are, says the Orator, tanquam speculatores in
corpore, Cicero lib. 2. de natura Deor.
the bodies watchmen, not in the feet or any of the lower members, but in the
head, in capite tanquam in Capitolio, in the Turret of the head. Qui Ecclesiae
praesides corporis Christies oculus, says Origin. Hom. 7. in Jos.
Since then the Bishop is the Churches eye, we may well afford him the eminency
and honor of his chair. Yea, and a correspondency of means withal: since he
is in a special manner to Watch; Let me use still the words of the Prophet,
Prepare a Table that he may watch in the watchtower. I saiah 21.5.
Since he must watch, you must not make him fast too; take away his means: that
would be too much; this is to make him not stand as a Watchman, but to lie
perdieu. No; prepare a table, and then on Gods name let him watch in the watch
tower, that is, not only see but say: The second branch.

That is Preach: For I would not be mistaken: I confess I reverence the Order,
for the Antiquity, Universalitie, and (where it is rightly ordered) the great
Convenience of it; but I come no Advocate for pompous ignorance, or learned
silence. This particular prophecy, in the verse before the Text, is called (ye
know) The burden of Dumah, and Dumah from (...), (from whence perhaps our
English dumb does come) is silentium, silence. Duma vel similitudinem vel
silentium sonat, Hieron. in locum.
Dumah interpretatur silentium, says S. Bernard; then surely to an idle
silence (wheresoever it is found) there does belong a burden, a heavy judgment
is threatened from the mouth of God. Neither our Watchmans seeing nor his
overseeing must stop his saying. Let the Watchman have his Watchtower; but let
not that tower be so high that his voice may not be heard below; Prepare him a
table, but let not his table be made a snare unto him, to stop his breath. God
as he has placed the eyes in the head, so the tongue too. The Bishops chair is
not a chair of state or chair of ease. S. Paul's (...) 1. Tim. 3.2.
must be (...); His chair is then Cathedra doctoralis, it is the chair of
Moses; and thence they are to teach and preach, even by their example to
encourage preachers, to preach up preaching. Praedicatio praecipuum munus
Episcoporum, The very Council of Trent determines it; Sess 5.10.2.
Preaching is the chiefest flower in the Bishops garden. An unpreaching Bishop
is an Idol in the Church, That has eyes and sees not; at least, he has a
mouth and speaks not. It was a fearful complaint, that of S. Gregory of his
times, Ad exteriora negotia delapsi sumus, and aliud ex honor suscipimus,
atque aliud ex officio actionis exhibemus. Ministerium praedicationis
relinquimus, and ad poenam nostram ut video Episcopi vocamur, qui honoris
nomen, non virtutis tenemus. Greg. Hom. 17. in Ev^ng.
I will not english it. But if we stop our mouths, it is no marvel if the
people open theirs. When the watchmen were asleep (you know the story) Anseres
clangore and alarm crepitu M. Manlium excitarunt. Live. Dec. 1. lib. 5.
etiam striderunt anseres, the geese once gagled to save the Capitol. The only
way to stop their clamours, is to use our own. Clama, ne cesses; Cry aloud and
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet. Isaiah 58.1.
This voice will drown their cries: It is not all the learning in thy brain
will do it, Scire tuum nihil est. Pers.
It must be thy learning in thy tongue, The Lord has given me the Tongue of
the learned. Isaiah 50.4.
It is the Priests lips, and not his head, that must preserve knowledge, and
the people seek the Law at his mouth. Mal. 2.7.
Good Zachary indeed though a Priest was dumb; Luke 1.22.
but when his tongue could not, his pen did speak; He made signs for his
writing-tables. Luke 1.62,63.
In that case his pen may be his tongue, but otherwise his tongue, like David's,
must be his pen; My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Psalm. 45.2.
They say in the fable that when Argus was set a watch to Io, Mercury the
feigned Deity of eloquence did charm him: Ovid.
Our Watchman must have the eyes of Argus, says Hector Pintus, In Isai^.
and the tongue of Mercury. He must open the door of utterance by the key of
knowledge; He must both see, and say, yea and say what he sees. That is the
third branch.

Otherwise he is but a treacherous Watchman, a false and lying Prophet. A
Prophet, a true Minister of the Gospel (whatsoever the world now thinks) is
an Angel of light, an Herald of heaven, an Ambassador of God. Especially an
ancient and Reverend Father of the Church; he is the head, The ancient and
honorable he is the head. Isaiah 9 15.
But on the contrary, a lying, a flattering and seducing Prophet, he is the
tail, The Prophet that tells lies he is the tail: (what more base?) Metaphora
a canibus and serpentibus ducta; qui cauda blandientes sensim illabuntur and
venenum evomunt. Cor. in locum.
O take heed of these, the poison of asps is under their lips, and the sting of
death is in their tayls. These leaders of the people cause them to err; and
they that are led of them are destroyed. Isaiah 9.16.
Such are Romes Scouts, their Emissaries, their Spies, even treacherous
Watchmen; who hold out false fires to poor straying souls, and give false
alarums to frighted consciences. You know who it is that is a lying spirit in
the mouth of the Prophets. 2. Chron. 18.21.
As for us, we have our light too and our alarm, even Gods word and the true
preaching of that word: We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto
ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. 2.
Pet. 1.19.
But with the word must go the alarm. The faithful Belman, the walking
Watchman of the night, commonly is furnished not only with his lantern, but
his bell: A Minister of Gods Church, he must have his lantern; Not one borrowed
from Faux, not Romes lantern, not a dark one, the lantern of humane Traditions,
by which they can turn the light of Doctrine which way they please; no Judas
lantern John 18.3.
to betray Gods truth; but David's lantern, the written word of God: Thy word
(says David) is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. But as he
must have David's lantern, so he must have Aarons bells. We hardly think a
Churchman possessed till he have rung his bells: That is but a supposed
Ceremony at his entrance; but the ringing of this bell, the constant and
faithful preaching of the true word of God, is the main substance of our
performance. By this he rings all in; he rings the truth of Christ into the
peoples ears and hearts; he rings both himself and all his auditors into
heaven. Take heed to thy self, and to thy doctrine; continue in them; for in
doing this thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. 1. Tim. 4.16.
Blessed are those watchmen whom the Lord when he comes shall find thus
watching. If he shall come in the second watch or in the third watch, blessed
are those servants. Luke 12.37,38.
And such we may suppose was the Watchman of the Text, a seeing, saying,
faithful Watchman. As it seems, he did not only vigilare, but excubias
agere, he kept both watch and ward; like Jacob, he watched his flock both day
and night. Genesis 31.40.
The Watchword does import no less: Here are tidings of the Morning, and
tidings of the Night; The morning comes and also the night. Like the vigilant
and spritefull cock (the native watchman of the house) he no sooner perceives
the morning dawn, but falls a crowing. Nay, like S. Peter's cock, Matthew. 26.75.
he croweth, and cries for our repentant tears; To Inquire, to Return, to
Come; That is the note; The Watchman said, The morning comes and also the
night: If ye will inquire, inquire; Return, Come.

And now it is high time to dismiss our Watchman, and our first general with
him. The second follows, and that is the Watchword, all tending to
repentance, but it is partly Monitory, and partly Directory. We begin with the
first, the Doctrine or Monition, Venit mane, The Morning comes and also the
Night.

Which in a twofold sense gives us a twofold motive to Repentance. We may take
the words Naturally and Morally. Naturally, The Morning comes and also the
Night; that is, our time is fleeting, and our whole life is fading, the Morning
of our life does pass, our Night of death draws on, therefore Repent.
Secondly Morally, The Morning of prosperity and of Gods mercies, that comes;
The Night of adversity and Gods temporal judgments, that comes. Since
therefore we are thus summoned both by the voice of Mercy, and the voice of
Judgment, therefore Repent.

First Naturally, Repent, because our time passes, our life fades, and our
death approaches. Our Savior said it of himself, I must work the works of him
that sent me while it is day, the Night comes when no man can work. John 9.4.
While it is day, that is, (...), says S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in locum.
while life does last; Quamdin vita suppetit, Dies est, post mortem Nox: Bar.
Our life is a Day, and our death a Night; a long night after a short winters
day. If we neglect to work this Day, what follows? Nox est perpetua una
dormienda; Catul.
a dismal and an eternal night. We fool away our time, (God knows) our
precious time either in not working, or in not working the works of him that
sent us; in works of vanity, works of curiosity, nay works of iniquity. A
Heathen could complain of this, Magna pars vitae elabitur male agentibus;
maxima, nihil agentibus; tota, aliud agentibus. Senec, ep. 1. ad Lucil.
But we Christians practice it. How many of us spend the choice of our dear
time in trickings and trimmings, in tirings and dressings? Dum moliuntur, dum
comuntur annus est. Tere^.
I dare say the morning is gone before many of us know it is come; at least by
any serious work that we have done therein. And be there not that spend their
Nights in revellings and riotings? O little do they think of that approaching
night of death; that serious thought would damp their sport and spoil their
play. How many are there of us that can spend an age in courting of some fair
face, some beauty of the times, and think of no other heaven then the fruition
of our Mistress favor; and her smile the only vision beatificall. Why alas,
vain man, death is courting that face as well as thou; and oftentimes he proves
the more successful, or at least the more revengefull rival. In the heat of
all thy pursuit, he either takes her from thee, or thee from her, and sends ye
to another world, there to embrace; but what? eternal flames. Again, he says
it in the Comedy, Sic vita est hominum ac si ludas tesseris, Terent.
The life of man is even as a game at Chesse or Tables. Many of us indeed make
it so without a trope or figure. We spend our life, whole days and nights,
even our best hours, at Cards, or Tables, or some such idle exercise; We sit
down to eat and to drink, and rise up to play. Exodus 32.6.
There is the model of our Gallants life; the summa totalis of his time laid
out. I do not say that all games or playing are in themselves unlawful. No,
but this I say, At the best they are no otherwise lawful then as recreations;
to which he has no right which has not first seriously employed himself in
his Vocation: He has no right to play, that does refuse to work. In what
condition then are they who scorn the very name of a Vocation? no, they would
have you know, they are better born then so, to follow a Vocation and be bound
to work. They have no other business but to enjoy their pleasure, (...). 2.
Tim. 3 4.
Was this the end that God sent thee forth into the world? Does God employ us
here as Claudius did his soldiers to gather cockles? Or will it be our last
account, How many games we have played, or sets we have won? Won? There
will appear but little winning then, I fear. He that in such sad times as these
has lost an hour at play, though happily he has won a pound, nay hundreds of
pounds, may put all his winnings in his eye; and so he must, and weep them out.
Would we spend our time thus, if we knew our time to be so short, and our work
so serious as Repentance is? Dies brevis, opus multum, opera^ pigri, Rabbi
Simeon.
That is the work of him that sent us. Tertullian said it of himself, Tertul.
lib. de poen.
I say it of us all, Omnium notarum peccatores, nec ullae rei quam poenitentiae
nati sumus. We are born for this, and only this. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 1.
We come into the world with tears; though our tongues cannot speak, yet our
eyes soon tell our errand. But we no sooner grow up to that which we miscall
years of discretion, but (like Idiots) we presently forget the errand for
which we are sent. No, it is true our lives are short; I know nothing shorter,
but one, and that is our wits and memories. Ars longa, vita brevis, said
Theophrastus: Theophrast.
Give me leave to say, Vita brevis est ars longa: It is one of the hardest
lessons, and we are longest in learning it, To know that our lives are short.
Every man almost would be a Macrobius, and flatters himself with the hopes of a
long life. Why man, thy life (at most) is but a day. Be it so: Yet, be there
not twelve hours in the day? at least, quatuor insigniores horae, as
Tertullian calls them, Tertull. de jejun. cap. 10.
specially mentioned in the Gospel. There is, says Origin, Orig. hem. 10. in
Matthew.
Hora pueritiae, adolescentiae, virilis aetatis, and senectutis: A twylight of
childhood, a morning of youth, a noon of perfect age, and an afternoon of old
age. All this before a night of Death: then time enough to repent. Yes; but
when? Will thou begin in thy childhood? What? put a child unto so harsh a
master, to repentance school? (...), That age was made for sport, and not for
work; gestit paribus colludere. Horat.
Well, youth is come, shall repentance be welcome now? By no means; Rejoice O
young man in thy youth, etc. Eccles 11.9.
Now let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments; Let no flower of
the spring pass by us; Let us crown our selves with rose buds before they be
withered: Wisd. 2 7,8.
And take our fill of love. Prove. 7.18.
Shall I poison the sweet flower of my youth with that bitter herb of grace,
Repentance? No, away Repentance; Thou come to torment me before my time. By
this time thou art become a man, what say thou to Repentance yet? Quin
importuna abi poenitentia; Unmannerly Repentance; I never had more business in
my life; Horat. de art^.
Aetas animusque virilis Quaerit opes and amicitias, inservit honori. My head
is wholly taken up with affairs of State; I am raising a family; I am
contriving to get into some great Office either in Church or State. When I have
got that, it may be I shall have more leisure, but certainly more cause to
repent. Therefore, good Repentance, spare me for a while, Go thy way for this
time, when I have a convenient season I will call for thee. Come to me somewhat
about my Old age. Nay Old age it self will not be old enough, Nemo tam senex,
says the Orator; Age hopes for an Evening even after an Afternoon. Thus we
post off Repentance from day to day, from Age to Age, as if it were fit only
for our dotage. Well, I will not say that Repentance then is either impossible
or unacceptable. But this I Will say, he is stark mad that trusts to that. O it
is the most Incongruous, most Difficult, most Hazardous thing in all the world.
Most incongruous: What? sing matins to the devil, and even-song to God? Have
thou nothing for him but the fag end of a life, the dregs of Age? Most
Difficult: Do thou think that thou will be fit to turn to God, when thou
can scarcely turn thee in thy bed? and that sin and Satan, the sole
companions of thy life, will shake hands with thee when thou art shaking hands
with the world? But above all it is most hazardous. Fond men that we are, we
talk of a noon, an afternoon, yea and an evening too; but my Text has only a
morning and a night, to teach us not only the shortness, but withal the
uncertaintie of life. Thou have a Morning now; how soon may thou be
overtaken with a Stulte hac nocte. God has not warranted thee a noon of life,
much less a noon of Grace. O then take heed lest thou that neglectest this
morning, be not surprised by night. Be thy age what it will, haec hora est
tua, Mart.
this hour is thy morning, Gallicinium: When this Gospel sounds the cock does
crow; the next hour for ought thou know may be Conticinium, the dead of
night; and thou hear no other music but the scrichowls note. Lord teach us
therefore so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom:
Psalm. 90.12.
And our wisdom is not (...), but (...), it is not Providence, but Repentance.
Let us therefore repent, for our life passes, our death approaches; The
Morning comes and also the Night: That is the first motive from the words
taken Naturally.

Secondly, Morally. The Morning of Prosperity and of Gods mercy, that comes:
The Night of Adversity and of Gods temporal judgments, that comes; Therefore
Repent. Per MANE praesentis vitae prosperit as designatur, says S. Gregory.
Moral. 16. cap. 27.
In prosperis and in adversis, hoc est in die ac nocte. Hieron in locum.
Every of Gods several blessings which he bestows on any of us in this life,
as Health, or Wealth, or Peace, or the enjoyment of his Word and Ordinances,
they are a kind of Morning to a Christian: They bring light to his eyes, heat
to his heart, they help to cheer his spirits and to warm his blood; Heaviness
may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30.5.
Yet the truth is, there is none, no not all of these are more then a Morning:
no blessing of this life can shine forth unto a perfect day; their light is
never full, and often changing, ever in danger of a night. No, the perfect day
is only the bliss of heaven; Lux haec perpetua est, and sine nocte dies. All
the best days of this life put together make but a Christians morning. Yet
there is none of these morning rays but should cause rorem matutinum, a
morning dew upon our souls. Look how the lowly earth, when the early sun
salutes it first, sends forth her vapors and exhalations toward heaven; as it
were in a due acknowledgement of her own baseness in her self, and in a real
thankfulness for those rays of light: just so the humble soul, when it
considers the undeserved blessings and mercies, of what kind soever, that God
vouchsafes unto it, cannot forbear to send forth some sighs and groans toward
heaven. Lord I am a sinful and a wretched creature, I was born in sin and
still live in it; as thou have added days unto my life, so have I each day
added sins to sins; and yet behold thou still do visit me, even every
morning, with thy loving kindness. O add this blessing to all the rest, give
me an heart truly sensible of thy goodness, and my own unworthiness; O let me
spend my self in heavenly sighs and groans; O let thy grace bedew my soul; O
let me melt into repentant tears; O let me live no longer in the fog of my old
sins. The night is far spent, the day is come, let us walk therefore as
children of the light. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
God in this morning has sent thee a ray of health, thou have an able body, a
firm and cheerful constitution: take heed thou do not abuse that health to
riot and intemperance, to surfeting and drunkenness, to lust and
lasciviousness; if thou do, thou cloudest thy morning. God in this morning
has sent unto another a ray of wealth, thou have riches in abundance: O then
abuse not thy wealth to pride and vanity, to avarice or worldliness; if thou
do, thou cloudest thy morning. God in this morning has sent to others a ray
of peace, they sit with quiet under their own vine and figtree: O then abuse
not this peace to idleness and security, be not senseless of thy poor
brethrens misery. Woe be to them that lie upon their beds of Ivorie, and stretch
themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the
calves out of the midst of the stall; That chaunt to the sound of the viol, and
invent to themselves instruments of music; That drink wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments; but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. Amos 6.4.
What is this but to cloud thy morning? Above all, God sends unto us the
sunshine of his Gospel, the light of his heavenly truth: O let us not shut our
eyes against that light, and turn our backs upon it; O let us not loath our
manna, and look back to Egypt; when light is come into the world, let us not
love darkness more then light: Heredian. lib. 4. Plato 10. de Leg.
But as the Persians, Parthians, and other heathens were wont every morning to
adore the Sun: so let us look to our God through every several blessing;
every morning salute the sun of Righteousness: (...), Rhodiginus lib. 15.
the Grecians were wont to say at every approach of light; then let every ray
of Gods gracious light, every blessing direct thine eyes upward, even to the
Father of lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift. James 1.17.
Especially those whom God has encompassed with his blessings; especially that
Nation which above all others under heaven has enjoyed health, and wealth, and
peace, and truth, and all together; those to whom God has given both the dew
of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, the blessings of the right hand, and
of the left too. When Gods countenance shines not only on our souls, but even
on our bodies and our estates withal; O surely this is a pleasant Morning;
When the light of Gods favor does not only appear bright in heaven, but even
gilds our very earth; When with the Gospel we enjoy all besides; When, as the
voice of the turtle is heard in our land, Cant. 2.12.
so the voice of joy and health is in our dwellings; Cum prata rident, When our
valleys do stand so thick with corn, that they even laugh and sing; Psalm.
118.15.
Cum ipsa suas mirantur Gargara messes; Virg.
when our garners be full and plenteous with all manner of store; when our
sheep bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets; when our oxen be
strong to labor, and there is no decay, no leading into captivity, and no
complaining in our streets; Psalm. 144.13.
O this surely is a gladsome Morning; Jane clarum mane fenestras Intrat and
angustas extendit lumine rimas. Stertimus? Pers. Sat. 3.
O me thinks this Morning should invite even a drowsy soul to rise; to arise
in thankfulness toward heaven. When our God appears to us, not as the Poets
Jupiter to Semele, Ovid.
but as to Danae; not in a crack of thunder, but in a shower of gold: when God
speaks to us, not out of a whirlwind, as to Job of old, Job 38.1.
and to our neighbor Countries now of late; but as to Eliah, in a still small
voice; 1. Kings 19.12.
What is all this, but a sweet wooing of us to Repentance? Suidas tells us
that when the morning rays, when the beams of the rising sun in the morning
lighted upon Memnons statue, cut out of stone in Egypt, the very stone did
speak, (...) Suidas.
and lest we should take it for a fable, Tacitus affirms as much, Memnonis
saxea effigies ubi radiis solis icta fuerit vocalem sonum reddit; Tacit. Annal.
2.
there be that add, that this voice was both a melodious and a doleful voice,
neseio quid sonabat lacrymabile. Not. Com. Myth. 6.
What though our hearts be hard? yea, hard as stone, corda lapidea, Ezekiel. 11.19.
the Prophet called them so, harder then the nether millstone; Job 41.24.
yet me thinks if there be any thing of Memnons statue, of Christ's image
engraven on them, this morning-light, the light of Gods countenance, the rays
of so many blessings, which in our Halcyon days he has heaped upon us, should
even make these stones to speak, to answer him, aut nescio quid sonare
lacrymabile, at least, for our not answering, to mourn in sighs, and melt into
repentant tears. Good David his heart even melted within him; yea, there was a
heart of wax, My heart in the midst of my body is even like melting wax. Psalm.
22.14.
That is a sweet temper of a heart, when it melts in the sunshine of Gods
favors. But what then is that heart that is hardened by them? O surely those
are corda lutea, ex meliore, shall I say? or ex duriore luto. It is dirt, it is
dirt that hardens in the sun. And to be obdurate notwithstanding so many
mercies, is impenitence died in ingratitude, a sin in grain. What is this but
to despise the riches of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering;
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance. Romans 2.4.
But if thou will not lead, God will try if thou will drive; Ducunt volentem
futa, nolentem trahunt: Sen. Trag.
God has not a Morning only but a Night also; The Morning comes and also the
Night.

The Night of Adversity, the Night of Judgments. For God, as in the midst of
judgment he remembers mercy, so at the end of mercy he remembers judgment. If
by the extending of the golden scepter of his mercy, he cannot reclaim us; then
he summons as with his Black rod, the Night of judgments and afflictions. It
was ingratitude not to listen to the music of his mercy; but it is open
defiance to stand one against the thunder of his judgments. What is that but
(...), giant-like to bid battle to the God of heaven? In what case are they
then that outface both? Yet such there be. Thus God sent Moses with a message,
and withal Aaron with a rod to Egypt; and if Pharaoh do still stand out, he
turns that rod into a serpent. If his message take not place, God often sends
his rod; not only to his open enemies, but to his disobedient children; not
only unto Egypt, but to Israel. If Israel break my statutes and keep not my
commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with a rod, and their
sin with scourges. Psalm. 89.31.
And the Prophet Jeremy speaks it of himself, I am the man that have seen
affliction by the rod of his wrath. Lam. 3.1.
And that rod, it seems, was the black rod too, for so it follows, He has led
me, and brought me into darkness, and not into light. Lam. 3.2.
There be that think that the same rod which God employed in Egypt, he
afterward used in Israel: Rabbi Simeon apud Galat. 1.6.
and that it is the same rod which is sometimes called in Scripture the rod of
Moses, sometimes the rod of Aaron, sometimes, and most properly, the rod of
God. But sure I am if they be diverse (whatsoever is become of the rod of Aaron,
or of the rod of Moses) the rod of God is not yet lost. For the rod of Aaron
the Apostle tells us that it was laid up in the Ark of the Covenant. Heb. 9 4.
I know that place is much disputed by reason that we read in the Kings, That
there was nothing in the Ark save the two tables of stone. 1. Kings 8.9.
How was the rod in the Ark, when there was nothing in the Ark but the tables?
Not to trouble you with the conjectures of others, I conceive that the Apostles
(...), In which, relating to the Ark, (not to the Tabernacle, as Ribera thinks)
is as much as (...), together with the Ark; or if you will, (...), close or
near unto the Ark: So the Hebrew (...) is sometimes taken as well for that
which is near about, as for that which is properly within. The rod of Aaron
then might be said to be in the Ark, as being near unto the Ark. And so the
truth is, that in the Tabernacle or Sanctum Sanctorum there was placed the Ark
of the Covenant, in which was the Tables, over which was the Oracle and the
Mercy-seat, and before it, or near unto it, was the rod of Aaron. Maimonid.
tom. 3. in Bethhabchirah, cap. 4.
For the rod of Moses, Baronius Baron. in anno 1008.
tells us out of one Glaber, that in the year 1008, part of that rod was
miraculously found in a city of France; and that great multitudes, not only
of the French, but out of Italy and other Nations came to see it. I confess
this sounds loud of a legend, with which stuff those vast volumes are extremely
furnished. But for certain, the rod of God is still forthcoming; God has laid
up his rod safe, even in his Tabernacle, in his Sanctum Sanctorum, not far from
the Ark, the Oracle, and the Mercy-seat: both France, and Italy, yea and
England, and poor Ireland too have seen this rod, yea and felt it now of late.
If any people, though formerly never so dear unto God, begin once openly to
break his Covenant, to despise his Oracles, to neglect his Mercy-seat; then let
them know, that near unto the Ark of the Covenant, the Oracle, and the
Mercy-seat, God still has his rod, even the rod of Egypt. God has given unto
a Nation the blessing of Health, Clementiam coeli, salubritatem soli; Regio
quocunque anni tempore temperatissima, Ortel. de Anglia.
A great blessing, a fair Morning! But if that Nation do abuse that health,
either to riot and excess; or else to lust and uncleanness; If they be mighty
to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; Isa. 5.22.
If when they are fed to the full they commit adultery; and assemble themselves
by troops in the harlots houses; If, as fed horses in the morning, every one
neighs after his neighbors wife: Jer. 5.7,8.
then Cedo virgam, says God, give me my rod of Egypt, I will stretch out my
hand and smite that people with blains and botches, with the pox and purples,
yea with the plague and pestilence. And was not this lately even our own case?
or are we yet quite free? Behold your Morning turned into a dismal Night, the
night of sickness.

God has given a Nation the blessing of wealth and plenty; we have solum
foecundum frugiferumque, Ortel. de Angliae.
our land does feed us with the flower of the finest wheat; Psalm. 81.16.
our flocks do clothe us in the softest wools; our Seas bring in the spices of
Arabia, and the Sabean gummes, the gold of Ophir, the pearls and gemmes of
India, all the riches of Asia and America pay tribute to the British Ocean; A
great blessing, a fair Morning! But if thou employest this wealth to pride or
luxury; or if thou be still thirsty after more, and therefore, forgetting
works of piety and works of charity, hoardest up riches per fas nefasque, by
hook or crook, by right or wrong; Cedo virgam, says God, give me my rod of
Egypt; he strikes upon the dust of the earth and it turns to lice, Exodus 8.16.
to penury and want; he strikes upon thy estate, thy bags, thy cofers, and
behold all is empty; your trades decay, and stock does melt, Ye have put your
money into a bag with holes; Hag. 1.6.
Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I
did blow upon it. Hag. 1.9.
Is it not our case? behold your Morning turned into a dismal Night; a night
of scarcity. God has given unto a people the blessing of peace, peace abroad,
peace at home, peace in Church, peace in State; A great blessing, a fair
Morning! yet if we abuse this peace to pride, to oppression, to the neglect of
our brethren that be in misery, Cedo virgam, says God, give me my rod of
Egypt; God stretches out his hand upon the rivers and turns the waters into
blood: Exodus 7.19.
Make Proclamation, prepare war wake up the mighty men, let all the men of
war draw near; beat the plowshares into swords, and the pruning hooks into
spears: Joel 3.9,10.
How near are we that case? Behold your Morning turning into a dismal Night; a
night of war. God gives a people the truth of his word and worship, the pure
light of his Gospel; An unspeakable blessing, a glorious Morning! But if that
people shall either detain that truth in unrighteousness Romans 1.18.
and keep only a form of godliness but deny the power thereof; 2. Tim. 3.5.
Or if they shall not so much as keep the form, but openly corrupt Gods truth
through heresy, and pollute Gods worship with their own inventions; Cedo
virgam, says God, give me my rod of Egypt; I will stretch out my hand toward
heaven, I will cause a darkness through the land, a darkness that may be
felt, so that one man shall not see another, neither shall any rise from his
place. Exodus 10.21,22.
Behold your Morning turned into a dismal Night, a night of spiritual
darkness. And surely this is of all others the most dreadful night; the very
dead of night, more then a Cimmerian darkness, so gross that it may be felt.
When after so much means of light, gross ignorance does possess a people;
when in their ignorance they grope several ways, some to Superstition and
Idolatry, some to Schism and Separation, so that one does not see another;
and all this with so much obstinacy, that prove and preach what you will, none
will rise from his place, nor alter his resolution, it makes me fear, lest even
for this cause God should send strong delusions amongst us that we should
believe a lie. 3. These. 2.11.
O let us pray to God to dispell this Night of spiritual darkness, to keep
off this rod; strike us with any rod but this: strike us with sickness,
famine, war, rather then with spiritual blindness. The sunshine of Gods
truth will afford some light of comfort to pious souls even in the midst of
sickness, want, and war. But if the light of the Gospel be once put out,
though we enjoy health, and wealth, and peace, we are but in a desperate
darkness. The Philosopher said well, If the sun be once down it is night for
all the stars. Well, beloved, there is one way, and only one (I know) to
keep off all these strokes, to remove whatsoever judgments do threaten us in
this dismal night which comes fast upon us; and that is a stroke too: This
stroke was David's ward. When David had displeased his God by numbering the
people 2. Sam. 24.2.
(and have not we done so? whosoever, in such times as these, does not daily
number up his sins, he does number the people; whosoever, not relying and
daily addressing himself to God, trusts to his own plots and projects, to his
wit and policy, he does number the people) well, when David had thus offended,
the Text says, His heart smote him. 2. Sam. 24.10.
If our hearts did truly smite us with a sense of our transgressions, God
either would not strike us, or striking would not hurt us, His rod and his
staff should comfort us. Psalm. 23.4.
But if thy heart with David will not strike thee; then do thou as the
Publicane, strike thou thy heart, percussit pectus, He struck his breast, and
said, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.13.
If thy heart will not complain, complain of thy heart; grieve because thou
can not grieve. But if we be so hard hearted to our selves, and tender
hearted to our sins, that we will neither strike our heart nor our heart
strike us, then what shall I say? Nothing remains for me, but only to pray to
God to take away these hearts, and to give us new ones, Cor novum crea, etc.
Make us a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within us. Psalm. 51.10.
In the words of Ezekiel, That God would take away these hearts of stone and
give us hearts of flesh. Ezekiel. 11.19.
Nay rather, with Bonaventure, that God would take from us these hearts of
flesh and give us hearts of stone; Were our hearts of stone, they would surely
feel the rod of God. When Israel was in distress and in a night of judgment,
ready for thirst to perish, God by the hand and rod of Moses struck the stony
rock, and the waters gushed out, and the streams flowed withal. Psalm. 78.21.
O that God, by that powerful rod of his, would strike the stony rocks of our
obdurate hearts that those waters, the waters of repentance might gush out. Our
Repentance, this is it which God expects, that he has long called for, early
and late, both in the morning, and in the night, even that we should inquire,
return, and come: so says the Text, The Watchman said, the morning comes and
also the night; if ye will inquire, inquire; return, come.

IF ye will inquire, inquire; return, come. That is the latter part, the
Directory of our Watchmans Watchword. A part that is rich in matter, and full
of life, but must be strangled by the time. The steps are three; The Prophet
has expressed them in three words; I must dispatch them in almost as few.
Where our first inquiry is about Inquiry,; if ye will Inquire, Inquire.
Inquire, of Whom, and of What? Of what? Inquire of thy own state to Godward:
Then, of whom should thou inquire but of God and thee. Inquire of God in his
Word; of thy self in thy Conscience; P^s.
Nec te quaesiveris extra. Let Gods Word tell thee what thou ought to do;
Let thy conscience tell thee what thou have done. The result of these two
inquiries will tell thee truly in what state thou stand to God. Gods Word is
speculum voluntatis divinae, a perfect glass of his ordinance concerning thee;
and thy conscience is speculum vitae, the most perfec glass, where by
reflection thou may see thy performance toward him. I see now adays many
much delighted in their looking-glasses; we will be sure to use them every
morning, and every night; we dress us and undresse us by them: Nay we are not
only dressed by them, but dressed with them; we wear them at our girdles, they
are become part of our apparel. Nay no room almost is now dressed up without a
looking-glass; and that in folio, a glass in the largest volume. It may be
you shall not find a Bible there, no not in the least. O that the glass of
Gods word, the miroir of eternal life, were in half so much use and esteem
amongst us. I will not say, as Tertullian seems, that they are Nundinatrices
pudicitiae quae consiliu^ formae a speculo petunt; Tertull. de vel. vug. c. 12.
That they set their bodies out to sale that dress their faces by a glass.
No, Socrates long since gave way to it in his scholars; A fair face, says he,
may learn even from the glass to beautify the soul; that so either part may
answer other; and those who are deformed may learn from thence the more to add
beauty to the soul to recompense defect. Apul. Apol. 1. Pharar. in praceptis
conjug. Sen. 1. Natural. Quast. cap. 17.
But this I will say, that they who more consult their glass then they do
their Bible, inquire more whether they be fair then good; and this is not the
inquiry of the Text. No, if ye will inquire, inquire; that is, inquire to
Godward. These inquire more into man's pleasure and their own pride, then into
Gods will and their own duty. First look on Gods glass, and then in Gods name
look on thine. If thou once truly see the deformity of thy soul, I dare trust
thee, thou will never pride thy self more in the beauty of thy body. In Grac.
Epigram.
Lais, the famous Curtezan, the pride of her youth being past, when she saw her
wrinckles threw away her glass; alas! the fault was in the face, not in the
glass: And too many of us upon the consciousnesse of our own sins, we throw
away our Bibles. In our Bibles we all, as in a glass, with open face behold
the glory of the Lord: 2. Cor. 3.18.
But when by a glimpse in our own consciences we perceive that we have all
sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23.
then we throw away the glass, and then we either go on carelessly in a bold
presumption, or fall suddenly into the pit of fearful desperation. Now God
forbid; No, inquire you must, nay and inquire you may. Search the Scriptures,
yea and search your hearts; John 5.34.
yea search them thoroughly, if ye will inquire, inquire; Psalm. 4.4.
search to the very bottom. Let me have no slight and superficial inquiry;
make not a pretense of inquiring and no such matter. Scrutemur vias nostras and
studia nostra, and in eo se judicet quisque profecisse, non cum non invenerit
quod reprehendat, sed cum quod invenerit reprehendit. Bern. Sermon. 58. in Cant.
Never cease to search till thou have found that thou had cause to search.
When Eliah sent his servant to the top of Carmel to report what he saw, the
Text says, He went up and looked, and said, Non est quicquam, There is
nothing. Well, go again says Eliah, seven times; 1. Kings 18.43,
and at the seventh time, the servant said, Behold, there arises a little
cloud, Sicut vola hominis, like a man's hand; 44,
But suddenly it came to pass, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind,
and there was a great rain. 45.
When we first employ our souls in this business of inquiry how things stand
betwixt God and us, whether no cloud of known sin do intercept his favor;
what with self-flattery, and what with negligent inquiry, we have no other
answer but all is well, Non est quicquam; There is nothing. How many here
present be there that never as yet made so much as a scruple of their
salvation? no, they think themselves as sure of heaven, and the blessed life to
come, as of this present life; they count themselves as deep in Gods favor, as
they are in their own. I pray God you have cause. But have thou inquired, man,
have thou inquired thoroughly? have thou inquired again and again, seven times?
If thou have, I dare say thou will discry a cloud; Shall I say a little cloud
of the bigness of a man's hand, Nubes sicut vola hominis? yes, all our clouds,
all our sins are measured by our own hands, they are the works of our
fingers, perhaps little at the first appearance: but soon after when the
conscience is well awakened, the whole heaven is black with clouds and wind.
Like S. Paul and his companions in the storm, neither sun nor stars in many
days appear, and no small tempest lies on us, all hope that we shall be saved
is taken away. Acts 27.20.
Behold, I am overshadowed, says one, with a cloud of ignorance; how negligent
have I been all my life in the reading and meditating of Gods word? how have I
profaned his day and despised his ordinances? Is there any hope that I should
be saved? Behold, I, says another, have been hurried with a tempest of wrath,
envy, and maliciousness: I have imbrued my hands in my brothers blood, for
which Christ shed his own. Is there any hope that I should be saved? Alas,
says a third, how have I been benighted in a cloud of lust, and smothered my
conscience for how long together in the unlawful bed? Is there any hope that I
should be saved? And I, says a fourth, have been puffed up with a proud and
ambitious wind, as though in despite of God, I would climb up to heaven by
the same way that Lucifer fell down. What hope is there for us that we should
be saved? Yes, poor souls, there is good hope; nay more hope of these that
have thus upon inquiry found their state, then of a thousand careless
wretches, or proud justiciaries, that either do not search, or will not find.
What though the heavens be black with clouds and wind? Remember what follows in
the Text, And there was a great rain. 1. Kings 18.44.
Let that rain follow upon thy inquiry: Shower down thy tears, and they will
spend the cloud, alay the storm, and clear the sky: I have blotted out as a
thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins; return unto me, for
I have redeemed thee. Isaiah 44.22.
If thou upon this inquiry wilt cry peccavi, God will cry veni; Do thou return,
and God cries Come; and therefore, If thou will inquire, inquire; Return, Come.

It is impossible to Return, unless we first Inquire; and it is unprofitable
to Inquire unless we also Turn: And therefore, Let us search and try our
ways, and Turn, says the Prophet Jeremy. Lam. 3.40.
(...), Convertimini; so S. Hierome reads the Text: Revertimini, says Junius.
Be ye Turned, or Turnye, or Return. The truth is, there is all in the Text; We
must be Turned; we must Turn; we must Return. There is a turning wherein we are
only passive; Et hic cardo salutis vertitur, This is the main hinge of all.
God must first turn us by breathing a new spirit into us, the Spirit of
Regeneration; and that is gratia praeveniens, or gratia operans, says S.
Augustine; August.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, says the Prophet Jeremie. Jer. 31.8.
Being thus turned by God, we together with him, must act, and turn our selves
by the employment of Gods grace in us; and that is gratia cooperans, or gratia
subsequens. Now by the assistance of this grace we must so Turn, that we
Return, even from our sins, and toward God. All this is included in our
Conversion. The first of the three is here supposed: God does not stir us up
to do his peculiar part, to work the first act of our conversion, that were
mere Pelagianisme; No man has quickened his own soul; Psalm. 22.30.
But you has God quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.1.
But being by him quickened, and turned from death to life, by the assistance
and cooperation of his grace, he calls upon us to do the parts of living men,
actually to turn. And a happy turn it is, though not so easy a matter as the
world thinks. Most think to Repent with the turning of a hand. It is not the
turning of our habits, the changing of our clothes from colors into blacks (if
that were all, we had store of converts here this day) no not from silks to
sackcloth. Rend your hearts, and not your garments; says the Prophet. Joel
2.13.
It is not the turning of our diets from flesh to fish; The kingdom of heaven
consists not of meats and drinks, says the Apostle. Romans 14.17.
It is not the change of our countenance, the turning up of our eyes.
Philostratus tells us of a Rhetorician who committed a solecisme, spoke false
Latin with his finger, he cried out, (...), O heavens, and pointed to the
earth. Philostratus. Huc alludit Quintil. lib. Instit. 11.
Many, too many, look demurely, but live wickedly; Curios simulant, and
Bacchanalia vivunt. No, it is not the bare turning or lifting up of our hands;
the doing of some seeming charitable good works. None of all these turnings
will serve our turn: the reason is, because all these turnings may be, and yet
we not Turn. If you will have it in a word, it is the turning of our heart,
even of all our heart, Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye unto me with
all your heart. Joel 2.12.
With the heart, and therefore sincerely, without hypocrisy; with all the
heart, and therefore entirely, without partiality. A man is said to turn that
way his face turns. The heart is the face of the inward man; that is his visage
toward God. Man looks upon the outward appearance, but God looks upon the
heart. 1. Sam. 16.7.
If thy heart do not turn, that is, the resolution and inclination of thy
understanding, will and affections (whatsoever thy outward actions be) thou
do not turn. But if thy heart detest the sins thou have committed formerly;
If thou see their foulness; If thou abhorrest their vileness; If what was
wont to be a pleasure to thee, be now a pain and grief to think on; If thou
can resolve for ever hereafter, not only to forsake them, but to loath them:
then thou Turnest, nay then thou Returnest, that is, thou do Turn homeward
from whence thou were strayed by sin: thou removest from sin, and drawest
home to Godward. This is that Godly sorrow that works repentance to
salvation, not to be repented of. For behold, this selfsame thing, that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort, what carfulness it wrought in you? yea, what
clearing of your selves? yea, what indignation? yea, what fear? yea, what
vehement desire? yea, what zeal? yea, what revenge? 2 Cor. 7.11.
Why what ado is here with these Corinthians? could they not repent without so
great a stir? O be not mistaken! where true Repentance is, it sets the whole
man awork, and so it had need; for it renders him a clean other man: new
thoughts, new desires, new resolutions. Ask not me, ask your own hearts whether
ye are returned or not. Ask thy self what was the last thought that went to bed
with thee last night, and was up this day most early stirring in thy breast;
Was it of heaven or earth? Was it a thought of vanity, or of piety? Was it for
the committing, or the crucifying of some sin? Did it savor of worldly
pleasure, or godly sorrow? Did thou think of thy old sins, as thy sworn
enemies, or as thy sweet companions, which, though now asunder (for a Fast Day,
or so) yet should meet ere long, and be as merry as ever? If you can think of
your old sins with patience, I dare not tell you what I think of you. But if
you be now truly grieved for them, seriously resolved to abandon them; Behold I
come a messenger of good news: good news unto thy soul, good news to heaven;
Heus tu peccator, bono animo sis; vides ubi de tuo reditu gaudeatur:
Tertullian. Tertull. de poen.
Heaven joyeth to see a returning sinner, it is tripudium coeli, The blessed
Angels joy: Lacrymae poenitentium sunt vinum. Angelorum. Bernard. Sermon. 30. in
Cant.
When thou returnest, they in troops come forth to meet thee. Nay, the blessed
Trinity does joy; God the Father joys at thy return; Why this, says he, is my
lost son, my returning prodigal; Tam pater nemo, tam pius nemo, Tertullian.
Tertull. ibidem.
God the Son rejoices; Why this, says he, is my lost sheep, returning to
the fold; Vna pastoris ovicula, sed grex una carior non est. Idem ibidem.
God the Holy Ghost does joy; Why this, says he, is my renewed temple,
returning to the beauty of its first erection. And therefore God the Father he
cries, Come: God the Son he cries, Come: and God the Holy Ghost he cries,
Come. The Father he cries, Veni ad me, Come unto me; for I am the End: The
Son he cries, Veni per me, Come by me; for I am the Way: The Holy Ghost
cries, Veni cum me, Come with me; for I am the Guide: All cry Come, and all
cry Welcome; And therefore, If you will Inquire, Inquire; Return, Come.

Come. This word only remains of the Text; only one word of it, and I have
done. Ye have heard, that the penitent sinner now returning from his sin,
every person of the Sacred Trinity inviteth him. God the Father, thy Creator,
he cries Come: God the Son, thy Redeemer, he cries Come: And God the Holy
Ghost, thy Sanctifier, he cries Come. Thy Almighty Creatcur calls thee by
the voice of Nature; Therefore come in humility to so great a Majesty. Thy
gracious Redeemer calls thee by the voice of Scripture; Therefore come in
faith to so dear a Savior. Thy blessed Sanctifier calls thee by his secret
motion in thy heart; Therefore come in holiness and new obedience to thy holy
guide. Behold a convoy of three heavenly virtues, Holiness in life, Humility
in heart, and Faith in Christ. If thou come to God, thou must Come with
these. Take heed thou leavest not Holiness behind; Without Holiness no man
shall see the Lord. Heb. 11.6.
Yet in no case forget Humility, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the Kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 5.
But above all bring Faith: For without Faith it is impossible to please God;
and he that comes to God must believe. Heb. 11.6.
These three Virgin-sister-Graces all join hand in hand, and make a ring, and
so convey the Christian soul to heaven between them. Holiness takes fast hold
of Humility; Humility takes hold of Faith; and Faith again of Holiness. Be
sure thou partest no hand; if thou do, thou may fall out between them; and
they fall out between themselves. Holiness without Humility will soon be
proud: Humility without Faith will soon despair: Faith without Holiness,
without works, is dead. James 2.26.
O let us labor for an humble Holiness, a faithful Humility, and a holy
Faith. Come with these to God, and I dare be bold in his name to bid thee
welcome: Come with these this day, and he will deny thee nothing. These never
are denied access to the King of Kings. Holiness, that is, a pure conscience
within, an unspotted life without, it is the daughter of the King of heaven.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold.
Psalm. 45.14.
Shall she be denied access to her heavenly father? No, she shall be brought
unto the King in raiment of needle work. 15.
But shall she come alone? No, the virgins that be her fellows (Humility and
Faith) shall bear her company, and shall be brought unto thee. With joy and
gladness shall she be brought, and enter into the Kings palace. 16.
Blessed soul that come thus accompanied! These are the Kings Daughters; Thou
art more, thou art made his spouse, his bride, his wife. Hear how he wooes
thee: My sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled. Cant. 5.2.
When thou thus come to God, what is it but even the marriage of thy soul
with Christ? Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give honor to the Lord; for the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her ready. Revel. 19.7.
Made her ready; how? what has she put on? It follows in the next verse, She
is arrayed in fine linen, clean, and white; for the fine linen, is the
righteousness of the Saints. 8.
Why then is the righteousness of the Saints so clean, and white? I thought
with the Prophet, That all our righteousness had been as a menstruous cloth,
Isaiah 64.6.
Stillamus quotidie super telam justitiae nostrae saniem concupiscentiae
nostrae. Bernard.
How then is our righteousness clean and white? Yes, all is true. Our
holiness, and inherent righteousness is fine linen, being the work of the
Holy Ghost; it must not be denied; but God knows how much soyled and spotted by
the flesh, till it be made clean and white; and therefore Humility must be
ever at hand to scour our righteousness; and Faith to wash it. Humility does
daily rince it in a stream of tears, and makes it clean; Faith does wash it in
the blood of Christ, and makes it white. These are they that have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Revel. 7.14.
Christ's bride has made her ready; she has put on righteousness, that is,
stolam sanctorum ((...) is the word) the outward-garment, the righteousness of
good works. But withal she must put on interulam humilitatis, the inward
garment of humility; Be clothed with humility, 1. Pet. 5.5.
(...), that is, says Beza, be ye inwardly adorned, estote intus ornati, be ye
clothed inwardly with humility. Beza in locum.
And over both, even in the sight of God to cover both, she has put on velum,
or peplum fidei, the veil of faith, whereby to Gods justice she presents
Christ's righteousness for hers. That is fine linen indeed, clean and white;
And to the bride it is granted ((...), that is the word) that she should be
arrayed in this. When she comes covered with this veil, she comes with boldness
to the throne of grace. With this veil of faith she passes through the veil,
and has boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. Heb.
10.19.20.


The Spouse did once complain of the watchmen, that they robbed her of her
veil. The watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me, they
wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me. Cant. 5.7.
If we have any such Watchmen, that would take away from the Church the veil of
Christ's imputed righteousness (our righteousness by faith) O let such
Watchmen watch no more, they smite, they wound Christ's Spouse; so that she
cannot do what the Watchman in the Text does bid her, she cannot come with
confidence to God. But so she must; even Come with Holiness, Come with
Humility, and especially Come with Faith; or else she will never come home. As
good not Come at all, as not come thus; and as good not Return, as not Come;
and as good not Inquire, as not Return. Our Watchman therefore has joined all
together, Inquire, if you will Inquire, Return, Come.

And now the Watchman has said: You have seen the Watchman, and have heard the
Watchword. You have seen the Watchmans Charge, and his Discharge. You have
heard the Watchword as it is Monitory and Directory. As it is Monitory it tells
us that the Morning comes, and also the Night; The Morning of Life, and Night
of Death; The Morning of Prosperity, and Gods mercy; The Night of Adversity,
and Gods judgments. As it is Directory it calls upon us to Inquire, Return and
Come.

What remains, but that we practice what we have heard and seen? And that we
may the better do it, that we turn the Sermon into a prayer, even to the
Watchman of Israel, That our Watchmen may stand where God has set them; That
our Watchmen may say what God does show them; That we all may be thankful for
our Morning and prepare for our Night; That we may Inquire into our selves,
Return from our sins, and Come home to God: The Watchman said, The Morning
comes, and also the Night; if ye will Inquire, inquire; Return, Come.

FINIS.

