A DECLARATION BY Major General Laughorn, AND The rest of the Forces joined
with him IN WALES, Of the grounds of their Engagement, and Demands in relation
to the King, Parliament and Kingdom.

Likewise the Copy of an Oath given to all that enter into the said Engagement
with them.

Also the true Copies of several Letters and Transactions betwixt the
Parliaments Commissioners, Colonel Horton, and Major General Laughorn, since
his last coming into Wales.

And two Letters to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax from Col: Horton, more
fully relating the particulars of the late Fight near Cardiff, May 8. 1648.

With a perfect List of the Names of the Prisoners, Officers, private Gentlemen
and Soldiers taken in the said Fight and Pursuit.

London, Printed for Laurence Chapman, May 15. 1648.

A DECLARATION of Major Gen: Laughorn and his Forces, with the rest of their
Associates.
WE whose Names are subscribed do Declare, That we will use our best Endeavors
to bring the King to a Personal Treaty with His Parliament, with Freedom, Honor
and Safety; To the end the just Prerogative of the King, Privileges of
Parliament, Laws of the Land, and Liberties of the people may be all maintained
and preserved in their proper bounds; and the Protestant Religion, as it stands
established by the Law of the Land, restored throughout the Kingdom, with such
regard to be had of Tender Consciences, as shall be allowed by Act of
Parliament.

The copy of an OATH imposed upon the Gentry and others in Wales, upon the
former Engagement and Declaration.
YOu that will either give consent to this Declaration, and join with us in
effecting it; or if you shall not think fit so to do, then not to reveal or
prejudice our Oath: and if you do consent to it, then to join with us in
Council, and not to reveal our Secrets to any, so long as they are Secrets, but
to those whom you think fit to reveal them to for the furthering of the
business, and those to be such as you do believe to be well affected to us, and
will not betray or reveal our Secrets.

A Letter from Major Gen: Laughorn to Colonel Tho: Horton.
SIR:
I Desire you would let me know, by what Power you first came, and still remain
in these counties of my Association, I being Commissioned Commander in chief of
these parts by an Ordinance of Parliament; and upon what grounds the Injury of
seizing on some of my Troop was offered, and the taking of the whole attempted,
without satisfaction rendered them in point of Pay, according to the
Instructions of Parliament to the Commissioners for Disbanding such
Supernumeraries: I should gladly be satisfied in these supernumeraries: I
should gladly be satisfied in these particulars, otherwise your perseverance in
these Affronts to my self, and the Soldiery, and the country, will not be
without some difficulty. Sir, If you please to withdraw your forces out of this
county, it may be a special means to prevent several Inconveniences; besides
the necessary Resolutions which otherwise must be forced upon,

Sir, St. Nicholas, 4 May, 1648. Your Servant, Row: Laughorn.

For Major General Laughorn.
SIR,
I Thought that it had not been unknown to you, that His Excellency the Lord
Fairfax is General (by Ordinance of Parliament) of all the Forces both in
England and Wales, and is empowered to dispose of them into such places, and in
such manner as he shall see cause, for the preservation of the Peace of this
Kingdom; In order to which, he commanded me into these Counties, with the
Forces now under my command, occasioned hither by Colonel Poyers refusing to
Disband according to Ordinance of Parliament, and His Excellencies Orders to
that end, and Col: Powel's adhering to him; notwithstanding whosoever should so
do, were adjudged and declared Traitors by the Parliament: As also Col: Poyer's
and Col: Powel's (with others their Confederates) issuing out Warrants (without
the least color of Authority) for the tumultuous raising of the Counties of
Southwales; Their entertaining Captain Arram's Company of Foot, after they had
received Three months pay, and were by the Commissioners of this County
declared Disbanded; Their inviting and gathering together most of the Officers
and Soldiers which were Disbanded in this county; and the joining all these
with the most active Cavaliers, both in these and other parts, into a Body, to
the great Disturbonce of the Peace, and much impoverishing of these Counties;
As also the apparent laying the Foundations of a New War; Besides the Affronts
put upon two Companies of Foot (sent by his Excellency to assist the reducing
of Pembroke Castle) by some of your Forces, which was owned by Col: Powel,
before any thing was attempted upon Capt. Agborows Troop, called yours; who
notwithstanding the mutual Engagement betwixt the Commisioners of this county,
my self, and the Captain, That his Troop should not depart this County, where
they should lie secure until Disbanded; yet Captain Agborow, having received
Four hundred pounds in order to Disbanding, gave private Orders (as I can
clearly prove) to his Lieutenant, to march (upon my advance) to join with Col:
Powel; which Orders the Lieutenant did observe, refusing to return into this
County, to receive the rest of his Disbanding money, though thereunto desired
by the Commissioners. Whereas I now understand that you are come down into the
Country (considering the former Trust the Parliament has reposed in you, and
your late Obligations to them) I would have rather believed, that you came with
an intention to join with us, for the suppressing of that Tumultuous Assembly
with you, then to appear amongst, and own those who have so manifestly violated
the Authority of Parliament, which you seem to maintain, and infist uponin your
Letter to me,

Sir, May 5. 1648. Your Servant, Tho: Horton.

A Letter from Col: Horton to His Excellency, The Lord General.
May it please your Excellency,
IN my last I made mention of sundry Gentlemen of the counties of Brecknock and
Radnor met at Bealt, to consult about the raising of those counties to join
with Col: Powel; and my sending a party to apprehend them, the success whereof
was the taking of one Mr. Hugh Lloyd (one of the excepted persons) Lewis Lloyd
late Sheriff of Brecon, and one of his sons Marmaduke Lloyd, and some others.
After the Ammunition was come up to us at Brecknock, we being upon a serious
debate of our next motion, which was proposed for Pembrokeshire; We were
ascertained by some special Friends in Glamorganshire, That the body of the
Enemy was fallen down into that county, having a Design upon Cardiff, both by
force and feigned friendship tempting the cordial and constant minded Governor,
with Mr. Bushy-Mansel, to come in unto them, so that we were necessitated, for
the preservation of that place, and prevention of the Enemies Design, of
entirely raising the counties of Glamorgan and Monmouth (which in the judgment
of wise and faithful men, was thought to be no less probable then dangerous) to
march with all possible speed toward Cardiff, which was done with much
difficulty, by reason of all ways over the Mountains, very unseasonable
weather, and want of Accommodations both for Horse and Man; and at last we
passed the River Taff at Landaff, about a mile above Cardiff, and came to St.
Fagons upon the River Ely, whether the Enemy intended to have advanced the same
night, which occasioned their stop at St. Nicholas, two miles from us on the
other side of the River Ely, being a place much for their advantage, where we
could make no use of our Horse, and because for want of food we could not
rationally attempt any thing upon them. This morning the Enemy is drawn off
from S. Nicholas toward Penmark and Fulnum castle. Major Gen, Laughorn came to
them on the 4. of May, and on the fifth sent two Letters, one to the
Commissioners of this county, and another to my self, the copies of both which,
with our Answers, I have herewith sent unto your Excellency: It has been
formerly represented to your Excellency by our most knowing and faithful
Friends in these parts, how improbable it was, that one party, though more
considerable then ours is, should of it self be able to subdue the Enemy in the
Field, reduce Pembroke, and keep all Southwales from rising, being generally
inclined to it, by reason of the malignity of the most of the Gentry, which
lead the common sort of people which way they please, which we fin 'e by every
days experience; and without doubt, Tumults will grow greater, and their
numbers increase, if such a strength be not assigned to these parts as may
attend both the motion of the Enemy, and to awe those places which are most apt
to rise. Captain Creed, with three Troops of Col: Thornhaughs Regiment does
very good service in this kind, being now quartered about Glasebery bridge,
which is a great pass near the conjunction of the counties of Hereford, Radnor
and Brecon, Col: Philip Jones, with his Company from Swanzy, has (for our
assistance) been with us in all our march, and himself many ways helpful to us:
I had frequently acquainted your Excellency with our condition, the temper of
these parts, and the state of the Enemy, had I not been hindered both from
intelligence from my friends, and likewise from sending to your Excellency, the
country people searching all passengers, and abusing of them: I am much
afflicted that I can give your Excellency no better Account of the state of
Southwales, but in one word I must say again, That it is generally against the
Parliament, so that what our condition has been, and is like to be, before any
supply can probably be sent hither, your Excellency may easrly perceive; yet by
Gods assistance I shall use my best endeavor (with my life) to prove my self
still faithful to the Kingdoms interest, and

Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Tho: Horton.
St. Fagons, May 6. 1648.
Major General Laughorns Letter to the Parliaments Commissioners.
Gentlemen,
I Cannot be ignorant how the sole command of these Associated counties was
conferred upon me by Ordinance of Parliament, nor of the Injuries and Affronts
put upon my men, in stead of receiving their Pay allowed them by the
Parliament, and agreed upon by some of your selves. Truly, I was very confident
my past Service for your country, had merited much better of you, then that
such Miscarriages should happen in my absence, and to your knowledge unrighted:
However, if you please to appear with your country, and to continue your
Endeavors in prevention of the Slavery threatened it, you shall not fail of the
most effectual assistance shall lie in the power of,

Gentlemen, St. Nicholas, 4 May, 1648. Your humble Servant, Rowland Laughorn.

The Commissioners Answer.
AS we are not ignorant that you were Commander in chief of the Forces of this
County, by virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament, so we well know that by the
like Ordinances, Thomas Lord Fairfax is appointed General of all the Forces of
England and Dominion of Wales, and that the Forces under your Commaud, were by
an Ordinance of Parliament to be Disbanded; upon his Excessencies Orders in
prosecution whereof, such of them as lay in this county received their money,
and some of them thereupon disbanded, and all departed this county, whereinto
they nor any other of your Forces were not again to return, without the Lord
General his Orders, but ought to have remained in the respective counties
wherein they then lay, to yield their obedience to the Ordinance of Parliament
for disbanding: We therefore much wonder, that not only your Forces lying in
the other counties, but likewise those who had received their money and
debenters, and had been departed, disbanded; yea, and a great part of the
Inhabitants of Carmarthen, Pembroke and Cardigan, should be drawn into this
county, we know not any color of the Authority of Parliament for such
proceedings: If you please to appear with us, to ease our country of this
intolerable burden, and to prevent the slavery that thereby is endeavored to
be brought upon us, and the whole county, we shall be glad of your assistance:
As for injuries and affronts put upon your men in your absence, we are so far
from being privy to any, that we believe we have showed to them all possible
respects and civility, and have not been in the least measure behind in the
pay alloted them by the Parliament, whatsoever we have exceeded; wherein might
have appeared our willingness, to express to your self and Forces, all the
affection that became real welwishers to the public good:

Sir, your humble Servants
5. May, 1648.
Another Letter from the Major General to the Commissioners.
Gentlemen,
NOr can I be ignorant how much you have forgotten your Service I and my
Soldiers have done you in your greatest Necessities; nor could they nor my self
expect much favor in our Disbanding, knowing some of you have constantly
designed our Ruin from the beginning, and rather have been affected to your
own Ends, in promoting a Faction, then any way reflecting upon the Public
good: But it is my comfort, the country has a better sense of me and my abused
Soldiers, then you have had, who neglected the Generals Order in that point of
Satisfaction to me allowed by him: And for my Soldiers, I refer it to the
World, how instrumental some of you have been, by your ill usage to distemper
them, for the enslaving your country. I promise you, my self and all with me
are far from the thoughts of it; and if you will but free your selves and
country from those with you now, more likely to enslave you, you shall find
me very ready to comply with your desires, in drawing of the burden off your
Neighboring countries, and appear, in what lies in my power,

Gentlemen, May 6. 1648. Your Servant, Rowland Laughorn.

Another Letter from Col: Horton, to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax.
May it please your Excellency,
I Have already given you an Account of our late tedious Marches and condition,
which seemed, (through the great increase of the Enemies numbers, by reason of
the general defection of these counties) to be very hazardous, we having for
some time layen at St. Fagons, near unto the Enemies Body, about two miles from
us, at St. Nicholas. The Enemy on Friday last drew back to Lancarven, Penmark
and Fulmun Castle, where they lay until the Lords day at night; at which time
they advanced to Peterstown: Upon Monday morning the Eigth of this instant, the
Enemy advanced with their Body toward us, and we having some notice of it,
drew forth, and took the best ground the place could afford: The Enemy tell us
they were Eight thousand Horse and Foot. We had a sharp dispute with them for
about two hours: In our Disadvantages, the Lord of Hosts wonderfully encouraged
both our Officers and Soldiers, that unanimously (as the Hedges and Bogs would
permit) they charged the Enemy, who were wholly Routed, and pursued about Seven
miles: Many of the Enemy were slain upon the place, and in the pursuit we have
taken, as I guess, about Three thousand Prisoners; as also Major General
Stradling, with many Officers and Gentlemen: We have taken all their
Ammunition, great store of Arms, and most, if not all their Colors. We have
lost not many Soldiers, and not one Officer that I can yet hear of: We had a
great loss in Horses, our Horse being forced to stand the Enemies shot, to
second our Foot. Major General Laughorn, I hear, commanded the Field: About
Sixty Horse of the Enemy charged once, but was beat back, and after not any of
them appeared. Ere long I shall give your Excellency a more particular Account
of what the Lord has done this day: And though both Officers and Soldiers kept
their order, and discharged their Duties very cheerfully and courageously, yet
they earnestly desire that God may have all the honor, and so does

Your Excellencies most humble and faithful Servant, Tho: Horton. For his
Excellency Tho: Lord Fairfax, General of all the Parliaments Forces in England
and Wales.
Dated in the Field, May 8. 1648.
A List of the Commanders Names in custody in Wales taken Prisoners at the
Fight near Cardiff, May 8. 1648.
MAjor General Stradling, Major Hopkins. Captain Matthews. Captain Rowland
Matthews. Capt. James Matthews. Capt. Evan Price. Capt. Craduck. Capt. William
Button. Capt. Lewis. Capt. Floyd. Capt. Williams. Captains, Hugh Floyd. Charles
Aberey. Hopkins. Rob. Matthews. Owens. Jones. Pewery. Tho: Bowing. John Thomas.
John Rice. Lucy Jones. Edmonds. Griffith Bowing. 25.
Capt. Lieut. Bartlet. Capt. Lieut. Hewit. Lieutenants, Thomas Jones. Button.
Swale. Wese. Richards. Prichard. Prother. Thomas. Talbot. Pew. Jenkins.
Mockames. Floyd. Griffith. Williams. Powel. William Griffith, Lucas.
Suttleworth. Loyd. Grimar. Griffith. Walter Jones. Tailor. Newsam. Lewis Jones.
Tho: Morgan. Peregrine. Tho: Jenkins. 32
Ensigns, Hairs. Tho: Hopkins. Walter. Rowland Petrow. John Williams. More
Prichard. John Carey. Not: Gee. Tho: Patchard. Auberey Haward. William Fluin
Griffith. Orian Morfew. Walter Williams. John Barrison. Griffeth Thomas.
Bartholomew Rutter. Rice John. Owen Bowin. Morgan Relarth. Rice Hewel. James
Annis. Tho: Williams. James Harman. Matt: Stakey. Evan Richard. John Barksted.
Ed: Thomas. 27.
Private Gentlemen, Samuel Howel. Hump. Matthews. Parson Owen. Dame Pewry.
Rich: Floyd. Robert Davy. Roger Williams. Richard Mawning. Geo: Davis. Robert
Nichol Chyrurgion. 10
The whole number Ninety four. Private Soldiers in custody, above 2000.
Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.

FINIS

