AN ABSTRACT OF A COMMENTARY By Dr. MARTYN LVTHER, upon the GALATHIANS.

Wherein the difference between the LAW, the GOSPEL, and the strength of
Faith is declared.

Whereunto is added Divine and Moral Latin Sentences, taken out of the
Fathers, and other Authors, which are cited in Margent of the Practice of
Piety, but not Englished there; Which for their excellency, and benefit of
those who understand not Latin, are here translated.

2 COR. 12.9. My power is made perfect through Fides sola, non est sola.

LONDON. Printed for Henry Atkinson, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Staple-Inne Gate in Holborne, 1642.

To my honored Uncle, MICHAEL MALET of Poyntington in the County of Sommerset,
Esquire.
SIR,
YOur pious life, in fearing God, eschewing evil, and doing good; has ever
been a lively Character to regulate my life by, and has imboldened me to
present and dedicate to your grave Patronage, and courteous acceptance, this
Abstract taken out of a Commentary of Doctor MARTYN LVTHER upon the Galathians,
a Copy whereof I sent you a year since in writing, and now have published the
same in Print, for the benefit of my friends and acquaintance, and all zealous,
religious servants of the Lord; It containing in a few leaves, most excellent
matter of saving Faith, which is, the Sum of Man's Salvation; (...)ely
revealed, and set forth unto us, (...) the Old, and New Testament; which
^^osoever duly considers, (unless stu(...)ied with supine carelessness, and
be^itched with the vain pleasures and va(...)ties of this world) will utterly
despise, (...)d contemn all earthly and transitory (...)ings, and continually
(being overcome (...)ith a divine rapture) meditate and con(...)mplate upon
eternal blessedness; The ^yes whereof, are more then ever eye ^ath seen, the
ear heard, or the heart of ^an can conceive; Witness St. Paul, 2. Cor. 12.2.
who was caught up into the (...)ird Heaven; whither God Almighty I ^ost humbly
pray and beseech to bring ^ou my dear loving Uncle, and all good ^hristians,
together with

Your obedient Nephew, and humble Servant.

To the Reader.
THis Epitome, (Christian Reader) is totally that famous and reverend Pillar of
our Church, Doctor MARTYN LVTHERS, being an Abstract of his Commentary upon
Saint Paul's Epistle to the Galathians; And as all our new Corn, comes out of
our old Fields; and all our new Learning out of old Books, for Nihil dictum,
quod non dictum prius; I thought I could not present to good Christians a
better work; it being the bread that comes down from Heaven, and the direct
and true path that leads to eternal happiness, being well and thoroughly
digested and ingrafted in the heart, and daily practiced in our Lives, and
Conversations. The Commentary it self, is a rich Cabinet of most precious rare
Jewels, and these the choicest and rarest (as I conceive) in that Cabinet, or
Treasury; which though it be very short, and easily read over in an hours
time; Yet it being rightly understood and steadfastly believed, brings
everlasting life and Glory; which is heartily prayed for, and wished to the
godly Reader by the Publisher hereof, who is thy servant in the Lord.

Edmund Ferrers.

AN ABSTRACT TAKEN out of a Commentary of Doctor Martyn Luther, upon the
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Galathians.
1. THere is a political or civil righteousness, which Emperors, Princes of
the world, Philosophers, and Lawyers deal withal.

Secondly, there is a Ceremonial righteousness, which the Traditions of men
do teach, this Parents and Schoolmasters may teach, in regard they do not
attribute to it, any power to satisfy for sin, to please God, or to deserve
grace; but teach such Ceremonies, as are necessary for the correction of
manners and life.

Thirdly, There is a Righteousness of the Law, or of the ten Commandments,
which Moses teaches, which we teach after the doctrine of faith.

Fourthly, there is a Righteousness above all these, to wit, the Righteousness of
faith, or Christian Righteousness, which we must diligently discern from the
former, for they are contrary to this righteousness, consisting in works which
are active, but this is a passive Righteousness. Of all things in the world, the
Law is most excellent, yet is it not able to quiet a troubled conscience, but
increases Terrors, and drives it into desperation. For by the Law sin is
made above measure sinful: I abandon my self from all active Righteousness,
both of my own, and of Gods law, and embrace only that passive Righteousness of
grace, mercy, and forgiveness of sins: Therefore the greatest wisdom of a
good Christian is, not to know the law, to be ignorant of works, and of the
whole active righteousness, especially when the conscience wrestleth with the
Judgments of God; But it is e contrario, to those who are not of Gods people,
for the law is not given to a righteous man, but to the law less and
disobedient: And both the word of Grace, and of wrath, must be rightly divided,
according to the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. which is, To set forth the Law and works
to the Old man, and the promise of forgiveness of sins, and of Gods mercy to
the New man, Romans 10.4. The law continued unto Christ, who being come, Moses
cease with his law, Circumcision, the Sacrisices, the Sabbaths, and all the
Prophets: He that is borne of God cannot sin, 1. Ioh. 3.18. it the Article of
Justification be once lost, then is all true Christian doctrine lost, the law
ought to have dominion only over the flesh: whosoever is assuredly preswaded
that Christ is his Righteousness, it is impossible but he should do all things
well. Grace and Peace comprehend in them whatsoever belongs to Christianitle;
grace releaseth sin, and peace makes the conscience quiet. The two fiendes
that torment us are Sin but sin is rather increased by works, for there is
no means to take away sin but grace alone. The peace of the world, grants
not king but the peace of our goods, and bodies. I am the way, the truth, and
the life, No man comes to the father but by me, Ioh. 14.6. wherefore in the
matter of Justification we must look upon no other God, but only this god
incarnate, clothed with man's nature, who says, Math. 11.28. Come unto me all
ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. In Christ are hid
all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge, For in him dwells the fullness of
the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.3.9. The world is ignorant of this, For no man
knows the father but the Soune, and he to whom the Son will reveal him,
Mat. 11.17. Christ gives not grace and peace as the Apostles give them, but he
gives them as the Author and Creator. The gifts which we receive of the
father and which we receive of the Son are all one, Behold the lamb of God,
who takes away the sin of the world, Ioh. 1.29. which shows that we cannot
put them away by our own works; Christ was not given for the holy, righteous,
worthy, and such as were his friends; but for wicked sinners, for the
unworthy, and for his enemies, who have deserved Gods wrath, and everlasting
death, Who gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. God so loved the World, that
he gave his only be gotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish but have everlasting life, John 3.16. The Lord has laid all our
iniquity upon him: For the transgression his people was he smitten, Esaias
53.6.8.

Christ is the Son of God, and of the Virgin, Definition.
delivered and put to death for our sins; therefore he is no Tyrant or Judge,
which will condemn us for our sins, he is no caster down of the afflicted,
but a raiser up of those that are fallen, a merciful releiver and comforter,
of the heavy and broken hearted. The World is the Kingdom of the Devil; Every
one that teaches that works do justify, is a troubler of the Church, and of
men's consciences: Christ and the Law, can by no means agree and reign together
in the conscience; for the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of
Grace are contrary: And if thou can not believe, that God will forgive thy
sins for Christ's sake, whom he sent into the World to be our high Priest; how
then will thou believe, that he will forgive the same for the works of the
Law, which thou could never perform. It seems to be a light matter, to
mingle the Law and the Gospel, faith and works together; but it does more
mischeife, then man's reason can conceive: There is nothing in us, able to
deserve grace, and the for givenesse of sins; But we obtain this grace by
the free mercy of God, only for Christ's sake: The knowledge of Christ, and of
Faith, is no work of man, but simply the gift of God. We may more safely
attribute too much unto God, then unto man; Man's reason has the Law for his
object; but faith being in her own proper office, has no other object but
Jesus Christ: It says not, What have I done? What have I offended? What have I
deserved? But what has Christ done? What has he deserved? Whereunto the
truth of the Gospel answers thee, he has redeemed thee from thy sin,
from the Devil, and from eternal death, which faith acknowledges and
believes; And whosoever turns away his eyes from this object, has no true
faith, but a fantasy, and a vain opinion, and turns his eyes from the
promise to the Law, which terrifieth and drives to desperation. For a true and
steadfast faith, must lay hold on nothing else but Christ alone, who justifies,
and needs not to be furnished with charity, as Popish Schoolmen teach. The
proper office of the Law teaches, what I ought to do; The Gospel teaches
what Jesus Christ the Son of God has done for me, to wit, that he suffered
and dyed, to deliver me from sin and death. We must not trust or glory in any
earthly thing, but in God alone: Non patitus ludum, fima, fides, oculus.

Faith makes a man here like unto God, who is immutable, so is faith, and
therefore may suffer nothing, give place to no man.

Nothing fights more strongly against Faith, then the Law and reason, which
we must conquer if we will be saved; For the conscience must be free from the
Law, but the body must be obedient to the Law.

There is as great difference between the righteousness of the Gospel, and of
the Law, as God has made between Heaven and Earth, light and darkness, day
and night: The Gospel justifies in Heaven, and the Law on Earth.

To abstain from certain meats for conscience sake, is to deny Christ, and
to overthrow the Gospel. God never gave to any man grace and everlasting life
for the merit of Congruence or worthiness; For grace cannot be deserved by
works, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Wherefore he that would
deserve Grace by works going before faith, goes about to please God with sins.

The first part of Christianity is the preaching of Repentance, and the
knowledge of our selves; And the second part is, not to seek salvation by
works.

Christ is no Lawgiver, but a forgiver of sins, and a Savior; For we are
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation unto us through faith in his
blood, Romans 3.24, 25.

These three things, Faith, Christ, Acceptance or Imputation, must be joined
together; To him that believes, sin is pardoned, and righteousness imputed;
but not for the merit of congruence and worthiness: He that honors me, I
will honor, they that despise me, shall be despised, 2 Samuel 2.30. By the deeds
of the Law no flesh shall be justified; Christ is the end and fulfilling of the
Law unto righteousness.

The Papists by their doctrine, make Christ Moses, and Moses Christ, turning
Grace into the Law, and the Law into Grace; But it is the proper office of
Christ to deliver from sin and death; for he is our reconciliation,
righteousness, peace, life, and salvation: And therefore we are justified and
reputed righteous before God by faith only in Christ; for we must be dead to
the Law, if we will live to God.

But when I have apprehended Christ by faith, and through him am dead to the
Law, justified from sin, delivered from death, the Devil and Hell; then I
do good works, I love God, I give thanks to him, I exercise charity toward
my neighbor; But this charity or works following, do neither form nor
adorn my faith; but my faith forms and adorneth charity; For this is the
victory that overcommeth the World, even our Faith. 1 John 5.4.

Whilst Christ is the Law, he is also liberty, whilst he is sin, he is
righteousness, and whilst he is death, he is life; For in that he suffered
the Law to accuse him, sin to condemn him, and death to devour him, he
abolished the Law, he condemned sin, he destroyed death, he justified and
saved me.

The Law is crucified, and dead unto those only which believe in Christ;
Therefore in the matter of Justification, thou must not separate the person of
Christ from thy person: By faith we are so joined together, that we are become
one flesh and one bone, Ephesians. 5.30.

Good works ought to be done, not as the cause, but as the fruits of
righteousness; The Tree makes the Apple, but not the Apple the Tree; I live
by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, confutes
the doctrine to be able to do meritorious works before Grace, Ex puris
naturalibus, etc.

Works of supererogation the Papists call those, which they do of their own
devotion more then God requires: Vltra posse viri, non vult Dous ulla requiri,
and such like sentences, properly pertain to the government of Commonwealths
and Families, and are not to be applied to the Church.

Christ is infinite mercy and goodness, freely given, and bountifully giving
unto us.

To reject and refuse the grace of God, is to seek righteousness by the Law.

The holy Ghost was not given by the Law, but by the hearing of the Gospel,
Cornelius received not the holy Ghost, by the Alms which he gave, but when
Peter had opened his mouth, and was yet in speaking, the holy Ghost fell upon
all them, which with Cornelius heard the word, Acts 10.44.

God gave the holy Ghost to the Gentlles, who lived without the Law, and to the
Jews by the preaching of the Gospel, or hearing of Faith in Christ preached,
and not at the preaching of the Law, nor by the works of the Law; So it
appears, that the Law never brings the holy Ghost, but only teaches what
we ought to do, therefore it justifies not; But the Gospel brings the
holy Ghost, because it teaches what we ought to receive.

The Gentiles justified without the Law, as the Nine vites, And the Ninevites
believed God, and proclaimed a Fast; and put on Sackcloth, Jonah 3.5. Naaman
the Syrian, Job and diverse others. Received ye the holy Ghost, by the works
of the Law, or by the hearing of faith preached, says Saint Paul? Gal. 3.2.

A man is made a Christian not by working, but by hearing; and when he has
received the Gospel, let him afterward exercise himself in those good works
which are commanded by the Law, so that the Law and works may follow faith;
Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give unto you, lo
to give unto you a Kingdom, Luke 12.22. Martha, Martha, thou carest and art
troubled about many things, but one thing is needful, Mary hathchosen the good
part, which shall not be taken from her, Luke 10.41, 42.

Abraham was justified before God, not because he did work, but because he did
believe, Galat. 3.6. For Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, Genesis 15.6. Saint Paul by these words, Abraham believed, Of
faith in God, makes the chiefest worship, the chiefest duty, the chiefest
obedience, and the chiefest sacrifice: For faith is an almighty thing, and the
power thereof is infinite and inestimable: Christian righteousness consists
in two things, in faith of the heart, and in Gods imputation for Christ's sake;
Faith kills reason, Christ is our cloudie Pillar for the day, and our Pillar
of fire by the night, least God should see our sin, Exodus, 13.21. He has
loved us, and given himself in very deed for us, he was made accursed for us,
etc. Galat. 3.13. Christ is called our object, because the eye of our faith is
directed unto him: There is no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesu; with
faith always must be joined a certain assurance of Gods mercy for Christ's
sake, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head, Gen 3.15.

The promise of blessing was given unto Abraham before Circumcision, and four
hundred and thirty years before the Law; Abraham which saw my day and
rejoiced, John 8.56. In thee shall all the Nations be blessed, Genesis 12.9.
There is great difference between Christ blessing and redeeming, and Christ
working, and giving example; So there was between believing and working
Abraham; they which are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham, says
Saint Paul: And as many as are of the works of the Law are accursed, which is
not a corporal but a spiritual curse; They therefore that hold on the Law,
and seek to be justified thereby, despising the promise, are accursed: The
true doer of the Law is he, who receiving the holy Ghost through faith in
Christ; begins to love God, and do good unto his neighbor. For without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb 11.6. So that faith incorporateth the
work and gives it his perfection. All sentences in Scripture concerning
works and rewards must be Spiritually expounded; If thou believe sin,
death, and the curse, to be abolished, thev are abolished; for Christ has
vanquished and abolished all these things; and wheresoever is a true faith, in
him, there sin is abolished, dead, and buried. Learn in all tentations, to
translate sin, death, the curse, and all evils which oppress us, from our
selves unto Christ, and again from him unto our selves, righteousness, mercy,
life, and blessing; God the Father cast the iniquities of us all (as Esaias the
Prophet says) upon him, which he took willingly upon him, that he might
fulfill the will of his Father, by which we are sanctified for ever: Let
Christ be always before thine eyes, as a certain summary of all Arguments for
defense of faith, against the righteousness of the flesh, against the Law, and
against all works and merits whatsoever. The Law was added for transgressions,
says Saint Paul; wherefore the first use of the Law was to bridle the wicked,
least the course of the Gospel, should be hindered by the tumults, and
seditions of the wicked, outrageous and proud men, which is civil. The other
use of the Law is divine and spiritual, which is, as Saint Paul says, To
increase transgressions, that is, to reveal unto a man his sin, thereby to
beat down the opinion of righteousness which abides in man; and is a
Minister that prepares the way unto grace: The Law with his office, helps by
occasion to Justification, in that it drives a man to the promise of grace,
and makes the same sweet and comfortable unto him, and is a true and
profitable Minister, which drives a man to Christ; For God is present unto the
afflicted and broken hearted; and this is the best, and most perfect use of the
of the law, Romans 10.4. So far forth as I do apprehend Christ by faith, so
much is the law abolished unto me; But my flesh, the world, and the Devil, do
hinder faith in me, that it cannot be perfect, He gave power to as many as
believed in him, to be the children of God, Ioh. 1.12.

So many as are justified, are not justified by the observation of man's laws,
or Gods laws, but by Christ alone, who has abolished all laws; Jesus Christ
is one yesterday, and to day, and shall be the same for ever; Christ is the end
of the law unto righteousness, to every one that believes; Christ was made a
curse for us, that he might deliver us from the curse of the law. I came not to
judge the world, but that the world should be saved by me, Ioh. 12.47.

Evil instruction, will increase and confirm the pernicious error of blind
reason, which naturally judges Christ to be a lawgiver, and printeth that
error mightily in our minds, that without great travail and difficulty, it
can never be abolished.

O law! thou have no power over me, and therefore thou do accurse and
condemn me in vain; for I believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God, whom the
father sent in to the world to redeem us miserable sinners, oppressed with the
tyranny of the law, he gave his life and shed his blood for me; therefore
feeling thy terrors and threatenings O Law, I plunge my conscience in the
wounds, blood, death, resurrection and victory of my Savior Christ, besides
him I will see nothing, I will hear nothing,

This faith is our victory, whereby we overcome the terror of the Law, sin,
death, and all evils, and yet not without great Conflicts: Come unto me (says
Christ) all ye that labor under the Yoke of the Law, Mat. 11.28. for I have
vanquished the Law by double right and authority, first as the Son of God and
Lord of the Law; Secondly in your person, which is as much as if ye had
overcome the Law your selves, for my victory is yours. If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. Romans 8.9.

If a man be uncertain, and stand in doubt of the grace and favor of God
toward him, then Christ profits nothing, for he that doubts of Gods
favor toward him, must needs doubt also of the promises of God and so
consequently of the will of God, and of the benefits of Christ, namely that he
was borne, suffered, died, and rose again for us, etc.

If we could fully assure our selves, and constantly believe, that God is our
Father, and we his sons and heirs, then should we overcome the Law your
selves, for my victory is yours. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the
same is none of his, Romans 8.9.

If a man be uncertain, and stand in doubt of the grace and favor of God
toward him, then Christ profits nothing, for he that doubts of Gods
favor toward him, must needs doubt also of the promises of God and so
consequently of the will of God, and of the benefits of Christ, namely that he
was borne, suffered, died, and rose again for us, etc.

If we could fully assure our selves, and constantly believe, that God is our
Father, and we his sons and heirs, then should we utterly contemn this
world, with all the glory, righteousness, wisdom and power, and with all the
riches and pleasures thereof, neither should we be so careful for this life.

Whosoever apprehends, the son and me, and my promise in him by faith, to him
I am a God, to him I am a father, him do I accept, justify and save. Christ
is the finishing and accomplishing of the Law to righteousness to every one that
believes To. 10.4 They that believe in him shall be blessed with faithful
Abraham they are the sons and heirs of God, who gives the word, which when
we have received by faith given from above, we are newborn, and the sons of
God; for there is no other name given unto men under heaven, whereby they must
be saved.

The heart being furnished with this confidence, or assurance, to wit, that for
Christ's sake we are righteous, has the true form of Christ, which is given
by the Ministry of the word, as it is said, 1. Cor. 4. J have begotten you
through the Gospel, that is to say in spirit, that ye might know Christ and
believe in him.

We must distinguish the heavenly and spiritual blessing, from the earthly;
for the earthly blessing is to have a good civil government, both in
Commonwealths and Families, to have children, peace, riches, fruits of the
earth, and other temporal commodities: But the heavenly blessing is to be
delivered from the Law, sin and death, to be justified and quickened to life,
to have peace with God, to have a faithful heart, a joyful conscience, and
spiritual consolation, to have the knowledge of Jesus Christ, to have the gift
of prophecy and the revelation of the scriptures to have the gifts of the holy
Ghost, and to rejoice in God; These are the heavenly gifts which Christ gives
to his Church.

A Christian laying hold of the benefits of Christ through faith, has no Law;
but all the Law is to him abolished, with all his terrors and torments; For
Christ has made us free, not civilly nor carnally, but divinely; That is to
say we are made free in such sort, that our consciences are now free and quiet,
not fearing the wrath of God to come.

And certainly this christian liberty, swalloweth up at once and takes quite
away the whole heap of evils, the Law, sin, death, Gods wrath, and briefly
the serpent himself, with his head and whole power; and in stead thereof it
places righteousness, peace, and everlasting life etc. Therefore blessed is he
that understands and believes.

And let us learn to magnify this our libertine purchased by Jesus Christ the
son of God, by whom all things were created both in heaven and earth; which
liberty he has purchased, with no other price then with his own blood; To
deliver us not from any bodily or temporal servitude, but from a spiritual
and everlasting bondage, under mighty and invincible Tyrants, to wit, the Law,
Sin, Death, and the Devil, and so to reconcile us to God his Father.

This liberty then, is not given us by the Law, or for our righteousness, but
freely for Christ's sake; Therefore according to the Apostle, Galath. 5.1. Stand
fast in that liberty wherein Christ has made you free; And in the 8. of John
36. If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed; And Christ
himself, Math. 9.2. says, Be of good comfort my son, thy sins are
forgiven thee.

Wherefore it is impossible for the Iusticiaries, which seek to win heaven,
life, and salvation, by works and merits, to know what the liberty and
deliverance from sin is.

And Gal. 5.2. Saint Paul says, Be not entangled again with the yoke of
Bondage; where the Apostle seems to compare those who seek righteousness by
the Law to Oxen; For like as Oxen draw in the yoke with great toil, and
receive nothing thereby but forage or pasture, and when they be able to draw
the yoke no more, are appointed to the slaughter: Even so they that seek
Righteousness by the Law, are Captives and oppressed with the yoke of bondage,
that is to say, with the Law, and when they have tired themselves a long time
in the works of the Law, with great and grievous toil, in the end this is
their reward, that they are miserable and perpetual servants of sin, death,
Gods wrath, and the Devil.

For the confidence and righteousness of works are nothing, but makes Christ
unprofitable; The Devil being the father of lying, and the Enemy of Christian
liberty, wherein Christ has made us free; But J know Christ to be profitable
unto me, therefore I will not make him unprofitable; which I should do, if
either I should presume to purchase my self favor and everlasting life by my
good works, or should despair because of my sins.

For it is impossible that Christ and the Law, should dwell together in one
heart, for either the Law, or Christ, must give place; And to have this
persuasion, that it is Christ alone that justifies me, both against my evil
deeds, and without my good works, is to lay hold of the true Christ; But if I
think that he exacteth the Law and works of me to Salvation, then he becomes
unprofitable to me, and I am utterly separated from him.

And though it be true, that only faith justifies, yet after it has
justified, it is not idle, but occupied and exercised in working through love;
So that the whole life of a Christian Man, consists inwardly in faith
toward God, and outwardly in charity and good works toward our Neighbor;
He being a perfect Christian inwardly through faith before GOD, who has no
need of our works, and outwardly before men, whom our faith profits nothing,
but our Charity, or our works.

Christ is set out in the Scriptures as an Example, and as a Gift, and is to be
set forth unto those who are already cast down, and bruised through the heavy
burden and weight of their sins, as a Savior and a gift, and not as an example
or a Lawgiver; But to those who are secure and obstinate, he must be set forth
as an example.

Faith is as a bright Sun beam coming down from heaven, which lighteneth,
directs and guides us; But both faith and charity, have their trust and
belief, but after diverse sorts, by reason of the diversity of their objects;
Faith trusts in God and therefore cannot be deceived; Charity believes in
man, and therefore it is often deceived.

And let the godly remember, that as in conscience before God they be free from
the curse of the Law, from sin, and from death, for Christ's sake; So as
touching the body, they are servants, and must serve one another, according to
Saint Paul, Galath. 5.13. serve ye one another through love: which words, do
not set the Christians at liberty, but shut them under bondage as touching the
flesh, which doctrine carnal men cannot conceive, but good Christians gladly
receive and obey it.

For the ungodly do most carelessly shake of the yoke and bondage of the flesh,
and turn the liberty of the spirit, into wantonness and fleshly liberty, not
observing the commandment of charity, which is not to render evil for evil,
but to overcome evil with good, according to the Apostle, Love thy neighbor
as thy self.

Faith and hope must continue, that by the one we may be justified, and by the
other be raised up in adversities, and endure unto the end; For in respect of
the flesh we are sinners, but in respect of the spirit we are righteous, and so
we are partly sinners and partly righteous, but our righteousness, if we walk
according to the spirit is much more plentiful then our sin, because the
holiness and righteousness of Christ our Mediator does far exceed the sins of
the whole world, and easily swalloweth up all sins, But the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary
one to the other; So that ye cannot do the things that ye would do, says
Saint Paul, Gal. 5.17. Despair not therefore in temptations, but resist the
flesh strongly, and fulfill not the lust thereof; Thus doing thou art not under
the Law; For God is merciful to those that believe for Christ's sake, and
imputes not unto us this sin, which cannot be put away by satisfaction,
works or righteousness, but only by the death of Christ.

All sin is damnable as touching the fact it self; But in that it is not
damnable to him that believes, it comes of Christ, who by his death has
taken away sin; But to him that believes not in Christ, not only all his
sins are damnable, but even his good works are also sin, according to that
saying, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

The faithful assures himself by faith, that his sin is forgiven, and not
imputed unto him, for as much as Christ has given himself for it. according
to the Apostle, Galat. 5.18. If ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under
the Law; But all worshippings, and services of God, and all Religions without
Christ, are Idolatry and Idol service; For in Christ alone the Father is well
pleased; He is the perfection of the Law unto righteousness, to all that do
believe.

Wherefore let all the godly glory and rejoice in the Cross of Christ Jesus,
and not in the mouth of other men; And if there be any that praise them, let
them receive this glory, but as a shadow of true glory, and let them think the
substance of glory, to be indeed the testimony of their own Conscience: And
if we seek first the glory of God, then surely our glory will follow,
according to that saying, He that bonoureth me, I will glorify.

And let all Ministers and Pastors endeavor purely and faithfully to teach the
Word, and let them have an eye to nothing else, but the glory of God, and
salvation of souls, then shall their work be faithful and sound.

We are taught out of the Word of God, that there is nothing under the Sun,
which avails unto righteousness before God, but Christ only, or as Saint
Paul says, Gal. 6.15. A new Creature.

Politic Laws, Men's Traditions, Ceremonies of the Church, yea and the Law of
Moses, are such things, as are without Christ, therefore they avail not unto
righteousness before God; We may use them as things both good and necessary,
but in their place and time; But if we talk of the matter of Justification
they avail nothing, but hurt very much.

Wherefore in Christ Jesu, or in the matter of Justification, we must not
dispute of the laws either of the Jews, or of the Gentiles; But we must
simply pronounce, that neither Circumcision or Uncircumcision avails any
thing, in the cause of Faith and Salvation; understanding by Circumcision all
the Jews, by Uncircumcision all the Gentiles, with all their force, and all
their glory.

For if Laws be so set forth, and urged, as though the keeping of them did
justify a Man, or the breaking thereof did condemn him, they ought to be
taken away and abolished; For then Christ loses his office and his glory, who
only justifies us, and gives us the holy Ghost.

And a new Creature is the gift of the holy Ghost, which cleanses our heart by
faith, and works the fear of God, love, chastity, and other Christian
virtues, and gives power to bridle the flesh, and to reject the righteousness
and wisdom of the World.

This being the only and true rule wherein we ought to walk, namely the new
Creature, which is neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision; But the new man
created unto the Image of God, in righteousness and true holiness, is he, who
inwardly is righteous in the spirit, and outwardly is holy and clean in the
flesh.

To them who walk after this Rule belongs peace, that is, the favor of God,
forgiveness of sins, quietness of conscience, and mercy; That is to say,
help in afflictions, and pardon of the remnants of sin which remain in our
flesh; Yea, although they which walk after this Rule be overtaken with any
sin, yet for that they are the children of grace and peace, mercy upholdeth
them, so that their sin and fall shall not be laid to their charge.

God is not a Merchant, that will sell unto us his grace, for our works and
merits; But he accounts us righteous by faith only in Christ, which causes
the godly to rejoice and glory in the only trust and confidence of Gods mercy
through Jesus Christ, who is the only high Priest and Savior of the World.

Therefore let us pray that he preserve and establish us, that we daily growing
more and more in the knowledge of his grace, and faith unfeigned, may be found
unblameable, and without fault in the day of our Redemption; To whom with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be glory world without end, Amen. 1 Timothy 1. Unto
the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be honor and
glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Divine and Moral Latin Sentences taken out of the Fathers and other
Authors, which are in the Margent of the Practice of Piety, but not Englished
there, which for their excellency and benefit of the Christian Reader, are here
translated.
FIdem mitte in Caelum, and eum in terris tanquam presentem tenuisti, Aug.

Send thy faith into Heaven, and thou have apprehended Christ, as if he were
present upon Earth.

Quomodo negent carnem capacem esse resurrectionis, quae sanguine, and corpore
Christi nutritur. Iren.

How can they deny the flesh to be capable of resurrection, which is nourished
with the body and blood of Christ.

Moriuum esse Christum etiam Pagani credunt, resurrexisse vero, propria fides
Christianorum. Aug.

The Pagans do believe Christ to be dead, but that he rose again, is the true
faith of Christians.

Rerum absentium, praesens est fides, rerum impossibilium, possibilis est
fides.

Of things absent, faith is present; Of things impossible, faith is possible.

Panem vides, verbum audis, cui potius credis, sensui vel Christo?

Thou see the bread, thou hear the word, whether do thou believe, thy
sense, or Christ?

Et Deus erat, and homo erat, and Matter erat, and virgo erat.

He was God, and he was Man; She was a Mother, and she was a Virgin.

Mira sunt quae de Sacramento dicuntur, Fides est necessaria, seientia rationis
supervacua.

Wonderful things are spoken of the Sacrament; Faith is necessary, the
knowledge of reason most vain.

Haec sunt quae expetunt simplicem creditorem, arguunt impium disenssorem,
credi oportet simpliciter, quod investigari non potest utiliter, nolite
quaerere quomodo fiat, nolite, etc.

These things require a pure faith, and condemn a wicked disputer; For that
ought to be believed simply, which cannot be found out profitably, search ye
not how it is done, do ye not, etc.

Scrutari hoc temeritas est, credere pietas, nosse vero vita aeterna. Bern:

To search this is rashness, to believe piety, but to know it eternal life.

Fides sola justificat, ut oculus solus vides.

Faith only justifies, as the eye only sees.

Ama unum illud bonum, in quo omne bonum, and sufficit. Ansel.

Love that only good, in whom all goodness is, and it suffices.

Non delinquenti, sed peccata relinquenti condonat Deus.

God pardons not a sinner, but him that forsakes his sin.

Qui dat paenitenti veniam, non dabit peceanti paenitentiam. Aug.

He that gives pardon to the penitent, will not give repentance to the sinner.

Paenitenti veniam spospondit, sed vivendi in crastinum non spospondit.

He has promised pardon to the penitent, But he has not promised that he
shall live till to morrow.

Latronis exemplum, non est exemplum imitationis, sed consolationis.

The example of the good Theife, is not an example of imitation, but of
consolation.

Tum Deum amare libet, cum persuasum habemus ipsum esse optimum maximum, ubique
praesentem, omnia in nobis efficientem, eum in quo vivimus, movemur, sumus.
Bucer. in Psalm. 115.

Then it is lawful to love God, when we are verily persuaded, that he is the
chiefest good, every where present, effecting all things in us, and he, in whom
we live, move, and have our being.

Congruebat filium assumere humanam naturam, ut haec persona quae est
substantialis imago aeterni patris, restitueret imaginem Dei in nobis
corruptam: Athan.

It was necessary, that the Son should assume humane nature, that that person,
who is the substantial Image of the eternal Father, should restore the Image
of God corrupted in us.

Incumbit nobis necessitas recte vivendi, cum omnia quae facimus, facta sint
coram oculis Judicis cuncta videntis; Boethius.

There is a necessitieimposed upon us of living well, when all things which we
do, are done before the eyes of a Judge, who sees all things.

Semper invenies Deum benigniorem, quam te culpabiliorem. Bern:

Thou shall always find God more benign, then thy self faulty.

Vindictae gladium, miserecordiae oleo acuit: Niceph.

He has whetted the Sword of his vengeance, with the oil of his mercy.

Ad paenam tardus Deus est, ad praemia velox; Sed pensare solet vi graviore
moram.

God is slow to punish, but swift to reward; But his forbearance commonly
causes more grievous punishment.

Ira Dei non est aliud, quam voluntas puniendi. Aug.

The wrath of God is no other, then his will of punishing.

Deus potest omnia, quae contradictionem non implicant. Aqui.

God can do all things, which implie not contradiction.

Omnipotentia excludit omnes defectus, quae sunt impotentia, seu posse mentiri,
mori, peccare, etc.

Omnipotency excludes all defects, as impotencie, or power to lie, to dye, to
sin, etc.

Creaturas fecit perfectas in suo quasq genere, ergo ipse perfectissimus est in
se, et per se. Scal:

God made every Creature perfect in his kind, therefore he is most perfect in
himself, and by himself.

In Deo nihil est, quod non sit ipse Deus. Zanch:

In God there is nothing, which is not God himself.

Exhibet omnia, accipit nihil, ipsum igitur bonum est Deus ipse semper.

God gives all things, receives nothing, therefore he is always our chiefest
good.

Site habcam solum, sane ruat arduus ether, Tellus rupta, suo dessiliatque
loco.

If I have God alone, let the high Element consume, the Earth break, and
remove from his Center.

Postquam anima agressa est de corpore, subito judicium Christi dese latum
cognoscit. Aug:

After the Soul is gone out of the body, forthwith it knows the judgment of
Christ pronounced upon it.

Anima damnata, continuo invaditur a Daemonibus, qui crudelissime eam
rapientes, ad infernum deducunt.

The damned Soul, is forthwith encountered by Devils, who most cruelly tearing
it, do carry the same to Hell.

Vbi volat spiri^us, ibi erit et corpus. Aug:

Where the spirit flies, there also shall the body be.

Spiri ualia post resurrectionem erunt corpora, non quiae corpora esse
desistant, sed quta spiritu viuificante subsistunt. Aug:

After the resurrection, our bodies shall be spiritual; Not because they leave
of to be bodies, but because they subsist by a vivificating Spirit.

Res verae sunt in mundo invisibili, in mundo visibili vmbrae rerum. Herm.

True things are in the invisible world, in the visible world, only the shadow
of things.

Lumen est umbra Dei, et Deus est lumen luminis. Plato:

Light is the shadow of God, and God is the light of light.

Homo male utens libero suo arbitrio, et se, and liberum suum arbitrium
perdidit. Aug:

Man evilly using his free will, lost himself, and his free will.

Per lapsum, arbitrij libertas in naturalibus manca, in supernaturalibus amissa
est, donee gratia restituetur. Phil:

By Man's fall, his free will was maimed in natural things, and quite lost in
supernatural, until by grace it be restored.

Fleres, si scires vnum tua tempora mensem? Rides quum non sit forsitan una
dies? Tho: Morus.

Would thou weep if thou knew thy life to be but a month long? And do
thou laugh, when perchance it is not a day?

Quotidie morimur, quotidie enim demitur pars vitae, et tunc quoque cum
crescimus, vita decrescit, Vives.

We die daily, for continually a part of our life is taken away, and then also
when we grow, our life decreases.

Quem dies vidit veniens superum, hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem. Senec.

He that you saw in the morning a loft, before night you see lyeing in the dust.

Qui conscientiae curam abijciunt; nec homines reverentur, nec Deum.

They who have no conscience, regard neither Men, nor God.

Socrates in foro egressus, quam multis, inquit, ego non egeo; Non est ergo
pauper quinon caret, sed qui eget.

Socrates going out into the Market, said, how many things are here which I
want not; Therefore he is not poor that wants not, but he who has need.

Qui notus nimis omnibus, ignotus moritur sibi: Senec.

He who is too well known to all, dies unknown to himself.

Insaniae damnandi sunt, qui tam multa anxie congerunt, quum sit tam paucis
opus. Vives.

They are to be condemned of madness, who with such care gather so much, when
so little will suffice.

Nobile vincendi genus est patientia, vincit Qui patitur, si vis vincere, disce
pati.

The noblest way to overcome, is Patience; He overcomes who suffers, if thou will overcome, learn to suffer.

Opti na injuriae vltio, est oblivio.

The best revenge of an Injury, is to forget it.

Ne verbis, quod scis, ostentes, sed rebus te ostende scire.

Boast not in words, but show by thy deeds, what thou know.

Non refert quanta sit vitae diuturnitas, sed qualis sit administratio. Vives.

It skils not how long, but how well we live.

Tota vita dies vnus, et mirum sit, homines non exsatiari iisdem toties
redeuntibus.

All our life is as one day, and it is strange, that men should not be wearied
with them so often returning:

Non potest praesentem diem recte vivere, is, qui se non eum quasi vltimum
victurum esse cogitat.

He cannot live well this present day, that thinks not to live so, as if it
were his last.

Nescit paenitenda loqui, qui proferenda prius suo tradidit examini. Cassiod.

He shall not speak things to be repented of, who considers well first, what
he is to speak.

Si mendacem te norint, nemo tibi credet, etiamsi affirmas verissima. Arist.

If thou art known to be a lier, no man will believe thee, though thou
speak the truth.

Vera amicitia tantummodo est inter bonos; Mali nec inter se amici sunt, nec
cum bonis.

True freindship is only amongst the good; For the bad, are neither freindes
amongst themselves, nor with the good.

Civilem amicum sic habeas, vt putes posse inimicum fieri.

So esteem of a civil friend, that thou think he may become thine Enemy:

Quod taceri vis, prior ipse taceas.

What thou desire to be kept secret, be sure first, to keep thy self secret.

Reprehensio, semper vel meliores, vel cautiores nos reddit.

Reprehension, does always make us better, or more cautious.

Si reprehendi fers aegre, reprehendenda ne feceris.

If thou take it ill to be reprehended, do not things worthy of
reprehension:

Qui facile in serijs jurat, in jocis jurabit; qui in jocis, et in mendacio.
Vives.

He who commonly swears in serious matters, will swear in jest; and he that
will in jest, will also to a lie.

Affabilitas, et Comitas, res sunt nullius impendij, amicitias tamen magnas
conglutinant exhibitae, dissolvunt praetermissae.

Affability and curtesy, are things of no cost, yet being used, do cause
great love and friendship, and loose the same being omitted.

Omnis peccandi occasi^ vitanda est, nam qui am^t periculum, peribit in illo.

All occasion of sinning is to be eschewed, for he that loves danger, shall
perish therein.

Nil juvat bonum omen, reclamante conscientia.

Good fortune delights nothing, where the conscience accuses.

Qui statuit aliquid, part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud
aequus fuerit. Senec:

Who determines a matter, one part being not heard, though he judges rightly,
yet he was not just:

Melius vt pereat vnus, quam vt pereat vnitas.

It were better one should perish, then that unity should perish.

Nihil est aliud tempus, quam vita, quam vnusquisque tantum se amare
profitetur, quum rei nullius magis sit prodigus quam temporis.

Time is no other thing then our life, which every one professes to love so
much; yet there is nothing that we are more prodigal of, then of our time.

Non turpe est veniam precari, turpe est Deum aut hominem habere inimieum.

It is not ill to crave pardon; But it is ill to have God, or man our enemy.

Cui semel ignoveris, cura vt illi sentiat bona fide id esse actum, et si qua
in re illum juvare potes, experiatur te amicum. Vives.

Whom thou do once pardon, take care that he understand it be done really,
and if in any thing thou can help him, let him find thee to be his friend.

In vita tempus quod somno impenditur, non est vita; vita enim vigilia est.

In our life, the time which is spent in sleep, is not life; for our life is a
watch,

Da Domine quod jubes, et jube quod vis. Aug.

Give Lord what thou command, and command what thou please.

Vt somnus mortis, sic lectus imago Sepulchri.

As sleep is the Image of death; so our bed, of our grave.

Hoc me docuisti, vt quemadmodum medicamenta, sic alimenta sumpturns accedam.
Aug:

This thou have taught me, that even as I receive medicaments, even so I should
receive nourishment.

Major sum, and ad majora genitus, quam ut mancipium sim mei corporis. Senec.

I am greater, and borne to greater things, then that I should be a slave to my
body.

Saint Austine had written over his Table.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere famam, Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse
sibi.

Whosoever delights to slander others behind their backs, let them know, they
are forbidden to come to this Table.

Legis substantia, est, sex diebus terrenis negotiis incumbere, septima, divino
cultui dare operam.

The substance of the Law is, to labor six days in our worldly affairs, and
the seventh day, to spend in the service of God.

Melius enim arare, quam saltare in Sabbato. Aug.

It is better to plow, then dance on the Lords day.

Climax vitae virorum fere septenariis aut novennariis; Faeminarum vero
senariis definitur. Bodin.

The Climatorie year of Men's lives, is commonly accounted by sevens or nines;
But of Women by sixes.

Praesentem narrat quaelibet berba Deum.

Every herb tells us that God is present.

Jejunium in Paradiso praescriptum est, reverere igitur jejunii canitiem.
Basil.

Fasting was commanded in Paradise, therefore reverence it for the Antiquity.

Quam diu jejunavit Adam, in Paradiso fuit, comedit, and ejectus est. Hierom.

So long as Adam fasted, he was in Paradise, he did eat, and was cast out.

Praeceptum esse jejunium video, quibus autem diebus non oporteat jejunare, and
quibus oporteat, praecepto Domini, vel Apostolorum, non invenio definitum. Aug.

I know fasting is commanded, but on what days we ought not to fast, and on
what days we ought; I find not set down by the commandment of our Lord, or
his Apostles.

Natura os parvum, and guttur arctum homini dedit.

Nature gave man a little mouth, and a straight throat.

Quid prodest vacuare corpus ab escis, and animam replere peecatis.

What does it profit, to keep the body from meat, and to fill the Soul with
sin.

Qui cibis abstinent, and mala agunt, Daemones imitantur, quibus culpa adest,
and cibus deest.

Those who fast, and do wickedly, imitate the Devils, who eat not, but do
evil.

Vis orationem tuam volare ad Caelum, facito duas alas, Jejunium and
eleemosynam. Aug.

Would thou have thy prayer to fly to heaven, make it two wings, fasting,
and prayer.

Jejunium orationem corroborat, oration Jejunium sanctificat. Bern.

Fasting strengthens prayer, Prayer sanctifies fasting.

Tota fiducia Christianorum, est resurrectio mortuorum. Tertul. lib. 5.

All the hope of Christians, is, the resurrection of the dead.

Lucrum est, pietatis nomine facere sumptum.

It is gain, to bestow cost in godliness.

Matrimonium inter aurum and arcam; Divortium inter Deum, and Animam. Aug.

Marriage between gold and the Chest; Is a divorce between God, and the Soul.

Sinit Deus justum incidere in calamitates, ut virtutem quae in illis latebat,
aliis apertam, manifestamque faciat. Damas.

God suffers the just to fall into calamities, that he might make plain and
manifest to others, the virtue which lay hid in them.

Deus calamitates instigit, non extinguere, sed castigare nos cupiens. Basil.
Ser. 3.

God afflicts us with calamities, desiring not to destroy, but to chastise us.

Malum pati, malum non est; Malum facere, malum est. Chrysostom.

To suffer evil, is not evil; But to do evil, is evil.

Novit Dominus mutare sententiam, si tu noveris emendare vitam. Aug. in Psalm.
50.

The Lord knows to change his sentence, if thou know to amend thy life.

Judas non tam scelus, quam desperatio fecit penitus interire. Aug.

Judas his Treason, was not so much the cause of his damnation, as his
desperation.

Sceleratior omnibus O Juda extitisti, quem non poenitentia duxit ad Dominum,
sed desperatio traxit ad laqueum. Leo.

Thou wast more wicked then all O Judas, whom repentance brought not to the
Lord, but desperation drew to the Gallows.

Post lachrymas, gemitusque graves, clementia Christi, Confestim est oculos
anteponenda tuos.

After tears, and much sorrow, the clemency of Christ is to be set before our
eyes.

O faelices nos quorum causa jurat Deus! O miserimos nos! Si non Deo quidem
juranti credimus. Tertul.

O happy we, for whose cause God has sworn! O most unhappy we! if we do not
believe what God has sworn.

S. Romitus; Cum quotannis gravi morbo tentaretur a Deo, doluit, quoduno anno
liber esset, ac si a Deo tune desertus fuisset. Vit. Patr. S. Romitus; Being
yearly visited with a grievous sickness, lamented that he was free one year,
as if God had forsaken him.

Morbus, non malis adnumerandus, quia multis utiliter accidit. Basil.

A disease is not to be numbered with evils, because it happens profitably to
many.

Morbus est utilis quaedam institutio, quae doc^t caduca aspernere, and
caelestia sperare. Nazian.

A disease, is a certain profitable means, which teaches us to despise
earthly things, and hope for heavenly.

Mors praesentis vitae exitus, and introitus melioris. Bern.

Death is the Exit of this present life, and the entrance of a better.

Timor mortis, ipsa mortepejor; Mors porta gloriae. Greg.

The fear of death, is worse then death it self; Death is the gate of Glory.

Vt moriare pius, disce vivere pie.

If thou desire to dye well, learn to live well.

Summum hominis bonum, bonus ex hac vita exitus.

The chiefest happiness of man, is to dye a good death.

Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.

Death makes Scepters and Ploughs equal.

Pastores omnes hic exoratos vellem, ut fideles ex hac vita migrantes, and
panem vitae petentes, non viatico suo fraudari sinant, ne lugubris, ista in iis
adimpleatur lamentatio; Parvuli panem petunt, and non sit qui frangat eis,
Lament. 4.4.

I wish all Ministers being desired, not to suffer the faithful departing out
of this World, and desiring the bread of life, to be defrauded of their
Viaticum; least as an addition to their mourning, this Woe be fulfilled in
them; The young Children ask bread, and no man breaks it unto them.

FINIS.

