The hatred OF ESAU, And the Love of JACOB unfoulded, being a Brief and plain
Exposition of the 9. Chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, being the heads
of what was delivered in several discourses, both Public and private.

By Samuel Loveday Servant of the Church of Christ.

(...) Psalm. 4.3. (...). Jud. 4. Qui reddet cuique secundum opera ejus, Romans
2.6. Credens and baptizatus salvabitur: at non credens Condemnabitur. Marc.
16.16. Printed by John Clowes, for Gieles Calvert, at the (...) Spread-hagle,
at the west end of Paul's.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT has been seated in the heart of man (since the fall of Adam) to put off
the sin from himself and put it upon others, yea, upon God himself. Although it
is very strange that man can find none to Father his corruptions upon but upon
him that is purity it self, who as James speaks, James the first, and the
thirteenth, cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. The Woman
that thou gave me (says Adam,) Genesis the third and the twelfth, gave me,
and I did eat, man is very loath to lay the saddle upon the right horse, as I
may so say, he is loath to take it upon himself, the woman which thou gave
me. Old Adam in these words laid a platform to all his sons, to say as their
Father said, the want of strength from the cause, he not being overpowered by
thee, he not being compelled by thee, thy determination and appointing me is
the cause that I am as I am, it is because thou have made me thus. But let us a
little consider what harm God did to Adam in giving him this woman, could not
Adam have made use of her to no other end? nay, did not God give him her to do
her good, and not hurt, Proverbs the 31. and the 12. Thus I say misapplying and
misapproving Gods dealings in Judgments or mercies, that makes men losers;
here is Pharaohs heart hardened by God even by giving him deliverances: if you
take good notice of it, its not under the plagues, but under the deliverances,
as you shall find in the following discourse, because man is so bad himself,
therefore he judges God to be like him, as in the 50 Psalm, the 21. to reap
where he has not strowed, as Luke the 19 and 11. though indeed few men deal so
hardly with their fellows, but I pray consider the Judge of all the earth shall
do right, that is to render to every man according to his works, Romans the 2.
and whatsoever he exhorts man unto, be assured, he is not failing in himself.

Therefore read without prejudice, and weigh things seriously, and see if these
things be so, and see what wisdoms children speak, those that are begotten by
wisdom which is Jesus Christ; for wisdom their Father is justified by them,
Luke 7. verse. 35. and take good notice of the 29 verse. of the same Chapter, the
Publicanes justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. Know this
that God is most just and equal in his proceedings toward the sons of men, my
desire is that this labor of mine may be to thy profit whomsoever thou art,
and if thou reapest benefit let God have the praise.

The Epistle Dedicatory To his Honored Father WILLIAM LOVEDAY.
DEar Father, because this following discourse wants an Indulgent Reader,
therefore I thought good to present it first to your hands, hoping you will
readily pass by those failings which may appear therein, and cloth them with
your favorable construction and Fatherly love, and look further then the
shell, even to the kernel and marrow of this business, I shall not present it
to you as a free gift, but as my obliged duty, as a small part of requital for
your Incessant love. I entreat you to consider seriously of the matter and not
to undervalue it, because of the meanness of the Author; but know I pray you
that Gods way and course in the days of the Gospel is to appear in weak means
to advance his own glory, that no flesh may glory in his presence: Out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings, he will perfect his praise; and not only so,
but he will lay low the wisdom of the World, and the pride of men who stumble
at Christ, because he is so obscure in the World that they cannot see him,
neither will they stoop so low as to take notice of him; but I hope better
things of you, therefore accept this small fruit from me, and what benefit you
receive I doubt not but you will be ready to give God the praise. So farewell.

A Brief exposition upon the ninth chap. of the Romans
I Say the truth in Christ I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the
holy Spirit, Verse. 1.

The Apostle having in the former Chapters of this Epistle largely treated of
the glorious and happy condition of those that were entered into the way of the
Gospel; in opposition to the Law, calling it being in Christ, as verse. 1. Which
being in Christ is to be in and under the Ordinances of the Gospel, as Gal. 3.
chap. verse. 27.

As many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. In the two
former verses it is called Faith, in opposition to works. The way of the Gospel
is called Faith, chap. 4. verse. 19.

My little children of whom I travel in birth, until Christ be formed in you,
(which is) till you worship according to the Gospel: and not according to the
Law, as in the following verses.

So that being in Christ according to the first verse of the 8. chap. Is to
walk in, and under the Ordinances of the Gospel. It is likewise called Spirit,
in opposition to flesh, as this Epistle treats of, as also the Epistle to the
Gal. chap. 4. verse. 29. he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit, (that is) he that was born of works, or of the Law,
persecuted him that was born according to Faith.

The Apostle having (I say) again largely expounded and Amplified those two
particulars, (viz.) works and Faith, in the seventh and eight chap. showing in
the latter end of the eight, what cause he and the rest of Gospel-Saints
(believers in Christ) had to Triumph in, as verse. 34.

Nothing shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ: (that is)
still in opposition to the Law, for under the Law there were many separations
from Christ, (as I may so call them) upon which so many sacrifices were
required to bring them together again, but now Christ has by that one
Sacrifice of his, for ever consecrated those that are sanctified, Hebr. 10.
verse. 14.

I would not here be mistaken, as though men thus sanctified could not again be
defiled, for then I should contradict other Scriptures, as the second of Peter,
the 2 chap. from the twentieth verse to the end, and diverse other Scriptures.
But thus, under the Law let a man do what he could to keep himself pure, yet
there would be defilements, and so separations from God and Christ, but now God
does not so require purity of men, (that is) external purity, (that is) to
abstain from touching of dead bodies or the like, but now only wilful sins
make a separation betwixt God and man, (I mean) those once truly joined unto
him, see Hebr. 10. verse. 26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins.

The Apostle (I say,) being thus very high in his expressions of his blessed
condition, with the rest of the Saints, (viz.) believers in Christ, as verse
the first, he now like an affectionate friend looks back upon the rest of his
kindred after the flesh, as it is the condition of a compassionate heart, to
look upon others as well as himself, and to endeavor to bring others to the
same enjoyment with himself, this was Paul's condition, as if he should say: Am
I and you who are in Christ thus happy and glorious? But stay, have none lost
that which we have found? yes, you my brethren the Jews have lost that which we
have found: therefore my joy is a little abated; this he is now upon, he does
not only hug and embrace the thing found, but withal he wishes he could
persuade the owners to take it of him again, though he lose it, see verse the
third, where the Apostle wishes himself accursed, or separated from Christ for
his brethren his kinsmen after the flesh.

Therefore the discourse that follows, is to be looked upon as from a man
deeply sensible of his friends loss, which will cause him to comfort himself,
and them with this, that the lost goods shall be returned. Now I come to the
words, verse the 1.

Verse. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the holy Spirit.

These words are a preface to that which follows: the words themselves are an
affirmation; or I may say an oath, where the Apostle does affirm that he will
speak nothing but truth in this following discourse: and therefore according to
the custom of men he swears himself, being not required by any other.

We have in the words something to be understood, or explained, as what he
means by saying the truth in Christ. Secondly, what he means by not lying, or
by a lie. Thirdly, what he means by Conscience. Fourthly, what he means by holy
Spirit.

For the first, to wit speaking the truth in Christ, I understand he means,
that he will not present that before them, which is not (which we call a lie,)
but speak words in reference to Christ who is truth it self, and speak them as
the truth it self, and speak them as the truth is in Jesus, and so it being
truth which he should speak, it must center in Christ, who is the truth it self.

But the second will more explain it, what he means by a lie.

The Greeck word (...), is severally taken in the Scriptures, sometimes it is
taken for vanity or emptiness, in opposition to substance and fullness, so God
is said to be true and every man a liar, Romans 3. chap. verse. 4. And so Christ
was said to be full of grace and truth, John the 1. chap. verse. 4. And so God
will be worshipped in Spirit and truth. John the 4. verse. 24. But this lie is
in opposition to truth, and so Idols are called a lie, in opposition to this
substance Jesus Christ; see Esai. 44. verse. 20. Speaking of Idols he says, is
not there a lie in my right hand, and so the Devil is called a liar, because
be persuades men to that which is not, as at the first he did to Eve, Genes. 3.
chap. verse. 4.

Therefore the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, and so consequently all believers
in Gospelorder to put away lying, see Ephesians. 4. verse. 25.

Thirdly, for that word conscience, the Greek word (...) which has affinity
with the Hebrew word (...) signifies knowledge and understanding with the
mind, and regard with the affections, as Genes. 48. verse. 19. the words of
Jacob, I know well my Son, I know well, Exodus 1. verse. the 8. Who knew not
Joseph, that is he did not know him so as to regard him, so Eccles. 2. verse.
19. Psalm 49.11. Where the same word (...) which is here rendered conscience, is
rendered an inward thought, see likewise Luke 3. verse. 27. Math. 7. verse. 23.
Where the Lord is said not to know the workers of iniquity, that is, not to
know them so, as to regard them with his inward affections, so that now the
Apostle will speak nothing but what he knows very well, and is affected with.

Fourthly what he means by (...): the holy spirit, by which we are to
understand, sometimes that visible discovery of cloven tongues, Acts 2.3.
sometimes a Dove, as Matthew. 3. verse. 16. sometimes for the word of Christ as
John the 3. verse. 5. Compared with 1. Pet. 2. verse. 2. Where you may see that
that which is called Spirit in the one place is called word in another; see
Romans 8. verse. 16. The Spirit of God bears witness with our Spirits that we
are the Sons of God, to wit, the word: this is that Spirit which being
received, and believed quickneth, see Psalm 119. verse. 50. Where David says
thy word has quickened me. Compare this with the 6. of John, and the 63. Which
will make it appear plainly, that the word is that quickening Spirit: so Christ
says in the conclusion of the verse, The words that I speak, they are Spirit
and life; and so our bodies are said to be a habitation for God by his Spirit,
Ephesians. 2. verse. 22. compared with Colos. 3. verse. 16. Let the word of Christ
dwell richly in you: and to this add, 1. John 2. verse. 24. Let that therefore
abide in you which you have heard from the beginning, which if it do, ye shall
continue in the Father and in the Son: to this add John 15. verse 7. If ye abide
in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what you will, and it shall be
done unto you: this is that Spirit or anointing, (...), or Christhood, which
makes us on with God, as we have the mind of Christ, or Spirit of Christ, see
1. Cor. 2. verse. 16. That is as we have the word of Christ.

I speak the more of this, because men in these late days speak much of a
Spirit, and yet lay low the words of Christ, which are Spirit and life: but
take notice, this is that Spirit, that does cleanse, comfort, exhort, and lead
into truth, yea, and make the man of God perfect and wise unto salvation, see
2. Tim. 3. verse. 15.17.

The word Spirit, if we take it, as it is taken for the quintessence or
abstract of God, as it may be so called, for it brings us thus to consider of
God: God at the first was (to us) an incomprehensible being, therefore Moses
could not deal with God as he was to be looked upon, but desires God to speak
in a way more suitable to him, which was by giving them Laws to walk by, which
God did for him and the rest, see Exodus 20. Yet notwithstanding this speaking
of God was too hard to be understood, (that is,) what his intent was in those
sacrifices and ceremonies wherein he was darkly seen, this was the first degree
of Gods condescension to man, to be abstracted, (as I may so say) and here was
spirit abstracted from God, that so by a little, man might understand and
taste, what this vaste incomprehensible being was: but this was not all, but
God therefore is pleased further to be abstracted, that is, to send Christ, who
is more expressly his image: now this Spirit comes to be more strong, and gives
a nearer discovery what this incomprehensible being is: but this is not all
neither, but this Image, or Abstract, or Spirit, must yet again be distilled
through the Limbick or Still of sufferings; and death it self, to bring forth
yet a more exact Spirit: this is intimated by John 7.39. and thus I have
brought you down to the word of Christ, or Mind of Christ, which is the best
discovery of God, and truest taste of him, that has been yet made known unto
the sons of men.

This is that Spirit spoken of by Christ, John 14.26. John 16.13. Chap. 17.8.
which some tasted deeply of after Christ's ascension, as Acts 2. ver. 3. and all
taste of, who taste of the Word of God, Heb. 6.4. and receive the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Indeed there are some that with those in the Acts 19. ver. 2. who have not
received the holy Spirit since they believed, (that is) they have not been
transformed into the same image of life and power. See Luke 24 49. compared
with 2 Cor. 3.8. But we all beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit (or
Power) of the Lord.

But are such as Timothy speaks of 2 Timothy 3.5. who have a form of godliness,
but deny the power.

This shows the Power of the Word or Spirit, that it is of a transforming
nature; this is attributed to the Gospel, Romans 1.16. It is the Power of God to
salvation to every one that believes.

This is that Spirit or Power that Stephen was qualified withal. See Acts 7.
he was full of the holy Spirit, 1 These. 1.5. Our Gospel came not unto you in
word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 4.20. The Kingdom
of God is not in word only, but also in power.

This is that Spirit or Power which the Lord has promised, and which we are to
expect and pray for, according to that in Luke 11.13. compared with Judges
16.28. where Sampson prays for strength, which in the former Chapter, 14.
verse he calls the Spirit of the Lord. Likewise see and consider Micah 3.8.

This I say is that Spirit which we are to taste God by, to know God by, and to
comprehend God by, namely his Word: and he that has this Spirit dwelling or
abiding in him, walks as Christ walked, pleasing to God, and profitable to
men.

So then thus I will speak, that which I am deeply affected with, and shall be
substantial and true, not in word only, but in power. So much for the
explication of the first verse.

Verse 2. That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrowing of heart: This
is part of that which he affirms in the former words.

There are three gradations, or degrees, used by the Apostle to set it forth,
as first, heaviness. Secondly, sorrow, and that continually. We shall a little
consider what he means by heaviness and sorrow, and what difference there is
between them, the Greek word (...) signifies heaviness, which causes sleep,
as Luke 22.45. Christ comes to his disciples, and finds them asleep with
heaviness: the Latin word aegritudo is taken for grief, passion, or sorrow of
mind, and sometime sickness of body, as in 1 Pet. 2.19. the reading these
Scriptures following will inform you what manner of heaviness it was, John
16.6.22. it is there taken for sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.10. it is there taken for
grief, Phil. 2.27. there the same word (...) is taken for sorrow again, but
the second word (...) is deep, as the Latin word cruciatus, which implies
torment, pain, affliction, a cross, and to be nailed upon a cross, Luke 16.24.

It is further taken for the travel of a woman, as 1 These. 5.3. where the same
word (...) is rendered travel: so likewise Gal. 4.19. it is taken for the
sorrows of death, as in Acts 2.24. where the word (...) is used, so that by
these places here cited, it appears to be very great sorrow, even to pain and
travel, nay, to be crucified for his friends the Jews.

Oh then I might a little press this upon you, is it so with you that profess
yourselves to be of Paul's spirit: are you grieved even to death, even to
crucifying, for your friends according to the flesh, because they are in
darkness, and do not enjoy the light of the Gospel, which you do? I fear, we
may all put our hands upon our mouths, and accuse our selves of neglect of our
duty in this particular.

Paul's condition was like Christ's, indeed he walked as Christ walked, his soul
was sorrowful even unto death, even so was Paul's: He, who thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.6,
7, 8. and was excluded from the glory which he was before invested with, and
was accursed from God, which separation makes him cry out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46. even so, Paul wishes himself accursed, or
separated from Christ for the Jews, such was his love toward them, as you
shall hear more at large when we come to the 3. v.

Now if we were in this condition, oh, what means would we use, what industry
would we use to be delivered, as the same Apostle expresses to the Gal. 4.19.
My little children, of whom I travel in birth, until Christ be formed in you:
and do but look back upon Paul's Epistles, what means he uses from this
travel, as his earnest prayers to God for them, chap. 10. ver. 1. so would
we, if we were as Paul, how would we pray in their behalf, who are in
darkness? and not only so, but he uses means, as in the 11. of the Romans
ver. 14. he there magnified his office before the Gentiles, to see if he by any
means could provoke the Jews to emulation, that thereby he might save some of
them, he uses all means possible to bring them in again to what they lost: and
the ground is, because he is in travel for them; and how vvilling a mother is
to see her child brought forth, I leave you to judge.

Neither is this a sudden passion of grief, and so rejoice again, no; and
that brings me to the third aggravation here in the words; and that is,
continuances, without intermission: there is no time when Paul does not bear in
mind the Jews loss their regaining.

Now then let us look back upon what has been said; he might well affirm it
with such strong affirmations and witness, it would scarcely have been
believed else that he could have been so troubled for them; Paul was like a
bird flying up into the air, in the chap. but this clog pulls him down again, he
cannot be elevated truly (nor no Saint) till this be removed.

We who are Saints should look upon our selves as tied to these dead carcases
(I mean the Jews) we cannot be right as we would be till they have life in
them, no ascending without them, no triumphing without them, so Paul has it
Romans 11.15. Their restoring shall be life from the dead, when they and we shall
be one body: as in another case it is said, Heb. 11.48. That the Saints that
are gone before without us (says Paul) should not be made perfect; so neither
they nor we without them shall be made perfect.

Therefore what need have we to be in Paul's frame; me thinks, it is like a
company traveling toward a City, and some fall by the way, or stray behind,
and the other that are willing to enter, runs forward, notwithstanding there
are orders given out, that none shall enter until all come up together.

How then should this make those that are strong help those that are weak, that
they may all enter together to the gate. So let us know that none of us shall
enter into glory, until the Jews come up too; therefore let us use all means
possible to publish that light, and put forth that power we have to bring them
up. And so much for the second verse.

Verse 3. For I could wish my self to be accursed from Christ for my brethren,
my kindred after the flesh.

For the understanding of these words, we are to consider what is meant by the
word (...). It is taken from an Hebrew root, which signifies to limit,
determine, or appoint, as Psalm. 78.41. They limited the holy One of Israel:
and the Greek word (...) not differing, signifies to six, determine, or
appoint; these words are a fruit or effect of the former: you may remember, I
told you concerning his heaviness and sorrow, the greatness of it; I told you
he was brought up to the condition of Christ, who was contented for our sakes
to be separated from the Father, as it appears by his expressions: See Matthew.
27.46.

Now Paul (as I told you before) being deeply sensible of their loss, is come
up to the height of his affection, but how may we understand this, that he
desires to be accursed from Christ: we must thus take it: That Paul prefers a
general good before a particular, therefore he could wish himself in their
condition, if so be, they might be in his.

Now we are not here to think, that he means to be for ever separated from
Christ: for the Jews themselves his kindred are not so separated; for all
acknowledge that they shall come in again, only he desires that if it were
possible they might have been first, though he were last, as Christ speaks
concerning the Jews, The first shall be last, and the last first, see Matthew.
19.30. that is, The Jews who were first a people, for their rebellion against
God, shall be last, and the Gentiles who were not a people, shall be first.

There is another acception of this word, (that is) to be blotted out of the
book of life: as Moses uses the same expressions to God, see Exodus 32.32.
Numb. 11.15. which agrees with that ((...)) 1 Cor. 16.24. which is
excommunicated to death, as it is sometimes taken, but I take it to be the
former that Paul speaks of, (that is to say) that Paul desires (for a time) to
be excommunicated from Christ, in the room of the Jews, who were so
excommunicated for their disobedience.

Then if it be so, let us a little consider, (as I said before) Paul might well
affirm it with such strong affirmations; for it might have been scarcely
believed that his love and affection, should be so strong toward the Jews:
where shall we find such love? here is such love, as John speaks of, to lay
down our lives for the brethren, here was that love of Christ visibly seen in
Paul, which we are commanded to imitate.

It is no wonder, though Paul writes so tenderly to the Churches, as Romans 1.
verse. 7. 1 Cor. 1.1. chap. 4. verse. 14. I write to you as my beloved children,
I have begotten you, and so the whole current of his Epistles was full of
loving expressions, as a tender Father.

Who would have thought, that ever that Saul spoken of Acts 8. Who you there
read did make havoc of the Churches, drawing out Men and Woman, putting them
into prison, he breathed out threatenings against the people of God: his very
name implies a man of a turbulent Spirit, a desperate, forcing, or Raping man:
but see what power he has met withal in the commands of Christ, that his Name
is not only changed, but his nature also, for Paul signifies ( separavit) that
is, set apart.

We may plainly see the power of the Word, of what a transforming nature it is,
it transformed a man into love, not only to his brethren, but also to his
enemies: This Doctrine Christ preaches largely, see and consider Matthew. 5.
verse. 43.44. It has been said, love your Neighbors; but I say love your
Enemies: do good to them that hate you, and bless them that curse you: and
these words of Christ, must be transforming words, to those that profess
themselves to be Disciples of Christ.

This lesson Steven had learned, Acts 7. Who prayed for his persecutors: Lord
lay not this sin to their charge. See here if there be not the same mind in him
as was in Christ. He prayed Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do. So Paul exhorts the Philippians, Phil. 2. ver. 5. that the same mind in
them which was in Christ.

I might largely insist upon this, but this may suffice. Only carry this along
with you, 1. John 2. verse. 2. He that says he abides in Christ ought so to
walk, even as Christ walked. The chiefest thing in Christ imitable by us, is
love to the brethren, as the same John in his first Epistle largely and sweetly
treats of. So much for the former part of the words. A word to the latter.

My brethren, my kinsmen after the flesh. I hope you know that Paul was a Jew,
and so his Brotherhood comes in as he was a circumcised person, therefore he
calls them brethren according to the flesh, because he could not call them
brethren according to Faith.

I proceed to the fourth verse, which will more fully explain the precedent
words: who are Israelites, to whom pertained the adoption, and the glory, and
the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises, verse. 4.

Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, who
is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. verse. 5.

In these verses we have a Catalogue of those Privileges which the Jews had,
but lost them by their disobedience.

1. Privilege, first they were Israelites of the seed of Jacob, who you know
was called Israel, upon his prevailing with God, Genes. 32.28. This name (
Israel) was given him as an encouragement unto him, to believe that he should
be a great prevailing people with God, and also with men; for we see in the
next chapt. a fruit of the promise, when he met with Esau his brother, Genesis 33.
verse. 4.5. and so forwards.

Now that this was a very high Privilege, none will deny, as to be such an
Israelite to whom such promises did belong, for we know that God did own the
Israelites as his choice peculiar people, both under the Law and under the
Gospel, as concerning his high expression to Nathaniel, Jo. 1.47. Behold an
Israelite indeed in whom is no guile.

Therefore Paul did very well to put this in the first place, that they were
Israelites, because there were no promises made, either under the Law, or under
the Gospel, but unto such as are or shall be found in the Commonwealth of
Israel, for all others are said to be strangers, aliens, and without God in the
World, both these are proved by the same Apostle into his Epistle Ephesians. 2.12.13.
That at that time you were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel; and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the World.

The second Privilege which the Jews were invested withal, was the adoption,
now the Greek and Latin words, ((...), adoptio filiorum) do signify a
receiving in of strangers, and investing them with sonship, as we find, Genesis
17. from the 23 to the last, where we find as well those who were strangers, as
those who were born in the house, were called sons, being circumcised, this
also was a very high Privilege; for therein the Jews had the same Privilege
as Jesus Christ had under the Gospel: for they might receive into sonship,
whomsoever would submit to that Ordinance of circumcision, and herein they did
signify, or type forth, that which is spoken of in the Prophet Isaiah
concerning Christ, that he should be as an Ensign lifted up, unto whom all
nations should flow according to that in Gal. 4.5. Wherein the Apostle does
declare our adoption by Jesus Christ, for says he, to redeem them that were
under Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, to this agrees Romans
8.15.23. Ephesians. 1.5.

The third Previledge is the glory, wherein we must enquire what the Apostle
means by the glory: Now the Greek word ((...)) signifies splendour, Majesty, or
domminion, as John 9.44. Give glory to God, Acts 7.2. the God of glory appeared
to our Father Abraham.

Again, we see it was one part of the Jews glory to have the presence of God,
as in the 132 Psalm. 13.14. for the Lord has chosen Sion, and loved to dwell in
it, saying, this is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have delight
therein.

The second part of the Jews glory is, that they had the Laws of God
communicated unto them, 147 Psa. 19.20. He shows his word unto Jacob his
statutes and his judgment unto Israel, he has not dealt so with every Nation,
neither have they known his judgments. Even as it is in inferior Courts,
Judges, they have some of the glory and Majesty of the King, because they have
power given them by the King, to execute his Laws and statutes in his name,
which in so doing they do represent the person of the King. I might largely
insist upon these words, but take notice of this, that these Privileges are
essential unto a Church of God, for the Covenant, Genes. 17. was made unto them
as they were separated from all the Nations in the World besides.

Neither does God make any Covenants or promises, either under the Law or
Gospel, but unto a people separated from the pollution of the World, Esai.
8.16. and there God dwells.

These Privileges belonged unto them as they were the Common wealth of Israel,
Ephesians. 2.12. So that there was an Act of Freedom past upon all that came into
this Commonwealth, or Corporation, which Act was circumcision, without which
they had no share in this Freedom or Privilege, for this was the door by which
they were to come in.

I shall hereafter show you how this does allude to the Gospel-principles, and
indeed which is but the shadow of that substance which the true Church of
Christ are in the days of the Gospel, I proceed to the 5. verse.

Of whom are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is
God over all, blessed for ever. Amen.

In which words there is declared another high Privilege added to these Jews,
that Christ came of that stock, I shall not speak of the Deity of Christ,
because it has been largely treated upon by others, but only take notice of
this, that when Paul does speak of Christ's glory, he spoke very highly of
Christ, so that in this verse is declared that not only God the Father, but
Paul wishes it so to be as in this word, Amen.

Now from all this which has been declared from the 1. verse. to the 5. verse.
there are these 3. things considerable.

First, that the Jews were a glorious people above all people in the World
besides.

Secondly, that they lost this glory.

Thirdly, that, for which loss Paul was very heavy, and sorrowful, yet this
sorrow was not without hope, as we may see in the succeeding verse, as in the
6. verse.

Notwithstanding it cannot be, that the word of God should-take none effect,
for all they are not Israel, which are of Israel, verse 6.7.

Neither are they all children, because they are the seed of Abraham, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called.

In these words the Apostle begins to comfort himself concerning Israel, and
here in he uses several Arguments to raise up his thoughts.

The first Argument he uses is this, that the adoption, Covenants, promises,
and glory, which he before spoke of, were not altogether given and made to
fleshly Israel, but to some other, or at least to them under some other
consideration; so then the Argument lies thus: If the promises were made with
Israel as they were Abraham's seed according to the flesh only, that is to say,
circumcised persons, then it must not have ceased to such an Israel: But we
find that it has ceased unto them according to the flesh, (as Mat. 3. where
they came to require Baptism of John, because they were of the seed of Abraham,
but that were not sufficient, therefore the promises were made to Abraham's seed
by faith, which are those who are of the faith of Abraham, this is clearly
proved, Romans 2.28, 29.

For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision,
which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 4.14.

So the Apostle lays all the blame upon Israel, not upon God; for the word of
God is become of none effect to that Israel, because they rejected this line of
faith: for the Apostle says in v. 31.32. That Israel has not attained to the
law of righteousness, because they sought it not by faith; (that is) Israel
looked not further then this covenant according to the flesh, as they were
circumcised persons; upon which ground John had such an harsh discourse, Mat.
3.9. Think not to say you have Abraham to your father: for that is not the
right line, but you are to be the children of Abraham by faith, before you
claim this badge of baptism, as you shall find the words clear; and upon this
ground most of Paul's discourse, is to beat men off from this prop, to wit,
outward privileges, as witness his whole Epistle to the Galatians, especially
chap. 3. the latter end, For ye are all the Sons of God by faith in Christ
Jesus, if ye be Christ's, ver. 29. then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to promise. And hence it is that Paul lays low the whole dispensation
of the law which is called Circumcision, equal to those without it, as Galat.
6.15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature: And here is the Israel of God, namely, a new creature by faith. For
in Christ Jesus: you may remember I proved being in Christ Jesus, was to be in
and under the ordinances or dispensations of the Gospel, as Romans 8.1. not under
the law, which is called flesh, as Gal. 4.29. and by circumcision and
uncircumcision, is meant Jews and Gentiles, the whole world, as Romans 2.3.4.
largely declared, so that now it lies here: it is not circumcision, (that is)
all those privileges, promises whatsoever, avails to acceptance with God now,
but faith, neither is the uncircumcision any thing, or the contrary, to avail
for condemnation, if thou be a new creature, as it is clear Romans 2.26. to the
end. So it is the circumcision of the heart, which was typified by the outward
circumcision of the flesh: and therefore the same persons, Acts 7. who were of
this outward circumcision, yet were uncircumcised in heart, as ver 51. Ye are
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, because they did not come
under the dispensation of the Gospel by faith. And to this agrees the whole
current of Scripture: and if you do but read Paul's Epistles to the Galatians
and Romans, you may plainly see this truth, so that here lies the cause; now
Paul is not so much grieved and sorrowful for the Jews, because they are no
longer such a glorious people as formerly they were: but for the cause of it,
that they should be so blind, as not to see the intent of God in all those
dispensations, as having reference to Christ: for it was upon this ground that
Israel was rejected of God, and blinded, because they would not see Christ the
end of the law, and that now the just should live by believing, as Romans 1. Then
we are come thus far, That the promises of God, Genesis 17. and several other
places, were not made with Abraham, as he was a person circumcised, but as a
person believing, and received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of faith, as Romans 4.10. and so those are his children that
believe in Christ, as witness Zacheus, Salvation is come to thy house, in as
much as thou art a child of Abraham, compared with Galat. 3.26. Ye are all the
Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ. And thus the Word of God is not fallen away,
but the Jews: Israel is fallen from the Word or Promises of God, so that God
did never intend that men should be justified by fulfilling the law, but by
eying Christ in it. Romans 3.28. Thus I am come down again to the words:
Nevertheless it cannot be that the Word of God should fall away, or be of none
effect: so that thus I conclude, that Israel whom Paul so much grieved for, and
those that have not obeyed the Gospel, nor entered upon that true line of faith
in Christ: so the comfort lies here, That there is yet an Israel of God, which
are those that are of a clean heart, Psalm. 72.1. Pax super ill^s and
misericordia, and super Israel Dei, Gal. 6.16. Well then, how does this comfort
Paul concerning the Jews: That at the time when those Jews shall believe in
Christ, they shall be counted for the Israel of God, and their punishment shall
be taken away, 2 Cor. 3.15. When they shall turn to the Lord, the vale shall be
taken away.

And this shall be: and therefore Israel is yet in a hopeful condition, Israel
is not yet past mercy and grace, and then Israel who is now hated for their
disobedience, shall then be loved, and his adversaries hated: and now we must
understand, that as the Jews or Israel sinned, they were not only blinded
spiritually, but afflicted outwardly, and given up into the hand of the
enemies, as ye know the whole current of the Scripture runs: Now Paul is
grieved for this cordition of theirs, and chiefly the cause of it, their
unbelief: they who were such a glorious people above other nations should now
lie amongst the pots, Psalm. 68.13. that they should now be the undermost, who
then were highest: they the tail, that were the head, they the last, which
were the first, Mat. 20. but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, Genesis 21.12.
that is, in that line that is most unlikely with men: a son of laughter o^
mocking, a son in Abraham's old age: God in all ages made use of the lowest and
weakest means and ways to drive on this design, because he will have men to
stoop to him in this way: it must not be glorious Israel according to the
flesh, decked with outward circumcision, and carnal ordinances, but Israel of a
clean and circumcised heart, in the mean way of believing in Christ: and hence
it is that Christ himself comes as a Carpenter of mean parents, despised and
mocked of men as Isaac was, and not like a noble learned man, or wise after the
flesh, 1 Cor. 1. God will make men stoop, let them be never so high, never so
learned, never so wise after the flesh; and why should men in this age wonder,
if God go the same way to make use of base things, foolish things, despised
things, to confound and bring to naught the high and mighty things, as wisdom,
learning, and greatness? Why then is it that they cry now a days, as it was in
Christ's, have any of the great and learned men believed on him? only a few
poor despised ones that know not the law. But take notice, that this small
channel is that where the promise runs: and the Jews for not submitting to
this way of God, lie under blindness and hardness till their stout heart
comes down as Christ tells them, Mat. 23. last, I will not see you henceforth
tell you, blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

And here is that treating made good, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. unto you that are not
persuaded, or are disobedient, The stone which the builders refused, or
dissolved, the same is made the head of the corner. These wise builders who at
the first thought the stone not worthy to be laid into their glorious building,
must return, and make it the chief stone, the cornerstone to direct the whole
building: Oh miserable are those people that are too wise to build upon this
stone, especially now after they have had this president, namely, the Jews
folly and mistake; Men are to take Christ's Rules, examples, and presidents to
build by, though they be counted fools by the World, it must be so, 1 Cor.
3.60. become fools to be wise; remember the Jews folly was their wisdom, being
too high for Christ: so much for the 7. verse.

Verse 8. that is They which ^e the Children of the flesh, are not the Children
of God; but the Children of the promise are counted for the seed: I speak
little to th^se words, because I spoke largely to the same thing: In the former
only take notice of this, the discourse how it runs: This verse is as it were
an explication of the former, and it is Paul's second Argument to comfort
himself, concerning Israel, and to clear God, concerning his promise: there are
as I said before two designs here carried on, the chief is this, Paul's kindred
for whom he so grieves, shall yet again be received and exalted, because they
shall be found of the seed of Isaac. The second is the manifestation of the
cause of this their blindness or hardness: the first of these is the chiefest
here intended, else it does no way answer the former part of the Chapter:
neither is it a suitable plaster for such a sore; for were the second the
chief, that is to say, that God has chosen the Covenant of grace in Isaac, and
rejected the Covenant, the Covenant of works, Ishmael; therefore I say these
three Chapters treat chiefly of the Jews coming in again to that glory which
they had only by promise, but shall have it really afterward.

I might from this strong affirmation of Paul, that the Children of the flesh
are not the Children of God, prove that it is not Children of believing
parents, or the like that are in the promise, but believers.

But I hope most people are taken off from this groundless conceit; therefore
I hasten to the main and chief thing here intended, which will lie in the third
Argument from the 11.12. and 13. verses, that is thus, viz. that though Israel
for whom I grieve so, be now thus low, yet they shall be brought in again, and
exalted because of Gods promise, to wit, the elder shall serve the younger: I
have Gods promise for it, nay, this was Prophetically spoken by God (to
Rebeckah) who calls things that are not as though they were, who cannot be
mistaken: Known unto God are all his works from the creation of the World; but
he has said the word, Jacob shall rise and Esau fall, therefore it must needs
be so: the place Isuppose is known to all Genesis 25.23. Rebeckah being with child
with twins, and strongly struggling in her Womb, or hurting one another as the
Hebrew word signifies, she could not but be troubled at this strange work: Now
God by this way or in this speaking to Rebeckah would comfort her concerning
him whom she loved (who should first be suppressed by the elder,) that yet he
should be chief and rule over his Brother, therefore he gives her this promise,
the Elder shall serve the younger, Jacob shall rule Esau: Now you know that
Esau at the first had dominion over Jacob, as witnesses his calling of him
Lord Esau, and submitting to him when he met him, Genesis 33. This promise or
prophecy of God to Rebeckah, as it then comforted her, so also it here
comforts Paul; and therefore he makes use of the same words: Now that we may
take up the whole scope of the words, I shall lay down these two conclusions.

First, that Jacobs love, nor Esaus hatred (here spoken of) is not yet
fulfilled.

Secondly, that the time of Jacobs love, is the time of Esaus hatred; for the
understanding hereof, we must inquire what the love and hatred here spoken of
is; for the which I shall refer you to the several Prophesies concerning Esan,
as chiefly the whole Prophecy of Obadiah, the whole Prophecy speaks of this
particular, as verse the 8. and 9. they of the Mount of Esau shall be cut off
by slaughter, and in the 21. verse, I will judge the Mount of Esau, and add to
it the last verse. where he tells us when it shall be, to wit, when the Kingdoms
are become our Lord Christ's, likewise the Prophet Malachy, Malachy the 1. and
the 2. He hated Esau, and laid his Mountain and his Heritage waste for the
Dragons of the Wilderness; but this is not yet made good as you shall know, for
it is when God brings back the captivity of Sion, Psalm 137. Remember the
Children of Edom, (which is Esau) in the day of Jerusalem, so that the love of
Jacob, and the hatred of Esau is in a visible way of exaltation or laying low:
now that this is not yet clear, if you take but the said 3. Chapters together,
to wit, the 9.10. and 11. of the Romans, Love and hatred in God are not to be
looked upon as inherent passions as they are in man; but we say God is angry
when it appears by his acts and works; and thus sometimes he is angry with, or
hates Israel, as in the 2. of Samuel, the 24. when David numbered the People;
and so likewise Esaias the 60. the 14. and 15. verses, where he says, Israel was
sorsaken and hated, so likewise in the second Psalm, verse 5. where the Hebrew
word (...) signifies the nostrils, or the appearance of anger in the nose,
because we should then say God is angry, when we see the effects of it, so that
then God hates Esau as aforesaid in Obadiah and Malachy, when he lays his
Mountain low, and not before, and then also he loves Jacob when he acts
toward him, according to Psalm the 68. and the 13. Now that God shall thus
deal with Esau, and that he has thus dealt with Jacob: I shall assert some
Scriptures, first, concerning Jacob or Israel, the Lord speaks largely by the
Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 4.6.7. verses, he threatened to bring a plague upon them,
he threatened to lay their Land waste, and destroy their Cities, waste without
Inhabitant, and this was not for nothing but for their great Rebellion, chap,
3. largely set out; by this you see how Gods love or hatred appears in his
acts: so likewise chap. 5.14. and 15. verses, and verse 25. Your iniquities
have hindered these things from you.

We have further fruits of this hatred, chap. 8.17. I will scatter them with an
East Wind before the Enemy, I will show them the back and not the face, in the
day of their destruction, and so likewise verse. 19. and many other Scriptures:
Now all this while Esau who is Jacobs persecutor, is saved in a sense, because
Israel is given into his hands; for this love and hatred appears in outward
Dominion and submission; and this is that hatred and love here spoken of in the
Text, to wit, the making of the one great, and the other small: the major shall
serve the minor; thus you see in some part the proposition cleared. For the
understanding what love and hatred is here meant, and the time of it; For the
second proposition, to wit, that the time of Jacobs love is the time of Esaus
hatred, must needs be true; for all the world being persecutors, or persecuted,
Jacobs or Esau's, the one being up, the other must needs be down: to this
agrees the whole current of Scripture, and a pregnant place is Psalm the 60.
which is to this very thing in hand, concerning Esau, under the name of Edom,
where the Prophet mixeth his discourse betwixt them both, as in the first
verse, where God is angry with Israel, and scatters them. In the last verse he
threatens to destroy both his and Isreal's enemies: and Ezekiel 39. the whole
Chapter being to this very thing in hand; so likewise Psalm 68. at the first
verse, and the whole Psalm likewise is eminent to this purpose.

So that is an undeniable truth, that the loving of Jacob, is the hating of
Esau, that is, the making of Jacob great, must be the making of Esau small; I
might speak much to this, but I must hasten. I thus conclude, that God did
prophetically speak unto Rebeckah, that though Jacob should first be small, and
despised (as you know he was,) yet afterward at his embracing Jesus Christ he
should be great and honorable: and so I proceed to the 14. verse, What shall
we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. These words depend
upon the former: the Apostle argues thus, men are very apt to think that God is
unrighteous when he comes to render vengeance upon them, for persecuting his
people: these enemies are as a rod in Gods hand, that must be thrown into the
fire, when it shall be said as the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias 40.2. she has
received double at the hand of the Lord, for all her transgressions, which is
the time, which the Apostle now points at; that men I say are very apt to think
that God is not righteous in his rendering a recompense to his enemies, appears
in their pleading with him, as in Mat. 25.43.44. When saw we thee hungry? etc.
but the second part of the words is the affirmation, God forbid: the sum of
which words is this, that God shall appear most just and righteous in his
hatred of Esau, and love of Jacob: this is cleared expressly by Paul, Rom:
2.4.6. for it is a rightcous thing with God, to render tribulation to them that
trouble you: it is an equal and righteous thing, that as Esau (and in him all
the persecutors and oppressors of the people of God) have had their time, not
only to persecute, but to enjoy the fatness of the earth; so Jacob who has
been small shall also have his time (as it is intimated by Christ, Luke 16.25.
concerning Lazarus) shall have their time to enjoy the earth.

I mean to reign with Christ on earth, herein is the righteousness of God seen
very much, and this is cleared by several Scriptures, as Math. the 5. and the
5. The meek shall inherit the Earth, see Math. 19.28.29. Revel. 5.10. and
Revel. 5.20. Psalm. 49.14. The just shall have dominion ever them in the
morning. But it is objected, that this love and hatred was before they were
born, verse 11. for ere the Children were born, and when they had done neither
good nor evil, that the purpose of God according to the election, might stand
not of works, but of him that calls. For answer to which I say, the words
were spoken by God, (that calls things that are not as though they were) before
they had done good or evil; and there is no more in the words, leaving out the
Parenthesis, it was said unto Rebeckah, the elder shall serve the younger: but
for more particular answer, I say as I proved before, that Gods hatred and love
is known by his external actings, which is not yet expressed toward either of
them; for the hatred of Esau Malachy the 1. and the 2. compared with Obadiahs
prophecy, was not acted before he was born, neither was it done without
reference to his works, for in Obadiah its said, for thy violence against thy
brother Jacob, etc. Gods promises and threatenings have always been
conditionally from the beginning of the World. As first concerning Niniveh, God
threatened to bring a Judgment upon them, they repented, and he repented to
consider also Jeremy the 18. If I speak against a Nation to pluck up and to
destroy, if that Nation turn, I will repent of the evil which I thought to
bring upon them the truth of which condition of God we see in Ahab, 1 Kings the
21.27, 28, 29. So also Luke the 13. Except they repent, they shall all likewise
perish. From whence I conclude, that God does always threaten and promise
conditionally: therefore if God did threaten to hate Esau and to love Jacob,
before they were born; it must be according to these rules of his proceeding,
which is according to their deservings: for his rule is to render to every man
according to his works, Romans the 2. Now these conditions of God are not
always expressed, but implied, which causes the mistake, as in the case of
Ninive; Forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed: where there is no condition
expressed, yet it must of necessity be implied, otherwise God had not been so
good as his word; for he did not destroy them. But a place eminent to this
purpose is, the first of Samuel the 23. the 11.12. where David inquired of God
whether Saul would come down, or whether the men of the City would deliver
him up? the answer of God was first, that Saul would come down. And secondly,
that the men of the City would deliver him up: neither of which things came to
pass. If David had been of the mind of some men in our days, having a word of
God, plainly saying that he should be taken, he would not have stirred, but
desperately have continued in the Town till Saul had come down upon him,
according as I said to the words of some men, if they be elected they shall be
saved; If not, do what they can they shall perish: but would such men do as
David did, who fled out of the City and escaped Saul's hands, so let them
forsake their evil ways and turn unto God, and they shall be saved. But it is
further added, that the purpose of God might stand, that is, say they that God
had a purpose to hate and love in time, it is true, God did foresee what the
actings of these two would be, and except Esau leave persecuting of Jacob, and
turn to love him, God will hate him, and when Israel shall turn to the Lord,
God will lift them, as in the 2. of the Corinthians 3.16. when they shall look
upon the brazen Serpent, they shall be healed. Ezekiel the 39. the 27.28. and
29. Gods foreseeing that men will do good or evil, does not give them power to
act either; for did his foreknowledge of men's doing good give them power to
act God-like, then his foresight of wicked men's doing evil must also give them
power to act wickedly, and so become the Author of sin, which he is not: as
James the first and the 13. Galatians the 5. and the 8. But you will say, that
God has power to hinder men from sinning and therefore it lies upon him. I
answer, where has God made any promise that he will hinder men from evil, or
put them forward to good, but as Persons shall embrace his word, and by his
working unto their reasons and understanding? so Luke 14. the guests are
invited, not forced: he does not send a Troop of Horse to bring them in by
force whether they will or no, but he sends them word all things are ready, and
this is likely to work upon their affections and to provoke them to come; for
if God did put forth this kind of power, he might cause a horse or any other
brute beast as well as man: but the way that God takes with rational
creatures, men and women; is to woe and entreat and beseech them to be
reconciled: as in the 2. of the Corint. the 5. Esaias the 55. the 6. and 7. from
all this we gather that Gods Prophetical speech to Rebecca did not cause Esau
to be wicked or Jacob to be Godlike. And so much for the objection. And the 14.
verse; verse the 15. for he said to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. These words
were the words of God to Moses, Exodus the 33. and the 19. where Moses desired
to see Gods glory, he would not be satisfied with a little of the back-parts;
but he would see his face, but God does as much as tell him, none can see his
face, but as he is in Jesus Christ that rock. Now the Apostle here makes use of
this promise of God there made to him and to Israel, and so the words are a
reason of the former; he argues thus Israel must be loved, and mercy must be
showed unto them, why? because God promised so to Moses, and he cannot lie; so
that this is another argument to comfort Paul concerning his kindred according
to the flesh, not only that promise made to Rebecca, but also this which was
made to Moses. But it will be objected: Gods supreme power, is here the cause,
and nothing in man, for it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy. For answer to this, I say, is not said, it is
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but that it is not of him
that wills, etc. that is, it is not of or from him that wills or runs to
procure a way of Salvation: for both Jews and Gentiles which are here termed
willers and runners, are both incapable of doing such a thing; for they had
both sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans the 3. and the 23.
Therefore mercy and grace, must needs be the gift of God, Ephesians the 2. and
the 8. where Grace is called the gift of God, which gift is Jesus Christ, John
the 4. So that it may well be said, it is not of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy, Hosea the 13. and the 9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy help. So that the case lies here, Paul is very sad for a
company of condemned creatures in the beginning of the Chapter, but he is a
little comforted, that the finds or hears that the King whom they have been
traitors to, has given out, that all and every one of these shall be saved, if
they will but own him for King, which is a small thing. Now the case of this
pardon cannot arise from the creature condemned, but out of the Kings mere
mercy. The Apostle grieves for a company of men his kindred that are stung with
fiery Sepents, but he is a little comforted in that there is a brazen Serpent
set up to heal them if they will but look, and there is but a look required,
and if they perish it is because they will not look upon the brazen Serpent;
and Christ in allusion to this, calls: look unto me, and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth. So that now there is hopes for Paul and them in this thing,
because willing and running is not now the way of Salvation, but looking and
believing in Jesus Christ; it is only now as coming to a wedding where there
is all delights, and therefore God had mercy on them that fell under the
dispensation of the Law. But now how shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation? there remains now no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking
for of Judgment. And so much for the 16. verse. the 17. For the Scripture said
unto Pharaoh even for this same purpose have I raised thee up that I might show
my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.
The words are the words of God to Pharaoh, Exodus the 9. and the 16. For the
word here used raised thee up, or made thee to stand, the Greek word (...),
sometimes signifies a resurrection from the dead, and sometimes a resurrection
from some deep extremity; see how God had thus raised up Pharaoh: how often had
Pharaoh been very low by those plagues which were upon him, yet God did still
raise him up and deliver him, and gave him as it were a new life, there was
never any that we read of, that had more eminent mercies from God then this man
had; nine several times we know God raised him up from the gates of death at
his desire, by the means of Moses and Aaron, though it were such a great sin,
and evil he lay under; as first, the persecuting the peculiar people of God;
and secondly his despising and vilifying of God himself, saying, what is the
Lord, that I should obey him? was there ever any that abused deliverances more
then this man did? But let us a little examine the cause, because he says, for
this cause; the cause was partly in reference to himself, and partly in
reference to Pharaoh. First in reference to himself two ways, as is expressed
in the following words. First to show his patience, and secondly his power; his
patience in forbearing and bearing so many abuses as Pharaoh offered to him and
his people, as in verse. the 22. Where both these particulars are proved, what
if God willing to show his long suffering, endured with much patience the
vessels of wrath, etc. Secondly, to show his power, that he could take off such
a stout Enemy in the height of his rebellion and persecution, and that he did
not only to deliver and for the comfort of Israel then, but for the comfort of
his people in succeeding ages, which is the very cause and ground that it is
here cited in this Chapter; the proceedings of God upon Pharaoh, that as; their
God delivered Israel from so potent an Enemy, he will also at last deliver
Israel from all the Edemites, Moabites, and Amorites, their Enemies. God will
wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of these that go on in their
wickedness, as he did unto Pharaoh; and let men make this construction of all
Gods deliverances, to consider of the patience and power that God holds forth
unto them; for Gods raising up of persons gives them power to amend their
lives, as Pharaoh might and ought to have done. But the second consideration,
why God made his power appear unto Pharaoh, was in reference to Israel, who
else must have been swallowed up; and this proves the former Proposition more
firmly. That the time of Jacobs love must be the time of Esaus hatred, for the
deliverance of Israel must of necessity be the destruction of Pharaoh: so that
now Paul argues thus to comfort himself; God that did so much for Israel of
old, in delivering them from Pharaoh; will do as much or more, in delivering
them from their persecutors, Esau and the like. This is plainly proved by
several places of Scripture, as in Esaias the 10. verse. the 24.25. and 26. Where
he describes the manner of Gods proceeding, in the second place to be according
to that of Egypt, Esaias the 11.16. Esaias the 34. from the fifth verse to the end;
and this deliverance of Israel was not procured by or from themselves, but it
proceeded from the breast of God himself, for he looked down upon Pharaoh's
cruel dealing with them, and he wrought their deliverance; only they were to
do what he bid them, to go when he bid them go, and to stand when he bid them
stand; and so must we or they: in the second Salvation by Christ the mercy is
free, Christ is free, but we must do as Christ bids us, we must hearken to the
voice of this Prophet in whatsoever he speaks unto us, Acts 7.37. and as it
was then to Israel, they were to hearken unto Moses that Prophet, they were to
go on when he bid them, and to stand still when he bid them, so likewise it is
now; so that therefore we conclude thus that mercy and pardon is free, it is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs: yet man must receive it, or
else he shall be never the better: for so now I proceed to verse. the 18.
Therefore he will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.
The Apostle is now about to describe God as a Supreme Majesty that has power
to punish or acquit; these words are woefully abused. Some gather from these
words, that God hardens and shows mercy by his royal prerogative only, without
reference to man's works or deservings, yet at the same time the same persons
deny an earthly King to use such a power, but call him a Tyrant that does rule
by his will and prerogative and not by his Law declared; but the Apostle herein
showing the will and power of God, does not intimate unto us, that he will quit
the guilty, or condemn the innocent; but in a way of Justice and Equity,
according to his declared Law and will, Romans the 2. and several other places,
where he declares to reward every man according to his works, and this he has
power to do, namely if men break his Laws to punish them, and if men obey him
to reward them; Gods will here spoken of his his word, part of which will is
John the 6. and the 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that he that
sees the Son and believes in him, should have life; and the second part of
his will is, Mark the 6. and 16. He that will not believe, shall be damned. God
will go by this will, and it being not observed, he has this power to execute
his Laws to the uttermost. But here I shall meet with a great objection, God
hardens whom he will, and so he hardens Pharaoh, for his will or pleasure, to
which I answer, that as hardness and blindness is a sin, so God has no hand
in it, but only as it is a punishment of sin, so he has a hand in it, and so
he hardened Pharaoh, and so he blinded the Jews. But for a more particular
answer; let us a little consider what way and means God took to harden Pharaohs
heart. It is by no other means then by mercies and deliverances, for all the
while the judgments were upon him, we find a softness in his heart; but it
was upon the removing and taking off the plague (which was an Act of grace and
mercy) that Pharaoh contracts this hardness upon himself. Now that this way
was a just ground from God to harden Pharaohs heart, let all men judge for it
is the same way and course that both God and man takes to soften, and we know
by experience that by this means many hearts have been softened, as Ezekiel the
16.63.

It was that that softened Saul, when David showed him mercy in cutting off the
lap of his Garment only, when he might have slain him, but this hardness of
Pharaohs heart is no other ways to be attributed to God, then the stinck of a
dunghill to the Sun, or the hardening of a clay-Wall, which we know falls out
accidentally, not intentionally; and thus God provoked David to number the
people, which in one place is attributed to God, and in another place to Satan;
which was true on both sides: for first, as he had life and motion and heat,
that was frow God, but as he supplied this life, motion and heat, to triumph
in the arm of flesh; this was from Satan: and thus God is the author of all
the great transactions of the Sons of men; and thus he was the cause of Adams
sin, at the first, as Adam pleads: The woman which thou gave me, etc. As
much as if he should have said; if thou had not given me a woman to have
given me the fruit, I had not committed this sin; So if God did not uphold the
lives of men, they could not sin: but it is a very unworthy application of the
mercies of God. It was the misapplying, and mis-improving the mercies and
deliverances of God, that did necessarily occasion that hardness to grow upon
Pharaohs heart; for if he were not softened, he must needs be hardened: for
Gods Word returns not emty and void, Esaias 55.10.11. and in this it is like unto
the Sun. But you may object, that as a judgment and punishment, God does
harden and blind as you say; therefore let us see what kind of hardening that
is?

For answer to which, I shall refer you to those several Scriptures which speak
of this thing, as Pro. 1.24. Because I have called, and ye have refused; ye
shall call, and I will not hear. Wherefore we may observe Gods part, and man's
part what they were. So likewise, Acts the 28.26. Go say unto this People,
hearing, ye shall hear, and not understand. The ground or reason is from
themselves, as in the next verse, 27. The heart of this People is waxed fat,
their eyer have they closed, least they should see with their eyes, and
understand with their hearts, and be saved. Thus God likewise dealt with the
Jews, Luk, 19.42. Now they are hid from thine eyes. Thus God punishes sin
with sin, Psalm. 69.27. Add iniquity to their iniquity. And this he has power
to do, to all those that deserve it, as the Apostle, Romans the 2. largely
declares. Here then is the scope of the words, Paul is comforted concerning
Israel again, because he finds God to be righteous and just, and also powerful
to deliver Israel, and punish their enemies: he uses this as an argument to
stablish his heart, concerning his kindred, the Jews, that those dry bones
should live; that Israel, the whole Israel of God, shall be at last set free
from the persecuting Lord Esau, to enjoy that promise, Genesis 25. The elder shall
serve the younger Jacobs enemies shall be subdued. Let us then with Paul,
encourage our selves, it will be ere long made good, and let us not question
how this can be, that these dry bones can live; but look upon the power of
God, who can show mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, harden and destroy,
verse the 19. Thou will say then unto me, who has resisted his will? why does
he yet complain? In the words we must inquire what he means by this word
complain. The Greek word (...) has several acceptions in Scripture, Mark. 7.
and the 2. They complained, or found fault. So Heb. 8.8. Col. 3.13 it is
translated quarrel, 1. These. 5.23. It is translated, blame. So that put these
together, and it is thus much. A contentious complaining to pick, a quarrel,
and that is, a man complains or quarrels against God. This appears, Lamen.
3.29. why does living man complain? man suffers for his sin; So that this it
is, notwithstanding Gods equal dealing with man, yet some will not be
satisfied, but will reply against God, as in the former verse, the 14. that God
is not so righteous in his ways, therefore God pleads with Israel, Ezekiel
18.25. Yet ye say, the way of the Lord is not equal, though God dealt as
exactly as he tells them that they could desire no juster dealing, yet they are
not contented, he appealeth to all men, if this be not equal dealing, that if a
righteous man, turn from his righteousness, he shall die, and if a wicked man
turn from his wickedness, he shall live and not die; yet they are not
satisfied, verse 29. they say his way is not equal, So here one might ask
Paul, to what end does man complain of Gods dealing to men, their folly appears
in complaining? the reason is given, because none has resisted his will; that
is, when God comes down to render vengeance upon his enemies, and to exalt
his people, none then shall be able to resist; so that is a further comfort to
Paul concerning Israel, that God comes irresistibly to deliver them, as you may
see more largely if you consider some Scriptures, as Esaias. 14. the 3.4.5.6.
where he speaks of the thing in hand verse the 6. He smote the people in his
wrath, and none hindered. So Esaias, 31.13. I will work, and none shall let. And
to clear up this irresistibleness in God, (when he comes to recompense his
enemies,) he adds the following verse, ver. the 20. Nay but O man, who art
thou, that reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? ver. 21. has not the Potter power over the
Clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and another to
dishonor?

In these verses as I have said before, the Apostle does undeniably prove this
unresistable power of God, in that he renders God as the Potter, and man as the
Clay, which is expressed also, Esaias, 64.8. For the understanding of these
words, we must consider whether the making of Vessels of honor and dishonor,
here spoken of, has reference to the first Creation or no. Secondly, how it
comes to pass that men are made Vessels of honor and dishonor. Thirdly, why
he here adds these words, Of the same lump. Fourthly, what he means by
vessels of honor and dishonor, and how we shall be able to say how such a
person, or such persons are vessels of honor, or dishonor. I shall by other
Scripturs endeavor to clear these particulars. For the first, whether this
making of Vessels of honor, and dishonor has reference to the Creation?

I answer no, in no wise? for if these vessels be only of mankind, as all men
acknowledge; then God made but one of these vessels, namely Adam, who was a
Vessel of honor; and for the whole Creation, God takes off this assertion, for
he justifies them to be xceeding good: and so Solomon in Ecclesiastes says,
God made man upright. Therefore I conclude, that God at the first made man a
Vessel of honor fit for the Masters use: man is called a Vessel, because he is
to contain some thing which the Master is to put into him, and he is
honorable, so long as that liquor remains in him, but when he leaketh or that
liquor runs out, then he becomes a dishonorable Vess Secondly, neither has
it reference to what man was after Adams fall, it is true Adam became a
dishonorable Vessel by disobeying God, but he was not thus a Vessel of Gods
making but of his own; for God created him honorable as I proved before.

The second thing to be inquired into is, how it comes to pass, or at what
time, man becomes a Vessel of dishonor? I answer, when men be disobedient to
God and Christ, then they become Vessels of dishonor, for this consider the
18. of Iere. is plain to this purpose, from the 1. verse. to the 17. In which
Scripture we find, that God intended Isael an honorable Vessel till they broke
in his hand; God in this declares himself after the manner of men, we know the
Potter does not make a Vessel with an intent to break it when he has done, but
this falls out accidentally; for want of the well managing of it when it is
made, neither did God make Israel a Vessel wherein he might dwell intentionally
to break them, and ruin them; but the case lay here whilst God was in framing
Israel for a glorious and happy condition, in that very time they rebelled
against him, as is plainly expressed in this Chapter. A dishonorable Vessel in
this place is a broken Vessel; now it is not for a small sin that a Person or
people becomes a dishonorable Vessel, but it is those that threaten and
desperately say, we will walk after our own imaginations, and do every one
after the stubbornness of his own heart; here is a people fit for destruction,
fit to be made a dishonorable Vessel; and now there is no other means to be
used, this crack in such an earthen Vessel is incurable; therefore now he must
be unchurched or excommunicated from God, therefore to such a people God
speaks sadly, Esaias the 1.24. Notwithstanding in the 14. verse. he had promised
them that if they would be willing and obedient, they should eat the good
things of the land, but if they were disobedient, they should be destroyed, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; God will spue such a people out of his
mouth; here is a Vessel of dishonor when God will no longer communicate
himself unto him as a Vessel for his use; therefore let us not mistake God: it
is for the highest and greatest sin that can be, to be a Vessel of dishonor
under the Gospel, it is to be excommunicate from the offices and fellowship of
the Gospel, according to that in the first of the Corinthians 16. and the last,
If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema, Maranatha; this was
the punishment of Israel.

God excommunicateth them, takes away his presence and his Laws from them, and
delivers them unto Satan, an adversary; as the fornicator was to be in the
first of the Corinth. the 5. But you have a more plain place to prove that an
excommunicated Person is a dishonorable Vessel, as in the second of Timothy
the second and 21. If a man purge himself from these he shall be a Vessel of
honor fit for his masters use. If the queston should be asked from what he
should purge himself? it is answered from the Doctrine of Himeneus and
Philetus, who were excommunicate, as we may gather from the first of Timothy,
the first for denying the resurrection, so that from hence we gather thus much,
that the embracing their Doctrine was the ready way to be excommunicated and so
to become dishonorable Vessels, and the cleansing or keeping a man pure from
those Doctrines was the ready way to be made or continued Vessels of honor; so
that we see the cause of men's being Vessels of dishonor, is their high
disobedience, rebellion and blasphemy against God, when men do as it were by
these means break in Gods hand; when God is in making a Person honorable, and
he does not walk suitable to it, then it is that God designs him to be a Vessel
of dishonor. Thirdly, why it is added of the same lump; to show that it is not
nearness of relation that shall excuse or exempt men from punishment, though
they be of the same lump of the same flesh and blood, Jacob and Esau you know
were of the same lump, not only children of one Mother, but brought forth at
one birth, they were twins, yet God hates the one and loves the other, as is
declared Malachy the 1. and the 2. Is not Esau Jacobs brother? says God, yet
have I hated Esau, and laid his mountain waste; so that it shall be no
advantage to Esau in the day of Gods wrath to plead that he is Jacobs own
brother, this Christ tells the Jews, John 8. and 37. I know that ye are
Abraham's seed, says Christ, but you seek to kill me; therefore they should not
abide in the house, they must not be Vessels of honor in his house, verse. the
35. So likewise in Matthew. the 3. Christ shows that it is not near relation
that can serve the turn, though they be Abraham's seed. So likewise Matthew. the
24.40. Two woman shall be grinding at the Mill, one shall be taken, and the
other left.

Fourthly, what he means by, or when a person or people may be said to be a
dishonorable Vessel. This was partly cleared in the 2. particular, but you
shall a little further see this cleared: when Israel was delivered up into the
hand of her Enemies, then she was a dishonorable Vessel; when she lies
amongst the pots, as Psalm. 68.13. When she is cast aside, as men commonly cast
aside a broke pitcher as a Vessel of no use or honor; and she is again
received to be a Vessel of honor, when she believes in Jesus Christ, she
shall again be employed for the Masters use, Romans 11.23. If they abide not
still in unbelief, they shall be grafted in: so that we understand thus much,
that God does not make men Vessels of honor and of dishonor, but upon just
ground and sufficient causes. I might prove this by several Scriptures, but I
shall only cite two; Romans 1.26. For this cause God gave them up to
uncleanness, the 2. of the These. the 2. and 11. For this cause God shall send
them strong delusions; there is a just cause why God deals so with men, and
God does so far condescend as to give man an account of it, therefore he does
not rule by his will or prerogative as some men say. Let us then a little
inquire into the cause why Esau shall be thus hated, or made a dishonorable
Vessel. Esau is now an honorable Vessel, as God makes use of him to correct
Israel; but when Israel shall be sufficiently corrected by him, he is to be
thrown into the fire, because he has corrected Israel, not as being in Gods
hand, but as satisfying his corrupt heart and cruel hands, Obadiah the 10. For
thy cruelties to thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee. The cause of Esaus
being made a Vessel of dishonor, is granted by the Prophet Amos, Amos the 1.
The whole chapter speaks of this thing, but especially verse. 7. he has not
remembered the brotherly Covenant, but pursued him with the sword, and cast off
all pity, as verse. the 11. Yet the cause of this upon Jacob or Israel is just
too Mich. 1.5. For the wickedness of Jacob is all this come upon them; see
likewise Michael the 6. Yet God had not given Israel any such cause as he
pleads with them to be so rebellious, verse. the 3. O my people what have I
done unto thee? or wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me. The Lord
appealleth unto man in all his proceedings, that if man does see, or Judge,
that God has not in any thing dealt justly, or equally, let him speak, or
plead, for he is not afraid that men should dive or search into his proceedings
in reference to man as some men will affirm; therefore Vessels of honor and
dishonor are of Gods making for just cause and grounds, given by themselves
and no otherways, verse. the 22. What if God willing to show his wrath and to
make his power known endured with much long-suffering, the Vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction? I shall be very brief in the following discourse. The
words are a further vindication of God, that he does not (as some say) make
Vessels of honor and dishonor, without reference to their works, nay, he is
so far from that that after they deserve to be made Vessels of dishonor, yet
he waits a long time upon them; and uses all means to reclaim them, he
suffers with long patience, the Vessels fitted or made up for destruction,
this the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel the 33.11. speaks largely to, why will ye
die. O house of Israel? and how shall I give thee up, (says God to Israel,) it
grieves him to do it; and therefore it is called his strange work, executing of
judgment of this long-suffering and patience of God, the Apostle Peter
speaks, 2. Pet. 3.15. And suppose that the long-suffering of God is for
Salvation: to this agrees the first of Tim. the 4.2, and the 4. and remains
the 2. and the 4. Which is very pregnant to this purpose, but this is not the
thing which is so much contradicted, but the question is, whether this fitting
or or making up to destruction, be not Gods appointing and ordaining men to
destruction from eternity? because Peter the 1. the 2. and the 8. He speaks of
some that were disobedient whereunto they were appointed, and Jude speaks of
some that were of old ordained to this condemnation: for that of Peter the
words run thus according to the Greek, being not persuaded, because they were
agreed or resolved (...) the same word is used, Joh. the 9. and the 22. The
Jews had agreed or ordained, that if any should confess Christ, they shall be
cast out of the Synagogue: for the 2. place, Jude the 4. of old ordained, the
Greek word (...) praeseripti, ordained by writing: in the Law, and who were
them, but ungodly men, turning the grace of God into wantonness; destruction
must be to the workers of iniquity. And the curse of the Lord are in the house
of the wicked, Proverbs the 3. and the 33. But he blesses the habitation of
the just. The wise shall inherit love, but shame shall be the portion of fools.
So it is fitting for destruction is one man's part, it is he that must fill up
his measure, as Christ speaks to the Jews, Matthew. the 23. Fill ye up the
measure of your Fathers, and then wrath must come upon them to the uttermost,
without remedy when they are thus filled up they are fit for destruction; so
was Pharaoh fitted for destruction by his often hardening his heart, the first
of Samuel the 6. and the 6. Yet upon such a person or people God waits, Romans
the 10. and the last verse. All the day long have I stretched out my hand to a
gainsaying, and rebellious people. So God waits all the day long upon wicked
men, to see whether they will return. Thus you see how these words agree with
the former. Man is very apt to reply against God, because he does not presently
make his power appear in punishing the wicked, and rewarding the Godly,
according to that which Solomon in the Ecclesiastes speaks, Because judgment
is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the Sons of men are set in
them to do wickedly. This is the use that most men make of Gods long-suffering
and forbearance. So Peter speaks of mockers walking after their own lusts: the
reason is because all things continue as they were the people of God also are
very apt to repine and mourn that God does not presently reward them, Hebrews
the 10. Ye have need of patience, says the Author, that when ye have done the
will of God, you should receive the promises. But here in the words you have
the cause why he does thus wait, that his blow might be the heavyer unto all
the Pharaohs in the World, and that his riches of grace might appear the more
eminently unto the Israel of God; which brings us to the 23. verse. the 23. ver.
And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the Vessels of mercy,
which he had before prepared unto glory. He has prepared unto glory all those
that believe in Jesus Christ and obey him, Romans the 2. and Psalm. the 4. and
the 3. He has set apart for himself the Godly man. The first of the
Thessalonians the 1. and 4. They were elect of God, because they became
followers of Paul, and the rest, as verse. the 6. Thessalonians the 2. the 2.
and the 13. You are chosen of God, through sanctification of the Spirit and
belief of the truth: so that if you be sanctified and obedient, you may
conclude you are the elect of God, Gods chosen ones, Gods Jewels, those that
own Jesus Christ for the foundation-stone to build upon: the first of Peter the
2. and the 7. God has prepared glory for no other Persons; for no unclean
thing shall enter into his Kingdom, therefore the Apostle adds, they must be
sanctified, they must be called, not only on Gods part (which all men are,)
but such as have submitted unto Gods call. Chosen; that is, those that are
counted Gods choice, that are contented to follow him as an obedient spouse;
there is a great mistake in such expressions as these: you have not chosen me,
but I have chosen you; where we are to consider Christ as one woing a wife,
according to that the 2. of the Corinthians the 5. Now we know it is not usual
for the wife to look for, or to choose the husband: yet there must be a
consenting or else it is not a match, and thus the wife chooses the husband
above all the men in the World besides; and thus Marie was said to have chosen
the better part, but Christ is the first mover in this business; so that the
sum of all is, God waits with long patience upon all, good and bad; Esau and
Jacob; he waits on Esau to show the power of his wrath, and on Jacob to show
the riches of his mercy; and not only so, but so, but for the Gentiles sakes,
that they may come in, the fullness of them, as Paul speaks in the 10. and 11.
verses. The 24. ver. Even as whom he has called not of the Jews only, but
also of the Gentiles. For the right understanding of the words, we must look
into the Prophet Hosea; Hosea the 1. and the 9. and 10. And indeed the whole
Chapter, where he speaks both of Isreal's cutting off, and coming in; he
endeavors to take them of from their carnal confidence that they were high in
the esteem of God, being his children of whoredom, Chapter the 2. verse. the 4.
And so he threatens them as such a people, yet he interlines his threatenings
with promises of mercy, as verse. the 23. I will sow her unto me in the earth;
I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, etc. So that when the
Apostle speaks of calling, he means calling by the Gospel, offering Israel the
means which once they abused and contemned, and in this appears his love; yet
this appearance of love from God, is when they shall say, blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord, Matthew. the 23. and the 39. They shall be glad
to embrace him whom once they rejected, the 1. of Peter the 7. and 8. So that
it is to these called ones that the promise runs, to those that are not
rebellious, as Chapter the 10. and the last verse. For had God come by this
power as some do imagine, to force men to accept him, then his power was too
weak to deal with Israel; for he complains, I have stretched out my hand all
day long to a rebellious people; and he says, what could I have done more that
I have not done? as in the parable of the vineyard; therefore there was all
the power Acted on Gods side, but this would not do; therefore this calling
here spoken of, is only the invitation of the Gospel, and those that are
overcome by this invitation, as to come upon Christ's call, they are the called
ones, that Christ speaks of; and upon this we are exhorted to make our calling
and Election sure: it lies on our part when the means is offered, when Christ
calls we are to answer. The word vo^abo does imply the giving a name to a
thing; it is so used in the next verse. In the place where it was said they are
not my people, there they shall be called the children of the living God: so it
is used, Ephesians the fourth and the first. That you walk worthy of the
vocation whereunto you are called. That is, you know that you are called
Christians, or Saints; I exhort you, that you walk according to such a name. So
that Paul here intimates that upon their return they shall have a new name,
that is, they shall be called or named (...): a people. Ye are to know; they
had this name before, but they lost it by their rebellion and disobedience; a
people that is in opposition to Nations or Gentiles; so that they were a Church
for corporation, having Laws and statutes to walk by, verse. the 25. As he says
also in Osea; I will call them my people, which were not my people; and her
beloved, which was not beloved. And it shall come to pass, that in the place
where it was said unto them, ye are not my people; there shall they be called
the children of the living God. In these 3. verses the 24.25. and 26. is
declared some fruits of the long-suffering and patience of God toward the
Vessels of mercy, prepared unto glory; the 25. verse. Seems to relate to the
Gentiles, and their grafting in: but look diligently into the plaee which Paul
cites, and it will appear to be undone, or unchurched Israel; which were
rejected for their whoredoms, and fornications, as plainly appears by that
Prophecy. And unto that add Peter the 1. the 2. and the 10. And it makes it
more plain, for Israel now are not a people, by reason they are scattered, and
dissolved, and in that sense they may be called Nations, as once the Gentiles
were. So that laying the Jews equal with the Gentiles in respect of being a
people, was the only way to make them capable of mercy. This appears plainly
in Romans the 3. at the 25. and Romans the 11. at the 32. God has shut up, or
concluded all in unbelief; that he might have mercy upon all. Thus God has
hedged up their way with thorns, and stopped all passages every way, that no
life or comfort can come unto it, but by believing and submitting to the
Gospel, as Galathians the 3. and the 22. All are shut up under sin. So that now
there is no people but believers, as appears plainly the 1. of Peter the 2.
and the 9. Ye are a peculiar people (to wit,) believers; and the Jews are not a
people, because they do not believe. Therefore God may well make a promise, to
make them a people, who are not a people now. In the next verses the Apostle
does (as it were) produce a Copy of Isreal's commitment; wherein is declared,
first, the extent and depth of their misery, secondly the cause, why it was so;
whereupon he directs you to the prophecy of Esaias, Chapter the 10. Which I
pray seriously read and consider, for the better understanding of these things;
wherein is declared at large the extent of their punishment, with the cause
thereof; and also a promise of their return: for the extent of the punishment
it was so sore, that a very small remnant escaped; in-so-much, that it was
almost brought to Sodom and Gomorrah's condition, wherein there were but eight
persons saved, 1. Peter the 3. and the 20. Now in the 30. and 31. verses the
Apostle begins to make the application of all that has been said, (to wit)
that a righteous Israel could not be acceptable with God, but the unrighteous
Gentiles. For Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
Which sinners we find were under the name of Gentiles; the Jews were whole,
therefore they needed not the Physician, they must be ungodly ones, that Christ
must be a Savior to. So that he concludes thus: a people self-righteous, are
those that stumble at Christ Jesus, and stumbling at him they become broken to
pieces like an earthen Vessel: And upon this Israel now lies amongst the pots,
cast aside as useless. So that from the whole chapter we draw thus much that
Paul was very much troubled at the Jews sad condition, because they are fallen
from the word or promise of God. But he calls to mind several promises of God
concerning them, or at least so many of them, as shall believe in Jesus Christ.
We may gather thus much from what is here comprehended, that all external
punishments are inflicted upon Nations, people, or Persons, as they are found
in Arms or opposition against Christ, and the despised way of the Gospel. And
secondly, people, Nations, or Persons, shall be outwardly exalted, as they are
found friends to Jesus Christ, and obedient Persons to the Gospel. I shall
produce some Scriptures to prove this, and so conclude my discourse. For this
consider Matthew the 19. from the 27. to the end. Revelations the 5. and the
10. Revelations the 20. and the 4. Luke the 12. and the 32. And a place eminent
to this purpose is, Luke the 23. and the 43. Where as soon as the thief
confessed Jesus Christ, whom (all thereabouts) mocked and despised; Christ
makes him a promise, that he should have a share with him in his Kingdom. I say
unto thee to day, thou shall be with me in Paradise; which is this Kingdom. So
that you see, the only way to have Honor and greatness; is, to believe in
Jesus Christ, though most in the World despise and reject him; for if we suffer
with him we shall also Reign with him, the 2. of Timothy the 2. and the 12. the
1. of Timothy the 4. and the 8. Godliness has the promises both of this life,
and of that which is to come. The just shall have domininion in the morning of
the Resurrection, Psalm. 49. and the 7. Therefore seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be added
unto you.

October. the 29. 1650. John Downame.

FINIS.

