THE LOYAL ADDRESS Of the Gentry of Gloucestershire.
TO THE Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects of Your County of Gloucester,
who neither to ease our selves of the insupportable burdens and oppressions we
lay under, nor to gain favor with our Oppressors, could ever be brought to
flatter with any Address whatsoever, any usurped power which has been over us,
Do now think our selves concerned in duty to express our great joy, and
congratulation for Your Majesty's being restored to Your Just Hereditary Right,
and Kingly power, without which, no means on Earth could possibly have rendered
any Settlement to these Your Kingdoms, or have quieted the anxious thoughts of
Your people in relation both to Church and State: But now that it has pleased
the Divine Providence to place Your Sacred Majesty at the Helm to steer both.
We do with all due obedience in all things acquiesce in Your Royal Prudence,
and do declare, That as we have always showed our dislike to all unjust
Powers, so we will stand by Your Majesty with our lives and fortunes against
all the world, for the preservation of Your Sacred Person and Authority.

Lord Herbert. Lord Campden. Lord Berkeley. Lord Tracy. Sir Baynham
Throckmorton Baronet. Sir William Hickes Baronet. Sir Richard Ashfield Baronet.
Sir William Ducy Baronet. Sir Hugh Middleton Baronet. Sir Robert Poyntez,
Knight of the Bath. Sir John Seymour. Sir Henry Frederick Thynne. Sir William
Catchmay. Sir Baynham Throckmorton. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton. Matthew Hale
Esqs; Kts. of the Shire. Edward Stephens Henry Capel Esquire; Thomas Overbury Esquire;
Henry Hall Esquire; Richard Stephens Esquire; Thomas Estcourt Esquire; John Hall Esquire;
Thomas Shine Esquire; William Oldsworth Esquire; David Williams Esquire; Richard Sackvile
Esquire; Richard Dowdswell Esquire; Thomas Veale senior, Esquire; Nicholas Veale Esquire;
Thomas Veale junior, Esquire; John Stephens Esquire; Thomas Roberts Esquire; Philip Langley
Esquire; John Freeman Esquire; William Stratford Esquire; John Fettiplace Esquire; John How
Esquire; John Grubbam How Esquire; Gabriel Low Esquire; Thomas Masters Esquire; John
Chamberlain Esquire; Thomas Chamberlain Esquire; Thomas Slaughter Esquire; Thomas Hodges
Esquire; Robert Fielding Esquire; Edward Chamberlain Esquire; John Wintour Esquire; John
Cuddrington Esquire; Nicholas Cuddrington Esquire; Edward Cook Esquire; Robert Oldsworth
Esquire; Richard Cook Esquire; Richard Wakeman Esquire; Richard Cocks Esquire; Edward Smith
Esquire; Edward Bathurst Esquire; Robert Baleson Esquire; Giles Baleson Esquire; Edward Rich
Esquire; Andrew Baker Esquire; William Bourchier Esquire; Walter Rawleigh Esquire; Thomas James
Esquire; Thomas Brown Esquire; Edward Stephens Esquire; Samuel Codrington Esquire; John Rich
Esquire; Henry Pool Esquire; Robert Oldsworth Esquire; John Newton Esquire; Anthony Sambach
Esquire; Edward Fust Esquire; William Cook Esquire; Miles Cook Esquire; William Roper Esquire;
Daniel Colchester Esquire; Thomas How Esquire; Lawrence Bathurst Esquire; Thomas Seymour
Esquire; Henry Brown Esquire; William Cope Esquire; Michael Rutter Esquire; Thomas Chester
Esquire; Henry Guise Esquire; Henry Spiller Esquire; John Powel Esquire; Thomas Chamborlain
Esquire; William Battison Esquire;
This Address was presented to his Majesty the 19th. day of June, by the hand
of the Right Honorable, the Lord Herbert, accompanied by very many persons of
honor and quality of the aforesaid County, to whom His Majesty in a very
gracious manner was pleased to express His acceptance of this their humble, and
loyal Address.

London, Printed for Humphrey Tuckey, at the black-spread Eaglein Fleet Street,
over against St. Dunstans Church. 1660.


