The late victorious PROCEEDINGS OF Sir Thomas Fairfax Against the Enemy in the
West.

The Lord Hopton routed, dispersed and fled; seven piece of Ordnance taken, and
many Prisoners.

The Earl of Berkeshire, the Lord Culpeper, the Lord Capell, Sir Edward Hide,
Sir Thomas Fanshaw, and diverse fled to the Sea, and shipped with the PRINCE.

A Ship with the Enemies best Horses sunk, Hoptons train of Ammunition taken,
and forty Oxen.

Sir John Greenvill routed, with the taking of Saltash, Temple, and diverse
other Forts and places of strength of the Enemies: With a List of all the
Particulars.

These Letters, with the Report of Mr. W. Curtis from the Army made to the
House of Commons, are examined and appointed to the printed according to Order.

London, printed for Matthew Walbancke, 9 March 1645.

SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX, HIS Victorious Proceedings against the Enemy in the West.
SIR:
SInce our coming to Launceston, the Intelligence and affairs of the Army may
be thus represented. On Thursday, Febr. 26. (the day after our entrance,) the
General sent a Letter to Captain Weldon to send all the Horse he could spare,
and as many Dragoones he could possible, to advance up the River as far as
Liston, to stay the passage at the Fords, that so our Horse might the better
overtake them, in case the Enemy endeavor to escape, which probably they
intend, and might do in such small parcels, and with such haste, that his
Horse might fall upon them with good success. Friday, February 27. we
understood that the Enemy was at Camelford that morning, and at Twilsborough
Down, two miles distant* from thence, toward the North-East, and a
considerable party of Horse lay there that might: Their head Quarters remain
at Bodman, from whence they have issued a Posse Comm. for appearance of all
able men at Bodman on this Friday. Saturday, Febr. 28. the greatest part of the
Army marched from Launceston to Lowenrick, but three miles, in regard there
could be no convenience of Quarters between that and Bodman. Our Information by
our Scouts (...) this day was. That the Enemy had drawn off their Guard from
Twilsborough Down, and that their Horse were all gone from Hamelford in great
fear to Bodman, where they attempted to get in, but the Foot refused to let
them, have entrance, three of them were killed in this difference, Hopton went
on Friday from Master Bellins house (where he quartered before) to Bodman: The
Enemy is reported to have a thousand Foot, and a consider^b^^ (...) of Horse,
but their, Arms and courage but mean: They give out they will make a
desperate attempt, to break through and leave the Cornish in their
inkindnesse, which is so great, that they are more ready to disarme them, then
assist them: The Country people at Tawnes disarmed eight of them, and the rest
of them about Camelford desire our Army to come to secure them from the Enemy,
who then for their non appearance, declared, they knew no greater Enemies then
Gorings Horse. The Enemy published through the Country before our entrance,
that we would destroy all, but since our coming into the Country (such has
been the saire and orderly demeanor of our Soldiers,) they say they find us
friends rather then enemies, and admire in many places that we should tender
Money for our provisions, which, (to use their own expression,) they never
were wont to tange of Gorings men on the Lords day. March 1. the General and
Lieutenant General advanced all the whole Army toward Bodman, in the way had
a Rendezvouze of Horse and Foot upon the Downs, aboot ten miles from
Launcerton, over which the Army marched completely in Batalia; (being indeed a
brave appearance.) The Forlorn Hopes were sent out, who met with the Enemies
Scouts, two of them who were scouting in one Company, they seemed to be
ignorant of our so neel approach, acknowledged that they were part of a Guard
of 300. Horse under Sir Tames Smith, that were to keep a Guard within three
miles of Bodman. Upon the Armies advance within four miles of Bodman, we
discovered two great Bodies of the Enemies Horse, who faced us a while upon the
top of an hill (though near two, Miles distant) but a Party of a thousand
Horse being sent, toward them, and for the relief of Captain Morgan and
Captain Farmers Companies of Dragoones, who we then understood were engaged,
and in great hazard to be lost, the Enemy being between them and our
Rendezvouze; our Horse no sooner appears, but the Enemy posteth away toward
Bodman, our Dragoons also having first made good their retreat into a Close,
defended themselves gallantly there, and afterward got into a Church, and so
came off with the loss only of four Prisoners, slew diverse of the Enemy; the
Army quartereth this night at St. Blissen, and all the Villages thereabouts,
with so much advantage that its thought that Sir James Smiths Brigade will
hardly get off; the faithful, valiant, and religious Lievt. General Cromwell
is all this night abroad with the Horse, the issue we shall hear next morning;
we had advanced this night to Bodman but that the Enemy is strong in Horse, and
our Foot had some of them marched this day above 12. long miles most part of
the Lords day (all night) our men brought in Prisoners, many of which say they
are glad they are taken, for they still look for it first or last, they giving
both themselves and all their party for lost. The Gentry generally have
inclinations to come in, and send for Protections; the Lord Mohun is unwilling
to obey the Lord Hoptons Commands. If the Enemy get not through, in probability
we shall drive them into the corner of this County, and make them glad to
accept of Conditions.

Monday, March the second, the Army was this morning by break of the day
drawn to a Rendezvous upon the Heath within two miles of Bodman: a Party being
sent out to discover whether the Enemy were in the Town, brought intelligence
that both Horse and Foot quit the Town the last night. About ten of the Clock
the Lord Hopton himself brought up the Rear; their Foot (not above four
hundred) being most of them Welch-men, went out disorderly, wearing Leekes (it
being Taffies day) and according to their wonted custom were most of them
drunk; a great part of the Horse and Foot went toward Truro, the rest of the
Horse toward Ware Bridges; to which if they steer their course they are like
to meet with gallant entertainment from the Lord Generals two Regiments of
Horse, and two Regiments more of Foot being sent to his assistance; the Prince
is at Pendennis Castle, and its supposed waits for a wind for France, we hope
(through Gods blessing) in a few days to give a good account of the clearing
these parts of the Enemy, and if they be looked after as well by Sea as they
shall by Land, many of them will not be left to tell the story of their sad
misfortunes: by which the whole Kingdom may take notice of the great zeal and
earnest affection of the Commanders in this Army for the welfare of their
Country, and that they are unwearied in their pains and endeavors for the
putting a more speedy period to these intestine differences; for had the whole
Army stayed before Excester, which-might have been as much as could be expected
this Winter season, the work would have been much longer in doing; but as
these resolutions were unexpectedly taken, so the issue of them has been
beyond expectation. The Enemies chief power in the Island being dissipated in
about a Months space, and scarce left all the face of an Army with out
bloodshed, and the most malignant County of the Kingdom reduced, and (if they
be not unparalled dissemblers) the County generally endeavors, and their
hearts drawn to the Parliament, for (as before in other places) so now in
Bodman the inhabitants were no ways terrified a tour coming, but rather
manifested expressions of Joy, being so oppressed by Gorings Horse taken from
them. The Townes-men aver for truth, that at the Grand Pass held near this
Town on Friday last there did not appear fourscore of the County, besides
Gorings and Hoptons Horse; they generally report (but I durst not assure it for
certain) that the Lord Mohun is under restraint for disobeying the Lord
Hoptons Gommands, this morning four of our Troopers who went forth to scout in
the Enemies quarters, took and brought away 42. of their foot Soldiers with
their Arms. The Lord Hopton had this day a Randezvouz of near 3500. Horse at
St. Dennis, a place six miles from Bodman; the Cornish this morning fired
their Beacons, their intentions therein we are yet ignorant of. This day six
of our Troopers fell into Lislythell, and brought away four of the Enemies
carriages laden with Muskets, Powder, Bullets and other Ammunition; we have
store of Guns, Horse, and Foot at all the passes about Bodman.

Bodman March 3. 1645. at 5. in the morning.
SIR,
HAving the opportunity of this Messenger, a friend of yours, I could not omit
the writing unto you, as a return of thanks for your candid and constant
remembrance of me: I shall not trouble you with particulars of News, having
written so largely to Master Scawen, of which I doubt not but you will have the
perusal, otherwise I should redeem some of that little time I have to write
unto you. We entered Bodman Monday, March 2. in the Morning, the Enemy quitted
it, the Night before; at 10 of the clock, upon our approach near it; the Lord
Hopton himself brought up the Rear; their Army is 3500 Horse, and about 400
Foot, most of which are Welsh, and were drunk when they went forth: we keep
Guards at War. Bridge, and Listithell, to prevent their breaking through
Eastward; six of our Troopers yesterday entered Listithell, and took 4 Wain
loads of the Enemies Amn union, each drawn with 10 Oxen; they beat off the
Guard that were to secure it; the Enemy had a Rendezvous at Saint Dennis, 6
miles from hence, but durst not stay there long, but are gone toward Truro:
the Prince is in Pendennis, expecting a fair wind for France, we hope soon
to make an end of our work in these parts through Gods blessing: I shall remain

Your thankful friend, W. C.
Bodman, March 3. 1645. 8. in the Morning.
Worthy Sir,
Just now we have intelligence, That the Prince, the Earl of Barkeshire, the
Lord Culpepper, Ned Hide, the Lord Capell, Fanshaw, and others of quality, were
ship't yesterday from Falmouth, for the Island of Sill, as is supposed, and not
for France; the Lord Hopton this day had a Rendezvous of his Horse at Saint
Michill, all their Foot are at Truro, they give all for lost: a ship of their
best Horse was last night cast away, splitten on the Rocks.

Your Servant. W. C.
Bodman, Twesday, March 3. 12. at Noone.
ON Saturday Morning, March 7. instant, Master W. Curtis, Messenger to Master
Bedford. Scout-master General all to the Committee of both Kingdoms (having
other things to deliver from the Army) was called into the House of Commons,
who being asked by Master Speaker (before the House) what he had to say
concerning the Army and where he left them, and when; Master; Curtis made this
Answer.

Master Speaker, Launceston, I shall therefore omit that, and apply my self to
acquaint you with what has been done since.

Master Speaker, Launcestand on the last Lords Day, early in the Morning, part
of his Army being gone the night before, and had marched about 4 miles in the
way to Bodman; On that morning there was a general Rendezvous on a Moore, by a
Village called Atternoone, 6 Miles beyond Launceston, 12 Miles on this side
Bodman; from thence the whole Army marched in Batalia toward Bodman, and when
we came within 4 miles, we discovered a Body of the Enemies upon a Hill
within three miles of Bodman, where they stood facing us on a hill, till our
General (who delights not in spending time, in facing them) drew out a good
body off to charge them, and the Lieutenant General, with another body of
Horse, marched presently for the relief of two troops of Dragoons, who were
then engaged, and to prevent their breaking away Northward. But the Enemy
finding our Army in so ready a posture, they retreated into Bodman: Night being
come, all our Army qu^tered in the fields, the General keeping the passage
between Lauston and Bodman, and the Lieutenant General at War Bridge,
himself lying in the field all night. The next morning, being Monday, the
General marched toward Bodman, and had a Rendezvous within two mile of the
Town, where he received intelligence that the Enemy had quit it.

M. Speaker, This Honorable House, being well informed of that already by
Letters, I forbear to speak any further of it; but yet I shall make hold to
acquaint you with the discipline of our Army, and their carriage toward the
County people, to whom the General gave a great satisfaction, in publishing
several Proclamations; but more when they saw our Soldiers obedience to the
same, they do very honestly pay for what they have, which does encourage the
Country to provide for them, and makes them very joyful of their company, and
it is the resolution of the General, and Lieutenant General and all the
superior Officers of the Army to continue the same; and it does much trouble
our Army, when they be necessitated to take any other course for want of money.
They are very ready to obey commands, and to undergo any hard-ship: And this I
can assure you of, that they are very free from any Divisions within
themselves, and in the room thereof, are possessed with love and union, courage
and magnanimity, whereby out hands are strengthened against the Common Enemy.

The House of Commons have Ordered, that twenty pound be immediately given to
Master W. Curtis, by the Committee of the west.

There were three ships Lanched out from Falmouth. 1. There were in the first
ship, Prince Charles himself in person, the Earl of Berkeshire, the Lord
Culpepper, the Lord Capell, and Sir Edward Hide, and others; and they are
either gone to the Isle of Silly or Garnsey. 2. In the next Ship was Sir Thomas
Fanshaw and diverse others, and treasure in both. 3. In the third Ship were the
Princes best Horses, and that Bark lighted upon a Rock, where it was split.


A List of the particulars, taken by Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX from the Lord Hopton,
on Sunday and Monday, March first and second, 1645.
Prisoners Taken.
Lieut. Col. Rocarecke. 1. Captain of Sir John Greenvills Horse, diverse other
Officers and Soldiers. Many come in daily, and submit to us. Seven Officers
came in when we faced them; said, they were his Countrymen, and others would
follow.
Taken also from the Enemy.
Lislithell, a strong guard of the Enemies. Four wane load of Ammunition of
the Lord Hoptons. Diverse lay down their Arms and go home. Forty Oxen.
Salt-Ash taken, and some Ammunition there, five pieces of Ordnance taken in
Salt-Ash. Bodman taken, and some Ammunition there: Two pieces of Ordnance taken
in Bodman. War Bridge taken, a strong Horse guard. The Bridge beyond Bodman
taken. Temple-Guard taken, a place of their horse guard, twelve prisoners,
horse and arms taken there.

FINIS.

