SEVEN SERMONS PREACHED Upon several occasions BY The Right Reverend and
Learned Father in God, WILLIAM LAVD, Late Archbishop of CANTERBURY, etc.

LONDON, Printed for R. Lowndes, at the White Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLI.

The several Texts of Scripture on which the learned Author grounded the
enlargement of his Meditations.
SERMON. I.
PSALM. 122. 6, 7. 6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; let them prosper that
love thee.

7. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces. p. 1.

SERMON. II.
PSALM. 21. 6, 7. For thou have set him as Blessings for ever: thou have made
him glad with the joy of thy countenance.

Because the King trusts in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most High he
shall not miscarry. p. 47

SERMON. III.
PSALM. 122. 3, 4, 5. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is at unity in it
self, (or, compacted together.) For thither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes
of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the
Lord. For there are the Seats (or the Thrones) of Judgment; even the Thrones
of the house of David. 95

SERMON. IV.
PSALM. 75. 2, 3. When I shall receive the Congregation, (or, when I shall take
a convenient time) I will judge according unto right. The earth is dissolved,
(or, melted) and all the Inhabitants thereof; I bear up the pillars of it. p.
145.

SERMON. V.
PSALM. 74. 22. Arise, O God, (plead, or) maintain thine own Cause: Remember
how the foolish man (reprocheth, or) blasphemeth thee daily. p. 191.

SERMON. VI.
EPHESIANS. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of
peace. 241.

SERMON. VII.
PSALM. 72. 1. Give the King thy Judgments, O God, And thy Righteousness unto
the Kings Son. p. 287.

SERMON. I.
Preached before His Majesty, on Tuesday the 19. of June, at Wansted, Anno 1621.
PSALM. 122. 6, 7. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; let them prosper that
love thee.

7. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces.


THe Ark of the Lord was brought out of the house of Obededom the Gittite,
with music and great joy, into Jerusalem, and there placed, 2 Reg. 6. 2 Reg.
6. 17
The learned are of opinion, that David composed this Psalm, and delivered it
to be sung at this solemnity. Before this, the Arc was in Gibeah, 2 Reg. 6. 2,
3.
a high place in the City Baalah of Judah, 2 Reg. 6. otherwise called
Kiriathjearim, Josh. 15. 9.
Josh. 15. 9. But now the presence of it made the City of David, Domicilium
religionis, the house of Religion, as well as Regni, of the Kingdom. It is
Domus Dei, the house of Religion, Gods house, Ver. 1. 9.
ver. 1. and the last of this Psalm. And it is the house of the Kingdom too:
Ver. 5.
for there is the seat of Judgment, and there is the house of David, ver. 5.
And it is fit, very fit it should be so; The Court, and the great Temple of
Gods service together; That God, and the King may be neighbors: That as God is
always near to preserve the King, so the King might be near to serve God:
and God and the King cannot meet in Jerusalem without a solemnity.

Now this Psalm was not fitted by David for the people only, when the Arc
was brought to, and placed in, Jerusalem: but also for their coming at their
solemn feasts to Jerusalem, to which they were bound thrice a year by the
Law, Ex. 23. 17.
Exodus 23. For then (some think) they sung this Psalm, either in their
journey as they came up; or else on the steps as they ascended to the Temple:
So the coming to the Temple was always with joy; And they were glad when the
solemnity came. At this joy the Psalm begins: I was glad when they said unto
me, We will go into the House of the Lord. Glad they were, but no vanity in
the mirth. For as they went up with joy, Ver. 1.
ver. 1. so did they with prayer here at the 7. Ver. 7.
And the prayer is for the peace of Jerusalem.

Why, but in David's time the Temple was not built; and how then this Psalm
composed by him for this solemnity? Yes, well enough: for though the Temple was
2. Reg. 6. 17.
2. Reg. 6. according to which pattern the Temple was to be built. So all the
service was there: and therefore the solemnity too. Beside, the eye of the
Prophet Qui non videbat, praevidebat: David that saw not the Temple built,
foresaw it was to be built by his Son, 2. Reg. 7 13.
2. Reg. 7. And so fitted the Psalm both to a present Tabernacle, and a future
Temple.

Babylon, to reedifie the ruins of both City and Temple: For then the people
assembled as one man to Jerusalem, Esra. 3. 1, 2
and kept their wonted ceremonies, Esra. 3.

Jerusalem, and that they may prosper that love it.

pray for the peace of Jerusalem; and the Prophets own Let them prosper that
love thee: Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces.

In the Exhortation to both Princes Jerusalem, I shall observe three
particulars. The Body, for which he would have us careful; that is, Jerusalem.
The Action by which we should express our love to it, Our care of it; that is,
Prayer. And the Blessing which our Prayers should entreat for it; and that is,
Peace.

First then, here is the Body, for Jerusalem. Now Jerusalem was at this time
(as I told you) made Domus religionis and regni, Gods House, and the Kings. And
so it stands not here for the City and the State only, (as many of the Ancient
name the City only) nor for the Temple and the Church only: S. Hierom. Basil.
Theod. Hilar. Arnob. Euthym. Ibid.
but jointly for both. For both: Therefore when you sit down to consult, you
must not forget the Church; And when we kneel down to pray, we must not
forget the State: both are but one Jerusalem.

There are some in all ages, (too many in this) which are content to be for the
State, because the livelihood both of them and theirs depends upon it: but it
is no matter for the Church, they can live without that. And there are some,
which are all, at least in their outcry, for the Church: as if Templum Domini,
the Church, the Church, might swallow up Kingdoms, and State Affairs. But
there is no Religion in the one; And neither that, nor Civil Wisdom in the
other.

Both then were commended to the Jews, and both are to us; And both under one
name, Jerusalem. One name, and good reason for it. Jerusalem. that the same
men, which in a temporal respect make the Commonwealth, do in a spiritual
make the Church: so one name of the mother City serves both, that are joined up
into one.

Now though in nature the Commonwealth go first; first men, before religious
and faithful men; and the Church can have no being but in the Commonwealth:
Yet in grace the Church goes first; religious and godly men, better than men;
and the Commonwealth can have no blessed and happy being, but by the Church.
For true Religion ever blesses a State: provided that they which profess it,
do not in their lives dishonor both God, and it. And it blesses the State,
(among other) two ways. One by putting a L. 2. Not. Q^. 42.
For Seneca tells us, that this placing of an armed Revenger, God, over the
head of impious men, (which is an acknowledgement of Religion) is a great
restraint, because against him, Nemo sibi satis potens videtur, no man can
think himself able enough, either to shun, or resist.

Psa. 68. 32.
So it is, Psalm. 68. 32. Sing unto God, O ye kingdoms of the earth; there is
exercise of Religion: And then it follows, and ver. 35.
ver. 35. God will give strength and power unto his people; there is the
blessing. And it is plain in my Text: for here prayer is to obtain blessing
for Jerusalem, for the State. But it is expressly said to be propter domum
Domini, for the House of Gods sake, Ver. 9.
ver. 9. Now I would all States would remember this; that they have a restraint
from evil by, and a blessing for, Religion: It would make me hope, that yet at
last, Religion should be honored for it self, and not for pretenses.

Jerusalem, the Body, as it comprehends both State and Church, to that which
the Prophet would have us do for it. That is, Prayer. Pray for Jerusalem. Pray
for it. Why, but is that all? Can a State be managed, or a Church governed,
only by Prayer? No: the Prophet means not so. You must seek, and endeavor
the good of both, as well as pray for the good of both.

And this is in my Text too: For the word in the Septuagint is (...), ask and
inquire after the good of Jerusalem; labor it. And yet, it is often read in
Scripture for Orate, pray for it. Both then. And the Fathers bear witness to
both, in this place. S. Hierom. Aug. Hilar. Prosp. ibid.
For S. Hierome, Angust. Hilar. and Prosp. are for the proper sense of the
word, Quaerite, seek it, S. Basil. Theod. etc. ib^d.
follow it. Saint Basil, Theod. and most of the latter Divines, are for the
borrowed sense, Orate, pray for it. And surely God would have the great
Ministers of State, and the provident Governors of the Church, do both; seek,
enquire, consult, do all good to both: And yet when they have done all, he
would have them pray too.

And there is good reason for this; for nothing more needful for Jerusalem,
for State and Church, than Prayer. For the State nceessary. For God is
President of all Councels of State; and shall he not be so much as called to
Counsel, and desired to sit? And for the Church necessary too. For the Son of
God, Christ Jesus, is Head of the Church; and can the Body do any thing well,
if the Head direct it not?

Peter that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, Math. 16.
Mat. 16. 18
He insinuates withal, that those open gates, gape not wider for any thing,
than for it: therefore prayer for the Church very necessary. And certainly, so
much danger over it, and so little prayer for it, agree not.

Now Rogate, pray for Jerusalem reaches every man in particular; and all men
when they are assembled together: For what can a Senate consult upon orderly,
or determine providently, if God be not called into the Assembly? If there be
not Deus stat, God stands in the congregation of Princes? Psalm. 82. 1.
Psalm. 82. And such a superior cannot be called into the Assembly mannerly,
but by Prayer.

Nay, solemn State-Assemblies, (because if they err, they err not lightly)
have greatest need of Prayer, both in, and for them. Hence is that ancient
Christian custom, that Parliaments assemble not for the State; Councels meet
not for the Church; but they begin both the first days work, and every days
work with Prayer. And the Heathen which knew not the true God, knew that this
duty was owing to the true God, to pray unto him most solemnly, in their
greatest consultations; and therefore Caesar being to enter the Senate,
sacrificed first: L. 2. Bell. Civil. p. 100*
And Appian speaks of that Act, as of a thing of custom. And it cannot be
thought they did sacrifice without prayer: Since Litare which is to appease by
Sacrifice, is to please by prayer too. But I leave them. My Text is more
ancient, and more full than their practice: For here verse. 5. the Tribes are
no sooner gone up to the seats of Judgment, Ver. 5.
to the house of David, but they are followed close by my Text, that they pray
for Jerusalem: So prayer the first work, and consultation after. And
doubtless the Spirit of God sees Prayer wonderful necessary for Jerusalem,
that he makes that, as it were, the door of entrance, both into the Seats of
Judgment among men, and the places of divine worship, and Adoration of God.

Prayer. Thirdly then, here is the Blessing which we are to beg and desire at
Gods hands for Jerusalem, for both the State, and the Church: and that (if you
will believe the Prophet) is Peace.

Peace is one of the greatest temporal blessings, which a State, or a Church
can receive: For where God himself describes the excellency of government, he
describes it by Peace, Esa. 37. 12
Esa. 37. The work of Justice shall be Peace; And my people shall dwell in the
Tabernacles of peace. I will not load you with a long discourse of Peace, and
the benefits it brings. It has the same fate, that some other of Gods
blessings have, It is better known by want, than use; and thought most worth
the having, by them that have it not. Look therefore not upon your selves in
peace, but upon a State in blood, upon a Church in persecution; Ask them which
are divided by the sword, which are rosting at the flame, conceive your case
theirs, That is the touchstone which deceives not, Then tell me whether it be
not good counsel, Rogare pacem, to pray for the Peace of both. And I do ill
to call it barely Peace; Our Prophet calls it the blessing of Peace, Psalm. 29.
Psalm. 29. 10
And doubtless it is to teach the world, that all earthly benefits are, as it
were, unblessed, till Peace be upon them: for till then, no enjoying of any.

Now Rogate pacem, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, seems but a plain and a
naked Exhortation for Peace. I must find more in it then so, and yet offer my
Text no violence, nor be busy with any thing above me, or out of my
profession. Observe then; When David made this Exhortation to pray for Peace,
it was Tempus Pacis, A time of Peace; For he composed the Psalm when he
carried the Arc to Jerusalem, and before that, he had smote the Philistims
twice, and made all at peace, 2. Reg. 5.
2 Samuel 5. A time of Peace? Why then a man should think there is least need to
pray for it. Yea but the Prophet thinks not so. He was pleased the State and
Church under him should enjoy Gods benefits longer; And therefore calls for,
not Peace, which they had, but continuance of Peace, which they could not tell
how long they might hold; To give thanks to God for the peace he had given,
ver. 4. Ver. 4.
and to pray for the continuance of it, ver. 6. Ver. 6.
And certainly it is one great degree of unworthiness of a blessing, to grow
weary of it.

Why, but there is a time for War, as well as for Peace, is there not?
Eccles. 3. 8
Yes, there is, Eccles. 3. And this time is in God to fit, I make Peace, Esa.
45. 7.
and create evil, Esa. 45. And in the King to denounce and proclaim. But it is
not Dies Belli, the day of war it self that can make void this duty Rogandi
pacem, of praying for Peace: For since the eye of nature could see, that the
end of all just war, is, but that men may live in a more just and safe Peace,
This Rogate pacem, pray for Peace, must be in the heart, even when the sword
is in the hand.

I will not meddle with the State: but there are many times, in which God will
punish and afflict his Church, And may we then Rogare pacem, pray Peace for
it? Yes, we may, nay, we must, even then pray for Peace, when his will is not
to give it. For first, so much of his will Action, than it is revealed; The
secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed, belong to
us, and our children, that we may do them, Deuteronomy. 29. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
And again, Saint Augustine Enchir. c. 101.
etiam voluntate bona, with a will that is good, will that which God will not.
And whatsoever he may will voluntate bona, with a good will, that he may pray
for; so he submit to his will, and rest when his will appears.

Rogate pacem, pray for Peace, and have it? For many times that which God will
not give without prayer, he will give with it. And then the cause of Non pax,
is non rogant; no peace, because not prayed for: And in that case, the State
and Church have not more misery, in that there is not Peace, than they have
sin, in that they might have had Peace for asking, and would not pray for it.

Now this rule varies not, We are never to neglect that which God has revealed
(which here in our case is to pray for Peace) upon any presumption of that
which remains secret. Therefore the objection of the Puritan against our
Church Letany, in which we pray to be delivered from Famine, and from Battle;
And against the prayer which follows it, that we may be hurt by no
persecution; as if it were an unlawful prayer, because it is sometimes Gods
will to punish and afflict his Church; is as ignorant as themselves: For in the
old Testament, here is David's call upon us, Rogare pacem, to pray for Peace;
And in the new there is Saint Paul's charge, to pray that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life, 1 Timothy 2. 1 Timothy 2. 2
And has the Church of England such ill luck, that it cannot do as David and
Saint Paul bids it, but it must anger the Puritan?

Again, while you follow the Prophets exhortation, and pray for Peace, every
kind of false worldly peace will not serve the turn. For as Christ was at
Pacem do vobis, sed meam; Peace, but it is My peace that I give unto you, Joh.
14. 27.
S. John 14. So David, the type of Christ, would have you pray for Peace, but
His peace for Jerusalem.

And in this relation, the words are general; Rogate, pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, of the whole State, of the whole Church: It must not be broken in
any corner of Jerusalem, if it may be preserved. A sedition, or a schism in a
corner, in a Conventicle, (which is the place where they are usually hatched)
will fire all if it be suffered. For the State, none doubts this, and it is as
true for the Church. But where peace is truly labored for, and not had, there
the Apostles limitation, Romans 12. 18.
Romans 12. will help all; Have peace with all men (says the Apostle) but it
follows, si possibile, if it be possible; and Quantum in vobis, as much as
lies in you.

When we therefore pray for peace with all men, and cannot get it; Heathenisme,
and Turcisme, and Judaisme, and Heresy, and Superstition, and Schism, will
not repent, and come in; we are quit by si possibile, if we do what is
possible for their conversion. And again, when any of these that have changed
the truth of God into a lie, would have us come over and make peace with them,
we are quit, though we do it not, by quantum in nobis, as much as lies in us.
For God has not left it in our power, to be at peace against his truth: And
therefore here is never a rogate, no Counsel to pray for that. Indeed peace
against truth is not Pax Jerusalem, a peace fit for the Church. The Church of
Rome challenges us for breach of this peace in our separation from them: But
we say, and justly, the breach was theirs, by their separation not only from
disputable, but from evident truth. Nor are we fallers out of the Church, but
they fallers off from verity. Let them return to primitive truth, and our
quarrel is ended. In the mean time it is possibile, and in nobis, both
possible, and in us, to pray, that God would in his time, fill the Church with
truth first, and then with peace.

Now rogate pacem, pray for peace, is a very full circumstance in the Text; I
cannot leave it yet: For when I consider that he that calls so earnestly for
peace, is David, it fills me with wonder. For David was a sword-man with a
witness. One of the greatest warriers that ever was, 2 Samuel 7. 2. Reg. 7. 9.
and most victorious. Nay, though God had anointed him before to the Kingdom;
yet the means which first made him known to Saul, and afterward famous in
Israel, was first his conquest of Goliath, 1. Reg. 17.
1. Reg. 17. and then his sword against the Philistims. Therefore if David be
come in upon rogate pacem, pray for Peace; it cannot be accounted only the
Gownemans, or the weak man's prayer; but it is the wise, and the stout man's too:
for David was both. And certainly it is not cowardice to pray for peace, nor
courage to call for troubles. That is the spirit of David, that can sing before
the Ark of God, rogate pacem pray for peace. But if the Philistims will
disturb Gods peace, and his, then, and not before, he will dye them in their
own blood.

And Rogate pacem, pray for peace, looks yet another way upon David's person.
For at the first, David was King only over the Tribe of Judah, where he
reigned seven years, and six months, 2. Reg. 5. 5
2 Samuel 5. The other eleven Tribes followed Ishbosheth the son of Saul, 2.
Reg. 2.
2 Samuel 2. But he did not compose this Psalm, till the carrying of the Arc to
Jerusalem, at which time he was King over all, both Israel, and Judah. So
Rogate pacem, pray for peace, was not David's counsel only, when his
Territories were less, Judah and Hebron; but after the great access of the
eleven Tribes too; when he was strong; when God had divided his enemies before
him, even as water is divided asunder: as himself praises God and confesses,
2. Reg. 5. 20.
2 Samuel 5. And therefore either David's example is not worth the following, or
else, a King in honor, and a King in plenty, and a King that has added
Jerusalem to Hebron, eleven Tribes to one, may make it his high honor Rogare
pacem Jerusalem, to pray to God, and persuade with men, for the peace of
Christendom.

And David had good reason to be at Rogate pacem, pray for peace: For though
he scarce took any war in hand, but with Gods approbation, and against Gods
enemies; yet we find, 1 Chronicles. 22. 1 Chronicles. 22. 8.
that his Battles and his Blood were the cause, why God would not suffer him to
build his Temple. He might sing before the Ark; he might serve him in the
Tabernacle; but no Temple would he have built by hands in blood. Solomon's
hands, Hands of peace must do that. What is the reason? What? Why it may be it
is, because when the blood and spirits of a man are heated, be the War never
so just, yet (to say no more) aliquid humani intervenit, some heated passion
strikes where, and as, it should not; S. Jaco. 1. 20.
And (as Saint James has it) The wrath of man does not accomplish the
righteousness of God: Appian. L. 2. B^l Civi. p. 504.
And the Historian tells us they are not a few that are guilty to themselves,
parum innocenter exactae militiae.

Again, I cannot be so unthankful to God and my Text, but that I must fit
one circumstance more to Rogate pacem, pray for peace. And it is, Pray for it
this day: Why this day? Why? Why David brought up the Arc with this Psalm,
and would have built the Temple; But Gods answer) to him was, No; But behold, a
son is borne unto thee, which shall be a man of peace* for I will give him
rest from all his enemies round about, therefore his name is Solomon, and I
will send peace and quietness upon Israel in his days, 1 Chronicles. 22. 1 Chronicles.
22. 9.
And had not David then great reason to call upon his people, even all of all
sorts to pray for that Peace, which God would give by Solomon? And surely we
have a Jerusalem, a State, and a Church to pray for, as well as they; And this
day was our Solomon, the very Peace of our Jerusalem borne; And though he were
not borne among us, yet he was borne to us, and for the good and welfare of
both State and Church: And can ye do other than Rogare pacem, pray for peace,
in the day, nay Nativity, the very birthday of both Peace, and the
Peacemaker? Certainly so unnatural to your Prince, so unthankful to God you
cannot be. I will lead you the way to pray for Him, his Honor, and his Peace;
That this day may return often, and crown many and happy, and blessed years
upon him.

I had now done with Rogate pacem, pray for peace, but that Jerusalem is come
again in my way. But it is a strange Jerusalem. Not the old one, which is
literal in my Text, for which David would have prayers; nor that which
succeeded it, Jerusalem of Jew and Gentile converted, for which we must pray:
But a Jerusalem of gold and precious stones, Apoc. 21. 2. 10. G. de voca.
Judae. page 44.
(as is described, Apoc. 21.) which shall be bnilt for them again upon earth
in greater gloy than ever it was. And this Jerusalem upon earth, is that which
is called the Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22. And the new Jerusalem, Page 66.
and 79.
Apoc. 21. 2, 10.

So it is not now sufficient that the Jews shall be (in Gods good time)
converted to the faith of Christ, as the Apostle delivers it* Romans 11. Romans 11.
But these converted Jews must meet out of all Nations: Posit. 7. page 2.
the ten Tribes, as well as the rest, and become a distinct, and a most
flourisbing Nation again in Jerusalem. Posit. 44. and 49.
And all the Kings of the Gentiles shall do homage to their King. Good God,
what a fine people have we here? Men in the Moon.

I will not trouble you with any long discourse, wherein this error with, or
parts from the Chiliasts; nor is it worth any settled confutation; Only I
cannot desire you Rogare pacem, to pray for any peace to this Jerusalem. It was
an old error of the Jews, (which denied Christ come) that when their Messiah
did come, they should have a most glorious temporal Kingdom, and who but
they? I cannot say the Author of this vanity denies Christ come, God forbid;
But this I must say, that many places of the old Testament, which concern the
Resurrection from the dead, and which look upon Christ in his first or second
coming, are impiously applied to this return of the Jews, which (says he)
is to them as a Resurrection from the dead. And this exquisite Arithmetician,
beside the first coming of Christ in the flesh, and his second to Judgment,
(which are all the personal commings of Christ that ever the Scripture
revealed, Page 48.
or the Church knew) has found out a Third, between One and Two, namely, his
coming to this conversion of the Jews.

But see a little: I will not be long a passing. Shall Jerusalem be built
again after this eversion by the Romans? The Prophet Esaias says no, Esa. 25. 2.
Esa. 25. But this (says our Author) is not meant of Jerusalem, Page 105.
but of her enemies. Yes, it is meant of Jerusalem, as well as other Cities; as
appears, Ver. 6, 7.
ver. 6, 7. and is confirmed by Saint Hierome, S. Hierom. and Genev.
and some Modern Divines. And suppose the place were doubtful, Annot.
whether meant of Jerusalem or not, Ibid.
yet that other is unavoydable, Jer. 19. 11.
Ier. 19. 11. I will break this City and this people, as one breaks a potters
vessel, that cannot be made whole again.

Well: But this new-built Jerusalem must be the Heavenly, and the new. Yea, but
it is against the received judgment of the Church, that these places should be
understood of any Church upon earth only, whether Jew, or Gentile, or both.
And apparent it is, that there are some circumstances in Apoc. 21. Apoc. 21.
which cannot possibly be applied to any Church on earth only; Which made S.
Ambrose profess, L. 3. de Virginibus.
that this Exposition is against Scripture. And suppose they may be meant of a
Militant Church only; (...) what should lead us to see this conversion of the
Jews there, I see not.

For the Ten Tribes coming in to the rest, the good man should do well to
tell us first; Where those ten Tribes have been ever since before the Baylonish
Captivity, or point out the Story that says they remained a distinct people.
No: they degenerated, and lived mixed with other Nations that captived them,
till not only their Tribes were confounded, but their name also utterly lost,
for almost two thousand years since; And yet now forsooth we shall see them
abroad again. It is strange we should not know our friends all this while.
Page 56. and 75.
For within these seventy four years, they shall have quite rooted out both
the Pope and the Turk, our two great Enemies; And shall begin to make both of
them stagger within less than these thirty years. I cannot tell here whether
it be Balaam that prophesies, or the Beast he rod on.

As for the Kings of the Gentiles, that they shall serve this King of
Jerusalem, you need not believe that till you see it. If Christ be King there,
I make no question, but the Kings of the Gentiles will easily submit to him:
But if it be any other, they have reason to hold their own. And it seems it is
not well resolved yet, who shall be King; For page 56. and 102. Page 56. and
102.
The Author tells us, Christ shall be King there, And page 163. Page 163.
he unthrones Christ again, and assures us One shall be King, whom the Jews
shall set up among themselves.

I will follow this vanity no further; Only do you not think the Papists will
triumph, that such monstrous opinions are hatched among us? Sure they will; yet
they have little reason here: For two of their learned Jesuits are of opinion,
Sal. To. 4.
(they are Salmer: Tract. 37. Lorin. in Act. 1. 6.
and Lori:) that the Apostles did not sin, when lead with the error of the
Jews, they thought Christ's Kindome should be temporal, Act. 1. 6.
Act. 1. 6. which is the ground of all this vanity. And Tullius Crispoldus, one
of theirs, left notes behind him (which are yet in Manuscript in the Library at
Millan) which agree in all things almost with this present folly. Lorin. in
Act. 1. 6.
So whatsoever is amiss in this Jewish dream, the Primogenitus, the first
borne of it, after the Jew, is theirs. Only herein their care out-goes ours;
They keep the Frenzy locked up, and we publish it in Print.

I will leave these men to out-dreame the Jews, And hasten to, Jerusalem: In
which the circumstances are six.

First then, whether you read the Hierome, S. Hierom.
and the Geneva Translation, (Let them prosper that love thee) and so make it a
Prayer, Ar. Mon. Trem.
Or with Ar. Mon. Tremel. and the last Translation, (They shall prosper that
love thee,) and so make it a Reason, full of promise, to induce us to pray for
it; It is not much material. It seems both may stand, and I will not make my
Text narrower than it is.

Take the words then first as a Motive. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: for
there is great reason you should do so. For They shall prosper that pray for
it. So the Argument is drawn from prosperity; and prosperity is a reason that
is very potent with men in all things else: why then should it not be
prevailing in this, to make men pray both for the State, and for the Church?
But shall men prosper that do so indeed? Yes: you have no probable cause to
distrust it; The words are, They shall prosper. And if you take them for an
earthly promise, you have a Kings word for it; If for a spiritual, you have a
Prophets word for it. Would you have any man testify that has had experience?
You have David's word for it: And he had often trial in himself, that God made
him prosper for his prayers sake, and his love to that State and Church. And
since you cannot distrust a King, a Prophet, a man of experience; be sure to
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, if it be but that your selves may prosper.

Prayer; Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: For there is great example to move
you to do so. For the Kingly Prophet goes before you; he asks no more of you,
than he does himself. He would have you pray for Jerusalem, and so does he:
Let them prosper that love it. The Prophet is not of their humor, that care
not what burdens they bind upon other men's shoulders, so themselves may escape
the load. No, he prays too; And no marvel: Sermon. 1. de Ieju. 10. Men.
For (as Saint Leo observes) Prayer is one, and the first, of the three things,
which do most properly belong to all religious actions.

He prays then, and in his prayer this is remarkable, Prius orat pro orantibus
pro Jerusalem, He prays for them that pray for Jerusalem, before he prays for
Jerusalem it self. First, Let them prosper that love Jerusalem, ver. 6. Ver. 6.
And then, Peace be within the walls of it, Ver. 7.
v. 7. And there is a great deal of spiritual wisdom in this too: For while
his prayer strengthens them that pray for Jerusalem, both his, and their
prayers meet, and go stronger to God, than if any (be it David) prayed for it
alone. Epist. 7. ad Smyrnen.
And therefore Ignatius tells his people at Smyrna, that their prayers reached
as far as Antioch, (who no doubt prayed for it self too) and these joined
prayers obtained peace for that Church.

David prays, as well as he would have others pray: so prays he also for the
self same thing, for which he exhorts others to pray; That is, for peace.
Peace be within thee. And it is an argument that his exhortation came heartily
from him, because he falls to it so close himself. And it is an excellent
thing full of honor to God and themselves, when Rex and Propheta, the King,
and the Prophet, go first in prayer for the States and the Churches peace.

Now he prays not for the peace of it alone, but for that which follows
peace, the prosperity of it too. He well knew, that God has pleasure in the
prosperity of his servants. Nor does he so pray for the temporal peace of the
State, as that he forgets the spiritual peace of the Church. Nor does he so
pray for the external peace of either, but that he preferres the inward, and
soul-peace of both. Not peace without virtue: for that is but a painted peace;
S. Hilar. Ibid.
and therefore Saint Hill. will have them together. Peace and Virtue Connexa
sibi sunt, must be knit together in Jerusalem: For Virtue is the strength and
preservative of Peace; And wheresoever Virtue is not, there Peace will be the
first that will abuse it self. Not Peace without Faith: For that is but a
profane Peace; S. Hierom. Ibid.
and therefore Saint Hierom tells us, it is Dominus Christus, our Lord Christ,
that is the true Peace of both State and Church. As if he so long before had
foreseen and prayed for (in these words, Peace be within thee) the coming of
the Messiah. And foresee it (no question) he did. And I will not deny, but that
he prayed for it: since neither Ierusalems peace could, nor our peace can, be
firm without him. But then if you ask me why so many States, and Churches,
are divided for, and about Christ, and so not at peace; the cause I must tell
you, is the sin of men: They divide and tear Christ first, and then what
wonder if they be divided about him?

Jerusalem, for the State, for the Church: but whereabouts would he have these
excellent blessings seated? Where? Why every where, but especially in Muris and
Palatiis, about the Wall and the Palace. And they are excellently fitted. He
would have them spread all over Jerusalem; But Loca Dominii, the places of
their exaltation, are these in my Text, the Wall, and the Palace: For Peace
that keeps at the wall, and so works inward, to calm the City; But the child
of peace, Prosperity, that is borne after in the Palace, and comes outward, to
enrich to the very Wall.

The strength of a City is in the Walls. In Walls that are fenced and
fortified with Turrets, (as Euthymius renders it:) Euthym. Ibid.
therefore if a tempest of war beat upon the walls of it, possess the
strength of it, there cannot be peace. Therefore the Prayer is fit: Sit pax in
muris, peace be within the walls. And David's prayer is as full as fit: For the
Church has the same walls, that the State has. It is in my Text. For it is in
Muris Jerusalem, in the walls of Jerusalem, and the Temple stood within it.
And by reason of the knot which God himself has knit between the bodies,
(which is, that the same men, which in respect of one Allegiance make the
Commonwealth, do in respect of one Faith, make the Church) the walls of the
State cannot be broken, but the Church suffers with it; nor the walls and
fences of the Church trampled upon, but the State must be corrupted by it:
therefore the Prayer is full; that Peace may sit upon the Walls, that Prosperity
may fill all that is within them.

Now neither the Walls of the State, nor the Walls of the Church, can keep
or defend themselves, or that which they compass; There must be Men, and they
must keep both the Wall, and the Palace, and the Peace: Viri-Muri, Men-Walles.
And among these, all are not bound to equal care in preserving the Peace.
Nihil firmius, aut utilius, aut celsius, Turribus.
But as the greatest strength of the dead Walls is in Turribus, in the Towers
and Bulwarks; so the greatest care in the living Walls lies in Turribus, S.
Hilar. Ibid.
in the Towers too; upon those that are eminent in State and Church. S. Hierom.
Ibid.
Now S. Hierome tells us plainly, that for the State, the Noble, and the wise,
and the Valiant men, they are the Towers. And for the Church, Saint Paul tells
us, Gal. 2. 9.
the Apostles were the Pillars, S. Chrysostom.
Gal. 2. And Saint Chrysostom. that the Priests are Muri Ecclesiae, Hom. 10. in
S. Mat.
the Walls of the Church. Here therefore the Prayer must go home; David's did;
Peace be in these walls too: For if these shall shake upon their foundations;
If these knock one against another; there can be no firm Peace in either Body.
A wall-palsie is ever dangerous.

Muris and Palatiis, in the Wall and the Palace, stays either the Prayer for
it, or the benefit of it, there? No sure; The benefit stays not: For the Peace
of the Wall and the Palace, is very diffusive; All Jerusalem is the better for
it presently. Not the meanest in the body of the State, not the lowest in the
Body of the Church, but they are the better, or may be, for this Peace. And it
is employed in the Text: For in Palatiis, in the Palaces, names indeed the Kings
house, but under that greater, comprehends the less. S. Hierom. Ibid.
And S. Hierome expresses it so, and reads in Domibus, prosperity in the
Houses: For the houses of Subjects cannot be empty of Peace, when the Palace of
the King is full. This for the Benefit; and Peace is no niggard of it self.
Then the rule is; Where the benefit goes on and multiplies, there must not be a
stop in the prayer; that must go on too, as David's did; Peace be within the
walls.

Fifthly, The form of this prayer, Sit pax in muris, Peace be within the walls,
and Prosperity within the Palaces, tells us, that Jerusalem had both these. And
no doubt can be made, but that Jerusalem, that State, that Church, had both.
And to this day as little doubt there is of civil States, muros habent and
Palatia, they have both Walls and Palaces. But for the Church, sacrilege (in
many places) makes all the haste it can, to frustrate this prayer, that there
may be nor Palaces, nor Walls, for Peace, or Plenty, to be in. Doubtless,
this ceremonial Church will rise in Judgment against the pillage of
Christendom: For the children of that Church left not their Mother without
Walls for defense, not without Palaces for honor. Ye see it is plain in my
Text. But many Children of the substantial Church, have showed themselves base
and unnatural. Palaces? no, Cottages are good enough; As if it were a part of
Religion, that Christ and his Priests must have less honor in the substance,
than they had in the ceremony. And yet when I consider better, I begin to
think it is fit the Priests house should be mean, where the Church, which is
Gods House, is let lie so basely: For he that hewed Timber before out of the
thick Trees, was known to bring it to an excellent work; but now they have
beaten down all the carved work thereof with Axes and Hammers, Psalm. 74.
Psalm. 74. 5, 6.
So that now I doubt we must vary the Prayer, from Sit pax, to Sint muri, not
presume to pray, there may be peace and plenty within the Walls, but that the
very walls themselves may stand.

But yet I will do the People right too. For as many of them are guilty of
inexcusable sin, both by cunning and by violent sacrilege: so are too many of
us Priests guilty of other as great sins as sacrilege can be; for which, no
doubt, we and our possessions lie open to the waste. It must needs be so. For
the hand of sacrilege it self, though borne a Thief, could never touch
Palatia Ecclesiae, the Palaces of the Church, as long as God kept the wall of
it: But while our sins make God out of Peace with the Walls; while he is at
Diruam, Esa. 5. 5.
I will break the wall thereof, Esaias. 5. it is in vain to shift off by humane
policies: for the Palaces cannot stand.

Sixthly, I may not omit, that Pro orantibus, but Pro diligentibus; not for
them that pray for it, but for them that love it: Let them prosper that love
it, and wish it good. Euthym. Ibid.
So the prayer (as Euthym observes) did not comprehend the Jews only, but as
many of other nations too, as were Diligentes, lovers of Jerusalem. And indeed
these two, to love, and to pray for the State, and the Church, make one in my
Text: For no man can pray heartily for them, but he that loves them* And no
man that truly loves them, can abstain from praying for them, and the peace of
them. This is certain, neither love, nor prayer, can stand with practicing
against either; nor with spoil and rapine upon either.

Nor is Diligentibus te, that love thee, an idle or an empty specification in
the prayer of the King: For as Jerusalem had, so has every State, and every
Church, some false members, whose hearts are nearer the enemy, than Jerusalem.
Therefore sit Pax, sed diligentibus, let there be peace, but to them that love
thee. But if any man have a false heart to Jerusalem, let him have no portion
in the prosperity of it.

Thus you see, the Prophets care is for Jerusalem. For this State and Church he
would have you pray. In this prayer he would have you beg for Peace. That which
he would have others do, he does himself, He prays both for Jerusalem, and
for them that pray for it. That which he also prays for, is peace and
prosperity. This peace he would have in the Walls, and this prosperity in the
Palaces. From thence he knows it will diffuse it self to meaner houses. Yet
it seems by the way, that that ceremonial Church had both Walls and Palaces.
And last of all, that this Peace, this Prosperity, might be the reward only
Diligentium, of such as love both State and Church.

And now there is a little behind. For my Text is an Exhortation, and preaches
it self. Rogate Pacem, pray for the Peace of Jerusalem. Pray for it? Why, it
seems strange to me that any age should be weary of Peace, or need an
exhortation to pray for it, either in Church or Commonwealth. Yet the age in
which David lived, was such. For though the instant time of the composure of
this Psame, was a time of Peace; yet it was but a time picked out, in an age
that loved not Peace. David tells us so himself a little before my Text, Psalm.
100. 5.
Psalm. 120. My soul has long dwelt among them that are enemies unto Peace: I
labor for Peace, but when I speak unto them thereof, thy make them ready to
battle. So there he speaks for peace; And in my text he exhorts to pray for
Peace; And after that, himself prays for peace: And all this is little enough
among them that love not peace.

Howbeit take this with you: They bear not the best minds, (Cases of
necessity, and honorable safety, always excepted) that desire the waters,
either of the Church, or the Commonwealth, should run troubled, that they
may have the better fishing. Pat^rc. L. 2.
And the Historian sets his brand upon them; Who are they whom peace cannot
please? Who? Why? Quibus pessima est, and immodica cupiditas, They whose
desires are worse than naught, in their Object, and void of all moderation in
their pursuit.

This I am sure of, since David at the placing of the Arc, exhorts all sorts
of men Rogare pacem, to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, he did not intend to
leave out the Priest, whom it concerns most to preach peace to the people;
neither the High Priest, nor the rest, but they should be most forward in this
duty. This for the Priesthood then. And Christ himself, when he sent out the
Seventy to preach, gave them in charge, to begin at every house in which they
entered, with Peace. S. Luke 10. 5.
Peace be to this house, S. Luke 10. And he that preaches not peace, or
labors not for it, must confess one of these two; Namely, that he thinks
David was deceived, while he calls to pray for peace; Or that himself is
disobedient to his call.

Calvin is of opinion, Calv. Ibid.
that he which will order his prayers right, must begin, not with himself, but
at Dominus Ecclesiae corpus conservet, That the Lord would preserve the Body of
his Church. It is just with the Prophet, Peace for Jerusalem. For if any man be
so addicted to his private, that he neglect the common State, he is void of the
sense of piety, and wishes Peace and happiness to himself in vain. For
whoever he be, he must live in the Body of the Commonwealth, and in the Body
of the Church; and if their joints be out, and in trouble, how can he hope to
live in Peace? This is just as much as if the exterior parts of the body should
think they might live healthful, though the stomach be full of sick and swollen
humors.

To conclude then: God has blessed this State and Church with many and happy
years of Peace and plenty. To have had peace without plenty had been but a
secure possession of misery. To have had plenty (if it were possible) without
peace, had been a most uncertain possession of that, which men call
happiness, without enjoying it. To have had both these, without truth in
Religion, and the Churches peace, had been to want the true use of both. Now to
be weary of peace, especially peace in Truth, is to slight God that has given
us the blessing. And to abuse peace and plenty to Luxury, and other sins, is
to contemn the blessing it self. And there is neither of these, but will call
apace for vengeance.

My exhortation therefore shall keep even with S. Paul's, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
1 Timothy 2. That prayers and supplications be made, especially for Kings, and
for all that are in authority, that under them we may live a quiet, and a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Here S. Paul would have you pray
for the King; And in my Text the King would have you pray for the State, and
the Church: His peace cannot be without theirs; And your peace cannot be
without his. Thus having made my Text my Circle, I am gone round it, and come
back to it; and must therefore end in the point where I began: Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem; Let them prosper that love it: Peace be within the walls of
it, and prosperity within the Palaces: That the Peace of God which passes our
understanding here, may not leave us, till it possess us of eternal Peace.
And this, Christ for his infinite Merit and Mercy sake grant unto us. To whom
with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be ascribed all Might, Majesty, and
Dominion, this day, and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON. II.
Preached at White Hall, on the 24. of March, 1621. being the day of the
beginning of His Majesty's most gracious Reign.
PSALM. 21. 6, 7. For thou have set him as Blessings for ever: Or, given him.
thou have made him glad with the joy of thy countenance.

Because the King trusts in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most High he
shall not miscarry. Or, not be moved.



MY Text begins, where every good man should end; that is, in Blessing. Not an
Esau, Genesis 27. 34.
but he cries, when the Blessing is gone, Genesis 27. This Psalm is a Thanksgiving
for David, for the King. In Thanksgiving, two Blessings; One, in which God
blesses us; and for that bless God; For he that praises him, and gives him
thanks, is said to bless him, Exodus 18. 10.
Exodus 18.

Now we can no sooner meet blessing in the Text, but we presently find two
Authors of it, God and the King: For there is God Blessing the King; and the
King Blessing the people. And a King is every way in the Text: For David the
King set the Psalm for the People; and the People, they sing the Psalm
rejoicing for the King; And all this is, Verse. 1.
that the King may rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, v. 1. And when this Psalm
is sung in Harmony, between the King and the People, then there is Blessing.

This Psalm was sung in Jerusalem; But the Music of it is as good in the
Church of Christ, as in their Temple. Nor did the spirit of Prophecy in David,
so fit this Psalm to him, S. Hierom.
as that it should Honor none but himself: S. August.
No; Jansen.
For in this the learned agree, Calv.
That the letter of the Psalm reads David; Lorin. ibid.
that the Spirit of the Psalm, eyes Christ; that the Analogy in the Psalm is
for every good King that makes David his example, and Christ his God.

The Psalm in General is a Thankesgiving for the happy estate of the King. In
particular, it is thought a fit Psalm to be recited when the King has
recovered health; or when a gracious King begins his Reign: Because these
times are Times of Blessing from the King; And these are, or ought to be, times
of Thankesgiving from the people. My Text then is in part for the day: For I
hoped well it would have been Tempus restaurationis, a time of perfect
restoring for the Kings health; and thanks were due for that: And it is Dies
creationis, the Anniversary day of his Crown; and thanks is due for that. And
there is great reason, if you will receive the Blessing, that you give the
Thanks.

The Text it self is a reason of that which is found v. 5. Verse. 5.
There it is said, that God has laid great dignity and honor upon the King.
And here is the Means by which, and the Reason why, he has laid it there. So
three parts will divide the Text, and give Means, by which God lays honor
upon the King. Not honor only, which they all have as Kings: but that great
honor in his salvation, which attends good and gracious Kings. And the Means
Dando and Laetificando, By Giving, and by Joying. By giving the King as a
Blessing to the people; Thou have given him, or set him as Blessings for ever.
And by Joying the King for blessing the people: Thou have made him glad with
the joy of thy Countenance. Reason both of the Honor and of the Means of
laying it upon the King: And that is, Quia sperat; Because the Success, which
his Honor shall have by his Hope, That in the mercy of the most High he shall
not be moved, he shall not miscarrie.

Means by which God adds Honor even to the Majesty of Princes. And because
that doubles in the Text, I will take the first in order, which is, Dando; Thou
laist great Honor upon the King, by giving or setting him, as Blessings for
ever. In which Means of laying Honor, the circumstances are three.

And the first of the three tells us King is; and that is worth the knowing: And
mark the Holy Ghost, how he begins. He describes not a King by any of his
Humane infirmities, such as all men have; And no mean ones are registered of
David, the particular King spoken of: No, that had been the way to dishonor
the King; which is no part of Gods intention. But he begins at that which
crowns the Crown it self. He is Benedictio, a Blessing, and no less, to the
people. And therefore in all things, and by all men, is to be spoken of, and
used as a Blessing.

Now it is one thing for a King to be blessed in himself, and another thing
to be given or set Up, as a Public Blessing to other men. David was both, and
he speaks of both. A King then is a Blessing to, or in himself (as the
Septuagint and Tremellius give the words, Dedisti illi benedictiones, Thou have
given blessings to him) when by Gods grace he is Particeps sanctificationis,
Partaker of Gods hallowing Spirit. For no man, King or Subject, can be blessed
in his soul without Religion and Holiness. And if these be counterfeits, such
also is his Blessedness.

But a King is given as a Blessing to others, when in the riches of Gods grace
upon him, he is made Divinae Bonitatis fons medius, A mediate fountain of Gods
goodness and bounty streaming to the people; When he turns the graces which
God has given him, to the benefit of them which are committed to him. For
mark the Heavens, and the Earth will learn. God did not place the Sun in
the heavens only for height, but that it might have power to Bless the
inferior world, with Beams, and Light, and Warmth, and Motion. David was
thus, and thus was Christ, and such is every King in his proportion, that sets
up these for his example. It is not easy to match David; but a better example
than Christ cannot be found; And therefore when Clem. Lib. 1. s^ro.
Alex. had described a King indeed, One that is Beatus and Benedicens, a
blessed and a blessing King; Or, if you will, as it is here in the Abstract,
Ipsa benedictio, Blessing it self; He is at Cujusmodi est Dominus, Such as is
Christ. There, the perfect example of Blessing.

Now while the King is said to be a Blessing, let me put you in mind that
there is a double Benediction; Descendens una, altera Ascendens, One
descending, and another ascending. That which Descends, is the Blessing of
Benefit; That is the Kings Blessing. He above, and this drops from him. In
this, like God, whose immediate Vicegerent he is: For Gods Blessings also are
said to come down and descend, Jaco. 1. 17.
S. Jacob. 1. The Blessing which Ascends, is that of Praise, and Thanks, and
fair interpretation of Princes Actions; and this is the peoples Blessing. And
they are both in Scripture together, 3 Reg. 8. 3 Reg. 8.
For there, ver. 55. Verse. 55.
Solomon's Blessing comes down upon the people; and ver. 66. ver. 66.
the peoples blessing goes up back again to Solomon.

Between these two is the happy commerce that a Prince has with his people;
when they strive to outblesse one another. When the King labors the peoples
good; that is his blessing descending upon them: and the people labor his
honor; that is their blessing reaching up to him. And in this sense also as
well as the former, a King is said, Poni in benedictionem, to be set up as a
Blessing, that is, for one whom the people ought to bless. For Gods ordinance,
Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
1 S. Pet. 2. does as much, if not more, require the people to bless, that is,
to honor the King, than it does the King to bless, that is, to do good to
his people. And there is no good division between a King and his People, but
this one; That in parting of this great good of a gracious government, the
Kings part be the Honor, the Peoples part may be the Benefit, and both meet
again in the Blessing. And it is so in my Text; For Ar. Mont. renders the
Original by Pones eum, There the King blesses the people; and the Septuagint
and Tremel. by Posuisti ei, There God promises that he will, or rather says he
already has; and ties the People that they do bless the King.

And you may observe too, that while a King keeps to the two great examples of
the Text, David and Christ, He is not only a Blessing, but he comes as he
writes, Plural; And so it is in the Text, Benedictiones; not one, but many
Blessings. And indeed the Blessings which descend from a King upon a people,
seldom come single and alone: and this, Kings keep theirhonour, that they
Bless by number. Esau could not believe that his father Isaac (who was far
less than a King to Bless) had but one blessing in his store, Genesis 27.

But be the Blessings never so many, never so great; Genesis 27. 38.
Be the Assistants which a King has, never so deserving; 1 Chro. 11. 10.
(And David had his Worthies you know, 1 Chon. 11. 10.) yet none of them may
share with him in his honor of Blessing the people, nor none ought to steal
away the hearts of his people upon any popular pretenses whatsoever. For these
wheels, of what compass soever they be, move all in his strength, and
therefore ought to move to the conservation of his Honor.

And this is in the Text too: for David, no question, had a wise and provident
Council, Nobles of great worth; and these wanted not their deserved Honors:
(God forbid they should:) And yet when it came to blessing the people, that
great means of specialtie of Honor to a King, there David stands alone
without a sharer. Dedisti, yea but whom? not eos, but Eum; not them, but Him,
as Blessings to the people. Ezekiel. 1. 15
The vision which Ezechiel saw, c. 1. seems to me an expression of this: It
was a vision of Wheels; the Wheels were many; the motion uniforme; one wheel
within another, the less within the greater; yet in the apparition, these
under-wheeles have no name, but only the great compassing wheel, Rota ecce
una, One wheel appeared. And in this case, every man is bound to be in the
service, but the best may not look to share in the Honor.

And seldom mean they well to Princes, that against the phrase of the Holy
Ghost in this place, Dedisti Eum, thou have given Him as Blessings, will needs
be thought Blessers of the People: For such men do but fish, and bait in
troubled waters to their own advantage. Yet these men speaking oftentimes with
more freedom, than either Truth or Temper, so long as they find fault with
the present government, never want (says Hooker) Attentive and favorable
hearers. Lib. 1. verbis primis.
Never. For my part I will keep to the words of my Text: and if there be a
Blessing (as who sees not but there is?) under God, I will go to Dedisti Eum,
Him whom God has given.

If you think I have stayed too long in this circumstance, I hope you will
pardon me; You should be as loath as I, to go from amidst the Blessings: but I
must proceed.

Secondly then, a King, a Blessing; for Ever. For Ever: And so Christ and David
are both in the Letter. Christ a Blessing for ever; and that simply, for of his
Kingdom no end, S. Luc. 1. 33. Luke 1. 33.
David a Blessing for ever: but that not in himself, but as Christ was to
descend from him, as he was Radix less, Esaias. 11. 1
Esai. 11. from whence did spring Christ the Blessing for ever. And Christian
Kings in their generations, a Blessing for ever too: but that limited; as they
profess Christ, and as they imitate David.

Now David is observed to have Blessed the people under him three ways; and to
these three generals, all the Blessings of a King are reducible. The true
worship of the true God, that is the first; Preservation from foreign Enemies;
And the third is* Life and vigor of Justice and Judgment among the people. The
closer a King keeps to these three, the larger his Blessings: but if he fall
short in any of these, so much does he lessen his Blessings upon the people.

Religion among them; then his Blessings are not for Ever, but end in the Peace
and Plenty of this life. If he preserve them not from foreign violence; then
his Blessings reach not so far as to the Ever of this life, but are hewn down
by the sword of the Enemy. If he do keep out foreign force, yet if Justice
and Judgment, be not in life and in blood at home, his best Blessings will be
abused, even by them which are trusted with dispensing them, and that for Ever.

Now this In perpetuum, for ever, was absolute in Christ: but in David and
other Kings, be they never so eminent in their times, it is but respectively
for ever; That is, not for the Ever of eternity; no nor for the Ever of time;
But only for the Ever of perpetuity of their own Reign, in their allotted
time. And this is a large for ever. For you can have no longer Blessings from
the best King, than God gives him time to bless in: for he is constant in
Blessing, that gives it not over but with life, and this was Josias honor. 4
Reg. 23. 4. Reg. 23. 25.


And yet I may not forget, that some times this for ever extends the blessings
of Kings beyond their life, Namely, when they bless their people with a
Blessing successor; for the Septuagint read it here (...), and that implies
Succession: Jansen. and Copp. ibid.
So it is a Present, and an after blessing. A blessing in himself, and a
blessing in his seed. In his person, and in his posterity a Blessing. And the
Text fitted David home. In himself, all his life: and in Solomon after his
life, a blessing for ever. And in this the Text applies it self, and so will
do, I hope, for ever: and I will ever pray, that the King may be a Blessing
long, and his Solomon after him, to his people, even in seculum seculi, age
after age in an Ever of succession, and so proceed.

King is a Blessing to his people, and that for ever; but who makes him so?
yea, now we are come to the great Father of blessings God himself: for if you
mark, the Text begins at Tu dedisti, or Tu posuisti; Thou Lord have given him,
thou have set him for blessings. And God as in other, so in this particular,
very gracious: for no people can merit this at Gods hand, that their King
should be a Blessing to them, and continue so. No, you see Tu dedisti, thou
have given him, makes him Donum, a mere gift, no purchase.

Again, no King can promise and perform this out of his own strength, that
he will be a Blessing to his people, and that for ever. No, you see Tu
posuisti, thou have set him, keeps him at his disposing, leaves him not to his
own. And indeed in this, a Kings felicity is borne as Christ's was, by an
overshadowing power; And you cannot, no not with a curious eye, search all the
Reasons how he is set for Blessings: because God in disposing it, has hid
Lumen intra umbram, and thickened the veil that is drawn over it.

There is much, I confess, in the King, to compass the Affections of his
People; and there is much in the People, not to distaste the heart of their King
for trifles, not to urge him with indignities: But when all is done, and the
blessing stands between the King and the People, ready to descend from the One,
to the other; yet you must go to Tu dabis, Thou Lord shall give it. For if he
give it not, it will not be had: There will be a rub where it is not looked
for, and a stop in the Blessing. For is there conquest over enemies, or rest
from them? why that is Tua gratia, Gods favor. So S. Basil. S. Basil. Ibid.
Is a King, or a State, famous for the ordering of it? why there is auxilium a
te, All help from God. Theodor. Ibid.
So Theodor. And God sells neither his help, nor his favor: It is all at Tu
dedisti, his gift, his free gift, where ere it is.

There is great Error in the world, I pray God it be not as Common as Great:
And it is, to think that this blessing can be brought about by Policy only.
Policy is necessary; and I deny nothing but the Only. And they which maintain
that, leave no room for Tu dabis, Thou shall give the blessing: But will
carry the world before them whether God will or no. Whereas there is more in
Tu dabis, in Gods gift, than in all the Policies of the world. And it must
needs be so; For all Policy is but a piece of Gods gift, a branch of Gods
wisdom: Therefore not so great as the whole. And no Policy can Promise it
self success; there it must needs wait and stay, for Tu dabis: Therefore not
so great as that upon which it attends. And when miserable events dog the
wisest projects, then Achitophel himself will confess this; 2 Reg. 17.
though perhaps not till he go home to hang himself, 2 Reg. 17.

With this Politic error, went another of Destiny. The former leaves Gods
Altar, and the sacrifice is to their own uet, Hab. 1. 16.
Hab. 1. This other hampers God in the uet, and makes both his blessings upon
Kings, and his blessings from Kings to the People, to be all fatal. And this
was too common among the Heathen. So Flav. Flav. Vop. in vita Cari.
Vopiscus. Fato Remp. regi satis constat, It is evident enough that Kingdoms
are governed by Fate. And then, where is Tu dedisti? Thou have given him, if he
and his Blessings must be whether God will or not?

But these blind men had Blessings, and knew not whence they came, unless
perhaps they understood Providence by Fate: (And Minut. Fael. M. Foel. in Octa.
p. 96.
is not much against it.) And if they did, then Providence, and Tu dabis, are
all one; For God never gives a blessing to a King and his people, but he gives
it, and orders it by Providence. Yet here the wisest of the Heathen are
unexcusable, in that they enjoyed the gift, and would not serve the giver, Romans
1. 21.
Romans 1. Look right therefore upon The Author of Blessings; And where it is, Tu
dedisti, Thou have given him as Blessings (as it is with us) there know, it is
worth Thanks both from Prince and People: And where it is, Tu dabis, Thou
shall give (and my Text is read both ways) there know, it is worth the asking,
both for Prince and people; that God will give their King unto them as
blessings for ever.

And as it is, Tu dedisti, Thou have given; So that is not all, but, Tu dedisti
prius, Thou have given first. God is first in the work, where ever a gracious
King is a blessing to his people. For that which is simply a gift in the Text,
is a prevention, ver. 3. Ver. 3.
And, Praevenis eum, prevents the King with blessings first, that he after may
bless the people: So that in this common blessing God is the prime mover,
as well as in grace given to particular men. And it it true of both, Lib. 11.
co^. duas epist Pelag. c. 19.
which S. Augustine delivers but of one, Avertat Deus hanc amentiam, God turn
away this frenzy from us, that in his own gifts (And here it is, Tu dedisti)
we should place our selves first, and set him after. No; where ever comes, Tu
dedisti, Thou have given; God is evermore first in the work to begin it, yea,
and last in the work to perfect it, or else no blessing.

And therefore mark the Text, and ye shall find, that wheresoever there is Tu
dedisti, Thou have given, there is still, Posuisti, and disposuisti, Thou have
set him, and disposed him to be so. And these two perfect the gift: Ar. Mon.
For, Tu pones, that sets and settles the King to be Blessings; And there is
his Constancy; Not a Blessing to day, and none to morrow. And, Dispones eum,
(for so Tremellius will have it) that disposes and orders the King in his
blessings; And there is his wisdom, to sit and steare his Passengers; That he
may make all things suite with the oppertunities, and fit the varieties of the
people: For they, do the Governor never so worthily, will not think
themselves Blessed, if they be not fitted. And a Commonwealth, when the humors
of the people feel a spring, and are swelling, (as it was once said of that of
Rome) suffers almost all those various motions, Quae patitur in homine une
mortalitas, Flav. Vopis. in Caro.
which motalitie it self suffers in a particular man.

And it should not be passed over neither, for whose mouths David David
speaks it for himself: And there is the King acknowledging Tu dedisti, Gods
gift in making him all the Blessings that he is to his people. Pij loquuntur;
they are the faithful that speak it: Not a religious and a good subject, but
he is at Tu dabis, that God would bless his King, and make him a Blessing for
ever.

And therefore when God gives, and the King blesses, and the people take no
notice of it, it is gross ingratitude: when they have a blessing and know it
not, it is a dangerous slumber; when they may have a blessing and will not, it
is sullen pet, and shows they have no mind to be thankful, either to God or
the King for Blessing them.

Against this: say, The blessings are not perfect. Well, suppose that, what
then? Are not the best actions of the best men mixed? Shall we refuse degrees
of happiness, because they are not Heaven? No sure: for Angels dwell not in
bodies of men. And in the very Text it is not simply, Thou have given
blessings; But the words are, Dedisti Eum: thou have given Him as Blessings.
Therefore the blessings here spoken of, come not immediately from God to the
people, that they should be thought every way perfect: But they are strained
Per eum, through him, through the Man, and therefore must relish a little of
the Strainer, Him and his Mortality. And there cannot be a greater wrong done
unto Princes, in the midst of their care for the people, than for men to think
they are not Blessed by them, upon supposall that some things may be imperfect:
Hook. Lib. 1. Ecc. Pol. Sect. 1. Prin.
For the secret lets, and difficulties in public proceedings, and in the
managing of great State affairs, are both innumerable, and inevitable; and
this every discreet man should consider.

Gods laying Honor upon the King. The first, ye see, was by giving him as
blessings: And this second is Laetificando, by making him glad with the joy of
his countenance. The Text goes on cheerfully, (and so I hope you do in hearing
it) from Blessing to Joy; and here again the circumstances are three.

Laetificando, by joying him, while he blesses the people. And the joy which
God gives cannot but be great; and therefore the Septuagint expresses it by two
words, (...), Thou shall Joy him with Joy, that is, thou shall make him
exceeding glad: and its requisite a King should have joy, great joy, for he
cannot sit at the stearne, without a great deal of Care; And therefore it is
fit he should be rewarded with a great deal of joy.

Now if a King will not fail of this joy, he must go to the right Owner of
it, God himself, that both has and gives abundantly. If he seek it in
Himself, if in the very People which he blesses, it will not ever there be
found. For when a King Blesses his people, if the blessing be as discreetly
taken, as it is graciously meant; then there is joy, great joy, of all hands:
But when a people, has surfetted long upon Peace and Plenty, it is hard to
please them with blessing it self; and every little thing is a burden to them,
that in long time have felt the weight of none: And in such times, Malcontents
are stirring; And there want not in all States, those that are Docti in
perturbanda Reipub. pace, very learned in disturbing the Peace of the
Commonwealth: And the factious aim of such men, is either to hinder and
divert the blessings which are ready, and upon the point of descending from
the King upon the People; or else in misinterpreting, or extenuating Blessings
already come down. And these (let the world dote on them while they will) are
the hinderers of mutual joy between the Prince and the People.

Therefore, if the King will look to the presevation of his own joy, he must
seek it where these cannot hinder it, at Tu laetificasti, Thou Lord have joy'd
him. And the word in my Text is (...), which signifies a joy that is inward,
and referred to the mind. And Tu laetificasti, is ever at this joy; Let the
Intentions be right and honorable, and joy will follow them. It was David's
case: I will forbear to tell you how scornfully, how unworthily, he was used
by the basest of the people: but God kept close to him, Tu laetificasti, and
made him joyful.

Tu laetificasti, God joying David, there the joy is not like Lightning, a
flash and gone, but a true and permanent joy: True in regard of the Author of
it, God; for here is another Tu dedisti, God gave this also; and true in regard
of the Object of it upon which it settles, which is God too; God, and the light
of his countenance. And how can it be other than true joy, that has God at
both ends of it, as this has? For it begins at God the Author; and it
continues, and ends, in God the Object.

God, but not simply so expressed in the Text, but God and his countenance,
expressing after the manner of men: For a man is joyed at the countenance he
loves; And yet not simply so neither, not this Countenance only, but the joy
of his Countenance. And a man would not see sadness in the face he loves; Joy
there rejoices him. But no Countenance like to Gods, an eye upon the Beauty of
his Countenance fill's with joy.

Now Vultus Dei, Gods Countenance here, signifies Gods presence; So Bellarm.
Bellarm. Ibid.
It is true; yet not his presence only, but his Favor and his Love too;
Theodor. Ibid.
So Theodor. It is true, yet not empty Love only, but succor and protection
too; Euthy. Ib.
So Euthym. It is true, yet it is not these alone, but all these and more.

And this considered, it is no great matter how you read my Text; A, or Cum,
or Juxta, or Apud vultum; For the King needs all, and God gives all: For when
he is once come to Tu laetificasti, this joy begins at a vultu, from his
Countenance; It goes on cum vultu, in company with his Countenance; It enlarges
it self Iuxta vultum, when it comes near his Countenance; And at the last it
shall be made perfect apud vultum, when it comes to his Countenance, to vision.

And as David's cares were great, so God would answer them with degrees of joy:
For had God any more Faces than one (as Ar. Mont. renders the Original Cum
faciebus ejus) he would hide none of them from David. If any were more
comfortable than other, he shall see that. And indeed though the Countenance of
God be but one and the same, yet it does not look joy upon all men: But his
Aspects to the creature are Planetary (as it were) and various. And David is
happy, that in the midst of all these various turns of Gods Countenance, A,
and Cum, and Iuxta, and Apud, we find not (nor I hope never shall) that
disasterous Aspect of opposition, which is contra, against; for then all joy
were gone: For if it should be Rex contra vultum Dei, then it were all sin;
and if it should be Vultus Dei contra Regem, (both which God forbid) then it
were all punishment; In neither Joy, in neither Blessing. It is far better in
my Text, if we take care to hold it there, Cum vultu, with, or in the favor of
his Countenance.

Thirdly, this joy begins at the Laetificasti eum, thou have made him glad. He
must have the greatest care, and therefore the joy must be first or chiefest in
him: and if you will take a view of my Text, you will find Him excellently
seated for the purpose; for I find Eum, that is David, that is the King,
standing between Laetificasti and Gaudium, as if God would have the Kings
place known, by joy on the right hand, and joy on the left; here God places
the King; this is his ordinance to season his cares: therefore if any attempt
to displace him, to plunge him into grief, to make him struggle with
difficulties, it is a kind of Deposing him. The care of Government should be
eased, not discomfited: else doubtless God would never have placed David
between Laetificasti and gaudium, Joy and Joy.

And it is fit for the people, especially the greater, in their families, to
look to this, that David may keep Inter laetificasti and gaudium, the place
where God has set him: for when all is done, and the brain weary of thinking,
this will be found true; They cannot hold their places in gaudio, in joy, if
David sit not sure in his: and it is an excellent observation made by
Cassiodore, Lib. 12.
(a Senator he was, Epist. 19.
and Secretary of State to Theodoricus, and after a most strict and devoted
Christian) He makes all sad that endeavors not the Kings joy: Et omnes
affligit, qui Regi aliquid necessarium subtrahit; And he afflicts all men, that
withholds necessaries from the King. And certainly it is the glory of a State,
to keep David upright where God sets him: and that you see is, Inter
laetificasti and gaudiu^, between Joy and Joy, where God ever keep Him, and His.

Reason both of the Thing, and the Means; of the Honor, and the Manner of
Gods laying it upon Kings: And the Reason is, Quia sperat, because the King
puts his trust in the Lord. In which, may it please you to observe three
circumstances.

The first of these is the Virtue it God first gave the Prophet, and for which
he after gave him a blessing to the People, and joy in himself. The Virtue, is
Hope; that Hope, in the Lord. Now Hope follows the nature of Faith: and such
as the Faith is, such is the Hope. Both must be in Domino, in the Lord, or
neither can be true.

And it is in a sort, with the denial of Hope in any Creature, That the Hope
which is founded upon God alone (I say alone as the prime Author) may be firm,
and not divided. Nulli hominum fidens, trusting upon no man, Theodor. ib.
is Theodoret. Not in Armies, nor in riches, nor in any strength of man,
Euthym. ib.
is Euthymius. Not in sword, nor spear, nor shield, but in the name of the
Lord of Hosts, 1 Reg. 17. 45.
is David himself, 1 Reg. 17. And David could not lay better hold any where:
For since before, all lies upon God, Tu dedisti, and, Tu laetificasti, Thou
have given, and, Thou have made glad; where could any man fasten better? And
indeed the words are a reciprocal proof, either to other: For because God
gives, David hopes; and because David hopes, God gives more abundantly, Honor,
Blessing, and Joy. It is in the Text, Quia sperat, even because he trusts.

Trust then, and relying upon God, a matter of such consequence, that it alone
stands as a cause of these? Yes, Hope and Trust rightly laid upon God, have
ever been in his children, loco meriti, in stead of merit. And what ever may be
thought of this Hope, it is a Kings virtue in this place. Lib. 2. de Erudit.
prin. cap 6.
And Thomas proves it, That Hope is necessary for all men, but especially for
Princes. And the more trust in God, Honoratior Princeps, the more honor has
the King, Ibid.
as Apollinarius observes it. And therefore Hope is not here a naked
expectation of somewhat to come; Calv Musc. Tremel. M^lle^. ib.
but it is Hope, and the ground of Hope, Faith, as some later Divines think
not amiss. And Faith embraces the Verity of God, as well as the Promises made
upon it: And this was right: For so God promised, and so David believed, 2 Reg.
7. 29.
he would perform, 2 Reg. 7. 29.

And since we have found Faith and Hope in this action of Trusting God (as our
English well expresses it) let us never seek to shut out Charity; And if
Faith, Hope, and Charity be together, as they love to go, then you may
understand the Text, Quia Sperat, because he Hopes, de toto cultu, of the
entire worship of God. Li. 8. Orig. cap. 2.
For (as S. Isidor observes) in all inward worship, which is the heart of
Religion, are these three, Faith, Hope, and Charity. And in the most usual
phrase of Scripture, (though not ever) scarce one of these is named, but all
are understood to be present; and if so, then, because he trusts, is as much as
Quia colit, because he worships. So at last we are come to the cause indeed,
why God set David for such a Blessing to his people; why he filled him with
such joy of his countenance; and all was, Quia cultor, because he was such a
religious worshiper.

It is in the Text then, that a Kings Religion is a great cause of his
happiness. The greatest Politicians that are, have confessed thus far, that
some Religion is necessary, to make a King a Blessing to his People, and a
Commonwealth happy: But the matter is not great with them, whether it be a
true, or a false Religion, so it be one. But they are here in a miserable
error; for since they suppose a Religion necessary (as they must) my Text will
turn all the rest upon them; that true Religion is most apt, and most able, to
Bless and Honor both King and People.

Truth is stronger than falsehood, and will so prove it self, wheresoever it
is not prevented or abused: and therefore it is more able. true Religion breeds
ever true Faith, and true Hope in God; which no false Religion can: therefore
promise of God, for the Kings joy, and the Peoples Blessings, even Quia sperat,
because he trusts, whereas the rest have only his permission: Therefore it is
both, both more apt, and more able, to bless King and Commonwealth, than any
false Religion, or superstition, is, or can be.

It was but a scoff of Lucian, In morte Peregri.
to describe Christians, simple and easy to be abused; or if any in his time
were such, the weakness of the men must not be charged upon their Religion:
for Christ himself the founder of Religion, though he did un-sting the Serpent
in all his charge to his Apostles, yet he left his virtue uncheck'd, nay he
commanded that; Be innocent, but yet as wise as Serpents, Mat. 10. 16
Mat. 10. 16. And this Wisdom and Prudence is the most absolute virtue for a
Commonwealth. So that till Christians forsake Christ's rule, Lucians scoff
takes no hold of them.

Thirdly, Since Quia sperat, the Trust in God, is inter fundamenta Regum,
amidst the very foundations of Kings. And spes is quasi pes, Lib. 8. Ori. cap.
2.
Hope (says Isidore) is the foot, and the resting place. Now no building can
stand, if the foundation be dug from under it. The Buildings are the
Blessings of a State; A prime foundation of them, is the Kings trust in God:
Take away the truth of this Hope, Faith, and Religion, and I cannot promise the
Blessings to stand; for then there is never another Quia, or cause in the Text,
to move God to give. But if the cause stand (as Theodor. Theodo. and Euthym. ib.
and Euthym. here make it) all is well.

And here it were sacrilege for me, and no less, to pass by his Majesty,
without thanks both to God and Him. To Him, for, Quia sperat, because he
trusts; for no Prince has ever kept more firm to Religion. And it is
sperans in the present in my Text; he continues it, and will continue it. And
to God for, Ar. Mont.
Quia dedit, because in mercy he has given Him this Blessing so to Trust, and
by this trust in him, to be this, and many other Blessings to us.

my Text, which is the happy Success which David shall have for trusting in
the Lord. It is a Reward, and Rewards come last. And it is, That in this trust,
he shall not slide, he shall not miscary. And here (to make all parts even) are
three circumstances too.

The first of these, is the Success Reward it self; and it is a great one:
Non commovebitur, He shall not be moved; or at least not removed, not miscarry.
And this is a great Success, To have to do with the greatest movables in the
world, the people, and not miscarry. So that trust in the Lord, makes a King in
the midst of a mighty people, Petram in mari turbido, A Rock in a working Sea:
Ebb, and slow, and swell, yet insolent waves dash themselves in pieces of all
sides the Rock; and the King is at Non commovebitur, He shall not be moved.

Secondly, This great Success spes in Domino, their trust in the Lord: yea and
this trust too, is not simply upon the Lord, but upon his Mercy. And indeed to
speak properly, Man has no ground of his Hope but Mercy, no stay upon the
slippery, but Mercy: For if he look upon God, and consider him in justice; If
he look upon himself, and weigh his soul by merit, it is impossible for a
man to Hope, or in Hope not to miscarry. And therefore the Prophet here, though
he promise non co^movebitur, that the King shall not miscarry; yet he dares
promise it no where else than In misericordia, in Mercy.

Mercy it is that gives success to Princes; and that is Altissimi, the mercy
of the most high, which is one of Gods usual Names in Scripture. Now Sperat,
and non commovebitur; The Kings Hope and his Success, do both meet in the
Highest mercy. It is true, Hope stands below, and out of sight: For Hope that
is seen is no hope, Romans 8. 24
Romans 8. yet as low as it stands it contemplates God qua Altissimus, as he is
at highest. And this shows the strength of this virtue of Hope: For as Hope
considered in nature is in men that are warm and spirited, so is it also
considered as a virtue. And therefore give it but due footing, which is upon
Mercy, and in the strength of that, it will clime to God, were it possible he
should be Higher than he is.

The footing of Hope is low, therefore it seeks Mercy; and the Kings Hope
keeps the foot of the hill: Rex humili cord sperat; (So S. August.) Ibid.
And the best hope begins lowest; not at merit, but at mercy. But then mark
how it soars: For the same hope that bears the soul of man company upon earth,
mounts till it comes ad Altissimum, to the most High in heaven.

Now in this Mercy-seate it is observable, three Grandies are met together;
Blessing, Joy, and Hope, and yet there is no strife for precedencie: For
Blessing goes first; Joy comes after, for no man so joyful as he that is
Blessed; and then Hope, to supply the defects of both, because nor Blessings
nor Joy, can be perfect in this life.

And they have chosen to themselves an excellent and safe place in Mercy of the
most High. An excellent place, and all receive virtue from it. For, that David
is able to be a Blessing to the people; that he can joy in the Blessing; that
his Hope can support him through the cares in ordering the blessing, ere he can
come to the joy; all is from Mercy.

And a safe place it is: For there Conatus impiorum, endeavors of wicked men,
and the labor of these is, to turn Blessing it self into a curse; To
overcloud joy with sorrow at least, if not Desolation; To crush Hope, or
rather, Decollare, to behead it. No place safe from these attempts, but that
which is high, and out of reach; And no place so high, as Sinus Altissimi, the
bosom of the Highest, which is, his Mercy.

The reason then why David shall not miscarry; nay, not so much as Nature,
shake, (as Ar. Mont. renders it,) why the scepter in his hand shall not be
(...), a shaken reed, S. Mat. 11. 7.
S. Matthew. 11. (And that is the word here in the Septuagint, (...)) is the
Mercy of the Highest. And when his feet are got upon this, he shall not slide.
And Apollinaris calls the feet of the King, Ibid.
while they rest upon Gods Mercy, (...), bold and confident feet, that dare
venture, and can stand firm any where; And so no question they can, that are
upheld by Mercy.

And now to reach down some of the Mercies of the Highest upon our selves: For
when I read David, at Rex sperat, The King trusts in the Lord; and hear him
speaking in the third person, as of another King, me thinks the prophecy is
worth the bringing home to our most gracious Sovereign. For, his constancy in
Religion is known to the world; And the freedom of his life, argues his trust
in the Lord; And the assurance of his Hope shall not vanish. For, let him keep
to the mercy of the Highest, and there he shall not miscarry.

And give me leave to speak a little out of my Spes in Domino, my trust in the
Lord; me thinks I see, Non commovebitur, He shall not miscarry, three ways
doubling upon Private; I have two great inducements among many in another
Kingdom, to think that he is so firm in the mercies of God, that he cannot
miscary. The one is as old as November. 5. 1605. The powder was ready then, but
the Fire could not kindle: The other is as young as January last, the 9. The
water was too ready then, and he fell into it. Neither of these Elements have
any mercy, but the mercy of the Highest was His Acquittance from both. In the
first, he learned, that when desperate men have sacramented themselves to
destroy, God can prevent and deliver, Act. 24. Act. 24. 12
In the second he learned, Psalm. 33. 15
that a Horse is but a vain thing to save a man; but God can take up, take
out, and deliver. And in the very Psalms for that day, Morning prayer, Psalm.
46. 1.
thus I read, Psalm. 46. God is our help and strength, a very present help in
trouble. And I know not what better use he can make of this, than that which
follows in the next verse; Verse. 2.
I will not fear, (nor distrust God) though the earth be moved.

Next, me thinks, I have a Non commovebitur, he shall not miscarry, for, or in
his public affairs. Prophet I am none, but my Heart is full, that the mercy
of the Highest, which has preserved Him in great sicknesses, and from great
dangers, has more work for him yet to do: the peace of Christendom is yet to
settle. Will God honor this Island in him, and by his wisdom, to order the
Peace, and settle the distracted State of Christendom, and edge the sword upon
the common enemy of Christ? Why should there not be trust in God, that in the
mercy of the Highest he shall not miscarry?

Thirdly, For that which is greater eternal safety of his soul, here is a Non
co^movebitur; he shall not miscarry for this neither: For so some read, and
some expound the word of my Text, Thou shall give him everlasting felicity.
Therefore let him be strong, Tremel. v. Angli. vet. Appolinar. Ibid.
and of a good courage, for in the mercy of the most High there is no
miscarrying.

Thus you have seen the Kings Blessing, the Kings Joy, the Kings Hope, and the
Kings Assurance. In King is a Blessing to his people; that a gracious King
(such as God has given us) is a blessing for ever: That he is so, Quia tu
dedisti, because God has given, and set him to be so. Joy; And there you have
seen, that the joy which follows a blessed Government, is a great joy, a true
and a permanent joy, a joy that is either first, or chiefest Hope; this Hope in
the Lord; this Hope includes Faith, and Religion, and so this Hope stands
amidst the foundations Success assured unto him, is, Non commovebitur, he
shall not miscarry, not so long as he rests on Mercy; that Mercy of the Highest.

Non commovebitur, drive wind and tide, he shall not miscarry. Shall not? what?
is it absolute then for David, or for any King? No, I say not so neither. There
is a double condition in the Text, if David will ex part Davidis, on David's
side, and that is at Sperat, a religious heart to God, that cannot but trust in
him. The ex part Dei, on Gods side, and that is at Misericordia, a merciful
providence over the King, which knows not how to forsake, till it be forsaken,
if it do then. Let us call in the Prophet for witness, Psalm. 94. 18
Psalm. 94. When I said, My foot has slipped, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.
Now the foot of a man slips from the condition, Collat. 3. c. 12.
from the trust, (as Cassian observes) Mobilitate Arbitrii, by the changings of
the will, which is too free to sin, and breach of trust; the Holder up in the
slip is Mercy, therefore it is safest relying upon the condition which is on
Gods side, that is Mercy, for that holds firm, when men break.

And mark my Text, Hope goes before, and Non commovebitur, he shall not
miscarry, follows after: but yet it follows not, till the Mercy of the
Highest be come in between. And indeed to speak properly, all those things
which the Scripture attributes to the Faith and Hope of man, are due only
Misericordiae Altissimi, to the Mercy of the Highest, which both gives and
rewards them.

And yet for all this, the Hope of the Believer, and the Mercy of God in whom
he trusts, are happily joined in my Text: because the Hope of Faith can obtain
nothing without the Mercy of the Highest; And that Mercy and Goodness will
not profit any man, that does not believe and trust in it. And Hope and Mercy
are not better fitted to secure David, than Mercy and the Highest are, to make
him apprehensive of his assurance: For Goodness and Mercy are invalid without
Power; now that is supplied by Altissimus, the Highest. And power is full of
terror when it stands apart from goodness; and that is supplied by mercy:
when both meet, the Hope of man is full. So David cannot but see all firm on
Gods side; and sure he is not to miscarry, if he look to performance of his
own. And though it be safest relying upon God, yet it is never safe to
disjoyne them whom God has put together. And therefore as he is merciful, so
Man must be faithful, He must trust.

And now to end at home, David is gone long since to his Hope, the Mercy of the
Highest: But a King, a gracious King, is living over us in Peace, and
Happiness, as our eyes see this day.

I know He remembers why God set Him over this great and numerous people; that
is, in benedictione, even to bless them: And that he has been a Blessing unto
them, Malice it self cannot deny. And I make no question, but he will go on
with the Text, and be Blessings to them for ever. For ever, through his whole
time; and for ever in his generous Posterity. Tu dedisti, Gods gift is through
all this; and I will ever pray, that it may never fail.

He has given this people all His time, the Blessing of Peace; And the sweet
Peace of the people, Cassiod lib. 5. epist. 39
is Praeconium Regnantium, the Glory of Kings. And Gods gift is in this too:
For though it be the King that Blesses, yet it is God that gives Blessing to
Blessing it self. And suppose Peace end in War, Tu dedisti, Gods gift
reaches thither too; 1 Reg. 17. 47.
For the Battle is the Lords, 1 Reg. 17. The Battle, yes, and the Victory.
For (says S. Basil.) S. Basil. ib.
Dextera victrix, Whosoever be the Enemy, the right hand that conquers him is
the Lords.

Now for his Blessing, it is fit he should receive Joy: But if he will have
that true and permanent, (and no other is worth the having) he must look it in
vultu Dei, in Gods countenance. If he look it any where else, especially where
the joy of his countenance shines not, there will be but false representations
of joy that is not.

This day, the Anniversary of his Crown, is to all his loving Subjects, Dies
Gaudii, and Dies Spei, A day of Joy, and a day of Hope. A day of joy: For what
can be greater, than to see a Just, and a gracious King multiplying his years?
And, a day of Hope: And what can be fitter, than to put him in mind even this
day, that a Kings strength is at sperat in Domino, Job 7. 20.
His trust in the Lord, the preserver of men, Job 7. That as God upon this day
did settle His Hope, and His Right to this Kingdom upon Him; So upon this day,
(which in this years revolution proves His day too, Dies Domini, the Lords day
as well as His) he would continue the settling of his Hope on him, by whom all
the Kings of the Earth bear rule, Prove. 8. Prove. 8. 15.


I say, Settle upon Him, and his Mercy, that is the last. The very feet of
Kings stand High; and in high places slips are dangerous. Nothing so fit, so
able to stand by them, as Misericordia Altissimi, the Mercy of the Highest. In
the goodness and the power of this Mercy he has stood a King now almost five
and fifty years; nay a King He was, before he could stand. Through many
dangers the Mercy of the Highest has brought Him safe. Let Him not go from
under it, Verse. 8.
and it follows my Text, verse 8. His right hand shall find out all that hate
Him: And for himself, Non commovebitur, He shall not be moved, not miscarry.

And so we offer up our Evening sacrifice unto God, for Him, and for our
selves, that God will ever give, and he may ever be, a Blessing to is People:
That His years may multiply, and yet not outlive His joy: That this day may
come about often, and yet never return, but In Gaudio vultus Dei, in the joy
of Gods countenance upon the King; and, In Gaudio vultus Regis, in the Joy of
the Kings countenance upon the People: That the mercy of the most High may give
Him hope in the Lord and strengthen it; That His Hope may rest upon the Mercy
that gave it: That in all His businesses, as great as His place, His Success
may be, Non comm^veri, not to miscarry: That He may go on a straight course
from Blessing others in this life, to be Blessed Himself in Heaven; And that
all of us may enjoy Temporal Blessings under Him, and Eternal with Him for
evermore. And this CHRIST JESUS for his infinite merit and mercy sake grant
unto us: To whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, three persons and one
God, be ascribed all might, Majesty, and Dominion, this day, and for ever. AMEN.

SERMON. III.
Preached on Monday, the 6. of Feb. 1625. at Westminster, at the opening of the
PARLIAMENT.
PSALM. 122. ver. 3, 4, 5. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is at unity in
it self, (or compacted together.) For thither the Tribes go up, even the
Tribes of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of
the Lord. For there are the Seats (or the Thrones) of Judgment; even the
Thrones of the house of David.


SOme are of opinion this Psalm was made by David, and delivered to the Church
to be sung, when the Ark of God was carried up to Jerusalem; when Jerusalem was
settled by David, to be the special seat both of Religion and the Kingdom.
The people were bound thrice a year, at Easter, Pentecost, and the Feast of
Tabernacles, to come up and worship at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
Deu. 16. And some think this Psalm was prophetically made to sing by the way;
to sing when they went up by the steps to the Temple. And 'twas fit: for they
came up with joy; And joy is apt to set men a singing; And at joy the Psalm
begins. Verse. 1.
I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord.

But whatsoever the use of this Psalm was in any special Service, certain it
is, that Jerusalem stands here in the letter for the City, and in type and
figure for the State, and the Church of Christ. My Text looks upon both; and
upon the duty which the Jews did then, and which we now do owe to both. The
Temple the Type of the Church, that is for God's service. No Temple but for
that. The City the Type of the State, that is for the peoples peace. No happy
State but in that.

Both the Temple and the State, God's house and the Kings, both are built upon
Pillars. And it is not long since I told you out of Psalm. 75. Psalm. 75. 4.
that there are many times of exigence, in which if God do not bear up the
Pillars, no strength which the Pillars have in and of themselves can support
the weight that lies upon them; Be they Pillars of the Temple, or Pillars of
the State. Therefore here to ease the Pillars God has built up Buttresses (if
men do not pull them down) to stay the maine walls of both buildings. The
Buttresse and support of the Temple is Religion. God will not bless the house,
if men do not honor and serve him in it. The Buttresse and stay of the
Kingdom is Justice. God will not bless the State, if Kings and Magistrates
do not execute judgment; If the widow and the fatherless have cause to cry
out against the Thrones of Justice.

So the Church and the Commonwealth, Gods house, the Temple, and the Kings
house, the house of David, are met in my Text. And they would ever meet, and in
love no question, did not some distempered spirits breath sour upon them. For
the Church cannot dwell but in the State. Ye never read that she fled out of
the State into the wilderness, but when some Dragon persecuted her, Apoc. 12.
6.
Revel. 12. And the Commonwealth cannot flourish without the Church. For where
the Church is not to teach true Religion, States are enforced, out of necessity
of some, to embrace a false; And a false is not a help to make a Kingdom
flourish. But when they dwell together, when the Church, the House of Grace, is
a welcome inmate to the State, which is a wise fabric of Nature; then in the
Temple there is meeting: The people go up to bless, and praise the Name of the
Lord. And then in the State there is meeting, To settle the Thrones of Judgment,
to make firm the house of David. And then, and never but then, Jerusalem, that
is, both State and Church, is a City as that is at unity in it self.

My Text is nothing but a most deserved praise of Jerusalem. And not of the
particular material Jerusalem alone, but of any State, of any Church, that is
as Jerusalem then was, and that does as Jerusalem then did. This praise of
Jerusalem both formal in it self, and exemplary to us, is set down in three
things. And they sever the Text into three parts. For, first Jerusalem; it is
builded as a City at unity in it self. For thither the Tribes go up, even the
Tribes of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of
the Lord. Thirdly, the Government of For there are the Seats of Judgment, even
the Seats of the house of David.

The first commendation of Jerusalem compacted together; That Is for the S.
Basil. ib.
says S. Basil. It Is like a City at unity in it self, That Is for the
Inhabitants. For the beauty and artificial joining of the houses is expressed
but as a type of this unity; When men men dwell as near in affection as their
houses stand in place.

It Is a great ornament of a City, that the buildings be fair; that they stand
not scattering, as if they were afraid each of other. But wheresoever it is so,
the City is beholding to unity for it. Let the Citizens break their unity
once, they will spend so much in quarrels that they cannot build the City. No
other times but when the Inhabitants are at peace can build; Nor no other time
can keep them from waste.

houses? out of question not, but for the Inhabitants that dwell therein. He
that takes the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire,
Psalm. 113. Psalm. 113. 6.
loves not man for his house, nor no City for the buildings. Jerusalem will not
let me wander for an instance: For here so long as the Inhabitants served God,
and were at unity, what City like Jerusalem? The City of the great King, S.
Math. 5. 35.
S. Mat. 5. The glory of the whole earth, Thren. 2. 15.
Thren. 2. But when they fell from God to Idols, from unity to heart-burnings
among themselves, what then became of Jerusalem? what? why just that which our
Savior foretold, S. Mat. 24. S. Mat. 24. 2.
That one stone should not be left upon another that should not be thrown
down, not one, neither of Temple nor City. Adrichom. in descrip. Jerus.
And so it came to pass before Adrian left it. If any man threfore will have
his house stand, he has no way but this; to labor that Jerusalem, the City,
may serve God in unity.

Now Jerusalem is by way of singular David himself might best call it so: For
before David's time Salem and Sion were two Cities; Jud. 19. 10
The Jews dwelt in Salem, 2 Samuel 5. 7
but the Fort of Sion was yet held by the Jebusites, 1 Chro. 11. 4.
1 Chronicles. 11. Two Cities, the upper, and the lower; Two people, the Jews, and
the Jebusites; Two most different Religions, the worship of God, and Idols,
till David's time: But then a City most compacted together; The Buildings, and
the Cities join; Benjamin and Judah dwell there together; Nothing then but
unity.

City, that is too narrow; We must enlarge the Type to the State, and to the
Church. S. Hill. ibid.
Saint Hilary puts me in mind, that my Text reads not Jerusalem is a City, as
if that were all it meant to speak of; but Sicut civitas, as a City; just as
you see that, so the State, so the Church. The City the Model if you will, but
the Building these.

And for the State first; That Is sicut Civitas, as the City, just so. Walls,
and Towers, and Forts are things of second consideration; ordo politicus, the
wise ordering of the people in concord and unity is simply the strongest wall
of a State: But break unity once, and farewell strength. And therefore
disjoynted factions in a State when they work upon division, are publica irae
divinae incendia, the public kindlings of Gods anger, and they burn down all
before them. And God seldom suffers these to fire a State; till himself be
heated first with the sins of the State. Genesis 49. 7,
But then he will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49.
Nay scatter Jacob and Israel it self for them.

And my Text has it not simply, like a City at unity, but at unity together,
or in it self. And this the better to resist foreign malice. It were happy if
all States, Christian especially, were at unity in themselves, and with their
neighbors. And the Church prays that the course of this world may be so
peaceably ordered. Col Dom. 5 post Trin.
But when the Ambition of neigbouring States will admit nor safe, nor
honorable peace, then there is most need Jerusalem should be at peace and unity
in it self. Need? yes, need with a witness: For all division if it be
voluntary, it is an opening; if it be violent, it is a breach; Both make way for
foreign force.

Thus it was with Jerusalem of old when she lost her unity. For faction within
the walls was a help to Titus, and his siege without. And long after, when the
Christians had won it from the Saracens, Plat. in vit. Urban.
their own divisions among themselves, to their loss and shame let in Saladin
the Sultan of Egypt.

And this has been often fatal upon our Jerusalem: For scarce ever did a
great enemy enter this Kingdom, but when it was not sicut Civitas, like a
City at unity in it self. Not at unity opened the door to the enemy still:
For Toustain's division and inrode made way for the Norman. And there were more
divisions than one to help in the Dane. And Gourthigernus first, and Mordredus
after brought in the Saxon. And I. Caesar himself, the mirror of men for
military Discipline, he which for ought I have read, and remember, scarce ever
turned his back to any enemy else, fled from the ancient Inhabitants of this
Kingdom, Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. Lucan.

till Avaroius, Lib. 5. de. Bell. Gal.
called by Caesar Mandubratius, out of hatred, and in faction against
Cassibellanus brought him back again, and made him entrance.

So it seems Tacitus his observation was too true upon us, In vita I. Agrip.
That nothing gave the Romans, powerful enemies though they were, more
advantage against the ancient Britans than this, Quod factionibus and studiis
trahebantur, that they were broken into factions, and would not so much as take
counsel and advise together. And they smarted for it. But I pray what is the
difference for men not to meet in counsel, and to fall in pieces when they
meet? If the first were our Forefathers error, God of his mercy grant this
second be not ours.

Now there is Coagmentatio duplex, a double buckling and knitting of the State
together. And if either fail, the unity is broken. The one is of the Members
of the State with their Head, especially the most honorable which are nearest.
The other is of the Members one with ather. And this is grounded upon that of
the Apostle, Cor. 12.
1 Cor. 12. where we find some necessity of every member; not a like necessity
of any: but honor and respect done to all. And why so? why? why the Apostle
tells you ver. 25. Verse. 25.
It is that there may be no division in the body; that still it may be at unity
in it self.

And it is very observable, that in all that large discourse of S. Paul,
concerning the unity of the Body and the Members, he conceives at full, how
Corruption can unnaturalize Nature it self. Therefore he supposes the Eye may
quarrel with the Hand, Verse. 21.
ver. 21. and it is a dangerous quarrel that, when the Eye and the Hand,
Direction and Execution are at ods in any State.

Well he can conceive that; But he does not so much as suppose, that any
members would be at odds with the Head: No, God forbid. The Head can compose
other members, and settle their peace in the Body; but if any quarrel the
Head, all unity is gone. And yet the Apostle cannot suppose so much
unnaturalness that any member should quarrel the Head; not the Tongue, as
unruly as it is: yet he is very direct, that there is an office, which the Head
owes the Body, and all the members to the very meanest, for the preservation of
this unity. For the head cannot say to the very feet, as low as they are, Verse.
22.
I have no need of you, ver. 21.

And for the Church, that is as the City too, just so. Doctrine and Discipline
are the walls and the towers of it. But be the one never so true, and be the
other never so perfect, they come short of preservation, if that body be not at
unity in it self. The Church, take it Catholic, cannot stand well, if it be
not compacted together into a holy unity in Faith and Charity. It was
miserable, when S. Basil labored the cure of it: For distracted it was then,
as S. G^. Nazianzen witnesses, Orat. 20.
into 600. diverse opinions and errors: And it is miserable at this day, the
Lord in his time show it mercy.

And as the whole Church is in regard of the affairs of Christendom, so is
each particular Church in the Nation and Kingdom in which it Sojournes. If it
be not at unity in it self, it does but invite malice, which is ready to do
hurt without any invitation; and it ever lies with an open side to the Devil,
and all his Batteries. So both State and Church then happy, and never till
then, when they are both at unity in themselves and one with another.

The Vulgar reads it, Jerusalem is a City, cujus participatio in id ipsum,
whose participation is upon the same thing; And that reading is warranted by
the 70. (...), whose participation, or communion is in, and of the same. So
this reading follows the effect, the other the cause. For unity in it self is
the cause of all participation. For unity is in charity; and charity
communicates all good things. It Is bountiful, 1 Cor. 13. 1 Cor. 13. 4.
and if any suffer, it suffers with it; participation still. Now in Heaven, and
the Church triumphant, there will be full participation, because there is
perfect union: But on earth, whether it be in the State, or the Church
militant, look how much there wants of perfect unity, and so much there will
ever want of joyful participation.

S. Luk 23 34.
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. But if unity be so
necessary, how may it be preserved in both? How? I will tell you how.

State in unity? In any case take heed of breaking the peace of the Church. The
peace of the State depends much upon it. For divide Christ in the minds of men,
or divide the minds of men about their hope of Salvation in Christ, and tell me
what unity there will be. This so far as the Church is an ingredient into the
unity of the State. But what other things are concurring to the unity of it,
the State it self knows better than I can teach.

And would you keep the Church State? If I mistake not, that can never be done
but by Christian patience; And that I find in the letter of my Text. For it is
not here simply said, Jerusalem is as a City, no, but built as a City. Built,
and upon a Hill, Esai. 2. 2.
Esaias. 2. Many a cold and a bitter storm it must endure, God knows. And if
Christ had not been a Rock in the foundation, I make no question it had been
down long ere this. S. Math. 16 18.
Built then; but upwards in the Building from this foundation, mark all along
the walls of it; Lapis Lapidem portat and portatur: there is such unity in the
Building, that every stone bears another, and is borne by another. And the
Apostle calls for the same duty in the spiritual Building, Gal. 6. 2.
Gal. 6. Bear ye one another burden. So no patience, no bearing; and no
bearing, no unity. The Building cracks presently. And continue it cannot long,
if the great Master Builders take not care of the Mortar. If it be laid with
untempered, or distempered mortar, all will be naught, Ezech. 13. 10.
Ezech. 13.

This Psalm was used for many years together in the Church, at Evensong upon
New years day, the day of the Circumcision. Why the Church appointed it for
that day, is not my question now: This I am sure of, this Psalm calls upon us
for the peace of Jerusalem, ver. 6, And that peace can neither be had nor held
long unless there be a Circumcision, and a paring off round about of heated
and unruly affections in the handling of differences. And there must be a
Circumcision, and a paring off of foolish, and unlearned Questions, yea and of
many Modal too, 2 Timothy 2. 23.
such as are fitter to engender strife than godliness, 2 Timothy 2. or no peace.
This is the way and no other that I know, to see Jerusalem flourish as a City
at unity within it self, both for State and Church.

The second praise of Jerusalem is from the Religion of it. For thither the
Tribes go up, even the Tribes of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, to
give thanks to the name of the Lord.

Jerusalem is very right now; At S. Luke 19. 2.
Luke 19. For at this time the Tribes went up to the Temple. It begins well:
for to the Temple, to the Church, to the consecrated place of Gods service, is
one of the best journies men of all sorts can make. And you may give a shrewd
guess at the devotion of the time, by the frequenting of the Church. And this
their public coming to worship at the Temple was Gods express commandment,
Exodus 23. Exodus 23. 17.
Therefore assembling and meeting at public service in the Church is no humane
Institution, but from God himself. Nor is this Ceremony Jewish or Ambulatory,
to cease with the Law, and that Temple; but omnino perpetuum, altogether
permanent in the Church of Christ, Christians must to the Church and place of
service too.

Jerusalem was right here too. They did give thanks to the name of the Lord,
and there. It Is no good sign when men are to seek what they should do when
they come to Church. Yet if any man be ignorant, my Text will inform him; men
are there now to do as they did then, to give thanks to the name of the Lord.

The 70. and the Vulgar have it, To confess to the name of the Lord. It comes
all to one. For be the word Thank or Confess, it stands here expressive of
the whole Liturgy, of all the public external Service of God: All which if
it be not accompanied with the inward service of the heart, is worth nothing.
So they went to the Temple, as we must go to the Church, to confess, to pray,
to worship, to praise, to give thanks to God, which even under the Law was
preferred before Sacrifice it self, Psalm. 15. 13, 14.
Psalm. 50.

Nor may the wisdom of the world think, that to pray, and to give thanks to
God, are void actions: For what ever worldlings think, the Church does great
service to the State while it prays. And it is no hard thing to prove this out
of those Politicians themselves, which have given the world just cause to think
they wrapped up God in their pocket, when they went to counsel. For their great
Master confesses, that not a few, but many things happen to States ex fato
urgente, out of such a pressing destiny, that they cannot be prevented, though
the remedies be obvious and at hand.

And is it so? Why then, where is the wisdom of the Wise, 1 Cor. 1. 17.
1 Cor. 1. Is it not confounded? out of question it is. For ye see the remedy is
acknowledged to be at hand, and yet not found. This purblind wisdom cannot see
it. But to come home to him. This Fatum urgens what ere it be, if there be a
remedy and at hand, it may be prevented. It Is true it cannot, by worldly
wisdom only. For nisi Dousinus, except the Lord keep the City, all other
watchfulness is in vain, Psalm. 127. 1.
Psalm. 127. But then allow God that which is fit for him, due to him, The
highest room at the Councell-Table, he will quickly divert this Fatum urgens,
this pressing necessity.

The time was when Ruin was traveling so fast toward Nineve, that it came
within 40. days of the City, Jon. 3.
Ion. 3. And it was fatum urgens, it came on apace. Did any wiseman of that
State discover that danger? secure a remedy? Not a man. The Prophet preached
the danger, and Devotion, as blind as it is thought, stumbled upon the Remedy,
Prayer and Repentance, things with which worldly wisdom has little to do.
And therefore to pray and give thanks are no empty Actions for the State.

Jews, was there no Reading, no Preaching of the Law to inform people? Yes,
out of question: They heard Moses, and the Prophets in their Synagogues every
Sabbath day, Act. 13. 27.
Acts 13. yea, and in the Temple too, if S. Basil be right. S. Basil. ib.
But mark then. The Original Copy of the Law, The word of God written in
Tables of Stone, was in the Temple at Jerusalem; And there the Priests, which
were to judge according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
Deuteronomy. 17. This Law they might and did expound, but they might not cross with
it. No preaching in their several Synagogues, and Parishes (that I may so
term them,) but was according to the Law, contained in the Arc, at the
Temple, the Mother Church. And 'twas fit. For if every man may preach as he
list, though he pretend the Law and the Gospel too, Jerusalem will be quickly
out of unity in it self. And if they leave coming to the Arc and the
Testimony, the world will soon have as many differences in Religion, as there
be young, ignorant, and bold Priests in Parishes.

Now there was a double Testimony Convention between God and the people. The
Law was the witness and covenant on Gods part with the people; And that the
people should come, and tender their homage and obedience to God and the Law;
that was the Testimony, and the Covenant of the people with God, Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
Deuteronomy. 16. God he promised to be present at the Arc, Exodus 25. Verse. 22.
and he performed it. Number. 7. Verse. 8, 9.
And so God is always ready at his end of the Covenant. All the fear is, we
fall short, and come not as we should, either to hear Gods Testimony to us, or
to give Testimony to the world by our obedience. And herein, as in all things
else, Christ be mecifull, that brought mercy into the Covenant.

Prophet an Ascent or going up, Ascenderunt; and an Ascent it is. It was fitted
in the Letter: For the Temple at Jerusalem was built upon mount Moriah; no
going up to it but by an Ascent. And it is fit in regard of the Material Church
now: For how low soever the situation of any of them be, yet it is motus sursum,
upward still and toward heaven to frequent the Church. And it is fit in regard
of the whole Militant Church. That Is an Ascent too, to come out of Paganism,
Heresy, or Schism into the Church at unity in it self. He that fell among
Thieves, and was almost killed by the way, was not going up to Jerusalem, but
down to Jericho. S. Luke 10 30.
S. Luke 10. from the Temple I warrant you. And as S. Augustine speaks, S.
Aug. ib.
si non descendisset, in latrones non incidisset, if he had not been sinking
and going downwards, from God, and from his Church, he had not fallen into the
hands of Thieves.

But it is most fit in regard of the Church triumphant in Heaven: For thither is
no going but by Ascending. Ascending still out of the dreggs of this sinful
life. And he is miserably out of this way that sinks farther, and farther into
sin, and dreams he is in the way to Heaven. Nor can any man say, feign I
would to Heaven, but I want stairs to ascend and get up: For this Psalm is
Psalmus Graduum, a whole Ladder of steps from the Church here, to the Church in
Heaven.

And 'its not unfit neither to express what pains they then were content to
take to serve God. For from their remotest habitations (and many were very
far off) every Male came up thrice a year to the Temple to worship; And they
might not appear before the Lord empty, Exodus 23. 15.
Exodus 23. No pains then too much, no charge too great to serve GOD: And
notwithstanding both pains and charge properabant ascendere, they made haste
to come up. Apolina. ib.
Now, the Church is at our doors, and we care not for going into it; And we
come up empty handed, else it were not possible so many Churches should lie so
ruinous as they do. Will you give me leave to tell you the reason of this?
It Is in my Text; When this devotion was on foot, Jerusalem was at unity in it
self: For so goes the Text. Jerusalem at unity, and then ascenderunt, then
they ascend by multitudes, and their devotion with them.

Persons that went up to serve the Lord. And they were the Tribes. Not all the
Tribes, Families, and Kindreds of the earth; No: For the many by Idolatry had
made themselves strangers to the true God of Israel. But Tribus Domini, the
Tribes of the Lord, they went up, all of them.

The 12. Tribes from the Patriarks the seed of Jacob, were then Gods peculiar
servants. They were made so in the Covenant. The Testimony of it was the Law.
So this honor to be the Tribes of the Lord, God's people, was reserved in the
band of Religion. If they had not believed, and served God, they had not been
his. They might have been Tribes, if you will, without serving in the Temple;
but not Domini, not of the Lord, but by that service. And they might have been
in some kind of unity; but not in Domino, not in the Lord, but by that union.
And they might have been builded as a City; but not ad Dominum, to the Lord's
honor, and their own salvation, but by that faith. And which was the honor
of Jerusalem then in all David's time, and Solomon's too, All the Tribes went
up; All, not a Recusant Tribe, or Person among them.

Now I may not omit the place whither they were to ascend. It was Jerusalem.
There the Temple. In that the Arc. In that the Law. And the Law says not
simply, that they shall assemble and meet to serve the Lord, but precisely, that
they shall do it in the same place which the Lord shall choose, Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
Deuteronomy. 16. And the Lord chose Sion, the Temple at Jerusalem to be his place, 2 Chronicles. 7. 12.
2 Chronicles. 7.

Would you have a reason why God tied them so strictly to one place? It Is not
hard to give it. That people were wonderfully prone to Idolatry; therefore
says S. Basil, S. Basil. ib.
God tied them to one place of worship, lest wandering here and there in strange
places, they might fall into the service of strange Gods. And mark it, God
would then have but one Temple erected, one Altar, in one City, that the people
might not fall assunder into different superstitions, and leave true Religion
least followed. And the Jews seeing the command, never halted in this duty so
long as Jerusalem was at unity in it self. But when that brake, all misery
began. For no sooner had Jeroboam made a Rent in this unity, and torn away ten
Tribes from the house of David, but by and by Samaria is as good as Jerusalem;
and the Calves in Dan and Bethel, as good as that God that brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, 3 Reg. 12. 3 Reg. 12. 28.
So dangerous a thing it is, when unity and God's command are broke together.

The Jesuit Lorinus tells us, Ibid.
There are better causes to persuade us now to go on pilgrimage ad Limina
Petri, and the Jubilees at Rome, than the Tribes had here to go to Jerusalem.
What? better causes? The Jews had Gods express commandment to go to
Jerusalem, and the form of worship that was there. And what better warrant can
any man, or any people have, than Gods command? Let him or any other show me
such a command, That all the whole Church of Christ, all the Tribes which now
serve the Lord must come in person, or consent and do it at Rome, we will
never stay for Lorinus his better reasons. We will take Gods command for a
good one, and obey it. But they must not think to choke us with the wool that
grows upon Pasce oves, S. Joh. 21. 16.
S. John 21. which as the Fathers have diversely spunne out; so no one of them
comes home to the clothing of Rome, with such a large Robe of State as she
challenges. And this in the mean time will be found true; That while they
seek to tie all Christians to Rome, by a divine precept, their Ambition of
Sovereignty is one and a maine cause, that Jerusalem, even the whole Church of
Christ, is not at unity in it self this day.

Jerusalem. Many, but one more especially. And that comes into the third
commendation of Jerusalem; the Government both Spiritual and Temporal. For
there also are the seats of Judgment, even the seats of the house of David.
So they might serve themselves at the seats of Justice, while they went to the
Temple to serve God.

Ascending 'twas illuc, thither. And here at the sitting it is illic, there. One
and the same City honored with God, his Church, and the King. And it must
needs be so. For these three, God, the King, and the Church, that is God, his
Spouse, and his Lieutenant upon earth are so near allied, God and the Church
in love, God and the King in power, The King and the Church in mutual
dependence upon God, and subordination to him; That no man can serve any one of
them truly, but he serves all three.

And surely 'twas in a blessed figure, that Gods house and the Kings stood
together at Jerusalem. The Temple (if I mistake not) upon the East, and the
Palace of Solomon upon the South side of the same Mountain: to show that their
servants and service must go together too; that no man might think himself
the farther from God by serving the King, nor the farther from the King by
serving God. The Kings power is Gods ordinance, and the Kings command must be
Gods glory: and the honor of the Subject is obedience to both. And therefore
in the Law the same command that lay upon the people to come up illuc, thither,
to Jerusalem; the very same lay upon them to obey the Judges, and the house of
David, illic, when they came there. To obey the Sanhedrim and the Judges, Deuteronomy.
17. 10.
Deuteronomy. 17. and both them and the King, after the house of David was settled, as
in this place. For then there was seated (as diverse of the Fathers and later
divines observe) both Authorities; S. Basil.
both of the Priests, Theodoret.
and of the King and his judges. Et thym. Calvin. Muscu. Jun. Ibid.
So the first lesson which the people do or should learn by going up to the
Temple, is obedience to both spiritual and temporal Authority, but especially
to the house of David.

illic, there were the Seats or Thrones of judgment. Of all things that are
necessary for a State none runs so generally through it, as justice and
judgment. Every part and member of a Kingdom needs it. And it is not possible
Jerusalem should be long at unity in it self, if justice and judgment do not
uphold it. And it is in vain for any man, whether he be in authority, or under
it, to talk of Religion, and Gods service, to frequent the Temple, if he do
not, in the course of his life, exercise and obey justice and judgment. And
this lesson Religion ever teaches. For it was the very end of Christ's coming
to redeem us, That we might serve him in holiness and in righteousness, S.
Luke 1. 75.
S. Luke 1. In holiness toward God, that is first: and then in righteousness
and Justice toward men, that is next. And they stand so, that the one is made
the proof of the other, Righteousness of Holiness. For he that does but
talk of Holiness, and does unjustly therewhile, is but an Hypocrite.

This for Justice the preservative Thrones, or Chayres, or Se^tes, (call them
what you will, the thing is the same) out of which they give sentence upon
Persons or Causes brought before them. And they are signs of authority and
power which the Judges have. And it is not for nothing, that they are called
Seats. For Judgment was ever given in public, sitting. And there is good
reason for it. For the soul and mind of man is not so settled when the Body
is in motion. For the Body moved moves the humors; and the Humors moved move
the affections; Non cadem videntur Judicibus tratis and quictis.
and Affections moved are not the fittest to do Justice and Judgment. Arist.
l. 2.
No; Reason in a calm unmoved is fittest for that. Rhet. c. 1.


Now the Seats stand here both for the Seats themselves; And so Sederunt
Seeds is Active for Passive, The Seats sat, for, The Seats are placed; or
for the Judges that sit in them; or sederunt, id est, permanserunt, for the
perpetuity and fixing of the Seats of Justice. The Seats must be in some
reverence for the persons that sit in them. The persons must have their Honor
for the Office they perform in them. And the Seats must be fixed and
permanent, that the people which are fallen into Controversy, may know the
illic, and the ubi whither to come and find Justice.

The words in my Text are plural, Seats of Judgment. And it is observable.
For the exorbitances of men that quarrel others are such and so many, that one
Seat of Judgment only was scarce ever sufficient for any State. Seats they
must be, and they seldom want work. In the prime times of the Church,
Christians could not hold from going to Law one with another, and that under
unbeleevers, 1 Cor. 6. 6
1 Cor. 6. To meet with this frailty of man, God in this Commonwealth which
himself ordered, appointed not one, but many Tostat. in Exodus 21. q 16. P.
Gunaeus de Rep. Hebr. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Seats of judgment. And therefore even the inferior Seats, howsoever as
they are settled by the King and the State, severally to fit the nature of the
people in several Kingdoms, are of positive and Humane Institution; yet as
they are Seats of Judgment, they have their foundation upon Divine
Institution too, since there is no power but of God, Romans 13. 1
Romans 13.

By these Seats of Justice and Judgment the Learned in all ages understand
Judiciary power and administration both Ecclesiastical and Civil; And they
are right.

For the Sanhedrim of the Jews their greatest Seat of Judgment under the King
(after they had that government) was a mixed Court of Priests and Judges, Both
for Causes and Persons. Pet. Cun. de Rep. Hebr. lib. 1. page 101. and 106.
Deuteronomy. 17. though other Kindomes since, and upon reason enough have separated
and distinguished the Seats of Ecclesiastical and Civil Judicature.

Since this division of the Seats of Judgment, there was a time when the
Ecclesiastical took too much upon them. Too much indeed, and lay heavy not
only upon ordinary Civil Courts, but even upon the House of David, and Throne
of the King himself. But God ever from the days of Lucifer gave pride a fall;
and pride of all sins least beseemes the Church. May we not think that for
that she fell? But I pray remember 'twas Fastus Romanus, 'twas Roman Pride,
that then infected this Church with many others.

The time is now come in this Kingdom, that the Civil Courts are as much too
strong for the Ecclesiastical, and may overlay them as hard, if they will be
so unchristian as to revenge. But we hope they which sit in them will remember,
or at the least, that the House of David will not forget, That when God
himself (and he best knows what he does for the unity of Jerusalem) erected
Seats of judgment, He was so far from Ecclesiastical Anarchie, that he
set the High Priest very high in the Sanhedrim. And Ecclesiastical and Church
Causes must have their trial and ending as well as others.

I know there are some that think the Church is not yet far enough beside the
Cushin: that their Seats are too easy yet, and too high too. A Paritie they
would have, No Bishop, No Governor, but a Parochial Consistory, and that
should be Lay enough too. Well, first, this paritie was never left to the
Church by Christ. He left Apostles, and Disciples under them. No Paritie. It
was never in use with the Church since Christ: No Church ever, any where, (till
this last age) without a Bishop. If it were in use, it might perhaps govern
some petty City; But make it common once, and it can never keep unity in the
Church of Christ. And for their Seats being too high, God knows they are
brought low, even to contempt. They were high in Jerusalem. For all Divines
agree that this in prime reference is spoken of Ecclesiastical Censures,
Calvin. Muscul. Jun. versio Genev.
and Seats. And the word is Thrones; Nay the Anabaptists themselves.
no less. So the original, So the Septuagint, and so many of the later
Divines, forgetting their own invention of the Presbytery. Ainsw. Ib.


And one thing more I Will be bold to speak out of a like duty to the Church of
England and the House of David. They, whoever they be, that would overthrow
Seeds Ecclesiae, the Seats of Ecclesiastical Government, will not spare (if
ever they get power) to have a pluck at the Throne of David. And there is not a
man that is for Paritie, all Fellows in the Church, but he is not for Monarchy
in the State. And certainly either he is but Half headed to his own
Principles, or he can be but Halfe-hearted to the House of David.

And so we are come to the last, the House of David: the Guide, and the ground
too, under God, of that unity which blesses Jerusalem. The house, that is, not
the house only, but the Government. All Regal and Judiciary power was seated
by God himself in David and his Posterity, 2 Samuel 7. 2 Samuel 7. 10. and Psalm.
89. 36.
That He, as King over his people, might take care, both that Jerusalem might
be at unity in it self; and that the Tribes of the Lord might go thither to
give thanks to the Name of the Lord: that all the servants of God among that
people might know, that God had committed them to the trust of David; that they
might not promise themselves succor from God, otherwise than as they lived in
obedience to David; that they might not think to alter the government, or the
succession, but rest dutifully where God had placed them. And therefore when
Jeroboam rent ten Tribes from the house of David, almost nothing but
distraction and misery fell upon that people ever after, as appears in the
story.

This to the letter strictly. Now to the sense at large, as both Church and
State have subordination to the house of David. For Jerusalem that is at unity
under David. And the Tribes they go up to the Testimony under David. And the
Seats of Judgment, they have their several ministrations, but all with
reference, all in obedience to the house of David.

Now in a State the King, obtinet locum fundamenti, is always fundamental.
All inferior powers of Nobles, Judges, and Magistrates rest on him. And yet
the holy Ghost does not say in my Text, that the seats of Judgment are upon
the foundation of David, but upon the House of David. And the reason is plain:
because there is one and the same foundation of the King and his people, that
is, God and Christ. But when the house of the King is built upon God, as
David's was, then it is to the people, and domus, and fundamentum, both an house
and a foundation of all their houses.

And that you may see the truth of this, look into the Story of all States,
and you shall never find a thunderclap upon the house of David to make it
shake, but the houses of all the Subjects in the Kingdom shook with it. And
this is an evident Argument, that the house of David is a Foundation, when such
a mighty building as a State, is shaken with it. And therefore there is no man
that loves his own house, but he must love the Kings, and labor, and study
to keep it from shaking.

And if you mark the Text, here is Seeds super sedem, one Throne, or Seat,
upon another. And all well-ordered States are built so by Sub and Super, by
Government and Obedience. The intermediate Magistrates have their
subordinations either to other, and all to David. But the House of David that is
both, Sub and Super; under the rest in the foundation; for so the Septuagint,
and the Fathers read it, (...), upon the house of David: so the house of David
under, as Foundation; but over the rest in the administration and the
government: For they which are upon him, must not be above him. A primacie, or
superintendencie, or what you will above the house of David in his own
Kingdom, is a dangerous, and an ill construction of Super Domum David.

The house of David a Foundation then; and my Text warrants both it and me. I
have no will to except against any form of government, assumed by any State:
Yet this my Text bids me say for the honor of Monarchical Government, The
Seats of judgment in it are permanent; And I do not remember that ever I read
Seats of Judgemens so fixed, as under Regal power.

I do not by this deny, but that there may be the City in peace, and
administration of justice in other forms of government, sometimes as much,
sometimes more; But there are Judicia, not Seeds, Judgment, not Seats of it.
And Justice there may be; but it continues not half so steady. The Factions of
an Aristocraty how often have they divided the City into civil wars, and made
that City which was at unity in it self, wade in her own blood? And for a
Democratie, or popular Government, Fluctus populi fluctus maris, The waves and
Gulfes of both are alike. None but God can rule the raging of the Sea, and the
madness of the people, Psalm. 65. 7.
Psalm. 65. And no safety or settlednesse, till there be a return in domum
David, to a Monarchy, and a King again.

I Will go no whither but to my Text and Jerusalem for instance. That people had
a Sanhedrim over them, a wonderful wise and great Senate; the chief of the
Priests, and the most expert in their Laws of the other Tribes. If any greater
difficulty arose, God raised up Judges and Deliverers to fight their Battles.
This people were well, a man would think, for point of Government, very well.
Calv. Ibid.
And yet Calvin observes, and it is true, though they had then Justice and
Judgment among them, yet they were but suspensa Iudicia, and vary mutata,
Justice with suspense and often changes. And which is more, that people restles
and unquiet even with the Ordinances of God himself till they had a King. 1 Samuel 8.
1 Samuel 8. So after the disobedience of Saul, (which can cast even Kings out of
Gods favor) that State was settled upon the House of David.

The King then a Foundation, and a settled one too, as Mortality has any. The
whole frame of the Commonwealth, understood here by the Seats of Judgment
rests upon the strength of his house. Upon his house? therefore it must be
built and settled; else it is not domus, not a house: When it is built, it must
be furnished, and plentifully too; else it is not fit to be domus Davidis, the
Kings house. If any disaster has been, it must be repayed; else Domus lacera a
house upon props, can be no foundation of Justice to friends at home, or upon
enemies abroad. And there can hardly be a greater misery to a Kingdom, than to
have the House of David weak.

Well then; would you have the house of David as David's was now at Jerusalem, A
built, A furnished, A strong, an honorable House? I know you would. You are a
Noble and a most Loyal People. Why then I will not take upon me to teach, but
only to remember you of the way. The way is; -- Am I out? No sure. The way is,
to set David once upon his own feet; to make him see the strength of the house
which God has given him; to fill him with joy and contentment in his peoples
love; to add of your oil to make him a cheerful countenance, now that God
has anointed him with the oil of gladness over you; that in a free Estate he
may have leisure from Home-Cares, every way to intend the good and welfare of
his people; and to bless God for them, and them in God.

And for David, God has blessed him with many royal Virtues. And above the
rest with the knowledge that his House is a foundation. A foundation of his
people, and of all the justice that must preserve them in unity, and in
happiness. But it is Domus ejus, His House still, even while it is your
foundation. And never fear him, for God is with him. He will not depart from
Gods service; nor from the honorable care of his people; nor from wise
managing of his treasure: He will never undermine his own house, nor give his
people just cause to be jealous of a shaking foundation. And here in the
presence of God and his blessed Angels, as well as of you, which are but dust
and ashes, I discharge the true thoughts of my heart, and flatter not. And now
my Dread Sovereign, upon you it lies to make good the thoughts of your most
devoted Servant.

Thus you have seen as short a Mapp, as I could draw of Jerusalem. She was
famous for her unity, and blessed too, when it was within her self. She was
famous for her Religion, and devout too, when all the Tribes went up to the
Arc of the Testimony, to give thanks to the name of the Lord. She was famous
for Justice, and successful too, both at home, and against foreign enemies,
when the Seats of Judgment Ecclesiastical and Civil were all, as their
several natures bear, founded upon the House of David.

This Jerusalem of ours is now at unity in it self. And I see here Capita
Tribuum, the Heads and Leaders of the Tribes, and People of the Lord, come up,
and present in his Temple. I would to God they were all here, that with one
heart, and one mouth, we might all pray unto God for all his blessings to come
down, and dwell in the House of David; and to rest upon this great and
honorable Council ready to sit.

You are come up to begin at the Temple of the Lord. The Arc was wholly
Ceremonial; that is not here. But the Testimony of Israel, the Law, yea and a
better Law than that, the Law of Grace and of Christ, that is here. Here it is,
and open ready to teach the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of all
wisdom, Psalm. 111. 10.
Psalm. 111. In this Law you can read nothing but service to God, and obedience
to the House of David. And so you find them joined 1 S. Pet. 2. 1 S. Pet. 2. 17.
Fear God, and honor the King. And it is a strange Fallacy in Religion for
any man to dishonor the King, and to make that a proof that he fears God.

To the Temple and the Testimony you are come up. When God would give Moses
more special direction, he declared himself from the Mercy-seat which was on
the Arc, Exodus 25. 22.
Exodus 25. The Mercy-seat was wholly Ceremonial, as the Arc was on which it
stood; that is, the Seat Ceremony, but the Mercy Substance. And though the
Seat be gone with Moses, yet I hope God has not left, will never leave, to
appear in Mercy to the House of David, and this wise Council. If he appear
in mercy, I fear nothing. If he appear otherwise there will be cause to fear
all things. And the way to have God appear in mercy, is for both King and
People, not only to come to the Temple, that is but the outside of Religion,
but also to obey the Law, and the Testimony.

Judgment went out from God lately, and it was fierce. How many thousands
strong men, which might have been a wall about Jerusalem, has the Pestilence
swept away? But his mercy soon overtook his Judgment: For when did the eye of
man behold so strange and sudden abatement of so great Mortality? A great
argument, that he will now appear in Mercy. And I cannot tell which has got
the better in the vie, Your Honor or Your Religion, that you have made
suchhast to bring the Tribes to the Temple, to give thanks to the name of the
Lord for this.

The first Lesson of this days Evening prayer is Exodus 18. Exodus 18.
There Is the Story of Iethro's counsel to Moses, for assistance of inferior
Officers. This was not the beginning of that great and parliamentary Council,
which after continued successful in the State of the Jews. For that was set
after by GOD himself, Numb. 11. Numb. 11. 16.
yet I make no great doubt, but that the ease, which Moses found by that
Council, made him apt to see what more he needed; and so far at least
occasioned the settling of the Sanhedrim.

I take the omen of the day, and the Service of the Church to bless it. That
our David may be as happy in this, and all other Sessions of Parliament, as
their Moses was in his Council of the Elders. That the King and his people may
now, and at all like times, meet in love, consult in wisdom, manage their
Counsel with temper, entertain no private business to make the public
suffer; And when their consultation is ended, part in the same love that should
ever bring King and People together.

And let us pray, That our Jerusalem, both Church and State, which did never
but flourish when it was at unity it self, may now and ever continue in that
Unity, and so be ever successful both at home and abroad. That in this unity
the Tribes of the Lord, even all the Families and Kindreds of his people may
come up to the Church, to pray, and praise, and give thanks unto him. That no
Tribe or Person for any pretenses (for they are no better) may absent
themselves from the Church and Testimony of the Lord. That the Seats of
Judgment Ecclesiastical and Civil af all sorts, may not only be set, but set
firmly, to administer the justice of God, and the King, unto his people. That
all men may reverence and obey the House of David, who it self upon God, is
the foundation of all these blessings. That God would mutually bless David,
and this People. That so the People may have cause to give thanks to God for
David; And that David may have cause to take joy in the love and loyalty of his
people; and bless God for both. Till from this Jerusalem, and this Temple, and
these Thrones, He and we all may ascend into that glorious State which is in
Heaven. And this Christ for his infinite mercy sake grant unto us: To whom etc.

SERMON. IV.
Preached before His Majesty, on Sunday, the 19. of June, 1625. at White Hall.
Appointed to be preached at the opening of the Parliament.
PSALM. 75. 2, 3. When I shall receive the Congregation, (or, when I shall take
a convenient time) I will judge according unto right. The earth is dissolved,
(or, melted) and all the inhabitants thereof; I bear up the pillars of it.


THis Psalm is accounted a kind of Dialogue between God and the Prophet: For
David sometime speaks in his own person, and sometimes in Gods. Some think
the time, when he sung this Psalm, was, when he was now ready to be crowned
King over Israel, 2 Reg 5.
as well as Juda. The occasion of this his solemn devotion was, not only the
care which he had of the world in general, the earth; but much more, and much
nearer the care which he took of the Kingdom of Israel, now committed by God
unto his Government. That Kingdom was then filled with civil combustions; and
the Church (as it uses to be in a troubled State) was out of order too.

The Learned, both the Fathers and the later Divines, differ much about my
Text. For some will read it Time; and some, The Congregation. And the best is,
there is warrantable authority for both. Again, some will have it, that this
speech (I will judge according unto right) is David's promise to God, of his
just administration of the Kingdom; and some, that it is Gods promise to
David, of his Grace and Assistance, to enable him so to govern. If it be Gods
speech, they are not all agreed, neither whether it be meant of his temporary
execution of judgment in this life; or of his great and final judgment. Nor
do they all agree, whether by the Earth, be meant the whole world, and the
Church spread over it; or the Kingdom of the Jews, and the Church, as then
contained in it. But the matter is not great. For the Scripture is not only
true, but full in all these senses; and all of them come in close upon the
letter of the Text. And therefore for ought I know, it is the safest way, which
shuts out nothing that the Text includes. And my Text will easily take in all,
if you consider the words, as David's speech; yet so, as that one way David be
understood to speak in his own person; and another way in Gods.

And this is no news. For usually in the Psalms, one and the same speech is
meant of David, and Christ; and one and the same action applied to God and the
King. And the reason of this is plain: For the King is Gods immediate
Lieutenant upon earth; and therefore one and the same action is Gods by
ordinance, and the Kings by execution. And the power which resides in the King,
is not any assuming to himself, nor any gift from the people, Romans 13. 1
but Gods power, as well in, as over him.

So God and the King stand very near together. And it is an infinite blessing
both upon the King, and the people, when the Kings heart keeps as near unto
God, as Gods power is to the King. For then it is but reading of my Text, and
you both see and enjoy the blessing presently.

For then the Congregation that comes up, the great Congregation; great in
number, great in place, and great in power. It shall not lose it is labor: For,
I will receive it, says God; and I, says the King. The Congregation, whether
it be to serve God, or the State, or both, comes up at an appointed time; and,
I will make a convenient time for it, says God; and, I will take a convenient
time for it, says the King. When I have received it, and in this time, I will
judge in it, and by it, according unto right, says God; and I, says the King.
If Justice and Judgment be not executed, the Earth will dissolve, the
Kingdoms will melt away, all things will sink and fall; but I will bear up
the pillars of it, says God; and I, says the King. If the Earth dissolve, the
Militant Church which dwells upon it shakes presently; It must needs bear part
with the State in which it is; but I will bear up the pillars of that too,
says God; and I, says the King. So blessed a thing it is, where God and the
King keep near, and work together.

The Text has Two parts. The Earth, of the Kingdoms, and the Inhabitors
thereof; and they, when the Prophet wrote this, were in weak estate, melted,
and dissolved. The other Remedy, which God and the King will take to settle it.
And concerning this Remedy, here are Three things expressed. First, the I
will judge according unto right. Secondly, the I bear up the Pillars of it.
Thirdly, the time for both these, a convenient Time, even when He shall
receive the Congregation.

David, when he came to the Crown, found the Earth, the world in general; the
Kingdom of Juda in particular; and the Church of God.

(...).
but Liquefactaa est, weakness, dissolution, and melting in them all.

For the world first, that so far as the Assyrian Monarchy prevailed, in
those days of David, melted between riot and cruelty. And the rest of the
world which was not under them, was broken and disolved into petty Dynasties
and Governments; which did nothing almost but prey one upon another. And for
the kingdom of Juda, (the special aim of my Text) that melted first in the
great disobedience of Saul, 1 Reg. 15. 23.
and after that in civil dissentions between David, and Ishbosheth the son
of Saul, for diverse years together. And as for the Church, that had no
public room then given it, but in Judea; and there it could not stand fast
when the Earth melted under it. And we find toward the end of Saul, 85. 1 Reg.
22.
Priests were put to the sword at once, and unjustly all. And the Church cannot
choose but melt when her Priests are slain: for the speediest melting that is,
is to melt in blood.

Now this melting, whether it be men or Kingdoms, uses the word melting, or
dissolving. And that shows that their honor and strength drops away and
decays, till they become as nothing, or quite another thing. Psalm. 22. 18.
In trouble, the heart of David melted like wax. Psalm. 22, When their enemies
prevailed, The heart of the people melted like water, Ios. 7. Josua 7. 5.
In the time of vengeance, the ungodly of the Earth shall melt and consume away
like a snaile, Psalm 58. 7.
Psalm. 58. And that is melting indeed: Put but a little salt upon a snaile, and
he will drop out of his house presently.

Melting then is a great Calamity upon a Kingdom. And it is not Juda only, but
all Kingdoms of the Earth are subject to melting. The many changes of the
world have Preached this over and over; That whatsoever has Earth to the
foundation, is subject to dissolution. And the Sermon is still made upon this
Text, Terra liquefacta est, The Earth is dissolved.

melting there goes a Heat: Hos. 8. 14.
And so it was, Hos. 8. A fire first, and then the melting of Israel. There
neither is, nor can be any Kingdom, but it has many Heates. These are most
felt by them, that are at the working of the State. But these are all quite
above me, save to pray for their temper: and I will not further meddle with
them. Heates then there are, but all Heates are not by and by a Furnace; nor
are all Furnaces able to melt and dissolve States. No God forbid.

Not all, but yet some there are, that can melt any Kingdom, especially two.
The one of these Heates Sin, great and multiplied sin. For (says S.
Augustine) delinquere est de liquido fluere, In Text.
To sin, is to melt, and drop away from all steadiness in virtue, from all
foundation of Justice. And here a State melts inward, there is little seen yet.
punishment for these sins. For that makes empty cities, and a desolate Land.
Ezech. 12. 20.
And there a State melts outwardly, and in view.

And by this we have found what, who it is that melts great and glorious
Kingdoms. In the Text there is no more than liquefacta est, the earth is
disolved; not a word by whom, or for what. But it is expressed ver. 7. Verse. 7.
that it is by God. And it is too well known, that it is for sin, and for
great sin too. For as there goes sin, before God heates; so there go great
and multiplied sins, before God makes his fire so hot, as to melt, or dissolve
a Kingdom. The sins of the Amorite not yet full, Genesis 15. 16.
therefore not yet cast into the melting pot. But so soon as their sins were
full, their State melted. The fruit of it from above, Amos 2. 9.
and the root of it from beneath, all destroyed. And this was not the Amorites
case only; for all Stories are full of it, That when States have melted into
wanton, and lustful sins, they have not long after dissolved into
desolation. In Ames 99
For (as S. Hierom observes) that course God holds with impious, and impenitent
Kingdoms, as well as men, absque discretione personaruus, without any
difference of persons or places.

Terra liquefacta, when a Kingdom dissolves and melts, what then? What? why
then no man is in safety, till it settle again; not a man. For the Text goes
on: The earth is dissolved, and all that dwell therein. All men then to seek
what to do; the wisest to seek, and the strongest to seek, All. And it must
needs be so. For so long as a State is Terra, like solid ground, men know
where to set their footing; and it is not every Earth quake, that swallows the
place. But when it is once Terra liquefacta, molten and dissolved, there is no
footing, no foundation then. Psalm. 69. 2.
I stick fast in the mire, where no ground is, Psalm. 69. and mire is but terra
liquefacta, molten and dissolved earth. All foul then, and no foundation.

And when a Kingdom melts indeed, that is, both ways, In sin, and under
punishment, there is great reason the inhabitants should melt with it into
fear, into danger, into ruin. For God never puts his fire to the melting of a
State, but for sin, and sin, that is never committed by the dead State, but
by the living. For when a fruitful land is made barren, Psalm. 107. 34.
it is for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. And therefore there is
great reason, when the earth dissolves, that the inhabitants should all sweat,
and melt too.

When David came to the Crown earth at large, for the Kingdoms about you, out
of question there has been liquefactio; a melting in the earth, and many
Kingdoms have sweat blood. But if you take the earth, for the State at home,
then it is high time to magnify God: First, for the Renowned, melting: And
secondly, melt) we live to see a miracle, Prove. 28. 2
Change without Alteration. Another King; but the same life-expression of all
the Royal and Religious Virtues of his Father; and no sinews shrinking, or
dissolving in the State.

If you ask me the cause of this happiness, I can direct you to no other but
God, and God in mercy. For as for the Kingdom, that is made of the same Earth
with others, and is consequently subject to the same dissolution. And as for us
that dwell therein, I doubt our sins have been as clamorous upon God to heat
his fire, and make it fall on melting, as the sins of them that inhabit other
Countries.

And though I doubt not but God has the sure mercies of David in store for the
King, and will never fail him, yet if Habitatores in ea, they that dwell in
this good and happy soil, will burden it and themselves with sin, great
sin, multiplied sin, unrepented sin; it will not be in the power, or
wisdom, or courage, or piety of a King, to keep the State from melting: For
David was all these, and yet liquefacta est terra, the Earth was as good as
dissolved for all that. And therefore that this Kingdom is not a melting too,
I can give no firm reason, but God and his Mercy. For he is content to give
longer day for repentance, and repentance is able to do all things with God.
And the time calls apace for repentance: The Heavens they melt into
unseasonable weather; and the Earth melts and dissolves her Inhabitants into
infectious humors; and there is no way to stay these meltings, but by melting
our selves, in, and by true repentance.

Would you then have a settled and a flourishing State? Would you have no
melting, no dissolution in the Church? I know you would, it is the honorable
and religious design of you all: Why, but if you would indeed, Tene magis
salvum populus velit, an populum Tu.
The King must trust, and indeere his people: The people must honor, obey, and
support their King: Both King, and Peers, and People must religiously serve
and honor God. Servat in ambiguo qui consulit and Tibi, and urbi Jupiter.
Horat. lib. 1. ep. 16.
Shut out all Superstition on Gods Name, the farther the better; but let in no
profaneness therewhile. If this be not done, take what care you can. God is
above all humane wisdom, and in some degree or other there will be Liquefactio
terrae, a melting, or a waste, both in Church and State.

Remedy, as it was then with the Jews, the Prevention, as it is now with us;
which God and the King will use to keep the State and the Church from melting.
This Remedy (and the Prevention is just the same) is expressed first in the
execution of Justice. And this God promises for the King; and the King promises
under God. I will judge according unto right, says God; and I, says the King.

Justice and Judgment, is the greatest binder up of a State; The great bounder
of Peace and War. And it is not possible to find dissolving sinews in a
Kingdom, that is governed by Justice. For if the King flourish, Prove. 19. 12.
the Kingdom cannot melt: And the Kings Throne, that is established by
Justice. Nay farther; Nothing but Justice can establish the Throne, and make it
firm indeed. But when God blesses the King with a heart full of Justice, when
God strengthens the King in the Execution of Justice, when the King follows
God as close as he can, with Ego judicabo, I my self will look to the
administration of Justice, with which God has trusted me; there can be no
melting about the Throne of the King, none in the State, none in the Church.

But then this Justice, which preserves Justice casually, though the thing done
be just, yet the doing of it is not Justice. The State may melt for all that,
because the Remedy is but casual.

Again, since the whole State has interest in the Justice of the King, his
Justice must be spreading over all persons, and in all causes. And so it is
plural in the Text, Septuag.
I will judge, Iustitias, for every man's cause, S. Hier. Ar. Mont.
so far as it is just.

Why, but then must the King do Exodus 18. 18.
Moses was not able alone for that. It was, and it is heavy. What then? why
then Jethro's counsel must be followed. There must be inferior Judges and
Magistrates deputed by the King for this: Verse. 21.
Men of courage, fearing God, and hating Covetousness. These must quit Moses
from the inferior trouble, that he may be active, and able for the great
affairs of State. For if they be suffered to melt and drop downward, there
can be no standing dry or safe under them.

And hence it follows, that, Ego judicabo, I will judge according unto right,
is not only the Kings engagement, between God, and the People; but it is the
engagement of every Judge, Magistrate, and Officer, between God, the King, and
the State. The Kings power, that is from God. The Judges, and the subordinate
Magistrates power, that is from the King. Both are for the good of the people, 1 Timothy 2. 2
That they may lead a peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty.

All Judges, and Courts of Justice, even this great Congregation, this great
Council, now ready to sit, receive influence and power from the King, and are
dispensers of his justice, as well as their own, both in the Laws they make,
and in the Laws they execute: in the Causes which they hear, and in the
Sentences which they give. The King, Gods High Steward, and they Stewards under
him. And so long as Justice and Judgment sits upon all the Benches of a
Kingdom, either its not possible for Fluxes and Meltings to begin in the
State; or if they do begin, their Drip will be cured presenly.

Now while the King keeps close to Ego judicabo, I will judge that which comes
to me according unto right; if inferior Judges (which God forbid) judge other
than right, they sin against three at once, and against God in all. For
first, they Justice. Secondly, they sin against their calling, but by
sentencing Good Evil, Esaias 5. 20
and Evil Good. Thirdly, they sin Justice under God, in slandering of his
Justice to the people, with the administration whereof they are trusted under
him.

And once again for inferior Governors of all sorts. The King is the Sun.
He draws up some vapors, some support, some supply from us. It Is true: he
must do so. For, if the Sun draw up no vapors, it can power down no rain,
and the Earth may be too hard, as well as too soft and too melting. Now this
Rain which descends, and is first caused by the Sun, is prepared in the
Clouds before it falls on the Earth. And all Great men that are raised higher
than the rest; especially Judges and Magistrates of all sorts, they are the
Clouds. They receive the more immediate influence from the King; and if they be
Gods Clouds, and retain what he gave them, Psalm. 65. 52.
they drop fatness upon the people. But, if they be clouds without water, Jude
v. 12.
they transmit no influence. If they be light clouds in the wind, then no
certain influence. If they be clouds driven (...), 2 Pet. 2. 17
by a whirlewind, then it is passionate, and violent influence. And the Clouds,
I hope, are not, I am sure, should not be thus, between the King, and his
People.

There is then Ego judicabo, I will judge according unto right, both for the
King, and all subordinate Magistrates under him. But here is Ego judicabo, and I
will judge according to right, for God too. For many of the S. Basil. Hier.
Ruffin. Aug. Theod. Euthym. Ibid. and S. Bern. Sermon. 15. in Cant.
Fathers will have this to be Gods speech, or David's in the person of God. And
then whatsoever men do with Justice and Judgment, God comes two ways in upon
the judgments of men to review them.

For first, God comes in, when Earth is melting by violence, and injustice. And
then Gods Ego judicabo, I will judge, is either in Mercy to repair the
breaches, to stay the melting of the State; or else in Judgment to punish the
debasers of Justice. And this God sometimes does in this life. But if he do it
not here, yet he never sails to do it at the last, and final Judgment; to
which diverse of the S. Basil. Hier. Aug. Euthym. Theod. Ib. Greg. 10. moral.
31. Bern. ep. 1.
Fathers refer this passage of my Text.

Secondly, God comes in when Seats of Justice, supreme and inferior, all are
entire. And then Gods Ego judicabo, I will judge, is always to confirm, and
countenance the proceedings of Justice, and to bless the instruments. And my
Text has it full. For it is not here said, I will judge the cause only, or
the men only whose cause it is, or the Judges only that sentence the cause;
but Ego justitias, I will judge the very Judgments themselves, how right, or
otherwise thy pass. And then this must needs be to confirm and honor them,
if they be just; or to condemn and dissolve them, if they be unjust, rather
than they shall melt, or dissolve the State; or sometimes to send a melting into
that State in which Justice is perverted,

Now, howsoever men sometimes break from their duty in judging according to
right, yet there can be no question of Gods proceedings. He will be sure to
judge all things, and all men, according to right, who ever do not. Shall not
the Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18. 25.
Yes, no question. And therefore even Kings themselves, and all mighty men of
the Earth, and Judges of all sorts have need to look to their ways. For God
is over them with Ego judicabo, I will one day call for an account. I will
judge all the Executions of Justice, with which I have trusted them. And this
is the first Prevention of the melting of a Kingdom; the first Remedy when it
begins to melt: The maintenance and Execution of justice.

The Second follows; and it is establishing of the Pillars of the Earth. I
bear up the Pillars of it. I, says God, and I, says the King.

Where first, it is not amiss to consider, Pillars of the earth are. The Earth
it self, that has but one Pillar, and that is the poize and aequilibre of the
Center. And that is borne up by the Word and Ordinance of God. Psalm. 33. 9.
Thou commandedst, and it stood fast; Hexam. l. 1. c. 6.
And (says S. Ambrose) it needs no other thing to stay it.

The kingdoms of the Earth, they have more Pillars than one. This one, which
is Gods ordinance for Government, they have; but they have diverse
Administratours of this ordinance. And these Pillars are Kings, and Peers, and
Judges, and Magistrates. Not one of these under the nature of a Pillar: not
one; but yet with a great deal of difference. For though there be many
Pillars, yet there is but Vnus Rex, one King; one great and Center-pillar; and
all the rest in a kingdom do but bear up under, and about him.

The Church, that is not without Pillars neither. No, God forbid. And it
resembles in this the kingdoms among which it sojournes. The great
Master-pillar, Christ, he is the Foundation of all the rest; 1 Cor. 3. 10.
and other foundation can no man lay of the Church. Next to Christ, the
Apostles and the Disciples are Pillars too, and so called, Gal. 2. 9.
Gal. 2. After these their Successors, Bishops, and Priests, the Fathers of
the Church in their several ages, Ruff. Aug. Euthym. ibid.
they came to be Pillars, and so shall successively continue to the end of the
world. S. Bern. ep. 77.
And so soon as Emperors and Kings were converted to the Faith, Ephesians. 4.
they presently came into the nature of Pillars to the Church too. If any man
doubt this truth, I Will call in the Pope himself to witness it. There are two
great Props, or Pillars of the Church, (says Leo) the Kings authority, Ep. 31.
and the Priests; both these: and the Pope was content then to put the Kings
first. And Kings (says Saint Augustine) are indeed great Pillars of the
Church, 5. De Civit. Dei. 24.
especially if they use their power, ad cultum Dei dilatandum, to enlarge (and
support) the true religious worship of God.

You have seen what these Pillars Pillar is known well enough what it is.
It Is sustinere, to prop, and bear up the Earth. Senec. Ep. 86.
Quantum est columnarum nihil sustinentium, sed in ornamentum tantum. I know in
luxurient buildings many Pillars stand only for ornament, but bear no weight.
It is not so with Pillars that are crowned. Honor and ornament they have, and
they deserve it, but they are loaded too. Kingdoms and States, the greatest,
the strongest in the world, are as mouldring earth, as men. Juda at this time
was Terra liquefacta, like a dissolving Body. They cannot stand sine Columnis,
without their pillars to bear them. And therefore the King has ever been
accounted, Ar. Mont.
and truly, columna stare faciens terram, Pro. 29. 4.
the maine pillar, and stay of the State. And (...) quasi (...), the King is
the pillar, the foundation of the people. So S. Gregory; Lib. 9. Mor. 13.
for he bears subjectorum suorum onera, not only his subjects, but their
burdens too.

Pillars is to bear; but when is there use of them? When? why continually,
they can be spared at no time: if they leave bearing, the State melts
presently. We read it four times repeated in Scripture, but upon two great
occasions only, Idolatry, and Abominable lust, Judge. 17. 6 and 18. 1. and 19.
1. and 21. 25.
that there was no King in Israel, Judge. 17. and 19. no King. And still there
followed a melting and a dissolving of the State. Every man did what seemed
good in his own eyes; and the punishment was great. At this time David was
King of Juda, and Ishbosheth would be King of Israel: 2 Reg. 2.
Joab was for the one, and Abner with the other. The Pillars here, in stead of
bearing, fell a justling: What followed? Why you see, Liquefacta est terra,
that kingdom melted.

The Pillars then can never be spared from their work, continual use of them;
but yet at one time more need than another. And the time of the greatest
necessity of these Pillars is, when there is any Liquefaction, or weakening of
the Earth. And that is in the Text, the Earth dissolving; and then by and by
recourse to the Pillars.

To the Pillars; and therefore they which weaken the government; nay, which do
but offer to impair the honor and reputation of the Governors, are dangerous
and unworthie members of any Commonwealth. For to murmr, and make the people
believe, there are I know not what cracks and flawes in the Pillars; to
disesteeme their strength; to undervalue their bearing; is to trouble the
Earth, and Inhabitants of it; To make the people fear a melting, where there is
none. And what office that is, you all know.

Continual use there is then of the Pillars. But what then? Can the Pillars
bear up the earth in a melting time, by their own strength? No sure, that
they cannot; not at any time: and therefore least at a melting time. But what
then? Why then here is Ego and Ego, I bear up the Pillars that are about me,
says David; and I, says God, bear up both these and David too. And indeed
all Pillars are too weak, if they be left to themselves. There must be one to
bear them, or else they can never bear the Earth. One, and it can be none
under God: Ego confirmavi, it is I that in all times have borne up the Pillars
of it. And it is per me, by me, says God, Prove. 8. 15.
Prove. 8. that Kings reign: And per me, by me, is not only by Gods
ordination, once set, and then no more, but by his preservation, and his
supportation too. In Psalm. 74
And (as S. Augustine observes) Quid essent ipsae columnae? A Deo deposcimus
rebus fessis, languenti busque tutamina. Arnob. lib. 1. contra Gent.
What could the Pillars themselves do, if they were not borne up by God? But
when it once comes to Ego confirmavi, I bear up the Pillars, there is nothing
then to be feared.

are not stony or insensible, but living and understanding Pillars:
understanding, therefore they feel Onus terrae, the burden of the Earth which
lies upon them, when the dull earth feels not it self; therefore as they
feel, so are they able to compare their strength, and the burden, and the
difference of the burden at several times; therefore while they compare they
are sensible of the difference between supporting of earth, and Terrae
liquefactae, dissolved or dissolving the earth: For this latter is heavier a
great deal; therefore in the difference they can tell where they are likeliest
to shrink under the burden, if God come not in to bear them up.

And in all these cases, and many more, the Pillars of the earth must go to
God, 1 Timothy 2. 2
as fast as the Inhabitants of the earth come to them. They must pray for
themselves. And the Church, and the people must pray for them too. And the
cloze of the prayers must still be, that God would bear up the Pillars, that
they may be able to bear up the earth.

I bear up the Earth, and the Inhabitants of it, though he does that too, and
they cannot subsist without him; but as if he had quite put them over to the
King, and the great Governors under him, he says, I bear up the pillars; and
then, I look and will require of them, that they bear up the State, and the
people.

Let me speak a little boldly, (says Gr. Naz.) Orat. 27. 13.
Show your selves gods to your Subjects; gods, and no less: Gods; why then you
must do Gods work. And Gods work ever since the Creation, is to preserve, and
bear up the world. Therefore as God bears up you, so you must bear up the
Earth, and the people. God reteins his own power over you; but he has given
you his own power over them, Romans 13. Romans 13. 1
His own power, and that is to bear up the people at home; and in all just
quarrels to force enemies abroad. And in all this it is Gods power still, but
yet he will exercise it by the Pillars.

Therefore in the first great leading of his people, himself went before them
in the form of a pillar, Exodus 13. 21.
Exodus 13. And when he smote the army of Egypt, he looked out of the pillar
while he struck it, Exodus 14. 24.
Exodus 14. And because this was an extraordinary pillar, and therefore can be
no principle for ordinary conclusions, He makes Moses, which was the ordinary
pillar, not bear only, but strike too. He must stretch out his hand upon the
Sea, Ex. 14 26
Exodus 14.

Now this great work of God in pillars, Kings and mighty Potentates of the
Earth, is so manifest, that no reason can be brought to deny it.

First, in that the wisest, and

Secondly, in that even those kings, bear them up. And this is a full proof,
that this principle is naturally printed in the heart of man, that God is Basis
Columnarum, the foundation of the pillars.

Julius 2. To ascribe this to Fortune only, worldly wisdom it self would
condemn for folly. To give it to Destiny, is to bind up God in chains
unworthy for men: Si totum muudum Deus, qui condidit, gubernat, quo in loco,
vel cui creaturae Casus, and Fatum, and Fortuna dominabitur. Paulin. Ep. 38.
For worldly wisdom knows this, that God in his works ad extra, must be most
free, or no God. To worldly wisdom it self, it cannot be ascribed: For she
has openly disclaimed many of their Actions, which have prospered best.
Therefore of necessity it must be ascribed to Gods blessing and protecting
them.

And certainly there is no true reason can be given of it, but this. First, Ego
confirmo, I establish and bear up the Pillars. For so long the world cannot
shake them. And secondly, Ego apto, I make fit the Pillars, (as Tremel. Tremel.
ib.
reads it) for so long they bear, even above their strength. And out of
doubt, there is very much in the fitting of the Pillars. It Is not the great
massinesse of a Pillar, but the clean, and true working of him, that makes him
bear; the fitting of him in time, and to his place.

And here, as for many other, so especially for two things, we have great cause
to bless and magnify God. First, that since he would remove Royal Pillar,
which had stood now under the weight of this Government full 22. years, yet he
would not do it, till he had prepared another, and brought him to full
strength, to bear up this Kingdom, to Gods great honor, and his own.
Secondly, that by Gods Royal Fathers prudent education, he is, and was from
the first hour, confirmata Columna, an established, and a settled Pillar. And I
make no question, but aptata Columna too, A Pillar every way fitted to the
State he bears; fitted to the difficulties of the time; fitted to the State,
and fitted to the Church.

Pillars too. At this time a great Pillar of this Church is fallen; and
doubtless a great part of the edifice had fallen with it, if God had not made
supply of another, and a very able Pillar.

I find Genesis 28. Genesis 28. 18.
that there was an Anointed Pillar; that it was anointed by Jacob. The place
was Bethel, the house of God. In it the Ladder of heaven, by which the Angels
go and come. But out of doubt this Pillar is here. This Pillar not yet
anointed by the hand of the Priest; but anointed already to the inheritance,
and by the blessing of Jacob. The place where Jacob left him behind is the
Church of God, and he left him a Pillar, for so he rested on him, and well he
might. Old Jacob is gone by the Angels way to heaven, but he left the Pillar
here behind at Bethel, for the house of God. And all the blessings of Heaven
and Earth be upon him all the days of his life.

The Church in all times of her dissensions, when schism and faction have made
great Rents in her buildings, has still had recourse to her Pillars, to her
Civil and her Ecclesiastical Pillars; and she goes right. For her Pillars must
support her, or she cannot be borne up.

This very time is a time of Church division. What follows upon it? what? why
the Church is become Terra liquefacta, there is melting almost in every part of
it Christendom through, melting in all places, but not at the same Fire. For
in one place Truth melts away from the doctrine of the Church. In another
devotion and good life melt away from the practice of the Church. In a third
all external means, and necessary supply melts away from the maintenance of
the Church. And, but that I know Hell gates cannot prevail against it, S. Mat.
16. 18.
it melts so fast sometimes, that I should think it is, as the world takes it
for, a house of Butter against the Sun.

Well, what is the cause that there should be such melting in the Church? what?
why surely there are many causes, would I complain to you of them. But there
are two in the very letter of my Text, and them I cannot bank. But I speak of
the Church in general, and still hope the best of our own.

Ecclesiastical Pillars, which are the Churches most immediate bearers, are in
many places of Christendom but hollow Pillars. And there is no trusting of
hollow Pillars with such a weight as the Church is. And therefore here where
God in mercy will stay the melting, it is (...), I will make the pillars solid.
I will not leave the Church any longer upon hollow, hypocritical, and
deceitful Pillars.

Pillars, upon the wisdom, and the power of them. And so far, that sometimes
Ego confirmavi, God that bears up the pillars is quite forgotten. And then
whenever she and her Pillars leave to rest upon God, they fall on melting
Presently, and no wonder.

But whatsoever the Churches Error be, this I am sure will concern the State,
and you. It is not possible in any Christian Commonwealth, that the Church
should melt, and the State stand firm. For there can be no firmness without
Law; and no Laws can be binding if there be no conscience to obey them;
penalty alone could never, can never do it. And no school can teach
conscience but the Church of Christ. For wherever you find the Church melt and
dissolve, there you shall see conscience decay. Therefore be Pillars to the
Church, and you shall be Pillars, strong Pillars to the State, and to your
selves.

The Third and last Circumstance Justice, and establishing the Pillars; And
that is a set, and a convenient time, even when he shall receive the
Congregation. For that time I Will take, says God, and I, says the King.

The first instant of this time set things that differences wisdom from folly.

Now a man would think that for these things in the Text, all times were times
of opportunity. For can any time be unfit to do justice, to judge according to
right, to bear up the pillars of State and Church? no sure, there cannot. And
yet, even for these, here is both God and the King for opportunity. For here
David promises both for God and himself, that he will take a convenient time.

But then there is a great deal of difference between God and the King in
taking of it. For when the King comes to bear up the State, it is simply cum
accepero tempus, when I shall take a convenient time. For no regal power has
any command over time. It can neither force on, nor draw back, nor make stay
of opportunity. He must take it when God offers it, or not have it. And if it
be let slip, he cannot promise it shall return to his hand again. Nor can
this great Court make an Act of Parliament, to stay or reduce it.

But when God comes to do justice and to bear up the Pillars themselves; then
cum accepero tempus, is not simply the taking of a convenient time, but the
making of it too. And it stands not for eligere but statuere, not for a choice
of time, as if God must wait upon it; but for appointing of time, and making it
fit to serve both God and the King.

For (says S. Augustine) Deus non accipit (proprie,) In Text.
sed gubernat tempora, God does not attend opportunities of time, as if he
could not work without them, but he governes and disposes of time, and
occasion, and makes them ready for us to take them. Lib. 1. contra Gent.
Otherwise obsequia temporum (as Arnob. calls them) the pliantnes of time, will
not attend, nor be commanded by us. So that here God's taking of the time is
nothing but God's fitting of the time to us, and us to it. And when he is said
to take it, it is for us, not for himself.

Now though God be at this taking any creature can do that. And therefore
where the speech is of God, it is absolute, and simply Quum Ego, when I shall
take it. Not I and you, not I from you; But out of his own wisdom he finds
it, and out of his own goodness he takes it, and by his own power he uses
it, to bear up the pillars of the Earth. And therefore here in the Text is
never a Quum tu das, when thou give me opportunity, but when I take and order
time by my self.

And yet let me tell you, that where man's strength can do nothing to give God
an opportunity to preserve the Earth, and the kingdoms of it from melting,
there his weakensse can. For as weakness is the thing that needs, so the time
of melting is the opportunity of establishing the pillars of the earth. Psalm.
9. 9.
And so God in mercy is often pleased to make it. Per desolatione^
inestimabilem ad solida^ consolationem.
'Twas so Psalm. 9. The Lord will minister true Judgment unto the people: He
will be a defense for the oppressed. Gers. li. 1. de consol. Theol. pros. 4*
When will he do this? in opportunitatibus, in the needful time of trouble;
and that is the melting time. And it is so in the Text, I bear up the Pillars
of the Earth. When does he bear them? Quum terra liquefacta est, when States
shake and seem to be dissolving.

And since our sufficiency can give Gods wisdom no opportunity, but yet our
weakness gives his mercy opportunity enough; it is manifest, that no one thing
is more necessary for preservation against the melting of a kingdom, then
humble and hearty prayer, that God will come always into that opportunity
which our weakness makes.

And now because God does often take unto himself second pillars of the Earth
comes; And that is (as S. Basil and some others read it) at the Receiving of
the Congregation; S. Bas. Call. verse. Angl. ult.
that is, when the people shall meet in the Synagogue to pray, and praise God:
or, when Honorable and selected of the people shall be summoned, and gathered
together in the name of the Lord, for Counsel or Justice. For no time so fit to
honor God; none to execute Justice; none to bear up the pillars of the Earth;
as when the Congregation is received, to meet, and consider and weigh all those
things which make for the honor and safety of a kingdom. And beginning that
service with Gods: For God forbid this Honorable Council of State should sit
down and begin any where else than at God.

Now the great Congregation among the Jews was the Sanedrim. And the going up
of the Tribes to Jerusalem, was first to give thanks unto the Lord, and then
to sit down on the seat of judgment, Psalm. 122. 4, 5.
Psalm. 122. And Jerusalem at that time was the seat both of Religion and the
State. Jansen. ib.
Differences I know there are many between us and them, our government and
theirs, but not in this, That the Tribes are assembled and come up to one
place; Nor in this, That they come up first to give thanks to God, before they
possess the seat of judgment; Nor in this much, that there is a Session, a
Convocation for Religion, as well as Parliament for State. But to leave them,
and come to our own.

This great Council of the kingdom, this Congregation is never received to
meeting, but about the Pillars of the State, the Laws, and the Government.
That by the Laws there might be Judgment according to right; and by the
Government the Pillars may both bear and be borne. I say bear, and be borne:
For though in the text it be, I bear up the Pillars, That is, I at all times;
and I in some cases, where none can but I; and I when all forsake save I; yet
that is not so to be taken, as if the people were not bound to bear up the
Pillars, as well as the Pillars them. No, for there is no question but they are
bound, and strictly bound too, Romans 13. 6, 7.
Romans 13. And certain it is no State can flourish, if there be not mutual
support between the Earth and the Pillars: if it fail of either side, there is
some melting or other presently.

For the strength of a King is in the multitude of his people, Prove. 14. 28.
Prove. 14. His supply, and his defense is there. And the strength of a People
is in the honor and renown of their King: His very name is their shield among
the Nations; and they must make account to bear, if they will be borne. And
this is read in the very Dictates of Nature for government. For no man ever saw
building of State, but the Pillars which bear up it, are borne by the Earth.

Now God and the King do both receive this Congregation, and in fitness of
time, and yet with a difference too: For the King receives the Congregation to
consult, and advise with it; but God receives it, to direct, and to bless it.
And God with his blessing is never wanting to us at these and the like times,
if we be not wanting to Him, and our selves.

And thus you have seen in what state the kingdom of Israel was in David's
time; and how easy it is for any kingdom to be in the like; in a melting, and
a dissolving estate. You have likewise seen what Remedy was then, and what
Prevention is now to be thought of against this melting.

This both Remedy, and Prevention consists especially in impartial
distribution of Justice to the people; and in Gods gracious and powerful
supporting of the pillars of the State. The time for this never so fit, as when
the Congregation is received by the King to consultation, and by God to
blessing.

It is not much which I have more to say. The Congregation is now ready to be
received. The very Receiving it joins it with the fitness of opportunity. For
it is the Kings opportunity to bless his people with Justice and Judgment;
and it is Gods opportunity to bear up both King and Peers, both greater, and
lesser Pillars of the State. My text delivers a promise of both. For it is
David's speech for himself, and for God. I Will do both, says God, and I, says
the King.

Now you may not distrust this promise on either side; neither on God nor
David's. Not on Gods side: For that is infidelity. Nor the Kings: For what has
he done that can cause misbeliefe? or what has he not done, and that above his
years, that may not merit, and challenge belief of all?

And for the comfort of this Kingdom, and all that dwell therein, the service
of the day, which was first designed for this business, seems to me to
prophecy, that another Hezekiah, a wise, and a religious King, has begun his
Reign. For the first Lesson appointed in the Church for Evening Prayer that
day, 4 Reg. 18. 2.
is 4 Reg. 18. which begins the story of Hezekiah. Hezekiah was twenty five
years old when he began to reign. There Is his age. What did he when he came
first into the Throne? Why one of his first works was, 2 Chro. 29 20.
He gathered the Princes of the City (there was the receiving of the
Congregation) and so went up to the house of the Lord. After this, what was the
course of his life? It follows, He clave to the Lord, and departed not from
him. 4 Reg. 18. 5.
(And I hope I may make a prophecy of that which follows.) So that there was
none like him among the kings of Judah, neither were there any such before him.
And thus is our Hezekiah come this day to receive this great Congregation in
the Name of the Lord.

Let us therefore end with Prayer unto God. That he would bless both the King
and the State. That this Kingdom may never be Terra liquefacta, like molten
and dissolved Earth. That if at any time for our sins it begin to melt, and
wash away, the remedy may be forthwith applied. That Justice and Judgment may
be given according to right. That the pillars of the Earth may be borne up; the
inferior and subordinate pillars by the King, and both the King as the
Master-pillar, and they, by God. That all this may be done in fit and
convenient time. That God would make fit the time, and then give the King and
the State, and this great Council, all wisdom to lay hold of it. That this
great Congregation may be in the fitness of time. That God would be pleased to
receive and bless it. That the King will be pleased to receive and grace it.
That it will be pleased to receive the King, according to his desert, and their
duty, with love, honor, and necessary supply: that so he may bear up this
Kingdom, and the honor of it, with comfort; and be a strong and a lasting
pillar, to support both it and us, in the true worship of God, and all
inferior blessings. That he may dwell before God for ever; Psalm. 61. 7.
and that God would prepare his loving mercy and faithfulness, that they may
preserve him. That all the blessings of Grace may attend him and this
Congregation in this life; and all the blessings of Glory crown both Him and
us in the life to come. And this Christ for his infinite mercy grant unto us:
To whom, etc.

SERMON. V.
Preached before His Majesty, at White Hall, on Wednesday the 5. of July, 1626.
at the solemn Fast then held.
PSALM. 74. 22. Arise, O God (plead, or) maintain thine own Cause: Remember
how the foolish man (reprocheth or) blasphemeth thee daily.


THis Psalm in the very Letter is a complaint of the wast that was made upon
the City of Jerusalem; and the profanation of the Temple that was in it. And
these go together. For when did any man see a Kingdom, or a great City
wasted, and the Mother Church left standing in beauty? sure I think never. For
Enemies when they have possessed a City seldom think themselves Masters of
their own possessions, till they have (as they think) plucked that God out of
his House, which defended the City. As you may see in that brag of the
Heathen in Minu. Foelix. In Octav. Judaeorum Deum fuisse Romans numinibus una cum
gente Captivum.
And so 'twas here. The Enemies roared in the City, and displayed their
Banners, Verse 5.
verse. 5. And then by and by follows the defiling of the holy Place. Down
goes the carved work with Axes and Hammers, and Fire on the rest, Verse 6.
verse 6.

A profanation upon the Temple, and upon all the Rites of Religion there was.
All agree upon that. But it was yet but in Prophecy, not come. And the learned
which lived after, and looked back upon the Prophecy, and the accomplishment of
it, are not agreed. For some say, the Text refers to the first great desolation
by Nebuchadonozor; some, to the last by Titus; some, to that which came between
by Antiochus Epiphanes; and some indefinitely to all. The best is you cannot
refer the Text amiss. For in every of these the City and the Temple; the State
and the Church were threatened alike. And I for my part see no great reason yet,
why the Prophet should not mean all, since certain it is both State and Church
did suffer in all.

This Psalm as in the Letter it looks back upon the State and Church of the
Jews, so in the Figure it looks forward upon the whole course of the Church
of Christ, entertained in any State: For if the State come to suffer, it is
madness to think the Church can be free. And therefore this Psalm certainly
was penned to be Documentum perpetuum, an everlasting document to the Church of
Christ, to labor and pray for the safety of the State; Because if any violence
threaten the Kingdom with Waste, it must needs at once threaten the Church
with both Profanation and Persecution.

Well, This danger is usually threatened before it come; And so 'twas here. But
upon that threatening what remedy has the State? What? why wisely to foresee,
carefully to provide against, and unanimously and stoutly to resist the
Insolence and the violence of the Enemy. And to this work every Subject is
bound by all Law, of God, of Nature, and of Nations, to put hand, and means,
life and livelihood. But what remedy has the Church? What? Why a Remedy beyond
all this. Hom. 14. in Ep. ad Hebr.
Majora arma as Saint Chrysostom calls them, greater, sharper weapons. For
foresight, and care, and unanimity, and courage, sometimes come all too short:
For all these may dwell in greater proportion in the Exemies Camp. Whither goes
the Church then? Whither? Why doubtless to God. For when all things else
fail, The help that is done upon Earth, he does it himself, Verse. 13.
ver. 13.

To God, and to God by Prayer. That Is the Church way. And the Church way is Via
Regia, the Kings way (as Epiphan calls it.) Here Is. 59.
The Prophet here is all upon this way. For here in the Psalm is a Noise of
Enemies coming. There Is a Prophecy what they will do if they get the better.
What does the Church? Does she stay till the Enemies be come? No sure. It Is no
wisdom in the State; It Is no Religion in the Church to do so. No: nor did
the Church so here. But she called to mind what strange things God had done of
old for his servants, ver. 14. Verse 14.
Upon that mercy she grounds her confidence; That upon the same Repentance, she
shall have the like Deliverance. And upon this Faith and hope she repents and
prays, Verse 20.
ver 20.

My Text is the conclusion of this Prayer; And it has two parts. The one is
the Invocation, that God Arise O God. The other is what the Prophet Risen: And
they are two things which he does expressly desire of him. The one is, that he
would plead and Arise O God, maintain thine own cause: Remember how the
foolish man blasphemeth thee daily.

The Text it self is all as it begins, a Prayer.

Proclaims for Prayer. No time is or can be unfit to call upon God; But such
Times as this are necessary. And there cannot more well be said, than such
Times as this. The Prophet David where he points out opportunity for Prayer
goes not so far. Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I hear thee,
and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. Psalm. 50. 15
There 'twas but the day of Trouble. But these Times, might I be bold to put
them under their just character, for difficulties both at home, and abroad, are
more than the day of trouble.

For, beside that they have made up a long Day of trouble already: These Times
are the very concurse of Fear and Danger. The Clouds have threatened from
heaven now many days together, to destroy a hopeful and plentiful Harvest in
the Day of Possession; As the Prophet speaks, Esa. 17. 11
Esaias 17. The Pestilence as if it were angry that God had driven it out of this
great City of the Kingdom, wastes and destroys far and near in other places
of it. The Sword of a foreign Enemy threatens to make way for it self: And
if it enter, it is worse than Famine and the Pestilence. The Prophet calls it a
Rasor, Esa. 7* 20.
Esaias 7. But such as is readier to cut the Throat, than shave the Beard.

Can ye tell where to sue out remedy against these, but at God? Perhaps you
may think upon second and subordinate Helps; And it is fit ye should: For these
are simply necessary too. And it is Gods great blessing upon the Kingdom, that
to meet with the Distractions of the Time, he has placed over us in the
Throne, a wise, a stout, a vigilant, and a most provident King. Well: But can
you always have these second helps at hand? Can you always by them effect
your end? Have you them ready at this time? Have you the Sinews that move
them? It Is well if you have. But I doubt it is a great part of the sorrow and
trouble of the time, that you have not. And howsoever, have, or have not, there
is a commanding power both over you and these. And therefore this is a time for
Humiliation under that power, that he which gives Grace to the Humble, would
resist the Pride of our Enemies, S. Jacob. 4.
S. Jaco. 4.

I need not press this any further. The necessity of these Times speaks out.
It Is past whispering now that this is a day of Trouble. Of Trouble: therefore
it ought to be a day of Prayer, humble and devout prayer, which may Outcry our
sins to God. And as it ought to be, so Authority in a most religious hand
commands it. And a powerful Edict has made that duty public, which else
perhaps would have been, as much neglected in the private, as the time it
self and the danger both have been.

Prayer is necessary, and the ready way to bring God into the Battle on our
side. Will ye see how? First, God gives Grace: In the strength of Grace do you
repent, and God cannot continue angry. In your Repentance pray, and God cannot
but hear; and some way or other come in to help. And it was never a Church
Conclusion; God is angry, therefore I will not pray. No, but therefore I will,
was the Churches voice. First, pray to appease his anger, and then pray again
to obtain his love, and those blessings which he gives where he loves.

And the Church of old often did upon great apprehensions, as we do this day,
Fast, and Pray together. That is, labor by all means to make God for the
State. First, because if there be any evil Spirit, as you lately heard, got in
between Abimelech and the Men of Sechem, between the King and his People, Jud.
9. 33.
Jud. 9. There Is no Exorcisme so sovereign to cast him out, as Fasting and
Prayer. For some Devils, you know, will not otherwise out, Mat. 17. 21
S. Mat. 17. And because a soul, humbled by Fasting, grows hungry after God;
Mat. 5. 6.
And that hunger shall be satisfied, S. Mat. 5. But one Fast there is, take
heed of it. It Is a mighty Enemy both to Prayer and him that prays. It Is to
Fast from sustenance while we are in the Church: and to fall greedily like
hungry Men, upon all our old sins, so soon as we are out at the Church door.
God himself cries out against this Fast, and will none of it, Esaias 58. Esa.
58. 5.


Fasting then and Prayer's necessary. But how does this Prayer of the Prophet
fit us? How? Why sure it fits us every way. And we have as much need, every way
as much, to power out our prayers to God, as Israel had. The Prayer is Exurge
Deus, Arise O God.

When the Priests of Baal had prayed long, and were not heard, Elias bid them
cry louder: Their God was asleep, and must be awaked, ere he could help them,
3. Reg. 18. 27.
3 Reg. 18. Asleep? Yes, dead asleep. And it was in just scorn of their
gross Idolatry, that he bid them cry louder upon a deaf Idol. But that God
that watches over Israel, does neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm 121. 4.
Psalm. 121. As appears in the speedy return which he there made to the
prayers of Elias.

Why but then, if the God of Israel does neither slumber nor sleep; why does
the Prophet call upon him to arise, and take care of the People? Why? Surely
not because he was laid down to rest: But because this is one of the many
speeches which are uttered of God in Scripture, (...), after the manner of men;
Not to express any such thing in God, but to make us understand something of
God by our selves. So that while the Prophet prays, that God would arise;
here is no signification of any slumber in God: But it is to teach us, that God
sometimes in his providence over us, is Dormienti similis, like to a man that
sleeps. As some in Saint Basil render that in the Psalm 44. 23. Psalm. 44. 23


For as he that sleeps must have some call to awaken him; S. Basil. in Psalm. 23.
So when God either for our sins, S. Hierom in Habac. 3. Velut ad dormientent
loquitur.
or for trial of our Faith and Patience, or for some other cause best known to
himself, shall suspend or draw in the sensible comfort of his providence, by
which we are presently exposed to Fear or Danger, our Prayers, must be the
Call, to make it appear by the Activenesse of his providence that he sleeps
not. And God is then said to Arise, when after long withdrawing, as it were
his Act of Power and Providence, (For so it is called ver. 12. Verse 12.
Why with-drawest thou thy hand?) he at last shows he was waking over his
people. And to manifest this to their comfort is the Prophets prayer: Arise, O
God.

Prophet prayed here in the name of the Church and of the State. And the manner
of the Prayer tells me, both were in danger, great danger: as they must ever be
when God withholds his mercy, as here he did. For, Nisi Dominus, except the
Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain, Psalm. 127. 2.
Psalm. 127. And Nisi homo, except Men have some sensible experience of Gods
favor that he does keep the City, they are apt to doubt and distrust his
goodness; And very ready to think he sleeps. Whereas he does but as earthly
Parents sometimes do with their lesser children, hide themselves that they may
be sought. And the more their children cry at their absence, the stronger
Argument they draw of their love; and Joy in their very Tears, to see they
cannot call but Crying. And poor Infants they cry, because they know no safety
but in their Mothers Arms. And certainly no safety for us, but in the hand of
God: And therefore it is time to call, that God would be found of us, and Arise
to succor us.

But you will say, Though God Christ as man could and did sleep. And it is in
vain for us to make any address to God, if Christ be asl^epe and not with us:
For, the well-pleasing of God is in him, S. Mat. 3. 17.
not in us, S. Matt. 3. Yea, but mark. Though Christ could and did sleep
while his body was pass^^le: yet after his Resurrection that his body was
glorified, as he can dye no more, Romans 6. 9.
Romans 6. So can he sleep no more. And he is more vigilant, a great deal, over
all the Prayers we make, than we are to make them: Else we must deny him to be
God. For (as S. Austin tells us) Aures Dei in Cord Precantis sunt, S. Aug in
Psalm. 129.
The ears of God are in the heart of him that prays. Not a motion in the
heart, but the ear of God has it presently. And so of Christ, or he cannot be
God: So, no fear that Christ is asleep neither

And even in the time while he carried about him our flesh mortal, we never
read that he slept but once, And that was at Sea: and at Sea in a Tempest, S.
Mat. 8. 28.
S. Matt. 8. An ill time chosen, you will say, to sleep in; But that is not so
neither. For he took opportunity only of the Tempest, to show his Disciples
that his Command could lay the Sea. If any Enemy come upon us, he must come by
Sea; It Is therefore fit for us to pray, that though CHRIST now slumber not, yet
that he would remember where he once slept, but Arose to make a Calm. We have
been in one Tempest, and we have cause to fear another; Let us in any case get
Christ to Sea, and aboard our Ships; That no Tempest may untackle them, or
rent their Keeles, or hew down their Masts. That no enemy may come near them
with safety; nor slide from them by escape. This is the way, and you are now
upon it, to make God and Christ arise together. And this very Prayer here in
the Text is grounded upon a wonderful deliverance at Sea, Ver. 14. Ver. 14.


Well, we are safe enough at Sea Land, if we can but get God to Arise on our
part. But how shall we be able to do it? How? why never dream, (for it is a
Dream indeed, and a fond one too) that ye can ever be able without Gods Grace,
to make God yours. But know that he has Grace for you, and gives it, and he is
half yours already: He will Arise and be all yours, if you pray in Grace. But
here two things are especially to be taken heed of, if we will have our Fasting
and our Prayers prevail. And I doubt we are guilty of both: and have taken
heed of neither.

The one is Pride: and the worst of it, Rising against God. For, we must not
look that God should Arise to help us, if we arise to oppose and unglory him.
And mark the phrase of Scripture. God resists the proud S. Jac. 4. S. Jacob.
4. 6.
Resists: therefore that time which we would have God spend to defend us, our
Pride forces him to use to Resist us. And certainly. Rising against God, and
raising our sins with us, even above Mercy, were it possible, is not the way
to make God Arise for us, but against us. If we will have God Arise, we must
fall low on our face before his Footstool, for he is Holy, Psalm. 99. Psalm.
99. 5.
And humble our selves as we have begun this day, that he which is all Mercy
and Power, may be as willing, as we know him able to deliver us.

Security. And the worst kind of that too, Security in and under danger. For we
must not look that God should Arise and take care of us, if we will sleep on
in Security, without care of our selves. And no destruction so sudden as that
which comes when security sings Peace and Safety, 1 These. 5. 3.
1 These. 5. Nay, which is worse, the Apostle there tells us, that in the time
of security God threatens it shall come. So Security is both a means to bring
danger, and a disinabling to resist it. And therefore if you will have God
Arise, you must arise too. Arise in soul by devotion; Arise in life by the
works of Sanctification; And arise in prudence and in provident care to be up,
and not found sleeping in riot and excess, when an Enemy is, or ought to be
feared.

I know it is hard to make you confess that you have been, or are, either
secure amongst men, or proud against God. And I am sorry it is so. For the very
difficulty of confession makes me doubt you are guilty of both, and so
continue. For he was a wise Man, that gave this reason why a man does not
confess his faults, namely, Sen. Ep. 53.
Quia etiam nunc in illis est; because he continues in them still. And you know
Somnium narrare, vigilantis est, It Is a proof that a man is awaked, when he
can tell, and does acknowledge how his dreaming fancy fooled him while he
slept. But if after all this you do not yet see you have been in a dream, I
must crave leave to think you are secure and asleep still. Let us therefore
confess and amend these and all our other sins, that have made God stand
aloof from us, and then God will Arise before we can call him up.

This for the Invocation. The second general part of the Text is, What the
Prophet would have God do when he is Risen. And they are two things.

would plead and maintain his own cause. In which the circumstances are many
and important.

the Prophet, that God has a cause in hand; not always the same, but still a
cause; and a cause in continual agitation among the Sons of Men. So it is
allwaies Term with God; some cause still, and a trying. And yet the opinion
which some of the Heathen had, Min. Foel. in Octav.
that God could not work in providence over us, but he must be unquiet and
troubled in himself, is as weak as false. Christ tells us otherwise, S. S. Joh.
5. 17.
Joh. 5. My Father works hitherto, and I work.

For (as the School observes) though he ceased the Seventh day from the work
of the general Creation of the kinds of things; Tho. sup. q. 88. A. 1.
yet there is another work from which he ceased not; That work is in
gubernatione Creaturarum, in his providence and government of the world. But
this work of God is questioned too. For many things in the works of
providence, many Men, yea and sometimes the best, are a great deal too busy
with.

For instance. They would feign know why many wicked Men prosper in the world;
And why many virtuous Men suffer? This secret has exercised the world in all
ages, and the Church ever since it had a being. It put such a stresse upon the
Prophet, that it crushed these words out of him. It is in vain that I have
cleansed my heart, and washed my hands in Innocence, Psalm. 73. 21.
Psalm. 73. In vain; No, God forbid. And the Prophet corrects his passion
after, Verse. 16.
ver. 16. In the mean time, here is the cause of God at trial; And men apt to
quarrel that for Injustice, which is not against the Rule, but above their
reach: As at the day of Judgment shall plainly appear says S. Augustine. Lib.
20. de Civit. Dei. cap. 1.


Again; They would feign know all the secrets of Predestination. But it is one
of Gods foundations: And such a foundation as he has set a Seal upon it, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
2 Timothy 2. The Lord knows who are his. It Is very dangerous breaking up of
Seals, especially Gods. The indorcement is enough for us, and very plain to
be read. It follows, And let every Man that calls on the name of Christ,
depart from Iniquity. If he do not that, he is not Christ's; Let him talk of
Predestination while he will. And in these and all other causes of God, try them
where you will, and how you can; David and Saint Paul agree upon it: He will be
Justified in his sayings, and clear, and overcome when he is Judged, Psalm. 51.
Psalm. 51. 4.
and Romans 3. Romans 3. 4.


Gods cause is at trial; But what cause of his is it that is particularly meant
in this place? For, if it be Gods, it is worth the knowing what ere it be; And
no cause of his can be here, but men owe it, as well as him, some duty; And
therefore necessary to be known, that due may be performed unto it.

Now the Cause of God meant here, though it be proposed as Causa una, one
cause, yet it is very large, and comprehends many particulars under it. Some
directly concern God, and some only by reflex. But God is so tender of his
Justice and his Honor, that nothing can so much as touch upon him, but it is
Gods cause presently: In as much as ye have done it, or not done it, to one of
these little ones, you have done it, or not done it to me, S Mat. 25. 45.
S. Matt. 25. And so goes the Text, Gods Cause, all, and but one, whether it be
directed against him, or reflected upon him: Whether it be the Reproach which
the Son of God suffered for us; Or the troubles, and afflictions which we
suffer for him; it is Gods Cause still, and accounted as one.

As one: And yet I find three things agreed upon, to be principally contained
in this Cause of God. First, the Magistrate and his Power and Justice. Calvin.
4. Inst. 20. Sect. 83
And resist either of these, and ye resist the power, and the ordinance of God,
Romans 13. Romans 13. 2
There Is Gods cause plain. And the Eye of nature could see Aliquid Divinum,
Arist. 1. Eth. c. 2.
somewhat that was divine in the Governors and Orderers of Commonwealths. In
their very Office: In as much as theyare singled out, to be the Ministers of
divine Providence upon Earth: And are expressly called the Officers of Gods
Kingdom, Sap. 6. 4.
Sap. 6. And therefore the School concludes, Tho 2. 2. q. 99. A. 1. Prmum.
that any the least irreverence of a King; as to dispute of his Judgments; And
whether we ought to follow and obey him, Sacrilegium dicitur, is justly
extended to be called Sacrilege. And since all Sacrilege is a violation of some
thing that is holy; it is evident that the Office and Person of the King is
sacred. Sacred, and therefore cannot be violated by the Hand, Tongue, or Heart
of any Man, that is, by deed, word, or thought, But it is Gods cause, and he is
violated in him. And here Kings may learn if they will, I am sure it is fit
they should, that those Men which are sacrilegious against God and his Church,
are for the very Neigbourhood of the sin, the likeliest men to offer violence
to the Honor of Princes first, and their Persons after,

Church in what kind soever it be, Be it in the cause of truth, or in the cause
of unity, or in in the cause of Right and means, it is Gods cause too: And it
must needs be so. For Christ and his Church are Head and Body, Ephesians. 1.
Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
And therefore they must needs have one common cause. One cause: And you cannot
corrupt the Church in her Truth, or persecute her for it, nor distract her from
her Unity, nor impoverish and abuse her in her Means, but God suffers in the
oppression. Nay more, no man can wilfully corrupt the Church in her doctrine,
but he would have a falfe God. Nor persecute the profession of the Church, but
he would have no God. Nor rent the Church into Sects, but he would have many
Gods. Nor make the Church base, but he would pluck GOD as low, were God as
much in his power as the Church is. And therefore the Churches Cause, is Gods
Cause. Lib. 7. Hist. cap. 32.
And as Eusebius tells us, when by Stephen Bishop of Laodicea the state of that
Church was much hazarded; it, and the means of it, were mightily upheld by God
himself. In G. Naz. Orat 4.
And Elias Cretensis goes full upon it in the general. It Is Gods cause, any
controversy that he debates against his Enemies.

Now this ever holds true, in whatsoever the Church suffers for the name of God
and Christ. And therefore if either State or Church will have their cause Gods,
the State must look their proceedings be just, and the Church must look their
Devotions and Actions be pious. Else, if the State be all in worme-wood and
Injustice; if the Church savor of impurity and irreligion; If either of these
threaten either Body, neither can can call upon God then. For sin is their
own and the Devils cause, no cause of Gods, who punishes sin ever, but
never causes it.

Gods cause, which is directly against himself, when Injustice that he will
not, or weakness that he cannot, Arise and Help, are most unworthily, nay,
blasphemously cast upon him. The very Text you see calls it no less than
blasphemy. Ibid.
And as S. Basil tells us 'twas audacter effusa, most audaciously cast into the
face of God. But how I pray? How? why they persecuted the Church of Christ with
great extremities, and then because God did not always, and in all
particulars, deliver it, Deum ut infirmum traducebant, they accused God of
Impotencie. Rabsaches case before Christ in the flesh: Which of the Gods have
delivered the Nations that serve them, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem?
4 Reg. 18. 4 Reg. 18. 25.
Pilates case to Christ: Have not I power to crucify thee, and power to loose
thee? S. Joh. 19. Julians case after Christ: S. Joh. 19. 10.
For while he raged against the Christians, Elias Cret. in Naz. Orat. 4.
he turned the contumely upon God; And charged omnipotence with weakness. So
you see the Cause of God what it is, and withal that it is many, and but one.
Many in the circumference of his creatures, which fill up the State and the
Church: and yet but one in the point of that indivisible Center which is
himself.

Well, we have found Gods cause Prophet would have God do to it? What? Why
that follows, Iudica, Plead it, Judge it, Maintain it Lord. For the King and
the State; For thy Church and Service; For thy self and thine honors sake.
Thou have made their cause thine own, therefore maintain it, as thou do
thine own.

Now this God is never wanting to do, nor never will be. So far as Justice
and Religion make the cause his, he will Plead it first, and Maintain it
after. But yet he does not this always with a Judgment that is visible to us;
Nor with such a one as will make enemies confess that Gods maintenance is on
our part. Ibid.
And therefore as Ruffinus thinks, these words are not only a Prayer, that
God would Arise, and maintain his cause: but that he would so plead it, that
he would make the Justice and Right of it appear to Enemies and Opposers; and
the maintenance evident to friends and defenders of it. So, maintain thy
Cause, is as much in effect, as make the world know it is thine, and thou will
maintain it. That from Gods maintenance, the cause may have lafety: And from
our hope of maintenance, we may receive Comfort.

Why, but why should God plead, judge, and maintain his own Cause? Is the
Prayer of the Prophet just? Yes no question. For, the Cause of God is ever
just, and therefore ought ever to be maintained. Nor is it any partiality in
God to his own Cause, that he comes to judge it. But he is forced, as it were,
to the maintenance of it himself, partly, because some men will not, and some
men cannot defend his Cause; And partly, because it must be judged at some
Tribunal. Now there lie many appeals in the cause of God. And all appeal is
to a superior Court; The highest is Gods. Therefore when Malice and Tyranny
has done what it can to Gods cause, if his Servants do but Appeal, as they
ever do; The Cause must in the end revolve to God himself, who alone has no
superior. Yet his very Enemies need not fear: For he will so plead and judge
his own Cause, that their own Consciences shall tell them his Judgement's
right.

Now one thing which lays a kind of necessity upon God to maintain his own
cause, is as I told you, that some Men will not, and some men cannot maintain
it. I find both these touched in the Text.

Arise, O God, and maintain thine own Cause, are a grievous tax upon all them
to whom God has given means and ability, yet will not stir to succor his
cause. For it is as if he had said, Men will not maintain thy cause: If thou will have it defended thou must do it thy self. The Jews it seems were now
very guilty of this, else the Prophet would never have run with that
earnestness to God. He would have prayed to God had Men been never so willing;
yes, God forbid else; but had they done their duty, the extremity had not been
feared. And mark and tremble at the curse of God which was called for upon
some of that People for this sin, Judge. 5. Curse ye Meroz, Judge. 5. 23.
(says the Angel of the Lord) curse the Inhabitants thereof. Why; because they
came not up to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. To help
the Lord. Why, What cause of God was this? What? Why 'twas his cause of War
against Sisera; as appears, Judge. 4.
Judge. 4. Against Sisera; yet to help the Lord.

And certainly it is a great and grievous error in any People as well as in
Israel; and in any age of the world as well as in that; to fast, and pray, and
call upon God to Arise and Maintain his cause and their own joined with it;
if in the mean time they will put nor hand nor purse to maintain either their
own, or Gods. Their own in the State; Or Gods in the Church. These Men
perhaps are of Tiberius his mind Deorum injuriae Diis curae; Tacit. Lib. 1.
Annal.
And what that Oracle meant, when he writ so to the Senate; whether, It belongs
to God to vindicate his own cause; Or, God will be sure to do it; Or, let his
cause sink if he will not defend it; I am not certain. This I am sure of, God
can defend himself sine Patrocinio nostro, Call. 3. Inst. c. 23. Sect. 2
without any aid of ours. But yet if we come not in to help when the Cause of
God is deposited with us; the fear is, and it is Just, that God will Maintain
his cause, and leave us to maintain our own.

Arise, O God, Maintain thine own cause, imply disability in Man, as well as
malice. For it is as if he had said, Men cannot at all times maintain thy
cause; If thou will have it defended, thou must do it thy self. And this is
true of the strongest of the Sons of Men, if they be left to themselves. But
this, though it puts us in more fear, yet it makes us not half so guilty. For
Guilt follows malice more then Impotency. And our weakness and disability is
such, that we are not able to hold up against so many and great Enemies, as the
cause of God has. This was the case of Hezekiah; He durst not trust to
himself, and his own strength against the Host of Assiria; Therefore to his
Prayers he went, 4 Reg. 19. 4 Reg. 19. 19.
O Lord God, do thou save us out of his hand: which is all one with the Text, 2 Chronicles. 32. 6.
Arise and maintain thine own cause. But I pray take this with you. When
Hezekiah prayed thus, the People were in Arms. No deserting the cause, though
no selfe-ability could hold it up.

But what Enemies had the cause Arise and maintain it? Do you ask what
Enemies? I Will tell you; Perhaps I shall not be able to tell you all: But what
my Text tells me, I Will show you. First, the Text Enemies that came up against
Gods cause were fierce, and got some hope of Advantage; Employed in this, that
the Israelites were feign to call for maintenance, and had supply against them.
Next the Text Enemies were thought too cunning and too strong for Israil, to
whom the defense of Gods Cause was then committed; Employed in this, that they
were feign to fly to God, and call him in to his own defense: A sign, that
all seconds were too weak. Thirdly, the Enemies were many, and not like to be
beaten or mastered at once; And that is expressed, Ver. 20.
ver. 20. A multitude of Enemies. And last of all, cruel, as strong and
numerous; For so we read, Verse 5.
ver. 5. Where they are called Roaring Enemies. A name which ever had some
affinity with the Devil, 1 S. Pet 5. 8.
1 S. Peter 5. So in all likelihood nothing remained but to get God to be
absent, and then they might easily swallow his People and his Cause together.
To prevent this was the Prophets prayer, and so it is ours this day. For so the
Psalm begins: O God (considering how thy cause is streitned) Wherefore art
thou absent from us so long? And it ends at Arise and maintain thy Cause
against them.

form of the Prophets Prayer is very confiderable too, and a great example to
the Church of Christ. The Prayer is, that God would arise and maintain his
Cause. The first thing the Prophet aims at is the Cause; the equity and right
that belongs to it, not the respect it had to Persons. And this out of question
is the way of Justice, to honor the person for the Cause, not to esteem the
cause of the person. Now men for the most part go a cross way to this, and
therefore, when they will come into the way of Justice I cannot tell. For
usually all business is sided into parties. It Is no matter for the Cause, let
who will maintain that simply for it self. If it make for us and our party,
so far we will maintain it; else be it Gods cause, or whose it will, whether
it sink or swim, it shall not trouble us. And I doubt as the practice of too
many men is, so is their Prayer: For the Faction and the Party all; not the
Cause, either as it is Gods, the Churches, or the States. And parties are ever
private ends. The Cause as it is Gods, the Churches, or the Kingdoms, is ever
common, ever fit to be made the Object of our Prayers.

Yet this advantage may here be had: If ever you may safely prefer the person
before the cause, and yet be just, you may do it here. God before his own
cause. And the reason is, because God as he can never tender an unjust cause to
his People, so is he Justice it self: And ever juster than any cause of his
that is without him. Therefore whatsoever others do, Arise, O God, and
maintain thy self, and thine own cause. Maintain it even from Heaven,
there is no great trust to the Earth, for that is full of darkness and cruel
habitations, Verse 21.
ver. 21.

Prayer. Epist. Fabio. de 42. Man's. Ma. 3 and Elias Cret. in Naz. Orat. 4.
Saint Hierom tells me, and he is not alone in the opinion, the Psalm was
David's, and therefore the Prayer too. As a Prophet he foresaw the danger, and
as a King he went on directly to the highest remedy. And though Kings now are
not Prophets, yet it is a great blessing upon any Kingdom to have the King a
Seer so far as is possible. To have him with both eyes open. His right eye
open and up to heaven, for God to maintain him; And his other eye downwards,
but open upon his People, to take care of them, and maintain them, with the
same support that he has received from God. And herein above other Nations we
are blesed this day, I say again, Above other Nations; if we can see our
blessing, and be thankful. For the King keeps his eye as steady upon God, as
if he had no help below him: And yet at the same time as gracious an eye upon
his People to relieve their just grievances, as if he were more ready to help
them, than to receive help from them.

Let not your hearts be troubled, neither fear, S. Joh. 14. 1.
S. Joh. 14. Here are two Kings at once at Prayer for you, David and your own
King. They are up and calling upon God to Arise. For shame Lagge not behind
God and your King. You have been, and I hope are, a valiant Nation, let nothing
dead your spirits, in Gods and your Countries Service; And if any man drop
malignant poison into your Ears, power it back into his own bosom.

And Sir, as you were first up, and summoned the Church to awake, and have
sounded an Alarm in the Ears of your People; Not that they should Fast and
Pray, and serve God alone, but go with you into the House of the Lord; so go
on to serve your Preserver. Your Merit, and the Nobleness of your heart will
glue the hearts of your People to you. And your Religious care of Gods cause
and service, will make him (I doubt not) Arise, and haste to the maintenance of
your Cause, as of his own. Only in these, and all times of difficulty, be
strong and of a good courage, keep close to the Law of the Lord. Be full of
Counsel, and then resolute to Act it. Else, if you shall not be firm to
deliberated Counsels, they which are bound to serve you, may seek and find
opportunities to serve themselves upon you. This do, and God Arise and be with
you, as he was with Moses, Joshuah 1. 7. 17.
Jos. 1. This do, and as S. Chrysostom. Homil. 14. in Epist. ad Hebr.
speaks, Aut non habebis Inimicum, aut irridebis eum: Either you shall have no
Enemy, or you shall be able to scorn him the world over.

Remember how the foolish man blasphemeth him daily.

his Cause, but base and uncivilly irreligious as they are, they fly upon his
Person too: For so you see the Text changes from the Thing to the Person;
Maintain thy cause: but remember, the Reproach runs against thy self, They
blaspheme thee. And by this you may see how dangerous a thing it is for any
Men, or any States, to become Enemies to the Cause of God. For sin will not
stay till it have wrought them farther, even into enmity against God himself.
And therefore this sin here, a high and a presumptuous sin, is not called the
presumption of them that hate Gods Cause, Verse 24.
but of them which hate God himself, ver. 24.

Presumption easily falls to Reproach Reproach is it these Enemies cast upon
God? What? Why, 'twas in the highest degree. 'Twas Blasphemy. Ibid.
For so Saint Basil renders my Text. Verse 11. and 19.
And so it is called again, Ver. 11. and 19 You may be sure the Prophet mistook
it not: It went not single, there were more than one; Ibid.
and Theodoret calls them Execrations, Cursings and Revilings of God.

And men of all sorts, as well as usurping Enemies, had need be watchful over
this sin. For a man may quickly be within the borders ^o it, before he be
aware; especially, ^^he be bold and busy with the Cause of God, as it is
reserved and secret in himself. For since all Blasphemy is a Derogation of
some Excellency, chiefly in God, Tho. 2. 2. q. 13. A. 1. c.
the School collects and truly, That whosoever denies to God any attribute
that is due unto him, or affirms any of God that is not agreeable to his
Nature; is within the Confines of Blasphemy. Entered, though perhaps not so
far gone. But these Enemies, it seems, stuck at no degree of Blasphemy;
Spared God himself no more than his Cause: And what reason can this State of
Church have, to think these Enemies, or their like, that spared not God nor
his Cause, will if they have power enough, spare them or theirs?

But I pray, who or what manner Enemy was it, that made thus bold with God?
Who? why, my Text answers that too, Stultus fuit, it was the foolish Man: And
you may know so much by his boldness. We find Psalm. 14. Psalm. 14. 1.
There was a Fool that blasphemed God. But 'twas in his heart. Out of his
mouth he durst not let it go: not once. And this Fool was in the same fear
at first: For, his Blasphemy kept in his heart, ver. 9. Verse 9.
But now he was grown impudent, it brake out at his Lips: Ibid.
For as S. Basil, Call. 3. Just. c. 23. Sect. 2.
and others observe, he did Palam maledicere, Blaspheme at large.

The Prophet no question knew these Enemies what they were, and that they had
other names beside Fools. But he fits them with their Name of Merit: That they
deserved, that he gives them. I told you these Enemies were cunning, subtle
Enemies. And it is true: But Malignity against Gods cause, and Blasphemy against
his Person, will make the greatest Wisdom in the world turn Fool. And Folly
dares adventure any thing against Man; Nay, against God too; which is alike
true of the Fool at home, and the Fool abroad.

The Prophet prayed against their Enemies, as we do now against ours. O my God
make them as a wheel, Psalm. 83. 13.
Psalm. 83. And see in what a wheel they are: The worst that ever moved. For
their Blasphemy carries their Wisdom round into Folly; And their Folly turns
their malice round into higher degrees of Blasphemy. Thus is this Enemy no
sooner a Blasphemer but a Fool: And no sooner a Fool, but a greater
Blasphemer. So Blasphemy is punished with Folly, and Folly with Blasphemy.
There Is the wheel, both in the sin, and the punishment.

And I pray observe: These Enemies that beset Gods Cause at Jerusalem were a
Nation. And so some read here; Not the Foolish man, but the Foolish People.
And a powerful Nation they were, were they Babilonians, Syrians, or Romans.
And one of them they were. And yet you see the Prophet gives them no other, no
better name, then Fool, when they violently persecute Gods Cause. Indeed they
deserve it. And this Sin is as able to Fool a whole Nation, as a particular
Man. Nay the holy Ghost here speaks of them as of one Man. As if Blasphemy
could change a whole Nation into one Fool. And surely, it is no hard thing with
God to make the wisdom of the whole world foolishness, 1* Cor. 1. 20.
1 Cor. 1. And it is as easy with him, to confound the wisdom of a whole
Nation, 2 Samuel 17. 14.
as of one Achitophell.

And see I beseech you how their Fool in this kind, and an Enemy to Gods
Cause, and a Blasphemer of his Person ever after, without a great deal of
mercy. And this is noted in the circumstance Tota Die, and Quotidie, Daily, and
all the day long at this Blasphemy: And it is usual this with Enemies; All the
day: For their studdy is upon it. And every day: For these Enemies were the
same in Blasphemy, The day of their preparation; The day of their Fight; and
the day of their Victory. And Ruffinus observes that this Blasphemy grew in the
continuance* Ibid.
And either it derided God in his Servants, or it menaced men for serving God.
How it flattered it self there while against both Man and God, is thus far
apparent in the Text: That they never durst have been daily Blaspemers against
God, if they had not been Opinators at least, that God could never have
maintained and made good his cause against them.

It is too much to see the cause of God opposed; To hear the name of GOD
Blasphemed, were it but once: But all the day long, and every day, is a
Tentation almost unsupportable to Christian and religious hearts. Yet this we
must be Inured to hear against King and Church, and God himself, if we take
not better course than hitherto we have done to keep out the Enemy and his
Blaspehmy.

Against this 'twas time for the Prophet, and it is time for us to pray. The
Blasphemy of an Enemy is a very urgent Motive to make Men pray. And the Prayer
of the Prophet here, that God would remember the Blasphemer, was very fervent:
For he begins this Prayer, at Remember the Rebuke of the Enemy, ver. 20. Verse
20.
And he ends his Prayer with Remember the Blasphemy of this Fool, ver. 23.
Verse 23.
Remember and forget it not, ver. 24. Verse 24.
This was the Prophet's Zeal for Gods Cause, and you may learn by it, that
cold Prayers are not they which remove the Blasphemy of Enemies. The Prayers
indeed of but one righteous Man does much, but it is when they are fervent. S.
Jaco. 5. 16.
Saint Jaco. 5.

But you will say: What needs all this calling upon God to Remember? S.
Hierom. in Thren. 5.
Is it possible he should forget? not possible certainly. But then as before,
Though God cannot sleep, Yet to awaken not him but our poor understanding
concerning him the Prayer was, Arise, O God. So here, though God cannot forget,
yet because in his providence he sometimes carries himself to our sense and
apprehension, Ad modum obliviscentis, as if he did forget, and threatens that
he will forget, Oblivione obliviscar eorum, Ose 1. 6.
Ose. 1. Forgeting, I will forget them, Therefore here again the Prayer runs
after the manner of men, Arise O Lord, yes, and Remember too.

Why? but since here is Enmity against the Cause of God, and Blasphemy against
himself, why does the Prophet ask no more of God, but that he would Remember
this? Why? why certainly it is, because there is abundantly enough of that. He
knew if God did Remember, he would punish; Ibid.
And (as S. Jerome observes) he therefore Remembers, that he may confound in
Judgment.

And indeed in Gods Language to Mark and Remember, Inuocen. 3. L. 2. Mist.
Miss. c 6.
is many times to punish: and not to Remember, is to forgive sin. If thou
Lord should be extreme to mark and observe, that is, to punish, What is
done amiss, Psalm. 130. 3
Psalm. 130. And the Church has learned not only to speak, but to pray of the
Prophet. For so the Church prays in the Letany: Not, punish not, but Remember
not Lord our offenses. And therefore the Prophets Prayer was home enough,
Remember Lord: Yes, do but that, and we either have, or shall have enough and
our enemies too. We, I hope of deliverance and preservation, and they of
punishment.

Thus you have heard the Prophets prayer, and I hope made your own, that God
would Arise and bestir himself. And what he desired God would do, both for
State and Church when he was Risen, that is, That he would plead and maintain
his own Cause. And Remember, that is, punish in his own time the Blasphemy of
all them, that reproach or detract from it or him.

One thing yet remains, and it is fit to be thought upon this day, every day,
all the day long. And that is, what it it is that makes God a Protector of any
King, any State, any National Church, against either inbred or foreign
Enemies. Against the Fox at home and the Lion abroad. And that certainly is,
for the State to go on with Honor and Justice. And for the Church to labor
Devotion as much at least, if not more then knowledge. For else Gods Cause and
ours may be two. And then God may Arise, and maintain his own, but leave us
to the Famine, to the Pestilence, to the Sword, to any other Judgment.

The only way to make God Arise as soon as ever we call: Nay, to prevent our
call and come in to help before we pray, is for both King and People, State
and Church, to weave their Cause and Gods together; To incorporate them so,
that no cunning of the Devil may be able to separate them. For then the benefit
is apparent. God cannot Arise and maintain his own cause, but he must
maintain ours too: because it is one with his. And his own (doubt you not) he
will maintain, against the proudest Enemy that can come against it. And
certainly the greatest hope and confidence of Gods Assistance to any Nation, to
any Man, that can precede deliverance it self, is to make their Cause all one
with Gods. And that is done by upholding his, and conforming theirs.

Our safety then is when our cause is one with Gods: Our danger when they
differ. But what is it that puts the difference between them? What? why that
which put the first Enmity between God and Man, Sin. And therefore if we will
quit the Enmity and be made friends, the only way to reconcile us with God,
and our Cause with his, is by Faith and Repentance to banish Sin. The sooner
this is done, the sooner we are safe: which cannot be till our Cause be one
with Gods. One, and yet when it is one, the pre-eminence is still with Gods
Cause, we must not suffer ours to step on before him.

For our Cause as it is spiritual and concerns our souls, if it be never so
good, never so close joined with God's, yet God's is to have the precedence.
For be ours never so good, I must beg of your humility to Remember, that Gods
Grace did both prevent and follow, to make it so. And therefore we are to put
his cause first, and to pray chiefly for the maintenance of that which gave
worth to ours.

And for our cause as it is temporal and concerns this life only, Our safety,
life, and livelihood; Gods cause is to have the precedence of that much more.
Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, Life and all, must
be accounted as nothing to Gods Cause, S. Luke. 14* 26.
S. Luke. 14. And it has ever been a sign that the soul of a man goes
right, That a whole People keep upon Gods path, when they seek first the
Kingdom of GOD and the righteousness thereof, and leave God to minister and
maintain the rest, S. Mat. 6. 33
S. Mat. 6. When they are more tenderly affected to the Cause of God, and more
sensible of the Reproach or Blasphemy of his Name, than of any calamities, that
might or malice can bring upon their persons.

And yet our giving Gods Cause the precedence, in our Love to it, and our
Prayers for it, is no exclusion of our own Cause: Nay, the preferring of Gods
before our own, And the making of our own conformable to Gods, is the way to
make God as jealous of our safety from all extremity, as he is to vindicate his
own honor from Reproach and Blasphemy. And therefore though the Prophet here
(as Theodoret observes) does not say, Ibid.
Arise, O God, and maintain Causam meam, my cause, but thine own; Yet the
same God that will have us prefer his cause, will have us pray for our own
likewise. And so the Prophet did: For though he be here all for Gods cause; yet
we have him very earnest for his own too. Plead thou my cause O Lord with them
that strive with me, and fight thou against them, that fight against me. Psalm.
15. 31. 1.
Psalm. 35. And defend my cause O God, against the ungodly People, Psalm. 43. 1.
Psalm. 43. 1.
Well then: Thy cause O God; and my Cause O God. But the Rule of Practice goes
here; Gods cause must lead, that ours may follow it, under the protection of
God.

As we have therefore now begun, so let us pray on as the Prophet did, That God
even our Gracious Father will be no longer like unto one that sleeps: That he
will Arise, and blow over these fears from us. It Is but his Breath, and he can
dry the Clouds, that they drop not Rottenness upon our Harvest. It Is but his
Breath, and he can clear the Air of Infection, as well all over the Kingdom,
as he has, beyond admiration, done it in our chief City. And it is but the
same Breath, and he can shake our Enemies to pieces in the Sea.

That God being Arisen and come near in providence, will plead first, and
after maintain his own Cause. His own in the hand of the King; His own in
the heart of the Church; And his own in the Holiness of his Name. That he
will give this State and Church, and every Member of both, such grace, that our
cause may be his, and his Maintenance ours. That he will remember and that is
enough, that if his Cause be ours, our Enemies are his. That we may so order
our lives by his Grace, that if these or any Enemies will Blaspheme, it may not
be Him for our sins, but Us for his service. That our Enemies and his,
how-wise soever in other things, yet in their plots and practices against us
may be written in the Text-Letters FOOLS. That we, being preserved from them
and all other Adversity, may take warning in time to mend our lives, and so
hereafter live to honor and serve him, that the world may see he has been
merciful, and we labor to be Thankful. That after the maintenance of his
and our Cause here, we may in our several times be received up to him in
Glory, Through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father, etc.

SERMON. VI.
Preached on Monday the 17. of March, 1628. at Westminster, at the opening of
the Parliament.
EPHESIANS. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of
peace.


THIS Chapter is a great Scripture for Unity: For, here we find there is but
One Lord whom we serve; Verse 5.
v. 5. But One God and Father, whom we worship and obey; Verse 6.
ver. 6. But One Spirit whom we receive, Verse 4.
while he sanctifies us; ver. 4. One Lord, One God and Father, One Spirit.
Three in One, all Three but one God, blessed for ever. But one Baptism, by
which we are cleansed; But one Faith by which we believe; Verse 5.
ver. 5. But one hope upon which we rely; Verse 4.
ver. 4. But one knowledge by which we are illightned; ver. 13. Verse 13.
But One Body of which we are members; Verse 4.
ver. 4. Different Graces, but all tending to One Edification, Diverse offices,
but all joynt-Overseers of the same work; Till the Building be One, and we One
in it, Ver. 11, 12
ver. 11.

This Chapter is as pressing a Scripture for Exhortation. And the first
Exhortation is, Verse 1.
That men would walk worthy of their calling, ver. 1. Their calling to be
Christians; their calling in Christianity. And that to show themselves worthy,
they would endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
Verse 3.
ver. 3.

All for Unity. And let me tell you, We often read of One in the Scripture;
but the word Unity in the abstract, is no where read either in Old or New
Testament, but only in this Chapter, and here it is twice. For we are exhorted
to keep it, Verse 3.
ver. 3. But how long? why even till we be made perfect, Verse 13.
ver. 13. that is, to the end of this life.

Why, but what need was there of this Exhortation at Ephesus? what? why sure
very great need. Ibid.
For Saint Anselm tells us, Schisma suit, there was a Schism and a rupture
there. And Charismata, the eminent Graces which God had given many of them, was
made the cause of the Schism. For Corruption at the heart of man breeds pride
even out of Gods graces. And they which had these gifts despised them which had
them not, and separated from them. This gave occasion to false teachers to
enter in, and lie in wayt to deceive, ver. 14. Verse. 14.
This was the state of the Church of Ephesus. How was it in the City and the
Commonwealth there while? How? why, the City was then a very famous City in
Ionia, a part of Asia the less; At this time subject to the Roman Empire;
Their Proconsul and other Deputies were over them, Act. 19. 38
Acts 19. But Diana was goddess there, and the City heathen.

Ephesus then was Ethnic: No Religion but Paganism avowed by the state. And
the City was a stranger to the Church that was in it. A Stranger and without as
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5. 12.
1 Cor. 5. Yet such is the force of Christian Religion, that as Herod and
Jerusalem were troubled when Christ was borne, S. Mat. 2. 3
S. Math. 2. So here Demetrius and Ephesus were troubled when the name and
Religion of Christ was borne and nursed up among them: For the word of God did
no sooner grow and prevail at Ephesus, Act. 19. 20.
Acts 19. 20. but by and by there arose no small trouble about it, Ver. 23.
ver. 23.

The City and the State Heathen, yet troubled when Religion came in: Therefore,
A City and a State Christian must needs be more troubled when Religion goes
out. And the ready way to out Religion, is to break the Unity of it. And the
breach of the Unity of Religion will be sure to trouble the City first, and
hazard the State after. For the State, whether Pagan or Christian, has ever
smarted more or less, as the Church has crumbled into Divisions.

S. Paul I know wrote this Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, not the City. And
he called for Unity bound up in peace for the Churches good, without any
express mention either of City or State. Yet he well knew that the good both
of the State and the City would follow upon it. For Unity is a binder up; And
Unity of Spirit, (which is religion's unity) is the fastest binder that is. And
lest it should not bind fast enough, it calls in the bond of peace. So that no
man can exhort unto, and endeavor for the Unity of the Church, but at the same
time, he labors for the good of the State. And if it were so at Ephesus where
the state was Heathen; much more must it needs be so, where the state is
Christian.

I shall follow my Text therefore both in it self, and in the Consequent which
follows upon it. In it self; and so it is for the Unity of the Church. And a
maine Text it is (says S. Jerome) against Heresy and Schism. Ibid.
In the Consequence it has; And so it is for the Unity of the State. And a full
Consequence it is. For Unity not kept in the Church is less kept in the State.
And the Schisms and divisions of the one, are both Mothers and Nurses of all
disobedience and dis-joynting in the other. So the Apostles Exhortation goes on
directly to the Church, by Consequent to the State. And it will behove both
Bodies that all the several members of each Endeavor to keep the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace.

Text has six particulars. For first, here is the thing it self, to which the
Apostle exhorts, That Is Unity. Secondly, All Unity will not serve the turn, It
must be the Unity of the Spirit. Thirdly, what is to be done with this Unity, It
must be kept. Fourthly, there will be no keeping of it, without a strong
Endeavor. in peace. And sixthly, Peace it self cannot hold it long, except it
be bound up in Vinculo, in the strongest bond that peace has.

Apostles Exhortation, It Is Unity;

known than loved. A thing so good, that it is never broken but by the worst
men. Nay, so good it is, that the very worst men pretend best when they break
it. It Is so in the Church; Never Heretic yet rent her bowels, but he pretended
that he raked them for truth. It Is so in the State; Seldom any unquiet Spirit
divides her Union, but he pretends some great abuses, which his integrity would
remedy. O that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man which has any
Controversy might come to me, that I might do him Justice. And yet no worse
than David was King, when this Cunning was used, 2 Samuel 15. 4.
2 Samuel 15. Unity then both in Church and Commonwealth is so good, that none
but the worst willingly break it: And even they are so far ashamed of the
breach, that they must seem holyer than the rest, that they may be thought to
have a just cause to break it.

Now to be one here, whether in one Body. But One is taken here (says
Paulinus) pro multorum unanimitate, Epist. 5.
for the unanimitie and consent of many in one. And the Church and
Commonwealth, take them severally, or together, they are, they can be no
otherwise One than Union multorum, by the uniting and agreeing of many in one.
And so S. Luke, Acts 4. Act. 4. 32.
The Church was a multitude of Believers, sed Cor unum, but they lived as if
they had had but one heart among them. Unio est aliquorum distinctorii.
This Unity then is so One, as that it is the Uniting of more than one: Thom.
2. 2. q. 17. A. 3. ^^r.
yet such a uniting of many, as that when the Common Faith is endangered, the
Church appears for it as One; And when the common safety is doubted, or the
common peace troubled, the State appears for it as One. As Israel was said to
be knit together as one man, Jud. 20. Jud. 20. 11
And indeed when One Man is not more at Unity in himself for his own defense,
than the Church and State are for public defense, then both are justly said to
be at Unity.

Fraction makes uneven reckonings. And it is hard, very hard, for a man that
breaks Unity to give either God or man a good account of so doing. Hard to
give account, but that is not all.

For, if Unity be broken, if a Division be made, the parts must be aequall or
unaequall. If the parts be aequall, neither of them has more than half its
strength. If they be unaequall, one has not so much. And that which has more,
usually has more pride, and so less will to unite. And yet for all this
pride, far weaker it is, than when there was Unity, and altogether. Nay, in
breach of Unity there is not always safety for the greater against the less.
For in that grievous breach in Israel, when the Eleven Tribes came out against
Benjamin four hundred thousand strong, and their quarrel good, yet they fell
twice before them, Jud. 20. 17
Judge. 20.

Nay this is not all, not any almost of the hurt which follows in either
Church or State, when discontents have swallowed up their Unity. For the
Church; Ibid.
Nothing (says S. Chrysostom) does so provoke God to anger, as to see divisam
Ecclesiam, his Church purchased by one blood, to be One Body, made more, made
other than One. And for the Commonwealth; A people is as one City, yet such a
one (says Saint Augustine) cui est periculosa dissentio, Lib. de Ord. cap. 18.
as to whom all breach of Unity is full of danger. For Church and State
together; It was a grievous Rent among the Jews, when Manasses devoured
Ephraim, Ephraim Manasses, and both fell upon Judah, Esaias 9. 21.
Esaias 9. What followed? was God pleased with this, or were the Tribes in safety
that were thus divided? No sure. For it follows. The wrath of the Lord was not
turned away, but his hand was stretched out still.

Still? How long was that? How long? Why, Till Ephraim and Manasses, which
could not agree at home, were with the rest of the ten Tribes carried away into
perpetual captivity. And Esaias lived to see his Prophecy fulfilled upon them.
For they were carried away by Salmanasar in the sixth year of Hezekiah, when
Esaias flourished. This wrath of the Lord was fierce, and the people drank deep
of this Cup. Therefore I go a far off both for time and place to fetch this
Instance: And do you take care not to bring it nearer home. And I pray observe
it too: The hand of God was stretched out upon Ephraim and Manasses, but
there is no mention, which was the first, or which the greater offender, Ephraim
or Manasses. What Is the Reason? It Is because the breach of unity scarce leaves
any Innocent; and the hand of God is stretched out upon all.

I press Unity hard upon you (pardon me this Zeal.) O that my thoughts could
speak that to you that they do to God; or that my tongue could express them
but such as they are; Or that there were an open passage that you might see
them, as they pray faster than I can speak for Unity.

But what then? will any kind Unity serve the turn? Surely, any will do much
good: But the best is fafest; and that is the Unity of the Spirit.

The learned are not altogether Calv. Bucer Lapide. Ibid.
what is meant by the Unity of the Spirit. For some think no more is meant by
it, than a bare concord and agreement in mind and will. Let Us keep this, and
both Church and State shall have a great deal of freedom from danger. But
others take the Unity of the Spirit to be that spiritual concord, Lyra. Hu.
Card. Amb. Cath Beza. Lapide. Ib.
which none does, none can work in the hearts of men, but the Holy Ghost, And
I am apter to follow this sense: because if you take it for a bare agreement in
judgment, Saint Paul had said enough by naming Unity, He needed have made no
Addition of the Spirit. And because in the Text it is (...), which for the most,
points out the Holy Spirit. And because else Saint Paul's words (which Bucer
calls Ardentia verba, Ibid.
zealous and burning words) add nothing to any even the coldest exhortation of
the Heathen to Unity.

Unity then of the Spirit, to which the Apostle exhorts, includes both; Both
concord in mind and affections, and love of charitable unity, which comes from
the Spirit of God, and returns to it. And indeed the Grace of Gods Spirit, is
that alone, which makes men truly at peace and unity one with another. Ei
tribuendum non Nobis, Tra. 110. in. S. Jo.
To him it is to be attributed, not to us, (says Saint Augustine) It Is he that
makes men to be of one mind in an house, Psalm. 68. 6.
Psalm. 68. Now one mind in the Church, and one mind in the State, come from the
same fountain with One mind in an house; All from the Spirit. And so the
Apostle clearly ver. 4. Verse 4.
One Body, and one Spirit, that is, One Body, by one Spirit. For it is the
Spirit that joins all the members of the Church into one Body. And it is the
Church that blesses the State, not simply with unity; but with that unity with
which it self is blessed of God. A State not Christian may have Unity in it.
Yes, And so may a State that has lost all Christianity, save the Name. But
Unity of the Spirit, nor Church nor State can longer hold, than they do in
some measure obey the Spirit, and love the Unity.

This Unity of the Spirit is closer Spirits meet where bodies cannot; and
nearer than Bodies can. The Reason is given by Saint Chrysostom: Hom. 9. in
Ephesians.
Because the Soul or Spirit of man is more simple and of one form. And the
Soul apter in it self to Union is made more apt by the Spirit of God, which
is One, and loves nothing but as it tends to One. Nay, as the Spirit of God is
One, and cannot dissent from it self; no more ought they whom the Spirit has
joined in One: and the Spirit has joined the Church in One; Therefore he that
divides the Unity of the Church, practices against the Unity of the Spirit.

Unity of the Spirit (so called, because it proceeds from the Spirit of Grace,
continues in Obedience to it, and in the end brings us to the Spirit that gave
it) is the cause of all other unity that is good; and the want of it, the Cause
of all defects in Unity. The presence of it is the Cause of all unity that is
good: Of all within the Church, no man doubts. But it is of all without the
Church too. For no Heathen men or States did ever agree in any good thing
whatsoever, but their Unity proceeded from this Spirit, and was so far forth at
least a unity of the Spirit. And for States that are Christian, and have
mutual relations to the Church that is in them, Lib. 4. Ep. 76.
S. Gregory's Rule is true. The unity of the State depends much upon the peace
and unity of the Church: therefore upon the guidance of the same Spirit.

And as the presence of the Unity of the Spirit is the Cause of all Unity that
is good: So the want of it is the cause of all defects in Unity. For as in the
Body of a man the Spirit holds the members together; but if the Soul depart,
the members fall a sunder: So it is in the Church (says Theophilact) and so in
the State. Ibid.
So little unity then in Christendom as is, is a great Argument, that the
Spirit is grieved, and has justly withdrawn much of his influence. And how is
the Spirit grieved? How? why, sure by our neglect, if not contempt of Him as He
is One. For as he is the Spirit of fortitude, Esaias 11. Esaias 11. 2.
there we will have him, he shall defend us in war. And as he is the Spirit of
Wisdom, there we will have him too, he shall govern us in peace. But as he is
One Spirit, and requires that we keep his Unity, there we will none of him;
though we know right well, that without Unity peace cannot continue, nor war
prosper.

One unity there is (take heed of it) it is a great Enemy to the Unity of the
Spirit, both in Church and Commonwealth. S. Basil calls it Concors Odium,
Epist. 63.
unity in hatred to persecute the Church. And to this work there is unity
enough; Men take counsel together, Psalm. 2. 2.
Psalm. 2. Saint Augustine calls it unitatem contra unitatem, Ser. 6. de verb.
Dom. c. 12.
a unity against unity; when Pagans, Jews, and Heretics, or any profane crew
whatsoever, make a league against the Churches unity. And about that work,
that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance, that there may be no
Church, or no reformed Church, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistims,
and they that dwell at Tire are Confederates together, Psalm. 83. 4. in Psalm.
140.
Psalm. 83. S. Hilary will not vouchsafe to call such union unity; Indeed It
deserves not the name, It Is not unity (says he) be it in Church or be it in
State: but it is a Combination. And he gives his Reason. For unity is in faith
(and Obedience:) but Combination is Consortium factionis, no other, no better,
the consenting in a faction. And all Faction is a Fraction too, and an Enemy to
unity, even while it combines in one. For while it combines but a part, it
destroys the unity of the whole.

Is the Spirit in this? Out of question, No. For a Faction to compass it is
end, I will not say, when it sees a thief it consents to him; or that it is
always partaker with the Adulterers: but this it does, It speaks against its
own Brother, and slanders its own Mothers Son, Psalm. 50. 19
Psalm. 50. Can any man call this the unity of the Spirit? or is this the way to
Unity.

And now I cannot but wonder what words S. Paul (were he now alive) would use,
to call back Unity into dismembered Christendom. For my part, Death were
easier to me, than it is to see and consider the face of the Church of Christ
scratched and torn, till it bleeds in every part, as it does this day: And the
Coat of Christ, which was once spared by Soldiers, because it was seamblesse,
S. Ioh. 19. S. Joh. 19. 23.
Rent every way, and which is the misery of it, by the hand of the Priest; And
the Pope, which Bellarmine has put into the Definition of the Church, Bellar.
3. de Eccles. Mil. c. 2. Sect. Nostra autem.
that there might be one Ministerial head to keep all in Unity, is as great
as any, if not the greatest cause of divided Christianity. Good God, what
preposterous thrift is this in men, to sow up every small rent in their own
Coat; and not care what rents they not only suffer, but make in the Coat of
Christ? What is it? Is Christ only thought fit to wear a torn garment? Or
can we think that the Spirit of Unity which is one with Christ, will not
depart to seek warmer clothing? Or if he be not gone already, why is there
not Unity, which is where ere he is? Or if he be but yet gone from other parts
of Christendom, in any case (for the passion and in the bowels of Jesus Christ
I beg it) make stay of him here in our parts.

Apostle goes on. Keep the Unity of the Spirit.

Jerome.) Ibid.
the one, that they which have this Unity of keep it: the other, that they
which have it not, labor to get it. And certainly nothing can be more
beneficial, or more honorable either for Church or State, than to get it when
they have it not, or to keep it when they have it. And this is employed in the
very word, which the Apostle uses, Keep. For no wise man will advise the
treasuring up and keeping of any thing, but that which is of use and benefit.
And the word (...), does not barely signify to Keep, but Tueri, to defend
too, which is the stoutest keeping. Now all wise men are for Unity: And all
good men for the Unity of the Spirit. In Genesis c. 7
Yes (says S. Isidor) Boni servant, Good men keep it.

Wise and good men keep it; why then none but fools, and bad men break it.
Sly and cunning men perhaps may have their hands in Divisions, but wise or good
men they are not. For are they not all without understanding that work
wickedness Psalm. 53. Psalm. 53. 5.
And a greater wickedness men can hardly work, than to dissolve the Unity of
the Spirit in either Church or Commonwealth. For they do as much as in them
lies to bring profaneness into the Church, and desolation upon the State.
Keep therefore the Unity of the Spirit.

Keep Unity: why, but what needs that? will not unity keep it self? It Is true,
unity is very apt to hang together. It proceeds from Charity, which is the glue
of the Spirit, not severed without violence. Yea but for all this, it needs
keeping. In the Church it needs keeping: And therefore the Prophets and
Governors of the Church are called Custodes, Keepers, Watchmen and Overseers,
Ezekiel. 3. 17
Ezekiel. 3. and Acts 20. Acts 20. 28.
And they must watch as well over her Peace, as her Truth. And yet there are so
many that scatter the tares of Schism and Heresy, that her Unity is not kept.

In the Commonwealth it needs keeping too. For her Governors are Custodes
Civitatis, Keepers of the City. But there also, there are not few that trouble
the waters for their own fishing. And many times a Commonwealth is in danger
to lose her Unity, Acts 19. 32.
just as Ephesus did, Act. 19. At which time all the City was troubled, but the
greater part knew not why. And the true cause of the Division was no more but
this; Demetrius and his fellows were afraid they should lose their gain, if
Diana and her Temple kept not up their greatness.

Now this noise at Ephesus does not only tell us that unity needs keeping, but
it informs us farther of the way to keep it. The way to keep unity both in
Church and State is for the Governors to carry a watchful eye over all such as
are discoverd, or feared, to have private ends. For there is no private end, but
in some thing or other it will be lead to run cross the public: And if gain
come in, though it be by making shrines for Diana, it is no matter with them
though Ephesus be in an uproare for it.

And certainly there is no keeping of Unity in either Church or State, unless
men will be so temperate (when it comes to a lump at least) as to lay down the
private for the publique's sake, Hom. 9. in Ephesians.
and persuade others to do the like: Else (says Saint Chrysostom) Quicquid
ducit ad amorem sui, dividit unitatem, whatsoever leads men to any love of
themselves and their own ends, helps to divide the unity. Tho. 2. 2. q. 183.
A. 2. ad 3.
And the School applies it both to Church and State. For in the Church they
which seek their own, and not that which is Christ's (who is publicum
Ecclesiae, the public interest of the Church) depart from the Unity of the
Spirit. And in an earthly City, the unity of that is gone, when the Citizens
studdy their own, not the public good.

Unity to be kept? When? why, surely at all times, if it be possible. But
especially it is to be kept, when Enemies are banded together against Church
or State. Then above all other times look well to the keeping of Unity. Am I
deceived? or is not this your case now? Are not many and great Enemies joined
against you? Are they not joined both against the Church and against the State?
Are they joined, and are you divided? God forbid. It cannot be that you should
so forget the Church of Christ, or the Bowels of your own Country, and your
own. Join then and keep the Unity of the Spirit, and I Will fear no danger
though Mars were Lord of the Ascendent, in the very instant of this Session of
Parliament, and in the second house, or joined, or in aspect with the Lord of
the second, Aphoris. 84.
which yet Ptolomey thought brought much hurt to Common wealths.

But suppose all danger over (I keep Unity at all times. For Enemies are as
Cunning as malice can make them: And if Unity be not kept at al times, at that
time when it is not kept they will make their breach. And they will make it certainly.
For if the Unity of the Spirit be gone, the Spirit is gone with it; And if the
Spirit be gone, Christ is gone with him: And if they be gone, God the Father
is gone with them. And what misery will not follow when an Enemy shall come
upon a State, and find the whole blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost gone from it, to accompany that Unity which is banished out of it?

Unity be lost, we will quickly fetch it back again. Soft: First it is more
wisdom to keep it, than to be driven to fetch it back. Secondly, before
Unity be thrust off, it would be well thought upon, whether it be in your power
to bring it back when you will. The Spirit, I am sure, is not, and it is His
Unity. And, lose it when you will, it is like the loss of health in the
natural body; Just like. For there every Disease is with some breach of Unity;
either by Inflammation in some noble or vital part; or by strife in the
humors; or Luxations in the joints; or by breaking veins or sinews; still
with some breach of Unity. Well, what says the patient therewhile? What? Why,
he says he will recover his health, and then take care to keep it. Yea, but
what if Death seize upon Him before health be recovered? What then? Had it not
been better and safer a great deal to keep health while he had it? And is not
death a just reward of his distempering his humors? I will not apply, to either
Church or Commonwealth: but certainly it is better for both to keep the Unity
of the Spirit, than to trust to the Recovery of it when it is lost.

Keep then the Unity of the Spirit; Text) that if you will keep it, you must
endeavor to keep it.

For it is not so easy a thing to keep Unity in great Bodies as it is thought;
There goes much labor and endeavor to it. The word is (...), study, be
careful to keep it. In Psalm. 99
Saint Augustine reads it Satagentes, do enough to keep it: And he that does
enough, gives not over doing till it be kept.

Nay, the Apostle comes so home, that he uses two words, and both of singular
care for Unity: For he does not simply say Keep it, nor simply Endeavor it,
but study and endeavor to keep it. Now no man can keep that is not careful;
and no man will endeavor that is not studious. Neither is it (says Saint
Chrysostom.) every man's sufficiency to be able to keep Unity: Hom. 9. in Ephesians.
And the word implies such an endeavor as makes haste to keep: and indeed no
time is to be lost at this work

endeavoring, whence comes it, that that which clings so together, as all
Unity does, is so hard to keep? Whence? why I Will tell you: I presume you will
endeavor the more to keep it.

First, then it is hard to be kept, in regard of the nature of this Unity. For
be it in Church, or be it in Commonwealth, it is Vnum aggregatum, One by
Collection and Conjunction of many; And the School teaches us, Tho. p. 1. q.
31. A. 1. 2.
that this Unity is Minima Vnitas, A Unity that is least One: and therefore
aptest to fall asunder. Both because many are not easily kept at One; and
because every one of the many, by reason of the contrary thoughts and
affections which divide him, is not long together one in himself. Which is the
Reason (as I conceive) of that in Philo, Philo apud Tho. 2. 2. q. 183. A. 2. 3
That a little difference is able to divide a City.

Secondly, it is hard to keep in regard of Opposers against it, and sly
practicers upon it. And they are many, David complained of them in his time,
Psalm. 120. 5
Psalm. 120. My soul has long dwelt with them that are Enemies to peace. And
there is no Church, nor no State, but has some of these. And since the plotting
and studdy of these is to break, you must endeavor to keep the Unity of the
Spirit. And you will find the work hard enough.

But as to keep Unity is a work Difficulty, and takes up much endeavor of
the best: so it is a glorious work, and worth their endeavor. It is a pitiful
thing to see a man but reputed wise, and his Endeavor, vain: But beside the
comfort that is within, there is a great deal of honor to see a wisemans
endeavor like himself. And nothing is more like wisdom than Unity. For wise
Counsels, are seldom better known by any thing than this; That as they are
in themselves One, and vary not; so they tend to One, and distract not: That
One end is Verity in the Church, Safety in the State, and Unity in both.
Notwithstanding this, Good God, what spending there is of great endeavors,
about vanity, and things of naught? Half that endeavor spent in keeping
Unity, would do what all our hearts desire, and more too.

Endeavor right to the keeping of this Unity of the Spirit? How? why the
Apostle tells you that too, Verse 2.
ver. 2. And the way he proposes is so direct, that I dare say, if you
endeavor, you shall keep the unity of the Spirit, both in Church and State.

First, then all Endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit is void, if it be
not virtuous. For the Spirit will neither be kept, nor keep men together in
vice. Next, among all virtues four are most necessary to preserve Unity. The
Apostle names them; and I Will do no more. They are Humility at the heart.
Meekness in the carriage. Patience in point of forbearance. And Charity,
whose work is supportation of the weak, that scandal be not taken, and Unity
broken.

And concerning this last great virtue whose work is supportation of the weak,
it is and excellent passage which S. Augustine has. In Psalm. 99.
Art thou so perfect that there is nothing in thee which another need support?
I wonder if it be so: It Is rare perfection. But be it so. Why then thou art the
stronger to support others. Is Unity like to be broken, and do thou say thou
can not support others? Ergo habes quod in te alii sustineant, Therefore thou
art not yet so perfect as thou thoughtest, but thou have somewhat that others
may support and bear in thee.

Endeavor then to keep the Unity of the Spirit, that we must. But in what is
Unity best preserved? In what, why that follows next. It Is in peace, says the
Apostle.

Now Peace in this place is not War: But it is that Peace which opposes all
jarring and falling out, especially falling off one from another. It is not
considered here as opposite to War: For that Peace and War cannot possibly
stand together. But this Peace in which Unity is kept, is most useful, most
necessary, when War is either threatened or begun. For as there is most need
of Unity against United Enemies: so is there most need of peacable dispositions
to Unite at home, against forces from abroad: Therefore the Learned agree here,
That Peace stands for a Calm, and quiet dispose of the hearts of men, and of
their carriage too, that the Unity of the Spirit may be preserved. And
certainly without this peacable disposition, it is in vain to say we endeavor
for Unity; either to get, or to keep it.

Peace then here spoken of, differs not much from the virtue of meekness.
Only it adds above meekness toward others, quietness with them. As it
agrees with meekness, so it is the way to Unity: As it adds above it; so it is
the Treasury in which Unity is kept. It Is an ancient Rule for kingdoms and a
good, Iisdem Artibus quibus parta sunt facile retinentur, Salast. in Conjur.
Catil.
They are kept in subjection, order, and obedience, by the same virtues by
which they were first gotten. Now the unity of the Spirit is a great part of
the Kingdom of Grace; Therefore this Kingdom too, if it be gotten, as it is,
by peace, then in peace it must be kept. For you shall never see the Unity of
the Spirit dwell in a froward heart, that is enemy to peace.

That affection of which Saint Bernard was, Epist. 252.
is the great keeper of Unity. And sure he dwelt in peace. Adhaerebo vobis etsi
nolitis, etsi nolim ipse, I will stick and be one with you, though you would
not have me do it: nay, though any tentation in my self would not have me do
it. And therefore they are quite out of the way, in the Church (says S. Jerome)
that think they can hold the unity of the Spirit, Ibid.
Dissipata pace, when they have shaken peace asunder. And they are as far
mistaken in the Commonwealth, that steep all their humors in gall, and yet
would entitle themselves Patrons of unity. And surely such, in what State
soever they live, know not of what Spirit they are, though all other men see,
it is fire they call for, S. Luke 9. S. Luke 9. 55.


Why? but what need is there of Peace? this Endeavor for Unity? what need in
regard of the times, the time it self preaches, I may hold my peace. But what
need there is, in regard of men's persons and conditions, which are to comply
with the times, that I Will tell you. The best Peace that is, and the fairest
calm that the Soul of man has, is imperfect in this life. What then? What?
why therefore says the School, Tho. 2. 2. q. 29. A. 2. 4.
though the Soul be at rest and peace with God, and consequently in it self,
and with others, yet there is still some repugnancy, both within, and without,
which disturbes this peace. For whatsoever is imperfect is under perturbation;
And the more a Man is troubled, the less perfect is his peace. Out of which it
follows again, that all Exhortation to recall a man's passions to peace is
very needful for the keeping of Unity: And he that is offended at S. Paul's
Exhortation to peace, is not at peace in Himself.

peace which keeps, and this Unity of the Spirit which is kept, is the blessing
and the gift of God? It shall ever be far from me to deny that. But what then?
Because they are Gods blessings, must not you endeavor to get them? And
because they are Gods gifts, must not you be careful to keep them? Nay ought
not you be the more careful to keep, when God himself is so free to give?
It Is true, You cannot endeavor till God give grace; But it is true too, that you
are bound to endeavor, when he has given it. Bound certainly; and therefore
Saint Jerome expounds this, Ibid.
which is but Counsel and Exhortation in Saint Paul, by a Praecipitur. There Is
Gods command upon you, that you endeavor for Unity in Peace.

And now, what if God have given sufficiency, nay abundance of Grace, and yet
there be no Endeavor, can any be blamed then for want of Unity but your
selves? It Is true, that except the Lord keep the City, your Watchmen wake in
Vain, Psalm. 127. Psalm. 127. 2^
But is it any where said in Scripture, that if you will set no watch, take no
care, that yet God will keep the City? No sure. And this will ever be found
certain, when and wheresoever the Unity of the Spirit is not kept, then and
there was want of man's endeavor to keep it in peace. And whenever God lays
that punishment which follows Disunion upon a Nation, the Sin upon which the
punishment falls is committed by man's misendeavouring, or want of Endeavoring.

Peace it self cannot hold Unity long, if it be not a firm and a binding
peace. And this brings in the end of the Text, the keeping of Unity in Vinculo
Pacis, in the bond of peace.

a settled unity, you must have a firm peace. The reason is, because in this
Unity many are brought together; And many will not be held together without a
bond. Saint Augustine discovered this. Lib. 1. De Doct. Christiana, p^ol^,
Vnitas sine nodo facile dissolvitur; That Unity (says he) which has no knot,
is easily dissolved. This Unity is so comfortable, so beneficial both to
Church and State, that it cannot be too fast bound. But if it be not fast
bound, both it and the benefit will soon be lost.

in vinculo, in that which binds this, is to be observed: It compasses about
all which it contains, and then where it meets there is the knot; So that which
is bound is held close within the Imbracings of the bond; And the bond is not
of one substance, and the knot of another, but both of one and the same
substance. So it is here. For the unity of the Spirit is contained and compassed,
as it were by peace: Peace goes before it, to bring it in; And Peace goes with
it, when it is in; And Peace goes round about it, to keep it in. And where the
two ends of Peace meet, there Unity is fast and knit up. And the knot is of
the same substance with the bond, Peace too. And therefore where the ancient
reading of the Text is, To keep Unity in the bond of peace, there some will
have it, Lapide. Ib.
to keep Unity in vinculo quod est pax; In that band which is peace.

This bond as it is the bond of unity; unity it binds. For if you mark it, it
binds unity; and the bond is but One; In vinculo pacis, in the bond of peace;
One band. And yet that which is unum, is not unius, that which is but One, is
not only of One, For it binds many, whole Churches, whole Kingdoms. And both
bodies are ever safest, when the bond is One; and that One able to hold them.
For when this One bond of peace cannot bind close, it is a shrewd argument,
either that some ill humor swells, and will not endure the bond; or that the
bond it self is strained and made weak. And in both these cases, timely help
must be applied, or the Unity of the Body is in Danger.

You may see this plain in the Natural body. The out-bond of the body is the
skin. If the body be too full of humors, and they foul and in Motion, the
body swells till the skin breaks. So it is in the Church, and so it is in the
State, when the body is too full of humors.

The inner-bond of the body is the Sinew. It Is (...), the very word which the
Apostle uses, The bond or the sinew of peace. If the sinew be broken or
over-strained, there is much pain and weakness in the body, and the members
hang as loose, as if they were falling one from another. And so it is in the
Ecclesiastical; And no other than so, in the Civil Body. If there be but a
straining in the bond, though perhaps the sinew be not yet broken, it is high
time to look to the Unity of the Body. Well, What Remedy then? What? Why, sure
there is none but Vinculum Vinculi; The sinew must have a swathe: And that which
was wont to bind the Body, must be bound up it self. And if the Cure light not
into honest and good Chirurgions hands, it may prove a lame Church, and a weak
State ever after. God bless the Body therefore, and direct the Chirurgions.

Now as the bond of these great bodies, the Church, and the State, may be
broken; so the knot, which has ever been hard to unty, may be cut. And both
Church and State have ever had Cause to fear both, both breaking and cutting.
Saint Ignatius was afraid of this in the Church, by and by after the Apostles
times; And therefore He writes to the Church of Philadelphia, Epist. ad
Philadelph.
In any case to to fly and shun (...), the partition or cutting off this
knot. And indeed it is not fit for any man employed about this bond of peace, to
have his Rasor about him. And David was afraid of this in the State; and he had
cause, great cause: For some wild unruly men cried out then, Let Us break their
bonds in sunder, and cast their cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3.
Psalm. 2. What bonds? Why, All the bonds of peace, and all the bonds of
allegiance too. For the Consultation then was (says Calvin) to depose David.
In Psalm. 2.
But he that dwells in heaven, laughed them to scorn, ver. 4. Verse 4.
And then brake them in pieces like a Potters vessel, Verse 9.
ver. 9. Now the Breakers of the bond of peace both in Church and Commonwealth
are pride and disobedience: For these two cry one to another, That is, Pride to
disobedience, Come let us break the bond.

disobedient man, but he is proud: For he would Obey, if he did not think
himself fitter to govern. Nor shall you ever see a proud man stoop to bind
up any thing: But if you see him stoop, take heed of him, it is, doubtless,
to break the bond of peace. The Reason's plain; if he stoop to bind up, He
knows he shall be but one of the bundle; which his pride cannot endure. But if
he stoop to loose the bond, then he may be free, and show his virtue (as he
calls it) that is, hope To run foremost in the head of a Faction. Fond men,
that can be thus bewitched with pride against themselves. For when they are
bound up, though but as one of the Bundle, yet therein, under God, they are
strong and safe: But when the Bond is broken, and they perhaps, as they wish,
in the Head, headlong they run upon their own Ruin.

Thus you have seen the Apostles care for Unity: For Unity, but feign would he
have it of the Spirit. This Unity he desires you should keep; yea studdy and
endeavor to keep, as the Spirit is ready to prevent and assist, that you may
be able to keep it. This Unity must be kept in peace: And if you will have it
sure, in the bond of peace.

That which remains is, that you obey and follow the Apostles Exhortation:
That all of you in your selves, and with others, endeavor to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace, both in Church and Commonwealth. For good
Counsel, such as here our Apostles is, does not make Church or State happy,
when it is given, but when it is followed. And to the danger that may come, it
adds guilt, to all such as will not obey the counsel, that they may prevent
the danger.

And let me say thus much for the Unity of the Spirit; It Is that which ties us
one to another, and all to God, and God to all. Without God we cannot be safe,
either in this life, or that to come. And without this Unity, no man is sure of
his Neighbors assistance, nor any man of Gods. But by this Unity, GOD himself
is content to be bound to you. And that which is bound, is sure and ready at
need. Et sortis cum debili ligatus, and illum portat and se, (says Saint
Chrysostom.) Hom. 9. in Ephesians.
And strength bound to weakness, bears up both it self, and weakness. And
in this sense I can admit of Scaligers Subtilty; Exerc. 365 Sect. 1.
That Unity is Omnipotent.

Keep Unity then, and be sour (it is honorable Justice) upon any that shall
endeavor to break it. He deserves not to live, that would dissolve that bond,
by which God has bound himself to assist the Church, and the Commonwealth.
Our adversaries make Unity a Note of the Church, and they persuade such as will
believe them, that we have no Unity, and so no Church. I would not have
Occasion given them to enlarge their doctrine; lest in the next place they take
upon them to prove, that we have no Commonwealth neither, for want of Unity.

Now to keep Unity, I have made bold to direct you one way already; and here is
an other. It Is necessary that the Governors have a good and a quick eye to
discover the cunning of them that would break the Unity first, and the whole
Body after. You shall give a guess at them by this; They Will speak as much for
Unity as any men; but yet, if you mark them, you shall still find them busy
about the knot, that binds up Unity in peace: somewhat there is that wrings
them there. They will pretend perhaps, it is very good there should be Vinculum,
A Bond to bind men to Obedience, O, God forbid else: but they would not have
the knot too hard. Take heed. Their aim is, They would have a little more
liberty, that have too much already. Or perhaps they will pretend, they would not
untie the knit, no, there may be danger in that, but they would only turn it
to the other side, because this way it lies uneasily. But this is but a shift
neither. For turn the knot which way you will, all binding to Obedience will
be grievous to some. It may be they will protest, that though they should untie
it, yet they would not leave it loose. They would perhaps tie it otherwise, but
they would be sure to knot it as fast. Trust not this pretext neither. Out of
Question, their meaning is to tie up Unity in a Bow-knot, which they might slip
at One End when they list. Indeed, whatsoever they pretend, if they be curious
about the knot, I pray look to their fingers, and to the Bond of peace too.
For whatsoever the pretenses be, they would be at the dissolving of Unity.

Well, Provide for the keeping of Unity; And what then? Why, then, God bless
you with the Success of this Day. For this Day, the seventeenth of March, I.
Caesar overthrew Sex. Pompeius. And that Victory was in Spain; and Spain
which had long been troublesome, settled, and came quietly in, by that one
Action. And this very Day too, Frederick the Second entered Jerusalem, and
recoverd whatsoever Saladine had taken from the Christians. But I must tell
you, These Emperors and their forces were great keepers of Unity.

The first Lesson at this Days Evening prayer, Judge. 4.
is, Judge. 4. There Sisera, Captain of Jabins Army, fell before Israel. But I
must tell you, The two Tribes, Zabulon and Nepthali, went up in great both
Unity and courage against them, Judge. 5. 8.
Judge. 5. And I make no doubt, but this Day may be a Day of happy success to
this Church and State, if S. Paul may be heard, and that yet (before it be too
too late) there be a hearty Endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of peace.

And now, to conclude; I beseech you Remember, That all this Unity and Peace,
what ere it be, and when it is at the best, is but Vestigium, a track, and a
footing of that everlasting peace which is to come. And I would not have you so
love this peace of Grace, that you should at any time forget the infinite peace
of Glory: The bond whereof nor Earth, nor Hell can break. For it is not folly
only, but madness says Saint Gregory) to love this Peace, Par. 3. pastor.
curae. Ad. 23
this Unity, which is but a foot-step, a print in the dust, soon worn out,
soon defaced; and not love God and his Peace, A quo impressum est, whose very
foot made this so safe, so happy, so pleasant as it is. But I cannot but hope
better things of you, and such as accompany safety here, and Salvation
hereafter. For you have not so learned Christ, as that you can prefer any
Unity before his; Or neglect the safe keeping of that which is his foot-step in
this world; The Unity of the Spirit.

Let us therefore all pray unto God, That he will evermore give both the King
and his People the comfort of his Spirit; That that Spirit of his may so direct
all your Counsels, that they may be for Unity. That following the direction of
this Spirit of Grace, we may enjoy the Unity of the same Spirit, both in Church
and Commonwealth. That all our Endeavors, public and private, may tend to
the keeping of this unity. That our keeping of unity may be such as it ought,
in Peace, in the very bond of peace.

I began with S. Paul's Exhortation. I end with his Prayer and Benediction, 2
These. 3. 2 These. 3. 16.
It Is the prayer of this Day; For it is the second Lesson at Evening Service. The
God of Peace give you peace always, and by all means: Peace in concord, and
Peace in Charity; Peace on Earth, and Peace in Heaven; Peace of Grace, and
Peace in Glory. To all which Christ for his infinite mercies sake bring us all.
To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Might, Majesty,
and Dominion, this day and for ever. Amen.

SERMON. VII.
Preached at Paul's Cross in Commemoration of King CHARLES his Inauguration.
PSALM. 72. 1. Give the King thy Judgments, O God, And thy Righteousness unto
the Kings Son.


THe Psalms of David, and his Heart never went sweeter. The Title of the
Psalm does not only tell us that; but it tells us that David had an eye upon
his Son Solomon: An eye, that is true; but not both eyes upon Solomon; no, nor
one absolutely fixed, because a greater than Solomon is here. A greater than
Solomon, who is that? who? why it is Christ. Solomon was the type and shadow
(if you will) and so one eye may be upon him: but the other eye must pierce
through to the Antitype, and body of the Promise, which is Christ. So the
ancient Fathers, Justine, Tertullian, Origin, Athanasius, and the rest are
clear: and upon very good ground: for there are many things in this Psalm,
that cannot be applied to Solomon, and no Type is bound to represent in all;
and there are some typical Propositions, as one observes upon Deuteronomy. 18. that
are applyable to the Type, or to the Antitype alone. There are many things in
this Psalm, that are not applyable to Solomon. But some are, and none more
than the words of the Text. For these words can as hardly be applied to Christ,
as that after to Solomon. Now that that agreed to Types before Christ's coming,
agrees to all that are like Christ after his coming. Therefore this is
applyable to all godly, religious Kings: For all have direction from, and share
in, the prayer of Solomon.

These words that begin the Psalm, I shall take in that sense as applied to
the Type, to Solomon, and in him to all religious Kings. Which so to Solomon,
that I am heartily glad to find Christ, so full in the Psalm, so near the King.

First, I am glad to find him so full in the Psalm, because that is a
confutation of all Judaisme: for they received the Psalms as well as we; and
here in this Psalm, there are many things that they cannot fasten upon
Solomon, or any other but Christ. So clear is that, that Tertullian has
observed long since against them: The Jews (says he) scorn us for receiving
Christ as a Savior, Praescribemus tamen, etc. yet we prove against them out of
the Scriptures, that they receive, that Christ is come the promised, prophesied
Messiah.

Secondly, I am glad to find Christ so near the King: because nothing can be
more honorable, and safe, for David, and Solomon, the Father, and the Son
that is to succeed the King, than to have God the Father, and Christ his Son so
near to them. So near and close, not only as they stand mixed in the Psalm,
but far more close by the Prayer of David, and by the blessings that follow
in the Psalm upon the Prayer, Blessings, not upon David and Solomon only, but
upon the Father and the Son in any Kingdom, where the Father with a true
religious heart imbraceth Christ, and will teach his Son to follow his steps:
for then, and there, God will give plenty of judgment to the King, and a full
measure of Righteousness to the Kings Son.

My Text then, as it is applyable to David, and Solomon, (for so I shall follow
it, here) is the Prayer of David to God for himself first, and then for his
Son Solomon after; for both have reference.

And the Blessings which follow upon this Prayer made by David, and granted by
God, are very many, and great, and follow in the Psalm; namely,

Here is judgment for the people, and that according to right, at ver. 2.

Then here is defense for the poor, I and for their very children too, ver. 4.

Then after this here is peace, peace upon all, abundance of peace, at ver. 3.

Then there is the punishment, and that as rightly settled as may be, upon the
wrong doer, ver. 4.

And all these come together, that righteous men may flourish, at ver. 7.

So it is a necessary Prayer to be made, a very necessary Prayer: for all
these, and many more blessings follow, and come upon any nation, and any
people, when God comes to Give his Judgments to the King, and his
Righteousness to the Kings Son.

My text is a Prayer; and there are two Petitions, and these two Petitions
divide my text into two parts.

The one is, that God would give his judgments unto the King.

The other is, that he would Give his Righteousness unto the Kings son; for
all other inferior circumstances fall into one of these. I will begin at the
first. Give the King thy judgments O God. My text I told you is a Prayer; and
I have made choice of a praying text. The Age is so bad, thy will not endure a
good King to be commended for danger of flattery, I hope I shall offend none by
praying for the King.

The text is a Prayer, and quis orat, who it is that prays, is the first
circumstance that appears in the text; it is David, it is the King, and he
bears a prime, and a great part wheresoever he is. And it was David's honor:
for there was never any King so often found at his prayers as David was; seven
times a day will I praise thee, Psalm. 119. This was David's promise, and for
ought we know it was David's performance too. And through all the book of his
Psalms (that devout part of Scripture) all his praises go mixed with prayer:
so he prayed very often. And certainly, there is nothing more necessary for any
King, than Prayer. And therefore S. Austine accounts it one of the greatest
happinesses of a King, not to neglect to offer to God sacrificium orationis,
the sacrifice of prayer.

1. And there is great need it should be so: for of all men (Priests only
excepted) Kings have the greatest account to make God: therefore prayer is very
necessary for them; that since no man is able to keep his accounts even, God
would be pleased to be merciful, and take Christ into the reckoning.

2. Of all men (could greatness let them feel their wants) none have such
burdens on their shoulders, as Kings have; therefore prayer is necessary for
them, that they may call as often upon God, as he calls often upon them that are
weary and heavy laden to refresh them, Mat. 11.

3. Of all men, none have so great troubles as Kings have. Indeed troubles must
needs be great, or else they dare not sieze on Kings: therefore prayer is
necessary then especially when the trouble is such, as no wit of man can work
off, and repel; and such troubles there are, when there is no shelter, or
help left in the world, but this, Lord remember David, and all his troubles.
But be the troubles never so great, if David pray, and God remember, the King
cannot be lost in any sorrow. Hezekiah found it so when he fasted and prayed,
and turned to the Lord, Isa. 37. for then the Host of Zenacharib was presently
broken, and himself saved. So then David is at this necessary work, he is at
prayer.

I, but for whom is it that David prays?

Surely, diverse ancient, and modern Divines, think that in this place the
King, and the Kings son stand but for one person, the person of Solomon under
two different relations, the King and the Kings son; and that there is an
Emphasis added by the Repetition. And they think too that David penned this
Psalm when he was dying, when he resigned his Crown to Solomon, and delivered
the Scepter into his hand; which the Jesuit Lorinus tells us (and he is very
exact) that it was just four years, (surely I think he fails of his
reckoning) before David's death, when he made his prayer for Solomon. And he
avoucheth Jerome to be his Author: but it is not so, the Jesuit in this, as in
diverse greater businesses is too bold: Indeed Jerome says that David lived
after Solomon was crowned aliquot annos, some years; but he says not just
four, it may be more, or fewer: I will not enter upon the question quando, when
David made this Prayer, and penned this Psalm.

First, because the quando, the time here is not in the Text, nor in any part
else in Scripture: therefore I may safely be ignorant.

Secondly, because, suppose this were the last Psalm that ever David made, as
some collect out of the last verse, yet that supposed will not prove that he
made this Psalm after he had crowned Solomon King: for before Solomon was
crowed David was little less then bedrid, 1 King. 1. at which time it is out
of question that David prayed, therefore he did not then compose this Psalm.
Therefore I shall take liberty to dissent from this opinion, with all
submission to better judgments; but especially to the Church.

Me thinks it was not so near night with the Prophet when he penned this
Psalm. I rather think that David made it when himself was King, and his
purpose was firmly set that Solomon should succeed him, for so he had sworn,
1 King. 3. And I think this prayer here in the beginning of the Psalm was made
first by David for himself, and then for Solomon after. And since this opinion
maintains nothing contrary to the Analogy of faith, nothing that hinders the
context, nothing that crosses any determination of the Church; nay since there
is in it more piety to God, more duty to himself, more instruction to his
Son, and more good example to other Kings, that the prayer begin at himself,
I will take the prayer as I find it in the very words of the Psalm, to be a
prayer, first for David, and then for his Son, and so proceed.

Well then, David's prayer here, is first for himself, (we shall come to his
Son after;) And he is an excellent example to Kings in this: for the first
thing that makes prayer necessary, absolutely necessary for a King, is
himself: that a superior hand, even Gods hand would set, and keep him right,
whom so many inferior hands labor to set awry.

I, but what need the King to pray for himself? he wants no prayers whom all
the people pray for.

Indeed it is true, the people are bound to pray for their King 1 Timothy 2. and I
make no doubt, but that the people perform this duty as they are bound, since
it is a tribute which by the Law of God they ought to pay; and David so great
and so good a King, had out of question the prayers of all his people, both for
himself, and his son; yet for all that you shall find David at his prayers
for himself too.

And certainly there is great reason for it; for of all acts of Charity, this
of Prayer is aptest to begin at home.

It is true indeed, the King ought to have the prayers of his people, and that
man cannot deserve so much as the name of a Christian, that prays not heartily
for the King; because that is not the Kings good only, but the peoples way to
lead a life in godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 5. Therefore, that man that makes
no conscience of praying for the King, let him pretend what he can, he must be
presumed to have as little care of all godliness and honesty.

I, but though the King ought to have the prayers of his people; yet in the
performance of their duty, I read not of any dispensation the King has to
neglect his own, not to pray for himself. If he be a King like David, he must
be a King at his prayers too, especially in those great things that concern
the King, that concern the Kingdom, that concern his Son, and his succession
to his kingdom; there he of necessity must pray for himself.

He may joy in his peoples prayers there, but he must pray for himself too.

And God be ever blessed for it, you have a King that is daily at his prayers,
both for himself, and for you: yet here, I pray take this along with you; that
as it is the peoples duty to pray for the King, and that takes not off their
King to pray for himself: So on the contrary side, the Kings religious care in
praying for himself is so far from lessening, that it augments the obligation
of the people to pray for the King. And when both pray, the King for himself,
and the people for the King, God will not refuse their prayers.

And the prayer granted, though it fall first upon the head of the King (as
good reason it should) yet it becomes as Aarons oil, Psalm. 133. for it runs to
the skirts of all his people; so that they have the benefit, both of their own,
and of his prayer.

I will never misdoubt the piety of this nation in the performing this duty, of
which both here, and in all places they are met this day to make public
proof. For the person that keeps close to this duty, among many others, he
shall be sure of this one great blessing, he cannot fall into the opposite
sin of murmuring against the King. David the King in the text, he had
faithful and religious people; yet there was a Shimei among them, that in
stead of praying for the King, cursed and reviled him, 2 Samuel 16. David was
very patient; but I pray remember what Solomon the Kings Son did to Shimei, 2
King. 2. remember that, and if the memory of his punishment would affright
other men from running into this blasphemous iniquity, all would soon be well.

We are to consider in the next place to whom it is here that the Prophet
prays, and that is expressed, A deo. Give the King thy judgments O God.

Do thou give. And as this is all men's duty; so it it is the duty of the King
too among the rest to go in prayer to God, and to God alone. Therefore
Damascene puts God into the very difinition of prayer, Prayer says that Father
is petitio decentium a deo, the asking of those things that are fit to be asked
of God. For prayer is one of the greatest pats of divine worship: so great that
Parmatius disputing against Sermonian, takes prayer for the whole entire
worship of God.

No Pope can dispense with King, or people, either not to pray, or not to pray
to God, but Saints, or Angels. As for their distinctions, they are all new; the
ancient Church knew them not; though these have their use sometimes, yet they
are a great deal too nice to be used in prayer, that is so essential a part
of divine worship.

And you have great cause again to bless and magnify God, for a King, so
constant in religion, so devout in prayer, so direct in his devotion to God
alone, as he has ever showed himself to be; and God for his mercy sake ever
hold him there, And indeed to whom should he, or any of you go in prayer, but
to God? for none can give but he; nor none can bless, or preserve that that is
given, but he. If the King look to have his Throne established to himself, or
his Son after him, he must go to God for the settling of it, or else it will
shake then when he thinks it surest. And since God has proclaimed it
himself, By me Kings reign, Prove. 8. Princes have reason to look up to him,
that they may reign by him, since against him, nay without him, they cannot
reign. To God then the King goes by prayer. But all this is lost except we know
for what? And that follows next in the text. It is for Judgment.

It is indeed for all that a Kingdom is, but principally for judgment.

First, because under God, that is the establishing of the Kings Throne, Prove.
25.

Secondly, because that is one of the Kings maine virtues, for the ordering of
his people: for they cannot have their well-being but by justice, and
judgment. Therefore in the Common Law of this Kingdom, justice is rightly
styled. The supporter of the Commonwealth.

I will not fill your ears with curiosities, nor trouble you with disputes,
wherein this judgment desired for the King, and this justice and
righteousness for the Kings Son differ one from another. I know they differ
in School learning, Judgment standing usually for the habit; and Justice for
the sentence, or execution accordingly. But here Rufinus, and Austin, and other
Divines tell me that judgment and righteousness in this place stand for that
justice, and judgment, that the King is indifferently, and equally to
administer to his people, and so for one virtue. Here is the virtue and the
power, both from the King, and both from God. The benefit of both are the
peoples; but from God by the King. Therefore David prays here not for one
virtue for himself, and another for his son; but for one, and the same virtue
for both. For the Son had as much need for this virtue as the Father, the one
being a King, and the other to be one; they both needed this great comprising
Kingly virtue, without which there can be no religious peaceable government
over a people. So justice and judgment in this place (as usually when they
attend the King) contain the virtue it self; and the power that brings this
virtue to act. The execution is as justice, and the power to give sentence,
moderation and equity to smooth over the rigor of justice; and all other
virtues, as far as they serve to strengthen, or direct and keep even the hands
of justice, prudence especially.

Then it is a wondrous necessary prayer here: for if justice should not be in
the Kings will (which God forbid) it must needs grow apt to turn to
soreness. And if judgment, and execution follow not upon the sentence of
justice, the Kings hand must needs shake into remissness. And one of these,
soreness, will make judgment it self, or the pretext of it a scourage for
the people. And the other, remisness, will make the people a worse scourge to
themselves, for want of discipline to keep them in order: For of all scourges,
there is none answerable to the unrulinesse of the people.

Now this virtue as large as it is, when it fills the heart of the King, it is
called another heart; it puts on other dismensions; for it furnishes the Kings
breast with all rectitude, and prudence; and rectitude is the being, and
prudence, the moderation, and guide of all justice: for so without respect of
persons it belongs to the wise, and prudent, Prove. 25.

Nay further, though this vertne be so large, yet the heart of the King is so
capacious, that justice and judgment cannot fill it, if it stand single:
therefore David: prays not for judgment single, but in the plural number,
Give thy judgments.

And there is great reason, that he should pray so: for justice continuing, one
and the same virtue, gives many times different judgments; and it must needs
be so, and the King must needs be an instrument in them all; And in the various
occasions that himself and his people have use of. This David found in his
own heart; therefore he prays for all.

And this pray we always for the King, for all judgment for the King. So give
Lord.

And here it is fit for you a little to take a view of your own happiness,
and to bless God for it: for you live under a King that keeps his Laws in his
life; A King that lives so, as if he were a Law himself, and so needed none. A
King that plants his Judges so, as they may equally distribute his judgment,
and justice to his people; A King so blessed by God for your good, that whether
it be for his own prayers, or yours, or both, or neither, but that God is
pleased to show his mercy, and glory upon him to you, certain it is, that God
has given him a very large heart, and filled it to the brim with justice and
judgment.

Take heed, I heartily beg it of you. I say it again, take heed I heartily beg
it of you, that no sin of unthankfulness, no base detracting murmuring sin,
possess your souls, or whet your tongues, or sour your breasts against the
Lord, and against his Anointed: but remember in that these two things.

First, remember, that it is as easy for God to take away any blessing (even
the great blessing of a good King) as to give it, remember that.

And secondly, remember, that unthankfulness to God for so gracious a King, is
the very ready way to do it, remember that too: and therefore look to these
things in time.

I, but what then, has a King enough, when God has given him justice, and
judgment? May his prayers then cease for himself, as your prayers for him?
has he no more need of God, when God has once given him judgment?

O God forbid; surely he has, and it is to be presumed, that the King daily
prays; I am sure his duty it is, to pray that God would ever please to
continue, and increase the righteousness, and judgment he has given to him.
Nor can I think, but that David was very often at this prayer too: for he says,
Psalm. 99. The Kings power loves judgment. And it is more then probable, that
that he loved, he would pray for; he prayed to have it, and to increase it. And
he that prays so often, Psalm. 119. I say so often that God would keep him in the
way of his commandments, and cause him to make much of his Law; he must of
necessity be presumed to pray for justice, and judgment, which is the vigor
of all Laws, divine, and humane.

And Kings have great need often to pray for this grace, and for the continuance,
and increase of it too.

For Kings stand high, that is true; but the higher they stand, the more they
are exposed to tempests, and windshakings, that pass lover the lower valleys
with the less noise, and danger.

And Kings are great. That is true too: but the greater they are, the stiffer
are the blasts of all temptations on them to batter, at least to would be wise:
For certainly, there can be no kingdom rightly constituted, further than God
himself comes in, in laying the foundation of it in true, impartial
judgment. When the foundation of a kingdom is perfectly laid (which is a
blessing seldom perfect in all things in any kingdom whatsoever, yet) no
kingdom can continue upon such a foundation, longer than it stands upright upon
it. If it sway on either side; if it fall not presently, it grows weaker
still, the more it leanes away from justice and judgment which is Gods.

And as it is with kingdoms in their foundation, and superstructure, so it is
with Kings too, that are to manage, and dispose them: for if any King think
himself sufficient by his own virtue against the difficulties of a kingdom,
by his own justice, and wisdom, and integrity, he will find by his loss, a
Nebuchadnezar in his greatest greatness, Dan. 4. that he and all his virtue
cannot long keep up, no not a settled King. Therefore David was wise, as well as
religious, that he went to God for his judgments, without which he nor his Son
after him, he knew was able to hold up the kingdom.

Give the King thy judgments O God. And what did David with them, when he had
them?

What, he resolved to make them the very rule of his government, and he did so:
for

First for himself, he tells us in Psalm. 119, Thy judgments have I laid before
me. There he makes them his own rule. Then he prays over his Son Solomon. O
Lord give here to Solomon my son a perfect heart, that he may keep thy
commandments, that they might rule his Son. Well then Thy judgments.

But is not all justice, and judgment Gods? Yes, out of doubt; In general
justice and judgment are from him. Therefore it is a great advantage to people
in any kingdom, even among Infidels, to have the kingdom administered by
justice, and judgment. But yet to make a kingdom perfect, and entire, to have
the judgment Gods, and the kingdom firm; then there must these grains be
put into the balance.

First, it must be justice, not only given, but guided all along by God, and
Grace. If this be not, judgment cannot remain firm in any man, or any King.
Now as it holds it works, for work it cannot beyond the strength it has:
therefore if Gods spirit assist it not, it may faint, and fail just there, and
then when on the sudden it may shake a kingdom.

Secondly, it must be judgment that is always Gods; and it must distribute
rewards and punishments, as God commands. If justice, and judgment role this
eye aside, though it may continue for ought may appear to others, and
themselves, yet they begin to look squint, and in part leave God. Therefore if
any pretended cunning way of justice and judgment so called, shall debase, and
sink the honor of God, and the sincerity of Religion: If any Municipall Law
be made in any kingdom to strengthen such designs, as are injurious to God,
and his worship; there must, there will come a failing upon all such kingdoms,
wheresoever they are; and then it will appear, (though perhaps too late) that
the judgments of their King were not Gods judgments.

Thirdly, it must be judgment, that (as much as humane infirmity can bear)
must be free from taint, both within, and without; within at the heart of the
King, and his Judges under him; and without, from all possession in the ear,
and from all corruption in the hand. If this be not, Justice which should only
be blind to see no persons, becomes so blind, that it can see no truth; and
justice that is so blind cannot be Gods. Therefore if the justice and judgment
of a kingdom cut up its own foundation, can any man think it can build
safely and wisely upon it for the State? it cannot be.

And this Thine in the text (for I must hasten) Thy judgments, It is so full a
circumstance, I cannot leave it yet. For by it you may see how necessary it was
then for David, and how requisite it is now for all Kings to pray to God; and
to him alone for judgment: For no King can master the Scepter well, but by
justice and judgment. And you see it cannot be done by any kind of judgment
neither; but that that is Gods judgment in the upright integrity of it: And
then who can give Gods judgments but God himself? who is as he is called
Isay. 30. The God, and the God of judgment: surely none can have it but he in
perfection, nor none can give it to others, to make them perfect but he.

Therefore Austine asks the question, but merely in scorn. What! is it come
to that? do thou think that thou can give justice and judgment unto thy
self? No, thou can not; for no man can give himself that that he has not;
and that that he has already, he needs not. This our Prophet tells us plainly:
for tho the King love judgment, yet it is God that prepares Equity, and
Righteousness in Jacob: O blessed are all they that wait for him. For if they
wait, he will give, and that no less than Judgment, his judgments to the
King.

One circumstance behind yet is, that the words are properly a prayer in the
most native sense of prayer. Not a thanksgiving only, that God had given him
his judgments. For though God had given David his judgments; and he was
thankful for such a gift as this: yet thinks here is not his proper work, but
humiliation, and supplication.

And it is an excellent thing to see a King at his prayers: for then you see
two things at once; a greater, and a lesser King, God and the King. And though
we cannot see God, as we see the King; yet when we see Majesty humbled, and in
the posture of a Supplicant, we cannot in a sort but see that infinite,
unspeakeable Majesty of that God, whom even Kings adore, and are made far
greater by their humblest adoration. For when I pray you was Solomon the Son
of this King at his greatest glory? Surely, you shall find him at his
greatest, then immediately upon the finishing of the Temple. And how do you
find Solomon there? just at his Fathers work; he was there at his prayers upon
his knees, says the text, 1. King. 8. upon his knees; whereas now many mean,
unworthy men, are loath to bow their knees, or stoop in prayer to God.

Now this prayer was a prayer indeed: for prayer is apt to beg, not to buy. He
that pleads desert, challenges reward of duty: but he that prays relies upon
the mercy, and goodness of the Giver. And this is the way that David comes to
God, both for himself and for his Son.

And I pray mark it, David here, the great example of a praying King, he says
not retribue domine, Lord repay me for the pains of my government; for my
service of the people, or for my worship to thy self; there is none of this;
but da domine, Give Lord, that thou art able to do by thy power, that thou art
ready to do by thy goodness. O Lord let not mine, or my peoples unworthiness
hinder that; Let not their murmuring, and disobedience be heard so far as to
thee; but Lord give the King thy judgments, and then I will execute them to
thine honor, and their good. This was David's way, and it was prevalent.

And out of question be he King, or Subject, he that asks no more at Gods
hands, than either of both, asks and shall have too little. But God gives much
to humble Suitors, Judgments, and his judgments. And neither the Prophet did
ask, nor God did give the earnest and pledge of this judgment only, but
judgment it self to the King. And certajnly the King had need to pray thus;
And so had the people as great need as the King: for if this prayer be not
made, what assurance have you that God will give? and if God will not give, the
King cannot have; and if the King cannot receive justice and judgment, he
cannot distribute it to the people, ver. 2. And if judgment be not distributed
to the people, there will be no peace, ver. 3. And where the people do not
receive judgment from the King, and peace from themselves, what are they?
Nothing but a heap of most infirm, and miserable creatures: which you can
never be as long as God gives his Judgments to the King, and his
Righteousness to the King son.

I have now done with the first general part of the text: and it is time to
descend from the King to his Son, the second part of the Fathers Prayer.

And thy Righteousness to the Kings son, give Lord.

Where first, though it be not expressed in the text, it may easily be
conceived, that such a King as David prayed for a Son, before he prayed for
Righteousness to be given him: and though David had diverse sons before, yet
in some respect or other, they were all to David* as no sons: therefore there
is no question to be made, but he prayed for him* I and therefore too, when God
had given him Solomon, he calls him not bare his son, but his only son, 1 Chronicles. 29. And no marvel, since he was that son, that God himself appointed to
succeed in the kingdom for David, 1 Chronicles. 28. and such a son is always worth
the praying for.

Well, but what then? when God had given David Solomon: when God has given any
other King a son, as he has given our gracious King (Gods name be ever
blessed) what then, is the Kings prayers then, or the peoples at an end?

No, nothing less; nay, there is more need a great deal, both for the King,
and for the people to go on in their prayers, as David did; that the same God
that has given his judgments to the King, will proceed, and Give his
Righteousness to the Kings son. For it is a greater blessing to the King,
when God gives his Righteousness to his son, than when he gives him a son. For
if Solomon succeed not David in his love to the Temple, as well as the Throne;
if he inherit not the truth of his fathers Religion, as well as the right of
his Crown; if he follow not his Fathers devotion, and pray for Justice, and
Judgment to be given him, as well as other temporary blessings: the very
blessings of the Son would end in bitterness, and be the discomfort, and
dishonor of the Father.

But it is the wise, and prudent Son that is the Fathers Crown, and the
Mothers joy, Prove. 10. And then the blessing of Son is a blessing indeed.
David saw this therefore he continued his prayers. And it is more than fit for
other Kings to do so too. Thy Judgments Lord give the King, and thy
Righteousness to the Kings son.

And for the people, they have great need, not only to say Amen to the prayers
of the King; but to repeat the prayer, and with fervencie to drive it in at
the ears of God, that so their children after them may be as happy under the
Son, as they themselves were under the Father, while God gives both the
Father, and the Son zeal to his truth, and judgment over his people.

And here I should take occasion to tell you of the care, and devotion of our
David in his days, and of his prayers, both for himself, and his Son; but
that the age is so bad, that they will not believe that he is so good beyond
them. And some (for they are but some) are so waspishly set to sting, that
nothing can please their ears, unless it sharpen their edge against authority.

But take heed: for if this fault be not amended, Justice may seize upon them
that are guilty God knows how soon: And the Kings Judgment that God has
given him, may pull out their stings, that can employ their tongues in nothing
but to wound him, and his government.

Well, these must not divert me, or any good subject from praying for the King,
and the Kings Son. The Kings Son! blessed name, what imports then to a
King? surely David knew well: therefore you see he leaps for joy, into this
prayer in the first words of the Psalm. Some tell me this name imports at
large, the King, and his posterity, Sons or Daughters, not distinct. And I
confess the least is Gods great blessing upon a people. For the wise Historian
tells us, that Plena, etc. The Kings house full of them, is the Kings security;
and the kingdoms too: and our Prophet proclames as much, for he proclames him
blessed that has his quiver full of them, he shall not be ashamed when he
meets his enemy in the gate, Psalm. 112. But when I find it Filio Regis, the
Kings Son, I think David made a difference, and had a special eye upon
Solomon, that God had given him to succeed after him, 1 Chronicles. 28. Well then,
be it to the Kings Son.

Why! but then is it but to one? out of doubt where there is but one, there can
be no question: but when there are more Sons than one, as David had (and other
Kings may have) there the Kings Son in the text, stands for that Son, that
in the course of the kingdom, is to inherit, and to be King after him.

Not that prayer is not neeessary, or not to be made for Gods blessings upon
them all: But because in the course of time the stern is to be held by that
hand, therefore the prayer is most necessary to fill that hand, with justice,
and judgment, of the Kings Son, and to season the Kings Son with justice
and judgment.

So then, the Son in the text was Solomon, not borne first, for he had other
brethren living; but designed by God, and by David himself to be King after
him: designed by David, therefore he had great reason to pray; designed by God,
therefore David had reason to hope, that God would give him a spirit of
government. And it was so; for God gave him plenty of wisdom, and store of
justice, 2 King. 1.

The Son with which God has blessed onr King, and us, as natus haeres, borne
heir; and I hope designed and marked out by God for long life, and happiness:
In all things like Solomon, God make him, saving in those things in which
Solomon fell from these prayers of his Father.

Now as it was to David, so it is to any King, a great happiness to have a Son
to pray for.

For first, there is scarce such another exercise of a Kings piety, as to pray
for his Son.

Secondly, there is scarcely such another motive to make the King careful of
his Sons education, as this prayer is. For the more David prayed to God, for
Gods justice and judgment, to descend upon his Son, the more he seemed to see
what a want it was for the Son of a King to want justice and judgment, and
the more he sees what this want is, the more undoubtedly must he endeavor by
prayer to God, and his own endeavor to look to it, for the virtuous
education of his Son. For it is impossible almost, that he that prays to God
to give; should not also endeavor that it may be given. For when we our selves
pray for any thing, that prayer if it be such as it ought, sets an edge on our
endeavors: because in a manner it assures us, that God will give what we ask,
if we endeavor by Gods grace, as we ask.

And for our own particular, I doubt not but we shall see Gods grace
plentifully given to the Kings Son, after his pious Fathers careful
successful endeavor in his education. That his heart may be full of justice,
and his hand of judgment, against the time come, that the judiciary power must
descend upon him.

And if you mark it here, the blessing that David desires for the Kings Son,
is the very selfsame that he asks for himself, Righteousness, that is,
Justice, and Judgment. And there is great reason for it: for this virtue is as
necessary for the Son, as for the Father. The same Crown being to be worn by
both. The same Scepter to be welded by both. The same people to be governed by
both. The same Laws to be maintained by both. Therefore the same virtue is
necessary for both.

And the copulative in the text, And thy righteousness for the Kings Son,
joins David and Solomon; the Father and the Son in one prayer for one
blessing.

And this example of David's prayer is a great leading case for Kings; for this
holy and pious King David, this King full of experience what the greatest want
of a King might be; he does not ask at Gods hand, for his Son long life, an
enlarged kingdom, heaps of wealth, (though that be very necessary) but the
grace of judgment, and righteousness, that so he may be able to go through
with the office of a King, that is David's prayer. And other blessings come
within the adjicientur, Mat. 6. they shall be cast into the lap of the King, if
he first seek the Kingdom of God, in the administration of Justice, and
Judgment to the people. For Kings are ordained of God for the good of the
people. And this David understood well: for himself acknowledges it, Psalm.
78. that God therefore made him King, that he might feed Jacob his people, and
Israel his Inheritance; that he might feed them: and as David knew this, so he
practiced it too; for he fed them with a faithful and prudent heart, and
governed them wisely with all his power.

And even with this goes along the prayer of the Church for the King, that he
may ever, and first seek Gods honor, and glory; and then study to preserve
the people committed to his charge, to preserve them, which cannot possible be
without Justice, and Judgment. For as Austine proves at large, there is no
bond of unity or concord that can be firm without it.

And I will not tell you, but Solomon may, what a King is, that has not the
grace of Justice, Prove. 28. But however, the more are you bound to God
Almighty, that has given you a King so full of Justice, and Judgment, as you
have found him to be.

And it is worthy our consideration too, how David and Solomon agree in their
prayers; and what a Kings Son may learn, when he is exampled by such a Father.
For we find when Solomon came to years, and wore the Crown, he fell to prayer
too: and his prayer was built upon the same foundation. The prayer of David,
and Solomon the son meet at once. For David did not simply pray for wisdom;
but for that wisdom that might enable him to govern the people. And indeed
all the wisdom of a King, especially to direct Justice, and Judgment, is the
very ready way to all Kingly wisdom. Therefore David's prayer went up first for
Justice: because without that there is no wisdom.

There may be wiliness if you will to resemble wisdom: but there was never
any wise King that was not just. And that policy will be fouud weak in the
end, that persuades any King against Justice and Judgment.

And as before, it was not Judgment alone, that David desired for himself,
but it must be Tuam, thy Judgment. So Righteousness alone does not content
him for his Son, but it must be Tuam too, Thy righteousness.

And indeed moral Justice alone cannot possibly be enough for a Christian
King. Religious and pious Justice must come in too. He must take care for the
souls, as well as for the bodies and goods of his people. Therefore one of the
Churches prayers is, that the King may study to preserve the people, not in
wealth only, and in peace, but in Godliness too. He must so give the people
their own, that is Justice; as that he command the people to give God his
own; that is, Justice with Religion. And there is no King, nor no Kings Son
can possibly do this, unless God give them the spirit of Judgment, and
Justice. God must first give it the King, before the King give it the people.

And it is, Give Lord: For as Moral Justice only will not serve, so neither
will Theological, but only qua datur, as it is given. For as it is acquisita,
as it is learned by study, be it by study or practice, so it is speculative, or
operative by rule (that is the most) but as it is given, so it is at the heart,
and so the King is not only active by rule; but it makes the King, and the
Kings Son to be in love, and to joy in the judgment that they are to put in
excution. Then the King is fitted indeed for government, when there is the love
of Justice, and truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. For then they cannot but
practice what they love, I, and then that Justice which is within at the heart,
is vera tua, truly Gods Righteousness: and for this Justice, and Judgment, I
shall therefore continue David's prayer, and go on, Give Lord thy judgment to
the King, and thy righteousness to the Kings son. For if God do not give, it
is not possible for Justice, and Judgment, any other way to descend into the
heart of the King, and the Kings Son.

None but God can see to drop Justice and Judgment into the deep heart of the
King; none but only Pater luminum, the Father of Lights, that stand over, and
sees how to do it.

And yet I must tell you here, that while he prays for Gods Justice, and
Judgment for himself, and his Son, it must be understood with a great deal
of difference, and and that in two respects.

First, because Gods Judgment as it is in God, is substantial. It is so in
God, as it is his essence himself. This way no King is capable of Gods
Justice, because it is his essence. But Justice as it is given to the King, is
a quality, an accident, and that is separable, if God either leave to give, or
desist from preserving that that he has given; therefore Kings have great need
to pray for this Justice, because they can neither have it, nor keep it
without him.

Secondly, because Justice as it is in God, is Lumen, all light, so bright,
that even impious men themselves cannot but accknowledge it, even when they are
condemned by it. So clear that no entangled cause can cloud it; no corner
sin can avoid it. And this way again no King is capable of Gods Light,
because that is a thing in communicable, as his substance, as essential as he.
But Justice as it is given to a King, is but Lucerna, but a Candlelight, an
imparted Light; a Light that is kindled, and set up in a material substance,
and so darkened with dregs: yet even this Light Kings must pray for: and it is
but need they should: for if God give not even this Light, it is impossible the
King should see how to do Justice; or that he should discern how to execute
those judgments that God has given him.

Therefore the Lighting up of this Candle in the heart of the King, the Light
of Justice and Judgment, is a mavelous blessing, and God himself accounts
it so; and it appears,

First, because among the many threatenings, that he thunders out against
rebellions people, this is one, that he will take from them the Light of a
Candle, Ier. 25. he will not leave them so much light: and it was so; for Gods
Judgment departed away from the King, the King lost the Kingdom, and the
people were lead away in darkness to captivity. So you may see what it is to
want this light of judgment in a King,

Secondly, it appears to be great by the promises of God: for among the many
professions, that he makes to this glorious King David, this was one, that he
had ordained a light for him, Psalm. 132. So then you see by the presence of
this light, what the benefit is to have it. But then still Kings themselves,
and the people must remember, it is but Lucerna, but a Candle lighted at that
great light, the Lamp of God; And being but a Candle light, it is easily
blown out, if God keep not his light about the King to renew it; and if God
provide not a fence for this Light of Justice against the winds of temptation
that bluster about it. Therefore our old English Translation reads that place
in the Psalm happily, I have provided (says that Translation) not only a
light, but a Lanthorn for mine Anointed, to carry this Light. And this
improves the blessing a great deal further: For there is no carrying of this
Light without the Lantern of Gods own ordaining: the temptations that beset
the King are so many, and so strong, that except this Lanthorn defend the
light, all the light of Justice and judgment will out. And this Lanthorn is so
hard to make, that God himself must ordain it, or else the King cannot have
it: for who can fence, and keep in Gods blessings, but himself? Therefore
David here went very right in his prayer, mavelous right, both for himself,
and for his Son, da Domine* Give Lord, not the light of thy judgment, and
justice only; but give the Lantern too for thine Anointed, that he may be
able with honor to carry through this Light of Justice, and Judgment, before
his people.

And let me me tell you one thing more, that filius regis the Kings Son here,
is not only a fit object of his Fathers prayers, but of yours too, for the
peoples prayers, as well as the Kings: for filius regis, is filius regni too,
the Son of the King, is the Son of the Kingdom; his Fathers Son by nature, but
the Kingdoms Son by right; all the subjects having equal interest in the
Justice and Judgment of the Kings Son. Therefore while David prays, pray you
also, that God would give his judgments to the King, and his righteousness to
the Kings Son.

I and where ever there is want for a Kings Son to succeed, and inherit his
Father, surely it is a mark, that God is somewhat angry with a people: For if
God do not sometime divert the judgments, and sometime lessen them, when
there is not a Son to succeed, that judgment nsually is a forerunner of
sorrows: of sorrows sometimes that men can neither see, nor prevent. I know
they may easily foresee that troubles may follow us, but of what kind they
shall be, to what greatness they shall increase, how long they shall continue,
what trembling they may make at the very foundation of a State, whether it will
please God to give them an issue, or not an issue, I suppose none can tell but
God himself.

Therefore still let the prayer be expressed in what person it will, let it be
made by the King, or by the people, or by both; all shall go well, so we
pray, and give thanks heartily for the King, and the Kings Son. I must break
off the rest.

Thus you have seen David praying for himself and his Son. That it is an
excellent thing to find a King at his prayers: that his prayers cannot better
begin, than for himself, nor better proceed than for his Son; nor be piously
made to any but God; nor for a more necessary kingly virtue, than justice, and
judgment; nor with more wisdom, than for the joining of Gods judgment to
moral justice: for that will ever be the settling of the Kings throne, and the
honor and safety of the King himself.

This day, is the day of the Kings crowning; many years may it sit on his
head, and crown all his days through with justice, and judgment; and this
solemnity in observing with prayer and devotion to God, the initiall days of
the Crowns of Kings, is old, as well as any other; For Tertullian tells us
that it was a practice long before his time. I, and even they which serve no
true God, Infidels themselves, were upon such days as this at their vows; and
prayers to such Gods as they had, for the happiness, and safety of their
Princes; and I hope we shall never fall short of Infidels in our prayers to
God, for the security and happiness of the King: but we shall take up the
prayer here, as David begins it; Give thy judgments to the King O God, and thy
righteousness to the Kings Son. And it is the best solemnity of this day to
pray for the King.

This is the day of the Kings crowning; and yet as I have not already, so
neither shall I now break out into any large panegyricks, and praises, no not
of a gracious King. But I come hither to preach a kind of Gospel to you, even
glad tidings, that God in the mercies of Christ (whose the Gospel is) has
given you a wise, and just, and religious King; a King whom God has enabled to
wind up all his other virtues in patience within himself, and clemency toward
his people. A King made by God (for so I hope) not only to bear (for that he
has done enough already) but to master the great difficulties of his time at
home, and abroad; that so his people may not only be, but may live, and
flourish in peace and plenty.

This is the day of the Kings crowning; and though not just upon this day, yet
within the compass of this year God has crowned him again with a Son, a
Crown far more precious, than the Gold of Ophir. For since Children are in
nature the Crown of their parents rejoicing, what joy must this needs be, both
to the King, and to the people, who have an interest, though not alike in the
Kings Son? In the Kings Son; and he a Son given by God after some years
expectation: and he a Son given after so great a loss of a Son in the former
year; and he a Son after so many fears that this blessing could not, or not
so soon come upon us? So here are two great blessings that God has given you
at once, the King and the Kings Son; the tree, and the fruit; the King to be
a blessing to you, and the Kings Son to be a blessing for your children after
you.

And besides, all other blessings that are to come; here is a double blessing
rising with this Son: for it dispells the mists of your fears, and promises
an influence to them that shall come after. And let me put you in mind of it;
for it is most true, whether you will believe it or no; There are no subjects
in any State (I speak what I know) whatsoever, Christian, or other, that live
in that plenty, at that ease, with those liberties, and immunities that you
do. There is no nation under heaven so happy, if it did but know, and
understand its own happiness. To these, nay far above all these, you have
Religion as free as may be. And all this you have maintained to you by the
justice and judgment that God has given the King for your good.

Take heed, I beseech you, take heed, what return you make to God and the
King, for these blessings. Let not the sins of the time, murmuring, and
disobedience, possess any. They are great sins when they are at the least; but
they are crying sins, when they fly out against such a King, as God has filled
with Justice, and Judgment.

Rather set your selves to praise God, and to bless his name, and to give him
thanks for his goodness. And pray to him that he would still preserve the
King, and that his loving kindness may embrace the Kings Son. That so no cloud
no confused darkness may be spread over this kingdom; that no cloud arising
from your ingratitude to God may obscure the King; nor no eclipse caused by
popular Lunacy may befall the Kings Son. For in this the King, and the Kings
Son are like the Sun in the firmament, seldom or never eclipsed, but by that
Moon that receives all her Light from them, nor by that, but when it is in the
head, or poisoned tail of the great Dragon, the Devil.

In the multitude of people is the Kings honor, Prove. 14. But in the loyalty
and love of the people, is the Kings safety; and in the Kings justice, and
judgment, is the happiness of his people; and the ready way to make a King
joy in justice, and judgment over his people, is for people to show their
loving obedience to the King. And since none of us can tell how, or what to do
better, let us take up the pr^yer here, where David leaves it, and proceed to
pray as he did, That as God has given us a King, and to that King justice and
judgment; so he will most graciously be pleased to continue these great
blessings to him for us; that the King may still receive comfort, and the
people from the King justice, and judgment. That these judgments may be many,
may be all, which may any way fit the King, or fill the people. That these
judgments may be Gods judgments; that is, as near the uprightness of Gods
judgments as may be, even such as may preserve Religion entire, as well as
Equity. And that God would graciously please, not to look for pay from us, but
to give where we cannot merit. That since he has not only given us the King,
but the Kings Son, he will at last double this blessing upon us, and make the
Queen a fruitful Mother of more happy Children. That to this Royal Prince, he
would give many happy days, and a large portion of his mercy, that the King,
and his Son, and the joyful Mother that bare him, may rest in the midst of
Gods blessings, both spiritual, and temporal; that we may be in the midst
of Gods blessings, and the Kings, till the Kings Son be grown up to continue
these blessings to our Generations, and transmit them to them. And so O Lord,
give and continue, and strengthen, and increase, and multiply thy judgments to
the King, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son; even so Amen Lord Jesus, and
do it. To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons, but one
everliving God, be ascribed all Might, Majesty, and Dominion, this day, and for
ever, Amen.

FINIS.

