A Large RELATION OF THE FIGHT at LEITH NEAR EDINBURGH.

Wherein Major General Montgomery, Colonel Straughan, with many more of
quality of the Scottish party were slain and wounded.

The Particulars on both sides fully related, With a List of the Prisoners
Taken, and Number killed.

Also a perfect Account of every Days Trans-Actions and Engagements between
the Armies, since our Armies first entering Scotland.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Ed. Griffin in the old Baily, 1650.

SIR,
ON Thursday July 25. the General and Army marched from Mordington to
Coppersmith, Col. Hackers Regiment being drawn up in the way; His Excellency
made a speech to satisfy them concerning Cap Ogles Troop, being sent back
into Northumberland, in regard of his interest in that County; and that Cap.
Greenwoods Troop appointed for Barwick should march with the Regiment in the
stead thereof, which gave great satisfaction. Col. Brights Regiment being drawn
up, Major Genesis Lambert appointed Colonel thereof, coming to the head of the
Regiment was received with great acclamations.

By the way we had intelligence from Edinburgh that on Monday last most part of
the inhabitants of the City shut up their shops, and carried away most part of
their Goods toward Sterling. That the Army was mustered near Edinburgh, their
horse were 2500, old horse of David Lesleys, the new raised made them up 5000.
the Foot not certainly known, in regard that orders were given for leavies, but
the men not come in; those that appeared were about 10000. That the Prince
removed from Falklend to St. Iohnstons on Saturday last, and intended not to
stay there, but to go to Sterling. That Major Genesis Massey was in Edinburgh,
but not in command.

His Excellency quartered this night at Sir James Nicholsons at Coppersmith,
being a Port Town about 14 miles from Barwick; when our Scouts came first to
the Town they were met withal by three Scots, which our men disarmed, and took
prisoners, but at night (they alleging they were only Countrymen, and that
their Ministers and Grandees had given out that the Army would kill man, woman,
and child) whereupon their Swords and other things taken from them were ordered
by his Excellency to be restored, and the men dismissed, which we hope will work
well upon the Country. One of our Scouts met with one of the Enemy, who ran at
him with a Lance, and broke it against his Armor, but seeing our Scout had the
better he quitted his horse and fell headlong down a steep hill where our
Trooper could not follow him, but seized the horse.

In the march between Mordington and Coppersmith we saw not any Scotchman, in
Eyton and other places that we passed through, but the streets were full of
Scotch women, pitiful sorry creatures, clothed in white Flannell in a very
homely manner, very many of them much bemoaned their husbands, who they said
were enforced by the Lairds of the Towns to gange to the muster.

Friday, July 26. his Excellency marched from Coppersmith to Dunbarre, a port
Town of Trade, and populous, where some Scotch foot had been the night before,
but upon the coming in of some of our Scouts ran away, so that one man might
chase ten or twenty of them, not daring one of them to look back. We understand
the Enemy were not far from the Town, but ran away so soon as our horse drew
toward them. All the men in this Town as in other places of this days march
were fled, and not any to be seen above seven or under 70 years old, but only
some few decrepid ones.

Our Soldiers had not been long in the Town, but there was an alarm that the
enemy were coming on, whereupon the Soldiers were drawn out into the field,
though much straightened for provisions; but since the Amity and other ships are
come from Newcastle with provisions. This day we marched to Haddington. A party
of the Scots who live about Hume castle fell upon some Countrymen who were
bringing provisions to the Army out of Northumberland, and cut the men, but the
Governor of Barwick has sent a Troop of horse which will scour the coasts.
Thus far from Dunbarre July 27.

On Sunday July 28 our Army went forth betimes in the morning from Haddington
and Rendezvouzd upon Gladmore, the Enemy appeared in small bodies, diverse of
them were taken.

Those that quartered in Muslebrough the night before quitted it, some of Col.
Fleetwoods Regiment coming upon them took several prisoners. A party of three
of ours charged 12 of theirs and took three.

A Trooper in Col. Whaleys Regiment was sentenc't at a Court Marshall to have
his horse and Arms taken from him, and to work as a pioneere for three weeks
for taking away some Curtains and other things out of a Scottish Gentleman's
house.

Major Haines being sent with a commanded party toward the Enemy, followed
them within half a Mile of Edinburgh. This day we understood that one Mr. John
Lowe^ a Scotch Minister preached upon this Text in Edinburgh, Exodus 14.8. the
words and his comment upon them are very observable but too long to be related.

Monday July 29. the Army drew out of Muslebrough within two Miles of
Edinburgh, our horse and theirs puckeerd all the forenoone, about four in the
afternoon his Excellency commanded a forlorn of horse near Arthurs Hill, who
faced the Enemy and still continued puckering, but perceiving the Enemy had
lyned the Park wall with Muskateers, and had the command of the hill, whereby
they vewed our Army, A forlorn of Muskateers were sent to beat them off which
they did without loss.

While this was doing a piece of Ordinance was drawing up near the Hill which
played upon a great part of the Enemies body, who then faced us, but quickly
quit their ground and retreated to their maine body who had entrenched
themselves between Leith and Edinburgh. By this time the whole Army were drawn
up in Battalia in sight of Edinburgh. A party sent to possess some houses near
the Town, which they did, and the Train drawn up there.

This day Captain Hall Reere Admiral, being come up with the Liberty, the
Heart Frigot, the Garland, and the Dolphin played hard with their Ordnance into
Leith, while the Army played with theirs by land til eleven at night, and so
again after three in the morning; all this while the Army stood drawn up in
the field; and from the first appearing till the next day at eight or nine a
Clock, there fell an exceeding great deal of Rain, which hindered the
attempting of any thing, and the enemy not stirring out of their intrenchment
and fortifications, which latter did more trouble our Soldiers, who were
exceeding cheerful, and desirous of nothing so much as to fight then all the
unseasonablenesse of the weather; while our Army was thus drawn out of
Musselborough, many of the wretched Country people, who had hid themselves in
Coalepits, at the coming of our men came to the Town, and fell to Barocadoing
of it, and 500 of them got together with an intent to have cut the throats of
the Army in case they had been beaten, which they expected; and had Orders as
they said from Lieutenant Genesis Lesley so to do, Major Haines with a party of
Col. Fleetwoods Regiment fell upon them; killed 30 of them, wounded others, and
took about 40 Prisoners.

Tuesday July 30. It being not held advisable to fall upon the Enemy, who were
more in number then our selves; and had the two Garrisons of Leith and
Edinburgh, besides the advantage of a high and strong Hill, where they had
intrencht themselves. The Army drew off toward Musselborough for refreshment,
both of horse and man, which the enemy perceiving with great bodies of horse,
the one from Leith on the right, and the other from Cannygate on the left,
marched furiously on, and fell upon the Reere Guard, being but 200 horse
commanded by Captain Evanson who received the charge, but being overpowred by
the enemy retreated, then the Generals Regiment being near advanced toward
the enemy gave them a hot charge and routed them; after this the enemy came up
again with another fresh body, and put the Generals Regiment to a retreat;
hereupon four Troops of Col. Whaleyes Regiment, and Major Genesis Lamberts charged
them, routed them, and pursued them to the Line, in doing of which our men were
disordered; and the enemy perceiving it came up again with another fresh body
of horse, thinking thereby to have put us to the long run, but upon the coming
up of one Troop more of Col. Whalyes Regiment, commanded by Captain
Chillinden, being in good order charged them, and put them to the run, pursuing
and killing them, even to and within their Line, so that after this the enemy
at that Port had no mind to engage, whilst these Regiments were thus employed;
Col. Hacker with his Regiment charged the enemy on the right toward Leith,
routing them and pursuing them within their works, we took two Colors at both
places, there were diverse killed of the enemy, and many dangerously wounded,
and but three of ours slain, and some small number wounded, whereof the Major
Genesis received two wounds in the thigh and shoulder with a Lance in the last
charge; he having twice before charged in the head of our parties, and in this
business the Major Genesis Col. Whaley and Co. Hacker with the rest of the
Officers and Soldiers that engaged deserve much honor, for their gallantry
and resolution therein, Capt. Gladman, of the Generals own Troop, and the
Cornet thereof were wounded; also Cornet Russell, Cornet to Captain Chillendin
were also wounded with some few Troopers: The Scotch King being upon the Castle
hill, to see his men which he called his Green Horns beaten on both sides to
Leith and Edinburgh to some purpose: Therefore that night they took a
resolution at a Council of war to redeem their credit, and resolved that a
party of their best horse of old Soldiers consisting of 1500 chosen men
commanded by Major Genesis Mountgomery and Col. Straughan should on Wednesday
morning 31 July, fall upon our quarters to beat them up, and as their own men
now prisoners confess that Straughan did engage to bring his Excellency our
General alive or dead to the Prince, which resolution was followed
accordingly; and on Wednesday July 31. they came out by a by way, and came near
our guards, then kept by Col. Fleetwoods Regiment, about three in the morning
our Scouts discovered them, demanding who they were for, they said friends
friends, but our men believing them not, fired upon them, and gave the Alarm
to the guard, who were in a good posture to receive them, but being over
power'd were put to disorder; then Col. Lilburnes Regiment received them, and
gave them a hot charge, so that many of them fell, broake their bodies, put
them to the run, forty or thereabouts slain, and about 100 taken prisoners;
among the slain was Major General Montgomery their commander in chief, also
Col. Straughan wounded if not slain. Prisoners taken were as follows.

Sir Thomas Nai^ne Lieut. Col. to the Lord Breckine, Major Brice Cockram, Major
to Col. Straughan. Alexander Facquet Lieut. to Major Lindsey in Col: Osan's
Regiment, James Brown Cornet to the Lord Breckin, Joseph Shet Cornet to
Captain Fairle in Col. Strauhans Regiment. Three of the Lifeguard to General
Leven. With 80 Troopers.

These are already brought into the custody of the Marshall General, there are
many other prisoners in the several Regiments, and wounded which are not
brought in.

Yesterday the Scottish General sent a Trumpeter to his Excellency with two
prisoners they had taken of ours, one was one of the Corporalls of the field,
aad the other a Trooper: To answer which Civillity, the Lord general sent back
two of his Lifeguard, and a Trooper.

There are several Vessels of provisions from Newcastle and other parts come
in for our Soldiers, which are now unlading, which gives them encouragement.
We hope those from London will be here suddenly, the people being more base in
hiding their provisions, then the country is barren of producing them. The
prisoners say the Prince came to Edinburgh last night; most of those who came
forth were English cavaliers. The prisoners say they promised to bring the Lord
Genesis Cromwell to him; not 100. of them got back to Edinburgh in a body. Our
men had the pursuit of them four miles, Col. Brights Regiment of Foot being
drawn up in the field, killed many of them. We lost only Col. Lilburns Cornet,
and some few soldiers.

Musleborough, July 31. 1650.
SInce the writing of the former we are further informed by the prisoners
taken, and other certain information, that the party of 1500 horse who came out
of Edinburgh were the choicest of their horse. That Major Genesis Straughan at the
council of War the night before had engaged to the Prince to bring the Lord
Gen Cromwell to him alive or dead, and therefore desired to command the party;
but it being not thought fit to trust him Major Genesis Montgomery was appointed
to command the party, and Col. Straughan to bring up the rear. They came out
of Edinburgh about ten of the clock at night, and went sixteen miles about;
when the first party of our men took the alarm, which were Col. Lilburnes men,
two of them came before as friends (being English) and told our men it was a
false alarm, whereupon they dismounted, and so the enemy came upon them
immediately, but did not much prejudice, only Col. Lilburnes Cornet killed, and
two or three others hurt, their intention reaching to more then that guard.

They came on to Muslebrough Town, and in the way Col. Fleetwoods three Troops
met with them and scattered them, and coming by Col. Brights Regiment they
gave them so great a volly that it took off many from their horses, three
horses were killed and a Corporals legs taken off at one Drake shot from that
Regiment, our men scattered them so that some of them were taken in Muslebrough
Town; we had the pursuit of them for four Miles, and our Dragoones which
quartered that night within a Mile of Edinburgh met them and killed diverse of
them. Amongst the rest of those that were slain of those Major Genesis Mongomery
was one, the rest are not yet known. One of them who was killed by our men was
heard upon his last Gasp to say, Dam me I Will to my King. They were most English
Cavaliers that charged in this and the first engagement; at both places, they
were heard to say, we are Morris his men, remember Pontefract. The Prince (it is
said) gave to each of them two shillings to drink, which made them drunk.

Capt. VVilford a Gentleman in my Lords own Troop, being on Tuesday taken
prisoner, (his horse being killed under him) was carried to Leith, where he was
very courteously used by Lieu. Genesis David Lesley, who kept him at his own
house, where resorted to him diverse of their Ministers and Commanders who
demanded of him how long he had served under Antichrist, that proud man
Cromwell, over whose head the curse of God hung for murdering the King,
breaking the Covenant, and they did expect daily when the Lord should deliver
him into their hands, they saying he termed his Guns his twelve Apostles, and
that he put his whole confidence in them, and the commanders old Cavaliere like
did swear most desperately that they had taken 18 of our Colors, and the
Ministers said that our ships in the Haven were revolted to the King. Which
your London Cavaliers may perhaps believe.

Musleborough, August 1. 1650.
FINIS.

