THE FREE MAN'S PLEA FOR FREEDOM, AGAINST The Arbitrarie unwarrantable actions
and proceedings of the Apostate Associates, commonly called by others,
LEVELLERS.

Wherein is briefly discovered how unsuitable they walk to common Right and
Freedom, being more Arbitrarie and Tyrannical then any they oppose, wanting
only a power to exercise their Cruelty.

By R. L. A Member of the Army.

Job 11.3. Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest
shall no man make thee ashamed?

Psalm. 50.19, 20. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames
deceit, thou sit and speak against thy brother, thou slanderest thine
own mothers son.

Job 15.5, 6. For thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and thou chusest the
tongue of the crafty, thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I, yea, thine
own lips testify against thee.

London, Printed for Robert White. 1648.

IT being the grand design of all deceivers to look one way, and row another;
to kiss, when they mean to betray; it cannot be judged unnecessary to try
all things, and to choose only that which is good; and the way to judge of the
ends and designs of men, is not to take notice of what they talk of, but of
what they do; for Absalom pretended justice to the people, when he made war
against his Father, but his design was to make himself King; so the Jews could
say they were Abraham's seed, and had one Father, even God, but Christ believed
them never the more for that, If you were Abraham's children, ye would do the
works of Abraham, John 8.39. If God were your Father, ye would love me, ver.
42. But ye are of your father the devil, and the works of your father ye will
do, ver. 44. He judged them by what they did, and not by what they said;
Therefore it is not enough for men to say they are for our freedom and
liberties; but let us consider what they are doing; the stature of Hercules may
be taken by the length of his foot; he that cannot employ one talent well, is
not to be trusted with five; therefore before we can believe you mean to do
as you say, we must be satisfied with these following Queries.

First whether those things you call common right, and freedom, be so common
as you say they are, or no? whether every free man in the Kingdom be equally
interested in them, or not if they be, whether one particular man be not as
competent a judge of his own freedom as another? and if so, whether any thing
can be called the agreement of the people, if you mean the whole, before every
man, or at least the Major part concerned in it, has owned it, and subscribed
it? if not, whether it be not a presumptuous delusion, for a few men to
represent any thing to the Peoples representative in the name of the whole,
before the whole, or half, or any considerable part of the People has
entrusted, or desired them to do it.



Romans 3.8.





him leave to be guided by his own reason, nor your principles?



Englands present misery flow from it is divisions and distractions, and no
probable means left to prevent its present ruin, but a christian, sober,
friendly compliance of all the honest interests distinguished among us by the
names of Presbytery, and Independency etc. and no such visible means to ruin
and destroy it, as the further adding to, and increasing of the divisions and
distractions already in it, how is it possible for any man to judge you desire
the life of the Kingdom, that are such utter enemies to the health of it? That
you desire the liberty and freedom of the People, that are such grand enemies
to the peace and safety of them? unless you can convince us, the nearest way
from York to London, is by Barwick.

Englands distractions and divisions, and so consequently its ruin, is to
propound some general heads to be agreed on by the People, containing the
fundamental rights and liberties of the Nation, we agree with you. To propound
and present such things according to the fundamental rights and freedoms of
the Nation, is good, which is an orderly Parliamentary way; but for you to
propound the fundamental rights and liberties of the People, and to prosecute
the evident ruin and destruction of the People, is a strange way to
demonstrate your good intentions; as thus, if our Brethren of Scotland should
march with an Army over Tweede, and should tell us they came for our good, and
to help us against the common enemy to the Covenant and cause, which formerly
they have assisted us in, and in their march should p^^nder and spoil us of
our goods, ^^^rison and destroy our friends, fight with and oppose our Armies,
etc. we should have very little cause to ^^leeve them; or thus, if any of your
houses were on fire about your ears, ^^d a company of People should come with
empty buckets, and pretend they wo^^d endeavor to quench the fire, and in the
interim plunder and spoil you of your goods, and in stead of water, cast on
pitch, or combustible matter to increase the flame, you would have very small
cause to thank them. And thus friends, while you are proposing to us good
things, and filling our ears with many good words, consider what your actions
have been: Judas could cry Hail Master, when he betrayed him. You have been
telling us of a free representative of the people in Parliament, in order to
which, you have used all possible means to bring this present Parliament under
force, to put conditions upon them, by prescribing rules, and setting bounds to
them, vilifying, reviling, and reproaching of them to their faces, in such an
audacious and uncivil manner, as few that have either conscience or prudence,
would do their servants, nay hardly their dogs, if they were capable of
receiving a reasonable reproof; calling them the supreme authority of England
to day, and deny there is any such thing as authority remaining in them another
day; as in Major White his book, Style them the honorable house of Commons one
day, the degenerate, unjust, arbitrary, tyrannical Parliament another day;
Print papers, entitled, An humble petition to the supreme authority of
England, the honorable house of Commons, on the top of the sheet: appeal to
the People against them, charging them with falsehood, lies, tyranny,
injustice, ruling by their crooked wills, and damnable lusts, in the bottom of
the same sheet, as you may see in a petition delivered to the house of Commons
presently after the rendezvous at Ware, in the behalf of the Agreement of the
People. Colonel Airs, and Captain Bray, etc. is this a demonstration of your
great affections to the Peoples representatives? is it the freedom of the
Peoples representative to be taunted, reviled, reproached, and scandalized, and
that publicly in Print to their faces, in such a manner, as the meanest man
represented would not endure, nor put up, without reparation. But the People,
and the representative, may expect both to drink in one cup; the representative
will but swallow down the top, the People shall be sure enough of the dregs:
These carriages differ much from Paul's spirit, who said, it is written, thou
shall not sp^ake evil of the ruler of the people, Acts 23.5. and so in Tim.
5.1. Rebuk^ not an elder, but entreat him as a father. But the Scriptures and
M^gna Charta are both of one authority, which most of these men, onl^ the
latter for the present is most in request; another ge^^^^^^ good which they
have held before our eyes to humble us with, has been the easing of the
Kingdom of, or from those sad oppressions and burdens which they lie under, as
Excises, Taxes, and free quarter, etc. and in order to this, they have
endeavored to prevent and stop all means used for that end, the greatest
visible burden which lay upon this Kingdom being the Soldiery, especially
before the disbanding supernumeraries, and taking them off from free quarter;
and ever since the Parliament has been about that work, they have been
endeavoring by all possible means to prevent it, both by persuading the
Country from paying their money, without which the work could not be done,
and telling the soldiers they ought not to disband, nor suffer themselves to
be disbanded nor divided, etc. And if God had not prevented their attempts in
opposition to this work, the Kingdom would have sunk under the burden of
free quarter by this time, or else have broken its own back, by endeavoring
to shake its burden off by force, and the soldiery, whom they have so much
endeavored to delude by their plausible pleadings for their rights, have been
wholly frustrated and prevented of all those things, which by their moderation
and patience, God has enabled the Parliament to do for them, in order to their
Accounts, Arreares, pr^^nt pay, indemnity, etc. so that what real pity or
affection you have toward the Peoples ease from their burdens, let themselves
and the world judge; And thus, if it were either worth the reading, or my
penning; it is observable, through your whole course, you have pretended one
thing, and done another; cried up the Peoples liberties with your mouths, and
destroyed them with both your hands.





Object. You mistake, we do not intend to give Laws to the Kingdom, but only
represent to them a paper, wherein is contained the substance of the Peoples
Rights and Liberties, to which we desire agreement, and accordingly have
entitled it the Agreement of the People.

Answ. You have given it a wrong name, you might more properly have called it
their disagreement, or falling out. But if it be an Agreement, as you call it,
we hope you mean a voluntary agreement, by free consent; which if you do,
what means all this endeavoring to engage men in Arms to own it? will Swords
and Guns convince men's reasons, and inform their judgments of the equity and
justice of the things? or if it be an agreement that ye hold forth, what means
those resolutions among you, that if you have but ten men on your side, you
will make your way through the blood of all the rest? Will nothing serve to
seal an ag^^ement but blood? nay, it is probable you will be as good as our
word; for those that are not tender of men's names and reputations, will never
be tender of their blood, and I am sure you have endeavored already to make
your way through the honor and reputation of such men whom God has chiefly
owned and honored in all those chief deliverances he has wrought for this
poor Kingdom in the late war; but considering, they are men who are not
desirous to be praised in Print, who had rather have their own actions
demonstrate their innocence, then other men's Pens; I shall desire them to
consider, there was a day when Shimei cursed David, and he comforted his heart
with this consideration, It may be that the Lord will look on my affliction,
and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day; and his
expectation was not in vain, and therefore for men to call that an Agreement
of the People, which they intend to make a Law to them by force, pretends a
Paradox; for what does this differ from that Agreement William the Conqueror
made with the People, which you call the Norman yoke, for whatsoever men are
forced and compelled to, can no more be called an Agreement, then Imprisonment
can be called Liberty: If this be Christian Liberty, then the Spanish
Inquisition is a Christian privilege. Again, if it be freedom and liberty
you contend for, why will you not give that to others, which you so highly
prize your selves? if it be your liberty to devise, prepare, and propose
things in the behalf of your selves and others, before any others besides your
selves, either hear, or see what you propound. Is it not as much the liberty
of those others you speak of, to read, consider, and judge of what is proposed
by you, before they agree with you? and if so, then surely when a Paper,
entitled an Agreement, or Petition is delivered to the Parliament by a small
number of persons in a Kingdom, in the name of themselves and the People, it is
the Parliaments liberty, as they are free Commoners of England; if you will
not allow it their Privilege as they are a Parliament, to consider, judge, and
determine what answer will become them to give to such a petition presented to
them by such Petitioners, and to deny as well as grant, if their judgments
lead them for it, unless you intend to ingrosse the whole power of judging
and determining the Peoples liberties to your selves, and convert the
concurrence of King, Lords, and Commons into one negative voice, and lay them
all aside together.

As we have little cause to judge you are so purely public principled for
common right and fredome, as you pretend by you^ actions, so have we less
cause to expect it from you, when we observe your dispo^^^^ions and
qualifications, there being naturally an inveterate dislike, and an abhorring
of all things that are not of your own creating, and of all men that are not of
your own principle and opinion, there being no more good nature in you then in
Lions, Bears, Tigers, etc. the worst of them being friends one to another of
the same kind, which is all the ground of friendship or charity that ever I
could discover among the generality of you, which is so far from pure
principles of common right and freedom, that the worst of Tyrants I have heard
or read of, has exceeded you, they have out of a principle of policy commonly
exercised a great deal of clemency toward people, whom they have known did
not favor these actions, thereby to delude them into subjection; nay, many of
them have used much seeming indulgencie toward their open enemies, if they
would but acknowledge their courtesies to be acts of grace and favor toward
them; but you have been so far from having any of these moderate humane
natural principles found in the worst of men ruling of you, that you have
degenerated from a great deal of that good nature and disposition which is
found in many beasts; the fiercest mastive dog, who wears a clogge and
chain to keep him from biting strangers will know the people in the same
family with him, and especially those from whose hands he receives much of his
food, and will be so far from exercising his natural cruelty toward them,
that he will run the greatest hazard in their defense: nay, it is observed in
Bears, after they have received acquaintance, or have received Courtisies from
a man, they will not hurt him, but will admit of much familiarity with him,
and I have some time heard, that the favor of a Lion may be won by courtesies.

By the way you may take notice of that common story of the traveller loosing
his way in the wilderness, found a Lion who had caught a thorn in his foot,
which he pulled forth, for which courtesy the cruel beast was so grateful,
as to become his protector till he brought him past all danger; and how
unworthily ungrateful many of you have been, and still are to particular
persons, and whole societies of men, who has made your condition their own,
who has and do still tender many of you as pieces of their own flesh, whose
hearts and affections desires your good as their own who would joyfully live or
die in any righteous cause with you, if y^^ would prosecute it only in a
righteous way, and put more trust in God in the use of lawful means, and
less in your own subt^^ty and craftiness; yet these are the men whom the
sharpest of your arrows are shot against, whose blood you lie in wait for, as
a Lion does for his prey; it being your meat and drink to hear and devise
falsehoods against them, to speak and print evil of them, that they may justly
take up that complaint against you which David used against some such
ungrateful friends of his, Psalm. 35.12. False witnesses did rise up, they laid
to my charge things that I knew not, they have rewarded me evil for good, so
in Psalm. 109.4. For my love they are my adversaries, and they have rewarded me
evil for good, and hatred for my good will: and as you are naturally
ungrateful, so are you as eminently malicious and revengefull, which is
another principal branch of tyranny. I never being able to find the least
inclination in many of you, to put up or forgive the least personal wrong or
injury, but rather to rest unsatisfied, as a bear robbed of her whelps, to be
revenged, and have full reparations, and as you are thus ungrateful,
malicious, and revengefull, so are you as ambitious, proud, and haughty,
esteeming highly of your selves in your own things; he being a man not worth
the calling a fellow-commoner that has not exalted his arrogant, resolute,
pride and haughtiness above his sense, reason and judgment; that has not
resolved to maintain any cause with resolution; if he be once engaged in it,
be it good or bad, that is not able to speak great swelling words, and look
mighty big looks in the face of any Authority he comes before, though for the
most scandalous offense that can be committed; and if these be your virtues,
the best part of you, what kind of things are the worst can we expect from such
a corrupt fountain as this wholesome waters? Do men gather grapes of thorns,
and figs of thistles? Matthew. 7.16. Sirs be not deceived, God will not be
mocked, For wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge do the same things, Romans 2.1. Thou hypocrite, first cast the
beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the
mote out of thy brothers eye, Matthew. 7.5.

A POSTSCRIPT.
To those private soldiers of the Army which has been deceived by these men's
delusions.
FEllow Soldiers, I having had the happiness to be a spectator of those great
things God has done for you, and by you. I am invited by that affection and
duty I owe and bear to you, to represent these things to your consideration,
well knowing there is not only a spirit of zeal, but of judgment in many of
you, able to discern betwixt good and evil, while you acted in the way of God
to accomplish the work of God. God then dwelt among you, his glory was upon
you, you were then a comfort to your friends, and a terror to your enemies:
but if you forsake his way, he will own you no longer in his work. Will you
do wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him, Job. 13.7. Let not men
which make lies their refuge, falsehood and deceit their strength, be our
leaders into evil ways, for when the blind lead the blind, then both fall
into the ditch: and how wilfully blind those men have been which has
endeavored to lead you into irregular ways, to the great dishonor of that
God who has so much honored you, is visible:

What is become of the great design your Officers had to advance the kings
Interest, and thereby procure their own greatness, Is Lord General Cromwell
made Earl of Essex yet? or Captain General Ireton Field Marshall General of
Ireland? Is the King at White Hall yet, without giving satisfaction to the
Kingdom? is the Army or any part of it disbanded without sufficient
indemnitie, present pay, and security for Arreares? Do but review those
delusive lying pamphlets entitled Putneys projects, a Call to the Army, an
Alarm to the Headquarters, the grand design, etc. And take notice with what
confidence and boldness they accused the Parliament and Army in general,
with many particular men, who has been eminently faithful to the Kingdoms
Interest, of treachery and baseness of spirit, declining their principles,
etc. and all grounded upon their under hand compliance with the King, their
carrying on His Designs by private conferences with Him, etc. All which
suggestions does plainly appear to all that has not willingly given up
themselves to believe lies, to be false and scandalous slanders; yet these and
such like are the only truths that pretended infallible spirit revealed to
these men at the time of the Randezvouzing at Ware, and did I not yet discover
the same spirit raging in the same men, with as much boldness and confidence
as if they had never been the author of all these lies, I should have forborne
any testimony against them, and rather have judged what they then did, might
proceed from rashness or mistake, and not done plotting or designingly; but it
has since appeared the contrary, they continuing to this very day by the same
evil means to prosecute the same things, which is to set you one against
another, and every man else against you all, endeavoring to make you odious to
the Kingdom, and the Parliament, and your Officers odious to you.

First, they Print petitions in the name of the People, and make you, whom God
has used to be the instruments of their deliverance, the cause of all their
oppression and miseries, c^^ing out of oppression, violence, taxes,
free quarter, etc. all which they charge equally upon you, as you are an Army,
making the miscarriage of one man among a thousand, to reflect upon all; on
purpose to render you odious, making you the cause of the decay of trading, and
of that deareness and scarcity that is in the Kingdom, as if they would have
the Kingdom rise, and cut your throats to save your victuals, and make corn
cheap; and yet when the Parliament is using all possible means to pay you
off, and disband you; and the General with your officers using the utmost of
their interest to obtain honorable and satisfactory conditions for you: both
Parliament and General endeavoring to their utmost to ease the Kingdom of
their burdens, and requite you for your faithful services, then are they of
another mind, then are they sending their Emissaries among you, to stir you
up to disobedience, telling of you, you ought not to divide, nor suffer your
selves to be divided, nor disbanded, etc. so what they would have you to do is
worth your enquiring after, for they would not have the Country either pay
you, nor give you victuals: neither would they have you to disband, nor suffer
your selves to be disbanded; they have only left you these two things to choose
one, either to continue in your warfare upon your own charges, or else to live
upon the spoil and ruin of the Kingdom: the former I fear you cannot do,
and the latter I am confident your souls abhor to think; therefore
consider, God has placed you under men that have preferred your well fare and
safety above their own; they trampled upon great gifts and high places, and
were willing to stand with you, nay to fall with you, rather then to stand
themselves, and see you fall: and therefore let it never be said, that an Army
of men so principled, so regulated, whom God has so honored under the conduct
of men so eminently faithful, honorable, and successful, should be
disobliged from their obedience, by false and scandalous suggestions of men,
wh^ make it their business to vent their rage, and their passion against all
that are not approvers of their disputable, if not evil actions: And since you
have found the power and presence of God so visible among you, while you every
one acted in the same place God has called you to, in the work he laid before
you, Wait upon God there still. It was the counsel Moses gave the people in
the greatest straight that ever they were in, to stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord: and they did take his counsel, and God did save them,
and by the same hand ruined their enemies: And if you do wait for the
salvation of the Lord in the use of lawful means, he is able and faithful to
do you good, and to make the sea of all those dangers and difficulties that
stand before you, to become a wall on the right hand, and on the left unto you:
and to make those things you most fear, to be most subservient unto his end,
which is his glory: and to your ends, which I hope is the settlement of this
poor distracted Kingdom, in a safe and well-grounded Peace; Which, that you
may be isntrumental in, is the constant prayers, and earnest desires of your
faithful servant.

R. L.

FINIS.

