THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT Of Tom Fairfax, and the Army under his Command:
Who now lie about Colchester, in a very sick and weak estate, past hope of
life, and given up for dead, by their sworn Doctors, the Earl of Norwich, the
LORD Capell, and Sir CHARLES LVCAS.

Published by the command of the aforesaid DOCTORS.

In a most sick and weak estate,
Tom and his Army lie:
But it is a strong and Powerful Fate,
That Votes their misery.
Had they but so much light to see,
A^ Cromwels snowt affords:
They would repent, and converts be:
Use prayers, and not swords.
The Gowt is grown so virulent,
In Fairfax pockey too:
He Will serve the thing called Parliament,
A nation to undo^.
But he decreaseth in his strength,
The Saints do moulder still:
I sluggard, but Resolved at length,
To write, and print, their will,
July.9th. Printed in the year 1648.

THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT Of Tom Fairfax, and the Army under his Command.
IN the name of Rebellion, Blood, Fury, and Horror, I Thomas Fairfax, General
of the Army, now lying near Colchester, raised for the Destruction of his
Majesty's Person, the known Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, and
the privilege of Parliaments, being at this time in a very sick and weak
estate, of a Disease called the Gowt, which some call Scabiae Franciae, others
Morbus Gallicus, and some Mechanics the French Pocks, but especially of the
Disease called the General Revolt of the People from the Traeytors at
Westminster, and for that the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capell, and Sir
Charles Lucas, my sworn Doctors, have given out that I must not live long,
being gone past hope of recovery, I therefore hold it expedient to make this my
last Will and Testament, in manner and form following:

Jmprimis. I give and bequeath my body to some dunghill, or to the City Common
shore, that my name (if it were possible) might perish from the earth, and my
infamy, cease among men, my Soul I give to be disposed of at the pleasures of
that once glorious Angel, now the King of Gehenna, who fell from heaven like
lightning* the sole Patron of me and my Faction, Lucifer, well knowing that by
him, I shall be courteously entreated, and that he will remember our former
friendship, so that where others are washed over head and ears in gulphes of
liquid fire, I shall but Tantalize in ye, and exchange the Torrid, for the
Frozen Zone.

As in the world there are degrees of Evils,
So in the next, there are degrees of Devils:
Give me thy Purgatory Lucian, I,
Should then esteem it, but a jest to Die:
To see great Alexander cobling shoos,
Charlemaine sell blacking, Caesar pulling crows,
Tamberlaine practicing the Tailors art,
And Pepin, selling apples in a cart:
Drawn by one horse some such inferior place,
I hope of Pluto to obtain the grace.
Item, I give and bequeath my Commission (since I believe the Saints under my
command must needs have one of eminent baseness, and known wickedness to go
in and out before them) to my dear brother the Earl of Denbigh, whom I know to
be a man sufficiently quallified for the work, whose very breath is as
contagious as the Pestilence, who with the toade sucks poison out of the most
clearest fountains, and whose face is as ominous as a Basalisk, whose heart
continually grates it self it with envy, and fights with his gall for mastery,
which is the reason of that roade-poole settled in his face, he is the man whom
I appoint the Champion of Israel after my disease, to fight the battles of
the Lord.

Jtem, I give and bequeath my perjury, and treacheries, when I delivered the
King my master into the hands of Whaley, at Hampton court, and permitted
Cromwell* by a wile to be guilty of his own ruin, by flying to the Isle of
Wight, notwithstanding I and Nel had solemnly sworn to him at New Market, and
at St. Albones that we woul procrue a present Personal Treaty, and restore him
to his lost greatness, I say I bequeath that my perjury, and disloyalty to the
peculiar use of the crew at Westminster, whom verily I now hate, for that they
suffer me to lie here, where I am each day buffeted by perpetual sallies, my
army each day wasted, and those that survive being in dread of Sir Marmaduke
Langdales approach upon their backs, and so to be pounded to their destruction,
and yet they send me no supplies (it seems they are busy in packing up their
goods for their journey) either of men or money, wishing them to add it to all
their former perjuries and Treacheries, for I Will assure them, that the
Projection of me, and Cromwell for the cleanly conveyance of his Majesty's
Person into the Isle of Wight, may stand upon record for the most pernicious
fallacy that ever hole instruments invented, and that cursed Plot, if well
husbanded, may procreate a thousand more, as pernicious as that has proved,
and as equally dangerous.

Item, I give and bequeath, six pounds per annum to be paid out of Delinquents
estates not yet discovered, to lack Hall, (the may game of Cambridge) who each
week proclaymes himself in a sheet of nonsense, blasphemye, and treason, by
the name of the the quondam Libeller Britain^cu^, which annuity I bestow on him
to quit his charges for pen, ink, and paper: for his maintenance I leave that
to Lilly and Booker the infortunates of the State, whose, hireling he is, and
who allow him money, for tobacco and beere-besides a sundays dinnir, of beef
and pudding, to rail against Elenctichus, and the Scots.

Item, I give and bequeath the sum of one hundred pounds, to be paid out of
mine own estate, to Mr. Marshall that Geneva bull as a gratuity for his pains,
when he shall preach my funeral sermon, which I would have him prate, in S.
Margarits church Westminster, his auditory I would have to be these whom I
nominate, Imprimis. Harry Martin, Mr. Weaver, and Mr. Scot: of committee men,
Corbet the swarthy, and Challenor the wall-eyd* of citizens, Warner the Mayor,
and Atkins the Alderman, of the Army, Ireton the Anabaptist, and Rainsborow the
leveller, of the Lords Say the sychophant, and Manchester the man-cater: his
text I would have to be, even where himself lists, for the truth is, I am
not so well read in holy scripture, as to remember any place pertinent to the
purpose, his Sermon finished, let my body be decently wound up, in the
Ordinance of Indemnity, (for perchance it may purchase me some favor amongst
my fellow-furies in hell, though (should I live) it could not mittigate my
censure and punishment on earth, that done my body to born with all solemnity,
and cast into the open fields, for the fowls of the air to feast upon me (if
perhaps they fly me not for the sowrenesse of my flesh,) and for that I am
like to have no tomb, I desire that this Epitaph may be entered into the
Iournall book of the crew at Westminster, but withal I leave it to the
discretion of Brittannicus, to frame another more plausible if he find occasion.

Epitaph*
Blessed Tom Fairfax, he who led a rout,
Of seeming Saints, though halting with the gowt:
Is dead, but woe to us, he so should fall,
We not provided of a General:
He marched about, and led the Babes of Grace,
To plunder, and to ravish, in each place:
And sound no stop his passadge to deter,
Until his Lameship came to Colchester;
There, oh that fatal place, his Saints and he,
Did sind the worst of Wars extremity:
Hundreds of them, were blown up into the air;
As many without arms, did in Despair.
This broak his Gow^ships heart, he is g(...)nzhes gone,
And the rest running to perdition.
The last will and Testament of the Army.

^N the ^^me of mischief, murder, massacres, and Ruin, Amen. We who term
our selves an Army of Saints, commonly known by the name of murderers,
plunderers, Blasphemers, Atheists, and out-throates, now lying before the Town
of Colchester, where we are continually kept waking with loud allar^^s, and
hundreds of us each day out off by furious Sallies, being in a very sick and
weak estate, and certainly assured that we cannot be long mortal, do make this
our last Will and Testament, in manner and form following:

Imprimis. We give our bodies, to be devoured by crows, pies, rav^ns, and
shrich-owles, and the other animals of the air, so soon as ever our Souls
shall be sent packing by the swords of the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capell,
Sir Charles Lueas, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and the rest of the eminent
Royallists, and their adherents, now in arms against us.

Jtem. We give and bequeath all our plunders* rapines, cruelties, and
abominations which we have practiced this seven years, to Scot, Manchester,
Say, Warner, Wild* Rolls, and the rest at Westminster, and the city of London,
who rule the roaste, wishing we could make them full Executioners to all our
Sins, not doubting but they will improve our aforesaid legacies to the best
advantage ye^, till they shall be pulled out of their house at Westminster, and
all they at G^^ld. Hall shall be whipped about the City.

Item. We give and bequeath, all our Scismes, Factions, outrages,
disturbances, tumults, contentions, to the Sectaries in, and abo^^ the City of
London, to be equally distributed amongst them the 22 of September next
ensuing when they shall meet together at the Spittle, to take their farewell of
Tub-L^ctures, to the end, they may be so well seasoned with seditious
principles, that they may on all occasions be prompt and ready to cause new
combustions, to give occasion of new jealousies, and to set on foot new
distempers, when we shall be quite forgotten, save to our Infamy.

Item. We give and bequeath, unto our venerable Apostle, Hugh Peter's, all
those gifts of the Spirit, (which the malignants term) of deulsion, with
which enabled we that are foot-souldiers and troopers have often with our
zealous Oratory frighted the Jack Dawes, of from Country Steeples, and have
led the high-shoes* and ba^on mouths, by the nose to their ruin, and this
boon we are the rather incited to bestow upon him for that he the said Hugh
Peter's, has of late days absconded himself from us, and has taken up his
quarters with the cutlers-wife, at -- having deserted his Apostolical
function, we mean not his players guyze (which i^ the reason that ever since
he has been a minister, he acts a sermon so ridicously in the pulpit, to the
incredible mirth of his Auditory, but mean his faculty of prating and
confounding Scripture al which his Errors, we are confident will soon leave
him, when our spirit shall take up hillet in his breast, also we bestow upon
him, all the riches which we shall leave sowed up in our doublets when we leave
the world (if he have such good fortune to attain it) which we do hereby
charge him to lay out upon good wine, and handsome whores, for we know, when he
leaves such recreation our cause perishes with him.

Item. We give and bequeath all our false eaths our breach of covenant, and
our frequent protestations to act nothing that might tend to his Majesty's
dishonor, the ruin of his Person, or to the diminishing of his just Power and
greatness, with which plausible pretenses (we once deluded the people) to the
States at Westminster.

It is by them that we are so accursed,
By them we were deluded at the first:
They were the Devils, that began the broile,
And we have been their hackneis, all our toil,
Has been their greatness, for to propogate,
And late, we brought them near unto a State*
But like to Sailors, see the Port, and die,
They look upon their wish, and fell from hie.
Willing and desiring our said executors, (if at least we may term them so)
to improve our impieties aforesaid to the utmost that so (if it be possible)
they may yet hold up a twelve month longer, and under a pretense of treating
with his Majesty, get time to strengthen themselves, or if that fail, to make
up their fardles for New England.

All these out Leganles being duly distributed, according to our aforesaid
wish, we will, that Mr. Dell that Gospel Reformer, in whose esteem his
Majesty is a dead dog, do preach our funeral in the fields, where we desire
that all the whole rabble of Sectaries whether Pre^biters, Independents,
seekers, Anabaptists, Apostoliks, Anti-trinitarians, Familists,
Antiscripturians, or Adamites, Shakers, Brownists, Barrowists, Erastians,
Nicholaitans, Antinomians, Armi^ians, and the whole swarms of Hornets, will be
present, and the sermon being finished, to lift up their voices, with
outrag^ous shriekes, and horrid gro^^^s, such as may fright nature into a
Chaos, and for that we doubt not but Mr. Dell will take great pains, in
sweating out his sermon, we will that he in recompense thereof shall have liberty
to print h^^ sermon, and to take money for the co^^^^ of whatsoever Book seller
he can get it, we could wish the dan^^ ^at Knave, Greek, who keeps shop in
fleet street, had the disp^^^g of it, and so de^i^ing one long ^ard brethren,
to take warning by our example, we bid them, farewell, assuring them, that we
will not sail to make known to their friends in the lower world t^is present
estate.

FINIS.

