The last Will and Testament, OF SIR JOHN PRESBYTER: Who dyed of a new Disease
called, The particular Charge of the ARMY.

With diverse Admonitions and Legacies left to his dear Children of the
Presbyterian Commons that have deserted the House: Likewise to Legions of
perjured Priests, residing in London, Westminster or elsewhere.

With his Life, Death, and Burial.

ALSO HIS EPITAPH.

July 22 Printed in the year of Iubilee, 1647.

The Last Will, etc. Know all men by these presents, that I,
John Presbyter Knight, by Country a Scotch-man, of the Tribe of Rabshekah, of
the Lineage of Judas; (being of perfect memory, only a little troubled with
mellancholly, and a disease called, The particular Charge of the Army) do
ordain this my last Will and Testament to stand in full force and virtue.

Imprimis, I give and bequeath my soul into the hands of him that gave it, and
whereas I have always (in my life time) been used, and taught all others to
plunder and rob both God and Caesar of their dues; yet at my death I detest all
such horrid Actions, Equivocations, and mental Reservations, and will not rob
the Devil of his: Therefore in plain English, Devil take thy due.

For my body, I bequeath to the earth; provided first, That it be first
decently wrapped in six sheets of the Directory, and then reverently coffined
up in the sacred Ordinance for Tithes, and so with all solemnity carried from
the Temple to Westminster by the C. L. asses, Doctor Burges, Doctor Gouge,
Master Edwards, and Byfeild being close Mourners, and going before the corpse,
and the wicked Elders following after, weeping, howling, and gnashing of their
teeth, as if they were already in the fire, which such stinking Trees were made
for, upon one of which Judas my my great Gransire hanged himself: you may read
more of them in the History of Susanna, with a slow motio, and in the midst of
the streets, that my body may be seen by all, and let your sorrow so much
abound, that you may take up that Lamentation of old, Wisdom crying out in the
streets, but none regards her -- my will is, That my learned Countryman,
Doct^ur Cybballs teach at my Funeral in a deplorable tone of language
(according to his special gift) my will being that he preach upon that text in
the 89. Psalm. verse. 44 The days of my youth have thou sh^rtened, and covered
me with dishonor.

Next I desire that Mr. Calamy and Mr. Case may be sent up to desire a
conferrence with both Houses, to procure an Ordinance, that the^e may be a day
of Humiliation appointed, and set appart to deplore my sad loss, and that a
Message be prepared, and sent with all speed into Scotland, to give them timely
not^ce thereof, that they may humble themselves with you, and that whereas we
have continued a Monthly Fast for the distressed Protestants in Ireland, and
we our selves having revoked the Protestant Religion, and instituted the
Presbyterian, (and now finding our own distresses to be above or equal with
theirs) we conclude that our prayers have not been ava leable for them, and
may now change the day, and fast and pray as long or longer for our selves. And
likewise, that they may be pleased to put it to the Vote, whether my corpse may
not be interred near his Excellency their late Lord General, and Mr. John
pym, and so hereafter all Parliament men disceasing, that we our selves may as
well now, as hereafter take up all the resting places of the Saints, and so
leave no room for either the King or his evil Counsel or Popish Bishops,
they having formerly engrossed that place only for themselves, that an
Ordinance may be speedily drawn up to this effect.

Thirdly, I will and bequeath unto Doctor Burges to have the disposing of all
fat Benefices whatsoever; provided that the said Dr. Burges hold and freely
enjoy as many of the said Benefices as he himself pleases, and the rest to be
by him disposed of to such persons as he shall think quallified and endued
with gifts befitting so great a Cause as the present Reformation shall require;
to which end, for the better encouragement of him the said Dr. therein, I do
freely give and bequeath unto the said Dr. Burges all the scaffolds, and loose
stones in or about, or belonging to the Church of Paul's, to pull down, take,
carry away, and dis^ose of as he shall think fi^ting.

Fourthly, I give and bequeath unto my Reverend Son D^. Gouge ^he full sum of
500 l for these Religious uses following, viz. 20 pounds to find his Parish
Bell-ropes, and in case his said Parish shall not have any use thereof, that he
or any of the rest of the venerable Assembly shall have full power and
authority to use them at their own discretions: That one hundred and 50 pounds
shall be by the said like to l ke quoth the Devil to the Colier,
Dr. Gouge disbursed in sea-coale whilst they are cheap, and by him sellered up
(as lately he did, most of his Parish can justify the same) and by him again
sold out to the poor of his Parish, or any other poor Christians at 10.d. the
Bushel clear gains. And I ordain that he employ the remaining sum in like
manner, or if he thinks it fitting to put it to use at 10 in the hundred, and
not under, and the gains thereof arising to be distributed equally to Mr. John
Prin, and Dr. Bastwick, that they may be the better encouraged to Query against
the Army, to rail against Independents, to root out Monarchy, and to prove
Presbytery jure Divino, provided that the principal remain entire to Dr.
Gouge himself, without any other fraud or deceit.

Fifthly, I give and bequeath to my dear Child Mr. Edwards, 5^0 acres of
Bishops Lands, with all the timber growing thereon, to be by him converted to
Gibbets to hang up the Independents; and in case the said Independents shall
resist the holy Synod, as is probable they will; That then it shall be lawful
for any of the Assembly being already furnished with hemp (if not enough in my
former Legacy, the Common people of England questionless will supply their
needs) to hang themselves, and to fulfill the old Proverb, give them halter
enough and they will hang themselves.

Sixthly, I give and bequeath all my plundered Books, and Libraries lately taken
from the Bishops to Mr. Calamy, Mr. Sedgwick, and Mr. Case, it being likely the
Case may suddenly be altered, and my Son Calamy feel Calamity, for I fear
destruction is nie, and my son Sedgwick will shortly bleat (like one of
Jeroboams Calves) to his Countrymen in Essex, in one only single poor
Benefice.

Seventhly, I give and bequeath all my Charity to the Aldermen of the City, and
by them to be dispsed of to the Parliament, as they shall have need thereof.

Eighthly, All my wisdom and learning to the Common Counsel, that they may
preserve the City as I and my Children have preserved the Church, and brought
it to the great light and glory that now you see it is.

Ninthly I give and bequeath to all broken Aldermen, defunct Committees, and
accused Members of the House of Commons, my new Creed; and by them to be
disposed of to their Creditors, and all others as they shall see cause, that
they may renew their faith, and again become credible men, by which means the
public faith may again revive, and the City look up: and whereas my
Predecessor known by the name of Doctors Commons of famous memory did decease
about six years since having first made a will which was made public in
print, and for as much as the said Doctors Commons is again revived to my
great and unspeakeable terror, I do hereby bequeath unto my said Predecessor
all jurisdiction, privileges, profits, and emoluments whatsoever so unjustly
usurped and detained by me, and the rest of my precious Brats.

Tenthly, All my zeal for the Cause I give and bequeath to the dissenting
Soldiers that have deserted the Army, that they may stand up mightily in the
gap, and stop that plaguey devouring Army of Sir Thomas Fairefax.

Eleventhly, I give and bequeath all my new invented Oaths, and Covenants, all
my Schismatic Sermons, all my perjuries, forgeries, plots, treacheries,
rebellions, Equivocations, and mental reservations, to my dear children the
Scots, provived that they shall make use of them in their own Country, and not
else where.

Twelfely, I give and bequeath unto Dr, A notorious turn-coat.
Cyballs, 10.l. of lawful money of England, in consideration of my Funeral
Sermon, besides two Canonical Coats, which he may turn, as he sees fitting,
and I desire him to make his prayer shorter then the ordinary use has been,
for I my self must confess the blasphemies, treasons, heresies,
incongruities, tautologies, absurdities of my children in their measure of
prayer, from time to time (observed by the people) has been a great cause of
my untimely decease: And also I desire that his Sermon may be printed, and
published, and that Wall-eyd Bartlet at Austins-gate, and Bellamy at the Old
Exchange have the printing thereof, and that an Ordinance may be desired, that
none dare to reprint the same.

Lastly, I do entrust all that out of a Conscientious duty to me (shall
suddenly after my discease) Leave and abandon the House of Commons (Provided
they exceed not the number of threescore) to be my Executors, that they see
this my last will and testament performed, without any fraud according to the
true sense and meaning thereof, and the several legacies to be paid to the
persons aforesaid within five months after my death. And this my will to
remain in full force, revoking all former Wills, Bonds, Bills, Gifts,
whatsoever.

Witness my hand and Seal, John Presbyter. Simon Synod. Cornelius Burges.

Adoniram Byfield, Scribe.

Sealed and delivered, July, 1647.



Postscript.
Rejoice O heavens, sing aloud O earth, clap thy hands for joy, O England post
nubula soles, thou shall now have a time of quietness, of peace, of content,
for Presbyter John is dead, and will never vex thee more, nor imprison thy free
Denizens, nor eat up thy fat things, not devour thy good things, nor eat the
bread out of thy childrens mouths: Therefore farewell persecution for
conscience; farewell Ordinance for Tithes; farewell Ecclesiastical Supremacy;
farewell Pont^ficall Revenue; farewell Dissembly of Devines, dissembled at
Westminster, you shall consult together no more; farewell Sir Simon Synod, and
his son Presbyter Jack.

Gens antiqua ruit, multos dominata per Annos, And therefore O England, Inter
pone tuis, interdum gaudia curis.

His Epitaph.
HEre lies Jack Presbyter, void of all pity,
Who ruined the Country, and fooled the City:
He turned preaching to prating, and telling of lies,
Caused jarres and discenssous in all Families.
He invented new Oaths, Rebellion to raise,
Deceiving the Commons, whilst on them he prays.
He made a New Creed, despised the Old,
King, State, and Religion by him bought and sold.
He four years consulted, and yet could not tell
The Parliament the way Christ went into Hell.
Resolved therein, he never could be,
Therefore in great haste, he is gone thither to see.
FINIS.

