A LETTER OR DECLARATION, SENT From the KING of SCOTS, TO The Marquess of
Ormond: Concerning his Agreement with the Scots; And his special command to
the said Marquess for publishing the same to the Irish: With his protestation
touching his former Grants.

Sent by an Express to the City of Paris, to be forthwith printed.

Whereunto is annexed; A Narrative from Portugal, touching Prince Rupert's
design, to have fired the Parliaments shipping; the manner thereof, the
discovery, and a fight that happened on shore, between Prince Rupert and Gen:
Blague's men.

London, Printed for G. Orton, and are to be sold at the Royall-Exchange. 1650.
June 6

A Letter or Declaration, sent from the declared King of Scotland, to the
Marquess of Ormond; touching his Agreement with the Scots.
SIR,
WHere liberty is, if great men be Magistrates they are hateful to the people,
being not sensible that they are banks reared, which though they hinder the
sight, yet withstand inundations; therefore to ruin a Kingdom by force, is a
dangerous undertaking: Good resolutions are seldom taken altogether; in all
things dangers do appear, and to secure our selves from evil, good is done by
halfs; and the half of that good is not good, which consisting in the whole
admits of no division. To reverse things now irrepairable, and which cannot be
diverted, is a labor without profit; but there ought a remedy to be had, for
the appearing danger. Injuries received, tend to the ruin of men, who with the
zeal of honor do not accompany wisdom; they run upon revenge for past-wrongs,
and throw themselves headlong upon new miseries; they would amend one error,
and produce a thousand. Too much haste is as much before time, as too much
delay is out of time: Errors of impatience, are worse then errors of delay;
for it is better to shun precipices then to run upon them: if they be not
hindered, they are retarded. Justice is not believed to be there, where violence
is observed to be; nor can it be accounted wisdom where there is no
augmentation. Augmentation is not had in an instant, time is not measured by
instants: Wisdom is the daughter of cold, violence of heat; things which have
not been done in times past, may well be effected in times to come, but things
already done, cannot be undone again: occasions are never wanting to men, but
men are wanting to occasions. And he who sighs, egged on by fury, begins his
war for having lost; he satisfies his affection not his duty, and is sooner
beaten by his own weakness then another valor. Our forbearance is to be
served, not despised; the world is his who has patience when it proceeds from
sagacity, not timidity. Generous spirits address themselves to endure present
injuries, out of hope of future revenge; they reprove their anger to vindicate
offenses, not to evaporate passion. Dissimulation is not to be blamed, when by
the injury of time it is not transformed into oblivion; dissimulation is never
worse then when it becoms forgetfulness; never better, then when it resembles
it. All industry ought to be used, to have peace with a people, who can never
have a worser war, then peace: fair pretenses are not wanting to cloak our
received injuries; and many great Statists have self-interest for the sphere of
their actions. It was the saying of a great Roman, that a Princes death (though
violent) if his whole race cease in him, is no impediment to the good
government of him that succeeds, if he be not a cause thereof himself, through
his bad government: where there is none of the blood, there is no head; where
there is no head, people do but murmur, they take no resolution; the greatest
provocations to revenge, are either necessity, or profit. And it was likewise
the saying of one of the Patriarks, that he who has won a kingdom by the
sword, if he lay not down the sword, the sword will lay down him; and that,
that Magistrate is not wise, that makes use of the same means to govern a
State, which he did to possess himself thereof: and that power is not worthy
to be obeyed, who uses not the means to be beloved. But it is not now with
England as it has been formerly with other Nations, who after an intestine
War, and differences composed, enjoyed future peace, by disbanding their
Armies, and sheathing the sword, having no enemies abroad to disturb or molest
them: But so numerous are the Enemies of the English Communalty, who act and
conspire in several parts, now to make an inroad for the involving of her in
new troubles, and taking revenge for bypast actions; that there is great
reason a defensive power should be kept on foot, for the safety and
preservation of its peace and liberty, from foreigners threats and fury.

But (Sir) fearing I have been too tedious in the foregoing circumstances, I
shall now proceed to the subject of my intelligence, representing such
occurrences as have reference to my Native Country England. The Treaty here
being ended, the declared King of Scots dispatched a letter to the Marquess of
Ormond, wherein he declared;

That what he had done as to his Agreement with the Scots, he had done it out
of mere necessity, for preserving to his obedience the kingdom of Scotland; and
that it had no ways diminished his good affection to the Irish Catholics, and
the rest of his party; and that as he had absolutely refused to give way to any
thing that should tend to their prejudice, so he would still adhere to them, as
relying altogether upon their true and faithful affection (under the juditious
conduct of him) incomparably more then upon any; either English, or Scottish.
And to the end that the true sense of his condescensions might be imparted unto
them, he conjured him to declare this his will and pleasure, to all his Roman
Catholics in that Kingdom; (viz.) That he will never diminish or recall any
of his Grants [formerly] made unto them, but augment them, in all things that
may redound to their liberty and safety, etc.

The particulars of this Declaration, I received from a very good hand, who
justified, that he was an eyewitness of the signing the said Letter; and
withal, that express command was given, that a Copy of the said Letter should
be forthwith sent to Doctor Tyrrell [the Irish Agent at Paris] authorizing him
to print a hundred Copies, to disperse amongst those of his loyal subjects
whom he could confide in, and that had an interest, for the carrying on of the
work in Ireland. These passages are very ill resented, and in all probability
(as many conjecture) the Scots will find the sad event thereof when once he
gets into the Saddle; which causes this expression from many, that they never
desire to see him set footing within those territories: And indeed it is the
desire of many others (on the contrary part) likewise. Thus runs the current of
several sorts of people; but for my part, I desire nothing more, then to see
the Land of my Nativity, flourish in peace and tranquillity: Which is the humble
supplication of him, who remains

Breda, May 29. 1650. Your unfeigned friend, Tho: Lathbury.

Postscript.
SIR,
AT the closure of my precedent lines, here arrived an express from Portugal,
intimating; That Prince Rupert had lately studied a notable stratagem, for the
firing of the English shipping, the manner thus: Two Portugal Negroes, and
three English Artificers, undertook the work, who in the night time had
prepared a Longboat with Granado shells, filled with wilde-fire and other
materials, to fire the Vice Admiral and Bone-adventure; and toward break of
day, coming near to the stern of the said ships, to execute the same,
miraculously they were discovered, and being seized on, confessed, that their
aim and intent was to fire the said ships, and that they were hired by Prince
Rupert for the performance thereof. But no sooner was the Plot discovered, but
immediately Prince Rupert (being almost mad with rage that his plot had
miscarried) fell upon some of the Parliaments men, that were then ashore
providing fresh water, killed three, and took four prisoners. But it is
believed, that these scores will be suddenly made even; for we hear that
General Popham is joined with General Blague, with ten of the Parliament of
Englands ships, and that the said General Blague has weighed anchor, and
sailed from the Bay of Weres, to Cassia's road, to try whether the King of
Portugal will order Prince Rupert to put to sea: Which by my next, I doubt not
but to give you a more particular account of; in the interim, nothing more, but
the affectionate subscription of him, who remains

Breda, May 29. 1650. Yours: T. L.

FINIS.

