A CONFUTATION OF The Solemn LEAGVE and COVENANT, AGAINST The persecuting
dividing sense put upon it by such who seek more themselves and their ends,
then the Glory of God, or the Peace of the KINGDOMS.

By R. L. A true friend to all real COVENANTERS.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini 1648.

The Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT, pleading its own innocence.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Burgesses Ministers of the Gospel
and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by
the providence of God living under one King, and being of one Reformed,
Religion, etc.] Which was not then Presbytery: Presbeters being reckoned among
the rest of their now despised brethren, for Sectaries, by their joint
adversaries, the Bishops, and the rest of that superstitious Popish faction.

Having before our eyes the glory of God, etc.] Who is alone glorious in
holiness, the brightness of whose glory is the man Christ Jesus; the
Spiritual, not the formal exalting of Christ, being the only mite we have to
cast into the treasure of his glory. Ex 15.11. Heb. 13.


And the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, etc.]
Whose Kingdom is a Spiritual Kingdom within men, not a carnal kingdom set up
over men, Luke 17.11. Heb. 1.8.
a Kingdom over whom there is no other King nor governor, but him that swayes
the Scepter of righteousness. For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.

The honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty, etc.] Esaias. 33.21.
It was not that honor and happiness which he himself fought for against the
Parliament and Covenant: but that honor and happiness wherein the happiness
and the safety of the Kingdom did consist.

And the true public liberties, safety, and peace of the Kingdoms, wherein
every ones private condition is included, etc.] These things, though last named
were first in our eyes, and more precious in our esteem then the honor and
happiness of him who would then have destroyed us, and did his utmost to make
us slaves.

And calling to mind the traccherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the enemies of God (which were not then called Sectaries)
against the true Religion, etc.] by which was not meant Church government, nor
unlimited Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Clergy, for those enemies we
speak, were then designing to advance those things, but by true religion must
be meant the power of godliness in godly people, which our formal
superstitious Church governors, viz. (the Episcopal Clergy) did endeavor to
persecute and destroy.

And professors thereof in all places, especially in the three Kingdoms, ever
since the reformation, etc.] Which has its eye to what we were reformed from,
viz. from Popery, superstition, etc. Which reformation was not then in Church
government, we being then under the government of Popish superstitious prelates
as if under any; but the reformation we eyed, was in those inward principles of
condence, and godliness shining forth in the conversation of particular
Christians.

And how much their rage, power, and presumption are of late, and at this time
inc^eased and exercised, whereof the deplorable estate of the Church and
Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and kingdom of
England and the dangerous estate of the Church and kingdom of Scotland, are
present and public testimonies, etc.] Which power, rage and presumption, that
put the three kingdoms into such a distraction, was not then for want of
suppressing Heresy and Schism so called, but the contrary, the suppressing and
opposing truth under those names, the persecuting and destroying good
Christians for such persons, viz. Seditious Heretics and Schismatics, etc. If
you will not believe me, ask Mr. Prynne, and Doctor Bastwick, etc.

We have now at last, after other means of supplications remonstrances
protestations and sufferings, for the preservation of our selves, and our
religion from utter ruin and destruction, etc.] Were not our supplications to
the King and his Council, against the Prelates, and their persecuteing such in
the High Commission Star chamber, etc. By whose means and from whose hands
we endured these sufferings here spoken of, against whom and their innoations
did run all our protestations and remonstrances here quoted, as you may read
in the preamble to the first protestation, May 5. 1641. In these words, That
the designs of the Priests and Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of
Rome, have of late been more boldly and frequently put in practice then
formerly; to the undermining and danger of the true reformed Protestant
Religion, and that diverse innovations and superstitions have been brought into
the Church, etc. Multitudes driven out of His Majesty's Dominions, etc. (who
were banished then for Heretics and Schismatics. Therefore I A B. do in the
presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest to maintain, and defend,
as far as lawfully I may, (not further) with my life, sower, and estate, the
true reformed protestant religion, against all Popery, and Popish innovations
within this Realm, etc.] Not against all disputeable controversies, and matter
of doctrine and discipline between godly people.

According to the commendable practices of these kingdoms in former times, and
the example of godly people in other nations, after mature deliberation,
resolved and determined to enter into a solemn League and Covenant, etc.] Not
to compel any others, who hate both us and our Covenant, to enter into it to
the prejudice of all faithful Covenanters.

Wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our hands
listed up to the most high God do swear; First, that we shall since^ely,
realy and constantly through the grace of God, endeavor in our several places
and callings, (not out of them) the preservation of the reformed religion in
the Church of Scotland, ( not the setting up of it in England,) in doctrine,
worship, disc^pline, and government against our common enemies, (not against
our differing brethren that are our faithful friends) the reformation of
religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine Worship,
Discipline, and Government according to the Word of God (not besides it, much
less against it) and the example of the best reformed Churches (whose
reformation is not differing from our first and chief rule the Word of God) And
shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God (the Synagogues of Satan, the
Kingdom and throne of Antichrist, whose dominion is over Kingdoms and
Nations, after a worldly secular manner, against which we have cheifely
covenanted) in the three Kingdoms to the merest conjunction and uniformity in
Religion confession of Faith, form of Church Government, Directory for worship
and Catechizing, etc.] That according to our former Protestation (lawfully we
may) not erring from the Rule of all Reformation, Joh. 16.13.
the chief Rule in our eye, and first example in our mouths, (the word of
God) allowing of no other infallible interpreter to our judgments then that
spirit which is come into the World to lead us into all truth.

Exclaiming against the authority of popish Fathers, counsels, etc. over us in
matters of Faith, It being a principal branch of Popery to believe as the
Church believes, which we have chiefly covenanted against. That we and our
posterity after us may as Brethren (not as Masters and servants) for the
Scribes and Pharisees love the uppermost rooms at Feasts and the chief places
in the Sinogogues and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men Rabbi,
Rabbi, but be not ye called Rabbi for one is your Master even Christ, and all
ye are Breathren, Mat. 23.6, 7, 8.
and call no man father upon earth, for one is your father in Heaven; Live in
faith and love, etc.] Not in envying, strife and vain jangling about things
indifferent, in Faith and Love, not in form, custom and tradition; in Faith
and Love, which is the unity of the Spirit, not uniformity of Church
Government, Worship, Discipline, etc. though the latter is likewise included
where it does not prejudice the former.

And the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us, etc.] Acts 7.48. Esa.
8.18. Joel 3.21. Psalm. 132.13. Psalm. 87.2.
Who delights not to dwell in Tents made of hands; whose habitation is not in
Discipline, outward Worship, or forms of Religion: for the Lord has chosen
Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation, he loves the gates of Zion more
then all the dwellings of Jacob, though Jacob were not without Altars and
Sacrifices no more then Zion.

Zion representing the spiritual Church of God, not the carnal; for God has
not his Habitation nor dwelling place, in or among none but such as have their
dwelling place in him; he that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells
in me and I in him, Io 5 56.
which relates to the spiritual union betwixt Christ and a christian, not to
an outward profession of the Gospel. So Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
writing of the new Jerusalem the spiritual Church of God, where only God
dwells, speaking of Christ the chief corner stone in whom (says he) ye are
also builded together for a habitation of God through the spirit, Ephesians. 2.23.
Pet. 1.1.4. 1 Cor. 12.13.
and if ye be not thus builded together in chief and made one with him by
pertaking of the Divine nature, by being baptized into him through that one
spirit, it is not your building together in outward Leagues and Covenants,
discipline and forms of worship, though never so pure, that makes you a
habitation for God to dwell in.

The second Head. That we shall in like manner without respect of persons
endeavor the extirpation of Popish prelacy, (that is Church Government by
Archbishops their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
hierakchy, etc] Not only the names, forms and offices of the Government, but
chiefly the evil of the Government which was their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction over the people. Their exalting forms, traditions and ceremonies
above and against the purest godliness, their troubling and persecuting good
Christians under the name of Heritickes and Schismatics, forcing multitudes
out of His Majesty's Dominions, to enjoy their liberties elsewhere, which is
taken notice of by the Parliament in their protestation made the 5. of May,
1641. all which kind of disposition and persecuting principles, we are fully
and really Covenanted to extirpate in others as well as in them.

Superstition.] Which word includes all manner of ceremonous, worship crept in
among us, by the customs and traditions of men, contrary to the word of God;
and forced upon us by the decrees and determinations of Councels and Synods,
all which are wholly superstitious.

Heresy.] Which word signifies a peremptory obstinacy in a gross visible
error, in opposition to a fundamental known truth, that is in opposition to
the very foundation upon which religion, viz. the power of Godliness is
grounded; not every small difference among Christians in matter of Opinion or
Judgment about discipline, Government; or points so disputable which are hard
to be determined.

Schism.] Which signifies Division, or striving about Religion, by some few
violent persons, to the great prejudice of the generality of godly Christians;
not a Christian sober contending for the faith of the Gospel, against the
traditions and customs of men. Paul withstood Peter to the face before
Barnabas, and all the Saints at Antioch; yet Paul was no Schismatic, nor Peter
a Heritick, for practicing such things in the Church, as were reproveable and
blameable by Paul.

Profaneness.] Which word signifies a fleshy carnal abusing of spiritual and
holy things, or the profaning of the Lords day, his names, etc. the
administering spitituall Sacraments, or Ordinances to Carnal, Ignorant,
Scandalous people; this is is that the Lord much complains of in Scripture,
Ezekiel 12.8.
thou have despised my holy things, and profaned my Sabbaths, so in ver. 26.
her Priests have violated my Law, and profaned my holy things, Heb. 12.16. 1.
Timoth. 1 9.
they have put no difference between the holy and profane; so it includes all
manner of evil scandalous conversation, whether in words or deeds. This word
in the Covenant is so little taken notice of, though it be less disputable,
and the sins against it more scandalous and provokeing to the pure eyes of
our God, who cannot behold iniquity, Heb 1.13
then difference in opinion among Godly people; and if there were a better
reformation of the former, the latter would be more easily obtained:
profaneness being to be driven out from among us, as Christ drove the buyers
and sellers out of the Temple, and holiness of life with unity among brethren,
to be led in by cords of love, and strength of reason. But we walking so much
by contrary means find by woeful experience; contrary effects and
consequences. Whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine that is
sound doctrine which destroys all our own things, whether parts, abilities,
works or righteousness and exalts Christ alone, to be all in all for us, and
in us, Romans 3.22, 23. 1 Cor. 12.6. Ephesians. 1.23. Col. 3.11. That is sound
doctrine which is preached in no other name and authority, Ioh. 7.16.
but Gods; as the doctrine was which Christ taught, my doctrine is not mine but
his that sent me, not that which derives its Authority from Counsels, Fathers,
etc. who have many of them preached for doctrine the Commandments of men. And
the power of godliness.] These two things are well placed near together, for
where the one is wanting, the other is seldom found, the power of godliness
being constantly attended with sound doctrine, though among the purest grain
there may be sown some teres; for the more ye find of the power of godliness
in any man or society of men; the more of sound doctrine is there to be
expected; and if the power of godliness be wanting in men, how pleasing so
ever their opinions may be, there is little ground to judge they either know or
love sound doctrine. Least we partake of other men's sins, etc.] Among which the
sins of persecution, and in destroying good people under bad names; the
exalting the form of godliness against the power thereof was not the least.
And thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, etc.] As it is two
evident we have committed the same sins, so have we much cause fear the same
punishments, which God laid upon them by our hands, is at our doors; the Lord
help us to be sensible of the one in time, that we may prevent the other. And
that the Lord may be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms, etc.] It is
a desirable end the Lord direct us in the means.

A third head of the Covenant. We shall with the same sincerity, reallity, and
constancy in our several vocations endeavor, with our Estates and Lives,
mutually to preserve the Rights and Liberties of the Parliament, and the
liberties of the Kingdom, etc.] Of both which the Parliament themselves are
the most equallest Judges, they having no privileges, but what is in order to
the better preservation of the peoples liberties, the Parliaments just
privileges, being the principle Bull warke to our Laws and Liberties. And to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true religion and liberties, etc.] Not
otherwise ways we being at the same time in actual war against his
Majesty's person and prerogative power in the defense of our religion and
liberties. That the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our
loyalty; and that have we no thoughts nor intentions to diminish his Majestis
just power and greatness, etc.] And likewise of our forwardness to hazard the
loss of our lives and all things else dear to us, in the vindication and
protection of our just freedom and liberties against his Arbitrary unjust
power and greatness. We shall also withal faithfulness endeavor the
discovery of all such as have been or shall be incendiaries, Malignants or
evil instruments, by hindering the reformation of religion, etc.] Which
principally and chiefly those are which hinder the free progress of the
Gospel in the Common dispensation of the preaching the word, which are angry
because it is the good pleasure of the father to hide the mysteries of Christ's
kingdom from the wise and prudent, and reveal them unto Babes. Matthew. 11.25.
1 Cor. 11.27.28. 2 Per. 2.16. Matthew. 21.16
Because God has chosen the foollish, weak, bases despised things of the
world, and things that are not to bring to naught the wise and mighty things
that are; because God sometimes opens the mouth of the dumb ass, to reprove
the madness of the Prophet; and by the mouths of Babes and Sucklings perfects
his own praise, the despising of the day of these small things being the Grand
hinderance of a true reformation. Dividing the King from his people, etc.] The
King has ever been so far divided from his people in Covenant, that he has
saved all evil instruments a labor in that work. Or one of the Kingdoms from
another, etc.] Whosoever it is, that endeavors to involve or intermix the
distinct interest of each Kingdom, hazards much the making a greater division.
Abraham and his brother Lot agreed best after they had divided their substance,
and became two distinct families, or little commonwealths; there was strife
between their heads-men before, Genesis 13 7.
and the keeping two distinct interests or property to each others substance,
did not break the bond of brotherhood; nor hinder their mutual assistance of
each other against their common enemy. Abraham was ready to relieve his Brother
Lot from under the Captivity of Chedorleromor. Or making any faction or parties
among the people, contrary to this League and Covenant, Genesis 14.15.
etc.] Which those men are chiefly guilty of (next to the common enemy) which
would turn the sharpest edge of the Covenant against their differing brethren,
who has testified in the worst of times their affections and faithfulness to
the Covenant and cause as fully as themselves, who would put such a sense upon
some branches or expressions in the Covenant, as no rational man can make it
bear, nor impartial can judge it means, and stir up one party of the
Covenanters, to force a disputable fence upon the other; which has been the
principal cause of those factions and divisions among the Covenanters (if any
there be that has been made. That they may be brought to public trial, and
receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall require or
deserve, or the supreme judicatures of both kingdoms respectively, or others
having power from them, for that effect shall judge convenient, etc.] If only
the supreme judicatures of both kingdoms or others empowered by them, ought to
judge in this case; then sure it does not become particular men, one to judge
or accuse each other, much less to judge their judges.

The fifth head. And whereas the happiness of a blessed peace between these
Kingdoms denied in former times to our progenitors, is by the good providence
of God granted unto us; and has been lately [concluded and settled by both
Parliaments; we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm peace, and union to all
posterity, and that justice may be done on the wilful opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the present Articles, etc.] In pursuance of which the only
means, that can be used in a Christian brotherly forbearance of each other in
things wherein we differ; a friendly fair disputeing of accidental
controversies, out of an earnest desire to give one another satisfaction, wholly
to leave all grand controversies between the two Nations to be judged and
determined, by the Parliaments of each Kingdom, who alone are capeable of
giving the Kingdoms sense or resolution in things dispureable, and for all
particular persons to forbear their crying out against Covenan^ (...) and
Covenant breakers, in their Pulpits and Communications, it being no less then
scandalous railing and reviling (whether true or false, which is very ill
becoming leading Christians, whethers Ministers or others, and especially in a
time of reformation; and let them rather particularize Covenant breakers: and
what of the Covenant it is they have broken, and deal with them either as
Christians according to the rule, Matthew. 18.15.

Or as men, by complaining of them to those, who have power to judge and
determine things in such cases; there being no such prejudice to the union and
peace, between the Covenanters in the two kingdoms, as such kind of
exasperating the spirits of any people interested in the Covenant, whether pro
or con.

The sixth head. We shall also according to our places and callings in this
common cause of Religion, Liberty, and the peace of the Kingdoms, assist, and
defend, all those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining
and pursuance thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly, or indirectly,
by whatsoever combination, persuasion, or terror to be divided, and withdrawn
from this blessed union and conjunction; whether to make defection to the
contrary part, or quit our selves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrallity
in this cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the
kingdom, and honor of the King, but shall all the days of our lives,
zealously and constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote
the same according to our power, againsts all lets and impediments whatsoever;
and what we are not able of our selves to suppress, or overcome, we shall
reveal and make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed, all which
we shall do as in the sight of God.] The principal thing contained in this
sixth head, is a mutual assistance of each other, in the pursuing and
obtainining the ends of the Covenant, which is in a brotherly firm uniting
against the Common Enemy to the Covenanted cause, viz. the preservation of the
purity of religion, the liberty and freedom of the people, etc. To endeavor
to retain unity, where we cannot uniformity, and to prefer the concurrence and
assistance of one approved tried friend to the Covenanted cause, though
differing in some particular circumstances, before the compliance of many
others, which stood neuters to it or opposed it, when we stood most in need of
their help. And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and
provocations against God and his son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our
present destresses and dangers, the fruits whereof, we profess and declare,
before God and the world, our unsained desire to be humbled for our own sins,
and for the sins of these kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought,
valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel; that we have not labored for
the purity and power thereof, that we have not endeavored to receive Christ
into our hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes
of out sins and transgressions so much abounding among us: and our true and
unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavors for our selves and others, under our
power and charge, both in public and in prevate, in all duties we owe to God
and man, is to amend our lives, and each one to go one before another in this
example of a real reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and
heavy indignation, and establish these Churches in truth and peace, and this
Covenant we make in the presence of almighty God the searcher of all hearts,
with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great
day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, most humbly beseeching
the Lord to strengthen us, by his holy spirit for this end, and to bless our
desires and proceedings with such successes, as may be deliverance and safety
to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under,
or in danger of the Yoke of antichristian tyranny to join in the same, or like
Association and Covenant to the glory of God, the enlargement of the kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian kingdoms, and
common wealths, etc.

What can be more said? or what words can more fully contain to discover a
people cordially and really sensible of the crying sins, of persecuting and
destroying good people under bad names; exalting the form of Godliness
against the power thereof, of opposing the Letter of the Gospel against the
Spirit of it? Let the Consciences of all Covenanters judge, acknowledging the
cause of the Kingdoms present distresses and dangers to flow from their many
sins and provocations committed against God and his Son Jesus Christ,
especially the not valuing the mosteemable benefit of the Gospel: but rather
sliting deriding, and persecuting the most precious part thereof vid. The
spirit and power of it, not laboring for the purity and power thereof, but
rather imprisoning it by the tradition and form of it: not endeavoring to
receive Christ in hearts; drawing near to him with our mouths, but having our
hearts far from him, not walking worthy of him in our lives. vid. Not living
at all to him but to our selves, promising ^eall not formal Reformation,
desiring to be strengthened by his holy Spirit, whose teachings, enlightnings
and strengthnings, are now become a byword to many Covenanters, aiming at the
incoridgment of other Christian Churches, groaning under or in danger of the
same yoke of Antichristian tyranny, and now make it the very work of the
Covenant to put the same yoke upon the neeks of our dissenting brethren, which
our own selves then groaned under; like those Scribes and Pharisees Christ
admonishes the people against; for they bind heavy ^^^thens, and grievous to
be borne, and lay them on other men's shoulders, Mat. 23.4.
but themselves will not move them with one of their fingers: For now the whole
League and Covenant which contains thus many good Christan Engagements, is all
contracted, or rather detracted into these three things: viz. the Establishing
and Settling Church Government according to that of Scotland, the suppressing
and punishing of Heretics and Schismatics, etc. The defending of, or restoto
his Majesty his Power and Greatness.

Now let us review the Covenant upon these particulars, and see what we are
engaged to in relation to these things, and let the Covenant continue a rule,
and not be a snare to any, much less to its true friends.

The preservation of the reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland in
Doctrine, Worship, Disciplune and Government against our common Enemies.

What is this to the setting of it up in England against the judgments of our
best friends? or if our brethren of Scotland should find cause to make a more
through Reformation in that Kingdom, are we bound by this Covenant to hinder
them? our covenant to preserve the present Reformation, in either Kingdom, is
no engagement to hinder reformation in both Kingdoms, if those in whom the
power of Reforming is find cause: therefore what we are by this Covenant
engaged to in relation to Scotland, is to assist them against any that shall
endeavor to drive the Reformation back again, toward the Idolatrous
superstitions of Rome; not those which endeavor the pressing of it forward
toward the pure rule of the Word.

The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England and Iroland, in
Doctrine, worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the word of God,
and the example of the be best referned Churches.

It does not say according to the length and breadth in every thing to a tittle
of that in Scotland, neither does it name this or that form of Government, or
particular Church or churches; but only says the word of God, and best
reformed churches, which is wholly in the breast of the Reformers which church
or churches to judge best Reformed; whether Scotland, Holland, Geneva, New
England, etc. Or whether they will approve of national or congregationall
churches: if the latter can prove themselves best Reformed, they ought by the
covenant to be our pattern.

And shall endeavor to bring the church of God in the three Kingdoms to the
nearest conjunction and uniformitie in Religion, confession of Faith, form of
Church Government, Directory for Worship and catechizing.

Here is not a word of making Scotland a pa^^^ne to the other two, until it
has proved it self one of the best reformed Churches, and when it has we are
no more tied to it than to other reformed Churches, equil with it in
reformation, nor to none of them further than the Word of God bears testimony
to the truth of their practices, it being our firstrule, reformed Churches
being rather named for presidents for justifying our reforming than for rules
to reform by, we having the same word for our rule, and the same spirit to
measure by that other reformed churches have, or otherwise our best reformation
will be but a painted sepulcher.

Again, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity. It does not say, the very
same, not nearer than it can be withour prejudice to each other, conjunctions
and agreements made by particulars for the mutual comfort, safety, and peace of
each other, having their eye to what may be advantageous to the whose when
conjoined in opposition to what shall be prejudicial to either as particulars,
and what any impartial man can gather from these things: to conclude, that the
parliament or kingdom of England is engaged by this covenant, to settle
Religion or church government by direction of rules given them from Scotland,
or from any other in England inferior to themselves is to me hid.

Nay, that the Parliament of England is not left as free to judge what Church
government or Form of Discipline, to settle in England, notwithstanding any
thing said in this Covenant, as the Parliament of Scotland is in Scotland, and
as the Parliament themselves are left free by this Covenant in their judgments
and determinations what Church government or form of Worship to settle in this
Kingdom: on the Affirmative part, so are all others engaged and interessed in
this Covenant with them, every particular man being left as complete a Judge by
this Covenant to himself in the matters of Religion as the Members of the
Parliament are for themselves as particular men, and for the whole Kingdom as a
parliament, which must be the meaning of these Words, and our true and
unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under our
power and charge both in public and private in all Duties we owe to God and
man to amend our lives and each one to go before another in the example of a
real reformation, page 21.22. And if we be bound to endeavor in our several
places and callings to go each before other in the example of a real
reformation, then can we not be bound up to stay each of other, for an example
of formal reformation.

The second thing which is made by some men the great business of the Covenant
is the suppressing or punishing of Heresy and Schism, etc.

That it is not the duty of every particular Christian in their several places
and callings to endeavor the extirpation of that which is really heresy and
schism, I deny not: but that every man, or any man which has taken this
covenant is bound thereby to become a persecutour of Heretics; etc. or to
judge, of error, heresy or schism, etc. by any other rule than the Word of
God: or to suppress and oppose it by any other means than what is there
prescribed, in which every particular man for himself is made a judge by the
covenant (I deny) there being not one tittle in the whole Covenant taking
notice of heresy and schism, except in the second head these two words,
endeavor the exterpation of popery, prelacy superstitions, heresies, and
schisms etc. And that any man could think these two words had been crowded
into that place for a snare to any peaceable, godly people, for preferring
unity with God before uniformity with men, when the later cannot be enjoyed
without prejudice to the former (to me seems strange) considering it was the
great Grievance our conforming Brethren as well as our selves then groaned
under, vid. the opposing the power of godliness in the form of it, the
persecuting and troubling good people under the name of seditious persons,
heretics, and schismatickes, etc.

And as God did then help his people to bear witness to his truths, though
under persecution for error and heresy, so shall he do still: for it is no
new but the old way of Antichrist, to persecute Christ for Belial, truth for
error and heresy, which Paul bears witness to, Acts 14.14. But this I
confess unto thee after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God
of my fathers. The third main part of the covenant which some are now promoting
to destroy all faithful Covenanters, which is the preserving and defending the
Kings Majesty's person and Authority.

But they have forgotten it is ontly in defense of the true Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdom: the Armies which were raised by the King against the
Parliament at first were pretended for the defense of his person and authority,
but according to the sense we are bound by the covenant to oppose him with our
utmost lives and fortunes. This Doctrine was not preached in Scotland. When the
King was forced to march into the North parts with a great Army to protect his
person in the exercise of his kingly office and authority in Scotland: though
Scotland had then never tasted of the cruel War, which since both Scotland and
England has groaned under, by that power and authority of their King, which
they make now the main quarrel of the covenant.

Our Brethren of Scotland with the the rest of their judgment in England have
had some dissatisfaction on their spirits concerning the kings restoration to
his power and trust before he has given satisfaction and security to the
kingdoms, as ye may read in the parliaments Answer to his Majesty's desites
of a personal Treaty to which they all concur. Concerning the personal Treaty
desired by your Majesty, there having been so much present blood of your good
subject shed in this War by your Majesty's commands and commissions: Irish
rebels brought over into both kingdoms, as also forces from foreign parts,
etc there being forces also in Scotland against that parliament and kingdom by
your majesty's commission, the War in Ireland fomented and prolonged by your
Majesty, whereby the three kingdoms are brought near to utter ruin and
destruction: we conceive that until satisfaction and security be first given
to both the kingdoms your Majesty's coming hither cannot be convenient, nor by
us assented unto.

Again, see the speech of the general assembly of the kirk of Scotland to the
king at Newcastle. The troubles of our hearts are enlarged, and our seares
increased in your Majesty's behalf, perceiving that your peoples patience is
above measure tempted, and is like a cart pressed down with sheaves and is
ready to break; while as besides many forms, designs, and endeavors to bring
desolation and destruction upon us, etc. Our country is now infested. The
blood of diverse of our Brethren spilt, and other acts of most barbarous and
horrid cruelty exercised by the cursed crew of Irish Rebels, and their
accomplices in this kingdom, under the conduct of such as have commission and
warrant from your Majesty, and unless we prove unfaithful both to God and to
your Majesty, we cannot conceal another danger, which is infinitely greater
than that of your peoples displeasure, etc. therefore in the Name of our Lord
and master Jesus Christ who shall judge the World in righteousness both great
and small, and in the name of this whole national kirk which we represent, we
make bold to warn your Majesty freely, that the guilt which cleaves fast to
your Majesty and to your Throne is such, as (whatsoever flattering preachers or
unfaithful counselors may say to the contrary) if not timely repented,
cannot but involve your self and your posterity under the wrath of the
everliving God, for your being guilty of this shedding of the blood of many
thousands of your Majesty's best subjects.

Was his Majesty blameable in the spilling of so much innocent blood, of his
best subjects in the three kingdoms, and was it then our duty to protect our
selves against his Majesty's power and authority which he exercised to our
ruin and destruction to the utmost of his strength, (and is it not so?) has
not the parliament several times declared, as particularly in their Message to
the king 25. August, 1642. That the king by setting up his Standard against
them, did put the two Houses of parliament, and in them the whole Kingdom out
of his protection, that until his Majesty shall recall those proclamations and
declarations, whereby the two Houses of parliament and all that adhered to them
are declared Traitors: they could not without betraying their trust admit of
any Treaty with his Majesty.

Now has the King recalled these Proclamations and Declarations ye or no, has
he given satisfaction for blood, or security to the Kingdom? if not, would you
have us betray our cause, break our covenant, and treat as Traitors? Had we
not better have done this at first before this great expense of blood and
treasure? Must the covenant needs be at war with it self? can we be bound by
the covenant to assist the Parliament, and all that adhere to them; in
maintaining the true Religion, the Libertyes and Freedom of the people, etc. In
opposition to the Arbitrary power of the King, and likewise bound to defend and
protect the Kings Majesty and Authority, while in opposition unto the same
former things? But it is not the covenant, but the designing faithless
covenanters, which are thus full of contradictions, but if ye shall still do
wickedly, 1 Samuel 12.25.
ye shall be consumed both you and your King.

A POSTSCRIPT.
BRethren this breife Explanation of the Covenant is not intended to persuade
any from taking it, much less any from keeping it: but rather to discover the
usefulness and inocency of it; it being at this time the design of all the
professed enemies of Christ and his people, to make this bond of Christian Union,
become a bone of Division amongst us, by a seeming compliance with some things
contained in it which serve best their own ends; which is a total subverting
the maine end of the Covenant. viz. the brotherly uniting together all godly
people, whether of Paul, Apollo, or Cephas: Against the common enemy to the
power of Godliness, and purity of Religion; the libertyes and freedom of the
people, the Covenant in the plain and naked sense of it, being as free from
compulsion as the late paper entitled the Agreement of the people only the
violent prosecuting of both by the rigid uncharitable promoters, acting more
out of design and bitterness of spirit, than conscience has converted the one
into a snare, and the other into a yoke, there being not one clause in the
Covenant binding to any conformity in matters of Religion, but what is with
such large and clear exceptions and conditions as any man, without prejudicing
his christian liberty, may take it and walk answerable to it, it being
acknowledged by the Assembly of Divines in their exhortation for their taking
the Covenant, page 33. That there is nothing contained in it, but what was
manifestly and fully included in that Protestation taken by the whole Kindome,
May 5. 1641. Upon which the Parliament gives this Interpretation, page 7.
Whereas some doubts have been raised by several persons out of this House
concerning the meaning of these words contained in the Protestation lately made
by the Members of this House. vid. The true Reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery, and
Popish Inovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine. The House
does declare by those words, was and is meant only the public Doctrine
professed in the same Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery and Popish
Inovations: That the said words are not to be extended to the maintaing of any
form of Worship, Discipline or Government, nor of any Rites or ceremonies in
the said church of England. What could have been more said to satisfy every
man in this point which is not affected to Popery and Popish Inovations?

Again in the first Preamble to the solemn league and covenant, entitled The
excellent usefulness of the Covenant, it has these words: Unton with God,
conformity to God, and unity of the three Kingdoms, are things most
desirable; in the first we are happy, in the second holy, in the third is
strength, peace, and safety: These are the kindly fruits of this covenant, and
a covenant that brings forth these, how gladly should they be embraced, and how
willingly received, they are lovely bands that bind us to be happy, holy, and
safe: The heart of man is backsliding, and a covenane is like a hedge or wall
to keep us from going backward. It does not say to hinder us from going
forward. From forgetting of those things which are behind, reaching forth unto
those things which are before, pressing toward the Mark, for the price of our
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.13.

There being not one clause in the whole Covenant, tending to bind or limit a
believer in point of Faith or practice in matters of Religion, but on the
contrary, making a strong provision for their further freedom; the very
business and end of the Covenant, being to defend and preserve our Christian
and Civil Liberties, against the Popish Prelaticall, persecuting party in the
Kingdom, which is not only my sense but the sense of the Assembly of Divines
themselves, as you may see in their exhortation annexed to the Covenant, which
is clear in these several places.

As first in page 30. For the Vindication and defense of their Religion,
Liberties, and Laws: against the Popish, prelaticall, and Malignant party, so
agai^e in page 32. to join with their brethren in this happy bond, for putting
an end to the present miseries, and for saving both of King and Kingdom from
utter ruin, now so strongly and openly labored by the Popish Faction, and
such as have been bewitched and besotted by that viprous and bloody generation.
They likewise acknowledge in page 34. the whole Government of the Church to be
but of humane constitution at the best, and prejudicial to the Civil State, a
great hinderance to the perfect Reformation of Religion, (and further adds
thus) ye who knows it not to be too too much an enemy thereto, and
destructive to the power of godliness, and pure administration of the
Ordinances of Christ.

And likewise they justisie their covenanting to oppose these persecuting
Principles, though in Kings and Rulers, by the practice of the Kingdom of
Scotland, page 38. Upon whose action and success, they make this inference,
page 39. therefore how ever some men hoodwinked and blinded by the Artificesses
of those Jesuiticall Ingineers, who have long conspired to sacrifice our
Religion to the Idolatry of Rome, our Laws, Liberties, and persons to
Arbitrary slavery, and our estates to their unsatiable avarice, may possibly be
deterred and amused with high threats and Declarations, flying up and down in
the wings of the Royal name, and countenance (now captivated and prostituted
to serve all their lusts) to proclaim all Rebels and Traitors who take this
Covenant: yet let no faithful English heart be afraid to join with our
brethren, of all the three Kingdoms in the solemn League: And further making
the great end of this Covenant to be the terror and confusion (only of those
men of blood the confederate Enemy of God and the King, who have long
combined, and have now raked together the dregs and scumme of many Kingdoms,
to bury all the glory, honor, and Liberty of our Nation, in the eternal grave
of dishonor and destruction: What more can be said, to discover a people fully
sensible of the evil and wickednesses of persecution, and troubling men, for
nonconformity to National Church Government, it being the very ground and
cause of all the sufferings of godly people in these Kingdoms, by those men
who are set out in these bloody Colors, by our now conforming brethren, nay so
tender were they of making the covenant a bond or yoke, to compel any man to
act further in any thing than he had freedom of spirit to doc, that they
declare this Covenant does not bind us to persecute our persecutors, whom we
covenanted against, but only to hold their hands, and hinder them from
destroying us, in these words. Page 35. Nor is any man hereby bound to offer
any violence to their persons; but only in his place and calling, to endeavor
their extirpation in a lawful way. Now what pity is it that a Covenant or
engagement, wherein the safety and freedom both of our C^vill and christian
Liberties is so much provided for, should be so little set by, so little prized
or valued on the one hand, and so much wrested and adulterated on the other
hand; Some cry up the Covenant, the Covenant, as the Scribes and Pharisees did
the Temple, the Temple, and the Law, Acts 24.6. Mark 15.29. Acts 6.13. And
others cry it down or stand at a distance from it, only because it was thus
cried up, now that both these extremes might be avoided, and a more christian
way of observing the Covenant practiced, let us consider these following Rules.

1. That we prefer the common Interest, safety, and preservation of all sorts
of people is teressed in, and acting for the ends of this Covenant, before ^he
satisfaction of any particular sort of men, who will not be satisfied with any
thing less, than having their own sense forced upon the judgments of all
others in Covenant with them, though contrary to the judgment of the
Parliament themselves.

2. That all private men be satisfied in the in joyment of their own liberty,
to act in the persuing the ends of this Covenant, as they shall find
themselves bound in Conscience and satisfied in their judgments, to do in
their several places, and callings, and freely to cast themselves upon the
judgments of those whom the Kingdom has chosen to be their Judges, and to
give their sense upon it, such things as concern the Kingdom in general,
that the Peoples representative may be neither menaced to forbear settling
Church Government, if their judgments and Consciences lead them to do it, nor
to settle it before such time, or in any other manner than they, themselves
shall find cause, that as the Parliament has ever since their taking this
Covenant declared to the Kingdom, their intentions and resolutions, to settle
Church Government, and particularly Presbytery, none may by any unlawful
means endeavor to hinder them; and as they have likewise publicly declared
and protested, to have a special regard to tender Consciences, in their
settling Church Government and Discipline, none may endeavor by evil means to
prevent them.

3. That we may make it more our business to observe and keep the Covenant our
selves, and less work, to force and compel it upon others: it being a Covenant
of Freedom, not of Bondage; a Covenant which we took with satisfaction in
Judgment and Conscience; not for fear of punishment or hope of rewards: and
for us to force any other by Penalties or punishments to enter into the
Covenant with us, especially such who are known to us to be professed enemies
to the covenanted Cause, how grossly do we force and compel men to take Gods
Name in vain? To make them swear with their hands lifted up to the most high
God, that they shall sincerely, really, and constantly prosecute such things
which we know in our own judgments and consciences they are bitte, enemies
against. Do you think the Army of Cavaliers which are gathered together in
Scotland, that are reported by some to have taken the Covenant, has any thing
more in their hearts and resolutions, than the making the covenant a reproach
and a byword to the generations to come? or if they do join with you in your
covenant, will they not expect you should join with them in their wickedness,
which if you do, remember the time will come, when judgment shall be laid to
the Line, and righteousness to the Plummet, and the Hayle shall sweep away the
refuge of lies, and the water shall overflow the hiding place, and then your
covenant with Death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with Hell shall not
stand; when the overflowing surge shall pass through, then shall ye be trodden
down by it. Esa. 28.18. For with such covenanting and covenanters God is not
well pleased: but unto the wicked says God what bast thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate Instruction, and cast my words behind thee. Psalm. 50.16. This is that
which God complains of in Hosea, 10.4. They have spoken words, swearing falsely
in taking a Covenant. So Malachy does sharply reprove the Priests for
profaning of the Covenant. Malachy 8.10.

4. That we be very tender of pressing any disputable sense upon any branch of
the Covenant especially when many godly people in covenant with us, though in
some things differing from us are subject to be offended at us, it being
contrary to the Apostles exhortation, Romans 14.10, 15.

5. That all manner of offensive words and actions be forborne on all sides
which tend much, to the increasing dissatisfactions and jealousies among us,
and that in every thing wherein we differ, there may be a Christian brotherly
submitting to each other, so far as possibly we ma^^ without wilful sin, Being
ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason if the
hope that is in you, with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15.

6. Since we have declared the first and chief thing we had in our eye at the
entering into this Covenant was the glory of God and the advancement of the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, p. 11. Let us consider, God will not be glorified, nor
the kingdom of Jesus Christ advanced by our sinful compliance with those men
whom our own consciences must tell us, we have fought against as the enemies of
God and his Son Jesus Christ. Not by our putting names of reproach and scorn
upon our distering Brethren, and thereby exasperate and inrage the spirits of
wicked ignorant and lewd people against them. God will not be glorified by our
seven years in frequent preachings, fistings, prayers, and sightings to the
expense of much blood, in opposition to oppression, tyranny, and persecution,
and at the end thereof to give the people of God as small hopes of ease or
relief as Rehoboam did the people of Israel. 2 Chronicles. 10.14.

7. Let it be the care and eneavour of every man to strive for the best things
to attain if possible the purest Reformation of Religion, the total abollishing
of superstition, humane traditions, and all manner of compulsing, persecuting
practices in all men; and withal let us learn to acknowledge and be thankful
to God for the smallest mercy, that we are gotten thus far out of Egypt, though
we be much short of Canaan. It may be the will of God, that we shall have our
time in the Wilderness, as well as his people of old, where we must be subject
to the stinges of fiery serpents, and to the fury of cruel beasts, where we
may have the trial in wants and distresses, in straights and dangers, and if
so let us take heed we do not murmur against God, that we do not prize the
fleshpots of Egypt before our Manna in the Wilderness, as theirs did.

Well may those whom God has made Instruments in the Kingdom say, as Moses
said to the people. Exodus 16.8. The Lord hears your murmurings which you
murmr against him.

And what are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.

May 14th. 1648.

Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbot.

FINIS.

