THE TRUE EFFIGIES, OR Portraicture Of the chief Philosophers, Historians,
Poets, Grammarians, and Orators.

OR, A Compendious VIEW of each, both dignified with, and distinguished by,
their peculiar CHARACTERS.

By Ed. Larkin, A. M. late Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, and now of
Limesfield in Surrey Minister.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Greyhound in St. Pauls-Church yard, 1659.

EIKON PHILOSOPHON:

OR, THE Philosophers, In their Express IMAGES.

By E. Larkin, M. A. and late Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge; now of
Limesfield in Surrey Minister.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Greyhound in St. Pauls-Church-yard, 1659.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM HAWARD OF TANDRIDGE, KNIGHT; A great
Honourer of LEARNING, and Learned Men.
Noble SIR,
HAving considered of some few choice Philosophers, and Historians, when spare
hours were for such pleasing Recreations, I have here represented them in as
brief Characters as I could, only begging your favorable View of them.

Sir, your high Deserts, in respect of your Excellent Parts, and your large
Improvement of them in all Literature, together with that serene Candor which
is in you to Admiration, have emboldned me to make these rude Draughts yours,
and to shroud them under the Wings of your great Name.

I know I have pitched upon, as a most Judicious, so, a most Candid Patron; And
were I sure to meet with as gentle a Reader, I should not then fear that black
Coal, which young Writers so much dread.

Sir, your Indulgent Acceptance of this so mean a Present, will tie me to you
with the strongest Cords of Observance, and force, me not only to write, but
also, to show myself ever more,

Yours, to Honor and Reverence You, Edw. Larkin.

The Names of the Philosophers as they are handled in order.
HErmes, Pythagoras, Democritus. Heraclytus, Socrates, Plato, Epicurus, Zeno,
Chrysippus, Cleanthes. Anaxagoras, Carneades, Aristoteles, Diogenes,
Theophrastus, Seneca, Plinius, Plutarchus, Apollonius Tyan. Epictetus, Arianus,
Plotinus, Porphyrius, Maximus Tyrius, Boethius,
Whereunto are added the Characters of those two most Eminent Physicians,
HIppocrates. Galenus.
THE CHARACTERS Of the chief of the PHILOSOPHERS.
Hermes, i. e. Mercurius.
HErmes, i. e. Mercurius, called by Gyraldus, Trismegistus, because he was in
three respects great; as a Philosopher, as a Priest, and as a King. He was
esteemed as the wisest of the Egyptians, and is thought by learned Suidas, to
have flourished in the World before Pharaoh: He calls him Termaximum, not upon
that account as Gyraldus does, but because he spoke something that did intimate
to him, he had some acknowledgment of the Trinity.

Lactantius expresses this wise Ancient in his Book de Ira Dei, where he
says, Ob virtutem multarumque artium Scientiam, Trismegistus nominatus, non
modo Pla^one, verum etiam Pythagora, septemque illis sapientibus antiquior.
Hermes named Trismegistus, for his Virtue and Science of many Arts, not only
more ancient then Plato, but Pythagoras also, and the seven wise Men. Lypsius
tells us, That though he was an Egyptian, and a Heathen man, Tamen in eo multa
esse mysteria and arcana nostrae legis. Yet there are in him many mysteries and
secrets of our Law. I Will let him pass with those Verses of Joseph Scaliger.

-- Quid vetus ejusdem
Tyrannus aulae terque maximus Nili
Regnator Hermes, qui logisticis punctis
Collegit astra, coelici penetrali^
Reseravit adyta, venit ad Deos ipsos,
Coelo potitus sic per astra captivo?
Pythagoras.
PYthagoras the Samian Philosopher, was the Son of M^esarchus a Jeweller, of
whom it is said, That in the Trojan War, his Name should be Euphorbus,
according to that of the Poet, -- Trojani Tempore belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram. --
But being there slain, and afterward reviving, he was called thenceforward
Pythagoras, whence arose that mad opinion of the Pythagorean (...), whereby
they report, that there is a migration of Souls out of one body into another,
as they suit each with other in their Constitutions and Tempers; so that
according to this principle, if a man of a fierce and fiery disposition dies,
then his Spirit goes into some wild and ravenous Beast, such as is the Bear, or
Lion; and so their Bodies are informed with an humane Soul.

Now what a Chimaera this is, I need not stand to show, it being in its self
absurd, and monstrous unto every eye. This Philosopher is by Justinus in his
Dialogue with Tryphon, joined with the great Plato, and called with him, Vir
sapiens, and quasi murus praesidiumque Philosophiae. A Wise man, and as it were
the Wall, and Bulwark of Philosophy. Valerius Maximus in his seventh Book,
styles him perfectissimum opus sapientiae, Wisdoms most perfect Work. And
Plutarch tells us, That the Decrees of him, and of Empedocles were the only
Laws of the Ancient Graecians.

He was against any man's eating of things, wherein there was Blood, and Life,
as is expressed by the Poet in the fifteenth Book of his Metamorphosis. I Will
conclude him with that of Lypsius, Ejus singula sententiarum frusta gemmas
habent. All his Crusts of Sentences have their Jewels.

Democritus.
DEmocritus, Surnamed Abderites, and called (as Suidas says) (...), quod
inania hominam studia derideret; Because he derided the vain Studies of men.
Aelianus further calls him (...), Wisdom, and (...), and (...), because he
was learned in Physics, Ethics, Mathematics, and in all other liberal Arts,
and Disciplines. Epicurus in Laertius, (...), A Censurer of toys. Or else as
Hadrianus Jun. would have it read, (...), from the Greek word (...).

This Philosopher placing himself in his Garden, situate near the City Walls,
did there purposely put out the sight of his Eyes, that he might be the better
disposed for Contemplation. His Opinion was, That all things were made of
Atoms, and that there were more Worlds then one. He learned Theology, and
Astronomy from the Chaldeans. He bought himself to great want by reason of his
tedious and frequent Travail, which he undertook for no other end but to
advantage his Knowledge by them. He was the first Anotamist.

Pliny calls him Virum sagacem and vitae utilissimum. He lived until he was
very Aged, as being an hundred and nine years old when he dyed. He wasted
himself in supplying the necessities of other men. His Father was so rich in
Substance, that it is reported of him, that he entertained Xerxes huge and
mighty numerous Host with a sumpteous Banquet.

Heraclitus.
HEraclitus the Ephesian Philosopher had affections quite contrary to those of
Democritus, for he would weep at every Object, as the other laughed: He is by
Suidas called (...), ^bscure, and dark, because he so clouded all his Speeches,
that the best eyed, and most judicious Philosophers could very hardly discover
the meaning of them.

Some say, that he never had any Master to instruct him, but that he learnt all
he knew, by his own only labor and industry; however others affirm, that he
was Schoold both by Xenocrates, and Hippasus the Pythagorean. Declining in
years, he fell into a Dropsy, but would not use the help of Physicians for the
curing of him. At last, tumbling himself all over Head and Ears in Dung, he was
torn in pieces by greedy Dogs, or as some others say, overwhelmed, and
smothered in the Dirt.

Pliny says of him, that for his rigor, and inflexible roughness of nature,
he was called (...), a man without passion: In Laertius we meet with this
Epigram upon him.

(...)
(...)
(...).
He was styled by Epicurus (...), an Ape, or Affectatour, as also (...) mero
bibus; he said of himself, that when he was young, he knew nothing, and when he
came to ripe years, he was ignorant of nothing. He flourisht in the Reign of
the last Darius the Persian; he wrote many things in a Poetical strein, and
way, and is often times cited by the great Peripatetick Aristotle; There were
four others of this Name.

Socrates.
SOcrates the Athenian Philosopher was the Son of Soproniscus, and Phanarota,
his Father being a Statuary, and his Mother a Midwife. He had two Wives,
whereof one was named Xantippe, a Woman of an unquiet, turbulent, and restless
Spirit; of whom its noised, that whilst her laboring husband was reading of
his grave Lectures, and in serious conference with his Disciples, she would
frequently break in upon them, and overturn the Tables, on purpose to vex him;
whence the good man was called, as we read in Seneca, Perpessitius Senex, per
omnia aspera jactatus; Invictus tamen.

It was his frequent saying; Quae supra nos, nibil ad nos. Those things which
are above us, are nothing to us: The Delphick Oracle spoke thus of him, as it
is noted in Aristophanes his Nubibus. (...), (...). Sophacles is wise,
Euripides wiser; but of all men, Socrates is the wisest.

Eunapius calls him (...), A living Image of Wisdom. Valerius Maximus, Humanae
sapientiae quasi quoddam terrestre oraculum. As it were an earthly Oracle of
humane wisdom. Heinsius, Solemn sapientiae: only Zeno of all men adventures to
disparage him, in calling him, Scurram Atticum.

Quintilian affirms, that he was the first Philosopher that brought down
Wisdom from Heaven, and placed it here on earth in the habitations of men. He
learned to play upon the Harp, when he was somewhat aged, he was compeld to
drink a draught of Poison, and so he dyed. I Will add but his Character from
Maximus Tyrius: Homo (says he) and corpore purissimus, and animo optimus, and
vivendi ratione perfectissimus, and in dicendo suavissimus, qui pie cum Deo,
and sancte cum hominibus versabatur. A man most pure in body, and best in mind,
most perfect in his way of living, and most sweet in his expressions, one that
lived piously with God, and holily with Men.

Plato.
PLato the Prince of the Academick Sect, was the Son of Ariston, and
Parectonia, so called (as Appuleius says, A corpori^ habitudine, from the
habitude of his Body; for he had broad Sholders, whereas before, he was named
Aristocles. Being young, he acquired the Art of Limning, and spent also some
time then in composing of Poems and Tragedies: when he grew in years he
followed Socrates, from whom he sucked his Rudiments of Philosophy; wherein he
so outstript all others of his time: that (as Cicero says) he was accounted
Deus Philosophorum, the God of the Philosophers, and called (as in the Epigram)
(...).

Tully further in his Book de Divinatione, tells us, That being a Child, and
lying in his Cradle, a Swarm of Bees ligted upon his Lips, and thence it was
answered, That he should prove the sweetest of all Orators: His Eloquence was
thus foreseen in his Infancy, and to it does that Epigram of Owens relate.

Quae primum in labris pueri sedere Platonis,
In Libris resident usque Platonis apes.
What says Antimachus of him in Cicero's Brutus; Plato unus mihi instar omnium
millium, Plato alone is ^o me as many thousands. Maximus Tyrius is bold to
affirm, That Nature herself never saw any thing more eloquent, no, not so much
as great Homer excepted; Panoetius therefore styles him the Homer of
Philosophers: Pliny, Sapientiae Antistitem, The President of Wisdom. Salvian,
Romanum Catonem, The Roman Cato. Et alium Italiae Socratem; And another
Socrates of Italy.

He is further compared by a Philosopher to Moses, and called (...), Moses
speaking in the Artick Dialect. Lipsius says, That he uttered many things
worthy of the Gods, and that, though he sometime spoke, yet he did not think
with the Multitude. He was named Philosychus, because he extremely loved to
seed on Figgs; he lived his whole life a Batchelour, and as some say, He dyed
Morbo pediculari, Of the lousie Disease.

Epicurus.
EPicurus the Head of that Sect, called the Epicurian, was an Athenian
Philosopher, of whom it is reported, That he should place Man's chiefest
happiness in Pleasure, yet not with Aristippus, in that of the Body, but in
that of the Mind. Seneca tells us, that he did Sancta, and recta praecipere,
Command things holy and just, and that he did Male audire Infamis immerito.
They further write of him, That he should deny the Divine Providence, as though
all things of the World were upheld and maintained without it: what ever these
say of him, yet Lucretius most highly extolleth him, doubting not to affirm,
That this Epicurus has as far dimmed the light of other Philosophers, as the
Sun does outshine the other Planets.

He was a man of most continent life, notwithstanding that his placing of man's
chief good in Pleasure has caused this; that all voluptuous men are from his
Name called Epicurians: He writ very much, whereupon he is in Diogenes Laertius
called (...). Suidas says, That he was seven years old at Plato's death; and
that when he was a young man, he could with much ado get out of his Bed, and
that his Eyes were so weak, that he could not bear the Sunshine.

Timocrates called his Philosophy (...), A nocturnall and secret Conventicle; he
cared not for Logic, asserting that Philosophy might be comprehended in
simple, and naked words.

Zeno.
ZEno the Head of the Stoic Sect, was had in so great esteem and admiration
with the Athenians, (as Laertius has reported) that they would dare to commit
the custody, and trust of their City Keys to him, honoring him moreover with a
Golden Crown, and a brazen Image. This man one day hearing a Youth to prate
idly and foolishly, spoke thus unto him, Ideo duas habemus aures, os autem
unum, ut scilicet multa audiamus, pauca vero loquamur. Therefore have we two
Ears, and but one Mouth, that we might hear many things, and speak but few.

Cicero tells us, That this was the Philosopher which did distinguish with his
hand, those two Arts of Logic, and Rhetoric, Nam cum compresserat digitos,
pugnumque fecerat, dialecticam a^ebat ejusmodi esse, cum autem diduxerat, and
manum dilataverat, palmae illius similem eloquentiam esse dicebat. When he
contracted his Fingers, and clenched his hand, then it resembled Logic, but
when those Fingers were spread abroad, and when he had opened his hand, then
did he represent Rhetoric, or Eloquence.

Its further said, to his great praise, and honor, that he did verba vertere
in opera, Even live, as he spoke, there being no dis-harmony betwixt his
Conversation and Doctrines. So that his Life was proposed to the Athenians, as
a Pattern for them to imitate. He is styled by a learned man (...), A severe
Philosopher, and one that uttered very sublime things. And he is called by
Laertius, Aegiptius palms; for the talness and procerity of his lean, and
slender Body.

Chrysippus.
CHrysippus the Son of Apollonius, or as others will have it, Apollonides, and
the Disciple of Zeno, was an eminent Stoic: His Opinions were repugnant to
many of his Contemporaries; He was so excellent a Logician, that it was an
ordinary expression in the World concerning him; That it there were any use of
Logic amongst the Gods, they then used none other then that of Chrysippus.

He is called by Carneades, (...), for the smalness of his Body, who speaks
further in the praise of him: Nisi Chrysippus esset, ego non ^ssem, Unless
Chrysippus had been, I had not been. Heinsius calls him very wittily Retiarium
Chrysippum, As if like to a Net, he was apt to catch all men; for his
voluminousness, and multitude of Books, he was thought to emulate Epicurus, and
therefore was well named by Carneades, Librorum ejus parasitus, His Books
parasite.

I meet not with any contemptuous or scornful affront put on him, but only
with one from Zeno, who playing upon his Name, very disdainfully called him
Chesippum, which word is derived from the Greek term (...), and signifies an
immodest Act, Cacare. Laertius says of him, How that next to Cleanthes, he was
the principal Member of the Stoic School.

Cleanthes.
CLeanthes a Stoic Philosopher, was the Disciple of Grates, and Successor to
Zeno, whose Philosophy he ever adhered to, and propagated it to all, that he
could converse with. Suidas says of him, that he was so (...), Such a great
Pains-taker, that he attained the name of another Hercules.

Being very poor, and not able to supply himself with daily Food, he would
suffer his Labor to be hired all Night, and to be used in drawing of water,
and when the day was come, he would spend the greatest part of that either in
his private Studies, or in Conferences with Disciples: yet because he wrought
so hard when he came to his handy Labor, therefore instead of Cleanthes, they
would very often call him Phreanthes, which being in e^pteted, (says Laertius)
signifies one that is an Emptier of Wells.

Cicero calls him notwithstanding, Stoicum majorum Gentium, and Zenon is
auditorem, A Stoic of the highest Rank, and the Auditor of Zeno. He was so
poor, that when he was the Scholar of the forementioned Zeno, not being able
to buy Paper for his own use, he would write the Instructions which he received
from his Master, in Shells, and Bones.

Anaxagoras.
ANaxagoras the Disciple of Milesius, and the Son of Hegesibulus, was called
(as Plutarch says) (...), because he asserted that (...) and (...), Matter,
and Mind, were the Maintainers, and Preservers of all things. Suidas reports,
that he was very rich, but left all his Lands to be devoured by Cattle, whence
Apollonius Tyaneus took occasion to say handsomely, Anaxagoram potius ovibus,
quam hominibus philosophatum fuisse. That Anaxagoras rather philosophiz'd to
Sheep then Men. At length, the question being asked him by his Friends, why he
took no more care of his Country, He forthwith stretching forth his Arm to
Heavenward, raplyed (as it is in Laertius) Patriam eam esse, That that was his
Country: At last returning home, and finding every thing out of order, his
Lands unmanur'd, and untilled, and his Houses ruinated, he brake out into
these, or such like words, Non essem ego salvus, nisi istae periissent. I had
not been safe, if they had not perished.

This Philosopher was the first man that found out the Lunary Eclipse (as
Plutarch affirms in the life of Nicias) for Nicias his Soldiders at the fight
of one, were therewith all terrified, and looked upon it, as a Sign of the Gods
displeasure, not knowing that there was a natural cause of it.

Laertims also writes, that he was the first too that undertook to publish to
the World the Works he had composed. It was his opinion of God, That he was
Infinita men's, quae per seipsam movetur, as Polydore Virgil has recorded it,
Cicero has styled him, Virum summum in maximaerum rerum scientia, A man most
eminently knowing in the most transcendent things.

Carneades Cyrenaeus.
CArneades Cyrenaeus called by Suidas, Novae, Academiae Author, The Author of a
new Academy, was a great Admirer of the Chrysippaean Philosophy, and opponent
to the Principles of the Stoic Zeno: They say, that he made use of the Art of
Memory.

Cicero, Gellius, and Quintillian write, that he was sent with others in an
Embassy, by the men of Athens to Rome, but as soon as Cato had espied him, he
informed the Senate, that he was a very dangerous man, and that it concerned
them to be wary of dealing with him, least his eloquent and winning Tongue
should so master them, as to make them grant whatsoever he demanded.

Tully extolls the Abilities of this man, in this following Character;
Carneadis vis incredibilis illa dicendi, and varietas perquam esset optanda
nobis qui nullam unquam in illis suis disputationibus rem defendit, quam non
probarit, nullam oppugnavit, quam non everterit; How well were it to be wished,
that we had that incredible faculty of Carneades his Eloquence, who never
undertook a Cause, but did maintain, never impugned one, but over-threw it.
Whence it was, says Cicero, that it was called Vis Carneadea aut Aristotelia:
Either a Carneadean, or Aristotelian Ability.

Valerius Maximus calls him Laboriosum sapientiae militem, Wisdoms laborious
and painful Soldier: and if Pliny may be thought worthy of Credit; It was the
Censor Catoes opinion, and saying, That it was a very difficult thing to
discern the truth, when this Philosopher was disputing. He lived ninety years,
and as the forementioned Historian says of him; Idem illi vivendi, ac
Philosophandi finis fuit.

Aristoteles.
ARistoteles the Stagyrite, the Son of Nicomachus was the Master of great
Alexander of Macedon, whose Works were had in that reveeence with Chosroes the
King of the Persians, that he had gotten them all by heart. He was Plato's
Auditor at Athens for the space of ten years, and so profited in the Study of
Philosophy, that one would think, the Characters which the Learned afforded
him, are Hyperbolicall, and yet some there be, that think, that they do not
transcend the man's merit.

Cicero calls him, Aureum eloquentiae flumen, A golden River of Eloquence.
Plutarch, Virum eloquentissimum, and peritum flectendi animos quaqua vellet, A
man most eloquent and skillful to incline, and draw men's Minds whithersoever he
pleased.

Averroes informs us, that he invented three of the Sciences, Logicam,
Naturalem, and Divinam, and in another place the same Author says, Aristoteles
est regula, and exemplar, quod natura Invenit ad demonstrandam ultimam
perfectionem humanam; Aristotle is that Rule, and Sample which Nature has
found out to demonstrate man's ultimate Perfection.

He is called by Suidas (...) Natures Scribe: and in the Greek Anthology,
(...); To Arnobius, he is Pater peripateticorum, The Father of Peripateticks.
To Julius Scaliger, Summus acprimus omnium scienti^rum dictator, The chief and
prime Dictator of all Sciences. And as the same Author further speaks, Neque
ipso, Pindaro minor, neither inferior to Pindar himself. Lastly, He is to
Lipsius, Summus rerum omnium Jude^, The chief Judge of all matters.

It is noys'd, that he withstood the learned of men, divine Plato, whence
Aelian takes an occasion to bring in great Plato, calling his Scholar most
unthankful, who like a wanton Calf filled with the Mothers Milk, lifts up its
Heel against its own Damme. He died in the sixty eighth of his Age, in the same
year as did Demosthenes.

Diogenes Synopensis.
Diogenes Synopensis, the Disciple of the Philosopher Antisthenes, who would
have him to be his Master, even against his will, for when he refused to take
upon him the charge of Scholars, Diogenes would not be put off, nor recede
from him; and when he threatened to strike him with his Staff, the Cynick most
willingly submitted his Pate to it, saying withal, Nullus tam dirus baculus
est, qui me a tuo possit obsequio seperare. There is no stick so hard, as to be
able to separate me from your Service.

He was familiarly and frequently called (...), a Dog, and being demanded, why
he was so named, his answer was to this purpose, Quod iis blandior, qui dant,
in eos vero qui non dant, oblatro, malos autem mordeo; Because I flatter and
fawn on those which give, and bark at such as give not; and for the wicked ones
I bite them. So that that Verse which the Poet Horace applies to sordid
Avidienus, may very well suit with this Diogenes.

Cui Canis ex vero ductum cognomen adhaeret. For as it is in Diogenes Laertius,
(...)
(...)
(...)


Suidas says, That this Philosopher was eminent for his Valor, and Courage,
as others were for other Virtues. Xenocrates for mildness, Theophrastus for
Gravity, Zeno for Austerity, and Plato for Majesty: The latter of which called
this Diogenes (...), Distracted Socrates.

Being Courted once by Great Alexander, and desired to ask of him any thing he
liked. In answer, He wished, that the King would not take that from him, which
he could not give him. Alexander being so great a Potentate, wondered greatly
what that might be, and forth with he understood that it was the comfort of the
Sun-beans, for indeed the King stood betwixt him and the Sun.

Theophrastus.
THeophrastus, a Philosopher of the City Eresse, whence called Eresseus, was
the Disciple of great Aristotle, who departing from his School to Chalcis, left
this man behind to be his Successor.

Suidas says, that at the beginning, his Name was Tyrtamus, but afterward he
was called by Aristotle, Euphrastus, and at length by some others Theophrastus;
his Philosophy indeed being Heavenly and Divine; It was a familiar speech of
his, that a learned man could never be Amicorum inops, Without Friends: the
same, Seneca has delivered of the wise man. They say, that he had two thousand
Scholars, the like not being affirmed of any Philosopher, either before, or
after him.

Casaubon says of him, That he was, Vir dignissimus qui eo seculo viveret,
quod tulit Socratem, vidit Platonem, Aristotelem generi humano dedit,
Triumviros constituendae philosophiae divinitus sine dubio excitatos: A man
most worthy to live in that Age, that brought Socrates into the World; Saw
Plato, and gave Aristotle to Mankind, the Trium^iri that were raised by Divine
Providence, for the constitution of Philosophy.

Therefore he says further of him, Seeing he was, as it were, bred in the very
Bosom of those, It is no wonder, if he arrived to that deptst of Learning, and
vein of Eloquence, that nothing could seem to proceed from him, which was not
every way thought perfect by all that were studious of Wisdom.

He is styled by Scaliger in his Poetices, Divina vir eloquentia, A man of
divine Eloquence: and by Aegllius, Suavitate homo insigni, linguae, pariter ac
vitae; One, both for Tongue, ana Life, of eminent Sweetness: Plutarch affirms,
how that the Roman Orator M. Tullius was wont to call him his Deliciae; his
Works are commemorated by Diogenes: He died very aged.

Lucius Annaeus Seneca.
LVcius Annaeus Seneca, of Corduba in Spain, was a Stoic Philosopher; and the
Master of Domitius Nero, by whom he was very ill recompensed for all his
Learned and good Instructions; for that same Monster of men compelled him to
open his own Veins, and to let out his own blood, and that only out of a
suspicion, that he had been one of Piso's Conspiracy.

He was called as Gyraldus well observes, Moralis, The Moralist, whom Fabius in
his tenth Book styles Egregium vitiorum insectatorem, An eminent Scourger of
the Vices: Quamvis in philosophia parum diligentem, Although not so diligent in
his Philosophy, as the same Author there notes: But Pontanus in his
Observations upon Macrobius his Saturnals, names him Romana philosophiae
Syrenem, The Siren of the Latin Philosophy. And Lipsius, Magnum inter magnos
virum, and sapientiae fontem: Great amongst the great ones, and the Fountain of
Wisdom: He further calls him an Author amongst all others most praise worthy,
and for the Study of Virtue almost a Christian; his matter was so sweet to him,
that he could not choose but break thus out. Pura, and coelo digna men's, and ad
coelum alios subducens O pure Mind, and worthy of Heaven and drawing others to
Heaven. Erasmus could say this also of the man, Si legas illum ut paganum,
scripsit Christian, si ut christianum, scripsit paganice. If thou read him
as a Pagan, he writ like a Christian: If thou read him as a Christian, he
writ like a Pagan.

Caussinus his Judgment of him was, That he had not his equal for Wit, and
that he is rather to be admired, then commended. They say, that Quintillian and
Agellius did for something or other dislike of him: but learned Lipsius shows
that they did it without a cause, so that he concludes thus of him; Soli
Caligulae, cui nihil boni placere poterat, displicuit: He was displeasing only
to Caligula, whom no good thing could ever please. Those Fathers, Tertullian,
Augustine, and Jerome speak very honorably of the man.

Plinius Secundus.
PLinius Secundus of Verona, flourished when Vespasian was Emperor, to whose
state affairs he was very serviceable, as appears by Suetonius, who in these
following words applauds his Faithfulness; Equestribus militiis industry
functus, procurationes quoque splendidissimas atque continuas summa Integritate
administravit, and tamen liberalibus studiis tantam operam dedit, ut non temere
quis plura in otio scripserit.

His Life was very diligently written by his Grandson Caecilius, whose Epistles
we have now extant with a Panegyric, in honor of Trajanus. But as for this
man, his chiefest work, is his natural History; upon the account whereof, we
have him styled by one of the Learned, Naturae Bibliothecarium; in which Work
of his Caussinus takes notice of some disparity, for says he in the third
Book, de Eloquentia, Plinius non ubique sui similis, plaeraque enim acute
scripsit, nonnulla neglecta and inculta: Pliny is not every where like himself,
many things he has writ acutely, others with more neglect, and with less
Ornament.

However there are others of the Learned, who highly extol him, as Heinsius;
Jam de Caio Plinio quid dicam? qui naturam universam and utrumque mundum plane
inusitata ante caeteris audacia, paucis voluminibus inclusit: qui imperio
Romano, cui universus terrae orbis concessisset, coelum quoque adjecit. Now
what shall I say of Caius Plinius? who included the whole Universe in a few
Volumes, a boldness that others before him did not dare to show; who added
Heaven also to the Roman Empire, to which the whole World had before submitted.

His Grandson in one of his Epistles attributes to him, Acre Ingenium,
Incredibile studium, and summam vigilantiam, A quick Wit, an incredible
studiousness, and a wonderful Vigilance. Dempster the Grammariam heaps upon
him many worthy Epethites. Scriptor diligentissimus, eloquentissimus,
veracissimus, incomparabilis, unus omnium Instar. A Writer most diligent, most
eloquent, most true, incomparable, and one in esteem that is worth all. He is
said to have been consumed in the flames that issued out of the Mountain
Vesuvius, whilst too carelessly he was enquiring into, and seeking out the
causes of it.

Plutarchus.
PLutarchus of Choeronea in Boeotia, called by Eunapius, (...), divine
Plutarch. As also, (...). The Venus and Harp of all Philosophy. He was in great
repute, when Trojanus, and Adrian were Emperors. Suidas says, That he was
honored with Consular Titles and Dignities by the former of the two Princes,
and that he was sent by him into Illyria with very great Authority, the
Magistrates being there required not to act or determine any thing without
Commission from their Deputy.

Heinsius in one of his Orations styles him, Compendium eruditionis, Prudentiae
Thesaurum, Antiquitatum utriusque generis, Quendam Delium Apollinem. An Epitome
of Learning, a Treasury of Prudence, and for Antiquities of either kind a
certain Delius Apollo. Lipsius calls him, Meliorem omnino, quam acutiorem
Doctorem. Rather a better, then more acute Doctor.

Frisclinus did so admire his Works, that it was his Judgment of them; that in
Case all other Authors were lost, yet they might be repaired, and made good
again by these Writings of Plutarch.

I Will let him pass with his Encomium from Bodinus, Est in eo, quod miremur,
liberum de re quaque judicium ut non tam Historicus, quam principum Censor esse
videatur; sic tamen existimo, si quis Idoneus est earum rerum arbiter, aut
Plutarchum esse, aut neminem, quid enim tantam sapientiam latere po^uit? There
is that in him, we may admire, a free Judgment in every matter, that he seems
not so much to be an Historian as a Censurer of Princes; so then I think, if
there be any fit Arbiter, or Judge of those things, its either Plutarch, or no
man, for what is there in the World, that can be concealed and hid from so
transcendent Prudence and Wisdom.

Apollonius Tyaneus.
APollonius Tyaneus, a Pythagorean Philosopher, styled by Vopiscus,
Celeberrimae famae authoritatisque vir, A man of most transcent Fame, and
Authority, as also by the same Author, Amicus verus Deorum, pro numine
frequentandus. A t^^^ Friend of the Gods, and to be honored as a Deity, had
his life written by Philostratus, and before him, by one Damis the sole
Companion of his tedious Travels.

Sidonius in his Epistle extols him, as a man that was endued with all Virtues;
Erat cupidus scientiae, continens pecuniae, inter epulas abstemius, inter
purpuratos lin^eatus, inter alabastra censorius. He was desirous of Science,
continent of money, in Banquets abstemious, amidst purpled Ones mean habited,
and among the Alabastred censorious.

This man being at Ephesus in that very hour that the Emperor Domitian was
murdered. As he was disputing in a Throng of people, on a sudden, he cast his
Eyes downward, and became mute; but presently he burst out into these, or the
like words, Euge Stephane pulchre, percute peccatorem, pulsasti, vulnerasti,
and interfecisti. Alluding therein to the ruin and destruction of that cruel
and bloody Emperor.

This man has excellent Characters given him by the learned. Paulinus, says
of him, Quod invenit ubique, quod disceret, and semper proficeret, That he
every where met with something that he might learn, and that he always
profited. Casaubon affirms, that the Critics called him (...), Faultless and
Inculpable, in whom indeed there appeared more of Ca^e, then Wit.

Eunapius speaks him to have been as it were of a middle Nature betwixt the
Gods and Mortals. Justinus Martyr notes him to have been (...) scientissimum,
eoque stupendae mirabilitatis effectorem celeberrimum. Suidas preferred him
before Simonides for strength of Memory, calling him Virum admirandum ac
divinum. Caelius Rhodiginus says, that he was skillful in the understanding of
the Beasts Language; it was his daily wish and prayer unto his Gods, that he
might know the good ones, and avoid the evil.

Epicteus.
EPictetus a Stoic Philosopher of Hieropolis in Phrygia, who going from thence
to Rome, bound himself in Service to Epaphroditus, one of Nero's, principal
Lifeguard, and there lived until the Reign of Domitian, whose Mis-government,
when he could not well digest, he left the City, and returned again to
Hierapolis: he fell lame by a Distillation, which had gotten into one of his
Legs, and that lameness he intimated in this following Epigram, being of his
Composing.

(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Lipsius calls him Philosophum optimi sensus, A Philosopher of the best sense:
and in another place, Virum totum a se, and a Deo, nihil a Fortuna. A man
wholly of himself, and of God, having nothing as from Fortune. Lucian tells us
in one of his Dialogues, That one gave three thousand Drachmaes for this man's
earthen Candlestick, or Lanthorn, hoping that if he might but read by that at
Night, he might attain to Epictetus Wisdom, and be like that excellant old man.

This Philosopher was had in high esteem with the two Antonies; his Enchiridion
was writ in Greek, but afterward Latiniz'd by Angelus Politianus. The Critics
have spoken very highly in the praises of it. What says Lipsius? Enchiridion
sane egregium, and Stoicae philophiae velut anima, His Enchiridion is truly
admirable, and as it were, the very Soul of the Stoic Philosophy.

Another says, that its a Book, more heavy for weight, then great for Bulk,
daily to be embraced, and kissed, and never to be out of men's hands. I Will end
him, with that of Dempster, Epicteti Enchiridion moribus utile, dissertationes
graves, prudentiae plenae; Epictetus his Enchiridion is profitable for manners,
his Disputations grave, full of prudence.

Arianus.
ARianus of Nicomedia the Disciple of Epictetus, sir-named (...), The new
Zenophon, or Zenophon the Junior; because he set forth the Dissertations of
Epictetus, as the other had done of Cyrus. Suidas says, That he lived at Rome,
in the Raigns of Adrian, and Marcus Antonius then Emperors, by whom he was
promoted to Consular Honors for his excellent Erudition, as is reported by
Heliconius.

Lipsius says, That he had Epictetus his Discourses, In via, Domo, Schola, In
his Way, House, School, as being never out of his Hands, and Mouth, and Heart.
Bodinus styles him, Virum summo ingenio, summaque doctrina praeditum, A man
endued with an admirable Wit, and with very great Learning, as indeed appears
by those his Commentaries upon the Renowned Epictetus.

Vossius admiring the sweetness of his Tongue, does also call him Alterum
Zenophonta, Another Zenophon: for he writ History as well as Philosophy, having
described the Warlike Feats, and Martial Affairs of Great Alexander, whereupon
he is called by Coelius Rhodiginus, Historicus (...), A truth-loving Historian.
There is a certain Grammarian that charge him with Arrogance, as one that
gloried mightily in his own Writings, and that would be accounted among the
Greek Historians, as was Great Alexander amongst the Martial Captains: There
was another of the Name, a Poet, with whose Verses, Suetonius writes, that
Tiberius Caesar was extremely well delighted and pleased.

Plotinus.
PLotinus named Lycopolita by learned Suidas, as being an Egyptian, and an
Inhabitant of the City Lycus, who (as the same Author relates it) was E Bajulo
philosophus. He was the Scholar or Disciple of Ammonius, and the Master of
Porphyrus: He was a man of a spare and lean body, subject unto many Corporal
Infirmities, and among the rest, to the Falling Sickness.

He lived in the Raigns of Galenus, Tacitus, and Probus the Roman Emperors;
Eunapius who writ the Lives of the Sophisters, calls him Magnum Plotinum, The
great Plotinus. Theodoret, one of the Greek Fathers says, That he was Origenis
Auditor, One of Origen's Auditors; and he affirms moreover, that he well
understood the Traditions of the Rabbis.

The forementioned Eunapius further testifies that this man's Speech was so
obscure, and Aenigmaticall, Quod a populari captu disjunctior videbatur; That
it seemed to be much separated from, and far above the popular Capacity.

Lipsius in the fourth Century of his Miscellanies, styles him Virum sapientia
inclytum, A man famous for his Wisdom.

Porphyrius.
POrphyrius a Philosopher of Tire, the chief City of the ancient Phoenicians,
was at the beginnig called by the name of Malchus, which in the Syrian Language
signifies King: whereupon Suidas says, that his Name was Basilius. However he
was called by his worthy and learned Master Longinus, by the name of
Porphyrius, and that from the Purple in his Garment, which is indeed an Ensign
of Majesty.

This man taking his leave of Longinus, traveled to Rome, and there heard the
Philosopher Plotinus, where for his Companions, and Condisciples, he had those
two men of Fame, Origin, and Amelius.

This Author does seem in his Works to have delivered Contradictions; but the
cause hereof, is thought to be his final Retractation, as rejecting in the end
those Principles, which he did at the beginning close with: In some of his
Writings, he endeavors to clear, that both Plato, and Aristotle were of one,
and the same Sect. He writ against the Christians; as for the time he lived in,
it was in the Reign of Aurelian, and he continued to Tacitus, and Probus.

Suidas in honor of his great Learning, gives him this ensuing Character;

(...). A man that formed and expressed all kinds of Philosophy. And again,

(...). One promiscuously rolled in every Virtue.

Nicephorus in his tenth Book, speaks him an Apostate from the Christian Faith,
and that Libanius the Sophister should account of him as it were a God;
Nazianzen also informs us, That Julian did glory in his fabulous Lies, as
though they had been the very Oracles of God. He fell sick once at Lylibaeum in
Sicilie, but recovering of that distemper, he died afterward at Rome.

Maximus Tyrius.
MAximus Tyrius a Platonic Philosopher, called by Heinsius in his Epistle
Dedicatory before Horace, Vir magnus and Terrarum Domini praeceptor, A great
man, and Tutor to the Emperor; for by Terrarum Domini is to be understood
Marcus Antoninus then Reigning: what this man disputed in the Greek Tongue at
Rome, was afterward Latiniz'd, or made Roman by learned Heinsius, who gives
all his learned Disputations this excellent Eulogy.

Hujus viri disputationes, quae ad nostram pervenerunt aetatem, tales sunt, ut
unum quidem si excipias Platonem, nemini dicendi venustate, pariter ac
sapientia concedant, neque quisquam hodie legatur, qui tam accurate, ac
feliciter indolem ac genium musae expresserit Platonicae. The Disputes of this
man which are come to our Age, are such, that if you do but except that one man
Plato, they shall be inferior to none in sweetness of Speech and wisdom.
Neither can any one be now read, that has so accurately, and happily expressed
the Wit, Spirit, and Genius of the Platonic Muse.

No wonder therefore if Casaubonus styles him Platonicorum mellitissimum, The
sweetest of Platonicks. Whereunto also that description, that Heinsius has
made of him, does very well accord. Scriptor ex Academia, Sapiens, Amaenus,
Floridus, Facundus, and qui ubique patrem suum refert Platonem. An Academick
Writer, Wise, Pleasant, Florid, Eloquent, and one that every where expresses
his Father Plato.

Severinus Boethius.
SEverinus Boethius, a man of Consular degree, and an excellent Aristotelian,
whence Barthius could say, That scarce any Writer was so commendable in the
Schools as he, because he Latiniz'd so well Aristotle's Doctrine of Disputing.

Scaliger tells us, that Valla commended this Boethius, and this Boethius Valla;
V^lla docet Boethium latin loqui, at Vallam Boethius been sapere. This
Philosopher was so good a Speaker, that a Critic could say of him Quod flumen
Romani sermonis apud illum fere solum remansit. That the River of the Roman
Tongue almost remained alone with him.

He was banished by Theodoricus, when Zeno was Emperor, and afterward
Imprisoned, and last of all put to death with his Father-in-Law Symmachus one
of the Senators, and all for suspicion of a Conspiracy for liberty.

Angelus Politianus extols him as a man eminent in all Sciences: Quis Boetio
vel in dialecticis acutior? vel subtilior in Mathematicis? vel in philosophia
locupletior? vel in Theologia Sublimior? Who more acute then Boethius in
Logicks? or more subtle in Mathematics, or richer in Philosophy? or more
sublime in Divinity.

And to all this I Will but add one thing more from Caspar Barthius, and it
relates to this Author, Ejus Ingenium neque ante se multos, neque pest se
aliquem toto Romani imperii tempore habuit similem. His Wit had not many before
him, nor any after like unto him, in all the time of the Roman Empire.

THE CHARACTERS Of those two excellent Physicians, HIPPOCRATES, AND GALENUS.
HIppocrates Cous the Son of Heraclidas, and the Auditor of Democrates, was for
his knowledge in Physic far preferred before his own Grandfather an eminent
Doctor, and of his own name; for Suidas gives him this honorable Encomium,
(...). The Star and Light of Physic, which is most profitable for life. He was
of great Repute with all that had ever heard of him.

Artaxerxes (as Suidas relates it) that mighty Emperor of the Persians did
solicit for, and woo his company by magnificent Largesses, and most high
Advancements, as esteeming his presence equal almost to the Wealth of his
whole Empire.

Cornelius Celsus calls him Medicinae parentem virumque art and Facundia
insignem, The Parent of Medicine, and a man famous for his Art and Eloquence,
he is styled by Agellius, Divina vir scientia, A man of Divine Knowledge: By
Seneca, Maximus medicorum and hujus scientiae conditor, The greatest of
Physicians, and the Creator as it were of this Science.

Macrobius speaking also of him, has this very passage, Hippocratis proprium,
ne fallere, aut fallisciat, It Is proper to Hippocrates, not to know, either to
deceive, or to be deceived. There is an handsome Epigram in the Greek
Anthology, and it runs thus.

(...)
-- (...)
(...)
(...).
Cicero says this of him, That he thought more sick and languishing persons
were recovered by this Hippocrates, then were by Aesculapius: I Will let him go,
but with a word from Heinsius, Quid cum solo conferendum Hippocrate ulla vidit
aetas. What has any Age seen worthy to be compared with Hippocrates. There
were more of the Name, one a Soldier mentioned by Thucidides. Another a
Mathematician, spoken of by learned Plutarch.

Galenus.
GAlenus was of Pergamus, the Son of Nicon, that famous Geometrician and
Architect. He is called by Caelius Rhodiginus, a Philosopher, as well as a
Physician; who further says of him, That in the common rumor and Fame of the
World, he through his wonderful Temperance, and Sobriety, prolonged his life
to an hundred and forty years, and that he breathed always Odoriferously.
Whence, says Rhodiginus, it became a Proverb, Vt Galeni valetudinem dicamus
pro ea, quae ultra humanum captum nimis sit prospera, nimisque inoffensa. That
we say, Galens Healthiness, for that, which is too prosperous, and too
inoffensive beyond the natural Capacity of men.

He flourished in the Reigns of Marcus, and Commodus; as he compiled much in
Physic, so he writ also much in Philosophy, Rhetoric, and Grammar. The
Learned have afforded him many eminent Eulogiums. By Diaconus, he is styled,
Medicus optimus, The best Physician, by Casaubon, Criticorum non minus, quam
medicorum princeps, No less the Chief of Critics, then of Physicians: By
Dempster, Medicorum, ex primo primus.

But of all others, Heinsius is most high upon his Merit, who calls him, and
that without flattery, Mare eruditionis, Oceanum disciplinarum, Omnium
Ingenuarum artium promum, condum, and quasi quandam Bibliothecam; A Sea of
Learning, an Ocan of Disciplines, a Butler or Drawer out of all ingenuous Arts,
and as it were a certain Library; He Composed a Dictionary in an Alphabetick
way, upon the Learned Works of Hippocrates; How, and where he died, I certainly
read not.

TY'POS 'ISTOPIO' N, OR, THE HISTORIANS In their proportionable LINEAMENTS.



LONDON, Printed by E.C. for Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

THESE ARE THE NAMES Of some of the chief HISTORIANS, As they are handled in
Order.
THucidides, Zenophon, Polybius, Herodotus, Dyonysius Halicarnassius, Caius
Julius Caesar, Velleius Paterculus, Diodorus Siculus, Crispus Salustius, Titus
Livius, Valerius Maximus, Quintus Curtius. Cornelius Tacitus, Lucius Annaeus
Florus, Josephus, Suetonius Tranquillus, Junianus Justinus, Pausanias,
Herodianus, Procopius, Ammianus Marcellinus,
THB CHARACTERS Of some of the chief of the HISTORIANS.
Thucidides.
THucidides an Historian of Athens, was the Son of Olorus, who flourished in
the time of the Peloponesian War, which he undertook to write, and performed it
most accurately; for having hired both sides with pieces of Silver, to inform
him with the most true intelligence, he was thereby enabled to deliver his
Narration incorrupt, and impartial: he learnt Philosophy of Anaxagoras, and
Rhetoric of Antiphon; Demosthenes was so transported with his History, that
transcribing it very often, he at length had it by heart.

Quintillian compares him with Herodotus, and Cicero prefers him to all others,
him only excepted: he is called (...), The Star of Rhetoric; and is equalled
on that account, to Demosthenes, and Aristides. Lipsius in his Politics
affords him this following Character; Res nec multas, nec magnas nimis
scripsit, sed palmam fortasse praeripit omnibus, qui multas ac magnos. He writ
neither very many, nor great matters, however he is advanced above those that
wrote both many and great. Gregory Nazianzen could not contain himself from
breaking forth into this praise; Quis mihi Herodoti ac Thucididis otium
linguamque suppeditabit? Who will supply me with the Leisure and Language of
Herodotus, and Thucidides?

Vossius gives him Tergeminam gloriam, in that he was, Et bonus Philosophus and
Historicus, and bello dux bonus. Both a good Philosopher, and an Historian, as
also a good Warrior; There were others likewise of this Name, but none equal
to him in Repute and Fame.

Zenophon.
ZEnophon the Son of Gryllus was the Disciple of Socrates, and an Historian of
Athens; he was called for the sweetness of his style Musa Attica, The Athenian
Muse, he was the first of the Philosophers that writ an History, wherein he
showed himself a most accurate Imitatour of Socrates; Cicero affirms of him,
That his Speech is sweeter then Honey, and that the Muses did, as it were, use
his Language, when they spoke.

He is styled Apis Attica, The Athenian Be by Laertius, as before, Musa
Attica, The Athenian Muse by Suidas. P. Cornelius Africanus was so high an
Esteemer of him, and his History, that he would never suffer him to be out of
his hands; and Lucius Lucullus, who was sent against that subtle and potent
Enemy Mithrydates, being himself but a raw, and unskilful Warrior, yet by
reading the Works of this Zenophon, he so bettered his Judgment in Military
Affairs, that at last he subdued him, and triumphed over him.

The style of this man is sublime, and his Expression Candid; so says
Dempster. Agellius informs us, that he lived sometimes in variance with great
Plato. There were three more of this Name, one of Antioch, another of Ephesus,
and a third of Cyprus, so says the learned Suidas.

Polybius.
POlybius an Historian of Megalopolis, a City of Arcadia, was the Master of
Scipio Africanus; he wrote the Roman History in forty Books, beginning from the
Banishment of Cleomenes, the Spartan, and Philip the Son of Perseus, and
afterward joining the Roman Affairs with the Macedonian, where this man ends,
Possidonius proceeds, as also does Strabo. Cicero and Plutarch, with many
others of the Learned, do in his Philosophy admire his Learning, in his
Manners, his Honesty, and in his History his prudence.

Titus Livius was so great an Admirer of his Works, that he would be
perpetually writing of them, and rehearsing them, as though they had been the
Product of his own Brain. And Marcus Brutus that eminent Censurer both of Men's
Writings, and Manners, to whom Cicero himself could not give sufficient
satisfaction, would never suffer this Polybius to be out of his hands.

Cicero styles him Bonum Autorem, A good Author: Lipsius says, Recta and
salutaria ubique esse ejus monita; That his Admonitions and Counsels are every
where right, and wholesome. And its Vossius his Character of him, Cedit uni,
altetique Graecorum eloquentia, civili prudentia, and scientia militari, nulli
secundus. He is inferior to one, or other of the Greeks, for Eloquence, but
for civil Prudence, and military Science, he is behind none of them.

Herodotus.
HErodotus of Hallycarnassius, an excellent Historian, wrote nine Books of
History, calling them by the Names of the Muses; he began from Cyrus King of
the Persians. This man being discontented at the Tyranny of Lygdanus, withdrew
himself to Samus, but afterward returned, upon the Tyrants expulsion: he is
called Thurius Scriptor, because being envied by his Fellows, he departed to
Thurius, a Colony of the Athenians, where he wrote his History.

Cicero calls him Patrem Historiae, The Father of History; and Quintilian
says, That he is both, Dulcis, candidus, and fusus, Sweet, candid, and
flowing. Thucidides would be present at the reciting of his Books, and upon the
hearing them read unto him, he would frequently fall on weeping.

Dionysius Halycarnassius makes him the chief of the Historians, as Sophocles
of the Tragaedians and Plato of the Philosophers. Scaliger could say of him,
Herodoti libros mihi difficilius est deponere, quam cyathum, Its more difficult
to me to lay aside Herodotus his Books, then the Cup: he died either at
Thurius, or at Pella; and where he died, there he was buried.

Dionysius Halycarnassius.
Dionysius Halycarnassius the Son of Alexander, wrote eleven Books of the Roman
Antiquities; he flourished according to the Judgment and report of Suidas, in
the Reign of Caesar Augustus, Eo accuratius tempora nemo observavit, says
Scaliger of him, No man observed the times with more diligence and care then he.

Some prefer him before Livie, because he seems to deliver many things
pertinent to the Roman Antiquities, with more accurateness then other Writers,
his style is said to be (...), To savor of comely novity: he was a noble
Censurer of other men's Labors, and Style, even as Quintilian was amongst the
Latins, being a Rhetorician, and Critic of that Repute and Credit, that all
men would close with his Sentence and Judgment.

Dempster calls him Historicorum clarissimum, eloquentissimum, veracissimum,
antiquitatis studiosissimum, and omnium ultissimum. The most famous, most
eloquent, most true, most studious of Antiquities, and the most profitable of
all Historians. Besides his History, he wrote the Characters of the ancient
Orators, together with a Method of composing Epithalamies, Epitaphs, and
Panegyricks; all which were translated into Latin by Theodore Gaza.

Caius Julius Caesar.
Caius Julius Caesar, the Founder of the Roman Empire, is very well
Uncharacterized by Velleius Paterculus; whose words I shall hear recite. Secutus
deinde Consulatus Caii Caesariis, qui scribenti manum injicit, and quamlibet
festinantem in se morari cogit. Then followed the Consulship of Caius Caesar,
who as I am writing lays his hand upon me, and what haft soever I am in,
constrains me to pause upon him; he being extracted from the most noble Julian
Family (which was accounted by all men of the greatest Antiquity) deriving his
Descent from Anchises and Venus; of person the most lovely of all the Citizens
of Rome, in vivacity of Spirit most sharp, in Bounty most liberal, of Courage,
either above the nature or belief of any m^n, in greatness of his Desires,
Celerity in execution, Patience in dangers, most nearly resembling that great
Alexander, but him sober, and not transported with Anger. Finally, That used
both Sleep and Meat to live, and not for Voluptuousness: this is Paterculus his
Figuration of him.

Now if his Person and Qualities were so Eminently Illustrious, we cannot but
estimate his Writings also conformable.

Quintilian says thus of him, C. Julius Caesar si foro tantum vacasset, non
alius ex nostris contra Ciceronem nominaretur: Had Caesar only employed his
time at the place of Pleas, he and none else of all the Romans might have been
opposed to Cicero.

Vnus mihi (says Gyraldus) Caeteros vicisse and scribendo and pugnando
videtur, He alone seemed to me to have overcome both in Writing and Fighting.

Lipsius speaks him an Historian eloquent, his Language pure without any
meritricious Paintings, worthy of the Roman or the Athenian Muses.

And Dempster compares him with the best of the Orators.

Velleius Paterculus.
VElleius Paterculus was at the first a Military Tribune in Thrace, afterward
Prefect of the Horse in Germany. Then Quaestor, then Tiberius his Legate in
the Pannonian War, all which he publishes of himself in his own History; He
sprang out of the eminent Princes of Campaine: he wrote his History in the
sixteenth year of Tiberius; his Ancestors were all famous for Military
Discipline; he dedicated his two Books of History to Marcus Vinicius. Tacitus
makes mention of him in the sixth of his Annals, where speaking of his
Descent, he tells us, that his Father and Grandfather were of Consular Degree
and Dignity: a great part of what he writ is lost.

Vossius thus Characteriseth him, and in his little Work: Dictio ejus plane
Romana, ac elegans; Quaedam etiam habet, quae haud alibi invenias, sed in sui
aevi rebus nimis Domui Augustae and Sejano adulatur. His phrase of Speech is
truly Roman and elegant; he has also some things, which you may not elsewhere
meet with, but in the Affairs of his own time, he too much flatters both
Caesar's House, and Sejanus.

Dempster herein complies with Vossius, who speaking of his History, affirms it
to be Styli elegantis, sed pudendae adulationis; of elegant Style, but of
shameful Adulation.

I Will end with that of Lipsius; Compendium Velleianum laudabile fuit, sed
potior pars periit, judicio, and ordine tamen scriptum, and quod exemplar
pleniori Chronologiae sit ad Imitandum. Velleius his Epitome was worthy of
praise, but the better part thereof is perished, yet written judiciously, and
with order, and which may be an Imitable Platform to a more full Chronology.

Diodorus Siculus.
DIodorus Siculus of Agyrium a Town in Sicily, according to the Geograpy of
Cluverius (though others call it Argyrium, and Angyrium) lived in the Reign of
Julius Caesar, as Eusebius reports; and yet this contradicts not learned
Suidas, who would have him to flourish in the time of Augustus, and so he did,
his Life reaching unto the midst of his long Domination. He wrote an
Historical Library, or as the Sholiast of Aristophanes, calls it, (...), A
Library of Histories, who gave it that appellation, because it was Catholic,
as treating of the Affairs of the Egyptians, Assyrians, Medians, Persians,
Romans, Graecians, Carthaginians, and others; and this Work of his he comprised
in forty books, the Argument whereof, he sets down in his Preface, where he
also says, that he was full thirty years in compiling of it, much of the time
being consumed in Travel through Asia and Europe: of all which Books, we have
at present but fifteen remaining.

What he writ was highly commended both by Justine Martyr and Eusebius; and yet
Ludovicus Vives reprehends his Matter, and Bodinus his Phrase, but Photius the
Patriarch, had a more noble opinion of him, who says, Vsum esse, (...). That
he used a perspicuous Phrase of Speech, not too much adorned with Tropes, but
most convenient for an History.

I Will let him pass with the phrase of Stephanus, Quantum solis lumen inter
stellas, tantum inter omnes, quotquot ad nostra tempora pervenerunt, historicos
(si utilitatis potius, quam voluptatis habenda sit ratio) noster hic Diodorus
eminere dici potest. As far as the Suns light is beyond the Stars, so far does
our Diodorus excel the Historians of our times, if so be, that we regard
rather profit then pleasure. And Dempster expresses him to be an Author of
ancient Erudition; and blames nothing else in him, but his corrupt Roman Names.

Crispus Sallustius.
CRispus Sallustius was born at Amiternum, of the Sabines, the year after that
Catullus was at Verona, and died four years after the Actiack War, as Eusebius
has recorded. He was Tribune of the People that same year that Cicero was
recalled from banishment, and Clodius slain of Milo; and in that Tribuneship
of his, he behaved himself very loosly, for being taken in Adultry with Fausta,
L. Sylla's Daughter, he was scourged with Rods by Milo, which was the cause
that he acted with the Clodian Party against him; he was removed the Senate for
his Adulteries and Rapes by Claudius Pulcher, and Calpurnius Piso; though
afterward restored again by Julius Caesar. Dion records, that he was set over
Numidia, which he exceedingly pillaged, but was absolved of the Crime by the
very power that advanced him, yet the Infamy ever stuck to him, as one that
acted those Obliquities, which he highly condemned in all others: he was at
length so enricht with his Numidian Rapes, that he bought those stately
Buildings on the Quirinall Hill, which were afterward called Sallustii forum,
The Court of Sallustius. His Deportment was so extravagant in his public
Capacities, that in respect of his Conversation, it prevented him of all
Praise; however his Writings were ever matter of Applause unto him, being a
good Writer, though a bad man.

The Ancients do judge his phrase of Speech to be brief and finuous, as one
that aemulated Thucidides. Turnebus calls him Scriptorem Atticum, The Athenian
Writer, and one that comes nearer to Demosthenes, then Cicero himself did.
Tacitus in the third of his Annals, styles him, Rerum Romanarum florentissimum
autorem, A most flourishing Author of Roman Affairs. Scaliger calls him,
Patrem Historiae, The Father of History; Scriptorem seriae and severae
orationis. Agellius, a Writer of serious, and severe Speech. Principem senatus
Historici, Lysius, the chief of the Historian Senate; Romana primum in
historia, Martial, the first, for the Roman Story. And S. Augustine calls him,
Nobilitatae veritatis historicum, An Historian of enobled Verity.

Titus Livius Patavinus.
TItus Livius Patavinus, called by Seneca in his first Book, De ira, vir
disertissimus, A most eloquent man, flourished in the Reigns of Caesar
Augustus, and Tiberius, in the beginning of the latters Reign, he compiled his
History, consisting of an hundred and forty two Books, as Petrarch reports,
though others will have two bated of the said number. Therein be comprised all
the Roman Affairs, from the Foundation of the City, to the German War, which
was managed by Drusus; of all which Books, there are but left remaining thirty
and five.

No Writer expresses more Majesty, and plenty, then this Historian. Quintilian
styles it, Lacteam ubertatem, and compares him to Herodotus, as Sallustius to
Thucidides. On the other-side its written of Caligula, one of the Roman
Majesty's, That he much vilified him, calling him Verbosum. Likewise Asinius
Pollio quarrelling with his Phrase was wont to say, that he found therein a
smack of Patavinity. But the forementioned Emperor did so distaste him, that
he threatened his removal, and ej^ction out of all the Roman Libraries: but no
wonder that he was thus transported against this noble Historian, when as those
two renowned Poets, Virgil, and Homer could not escape his Censure; nay, he was
like to consume them, if we may believe Suetonius in these his words;

Cogitavit and de Homeri carminibus abolendis, cur enim sibi non liceret,
dicens, quod Platoni licuit, qui eum a civitate, quam constituebat ejecerit?
sed and Virgilii, and Titi Livii scripta, paulum abfuit, quin ex omnibus
bibliothecis amoverit, quorum alterum and nullius ingenii, minimaeque
doctrinae, alterum ut verbosum in historia, negligentemque earpebat. He thought
of abolishing Homers Verses, saying, Why should it not be as lawful for him to
do it, as it was for Plato, who cast him out of that City, whereof he was the
Founder.

But the Judgment of this Savage Prince was no way prejudicial to those two
renowned Authors, and as little to this eminent Historian, let us therefore
hear what better heads have said of him. He is called by Barthius, Patavina
Siren, The Patavinian Mearmaid. Gruterus styles him, Historiae latinae
principem, The Prince of the Latin History. Lipsius, Historicorum uberrimum,
Of Historians the most plentiful. And again, says the same Author, In Livio
nimia nobis bona, In Livy we meet with things that are too good for us.

Valerius Maximus.
VAlerius Maximus, lived after Velleius Paterculus, as may be made to appear
from his depressing and disgracing of Sejanus, whilst Paterculus beyond the
bounds of all Moderation parasitically extolls him, which shows, that when
Paterculus writ, Sejanus was in his full Greatness, and Glory, but when
Valerius compiled his Collections, he was under judgment, contempt, and
Ignominy, as his own words do clearly manifest, which are as follows.

Eum (speaking of Sejanus) omni cum stirpe sua Populi Romani pedibus obtritum,
etiam apud Inferos, si tamen illuc receptus est, quae meretur supplicia pendere.

He flourished under Caesar Tiberius, for he says in his second Book, and
eighth Chapter, That he went with Sextus Pompeius into Asia, which Pompey was
Consul with Sextus Appuleius on that very year, that Augustus died, and so
were the first Consulls, which swear Alleagiance to Tiberius.

Further, its proved that he lived then, from another passage in his fifth
Book, where speaking of Marcus Antonius, he says, that he was the famous
Orator of his Grandfathers time: Now this Antony flourished in Julius Caesar's
Reign,

Again, considering the Language wherewith he scourges the Parricide Brutus,
all to gratify the care of Tiberius; and that Speech of his also in reference
to Cassius, whom he would not have named without a Note of the grandest Infamy.
All these Arguments may clearly convince, that he lived after Paterculus in the
Reign of the Emperor Tiberius.

Neither does the meanness of his Language any way gainsay it: for Cicero
himself could complain in his time (which was many years before) that the
Roman Tongue began even then to be corrupt, through the reception of
Forreiners: no wonder therefore, if this Authors Speech did somewhat decline
from that sweet purity, that was in the Age before it.

However let us hear what Testimonies, either of Merit, or Demerit the
Ancients have afforded him. Its Caussinus Character of him;

Valerius Maximus, ut Aegyptus Homerica, bonis and malis mixtus est; in
plerisque enim est acutus, and subtilis, in plerisque durus, and obscurus, and
ad plebeium sermonem abjectus, a puritate, and candore latini sermonis longius
discedit. Est tamen in eo jucunda, tot Historiarum quasi florum congesta
varietas, and brevitas narrationum, acuminibus sententiarum, non ra^o ^am apt
aspersa, ut nihil videatur Amaenius. Valerius Maximus, as Homers Aegyt, mixed
with good and bad things, for he is in very many of them acute, and subtle,
and again, in many hard and obscure, and being immerst into the Vulgar
Dialect, he deviates far from the purity and candor of the Latin Phrase, yet
there is in him a sweet variety of so many Histories, as it were Flowers
gathered into a heap, and shortness of Narrations, with acuteness of Sentences,
not seldom so aptly scattered, that nothing seems more delightful. Thus
Caussin.

Dempster no way detracts from him, for he styles him, Authorem rerum
varietate, eloquentiaque incomparabilem, An Author incomparable, both for
variety of things, and for his Eloquence. Only this he says in his
disparagement, That he did Sola adulationis foeditate vilescere, only become
vile through the deformity of Adulation.

And another calls him Ineptum affectatorem sententiarum, quanquam non inutilem
propter exempla. A Fond Affectator of Sentences, though not unprofitable for
examples.

Quintus Curtius Rufus.
QVintus Curtius Rufus filled the World with the Exploits of Great Alexander,
his History being contained in ten Books, two whereof are lost, yet supplied by
an addition from some other. There is a passage in his tenth Book, which
discovers the Age he lived in, which passage is after this manner.

Proinde jure meritoque Populus Romanus salutem se principi suo debere fatetur.
Which Prince who it should be, the Learned agree not: Some will have him to be
Caesar Augustus, but that Opinion cannot well stand, because he brought not
peace along with him, as who had civil Wars for the space of thirteen years.
Others affirm, that it may be Claudius Caesar, and that those Hurli-burlies
before mentioned, might relate to the slaughter of Caligula, and the Confusions
which happened thereupon; but this Opinion also is very rationally impugned by
some learned Ones. Now a third sort refers it to the Reign of the Emperor
Vespasian; and that because the foregoing words of the Historian, may suite
well with those Distractions, that happened upon the death of Nero, when Romes
Dominion was sought by force of Arms, between Galba, Otho, and Vitellius: And
this is the Judgment of Rutgersius, and Vossius: That he flourisht in the Reign
of Vespasian; of whom its reported, that he should teach Rhetoric in the last
year of Tiberius, which might well be, considering that there were but two and
thirty years betwixt that, and the Reign of Vespasian, he being young, when a
Rhetoritian, and old when an Historian; Vossius thus advances him.

Vsque adeo auctor est is verborum eligens, nec perspicue minus, quam terse
scribit. Acuius etiam est in sententiis, inque orationibus mire disertus. Imo
vel Augustaeo aevo digna esus est dictio, vel proxime abit. That he is an
Author very choice in his words, neither writes he less perspicuously, then
neatly: He is also acute in his Sentences, and in his Orations wonderfully
eloquent. Nay, his Phrase is worthy of the Age of Augustus, or else that which
immediately followed it.

Lipsius styles him, Historicum proprium principum, and assidue iis in manu
sinuque habendum. An Historian proper for Princes, and daily to be had in their
hands, and Bosoms. Floriditas Curtiana quatenus laudanda, says C. Barthinus?
Alphonsus King of Arragon being very sick, and his Physicians having tried all
the ways they could to cure him with their Physic, but therein failing, he
though very weak, on the sudden sell to reading of the History of Great
Alexander, written by this Curtius, and thereupon he recovered, crying out,
Valiant Avicenna, Hippocrates, and caeteri medici, vivat Curtius sospitator
meus. Away with Avicenna, Hippocrates, and other Physicians: and let Curtius
live my only Recoverer.

Cornelius Tacitus.
Cornelius Tacitus, in some old Editions called by the name of Publius, but
misliked of, and rejected by the learned: he wrote his History in the Reign of
the Emperor Nerva, and not when Trajane Governed; as will appear by his
stiling of Nerva, Divus, but not Trajan: he writ his Annalls after his History,
although they be placed before it. He begins them with the death of Augustus,
and ends them within two years of the death of Nero.

Besides his said Annalls and History, he left behind him a Book of the
Situation of Germany, and the manners of that People, as also a Treatise of
the life of his Father-in-Law, Julius Agricola, which he writ in Trajans time.

Vossius comparing his History with his Annalls, speaks thus of them.

Dictio Taciti floridior, uberiorque in Historiarum est libris, pressior
siociorque in Annalibus. Interim gravis utrobique, and disertus. The Speech of
Tacitus is more florid, and copious in the Books of his Histories; more
contracted, and more dry in his Annalls. In the mean, every where Grave, and
Eloquent. However Alciatus a man well learned, prefers Paulus Jovius far before
him, in comparison of which Author, he calls the Lines of this Tacitus, but
Senticeta, Briars: but this was said by him in regard of his transcendent
Affection to his Friend Jovius.

But the Emperor M. Claudius Tacitus so highly honored this Historian, that
he placed his image in all the Libraries, and caused his Books to be ten times
transcribed in one year by his Notaries, for fear of perishing.

Sidonius says of him, that he should be never mentioned without praise.
Tacitus nunquam sine laud loquendus. Lipsius calls him, Sallustii imitatorem,
The Immitator of Sallustius: and of whom, he also further says, Quod est omni
virtute antiquis proximus, and si linguae latinae esset eadem puritas, caeteris
sic perfectus, ut vocare illos ipsos antiquos in certamen possit dignitatis.
That he is in every Virtue next unto the Ancients, and if there were but in him
the same purity of Language, in other matters be is so perfect, that he might
contend for Dignity with those very Ancients.

The foresaid Critic moreover styles him, Acrem and prudentem scriptorem: A
sharp and prudent Writer.

The first five Books of this singular good Author, were found hid at Corbeia,
and being brought to Leo the Great, the person which presented them, was
rewarded with five hundred Pieces. Owen has an Epigram upon him, with which I
shall end his Character.

Veracem fecit probitas, Natura sagacem.
Obscurum brevitas te, Gravitasque brevem.
Lucius Annaeus Florus.
LVcius Annaeus Florus, flourished (as some are of opinion) near the end of the
Reign of the Emperor Trajan, though others will have it to be in the time of
Adrian. The Prologue of his History, Discovers the Age that he lived in: A
Caesare Augusto in seculum nostrum (says he) sunt non multo minus anni
ducenti. From Caesar Augustus to our time, there are not much fewer then two
hundred years. But there is a grand mistake in the very number, for if we will
compute the term of years, which intervened between Augustus and Trajan, we
shall find that its short of it by fifty; and therefore Vossius taking special
notice thereof, will have the number to be but an hundred and fifty.

It has been a general opinion, that this Author should be the Epitomizer of
that voluminous History of Titus Livius, but they which will well observe him,
will find much of Discrepancy, or difference betwixt them. There are some that
disagree likewise concerning his very name, occasioned by Lactantius, in his
seventh Book of Institutions, where he thus writes,

Non inscite Seneca Romanae urbis tempora distinguit in aetates. Soneca does
not unwittily distinguish the times of the Roman City into Ages. But
questionless they were distinct, and different persons, only the one did
imitate the other, as Florus Seneca. However it cannot be denied, but that
Florus was of the Family of the Senecaes, and therefore called in the ancient
Books by the Name of Seneca, and Annaeus, as well as Julius. The Senecaes being
all of them Branches of the Annean Family. Now for his Character, we may
receive it from that excellent Grammarian, Gerardus Vossius; who speaking of
him in his Book of the Latin Historians, thus extolls him.

Ea potissima est Flori nostri laus, quod scriptor est elegans, and disertus,
and si paucula exceperis, quae frigidius dicta videntur, vere floridus. That is
the principal commendation of our Florus, that he is a Writer, elegant and
eloquent, and if you will but except some few things which seem more coldly
spoken by him, he is truly florid. As for his style, it is declamatory, and
nearer unto Poetical, as one that powers out Virgils Hemisticks.

Flavius Josephus.
FLavius Josephus a Jew, was the Son of Matthathias, born in the first year of
Caius Caligula, by the Mother-side nearly related to the Royal Stock of the
Maccabes. As for his Sect, he was a Pharisee, which Sext among the Jews was not
unlike the Stoics of the Gentiles: He when he was arrived at the Age of twenty
six years, repaired to the Roman Court, that he might there mediate with the
Caesarean Majesty for those Priests, which Felix the Governor had for some
petty Offenses cast into Prison; Now arriving at Rome, and falling into Favor
with Poppaea, Augustus Caesar's Wife: his success was such, that he did not
only procure liberty for the Captives, but was dismissed with bountiful
Rewards; but soon after returning into his Country, and upon an insurrection,
being chosen chief Captain of those Galilaeans which rebelled, was at length
besieged in Jotapata, and the City being taken by assault, he was commmitted
unto safe Custody, that he might be sent thence, to give an account of his
Sedition unto Caesar.

Now being advertized of the Enemies design toward him, he requested the
favor of Conference with the General Vespasian, into whose presence as soon
as he was admitted, he saluted him with a Praediction, that he should be
Emperor. Vespasian at first supposed that he devised that shift, thereby to
procure his liberty, but on the sudden, receiving Intelligence of the death
both of Nero, and Galba, as also news of the Civil Wars already commencing
between Otho and Vitellius, he forthwith not only discharged him of his
Restraint, but clothed him with such Apparel too, as might suit with his
Education and Condition.

Now soon after these Attempts, and providence that followed them; he
accompanied that Hero Titus to the Siege of Jerusalem, which Siege he
Ingenuously described, and commended it, when finished, to Vespasian and his Son
Titus. The latter of the two approving it by a Subscription from his Royal
hand, and afterward commanding it to be received into the public Library.

This Author writ also the Jewish Antiquities, which work was perfected by him
in the thirteenth year of the Reign of Domitian. Many there were, that
undervalued the Faith of this Writer: But Scaliger in his Book De Emendatione
Temporum, does most nobly vindicate him, where he thus Characters him.

Diligentissimus (...), omnium scriptorum Josephus, de quo nos hoc audacter
dicimus, non solum in rebus Judaicis, sed etiam in externis tutius ei credi,
quam omnibus Graecis ac Latinis. Josephus the most diligent and the greatest
Lover of Truth of all Writers, of whom we dare boldly affirm this, That not
only in Judaicall matters, but also in external, he may be more safely
credited, then all other Authors, whether Greek or Latin.

He is styled by Isidore Pelusiote (...), A man most famous for Erudition and
Eloquence. No marvel then, if he merited a Statue among the Romans for the
Glory of his Wit, To all this I Will add but one thing more, and its this; That
he gave an excellent Testimony to our Lord and Savior, in the twenty second
Book of his Antiquities.

Caius Suetonius Tranquillus.
Caius Suetonius Tranquillus, lived in the Reigns of Trajan and Adrian, being
Magister Epistolarum, The principal Secretary to the latter of the two: As
Spartianus has recorded it in the life of that noble Emperor. His Father was
Suetonius Lenis, as he himself testifies in his Otho, and not Paulinus, as
some others have reported

Plinius held great Correspondency with this Historian, as appears by some
special, and choice Epistles directed unto him. This man among other of his
works, writ the lives of the Grammarians, and Rhetors, but the greater part of
them is lost, and almost his whole Book of the Poets, none of them remaining to
be seen, but the lives of Terence, and Horace; as for Lucan, and Persius,
though they are with us, yet its questionable, whether their Lives were written
by him; many of the learned Critics doubt it, a Book he wrote (...). Whereof
Suidas makes mention.

Vopiscus styles this man, Auctorem emendatissimum, and candidissimum, and cui
familiare sit amare brevitatem. A most fair, and most candid Author, and to
whom its familiar to love brevity. Ludovicus Vives calls him also, Graecorum ac
Latinorum scriptorum diligentissimum, atque Incorruptissimum. Of the Greek and
Latin Writers the most diligent, and most pure.

There are some that would prefer him before those Renowned Ones, Livy, Salust,
and Tacitus, but the Grammarian Vossius will by no means assent to that, who
approves of the Encomiums given him by Vopiscus, and Vives, only in reference
to such men that have written Lives like himself. Suidas calls him, The Roman
Grammarian, and Plinius, Virum probissimum, Honestissimum, Eruditissimum.

Justinus.
JVstinus, whom Orosius calls Breviatorem Pompeii, The Epitomizer of Trogus
Pompeius, and Justus Lipsius, variarum rerum, gentium, temporum, compendium: A
Compend of various Things, Nations, Times. He lived almost Contemporary with
Suetonius, though indeed both his Name, and the Age he lived in, fall under
some men's doubts, and suspicions. Arnoldus his Edition expresses him by the
name of Frontinus; but the Medicaean Library calls him Junianus, and the latter
may well carry with it more show of truth, because of its Antiquity.

And now for his time also, that has been under some controversy; there are
they, that think he lived after the Traslation of the Empire to Constantinople,
as seems to them out of those very words of his in his eigth Book, Graeciam
nunc and viribus, and dignitate, orbis terrarum principem: But their mistake
lies in misapplying the Conjunction Nunc, which indeed is to be referred, not
to the time he writ in, as they suppose, but to the subject matter whereof he
wrote.

It is the Judgment of Vossius, that he lived under Antoninus Pius, and
dedicated his Epitome unto him, as is manifest by those very words in the
Preface, Quod ad te, Imperator Antonine, non tam cognoscendi, quam emendandi
causa transmisi. And that he lived under this very Emperor: we have besides
this, the Testimony of Martinus Polonus, as he has asserted it in his
Chronicles.

Dempsier gives him none of the meanest Commendations, calling him, Quantum
stili genus patitur, disertum: As far as his kind of style suffers, eloquent.
Only one tells us, that his Epitome is confused, Et omni temporum luce carens.

Tilem. --

Pausanias.
PAusanias, a man of great Note and Repute in the Reign of Marcus Antoninus,
was the Disciple of that Herod Atticus, who under those two Emperors Adrian
and Antoninus Pius, had obtained a great Name amongst the Sophists of that Age.

The Native Country of this gallant Historian was Cappadocia, and the place of
his Commoration, Caesarea, whereupon it has been observed of him, that
according to the Genius of the Cappadocians, he does produce those Syllables,
which he should shorten; and on the other side shorten those, that he should
produce; and therefore he is very ingenuously resembled to a Cook, that
provides unpleasing Sauce for good and savoury Meats.

He declamed not at Athens only, the famous Academy of all Greece, but at Rome
also, the Metropolis of the whole World. Philostratus speaks much of him in
his Lives of the Sophists. There is extant of his composure a Book De Graecia,
wherein he describes the Situation of her Cities, Regions, Countries, and
whatsoever in any of her Confines is thought worthy of notice-taking, a
Treatise of more Learning, then Eloquence.

As concerning his style, it is accounted very weak, languid, and faint.
However, that which Domitius Piso said once, may well be applied to this
Pausanias. Thesauros scribi debere, non libros. That Treasuries ought to be
written, not Books: for his Work is indeed a very Treasury. He is styled also
by the Learned, Author, ob variarum rerum copiam, and Historiarum jucundam
diversitatem, utilissimus. An Author for copiousness of diverse things, and
sweet variety of Histories, most profitable.

Herodianus.
HErodianus flourished much about the time, that Commodus was Emperor, a man
of great esteem for his Abilities amongst the Romans; he wrote eight Books of
History, beginning them from the death of M. Aurelius Antoninus the
Philosopher, and ending them at the decease of Balbinus and Maximus.

His style according to the Judgment of Photius is elegant, perspicuous, and
indeed such, that he is comparable upon any account to the best Historian; he
is much for the truth of things, only in Alexander and Maximinus, he does
somewhat decline from it, which is well observed by that most exquisite
Interpreter of him Angelus Politianus.

He is commemorated by Julius Capitolinus in his Clodius Albinus, where he
says, Quod ad fidem pleraque dixit, as who was both (...). So does also
Trebellius Pollio make mention of him in his thirty Tyrants, as also Lampridius
in his Alexander Severus, and Antoninus Diadumenus.

Ammianus Marcellinus styles him, Artium minutissimum sciscitatorem, A most
exact Searcher of all Arts: and Dempster calls him, Historicum elegantem and
copiosum, An elegant and copious Historian. Of his History, it is Stephanus his
Observation. Quod nulla Romana Historia extat, quae tam mirabiles rerum in
Romano Imperio vicissitudines non plurium annorum spatio complectatur. That
there is no Roman History extant, which comprehends so wonderful vicissitudes
of affairs in the Roman Empire, no, not in a larger space of years, as that
does in so short a time.

Procopius.
PRocopius lived when Justinian was Emperor, and was called by Suidas (...). He
was Notary to Bellisarius, whose Acts he composed, and published; he has written
eight Books of History: The two first do treat of the Persian War, the two next
of the Vandall, and the four last of the Gothic. Those twain which give an
account of the Persian, are Epitomized by Photius in the sixty third Chapter of
his Bibliotheca; but yet a Synopsis of the whole we meet with in the Preface of
Agathius, who proceeded where this Procopius ended.

Before he died, he added a ninth unto his former eight, which he called by the
name of (...), because it contained those things, that were not before
published. Suidas reports, That this Historian in this his Addition, was very
invective, against the Emperor Justinian, and the Empress Theodora, as also
against Bellisarius, and his Wife: whatsoever is extant in the Greek Tongue of
this Authors, the World is beholding to Heschelius for it; but as for the
Translation of Porsena, it may be justly said of him, that what he undertook to
convert, he altogether perverted.

Dempster styles this man Historicum Insignem, A famous Historian. And Bodinus
is no way a Detractor from him, who writes thus, Cum singulas epistolas
Decreta, foedera, conciones vario dicendi genere, ac stilo describit; magnum
verissimi scriptoris praebet argumentum. Seeing that he describes all the
Epistles, Decrees, Leagues, Orations, with variety both of Speech and style, it
is a convincing Argument, of a singular true Writer.

Ammianus Marcellinus.
AMmianus Marcellinus flourished under Gratianus, and Valentinian, and wrote
one and thirty Books, whereof thirteen are not now extant of what Nation, and
Profession whence he took beginning of his History, and where he ended it; his
own words in his Epilogue will clearly manifest it, he began with Nerva, and
ended with Valens: That he was a Greek, not only a passage in his one and
thirtieth Book, but also his phrase of Speech, or Dialect bewrays it. Suidas
says, That he was familiar with Sallustius the Philosopher, who was Captain
of the Praetorians, and the first man that designed Valentinian to the Empire.

He is a grave, and serious Writer (says Vossius) worthy to be beloved of all
men, especially of the Germans, the Situation of whose Country he most
accurately described, as who had been engaged into a Military Employment in
that Nation. But (says the same Grammarian) Dictio horridior est; and no
marvail if it be, for why should any wonder, if a Soldier speak like a Soldier,
more roughly then other Writers? And besides, he was a Greek, and therefore the
more excusable, if he writ after his own Native Idiome; he is remembered by
Ammianus Priscianus.

Barthius speaks nobly of him upon the account of a Soldier, whom in that
respect, he thus Characters.

Homo magno animo, Disciplinae militaris assecla, inter tubas and strepitum
armorum pervenire eo absque ulla animi contentione potuit, quo nos studia per
tot tantosque anfractus vix ducunt. A man of great Courage, and an Affector of
Military Discipline, one that could amidst the sound of Trumpets and noise of
Arms arrive there without any reluctance of Mind, whither our Studies, through
so many and great streights can hardly lead us. Neither does the same Critic
speak less of him as a Scholar, Vtilitate monitorum, and veritate Historica,
nescio an quisquam author ullibi sit supra Ammianum Marcellinum. For
profitableness of Admonitions, and Historical Truth, I know not, whether there
be any Author before Ammianus Marcellinus. I Will but add a Note from Dempster, to
this of Barthius, and so end; Ammianus, Luculentus Rerum Romanarum scriptor.

THE CHARACTERS Of some of the chief of the GRAMMARIANS AND ORATORS.

LONDON, Printed by E.C. for Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

THE NAMES Of the chief GRAMMARIANS Herein handled.
VArro, Athenaeus, Julius Pollux. Aulus Gellius, Martianus Capella, Suidas,
Coelius Rhodiginus, Erasmus, Budaeus, Julius Scaliger, Camerarius, Casaubonus,
Josephus Scaliger, Justus Lipsius, Janus Gruterus, Caspar Barthius.
The Orators.
ANtiphon, Gorgias, Isocrates, Demosthenes, Aeschines, Lysias, Demades, Cicero,
Marcus Seneca, Petronius Arbiter, Hermogenes, Quintilianus, Lucianus, Elianus,
Aristides, Symmachus.
OPPH' GPAATI^N* OR, THE GRAMMARIANS In their due FORMS.
Marcus Terentius Varro.
MArcus Terentius Varro, was one of the Learned among the Romans, highly
honored by Cicero himself, although Remmius Palaemon could most arrogantly and
contemptuously call him Porcum, a Hogg, Whereunto one wittily replied, That he
should have added, Literarum unto it, A learned one. He is by Lactantius
equalled to any one of the Latins or, Greeks; Marcus Varro, (says he) Quo
nemo unquam doctior, ne apud Graecos, nedum apud Latinos vixit. Marcus Varro,
then whom, none lived more Learned, either with the Greeks, or Latins.

Quintilian does prefer him before all the other Romans; Vir Romanorum
eruditissimus: Cicero likewise in his Brutus styles him diligentissimum
investigatorem antiquitatis, A most diligent Antiquary. Valerius Maximus calls
him Vitae humane exemplum, The Pattern of man's life; and Dempster names him
Criticorum patrem Incomparabilem; The Incomparable Father of the Critics. I Will
but add to all this his Character from S. Augustine.

Quis magno Varrone curiosius ista quaesivit? Quis invenit doctius? Quis
consideravit attentius? Quis diligentius pleniusque conscripsit? qui tametsi
minus est suavis eloquio, doctrina tamen, atque sententiis ita refertus est, ut
in onmi eruditione, quam nos secularem, illi autem liberalem vocant, studiosum
rerum tantum iste doceat, quantum studiosum verborum Cicero delectat. Who
sought into these things more curiously then Marcus Varro? Who more learnedly
found them? who considered them more attentively? Who writ them more diligently
and fully? Who, although he be not so sweet in his Language and Expression, yet
he is so stuffed with Learning and Sentences, that in all Erudition which they
call liberal, we secular, he teaches him that is studious of things, as much
as Cicero does him, that is studious of Words.

It Is Terentianus his Versicle of him; Vir doctissimus undecuncque Varro.

Athenaeus.
AThenaeus was a Grammarian in the Reign of Marcus Antoninus, and was called
by the name of Noucratita; his Deipnosophists are a Work both commendable for
variety, and also for Erudition; he has thereby described a magnificent and
sumptuous Supper (The Order and Structure of the Book, being the same with that
of a great and large Feast.) Indeed his Disputes are set out with the greatest
Oratory and Rhetoric that can be, so that his transcendent Wit is very worthy
the Readers Admiration.

What pity is it then, that this laudable Work could not come unto our hands so
perfect, as he intended it, a great part thereof being lost, indeed so great a
part, that the remainder may be called, but as it were an Epitome of the whole.

He is styled by Isaac Casaubon, Scriptor vere (...), A Writer very learned in
many things, and ut paucis multa complectamur. Grecorum Varro, aut Plinius. And
that we may comprehend much in a little, the Varro, or Pliny of the Greeks.
Dempster also calls him, Doctum veterum autorum compilatorem: A learned
Compiler of ancient Autors.

There was another of his Name before him, one that was an admirable
Philosopher, as this was an Historian.

Julius Pollux.
JVlius Pollux lived under Caesar Commodus, and taught Rhetoric at Athens; he
dedicated his Onomasticon to his Scholar the Emperor. Suidas says, That he
writ also on other Subjects, but they all miscarried.

This Encomium is given to his Onomasticon, that its called, a Treasury of all
Words and Things, fit for, and exposed unto every use.

Isacus Casaubonus in an Epistle that he writ to one, that set him forth, has
Characterized him thus:

Et sane Pollux, siquid Judico, scriptor optimus, eruditissimus, utilissimus,
and eo seculo, quod tot claros in literis viros tulit dignissimut. If I have
truly any Judgment, Pollux is a very good Writer, very Learned, very
profitable, and most worthy of that Age, which brought forth so many famous men
for Learning.

Dempster says, That in his Collections, he is incomparably diligent, and
erudite; he died in the fifty eighth year of his Age.

Aulus Gellius.
AVlus Gellius, called by Gifanius Maximi Judicii vir, A man of deep and solid
Judgment, flourished according to the account of learned Petavius, in the
Reigns of Trojan, and Antoninus; who in his Rationary of times, joins him with
some other eminent Grammarians, which were then Contemporary with him: Nay,
Gellius himself in his twentieth Book of Attick Nights, discovers unto us the
Age he lived in, where he says, That he was present at the Dispute which was
betwixt Sextus Caecilius the Civilian, and Favorinus the Philosopher.

Lipsius in his Miscellanies very highly commends his Latin, stiling him
Scriptorem purissimae latinitatis, and plane ad comadiam antiquam, A Writer of
the purest Latin, and plainly suitable to the ancient Comaedian strain.

Politian speaking of his Books of Attick Nights, says thus of them, That they
are Maxim candidae, Very candid. Only Vives does most injuriously condemn,
and under value him, for which he is reproved by Henricus Stephanus. Pareus
calls him, Criticorum madulsam: and Dempster, Grammaticorum utilissimum.

As for this Authors Name, its uncertain whether it be Agellius, as some have
thought, or Aulus Gellius. Its Lipsius his confession, Se ejus nomen nunquam
nisi dubitantem and haesitantem posuisse, That he never writ his Name without
great haesitation, and doubting.

Martianus Capella.
MArtianus Capella was a Carthaginian of proconsular degree and dignity, whom
Dempster calls Rebus latinum, verbis Africanum, For Things a Roman, for Words a
Carthaginian. And though Barthius acknowledges him to be Barbarior scriptor, A
Writer that savoureth in his Speech of too much Barbarism, yet in this he
commends him, that he is, Vtilissimus ad autorum de singulis artibus
liberalibus sententiam capiendam, very profitable in apprehending the Judgment
of Authors, touching all the liberal Arts; and therefore not worthy to be
prostituted by the Critics unto that reproachful Name of Tulliaster.

I will but add to this the commendation, which that eminently learned Grotius
is pleased to bestow upon him;

Ad ipsum Martianum te Relego, in quo plurima invenies, quae nec discere
taedebit, nec didicisse poenitebit, Neque hoc ipsos barbari seculi homines
latuit, apud quos quan^i nominis fuerit Capella, vel solus Turonensis satis
superque docebit, qui eum in fine libri non aliter nominat, quam si
Aristotelem, Ciceronem, Varronem nominasset.

I send thee to Martianus himself, in whom thou shall find very many things,
which it will not be irksome to learn, nor repent thee to have learned. Neither
were the men of that barbarous Age ignorant of this, with whom in how great
repute, and credit this Capella was, Turonensis alone will more then
sufficiently make appear, who in the end of his Book calls him after no other
name, then that of Aristotle, Cicero, Varro.

Suidas.
SVidas was, as some say, a Monk of Byzantium, and flourisht about six hundred
years since, according to the opinion of learned Casaubon. His Work is styled,
Thesaurus insignis and Amaltheae velut Cornu: which though it be imputed unto
his Name, yet many learned men (whose Names are praefixed to the Book) were
Isntrumental to the composure of it.

The Grammarian Dempster thus is pleased to limn him, and to afford us such a
Draught of him, as may serve sufficiently to express him.

Suidas admirabilis, incomparabilis, unus instar omnium Grammaticorum: Suidas
an admirable and an incomparable Author, one that is worth all the rest of the
Grammarians. This Encomium may seem to some Censurers hyperbolicall, but if any
Author in that kind has merited such a Character: Surely this Suidas has much
more deserved it.

Some there are, that have taken notice of a notable slip committed by this
Critic, in that he has passed by in his Thesaurus, the Names of many eminent
Writers, particularly amongst the Historians, he neither mentions Polybius, nor
Dion.

However his Work is called by one that was very learned, Copiosa and perfecta
quaedam Grammatica. A certain copious, and perfect Grammar. There was another
Grammarian also of this Name, one that was charged with this Fault by the
Learned, as to be full of untrue Discourses, and therefore deservedly styled by
some, Fabulosus scriptor, A fabulous Writer.

Caelius Rhodiginus.
Caelius Rhodiginus, called Varro by Caesar Scaliger, as was Athenaeus by Isack
Casaubon, yea, and Varrone major, And greater then Varro, and he thinks it
spoken without the least shadow of Flattery: He is indeed an Author (as
Dempster says) Admirandae eruditionis, Of wonderful Erudition, although he
be, as the same Critic has elsewhere decyphered him, Asperae dictionis, Of
rough Phrase or Elocution.

Jovius does discredit this man's Thesaurus, affirming, that it seems to him
Rancidum quiddam olere, To have a very rank, and offensive smell: however,
those two well known Verses do sufficiently vindicate him.

Abfuit usque adeo nihil, hoc in Caelio haberent
Tempora Varronem quo minus ista suum.
Desiderius Erasmus.
DEsiderius Erasmus, of Rotterdam in Holland, honored by Jovius with this
Excellent Title, Varro sui seculi and Cicero Germaniae, The Varro of his Age,
and Cicero of Germany; The same Author says further to his honor, Quod ad
arcana cujusque doctrinae infinita lectione, inusitataque memoria penetravit:
That he pierced to the secrets of all Learning by his infinite reading, and
unheard of Memory.

The Monks were wont to say this of him, Erasmum posuisse ova, Lutherum, and
caeteros exclusesse pullos, That Erasmus laid the Eggs, and Luther, and others
brought forth the young Ones.

A certain Romish Doctor having gotten his Picture impressed upon a piece of
Paper, set it up within his Parlour, which as he passed by, he would
disdainfully spit upon, and being asked the question, why he did so? he
returned answer, Se Erasmo acceptum far calamitosum illud seculum: That he
imputed to Erasmus the calamity of that Age.

He is called in allusion to his Name, by one that wrote his life, (...),
Amiable, and by Gifanius, Alterum orbis jubar, maximumque rei literariae decus,
Another Sun beam of the World, and the greatest Ornament, and honor of
Learning. Only Gyraldus does endeavor to abate somewhat of his true worth.

Vir, says he, Vbique magnus, sed an tantus fuerit, quantus a nonnullis
existimatur, haud mihi parum liquet: Certe inter Germanos latinus, inter
latinos aliquando Germanus. A man every where great, but whether so great, as
he is thought by some, its not so clear to me; truly amongst the Germans, he is
a Roman, and sometimes among the Latins, he is a German.

There were some, that thus expounded this Versicle in that Psalm of David's,
Thou shall tread upon the Lion, and the Dragon. Upon the Lion, that was Luther,
and upon the Dragon, that was this Erasmus.

Gulielmus Budaeus.
GVlielmus Budaeus, called Gallicus Alcides, The French Hercules, and for his
great Erudition and Knowledge, by Erasmus, Galliae portentum, The Wonder of
France: Nay, Jovius prefers him before all the Learned men of Europe, Non
Galliae modo, sed etiam totius Europae long doctissimus, Not only the
Learned of the Frenchmen, but also of all the Europaeans.

Barthius honors him for his incomparable skill in the Greek Tongue, which did
indeed give occasion to those two Verses of the Poet.

Gallia quod Graeca est, quod Graecia barbara non est
Utraque Budaeo debet utrumque suo.
It was his earnest desire before he died, that all Solemnities should be
omitted at his Funerals, and therefore they Interred him very privately in the
deep silence of the Night. Its a gallant report, which the Poet Buchanan
bestows on him in these following Verses.

Sunt universi splendour orbis Galliae
Et Galliarum splendour est Lutetiae.
Splendour Camoenae sunt sacrae Lutetiae,
Budaeus ornat unus innocentia,
Splendore vitae, literis, solertia
Orbem, Camoenas, Galliam, Lutetiam.
Julius Scaliger.
JVlius Scaliger styled by learned Vossius, Eruditorum maximus, naturae
miraculum, and vir ad unguem factus: The Greatest of Scholars, Natures Miracle,
and a man exactly made, even to a Nails breadth. He was an excellent Poet, as
well as a Grammarian, whose Poems Justus Lipsius equals with the Poetry of the
Ancients.

The said Critic speaks thus of him, Quod de Tullio dixit vetus magister,
profecisse multum, cui is placeret, ego verius, magnum esse, cui Julius iste
magnus. Vossius says, that he was, Sed uno Aristotele minor, Inferior to none
but great Aristotle. Barthius calls him Hominum (...), The great wonder of
men.

Isack Casaubon does compare him with the very Gods themselves, giving him this
sacred Epithet, (...), I Will let him pass with that of Vossius: Vir ille, hoc
uno excepto, quod parem sibi filium genuit, caetera incomparabilis: That man
(This one think being excepted) that he begot a Son not inferior, but equal
to him, is to all others Incomparable.

Camerarius.
CAmerarius graced by Turnebus with this ensuing Appellation, Germaniae
ornamentum, and Europae Decus, The Ornament of Germany, and the Honor of
Europe; Thuanus says, That he was of Noble Extraction, though his Wealth did
no way answer to his Descent: He was endued with an Ingenuous, and handsome
Shape, and delighted his Mind in such noble Exercises, as his Birth and Quality
did require. He greatly affected good Horsmanship, being very skillful in
managing his Bridle, and for all such Feats, as that Art could instruct him
with.

For his Learning, he was of that great Repute, that Janus Gruterus on that
account, styles him, Incomparabilem, Incomparable; and Justus Lipsius in his
Miscellanies thus honors him: Vir quem Germania habuit sine paro: A man that
Germany could not equal or parallel.

His knowledge was such both in the Latin and Greek Tongues, that Jovius said
this of him, Quod scribendo pernobilis Ciceronis imitator evaserit; That in
Writing he showed himself a very noble Imitator of that eloquent Orator Marcus
Cicero.

Isacus Casaubenus.
ISacus Casaubonus, is by Dempsterus called Quidam Pythius, A certain Apollo;
By Heinsius, Eruditionis sol, and aetatis Decus, The Sun of Learning, and the
Glory of the Age: And by Josephus Scaliger, Eruditorum Phoenix, The Phoenix of
the Learned.

His Writings were of that weight, and worth that one said of him, Quod tot
palladas edidit, quot libros conscripsit. That he begat so many Palaces, as he
wrote Books; and therefore says another, Vir erat Nectare, and Ambrosia qui
alatur, and sarrano qui dormiat ostro dignissimus: He was a man most worthy to
be fed with Nectar, and Ambrosia, and to sleep upon a silken Bed.

His Language and expression is so sweet, That Vossius calls him,
Musarum-Favum, The Hive of the Muses: and for his great Learning he is styled
by Pareus (...) politioris literaturae. I Will but mention Barthius his Character
of him, and so proceed unto the next.

Immortale Galliae decus, quo digniorom omni laud alium ne historiae quidem
continent: The Immortal Grace of France, then whom History mentions not any
more worthy of all Praise.

Julius Scaliger.
IVlius Scaliger was the Son of Julius, whom Casaubon thus salutes: Magni
parentis non minor Filius, O thou Son, no less then thy great Father. He is
styled by the same Critic, Hercules Musarum, The Muses Hercules. By Vossius
Alter Varro; Another Varro. By Pareus, Criticus (...), A Critic skilled in many
Tongues. By Lipsius, Rei literariae Aesculapius, The Aesculapius of Learning.
And lastly, by Caspar Barthius, (...), Most divine.

Heinsius in his Funeral Oration breaks out thus into his Praises:

Alii Abyssum eruditionis, alii scientiarum mare, alii doctorum solemn, Alii
patris sobolem divinam, Alii genus Deorum, Alii perpetuum literarum dictatorem,
Alii maximum naturae opus, and miraculum, Alii aliter vocare. Some call him an
Abyss of Learning, Others a Sea of Sciences, Others a Sun amongst the literate,
Others the divine Offspring of a divine Father, Others the Stock of the Gods,
Others a perpetual Dictator of Letters, Others the greatest Work, and Miracle
of Nature, Others, Natures utmost Strength, And others otherwise.

Casaubon, honors him with the Title of Tripos, whereto all, which are in
doubt are to repair. And the same Grammarian further resembles him to the
ancient, and wise Cato:

Plane quod de Catone olim dictum versatile ingenium, sic illi pariter ad omnia
fuisse, ut natum ad id unum diceres, quodcunque ageret, id verissimum in eo
reperiri, non seria magis, quam lusus evincunt.

Truly that which was heretofore said of Cato, That he had a Wit so pregnant,
and prompt to every thing, that you would say, it was formed for the very
thing, whatsoever it was he was about; Now that this is found to be most true
in this very man, his serious Affairs do not more evince it, then his Sports.

I Will end him with that of Heinsius: Vir sine exemplo magnus, A man Great,
without his Peer.

Justus Lipsius.
JVstus Lipsius is saluted by Pareus with the name of the Belgic Seneca, and
called by Schottus, the very Eye of the Low Countries, by Woverius, Amor and
deliciae Generis humani, The Love and Darling of Mankind, by Gruterus, Apex
eruditionis reconditae, The top of all mysterious Learning. By Dausqueius,
Seculi literati Sydus: The Star of the learned Age: and by one more, Deliciae
Musarum, The Muses Delights.

Acidalius in his Readings upon Paterculus gives him this excellent ensuing
Character.

Quem virum per omnia Diis, quam hominibus ingenio propiorem, uti lumen unicum,
and numen aevi nostri colo, and veneror praeter omnes, quos ille admiratores
cultoresque ubique habuit plurimos. Which man in all things for Wit, more near
the Gods, then Men, as the only light, and Deity of our Age I love, and
reverence beyond those many Honourers, and Admirers which he has.

I Will add to this but that of Heinsius: Lipsius suavissimae quidem, sed
inimitabilis, and ut ipse judicabat, ne tentandae quidem aliis eloquentiae vir;
Lipsius a man of most sweet, and yet of unimitable Eloquence, and as he himself
did judge, not to be aspired unto by any others. And therefore it was well said
by Gaulterus, That he was Major omni invidia, Above all Envy.

Janus Gruterus.
JAnus Gruterus, an excellent Grammarian and Critic is commended by Caspar
Barthius for his skill in correcting what in any learned Author may be amiss:
Vir (says he) emendandi prudentissimus, ac perspicacissimus: Dempster extolls
him for a Critic of incomparable reading, and Judgment, calling him Seculi sui
alterum Varronem, Another Varro of that age he lived in.

Barthius advances his prudence, Honesty, Learning, and Wit. Praestantissimus
Gruterus, vir intime bonus, prudens and super quam credibile, eruditus, and
acutus. But of all men Pareus bursts forth into a strange admiration of him.
Janus Gruterus (...), qui vir (...), criticorum hujus seculi, (...), cujus
scripta merum Nectar spirant and Ambrosiam. Janus Gruterus a Wonderment, which
man is an Eagle in the Clouds, the Alpha and Omega of the Critics of this Age,
whose Writings breath forth mere Nectar, and Ambrosia.

Caspar Barthius.
CAspar Barthius is called by one of the Learned, (...), and graced by Pareus
with this following Periphrasis: Clarissimum Germaniae lumen, and columen
nutantium literarum. The most clear light of Germany, and the very Prop of
staggering Learning.

One says of the Books he writ, that they are such, that we can scarce read
the Indexes of them without astonishmment, much less the Books themselves.
Another thus Characters him.

Varro alter, si quisquam, merito dicendus, qui tam multa legit, ut aliquid ei
scribere vacare, miremur, tam multa scribit, quam vix quenquam legere posse
credamus. Worthy to be called another Varro, if any man may be so named, who
reads so many things, that we may wonder he had time to write, writes so many
things, as that we may think no man able to read them.

I Will end all with that Hyberbolicall Eulogy given him, by one that Comments
upon Musaeus.

(...). The all-seeing Eye of the Graces. S^A PTOPO^N: OR, THE ORATORS. In
their right SHAPES.
Antiphon.
ANtiphon an Orator of Athens, was the first that did write an Oration, and
delivered Precepts concerning it, whereupon he is styled by Suidas, the most
ancient of the Orators, of whom Cicero says in his Brutus, That no man ever
went beyond him in pleading of Causes of life, and death: as it appeared, when
he pleaded his own Case.

No marvel therefore, if the foresaid Suidas calls him Nestor, and after
Gorgius the Prince of Orators: And Philostratus who writ the Lives of the
Sophists, gives him also the same Character, and withal inserts the reason,
Because he was able to persuade, in whatsoever he proposed.

He used to sell his Pleadings at a very high rate, so that he became thereby
wondrous wealthy, he was Contemporary with Socrates, with whom he had frequent
Conferences: Zenophon relates one, that he had with that Philosopher, he
studied also Poetry, and professed that the had an Art thereby to drive away all
sadness.

Plutarch tells us that he lived in an hired House near the Forum, where he
published by Pen and Paper, that he could cure all griefs, so that when any
made their addresses to him, and related the causes of their sorrows, he very
sweetly allayed them. I read not who was his Master, but Plutarch acquaints us,
that he was (...), His own Instructor.

I Will but add a word from Thuoidides which concers him, (...), second to none
of his time, (...). And one that was most excellent both for Invention and
Elocution. Suidas says, that he was (...), The Master of this Thucidides.

Gorgias.
GOrgias was a Rhetor of Scicily, the Disciple of Empedocles, and the Master of
Isocrates, and other Orators, as Cicero has recorded, of whom Philostratus
has said this, That as soon as he came forth into the Athenian Forum, he was
wont to say continually, Propound to me what you please, and I will forthwith
speak copiously to it, vanting unto them, that he knew all things, and could
discourse excellently well on every Subject. Whence says the same Author, it
was Proverbiall, Gorgias his Eloquence,

Caelius Rhodiginus informs us, that his Oratory was had in so great esteem
amongst the Athenians, that they would call those days wherein he was to
plead, (...), and his Orations (...); He gained so much Wealth by his
Rhetoric, that of all the Orators which ever were, he was the first that
placed a Statue of beaten Gold within the Temple of Apollo Delphicus, whereupon
Plato meeting him returning from Delphos, said unto him, Behold the fair and
golden Gorgias: You may read more of that Statue in Pliny.

So sweet was this man's Eloquence, that it could detain and chain fast to his
Society, those two famous young men, Critias and Alcibiades, as also the most
excellent Thucidides, and Pericles, even then when they were both aged.

Isocrates.
ISocrates the Son of Theodorus a Rhetor of Athens, and Disciple of Gorgias,
coaetaneous with Plato, whom of all the Orators (he himself could say) That he
only admired: he was defective in his pronunciation, and therefore came not
into the Forum to plead causes; yet he reconciled Philip by his Letters to the
Athenians, and in his excellent Panegyric he stirred up the Greeks against
Asia, and incited also the Rhetorician Gorgias to do the like.

Cicero calls him Patrem eloquentiae, The Father of Eloquence, Et singularem
doctorem, and a singular good Doctor. Lipsius, Oratorem militum. Nay Tully
speaking of him comparatively to other Orators, as he commends the subtilety
of Lysias, the acuteness of Hiperides, the sound of Eschines, the force of
Demosthenes, so he praises the sweetness of Isocrates.

Philostrates calls him the Athenian Syrene, telling us that the Siren was
placed on his Sepulcher as it were singing: In the Greek Anthology he is named
(...), The light of Rhetoric. The Roman Orator compares his School to the
Trojan Horse, out of which most eminent Rhetoricians came forth.

Quintilian admireth him both for his speaking, and teaching; whose words are
these:

Clarissimus ille praeceptor Isocrates, quem non magis libri been dixisse, quam
discipuli been docuisse testantur: That most excellent Schoolmaster Isocrates,
whom his Books do not more testify to have spoken well, then his Scholars to
have taught well: his Writings were so precious, that Pliny says, He sold one
only Oration for twenty Talents.

Demosthenes.
DEmosthenes a Citizen of Athens, and the Son of a Cutler, who, although he was
left by his Father somewhat wealthy, yet being cheated through the dishonesty
of his Guardians, he became so poor, that he had not wherewithal to satisfy
his Schoolmasters: however at length by his great Industry and pains, he
attained to such a perfection in Oratory, that he became the only Maintainer
of the Liberties of Greece, making King Philip odious by his Orations, for his
endeavoring the infringement of them.

Isodorus Pelusiota calls him (...), The head of all Greece: and another eminent
Author joining him with Aristides and Thucidides, stils them, Tria sydera
Rhetorices, The three Stars of Rhetoric.

In the Greek Anthology, he is honored with this following Character:

(...): The eloquent Trumpet of well sounding Oratory, a wise Father. Suidas
tells us, that Salust had by heart all his Orations, and that Nonnus had also
read him over no less then six times.

Cicero in his Brutus gives him this Eulogy: Oratorem plane perfectum, and cui
nihil admodum desit, Demosthenem facile dixeris. And again, in his Book de
Oratore; Quo ne Athenas quidem ipsas magis credo fuisse Atticas. Then whom I
believe Athens it self was not more Athenian. Quintilian expresses him with
this Title. Lex orandi; to all this, I will but add that of of the Satyrist,
Quem mirabuntur Athenae
Torrentem, and pleni moderantem Fraena theatri.


Eschines.
ESchines of Athens was first (as Suidas relates) a Stage Player, then a
Scribe, and afterward an Orator: he was Demostenis aemulus, but overcome by
him in that Cause De Corona. Cicero does very highly extol him, Nihil illo
oratore arbitror cogitari posse divinius. Indeed he was the first of Orators,
that was said to speak Divinely, because what he delivered was without
premeditation, as though he had been inspired by some heavenly Deity.

Wherefore Philostratus says of him, that his Eloquence was such, that none
could imitate it; and hence it was, that his very Enemy Demosthenes (as it is
in Vossius) would style him, (...).

Agellius calls him, Acerrimum prudentissimumque oratorum, qui apud conciones
Atheniensium floruerunt. The most sharp and prudent of the Orators, which
flourisht in the Athenian Forum.

This man in a weighty Cause corrupted the Judges, for which Delinquency he was
cast into Prison, where by a Draught of Poison he made himself away; he was by
the way of jeer called by Demostenes, (...), A Corrupter of Letters. Dionysius
makes mention of seven more of this very Name.

Lysias.
LYsias the Son of Cephalus, the Syracusane, was one of the ten Orators born at
Athens, whither his Father had been transported, styled by Marcus Cicero,
Venustissimus scriptor, ac politissimus, A most gracious and polite writer, of
whom in his Brutus also, he gives a most glorious Character, preferring none
before him, but that same Paragon of Greece, Demosthenes.

Neither is Dyonisius any way behind that Orator in commending him, who says
this to his immortal praise, that he obscured the glory of all those Orators,
which either were before him, or Contemporary with him; so that thereupon, he
styles him the very Rule, or Archetype of the Athenian Language then used.

When he was a Boy, he went to the Colony of Thusios, where he continued,
until he was seven and forty years of age: and then returned a most excellent
Orator.

Quintilian speaks thus of him, Lysias subtilis atque elegans, and quo nihil,
si oratori satis sit docere, quaeras perfectius; nihil enim est inane, nihil
arcessitum, puro tamen fonti, quam magno flumini propior: Lysias is subtle,
and elegant, then whom (if it be enough for an Orator to teach) you can require
nothing more perfect, for there is not any thing vain, nor any thing borrowed,
being nearer to the pure Fountain, then the great, and wide Stream.

I Will let him go with this Character from Dyonisius (...), None more diligent,
and more gracious then Lysias.

Demades.
DDemades whom Suidas styles (...), Crafty and fortunate, of a Mariner, and
Porter, became an Orator of Athens, he lived about the times of Philip, and
Alexander, Kings of Macedon; he writ, says Suidas, (...) which Olympias was
the Wife of Philip, and Mother of great Alexander.

He waxed exceeding rich, and Potent, and desired nothing more then the favor
of the Macedonians, and especially of Antipater: He was much addicted to
Luxury, so that he consumed most of his Wealth upon his Belly; whence it was
Antipaters sc^ff, Nihil ei, sicuti and coesis victimis, praeter linguam, and
ventrem superesse. That there was naught more remaining to him, then what was
wont to the Sacrifices, even the Tongue, and the Belly.

Cicero reports, that he wrote nothing; but Suidas mentions somewhat that he
should write, (...). Besides what he might dedicate to Olympias.

Plutarch in the life of Demosthenes does inform us, That Theophrastus being
once asked the question, What kind of Orator was Demosthenes? his Answer was,
Worthy of this City. And then being demanded, what a one was this Demades, he
replied, Supra urbem, Above the City.

He was an extreme factious, and seditious man, never well, but when he was in
the fire of Contention. However excusing himself one day as to that matter, he
acknowledged, that he had oftentimes spoken words to his own particular
damage, but never any that were injurious to the Commonwealth. Suidas says,
(...). That he everted Judgments, and took away all Oratory Contentions. He
dyed under Antipater.

Marcus Tull. Cicero.
MArcus Tull. Cicero whose Father was a Roman Knight, passed through all the
Honors and Dignities of that excellent Republike; being one of the Consuls,
when Catiline broke out into Rebellion, he soon by his vigilance and prudence
quieted that Commotion. In his old Age, he was first proscribed by Marcus
Antonius, and afterward murdered, which caused that serious Apostrophe from
Vellius Paculus to the said Antony, which I shall here insert.

Rapuisti tu Marco Cicerone lucem sollicitam, and aetatem senilem, and vitam
miseriorem te principe, quam sub te triumviro mortem. Famam vero, gloriamque
factorum, atque dictorum, adeo non abstulisti, ut auxeris, vivit, vivetq, per
omnium seculorum memoriam, dumque hoc vel forte, vel providentia, vel utcunq
constitutum rerum naturae corpus, quod ille poene solus Romanorum animo vidit,
ingenio complexus est, eloquentia illuminavit, manebit incolume, comitem aevi
sui, laudem trabet, omnisque posteritas illius in te scripta mirabitur, tuum in
eum factum execrabitur, citiusque in mundo genus hominum, quam hujus nomen
cadet.

Thou have snatched from Marcus Cicero a sollicitious light, and old age, and a
life more miserable under thee Prince, then death under thee Triumvir. The fame
and glory of his deeds, thou art so far from taking away, that thou have
augmented them; He lives, and shall live through the memory of all ages, and
whilst this Universe, or body of natural things, constituted either by
casualty, or by providence, or any other way (which he only of all the Romans
apprehended in his mind, comprehended with his wit, illuminated with his
wisdom) shall remain in safety, his praise shall bear it company, and all
posterity shall admire his Writings, against thee, and curse thy bloody deed
against him, and mankind shall sooner cease to be in the World then his Name
shall perish.

Its reported of Molon this Orators Master, (as it is affirmed by Aurelius
Victor) that he wept very soar, because he did as it were foresee, that his
Scholar being a Roman, should deprive Greece of her Renown for Eloquence; Its
the forementioned Paterculus his Observation of him, Quod omnia sua incrementa
sibi debuit, vir ut vita clarus, ita ingenio maximus, qui effecit, ne quorum
arma viceramus, eorum ingenio vinceremur. That he owed all his proficiency
only to himself, a man as eminent in life, so transcendent for wit, who indeed
effected, that we were not overcome by their wit, whose Arms we had conquered.

Seneca the Rhetorician speaks to the same purpose:

Quicquid Romana facundia habet, quod insolenti Graeciae aut opponat, aut
praeferat, circa Ciceronem floruit: Whatsoever the Roman Eloquence has, which
it may oppose, or prefer to insolent Greece, it all flourished in Cicero. And
again says the same Author, Illud Ingenium solum populus Romanus par Imperio
suo habuit. The People of Rome had that only wit equal unto their Empire.

Quintdian tells us, that he attained to the force of Demosthenes, the
copiousness of Plato, and the sweetness of Isocrates: well might Symmachus then
call it Tullianam Opulentiam.

Marcus Seneca.
MArcus Seneca the Rhetorician, was the Father of Lucius the Philosopher, and
vulgarly called by the name of Declamator, although (as Justus Lipsius says)
Those Declamations were not of his own Composure, but only were digested,
methodized, and set in order by him; wherein (says that learned Grammarian)
Come ac amaenum ingenium suum satis ostendit, He sufficiently displayed his
neat and pleasant wit.

This same Lipsius says further, That that work of his is very profitable for
Eloquence, because he brings into one body thereby (as it were) the Members of
all other Orators: And again, comparing him with his Son, he thus speaks of
him, Vnice me in filio sapientia delectat, in patre comitas, lepos and Facundia
quaedam simplex: In the Son, Wisdom is the thing that only affects me, In the
Father Comity, Pleasantness, and a certain naked Eloquence.

I Will add but that of Andreas Scottus, Nihil in lingua latina cum a Cicerone,
Fabioque discesseris, scriptum purius, aut elegantius. If you will but except
Cicero, and Quintilian, there is nothing written in the Latin Tongue more
purely, and more elegantly.

Petronius Arbiter.
PEtronius Arbiter was a Knight of Rome, and very intimate and familiar with
the Emperor Nero, called thereupon Barthius, Arbiter noctium voluptatumque
Neronis, Pandar unto Neroes Nightly pleasure: for to this lascivious Writer,
the Tyrant owed all his Sports, and Pastimes, and therefore was delighted with
no man's company, as he was with his.

Tacitus speaking of this bloody Prince, says this of him, Quod nihil amaenum
and molle affluentia putavit, nisi quod ei Petronius approbavisset. That he
accounted nothing sweet, and soft, and pleasant, but what Petronius had
approved of. It seems then that this Petronius had the skill to make Provision
of such Dainties, as would be suitable to his lustful Appetite: and this
appears by those common Characters which several Authors have bestowed upon
him.

Turnebus calls him, Obscenum and lascivum scriptorem, An obscene and
lascivious Writer. Et quod venustatem orationis suae spurcissimis inquinavit
amoribus, And that he defiled the Elegancy of his Oration with his most filthy
Loves.

Indeed his Latin is of the sweetest strain, and therefore deservedly styled,
Vernulae and latinae urbanitatis purissimus fons, The purest Fountain of the
Roman Language. What says Lipsius of him? Vidistine quidquam venustius,
argutius post natas Musas? Have thou seen any thing since the Muses were in the
World, more sweet, and witty? And it is a pretty expression of the same
Critick's; Fragmenta ejus purissimae impuritatis. His Fragments are of a most
pure impurity.

Dempster also does express him to the life in this following Character.

Candidus, Tersus, suavis, in omnibus mirandus, modo absit obscoenitas. Candid,
fair, sweet, admirable in all things, were but his obsceaness wanting.

Hermogenes.
HErmogenes of Tarsus, surnamed Xyster, wrote a Book of Rhetoric when he was
but of the Age of eighteen; so that his Fame spread so far and wide, that it
came to the Ears of the Emperor Antoninus, whose Imperial Majesty did
condescend and stoop so low, as to receive Instructions in that Art of
Eloquence from him so young: as also did the grave Philosopher Musonius.

But when he had arrived at the four and twentieth year of his Age, he was
deprived of his Wits, loosing all his Eloquence, without any visible cause of
so sudden, and so sad a change. This made Antiochus the Sophist (as it is in
the learned Suidas) to play upon him with this following Jeere.

(...).

Hermogenes which was amongst the Boys as an aged man, became at length
amongst the aged men a Boy.

Vossius alluding to his Name calls him, Mercury, si nomen spectes, patrem
merito voces ipsum eloquentiae Mercurium. If you consider and regard his Name,
you may very well call him the Father of Eloquence Mercurius.

Quintilianus.
QVintilianus by nation a Spaniard, called by an eminent Critic, Romanae
eloquentiae censor, and oratorum Coryphaeus, accompanied the Emperor Galba
unto Rome, where he was afterward made Tutor to the Nephews of Caesar Domitian.

Angelus Politianus says, and that out of Hierome, Quod primus omnium Romae
publicum juventutis gymnasium instituit, and e fisco eximium stipendium
accepit. That he was the first which taught a public Freeschool at Rome, and
upon that account received a large Stipend from the public Exchequer.

Trebellius Pollio says of him, That he was the acutest, and wittiest
Declamator within the whole Roman Empire, and that the reading bu^ of one of
his Chapters will sufficiently declare it: no wonder therefore if Sidonius
styles it, Acrimoniam Quintiliani, The Acrimony of Quintilian: and Barthius,
Omnium qui unquam scripserunt auctorum elegantissimum, The most elegant of all
Authors that ever writ.

Another Characterizeth him thus: Criticorum omnium (...), The most Critical
of all Critics. And Dempster gives him th^se two ensuing Periphrases: Orator
eximius, ac necessarius, Optimusque dicendi Artifex, A famous and necessary
Orator, and the best Master of Language. Witty Martial Commemorates him in one
of his acute Epigrams.

Quintiliane vagae moderator sum Juventae,
Gloria Romanae Quintiliane Togae.
He is also taken notice of by that same admirable Satyrist Junius Juvenal.

Lucianus Samosatensis.
LVcianus Samosatensis lived in the Reign of Trajan, he was in the beginning a
Professor of the Christian Faith, but in the end he Apostatized and fell to
disparaging, disgracing, and reviling of it, thereby proving a Blasphemer of
that glorious Profession, whereof he had been once, as it were a noble Champion.

Suidas says that he was at length torn in pieces by fierce and greedy Dogs,
a very just Judgment from Heaven upon him, and a righteous reward to his base
Apostasy. He was surnamed Blasphemus, or Dysphemus, because he would frequently
deride the Oracles of God, and make but a mock of the true Religion.

Hence it is that Barthius styles him, Deorum hominumque irrisorem, A derider
both of Gods and men; and says Lactantius, Lucianus, Qui Diis and hominibus
non pepercit. Lucian who spared neither God nor man. Eunapius tells us, That he
was altogether composed for merriment. (...). A man as it were made for to
provoke Laughter.

Nay, he himself who best of all knew his own natural temper, confesses in
his Pseudologista, that he was (...): Incontinent of laughing.

I Will but ad that, which Caspar Barthius has said of all his Writings. De
philosophia hujus scriptoris dicere ausim n^mini ad nos usque fuisse
perspectam, and cognitam, neque impiam esse, nisi quatenus veritati sese
opponit Christianae, and non paulo altius oculos in rerum divinarum
considerationem immittere, quam vulgo censetur.

Concerning the Philosophy of this Writer, I dare affirm that it was never well
apprehended and known by any, even to our very selves; Neither is it impious,
but where it opposes Christianity, and that it looks higher into the
consideration of divine things, then is commonly imagined by the Vulgar.

Aelianus.
AeLianus born at Praeneste a Town in Italy, was the Auditor of Pausanias: he
taught Rhetoric at Rome, soon after the death of the Emperor Adrian. Suidas
says, That for the sweetness of his Speech he was called (...). He writ De
animalibus, de varia Historia, De Re Militari, all which are come safe into our
hands, we find this Character given him by Eunapius, That he wrote as Athenian
like, as the very Athenians themselves, a man most praiseworthy for his purity
in the Greek Tongue.

Gesner speaking as to his History of living Creatures, says thus of it:

In Aeleani de Animalibus libris Temperamentum quoddam, and Harmonia utriusque
philosophiae, moralis (inquam) and naturalis. In Aelian's Books of living
Creatures, there is I say, a certain Temperament and Harmony of either
Philosophy, moral and natural.

And says another occasionally, wherewith I shall let him pass;

In ejus narrationibus, quid non egregium, non praestans, non Idoneum vel ad
cognoscendum, vel ad emitandum, fugiendumve? Quid non in eo tersum, elegans,
politum, and Atticum? In his Narrations, what is there, that is not egregious
and excellent? What not fit either to be known, or to imitate, or to be
declined? What is there, that is not neat, polite, elegant, and Attick.

Aristides Adrianensis.
ARistides Adrianensis an excellent Sophist, was much affected with
Contemplation, who not being naturally prompt to Oratory, yet through his
painful Industry, he attained to an incomparable strain of Elocution. When
Mark Antonine the Emperor was at Smyrna, where he had been for the space of
full three days ere this Orator would afford him his attendance; at length
coming to wait upon his princely Majesty, it was the Emperors first question,
Quare te sero vidimus? Why so late before we saw thee? And the Rhetors reply
was, Theorema O Rex nos occupabat, atqui men's aliquid considerans, ab eo quod
quaerit, suspensa esse non debet. We were O King taken up with a Theoreme, but
the Mind being under meditation, must not be withdrawn from that it seeks.

Antonine being well pleased with this return, put this question also to him;
Quando audiam te? Whom the Orator thus answered, Hodie propone, and cras
audies; (...).

Propound to day, and you shall hear to Morrow, for we are not of those, that
vomit forth things, but of them, that do all things accurately.

Philostratus calls him the Builder of Smyrna, for that City being destroyed by
a most fearful Earthquake, this Aristides wrote a lamentable Letter to the
Emperor, such a Letter, as made him weep, and it so far prevailed with him,
that in the end he condescended to rebuild it.

He is highly applauded by one that set forth his Orations, and that in these
ensuing words; Certe si quid judicare possum, videor mihi in uno hoc oratore
and subtilitatem Thucididis, and suavitatem Herodoti, and vim denique (...)
Demosthenis, accuratissime expressas deprehendere. Truly, if I am able to
judge, I seem most accurately to meet within this one Orator, the subtility of
Thucidides, and the sweetness of Herodotus, and the force and gravity of
Demosthenes.

Quintus Aurelius Symmachus.
QVintus Aurelius Symmachus was a man of Cosular degree, and Prefect of the
City. He is much commmended by Marcellinus for his Learning, and modesty, and
thus Characterized by Boethius, Illud pretiofissimum generis humani decus, vir
totus ex sapientia ac virtutibus factus: That most precious Ornament of
Mankind, altogether composed of Wisdom and the Virtues: As also thus by
Prosper; Mirabili eloquie and scientia praeditus, Endued with wonderful
knowledge, and Eloqution. Ausonius writing an Epistle to him, gives him therein
these following Commendations: Haud quisquam ita nitet, ut comparatus tibi non
sordeat; Quis ita Aesopi venustatem, Quis sophisticas Socratis conclusiones,
Quis Enthymemata Demosthenis, aut opulentiam Tullianam aut proprietatem nostri
Maronis accedat? Quis ita affectet singula, ut tu imples omnia? Quid enim
aliudes, quam ex omni bonarum artium ingenio collecta perfectio? Who comes so
near the Grace of Aesop? who the sophistical conclusions of Socrates? Who the
Enthymem^ of Demosthenes? Or the Opulency of Cicero? Or the propriety of our
Maro? Who so affects each as thou fillest all? For what art thou else but
collect Perfection from the Wit of all good Arts?

I Will but add a Note from Dempster: In Epistolis eloquens, in Relatione
vehemens. Eloquent in his Epistles, in his Relation vehement.

APAKT'P POITO^N OR, THE POETS In their lively PICTURES.

LONDON, Printed by E.C. for Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

TO HIS HONORED FRIEND, JOHN HOLMDEN Of Limsfield in the County of Surrey,
ESQUIRE.
Ingenious SIR,
AND I hope as kind, otherwise I must expect to meet with Frowns, for so
slender has my performance been, that if there be such a Grace, as Modesty, I
may blush to own it. However a courteous Eye may pass over all my slips with a
generous Indulgence; Indeed this is the presage, to which I may impute all my
boldness, and if I am deceived, its my too forward praeconception of your
Candor has beguiled me: And yet I am brief enough, and therefore guilty of the
fewer Faults; had I been more prolix, I might have tired out the greatest
Patience, but seeing you are secured from that, I hope it will be one Grain
more in the Scale to make your Lenity the heavier. If I shall attain this
undeserved Favor, I shall have my wish, and be engaged to approve my self,

SIR, Yours to all Civilities, Edward Larkin.

THE NAMES Of the POETS As they are handled in Order.
ORpheus, Alcaeus, Sappho, Musaeus, Homerus, Hesiodus, Pindarus, Anacreon,
Theognis, Theocritus, Aratus, Lycophron, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides,
Menander, Aristophanes, Plautus, Terentius, Callimachus, Afranius, Lucilius,
Accius, Ennius, Lucretius, Catullus, Virgilius, Corn. Gallus, Horatius,
Ovidius, Manilius, Tibullus, Propertius, Gratius, Seneca, Persius, Pedo Albin.
Pomponius 2us. Arunt. Stella, Juvenalis, Valerius Flac. Silius Italic. Lucanus,
Martialis, Statius, Ausonius, Oppianus, Sidonius, Prudentius, Claudianus,
Pontius Paul. Dracontius,
APAKT'P POITO^N OR, THE POETS In their lively PICTURES.
Orpheus.
ORpheus an excellent Musician and Poet, was a Thracian by Birth the Son of
Oeagrus, and the Muse Calliope, much reverenced by the Odrysae, a Mountainous
and wild People, their manners answering to the Climate of their Country, who
notwithstanding their Native Ferity, danced after his wel-tuned Instrument,
nay, the very senseless Trees are reported to have skipt, whenever his Harp
sounded, whereunto the Poet Horace has alluded.

Unde vocalem temere insecutae
Orphea sylvae,
Artemat erna rapidos morantem
Fluminum lapsus, celeresque ventos
Blandum and auritas fidebus canoris
ducere quercus.
Suidas says of him, that he was (...), A wise man, and instructed in many
Secrets. He was torn in pieces by the raving Maenades, near the River Hebrus,
whose rent and dispersed Members the Muses gathered up and buried. His Harp
upon his death was feigned to have been taken up into Heaven.

Suidas in (...) affirms, (...). That he was the first Inventor of the
Mysteries of the Greeks, so does also Tertullian in Apologetico.

Alcaeus.
ALcaeus of Mitylene a Lyrick Poet, equal with that Pittacus, which was one of
the seven wise men; amongst other of his Works, wrote a Book called Stasiotica,
wherein he sharply reproved Pittacus, Myrsilus, Meglagyrus, Cleanthis, and
other Tyrants for oppressing their Native Country.

Stobaeus does recite two of his Verses concerning the dispraise of Poverty,
the same being also recorded by that learned Writer Athenaeus, Plutarch the
Philosopher in the life of Flaminius, does rehearse those Verses which this
Author has written in the dishonor of King Philip.

He was a most excellent Musician, and a great Warrior, preferring his strength
far before his Poetry. Athenaeus does describe him to have been a Lover of
Drink, wherein he would exceed without regard had either to the time of the
year, or the disposition of the Heavens.

And Barthius gives him this mark, Quod erat omnium post Anacreonta maxim
bibulus: That after Anacreon he was the greatest Tipler. Its said, that one
part of his Writings is worthy of a golden Harp, but in the other part, he
descends to his vain sports, and loves, being indeed fitter for matters of
greater weight and moment,

Sappho.
SAppho a Lyrick Poetress, was born about the forty second Olympiad; she wrote
Epigrams, Elegies, Iambicks, and nine Books of Lyrick Verses. Suidas says of
her, Quod (...), That she was the first Inventress of the Harp; she is cited
both by Athenaeus and Stobaeus. Plutarch in the life of Demetrius, makes
mention of a Book, that she should write of Loves.

Others say, That there was another Sappho, and a Poetress, which entirely
loved the young man Phaon; however the Latins do commend but one, who is by
Gyraldus styled Mascula for her Virile Studies, which Epithet is likewise given
her by Horatius, Temperat Archilochi musam pede mascula Sappho.

And she is called also Pulchra Fair, a^carminum pulchritudine, From the beauty
of her Poems. In the Greek Anthology they characterize he^ thus, (...): The
sweet Pierian Be. Whatsoever is extant of her composure, is printed in Greek
and Latin by Henricus Stephansis.

Musaeus.
MVsaeus a famous Poet, was the Disciple of Orpheus, if (as some say) not his
Son: he had that renowned Harp of his conferd upon him at his death, being for
his great skill in Music, thought worthy of it. He is the first that wrote of
the Genealogy of the Gods; so great was his esteem among his Countrymen, that
Tertullian says, they accounted of him as a God, Deus a suis habitus. There
goes a Poem under his authority and Name, called Leander and Hero, but learned
Casaubon has clearly discoverd, that he was never the Author of it.

Scaliger in his Poetices speaks thus of him: Arbitror ego Musaei stylum
long esse Homerico politiorem ^o comptiorem, Quod si Musaeus ea, quae Homerus
scripsit, scripsisset, long melius eum scripturum fuisse judicamus. I believe
that Musaeus his style is far more polite and neat, then Homers, so that if
Musaeus had written upon Homers Subject, in my Opinion and Judgment, he would
have written much better then he. Suidas says, that there were no less then
three of this Name, and all of them Poets.

Homerus.
HOmerus so named by the Ionians for his blindness for (...) in their Language
by the Figure Metathesis signifies blind; yet his proper Name was Melesigenes,
because he was born near the River Meletes: He is otherwise called Maeonides,
from his Parent Maeone, though some others would needs have him to be the Son
of Apollo, and the Muse Calliope: he was a Poet of that great Renown, that no
less then seven Cities strove to have the honor and glory both of his Birth
and Breeding. The Verses are very well known.

Septem urbes pugnant genus obsapientis Homeri;
Smyrna, Chios, Colophon, Ithace, Pylus, Argos, Athenae.
Neither only did these 7. lay claim unto him, but three times seven, if we
will give credit to the learned Plutarch, and Suidas, amongst which, Rome is
very urgent, that he may be accounted hers; Now the uncertainty hereof moved
Appion the Grammarian to invoke his Ghost to come forth from the dead, and to
declare the Country, that so the Controversy might be decided. He wrote in
twenty four Books the Wars of Troy, which he calls his Illias, and in as many
more the Travells of Ulysses, which he Names his Odysses. They were digested
into that Order, wherein we now have them, not by himself, but by other men,
and (as Suidas reports) chiefly by Pisistratus the Athenian Tyrant.

His Works were so admired by Arcesilaus, that he would not take his rest,
until he had read some portion of them. And again in the Morning, as soon as
he was risen, he would say, Se ad Amasium ire, That he was going to his Darling.

Alcibiades would strike that Schoolmaster in the Ear, whom he found without
the Books of this most renowned Author. Alexander the great King of Macedon,
having taken a rich Cabinet from Darius, whom he had overcome in Battle,
resolved, that it should serve to keep these famous Works in.

Elian tells us, That Plato at the beginning studied Poetry, and having
compiled certain Heroic Verses, he came to examine them by these noble
Treatises of Homer, and finding them to fall very short of this eminent Poeta
Art and Faculty, he forthwith tare them, and burnt them.

Dionysius Hali^arnasensis calls him (...). The top of all, whence every River,
Sea, and Fountain flows. No wonder therefore if the Painter Galaton feigned him
Vomiting, and all the other Poets like so many Dogs licking up what he had
spued out.

Cicero could say, Homero nemo similis, None like great Homer: And Velleius
Paterculus a most elegant and neat Historian, could give him a Character
somewhat suitable to his merit.

Clarissimum Homeri ingenium sine exemplo maximum, qui magnitudine operum, and
fulgore carminum solus appellaripoeta meruit, in quo, hoc maximum est, quod
neque ante illum, quem ille imitaretur, neque post illum, qui eum imitari
possit, inventus est.

The most bright and matchless Wit of Homer, who both for the greatness of his
Works, and the clearness of his Verses did alone deserve the Name of Poet, in
whom this is most glorious, That there was neither any one before him, for him
to imitate, nor any found after him, that could imitate him. I meet with his
Epitaph in Suidas, which is as follows.

(...).
(...).
He flourished about 160 years before Rome, the Mistress of the World, was
sounded.

Hesiodus
HEsiodus was called Cumaeus from his Native Soil, and Ascreus from the place
of his Education, he lived an hundred years after Homer, so says Porphyrius,
and some others, as it is in Suidas. Plutarch writes of him, That being a Boy,
and keeping his Fathers Flocks and Herds, he was beloved of the Muses, who
gave him Laurel to eat, whereupon he commenced a most excellent Poet; and a^
Homer was called Poeta Lacedaemoniorum, The Poet of the Lacedaemonians; so this
Hesiod was styled Poeta Helotarum, The Poet of the Helots. The one teaching the
way of Warfare, the other of Tillage.

The Philosopher Jeronymus reports, That Pythagoras descending into Hell, saw
the Soul of this Hesiod fastened to a brazen Pillar, and there making a most
doleful, and dreadful noise: as also the Ghost of Homer compast about with
Serpents, and all for this cause, because they uttered in their Books false
things of the Gods.

Pliny, and Columella affirm, that this Poet was the first man that wrote of
Agriculture: The Critics have afforded him many worthy Encomiums. Hesiodi
opuscula, (says Barthius) Quantus Thesaurus Infucatae sunt sapientiae? The
Works of Hesiod, how great a Treasury are they of untainted and unadulterated
Wisdom? And for his Style, Heinsius says of it, That it is Mitis, facilis, ac
amaenus, Mild, facile, and pleasant.

Amongst the Tragaedians he is compared to Euripides, and amongst the Lyricks
unto Sappho, and amongst the Orators unto Isocrates.

Paterculus thus Characters this Poet; Hesiodus vir perelegantis ingenii, and
molissima dulcedine carminum memorabilis, otii quietisque cupidissimus, ut
Homero tempore, ita operis autoritate pr^ximus.

Hesiod for the clearness of his Wit, and the dainty smoothness of his Verse,
is worthy of memory, a man infinitely desirous of rest and quiet, and as he was
in time, so also in esteem the next to Homer.

Suidas speaking of his death, says, that he was slain upon mistake, by the
two Brothers Antiphus, and Climenus, who in the Night thought they had been
avenged on him, who had been the Deflowrer of their Sister.

Pindarus.
PIndarus of Thebes, the Prince of the Grecian Lyricks, was Eschylus his
equal, he wrote in the Dorick Dialect, whom Horace for his Sentences, Figures,
and Expressions, calls unimitable, he being indeed a Poet so much abounding
with them.

When Alexander the Macedonian King made an assault upon the City Thebes, and
took it by storm: Curtius informs us, that he spared the Family of Pindar, for
the respect and reverence that he bare him. But Suidas is of opinion, that it
was another Pindar, the Son of Scopelinus, whom Alxeander so honored, though
the Cousin German of this Lyrick Poet.

Yet Plato styles this man (...), Most wise and divine: And Athenaeus
expresses him to be (...). In the Greek Anthologie he is termed (...). The
sweet singing Heliconian Swan. As other Muses were feigned to inspire other
Poets, so did Polyhymnia him.

I Will say no more but a word from Lipsius. Pindarus ex ore humano praefert
aliquid non humanum; Pindar out of an humane Mouth lets drop somewhat, that is
more then humane.

Anacreon.
ANacreon was a Poet of Ionia, whence he was called Ionum Gloria. He lived in
Favor with Polycrates the Samian Tyrant: Cicero says, that his Poem is
amatorious, and lascivious, as is also his life: He was much taken among others
with the beauty of the Boy Batillus, whereunto the Poet Horace alludeth in that
Verse of his; Non aliter Samio dicunt arsisse Batillo
Anacreonta Teium.


He flourisht in LII Olympiad. He was named Teius from the City he lived in,
which was called after that Name: Pliny writes, that he was strangled with the
stone of a Raysin. Scaliger thus praises him;

Hic excelluit adeo, ut ejus dictio quovis Indice arundinis succo dulcior mihi
videbatur. He so excelled, that his Speech seemed to me sweeter then the juice
of the Sugar-Cane. Dempster styles him, Lyricum suavissimum, The sweetest
Lyrick. Suidas says of him, that he wrote (...), Drunken Verses and Iambicks;
and all of them (...), in the Ionick Dialect.

Theognis.
THeognis was of Megara in Sicilia, and flourished about the LIX. Olympiad. He
wrote an Elogy upon those of the Syracusanes, that were preserved in the Siege,
dedicating it to one Cyrhus, whom he dearly loved: There was another of this
Name, which was a Tragic Poet, so cold in all his Works, that he was
proverbially called (...), Snow: But this Theognis as he has been discommended
by some, so he has been applauded by others.

Ammianus Marcellinus says, That he is both Poeta prudens, and vetus, An
ancient and wise Poet. And although Barthius could lay it to his charge, That
his Poem had neither Caput, nor Calcem, Head, nor Tail, yet Dempster affirms,
That he is Vel Isocrate Judice necessarius. A necessary Poet even in the
Judgment of Socrates. He begins his Work with the usual form of Invocation;
(...).

Theocritus.
THeocritus was a Poet of Syracuse, the Son of Symmichus and Philina, though
Suidas calls his Father by the Name of Praxagoras, he lived in the time of
Ptolemy the Son of Lagus; some would have him to be of Cous, and that he was
transported from thence in a Ship to Syracuse. He wrote Idylls, and that in the
Dorick Dialect, which Virgil afterward undertook to imitate.

Heinsius styles him, Bucolicorum principem, The Prince of Bucolicks,
preferring him on that account far before the renowned Maro: he was named
(...), as Homer was Poeta; of whom this is also Heinsius his Character.
Theocritus scriptor, cujus gratias, and Veneres nemo satis capit, Theocritus a
Writer, whose Graces, and sweetness none sufficiently comprehends.

Suidas joins this Poet with Moscus, and Bion, and says of them all, That
they were (...). The three Bucolick Poets.

Aratus.
ARatus called by Suidas (...), Solensis, from a Town of that name in Cilicia;
was an ancient Greek Poet, the Son of Athenodorus, instructed in Grammar by
Menecrates the Ephesian, and in Philosophy by Timon, and Menedemus: so Suidas.
Cicero testifies of him, that being ignorant of Astrology, yet he described
the Heavens and Planets in most eloquent and excellent Verses.

Quintilian thus commends him, Sufficit operi, cui se parem credidit, He
suffices for the Work whereunto he thought himself equal: Its Ovids Verse of
him; Cum sole, and luna semper Aratus erit.

Suidas says of his Phenomenon, (...). That the beginning of them is
admirable, and his aemulation Homericall. Cicero translated them when he was
but a young man. Suidas informs us also, that besides his Poetry, he wrote
(...), Epistles also in Prose.

Barthius applaudeth him for this, Quod de Deo locutus est divinitus, That he
spoke divinely of God, more then could be expected from one that was ignorant
of all heavenly truth: Saint Paul himself makes use of a saying of this Poets,
Act 17.28.

(...). For we are his Off spring. He was borne about the hundred and twenty
fourth Olympiad.

Lycophron.
LYcophron of Vbaea, Citizen of Chalcis, the Son of Aricles, though adopted, as
Suidas says, by Lycus of Rhegium, was both a Grammarian, and a Tragic Poet:
and (...). One of those seven which were called Pleiades. He wrote in all
twenty Tragedies, whose Names are recorded by Suidas: and besides those, a very
obscure Poem, named Alexandra, which the forementioned Grammarian styles (in
respect had to the obscurity of it) (...), A dark Poem.

Laertius tells us, That he was the Author of that Treatise Menedemus, so
called from the Philosopher, whom he does therein extol; of his death, the
Poet Naso in his Ibin, thus writes.

Utque cothurnatum periisse Lycophrona narrant,
Haereat in fibris fixa sagitta tuis.
He was very gracious with Ptlomeus Philadelphus; his Works were so dark and
obscure, that the Poet Statius makes it proverbiall of him, Carmina Battiadae,
tenebrasque Lycophronis atri, His Alexandra is set out by Meursius, from whose
hand it has received so much clearness, and light, that he who was before
called Lycophron, may be now named Glycophron.

Eschylus.
AeSchylus of Athens, according to the report of the Orator Quintilian, was the
first Composer of Tragedies. Suidas says, that he writ in all ninety, and
besides them some Elegies: his death was sudden, and strange, for fitting in
an open place, on purpose to decline that stroke, which by unhappy
prognostication threatened his ruin. It fell out, that being bare-headed, and
bald, an Eagle flying over him with a shellfish enclosed in his Talons, and
taking his Pate to be some stone, whereon it might crack the shell, to come at
the Meat, let it fall on the sudden, and brained him.

Its reported of him, that being well heated with Wine, he would then compose
his Tragedies, and consecrate them to Bacchus: Plutarch as he commends the
wisdom of Euripides, and the eloquence of Sophocles, so he does the sublimity
of this Aeschylus, all the commendation that he himself would give his Works,
was this, he would call them, The Crusts of Homers magnificent and sumpteous
Suppers.

He was a good Warrior, and as he did fight, so he did speak, wherefore
Heinsius says thus of him.

Sane ad tubam etiam scripsisse credas, adeo sublimis in oratione, ac grandis,
verbisque quibus utitur, ipsis prope par rebus, heroicam and audacem dictionem
effundit.

He wrote indeed with his Pen, as he fought with his Sword.

Sophocles.
SOphocles was an Athenian, the Son of Sophilus, borne in the seventy third
Olympiad, about seventeen years before the Learned Socrates: he was called
(...): The Be for the sweetness of his Expression; so says Suidas.

Its recorded, that his own Sons accused him in his old age for a witless man
before the Judge, whereupon the aged Father produced a Tragedy, which he had
lately formed, and then asked the Judge the question, Whether that seemed to be
the work of an Idiot? Wherefore the Judge commending him, and his Poem, rebuked
his Sons, and sent them away with shame.

Polemon the Athenian Philosopher, was so delighted with this man, and Homer,
that he would frequently say, they were both endued with equal wisdom,
calling Homer Heroical Sophocles, and Sophocles Tragical Homer.

Simonides the wise man, styled him (...). The Flower of the Poets. Suidas
says, that he wrote one hundred and three and twenty Tragedies: and in his
Contentions for the palm with other Poets, he obtained no less then four and
twenty Victories, the last whereof happening far beyond his expectation, he was
so transported with sudden joy, that he forthwith expired: he dyed about six
years after Euripides, and is preferred before him for the majesty of his
style, though short of him for number of Sentences. Suidas says, that besides
his Tragedies, (...). He wrote an Elegy, and Paeans, and also solute Prose.

Euripides.
EVripides was the Son of Mnesarchus and Clito, and had not, as some have
reported, a Seller of Herb^ for his Mother: Suidas vindicates him from the
disparagement of so mean a descent, asserting (...). That he was of noble
Birth, as Philochorus does demonstrate it. He was born on that very day,
wherein that huge and numerous Host of Xerxes was overthrown by the Athenians

At the first, he was a Painter, but afterward he became a most excellent
Tragedian. For Rhetoric he was the Scholar of Prodicus, and for Philosophy the
Auditor of the most learned Socrates; he had his Name from Euripus: for his
Austerity, they called him, (...), A Hater of Women: and yet Suidas affirms,
that he was a married man, and had two Wives, being divorced from the first for
her unchastity, neither did he find the second more loyal to his Bed: he
flourished in the Reign of Archelaus the King of Macedon. Suidas says, That he
was torn in pieces by ravenous and greedy Dogs, or rather in the Night by
barbarous and bloody Women: The Athenians grievously bemoaned his untimely and
sudden death, his Monument is all Greece: He was aged seventy five years, and
died in the ninety third Olympiad: he wrote (they say) seventy five Tragedies,
for every year he lived a Tragedy, though others will have the number of them
to be ninety two: however Suidas says, that there are but seventy seven
extant. He obtained five Victories, four in his life time, and one after his
death, his Brothers Son being the Actor of that Tragedy.

Heinsius gives him this good commendation, Omnium Oratorum non minus pater,
quam optimus Poeta. No less the Father of all Orators, then a most excellent
Poet.

Menander.
MEnander an ancient Comaedian of Athens, was solicited (as Pliny reports)
by solemn Ambassadors from the Kings of Egypt, and Macedon, to grace them
with his Society, craving it from him, by very bounteous and magnificent
proffers of honor and wealth.

This Poet wrote according to the Judgment of Suidas, an hundred and eight
Comedies, though others affirm no less then an hundred and eighty; They were
all translated into elegant Latin by Terentius, but the ill success of the
times prevented us of the enjoyment of them, they being all lost He writ also
Epistles to Ptolomeus the Son of Lagus King of Egypt, and some to his friend
Glycera; he flourished about the hundred and fifteenth Olympiad: Suidas calls
him (...) and besides he says of him, that he was (...). Very mad in his love
of Women. However Quintilian is very large in the setting out his praises.

Menander vel unus meo judicio diligenter lectus ad cuncta quae praecipimus
effingenda sufficiat, ita omnem vitae Imaginem expressit. Menander alone in my
Judgment well read, may suffice for all that we command to be done, for he has
very well expressed every kind of life. The same Author extolleth him both for
his copiousness of Invention, and for his vein of Eloquence, neither is
Plutarch less backward in his advancement.

Aristophanes.
ARistophanes a Comaedian, lived in the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad.
Suidas, speaking of his Birth, says thus of it; (...). Some affirm that his
extract was servile. The same Author reports him to have been (...). He was
called (...), because in his Comedy styled (...), he does satyrically traduce
Socrates, who indeed was by Oracle reputed the wisest of the World

Scaliger says, that this Poet is Cum risu mordax, Though merry, yet without
biting: Its reported, that Plato so admired him, that when Dyonisius the Tyrant
was desirous of the Athenian Language, he sent this man's Comedies unto him. And
Chrysostom was so taken both with his Eloquence, and vehemence in taxing, and
reproving the Vices of Women, that he would spend a great part of the day in
reading of him, and at Night going to his rest, he would put him under his
Pillow, and so sleep upon him, as Alexander the Great was wont to use Homer.

Quintilian joining this Comaedian with Aristarchus, calls them Poetarum
judices, The Judges of the Poets, and yet Athenaeus ^elleth us, that he was
ever in drink when he composed his Verses, as was also Alcaeus. The Athenians
so highly honored him, that they would have him, and none other to be supreme,
so says Aelian.

M. Acc. Plautus.
M. Acc. Plautus, named at the beginning Plotus (as Festus reports) A
planicie pedum, From the plainess of his feet, which the Vmbrians call Plotos,
was a most witty Comaedian, styled by Scaliger, Romanae linguae lex, The Law of
the Roman Tongue: and by Lipsius, Decima Musa, The tenth Muse: as also
Gratiarum hortus, The Garden of the Graces. He lived in those times at Rome,
wherein those eminent Romans, Publius Scipio, Fulvius Nobilior, and Marcus Cato
flourished. Horatius Flaccus testifies, that he imitated in his Plays those
Greek Authors, Demophilus, P^i^emon, and Epicarmus the Sicilian.

It was Varroes opinion, that if the Muses spoke in the Latin Tongue, they
then used the phrase of Plautus.

Meursius styles him, Omnium leporum patrem, The Father of all witty Conceits.
He was compeld to grind at a Mill, in regard of his extreme poverty, and when
he was tired by that painful and heavy work, then he would by way of
recreation compose Comedies, and sell them for his provision and sustenance.

Volcatius Sedigitus writing of the Comaedians, and setting every one in his
place and order, prefers this Plautus before all others, even next unto
Caecilius: Jerome takes special notice of this Author, Haec est Plautina
elegantia, hic lepos Atticus, and musarum, ut dicunt, eloquio comparandus. This
is Plautus his elegancy, this is the Athenian Wit, and (as they say) comparable
to the elocution of the Muses. He died few years after Quintus Ennius in the
hundred forty fifth Olympiad: what a great loss was sustained by his death, he
himself witnesses by these Verses, which he composed before his death.

Postquam est morte captus Plautus,
Comaedia luget, Scena est deserta.
Deinde risus, ludus, jocusque and numeri
Innumeri simul omnes collacrymarunt.
There were imputed to this Poets composure an hundred and thirty Comedies, but
Laelius a most learned Writer will have but twenty five acknowledged to be his,
many being composed by one Plautius, whereupon the mistake might be grounded in
respect of the vicinity of their Names.

Publius Terentius.
PVblius Terentius was by Birth a Carthaginian, but brought to Rome in his
tender years, where he was ingenuously trained up, and educated both in good
Literature, and Manners by Terentius Lucanus; being naturally furnished with a
quick Wit, and ripe Judgment, he was taken into Fellowship by those two noble
Romans Laelius, and Scipio, whose assistance he had (as Cicero writes) in the
composure of his most neat and elegant Plays. And the learned Varro is also of
the same judgment.

This Comaedian was an Imitator of Menander, whereof Justus Lipsius calls him
Menandri Imaginem, The Image of Menander: and so the Verses of Caius Caesar do
Decypher him.

Tu quoque, tu in summis o dimidiate Menander
Poneris, and merito puri sermonis Amator.
Africanus that great Comaedian prefers him before all other Comic Poets.

Terentio non similem dices quempiam. Heinsius says, that his Wit is
incredible, and that scarcely one in one hundred understands him. Caecilius,
Afranius, and he, lived all about the same age. Dulces latini leporis facetiae
per Caecilium, Terentiumque and Afranium sub pari aetate nituerunt. The dainty
witty Conceits of the Latin Tongue about the same age were by Caecilius,
Terentius, and Afranius rendered worthy of an high esteem. So Paterculus.

Horatius Flaccus the best Censurer of the old Poets, admires the Gravity of
Caecilius, and the art of this Terence, wherein he wonderfully excelled; and of
the same judgment was also Quintilian, as the Epigrammatist Ausonius compares
Virgil with Homer, so he does Terence with Menander, attributing to him the
very elegancy of the Latin Tongue.

Tu quoque qui Latium lecto sermon Terenti
Comis, and astricto percurris pulpita socco.
Concerning his death Authors vary, some say, that he died in Arabia, others,
and amongst them the Poet Ausonius, do affirm, that the loss of his Plays
(which happened through Shipwreck) broke his heart, so that he died for very
grief.

Callimachus.
CAllimachus the Son of Battus, and Mesaime was an Elegiographe^ of Cyrene, of
whom Suidas says, That his industry and diligence was so wonderful, that he
could compose Poems in any kind of Verse, and also write most excellent smooth
Prose. The said Author moreover affirms, that he compiled no less then eight
hundred Books: he lived in the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus: Quintilian
styles him, Elegiae principem, and says Ovid of him.

Battiades toto semper cantabitur orb;
Quamvis ingenio non valet, art valet.
He wrote a notable Work, De sucrorum origin, which he calls (...), The
argument whereof is much after that of Ovid, de Fastis. Martial commemoratos
him in his tenth Book, in an Epigram to his friend Mamurra.

Legas Aetia Callimachi. Before he came to converse with Ptolomy, he taught
Grammar at Eleusine a Village of Alexandria. He married the Daughter of
Euphrates a Syracusan, his sisters son was of his Name, and an heroic Poet,
mentioned by Suidas.

Lucius Afranius.
LVcius Afranius, called by some Marcus Afranius was a Comicall Poet and
flourished in Rome at that time, when Terence, and Caecilius were somewhat
aged. Cicero in his Brutus styles him Hominem perargutum, in Fabulis etiam
disertum: A witty man, and eloquent in all his Comedies. He came near in his
imitation to Menander, according to that of the Poet Horatius.

Dicitur Afrani toga convenisse Menandro. Indeed Macrobius affirms, that he
borrowed much from that old Comaedian, which the Poet himself very ingenuously
acknowledges, as is to be seen in that answer of his, to his Obtrectors.

Fateor, sumpsi non a Menandro modo,
Sed ut quisque habuit, quod conveniret mihi,
Quod me non posse melius facere credidi.
Quintilian commends his Elegancy, but withal takes special notice of his
filthy loves, wherewith he did deprave and corrupt his Arguments.

He is remembered by that neat Epigrammatist Ausonius.

Qui toga facundi scenis agitavit Afrani. And he is mentioned likewise together
with Caelicius and Terentius, by Velleius Paterculus, ut supra. Aulus Gellius
highly honors this Poet, and chiefly commends that Verse of his, wherein he
thus speaks of Wisdom.

Usus me genuit, matter peperit memoria,
Sophiam me Graii vocant, vos sapientiam.
The Grammarians do frequently make mention of him, but of his death the
Ancients write not.

Caius Lucilius.
Caius Lucilius called by Juvenal, Alumnus Aruncae: was born of good Parentage,
being Uncle (as some of the Grammarians have written) to Cneius Pompeius.
Petrus Crinitus thus extolls him. Illud imprimis manifestum est, fuisse
Lucilium in genio acerrimo, and in scribendis versibus festivo, and urbano.

He was very intimate and familiar with Quintus Philocomus, who was one chief
Instrument of the publication of the Works of this Satyrist, so records
Suetonius.

He was the first Poet that wrote Satyrs, being an Italian by Birth. He
scourges the Vices of those that were his Countrymen, by name Rutilius, Carbo,
Tubulus, and many others whose wickednesses his Ingenuity could not bear with.

Horace fastneth this reproach upon him, that he should flow muddily.

At dixi fluere hunc lutulentum. And Scaliger says, Illum ne fluere quidem:
that he flows not at all; But Juvenal well observing his Acrimony, thus
describes him.

Ense velut stricto quoties Lucilius ardens
Infremuit, rubet auditor, cui frigida men's est
Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordia culpa,
Inde Irae, and lacrymae.
The Emperor Adrian preferred this Lucilius before all the Poets that had written
Satyrs. Gellius and Quintilian were great Admirers of him, the Encomium, which
the latter has given him, we will here publish. Satyra quidem tota nostra est,
in qua primus insignem laudem adeptus est Poeta Lucilius, qui quosdam ita
deditos sibi habet amatores, ut cum non ejusdem modo operis autoribus, sed
omnibus poet is praeferre non dubitent; Ego quantum ab illis, tantum ab Horatio
dissentio, qui Lucilium fluere lutulente, and esse aliquid quod tollere possis,
putat, nam eruditio in eo mira, libertasque and acerbitas, and abunde salis.

The Satyr is wholly ours, wherein the Poet Lucilius has first attained
transcendent praise, who has indeed gained lovers so firm and constant to
him, that they do not doubt, not only to prefer him to the Authors of the same
Work, but also to all other Poets. In as much as I differ from those so I
dissent from Horace, who thinks that Lucilius flows muddily; and that there
is in him, which you may strike out; for there is in this Author, learning to
be admired, and freeness, and bitterness, and abundance of salt.

Now, that he was the first Satyrist, we gather it from those words of Pliny;

Lucilius primus condidit stili nasum: He flourished about the time of the
second punick War; he died at Naples, and there was Interred after he had lived
to the age of six and forty years: Some write, that he had a public, and
solemn Funeral.

Accius.
ACcius a Tragaedian, Junior to Pacuvius, was borne when Macrinus and Seranus
were the Roman Consuls: a Poet so beloved of Decius Brutus, that he would
adorn the Frontispieces of the Temples, and the Monuments of the dead, with
his worthy Verses. This Poet would not arise to Julius Caesar, when he entered
the Theater, not out of contempt to his Mighty Greatness, but because he
thought himself in reference to his Abilities, far Caesar's Superior, and
therefore he was not accounted insolent, because in those assemblies, there was
a comparison of Volumes, and not of Images.

This Accius journying into Asia, went to Tarentum, that he might converse with
Pacuvius, to whom he recited his Tragedy Atreus, which that grave Poet did
indeed commend, but withal said (as it is in Crinitus) Simul grandia and
sonora esse, quae ab Accio scripta forent, videri tamen sibi duriuscula, and
subacida. To which words of Pacuvius, Accius thus replied (as I read in the
same Author) Nec se poenitere, quoniam idem ferme ingeniis solet accidere, quod
pomis, quae enim dura admodum, and acerba nascuntur, paulatim mitia fiunt,
atque perfectiora redduntur; Quae vieta gignuntur, and mollia, nunquam ad veram
frugem, and maturitatem perveniunt: Sic sentiendum est de hominum Ingeniis.

Pliny says, that he was but of low stature, although he had placed his Image
in the Temple of the Muses, in a very large form and proportion: his Trajedies
are often cited by our Grammarians. Quintilian conferring this Poet with
Pacuvius, says thus of both.

Nitor and summa in excolendi^ operibus manus magis videtur temporibus, quam
ipsis defuisse. Virium tamen Accio plus tribuitur, Pacuvium videri doctiorem,
qui esse docti aff^ctant, volunt. Horace also thus compares him.

Aufert Pacuvius docti famam senis, Accius Alti. Pacuvius gets the same of
being learned, and Accius of being sublime, and high. That comparison of
Quintilians makes me altogether forbear to speak of Pacuvius.

Quintus Ennius.
QVintus Ennius called Rudius, from Rudium a Town in Calabria, where he had his
birth, and breeding, was in the Consulship of Quintus Valerius, and Caius
Manlius brought by the Quaestor Cato into the City of Rome, where he had his
habitation in the Mount Aventine. He wrote Annals, Satyrs, Comedies, and
Tragedies, but they are all lost, there being nothing else communicated unto
us, but a few scattered Verses, cited by several Authors: Horace calls him,
Alterum Homerum, Another Homer.

Ennius and sapiens, and fortis, and alter Homerus. For he himself gave out,
that Homers Soul was the Informer of his Body. Aulus Gellius affirms, that he
would oft-times say, that he had three Hearts, Quod loqui Graece, latin and
Osce sciret: Because he could speak both the Greek, Latin, and Oscian
Languages. Whence it is, that Gyraldus also styles him, Tricor, and Lucretius
Tripectorum.

Its the common fame, that Virgil should say, Aurum se ex Ennii stercore
colligere, That he gathered up Gold from Ennius his Dunghill. Scipio Africanus,
so intimatly and entirely affected him, that he would needs rest in the same
Sepulcher with him: he died through immoderate drinking; whereupon the Poet
Horace in his Epods, changes him with the guilt of drunkenness.

Quintilian so highly esteemed this Ennius, that he thought him worthy to be
adored with the same Religion, they honored their sacred Groves. Marcus Cicero
affirms, that this Poet composed these following Verses of himself.

Aspicite o Cives, senis Ennii Imaginis urnam:
Hic vestrum pinxit maxima facta patrum.
Nemo me lacrymis decoret, nec funera fletu
Faxit, cur? volito vivus per ora virum.
Titus Lucretius Charus.
TItus Lucretius Charus, of the Family of the Lucretii, was a physical Poet:
Quintilian joins him with Macer; Macer and Lucretius legendi quidem, elegantes
in sua quisque materia, sed alter humilis, alter difficilis. Macer and
Lucretius are to be read indeed, as being both of them elegant in their matter,
the one humble, the other hard: Lucretius wrote more purely, then learnedly,
showing the Reader more of his Wit then Art, for he did nothing else but
illustrate what others had invented, by the sweetness of his Verse.

He wrote six Books of the Nature of things, wherein he followed the Doctrine
of Epicurus, and the Poet Empedocles, whose Verse and Wit he did exceedingly
admire. Some say, that this his Work was afterward corrected by Cicero,
himself deceasing ere he had time to revise it. They say of this Poet, that
after some intervals of recreation, he would return unto his Poetry as one
surprised with a spirit of madness, whence is that of Statius.

Et docti furor arduus Lucreti. Of whom also thus writes Ovid.

Carmina sublimis tum sunt peritura Lucreti,
Exitio terras cum dabit una dies.
In Vespatian's time there were those that for Virgil would read Lucretius, and
for Horace, Lucilius; so says Crinitus. Eusebius tells us, That his own Wife
Lucilia, by giving him a Philter, cast him into a Frenzy, whereof he
forthwith died; whereas her only intent and design was to make him love her the
better, he was not much before Cicero's time, neither did he live above the age
of forty.

Caius Valor. Catullus.
Caius Valor. Catullus, an Epigrammatist of Verona, was born when Terentius
Varro that learned Grammarian flourished, one year before the Historian
Salustius; much about that time, that Sylla and Marius rent the Commonwealth of
Rome with their intestine and bloody Factions: he was gracious with Virgil, as
appears by that known Distick.

Sic forsan tener ausus est Catullus
Magno mittere passerem Maroni.
He was brought unto the City by Mallius when he was but of tender years, where
by the maturity of his piercing Wit, and eminent Learning he soon found grace
and acceptance with the Nobles, and chiefly with Cicero; to whom, as his
Patron, he dedicates this neat and elegant Epigram.

Disertissime Romuli Nepotum.
Quot sunt, quotque fuere Marce Tulli,
Quotque post aliis erunt in annis,
Gratias tibi maximas Catullus
Agit pessimus omnium Poeta,
Tanto pessimus omnium poeta,
Quanto tu optimus omnium Patronus.
He merited the name of Learned, because he so well expressed in the Latin
Tongue, what the Greeks thought not immitable, for indeed a better Interpreter
of the Grecian Poems, no Age can present us with, then this Catullus, whose
success therein was so incomparable, that Martial could not choose but sound
his praise.

Verona docti syllabas amat vatis. Aulus Gellius honors him with this Title,
Elegantissimus poetarum, The most elegant of the Poets. However Lasciva est
pagina, his Book is lascivious, and biting too beyond moderation, so that its
reported of him, That he would not spare Caesar himself, no, not even then when
he was in his greatest Glory. He loved one Clodia, whom by a feigned Name, he
called Lesbia, according to Ovids Verses.

Sic sua lascivo cantata est soepe Catullo
Foemina cui falsum Lesbia nomen erat.
The same Poet does oppose this very man to Virgils Majesty, and the
Epigrammatist Martial prefers him before himself in that Epigram of his to his
Friend Macer.

Nec multos mihi praeferas poetas,
Uno sed tibi sim minor Catullo.
Gellius in his Attick Nights commends him for a most elegant and sweet Poet He
died but young, not exceeding the Age of thirty years. I Will let him pass with
that well-known Distick.

Tantum parva suo debet Verona Catullo,
Quantum magna suo Mantua Virgilio.
Publius Virgilius Maro.
PVblius Virgilius Maro, called Virgillius a virga, which Calvus alludeth unto
in that Verse of his.

Et Vates cui virga dedit memorabile nomen. The Poet to whom the Laurel Rod did
give a memorable Name. Yet some others will have it to be the Poplar; he was
called Parthenias, from his modesty: of his Birth Martial thus speaks.

Maiae Mercurium creastis Idus,
Augustis redit Idibus Diana.
Octobres Maro consecravit Idus.
He was born in the Village Ande, not far from Mantua, and therefore called by
Silius Italicus Andinus vates. He studied at Cremina, and at Naples, his
Masters were Orbilius, and Scribonius, he put on his Viril Gown the same day
that Lucretius died. In his Bucolicks, he imitated Theocritus, in his Georgicks
Hesiod, in his Eneids, Parthenius, Pisander, Apollonius, and chiefly Homer, and
amongst the Latins, Ennius, Livius, Andronicus, Naevius, and Lucretius.

His choice Friends, he converst with, were Asinius Pollio, Cornelius Gallu^,
Quintilius Varus, Horatius Flaccus, and Maecenas. Nay, Caesar himself was a
transcendent Lover of him, they writing familiarly each to other.

Jerome in one of his Epistles compares him unto Homer, stiling him Alterum
Homerum. Lampridius writing his life, names him Platonem poetarum, the Plato of
the Poets, and so Caelius Rhodiginus, Poeta platonicus, The Platonic Poet.

Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor placed his Picture together with the
Image of Cicero in the House of his Lares. Columella gives him this Epithet,
Sydereus vates, The Starry Poet. Scaliger calls his Eneids, Altiloquentissima
Eneis. Whenever any of his Verses were recited in the Theater, the people
would all rise up, and reverence him being present, as though he were Caesar
Augustus: he was had in so great esteem at Rome, that whenever he did but
show himself in public, the people would cry out, Delitias Romae, Rome^
D^rling,

I will but add Scaligers report of him, and so pass unto the next; Vates
suavissimus, Nitidissimus, pulcherrimus, dulcissimus, politissimus; Inest in eo
phrasis regia, and ipsius Apollinis ore digna, sic puto loqui Deorum preceres
in Conciliis Caelestibus, Non, si ipse Jupiter poeta fiat, melius loquatur.
Most sweet, fair, splendid, polite Poet; There is in him a regal phrase,
worthy of Apollo's Mouth, so I think the principal Gods speak in their
heavenly Counsels, and if Jupiter himself were become a Poet, he could not
speak more sweetly.

Moreover this eminent Critic comparing him with Homer, says thus, Virgilius
Magister est, Homerus discipulus. Virgil is the Master, and Homer the Scholar.
Homerus moles quidem est, sed rudis, and indigesta, Virgilius autem Deus, and
melior Natura. Homer indeed is an heap, and that rude and indigested, but
Virgil is as God, and the better nature. His death was deplored by Cornelius
Gallus amongst many others, in a Paper of Verses to Caesar Augustus.

Cornelius Gallus.
Cornelius Gallus was excellent for Elegies, born that very year, wherein the
most learned of the Romans Terentius Varro died. He was of mean Fortune, but by
the Favor of Octavianus Caesar, he was promoted to great dignities: he governd
Egypt after that it was made a Province by the Romans; being suspected to have
been in Conspiracy against Augustus, he slew himself, as Dion and Marcellinus
have recorded, and whereunto also that Verse of Ovids does relate.

Sanguinis atque animae prodige Galle tuae. He was Virgilii delitiae, Virgils
Darling; as does appear by the fourth Book of his Georgicks, wherein he much
advances the worth of this Gallus: he was in love with Cytheris the freewoman
of Voluminous, which disdaining him went after Antonius into France, whereupon
Virgil comforted him, who in the tenth Eclog of his Buzolicks, calls this
same Cytheris, Lycoris.

Dion writes, how that Proculeius meeting accidentally with this Poet, clapped
his hands forthwith unto his Mouth, thereby signifying, that it was not safe
either to speak, or breath, where that Gallus was in presence: so great indeed
was his Insolency. There are some Verses imputed unto him, which are not after
his strain, being neither suitable to his time, nor phrase; but they are
presumed to be the invention of one Maximianus, a mere Juggler. So dear was
this Poet to Virgil, that his fourth Book of Georgicks, from the midst thereof,
unto the end, only comprehends his praises. Diomedes speaking De elegia,
joins this Gallus with Tibullus, and Propertius. Quintilian mentioning him,
calls him Poetam duriorem, A harder Poet.

Quintus Horatius Flaccus.
QVintus Horatius Flaccus of Venusium a Town in Apulia, lived in the Reign of
Caesar Augustus, with whom he was in high esteem, and great credit, as also
with his Patron Maecenas. He was born two years before the Conspiracy of Lucius
Catiline. His Father was a Libertine, and Collector of the public Loanes and
Taxes: his Master was Orbilius of Beneventum, whom he styles in his Poems,
Plagosum, he went to Athens, and there studied Philosophy, chiefly approving of
the Epicureans, as appears by that Vrbane Speech of his.

Me pinguem and nitidum been curata cute vises,
Cum ridere voles Epicuri de grege porcum.
He was much prone to Cholar, however very pleasing, grateful, and officious
to his friends: among the Poets he was very intimate with Tibullus, Quintilius,
Varrus, Valgius, and Virgil: among the Nobles with Julius Florus, Maximus
Lollius, and Maecenus, with whom he lived familiarly seven years, and upwards,
as is manifest by these following Verses.

Septimus octavo propior jam fugerit annus,
Ex quo Maecenas me caepit habere suorum
In numero.
In the civil Broils of Rome, he took part with Brutus and Cassius; as
Sidonius Apollinaris amongst many others, thus testifies: Et tibi Flacce acies
Bruti Cassique secuto
Carminis est author, qui fuit and veniae.
However Mecaenas restored him to his Princes Favor, and thereby, to all his
pristine Dignities.

As touching the habit and proportion of this Poets Body, he was short and fat;
whence he was called by Caesar, Homuncio, a man of low stature, or Dwarf, he
names himself Latinum fidicinem, The Latin Harper: In his Epods, he has
expressed himself an Imitator of the Courage, Numbers, and great Spirit of
Archilochus; he was excellent at writing of Iambicks.

Heinsius says, that he performs much more, then he promises, for when we
come unto him as to a Poet, we carry away upon our return such Fruit, as speak
him a Philosopher. He is Optimus vivendi author, One that teaches all that read
him to live well: Though he be Vrbanus, Jocund, yet, which may seem strange, he
is also gracious, serious, and grave.

I will but recite that Charecter, the eminent Orator Quintilian is pleased to
bestow upon him, and so proceed to the next. Lyricorum Horatius fere solus legi
dignus, nam and insurgit aliquando, and plenus est jucunditatis, and gratiae,
variis figuris, and verbis felicissime audax. Horace of all the Lyrick Poets is
almost only worthy to be read, for he swells sometimes, and is full of
sweetness and grace, being most happily bold with variety of Figures, and
expressions.

He is very pleasant in his taxing of the Vices of the times, whence is that of
Persius.

Omne vafer vicium ridenti Flaccus amico
Tangit, and admissus circum praecordia ludit,
Callidus excusso populum suspendere naso.
He died in the 57 of his age, though some others will have him to have reached
70.

Publius Ovidius Naso.
PVblius Ovidius Naso of Sulmone, was born the same day with Albius Tibullus,
that excellent Elegiographer, as some have testified: in his Childhood he was
much addicted to Poetry, which his Father wished him to decline, and to betake
himself to the study of Oratory, that being the right way to get wealth: for
which end, he was instructed in Rhetoric by Arellius Fuscus, and Porcius
Latro, wherein he made no mean progress in very short time, as Annaeus Seneca
has declared. However at length he returned to his old study, whence he knew
he might attain singular fame and rest: He had no less then three Wives, the
two first he put away, the one for naughtiness, the other for other causes, but
the third, which was his Perilla, he adhered to, and dearly loved, whom he
instructed in the Art of Poetry. He was intimate with many great Ones eminent
both for Learning and Birth; by name Albius Tibullus, Corn. Severus, Sabinus,
Sext. Pompeius, Graecinus, Flaccus, Messala, Macer, Maximus, and many more;
with these he conversed most familiarly. Sueton says, that he was greatly
beloved of Julius Higinus, Augustus his Freeman, one that was eminent both for
Wit, and Literature.

He wrote sundry Poems: In his Metamorphosis, he imitated Parthenius the Chian
Poet, who wrote in Greek upon the same Argument and Subject. This Poem of Ovids
was so admired by the Grecian Wits, that they translated it into their Mother
Tongue. In his Elegies he was too lascivious, but for his heroic Epistles, the
Critics note, that they are fraught with excellent Elegancy, and Artifice. He
was banished by Caesar unto Tomos in the Isle of Pontus; as for the cause of
this his Relegation, Authors do differ about it. Sextus Aurelius is of opinion,
that it was for his Book of Loves, which for their lasciviousness did highly
displease Augustus, but others affirm, that it was for committing Adultery with
Julia, Caesar's Daughter: of this Judgment was Sidonius Apollinaris, as these
Verses insinuate.

Nec te carmina per libidinosa
Notum Naso tener, Tomosque missum:
Quondam Caesareae nimis puellae
Ficto carmine subditum Corinnae.
Nay the poor Poet himself seems to acknowledge this the cause.

Lingua sile; non est ultra narrabile quicquam! Without question, or doubt this
Julia was a notorious Strumpet, infamous for her burning Lust, and frequent
Adulteries; and therefore very likely it is, that she prostituted her body to
this unhappy Poet. Et hinc causa malorum.

He is styled the Prince of Elegiacks by Dempsterus, and so admired he was by
all men, both in his own time, and since, that he is called, Non ingeniosus
tantum, sed etiam ipsum ingenium. Not engenious only, but Ingenuity it self.
Non Musarum sacerdos, sed ipsum Numen. Not the Priest of the Muses, but even
their very Deity.

Its the judgment of the Learned, That if the Latin Tongue were quite extinct,
yet his Poems only remaining, there might be from them a very speedy
restitution. Seneca says of him, That he had been Poetarum ingeniosissimus,
The most Ingenious of the Poets, if he had not reduced the acuteness of his
Mind, and Wit, and Matter to Boyish Fancies.

Barthius affirms, Quod opus ejus universum ingenium potius refert, quam curam.
That his whole Work speaks more his Wit, then Care. Scaliger reports, Quod
sibi pepercit, cum meliora multo posset, That he spared himself too much, when
he could have done much more. He was so dexterous in obliging those, with whom
he conversed, that the barbarous Nations to whom he was confined, had him in
great reverence, not being able to contain themselves from lamentation, when he
died, he, and Titus Livius deceased both in one year.

Marcus Manilius.
MArcus Manilius was an Astronomicall Poet, for he wrote Poems of Astronomy,
and for that Treatise of his, he is compared to Atlas and Alcides, as the Verse
has expressed him.

Manilius Altas
Alter, and Alcides, qui capite astra tulit.
What a Poet, and of how great Wit this man was, we may discover out of the
description of his Andromeda, which he has adorned, and set out with
incomparable Elocution. However Scaliger in his Castigations charge him with
this folly, that he should undertake to write of those things, whereof he was
wholly ignorant: The like is said by the Ancients of Nicander, and Aratus, how
that they also aspired to treat of matters beyond their reach, and knowledge:
This Manilius lived in Augustus Caesar's time, as appears by the dedication of
his five Books unto him.

Albius Tibullus.
ALbius Tibullus was born at Rome, being of Knightly Parentage, whose Wit was
facile, and Visage comely, so that he drew many of the Nobles into Affection,
and Admiration of him; he was much endeared to Messala Corvinus, whom he calls,
Sui studiosum, and whose Praises he celebrates in excellent Verse: he
accompanied this his Patron and Friend into the Province of the Phaeacians,
where fasting ill, he composed these two Verses, as a testimony of his Faith,
and Fortune.

Hic jacet immiti consumptus morte Tibullus.
Messalam terra dum sequiturque mari.
He loved Horace, and Macer, those two admirable Poets very entirely: He was
very inclinable, and prone to love, and bodily pleasures, whence that Dist^ck
is so common; Vsset amatorem Nemesis ^asciva Tibullum,
In tuta juvit, quem nihil esse ^omo.


He wrote four Books of Elegies, for which he is reputed one of the chiefest of
the Elegiographers. Josephus Scaliger accounts him, Inter tria lumina Poetices
Romanae. One of the three Lights of the Roman Poetry; and Julius also thus
limnes him; Tibullus omnium cultissimus, nec redundans in elegia. Tibullus of
all Poets the most adorned, no way redundant in his Elegy.

Petrus Crinitus speaking of his Books of Loves, says thus of them, Facile
probatur, quam elegans and candidum sit ejus carmen, ut ejusmodi caloribus
describendis latinos omnes videatur superasse, cum affectibus exprimendis, tum
elegantia, and suavitate ingenii. Its easily proved how elegant and candid his
Verse is, that he seems in describing those heats, to have gone beyond all the
Latin Poets, both for expressing the Affections, as also for Elegancy, and
sweetness of wit. He died young, to the great grief of his Friend Naso; yet his
Poetry will never die, according to that known Distick.

Donec erunt ignes, arcusque Cupidinis arma:
Discentur numeri culte Tibulle tui.
Sextus Aurel. Propertius.
SExtus Aurel. Propertius an Vmbrian, called himself the Roman Callimachus,
because he was a notable Imitator of that Cyrenean Poet: he lost his Father
when he was but young, even as it were a Child, whom Caesar Augustus caused to
be slain, for his siding with Antonius at Perusia: his Son the Poet upon
occasion of this sad Accident repaired unto Rome, and there lived; where he
soon procured favor with that noble Hero Mecaenas, as also near familiarity
with Cornelius Gallus, both honoring him for his Wit and Breeding. Ovid
commemorates him as his special Friend in this ensuing Distick.

Saepe suos solitus recitare Propertius ignes,
Jure sodalitii qui mihi junctus erat.
It seems that he had communicated unto him his burning Affections to the
Maiden Hostia, which, not so well liking that Name, he would familiarly call
Cynthia.

Hence it is, that Sidonius Apollinaris reckoning up each Poets Friend, calls
Propertius his by the name of Cynthia. Meminisse debes quod saepe versum
Corinna cum suo Nasone complevit, Lesbia cum Catullo, Cesenna cum Getulico,
Argentaria cum Lucano, Cynthia cum Propertio, Delia cum Tibullo.

As for his commendations, Justus Lipsius joins him with Catullus, and
Tibullus, and then calls them, Amorum Triumviros. Crinitus speaking of
Callimachus Mimnernus, and Philetas, those Greek Poets, whom this Author
imitated, says thus; Nam ut illi apud Graecos in elegia consensu omnium long
praestiterunt, ita Propertius apud Latinos eorum imitatione primus videtur
quorundam consecutus. For as they among the Greeks by the consent of all men
far excelled in Elegy, so Propertius amongst the Latins, by imitating those
Greeks in the Judgment of some, has out-stript many others. Quintilian after
that he had highly commended Albius Tibullus, adds this to it, Non deesse tamen
qui Propertium malint. That there were not wanting those that prefer Propertius.

I Will let him pass with that of Barthius. Dulciore eruditione and eruditiore
dulcedine nemo scriptor est tota antiquitate ante Propertium, quem scriptorem,
quo magis rimaberis, eo magis amabis, quae enim primo intuitu abscuriora
videbuntur, ea si penetraveris, omnium videbuntur naturali quadam venere
gratiosissima. There is no Writer in all Antiquity to be preferred before
Propertius for sweet Erudition, and erudite sweetness, which Writer the more
narrowly you sift him, and the more deeply you dive into him, the more dearly
you will affect him: for indeed those very things which at the first sight seem
most obscure if you will thoroughly search into them, you will in the end
perceive them to be most gracious.

He had the Name of Nauta given to him, and the reason thereof Scaliger in his
Castigations tells us: his death, for the manner and time of it, is not certain.
There are some that say, he died at the age of one and forty.

Gratius.
GRatius, a Latin Poet, Contemporary with Albius Tibullus, and Propertius
wrote a Book in Hexameters, De venatione, Of hunting, he was so ingenious, and
excellent at his Art, that, that incomparable Censor Scaliger acknowledges in
him the felicity of that age.

He is esteemed next after Virgil, inferior to none; As for his phrase of
speech, Caspar Barthius says of it, that it is Castigata, and erudita,
pressaque, and sibi semper aequalis, Corrected and erudite, and pressed, and
always equal unto it self.

Dempsterus gives him this Encomium, That he is, Poeta cultus ac tersus, An
adorned and neat Poet. Barthius was the first that vindicated his Cynegeticon
ex carcere squaloris, and situs: From the Corruptions and Errors wherewith it
was depraved.

Lucius Annaeus Seneca.
LVcius Annaeus Seneca the Tragaedian, who of all Latin Writers in that kind
is only extant; and it is the Opinion of Learned Heinsius, that he only wrote
these four following Tragedies, Hercules, Furens, Oedipus, Thyestes, and
Agamemnon, and that the Philosopher composed Hippolitus, Troas, and Medaea, the
rest being written by several distinct persons, it being customary for
Critics to deal with Tragic Poets, as with other Writers, that is, to join
together diverse men's Works, and then to prefix such a Name as they think most
convenient.

This man was by Nation a Spaniard, borne at Corduba, Comtemporary with
Pomponius secundus, of whom Quintilian says, that he affected the same Studies
this Poet did, as one that took great delight in composing of Tragedies: That
Grammarian has commended him both for his Sublimeness, and Gravity; In the
composure of every Tragedy, he is said to follow those two eminent Ancients,
Aeschylus, and Euripides, as it is hinted unto us by Sidonius Apollinaris, in
these following Verses: Non quod Corduba praepotens alumnis
Facundam ciet, hic putes legendum;
Quorum unus colit hispidum Platonae,
Incassumque suum monet Neronem:
Orchestram quatit alter Euripidis
Pictum faecibus Eschylum secutus.


Scaliger equalleth him for stateliness, and Majesty, with any of the Greeks,
and for clearness he prefers him far before Euripides; and Dempster styles
him, Tragaedum purum, and gravem, A Tragaedian pure, and grave.

Aulus Persius Flaccus.
AVlus Persius Flaccus of Volaterris, a Town in Etruria, was in great esteem
when Domitius Nero was Emperor, he was instructed in Grammatical Learning by
Rhemmius Palaemon, in Rhetoric by Virginius, and for his proficiency and
growth in Philosophical Literature, he most familiarly conversed with Annaeus
Coruntus, whom he very gratefully acknowledges in one of his Satyrs, as
appears by these ensuing Verses.

Cumque iter ambiguum and vitae nescius error
Deaucit trepidas ramosa in compita mentes,
Me tibi supposui, teneros tususcipis annos
Socratico Cornute sinu.
He imitated that excellent Satyrist Lucilius, who was the most dexterous of
all the Poets to inveigh against the Vices of the Romans: some think that this
Poets little Work was not absolved, by reason of the Authors sudden death, he
living not above the Age of thirty. He was very invective against the
naughtiness of Nero, whom under the person of Mi^as he lays open, and
obnoxious to derision.

Quintilian highly advances his small Volume, Multum verae gloriae, quamvis uno
libro Persius meruit; Although Persius wrote one only Book, yet he has merited
thereby much of true glory. Whence also is that of the Epigrammatist Martial.

Saepius in libro memoratur Persius uno,
Quam levis in tota Marsus Amazonide.
Casaubon says, that he is, Gravissimus morum Censor, and virtutum praeceptor
fidissimus, A most grave Censurer of our Manners, and a most faithful Master
of the Virtues. Scaliger in his Poetices tells us, That his style is Morosus,
and that he endeavored so to write, as that being read, none might be able to
understand him, although now he is become sufficiently intelligible.

Gyraldus says of him, that he is to be reckoned amongst the laudable Authors,
notwithstanding his obscurity and darkness, for though he be very intricate to
some, according to that o^ Owen.

Scripta tenebrosi lego, non intelligo Persi
Lectores nimium negligit ille suos.
Yet he is well enough apprehended, and understood by those that are more
Learned.

Caius Pedo Albinovanus.
Caius Pedo Albinovanus was an Epigrammatist, and flourished in the Reign of
Nero, in his youth he studied Oratory, and was accounted no mean Declamator, as
may be gathered from some words of Annaeus Seneca concerning him. Ovid reckons
this Pedo amongst those Poets, that were notable that way in his time, and
Martial relates him to be one of the Authors, he imitated in his witty kind of
Poetry.

Indeed, his Wit was Elegant, and Urbane, and for his dexterity in composing of
happy Epigrams, he was had in great account. Quintilian styles him, Sublimem,
and Altiloquum poetam. A sublime, and lofty Poet. Ovid, sydereum, starry; and
Seneca, Fabulatorem elegantissimum, A most elegant Fabulator. Non indignum
cognitione si vacet. Caspar Barthius likens him to the Poet Naso. Quem vulgo
Pedonem Albinovanum faciunt, non alius est Nasone ipso. He whom they call Pedo
Albinovanus, is no other then Ovid himself.

Pomponius Secundus.
POmponius Secundus was of Noble and Illustrious Parentage, numbered amongst
those Poets which were Tragical, he flourisht when those excellent Orators
Porcius Latro, Domitius Afer, and Albusius Silo, were living at Rome.
Quintilian writes, that this Author for excelled all those Poets, which in that
kind of Verse he had ever seen; so transcendent was his Erudition, and
Sublimity in the composure of his Poems, that he was styled by all that read
him, The Tragic Pindar.

Pliny wrote two Books of the Life and Manners of this Tragaedian, because he
was induced thereunto, by the eminency of his Name, and Virtues. He was much
endeared to that renowned worthy Caesar Germanicus, whom he entertained with a
sumpteous Supper.

Pliny calls him, Civem, and vatem clarissimum, Where he speaks of the
Monuments of the two Gracchi, Caius, and Tiberius. Maurus Terentianus a worthy
Poet, mightily bemoans the loss of this man's Tragedies in a paper of
well-composed Verses; of his Death Authors mention nothing.

Aruntius Stella.
ARuntius Stella was a Poet of great repute in Vespasians time; he was of
Patavium: for Martial says, that the Region of Apenum was dignified and
enobled with the Births of Livius, Flaccus, and this Stella.

Papinius mentions him in these his Verses, commending thereby the nobleness of
his Descent.

-- Clarus de gente latina
Est juvenis, quem patriciis majoribus ortum
Nobilitas gavisa tulit, praesagaque formae
Protinus e nostro posuit cognomina coelo.
He loved Violantilla a Neapolitan Maiden, and at length obtained her for his
Wife, whom Martial calls Ianthis, a Greek Name.

Amongst many Poems which this Poet writ, there were Elegies, and his Work De
Asteride, but none so much cried up and had in admiration, as that De Interitu
Columbae, of the death of his Dove; which the Epigrammatist prefers before
Catullus his Verses of Lesbia's Sparrow, as the Epigram declares: Stellae
delicium mei Columba
Verona licet audiente dicam,
Vicit maximi passerem Catulli.


Statius in his Sylvis, acquaints us with the Dignities he was honored with,
who had been created Praetor, and after that Duumvir; only, for his admiral
qualifications and Embellishments: whereupon he was so high in that Poets
Affections, that he could find none in Rome so worthy, to whom he might
dedicate his Poems, as he.

This Stella was of intimate acquaintance with Julius Secundus, and the Poet
Martial: of his death I read not.

Decius Jun. Juvenalis.
DEcius Jun. Juvenalis a Satyricall Poet of Aquinas, flourisht in the Reigns of
Caesar Domitian, Nerva and Trajan: in these following Verses he congratulates
the Emperor Nerva for favoring so much those of his profession.

Et spes and ratio studiorum in Caesare tantum:
Solus enim tristes hac tempestate Camaenas
Respexit;
Yet there are some, that think they do refer unto Domitian, because he greatly
affected Poetry, as Suetonius and Tacitus have jointly testified. He was
instructed in Grammatical Learning by Fronto, a Grammarian of great Name then
in Rome, though others affirm that his Master was Quintilian a Rhetor of as
excellent Endowments and Abilities; his chief Friends were Volusius, and
Corvinus, and also Martial, who in this Distick speaks his Intimacy with this
Satyrist.

Cum Juvenale meo, quae me committere tentas,
Quid non audebis per fida lingualoqui.
He is called by Gifanius, Satyricorum haud dubie princeps, Without doubt the
Prince of Satyrists, and is preferred by most of the Ancients before Horatius,
and Persius, as one that had attained to the Perfections of them all; the salt,
and bitterness of Lucilius, the Candor and Elegancy of Horace, and the Gravity
of Aulus Persius.

Its the same Authors commendation of him, Juvenalis Ardet, Instat, Jugulat.
Juvenal burns, presses, stabs. Barthius styles him, Scriptorem eruditissimum,
elegantissimum poetam, and censorum morum celeberrimum and acutissimum. A most
learned Writer, a most elegant Poet, and a most free and sharp Censurer of Men's
Manners.

He is dignified by the Critics, with the Title of Ethicus the Moralist, being
indeed compared, and equald to the most flourishing Philosophers by
Sarisburiensis, Alanus, and other Philologues: Its Lipsius his observation of
him; In Satyra nemo Idoneor ad mores corrigendos Juvenali: None more fit for
correction of men's Manners then Juvenal. And it is also Casaubons, Vbertate
inventionis, copia exemplorum, tractandi dexteritate, praestat Juvenalis:
Juvenal excels for plenty of Invention, abundance of Examples, and dexterity of
handling.

Caius Valerius Flaccus.
Caius Valerius Flaccus called Setinus, from the City Setia, in Campania, was
an heroic Poet, and Countryman to Titus Livius, and Aruntius Stella. Martial
styles him Laris Antenorei alumnum. He wrote eight Books De Argonauticis, which
he dedicated to Domitian, or as others will have it, to his Father Vespasian.
He had written much more, if sudden death had not prevented. Quintilian speaks
as one very sensible of it, in his Books to Marcellus Victorius, wherein he
sadly complains of so great a loss.

Scaliger writes thus of him, Cujus cum esset ingenium felix, judicium magnum,
diligentia non vulgaris, immatura morte praeventus acerbum poema suum nobis
reliquit. Whose Wit when it was happy, Judgment solid, Diligence extraordinary,
being prevented with an immature death, he left us a bitter Poem. The same
Critic styles him Omnium duriusculum.

He expressed Apollonius Rhodius, not only in the Argument of his Work, but
also in the phrase and style of all his Verses; he held friendly compliance and
correspondence with those eminent Worthies of that time, namely, Secundus,
Maternus, Stella, and Martial. The later of them counseled him to leave his
Muses, and to follow the Forum, as it appears by this ensuing Epigram, Omihi
curarum precium non vile mearum,
Flacce Antenore^ spes and alumne laris
Pierios differ cantusque chorosque sororum
Aes dabit ex istis nulla puella tibi.
Quid tibi cum Cyrrha? quid cum Permessidos unda?
Romanum propius divitiusque forum est.
Illic era sonant.


I Will let him go with that of Barthius, Poeta nobilissimus and Romanae Musae
genuinus: Sonus, spiritus, eruditio, gravitas in eo sunt insignes. A most noble
Poet, and genuine to the Roman Muse; Sound, Spirit, Learning, Gravity, are all
transcendent in him.

Silius Italicus.
SIlius Italicus, was as some have reported, a Spaniard by Birth, called
Italicus, from a noble City in Italy, whence the Family first sprang; he was an
excellent Orator, endeavoring to express (and from which he fell not much
short) the Eloquence of Marcus Cicero: he was under some Cloud of disgrace in
Neroes time, having been accused of some notable Crime to that infamous
Emperor, but he behaved himself wondrous prudently under Vitellius, and at last
he found favor and special grace with Caesar Domitian: Martial reverenceth
him with these Verses; Augusto pia thura, victimasque
Pro nostro date Silio Camoenae.


He imitated heroic Virgil, whose Wit and Majesty he greatly admi^ed: he is
called by one Vates Consularis, The Consular Poet. Another says, that he writ
Verses with more care, then wit: he would often times recite his Poems
publicly, to discover thereby men's Judgments of them. There is a Critic that
speaks thus of him. Non Poeta, non Historicus, sed utrumque est, libripunicorum
historicum volunt, dicendi character poetam. He is neither a Poet, nor
Historian, but both; his Books of the Wars speak him an Historian, and his
character of speech a Poet. The same Author says, that he is not unlike to
Euripides.

Martial gives him this great commendation: Castalidum decus sororum, The Grace
or Ornament of the Muses. Dempster says, Quod erat Orator verius, quam poeta,
nimius, and interdum ridiculus Virgilii imitator. That he was more truly an
Orator, then a Poet, and too much, nay, sometimes a ridiculous Imitator of
Virgil. Pliny informs us, that he died for want of necessaries in his
Country House at Naples.

Marcus Annaeus Lucanus.
MAarcus Annaeus Lucanus of Corduba, was the Nephew of Seneca, the Tragaedian,
and Son of L. Annaeus Mela, he was instructed in Grammar by Palaemon, in
Rhetoric by Virginius. His Condisciples were Saleius Bassus, and Aulus
Persius, he was at first much favored by Nero, but at length put to death by
him, as being found guilty of Conspiracy against him. Martial describes his
Birthday in these Verses, and is invective against Nero for killing of him.

Haec est illa dies, quae magni conscia partus
Lucanum populis and tibi Polla dedit.
Heu Nero crudelis, nullaque invisior umbra,
Debuit hoc saltem non licuisse tibi.
Farnaby that set out his Pharsalia with Notes, speaking of his River of
Poetry, says, that it does not rush with a great noise (as Pliny has written
of the River Ni^us) but rather seems to flow like the calmest stream; his
Acuteness is divine, his Spirit ardent, his Muse Masculine, and every
expression high, clear, and chaste. Quintilian Characteriseth him thus:

Lucanus ardens, and concitatus, and sententiis clarissimus, and ut ita dicam
quod sentio, magis oratoribus, quam poetis annumerandus. Lucan is ardent, and
incensed, and in Sentences most clear, and that I may speak as I think, rather
to be registered among the Orators, then the Poets. Boethius also describes him
to be Familiaris philosophiae, Familiar with Philosophy. His wife Polla was
very learned, if Sidonius Apollinaris, and Papinius Statius may be credited.

He wrote the Civil War which was between Julius Caesar, and Pompey, but was
prevented of finishing it, by an immature and sudden death. Dempster says of
him, that he was not inferior to Virgil, whom indeed he imitated.

M. Valerius Martialis.
M. Valerius Martialis was a Spaniard, and a most eminent Epigrammatist: he was
borne at Bilbilis, no mean Town of Celtiberia, which he himself is pleased in
one of his Epigrams, to mention, Nec me tacebit Bilbilis. In his youth he came
to Rome, that he might dedicate himself wholly to his studies, where finding an
unfitness in his Genius for the way of the Forum, he applied his Fancy to the
composing of Epigrams, wherein indeed he did excel all others in the opinion
of the Ancients.

Pliny gives him the Character of an Ingenious and acute Poet, Qui plurimum in
scribendo and salis haberet, and fellis, nec candoris minus, who in his writing
discovered much Salt, and Gall, nor less Candor. Elius Verus, who was wondrous
gracious with the Emperor Adrian, entertained his wity Jests with much delight,
and recreation, being ever now and then heard to call him his Virgilius.

In the framing of his Epigrams he imitated those three facetious poets,
Marsus, Pedo, and Getulicus, and whenever he was blamed by any for his
obsceness, he would excuse himself with this, That he did but that, which
others had done before them, meaning those, to whose pattern he had conformed:
He highly regarded Licinius Calvus, and Catullus, for their Abilities in his
way of poetry.

Caspar Barthius tells us, that he was called Cocus, because most of his
Epigrams are conversant about Meat, Drink, Clothing, good Fellowship, and such
like. And Dempster gives him this Encomium. Vnus qui Epigrammatis genium
videtur possedisse. Indeed his Genius was ever leading him to the composing of
Epigrams: he returned in the end to his own Country, and there died, whose
death Pliny does bewail in an Epistle to Cornelius Priscus.

Publius Statius Papinius.
PVblius Statitus Papinius was the Son of Papinius, by Birth a Neapolitan: he
flourished under the Emperor Domitian, to whom he dedicated his Thebais^, in
which Poem of his, he followed the Poet Antimachus, who had managed the like
Argument, and therein he had much assistance from his learned Father: next to
his Thebais, he composed his Achilleis, but died ere he could accomplish it,
though some others have thought that Poem was perfected before his death, but
since in part lost. As for his Sylvae, he was in doubt, whether he should
publish those, because they had been hastily, and as it were on a sudden heat
compiled by him; yet Sidonius Apollinaris does greatly praise them in these his
Hendecasyllablis.

Non quod Papinius tuus, meusque
Inter Labdaicos sonat furores:
Aut cum forte pedum minore rythmo
Pingit gemmea prata sylvularum.
The Emperor Domitian was so well affected toward him, that he entertaind him
with a magnificent and royal Banquet: his Verse is so lofty, and Style so
sublime, that they named him by the name of Aquilinus, so says Barthius.

Scaliger calls him Equum alatum, The winged or flying Horse, only upon this
account of his mounting Language. He is preferred by the same Author before
Renowned Homer, and also in these following words compared with heroic Virgil.

Non ullus veterum ac recentiorum propius ad Virgilianm majestatem accedere
valuit, etiam propinquior futuus, si tam prope esse voluisset.

None of the ancient, or latter Poets, were able to approach so near Virgils
Majesty as he, who indeed, if he would have assented, might have come nearer
unto it, then he did.

Lipsius gives him these honorable Characters; Sublimis, ac celsus, magnus,
and summus poeta. And Dempster does assign unto each Book its deserved praise.
Eruditus in Sylvis, Learned in his Woods, Sublimis in Thebaide, Sublime in his
Thebais, blandus in Achilleide, Pleasant in his Achilleis; He lived, until he
was very aged.

Decius Ausonius.
DEcius Ausonius by Nation a Frenchman, was the Son of Julius Ausonius a
Physician, which Julius was of so great account with the Aquitanes, that they
would compare him with any of the wise men: They have his saying frequently in
their Mouths, Beatum esse, non qui habet, quae cupit, sed qui non cupit, quae
non habet. That he is happy, not that has the things which he desires, but
that desires not the things which he has not. This man's Son the Epigrammatist
was high in favor with Valentinus and Valentinianus the Emperors, but most
familiar with Gratianus Caesar, whom he tuto^^^, by whose Affection and
Countenance he was advanced to consular Dignity.

He was excellently well skild both in the Greek and Latin Tongues, wherefore
he expressed the Greek Epigrams in most elegant and sweet Latin: amongst his
special good Friends, he chiefly placed Tetradius Gallus, Paulinus the Poet,
and Hesperius: neither was there less familiarity betwixt him, and Symmachus;
who in his Epistles delivers his Judgment of this Authors Poems. Oration alticis
salibus aspersa, and thymo odorata: Barthius would have us believe, that what
we read in Ausonius, we may find both in Lucilius, and Ennius, of whose
Composures he was a great Admirer, and Peruser.

His Writings express him to have been a Christian; of his death we have
nothing that is certain, some report, that he lived to the Age of ninety, but
they mistake him for Julius his Father, who died very aged.

Oppianus.
OPpianus a Poet of Cilicia, and of the City Anazarba, wrote five Books of
Fisher, which he called Halieutica, and four of Venation, wherein he has
shown both Elegancy of expression, and inoffensiveness, or chastity of Verse:
what he wrote of the Nature, and Genius of living Creatures, he dedicated to
Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla, with which Present the Emperor being highly
pleased, wished him in a way of recompense, to ask any thing, that he could like
at his royal hands: The Poet forth with begged his Fathers return from
banishment, which request of his was with much good will and approbation
granted; and besides, or over and above, the Emperor gave him for every Verse,
Aureum staterum, whence, from that time forward, his Verses were called Aurea
carmina, Golden Verses.

Julius Scaliger thus writes of him:

Musarum alumnus prudentissimus, poeta candidissimus, atque
magniloquentissimus, cui Graecorum neminem ausis comparare, cujus unius spiritu
Virgiliana divinitas repraesentata.

The most prudent Scholar of the Muses, a Poet most candid, and magniloquent,
to whom thou can not compare any of the Greeks, one whose Spirit represents
the diviness of Virgil.

And Dempster also honors him with these following Characters; Suavis,
Generosus, Incomparabililis Poeta: A Sweet, a Generous, and an Incomparable
Poet.

Claudius Claudianus.
Claudius Claudianus an Egyptian, though some would have him to be a
Florentine, was had in great reverence by those two learned Emperors, Arcadius
and Honorius, whom they honored with a Statue, having this Inscription
engraved upon it; (...)
(...).
And now if he had the mind of Virgil, and the Muse of Homer, of how great Fame
then must we think that he was in the World? His Genius at first was much
propense to Poetry, so that what I read in Crinitus of him, I cannot but assent
unto: Ingenio excellenti fuit, maximeque apto ad carmen componendum, nam and
assurgit feliciter, variisque figuris, ac sententiis mirifice delectat, ut
videatur a natura ipsa instructus ad poeticam facultatem. He was of a most
excellent Wit, and very apt to compose Verses, for he happily swells, and
wonderously delights with variety of Figures, and Sentences, so that he seems
naturally instructed, and fitted for the Poetical Faculty.

Barthius has afforded him two notable Characters: first he says, that he is,
Praecentor, and choragus poetarum panegyricorum, The prime Singer, and
Ringleader of the panegyricall Poets: as also, Obeuntis jam eloquentiae
supremus Fulgor. The last Lightning of fading Eloquence.

Dempster tells us, that he is before all the Latins for plenty of matter, and
amongst the Greeks only inferior to Homer, for glory of Invention. He wrote
four Books of the Rape of Proserpine, but the fourth had not the success, as
to come unto our hands. Even S. Austine has commended the Wit, and Erudition
of this Poet. Of his death I read not.

Aurelius Prudentius.
AVrelius Prudentius was skillful in the Law, and Consul of Messalia; and that
he was honored with Military Dignities, as well as Civil: his own Verses show
it, as they follow.

Froenis nobilium reximus urbium,
Jus civil bonis reddidimus, reos
Tandem terruimus; militiae gradu
Evectum pietas principis extulit.
Sidonius Apollinaris no contemptible Author in reading, and observing the
ancient Writers, when he comes to speak of this Poet Prudentius, he does not
fear to join him with Horace: he acquired much praise especially from that
Poem, wherein he commended their patience and constancy, that suffered
Martyrdom for the Christian Faith.

He was by the Ancients named Amaenus, because he surpassed all other Christian
Poets in sweetness: Caspar Barthius tells us, Quod nemo divinius de Christianis
rebus unquam scripsit, That no man ever wrote more divinely of Christian
matters. And says another of him, Vnius omnium inter poetas christianos,
lectores suos pascere sufficient lautissime, sive pretiosissimas panis
coelestis, h. e. verbi divini epulas esurias, sive efficacis eloquen^iae
condimenta requiras. He only of all Christian Poets is able to feed his Reader
very plentifully, whether thou thirstest after the most precious Dainties of
the heavenly Word, or whether thou requirest the well pleasing Sauce of
Eloquence.

Erasmus highly commends him for his Sanctimony, and sacred Learning, of whom
he further says, That he deserves to be Registered in the Catalogue of the
gravest Christian Doctors; he flourisht in the year of Christ 380. his Life was
written by G. Fabritius.

Caius Sollius Sidonius Apollinaris.
Caius Sollius Sidonius Apollinaris was a Frenchman, borne of honest Parents,
and of an Illustrious Family: he was instructed in Grammatical Learning by
Flavius Nicetius an excellent Retorician, and by his industry and diligence he
out-stript in Erudition all that were his Equals. He wrote many things both in
Prose, and Verse, particularly nine Books of Epistles, wherein he imitated
Plinius Secundus, as he himself has declared, in which Work of his, there is
more of Wit, then of solid Judgment; so that his praise springs rather from his
Poems, then his Prose, wherein he has shown much Ingenuity, and as much
Elegancy.

He had the Name of Modestus for his good and modest carriage, and next unto
Claudian he was accounted the best of the Poets. Petrarck speaks thus of him,
Sidonii tarditatem admirari vix sufficio, I am scarce able enough to admire the
slowness of Sidonius.

Caussinus rises higher in his praises: In Sidonio Ingens, ut apparet ingenii
vigor magis ob multas virtutes admirandus, quod praemortua facundia Romana haec
scripserit, quam ob temporis vitia accusandus videatur. There appears in
Sidonius great vigor of Wit, who is rather to be admired for his many Virtues,
that he wrote those things, when the Roman Eloquence failed, then to be accused
for the Vices of the times.

Dempster says, that he shows himself both in his Epistles, and Poems, Supra
modum literatum, Transcendently learned: no wonder then, i^ ^e be said of his
Work; Apollinare opus Musis, and Apolline dignum. He was one of the principal
Senators in Gallia, and therefore called by one, Omnium praesulum
scholastissimus, the most Scholiasticall of all the Prelates. Gregorius
Turonensis affirms, that he married the Daughter of the Emperor Avitus.

Pontius Paulinus.
POntius Paulinus was of Bordeaux in France, and nobly descended, he flourished
when Gratian was Emperor: some thought him to have been the Nephew of
Ausonius, because that Poet Complemented him with the Name of Son; he wrote a
Poem in Hexameters, of those Kings collected by Suetonius, whence he is
commended for that Work by Ausonius in these words:

Collegisti in Epitomen tres libros Suetonii de regibus tanta elegantia, solus
ut videare consecutus, quod contra rerum naturam est, brevitas ut obscura non
esset.

Thou have Epitomized Suetonius his three Books of Kings so elegantly, that
thou seem alone to have obtained, what is contrary to the nature of things,
that brevity might not be obscure,

Scaliger dignifies him with this Title, Aquitanorum procerum princeps, The
chief of the Aquitan Nobles. Another with a better Character, Vir vita, atque
scriptis, ut veteres loquebantur, vere Apostolicus. A man for Life, and
Writings, as the Ancients were wont to say, truly Apostolical. So Barthius.

And the same Critic speaks further of him, to his great credit:
Christianorum literis poeticis clarorum neminem Paullino praeponere possis. You
cannot prefer any of the famous Christian Poets before this Paullinus. Et paulo
post, it follows, Quod si ipsos Dei praecones Apostolos latinis numeris
lauds domini pangere voluisse diceres, talibus utique usuros fuisse
confitereris. That if you should say that those Preachers of God the Apostles,
would set forth the praises of the Lord in Latin Verses, you would
acknowledge, that they would use such as these. There was another Paullinus
besides this, and a Poet also, whom some confound with this Author which has
been treated of, but they differ each from the other, both in profession of
life, and elegancy of Verse.

Dracontius.
DRacontius a Spaniard, lived in the time of the Emperor Justinianus, being a
Poet more commendable for his Sense, and Learning, then for his Eloquence; He
composed an Hexameron of the Creation of the World in heroic Verse, set forth
at Basil, together with the Works of the old Christian Poets.

Barthius says, That he speaks of matters so darkly, that he is thought
scarcely to have understood himself. He is likened to Prudentius. Consimiliter
ut in Prudentio, sic in eo elegantiarum flosculi, ceu purpurae quaedam infitae
interlucent, ac scintillant. In like manner as in Prudentius, so also in him
there do shine and sparkle Flowers of Elegancies, like certain in woven Purples.

FINIS.
Errata.
P. 34. l. 6. r. transcendent, p. 37. l. 2. r. Antonines, p. 37. l. 25. r.
Antoninus, p. 61. l. 10. r. And his, p. 64. l. 30. r. Lipsius, p. 76. l. 8. r.
Sect. p. 93. l. 14. r. literarium, p. 106. l. 27. r. Pari, p. 107. l. 18. r.
Pallasses, p. 108. l. 7, 8. r. Josephus Scaliger, p. 116. l. 16. r. mellitum,
p. 120. l. 17. r. Thurios, p. 126. l. 4. r. by Barthius.


