The Latest Remarkable Truths FROM Worcester, Chester, Salop, Warwick,
Stafford, Somerset, Devon, York, and Lincoln Counties.

Most of which was sent up Post from judicious men, of purpose to be Printed.

Among other things there is a cruel and bloody Speech of the Lord Paulets,
which he spoke to his fellow soldiers in Sherbourne the 7. of September,
wherein he gives them order to kill men, women, and children, without mercy,
but to reserve such Ministers as they could take that were well-wishers to the
Parliament, for to be flead alive, and such like exquisite torments.

printer's or publisher's device

7ber 29 LONDON, Printed for T. Underhill. 1642.

Birmingham Sept. 24. 1642.
PRince Robert came Sep. 23. about 9, or 10. of the clock into Worcester, as is
thought to fetch away those Forces that lay at Worcester much endangered by the
Lord Generals forces approaching near the City: about ten Troops, under the
command of Colonel Brown, with about two or three hundred Dragooners, drawn
from an advantageous plot of ground, where they had pitched safely, to prevent
(as is thought) the Cavaliers flight, were fiercely assaulted at great
disadvantage, with all P. Roberts Forces, supposed to be strong 5000. horse,
they valiantly charged against the Cavaliers, had a cruel and bloody fight
till it came to swords point; Col: Fines himself rode up to their chief
Commander, thrust his Pistol to his belly, discharged and slew him outright:
Lord JOHN is thought to be slain or desperately wounded, and so carried away
in a coach, Prince Robert is reported to be shot through the thigh, but it is
not certain, the Parliaments Forces being far too weak were forced to
retreat: The Lo: General his Forces being not come in, and some of them
retreated into Worcester with the Cavaliers, and being discovered in the
streets of that City, they had another bitter skirmish in the streets where
diverse were slain. The Cavaliers came into the City woefully mangled and
bloody, some having their ears cut off, some with the flesh of their heads,
some with their very skulls also hanging down, their Pistols and Carbines
stocks being hacked away which they held up for the guard of their heads.

About 10. of the clock at night, all P. Roberts forces fled over the bridge
toward Ludlow, with many malignants of the City with them, both men, women,
and children, and made Captain Wingate (whom they took prisoner) to ride
before them in their flight, naked.

This 24. day about 10. of the clock in the morning, his excellence possessed
himself of the City, which ere this, had most of it been laid in the dust, had
not the Rogues quitted the City, his Excel: being ready for a battery.

The Townsmen certainly affirm that 22. of our side are slain, whom they have
buried, have found no more for present dead, many are sore wounded, Col: Sands
and Col: Brown, wounded among others. Mauy of theirs are killed, but I cannot
hear of a certain number.

The Cavaliers ragged regiment dare not stand battle upon any equal terms,
they have left diverse arms behind them, it is thought all they took from
Kiderminster and Beudley or more, they disarmed Worcester before they ran away,
but Worcester set upon the rear of the Dragooners in the flight, and disarmed
them again.

The Cavaliers in Shropshire and all other places where they come disarme all
Towns and families well affected to the Parliament, plundering their houses
most lamentablely, carrying away and spoiling all their goods, terrifying the
inhabitants extremely, and driving them to fly for their lives, taking many
prisoners, and they have lists of the names of all active persons whom they
seize upon, and do most mischief unto; Papists and Malignants houses,
generally escape their cruelty. If a running army be not raised to run as fast
as they, the whole Kingdom is in great danger suddenly to be run over.

Prince Roberts Army most part consists of Papists, who deal most cruelly with
all good men and Ministers, and all that have opposed the commission of Array.

Namptwich, Sept. 24.
The Commissioners of Array in Cheshire, met upon monday last at an house on the
Forest of Delamere, and as we hear they combined together by an oath of
secrecy to plunder and disarme the town of Nampt witch, which they have done
by the assistanc of about 1500. horse which came from Draiton to meet them,
under the command of the Lord Grandison. The inhabitants of the town having
certain intelligence of what they intended against them, presently assembled,
in consultation, to take a course, for securing of themselves, and immediately
sent messengers to the Gentry and towns abroad, to see what assistance they
would send, who formerly had couenanted to assist the town (as a place of
great consequence) if necessity required, and one messenger going to Sir
Thomas Delues 3. miles from the town, to acquaint him with the state thereof,
and entreating his aid formerly promised, he returned answer, he could not
spare one man, for he must look to him self, and within two hours after he came
by the town ryding to Chester, but left his arms in his own house, which the
next day after without any resistance were taken away by the Cavalires, Sir
Richard Wilbraham was forward for our help in sending us arms, and his men
abroad to bring in the Country, which care had he exercised in due time,
standing against the commissioners of Array, when by the rest of the gentry he
was with all importunity pressed thereunto, the town and county had never come
to that deplorable condition. M. Vernon, a brave Gentelman, and a great patriot
of our country, was the most forward man of all: had he come in half an hour
sooner we had held it out against all that assailed us. Cap: Croxon was the
greatest strength, and very resolute to defend the town. M. Clutton, an active
Gent: was resolved to fight it out, and disarmed the undersherifes man, who
came from the Cavaliers, who would not hear talk of any parlie, but gave
express command to the townsmen of his own company to give fire as soon as
the Caveliers should come within shot, and not to admit of any parlie, but
other Gent. of the town persuaded the contrary, lest it should be fired:
where upon they came to parley. The Lord Grandison, and the Lord Cholmoudelcy
engaged their honors, that noe man should be hurt, nor any arms or goods taken
from any man, but only desired that the arms might be laid up in the church
or the town hall till they heard further from the King: whereupon the town was
given up, but they dishonourably broake their engagement, seizing upon their
arms so soon as they entered the town, searching up and down for arms, and
men, threatening many, and pursueing them that fled, many took the river to
escape them, they stopped the passages of the town, to be revenged of them within
it, rid up and down the gardens to find them out and imprisoned many, then
they plundered the town, and all the country, which now lies open for a prey
to a perfidious enemy, conducted and strengthened by them of the Array to all
such places, where they have bin most serviceable to King and Parliament, if
speedy help come not, we shall be utterly desolate. This intelligence is from
many eyewitnesses.

That malignant party is further strengthened by these forces, of which this
is a true list.
THe Earl Rivers has five pieces of Ordnance, 10. barrels of powder, and 60.
bullets landed at Frodsham Sep 17. The Lord Strange Sep. 19. brought 2000. men,
and 2. Troops of Horse to Warrington, and are there bilited for 8. days, and
has 11. pieces of Ordnance, besides it is reported he expects 3000. men out of
Cumberland, Westmerland, and Northumberland.

Taunton in Somersetshire, Sept. 18.
THe beginning of this week the E. of Bath was in Devonshire about the
Commission of Array; the first Town we came to (the name whereof I have
forgot) he (not daring to go in) sent a brave Cavalier to the Town to find
how it stood, where the women so paid him for his pains, that he scarce
returned with any skin on his face. The second Town he went to was Moulton,
where he sent store of venizon, pretending his coming was to feast and make
merry, but his intentions being discovered, the women beset his house and
forced him with much ado to make an escape and leave his roast. On monday last
the Marquess and Cavaliers left Sherbourne and are gone to Minyard a sea Town
near Wales, and the next passage from thence to Ireland, they troubled all the
Countries in their passages, in so much that on tuesday night all the
shopwindowes here were shut, every man Armd and the Town guarded.

Taunton, Sept. 25.
Yesterday the E. of Bedford came with about 500. horse, some troops went
toward Minyard the last night at 12. of the clock, the rest go to day with
diverse Dragooners and Foot from other parts, and here are preparations for war,
all this country over, as if it were to be the seat of war. I could not
conveniently write unto you sooner, having been very busy in all the late
service about Sherbourne, in which God has graciously preserved me, though I
was employed in the Front of our Army, when we gave them the first onset. I
have here sent you the Lord Paulets unparalled bloody speech to his
soldiers, which you may publish if you please. Thus praying God to bless you,
and be a wall of fire about you, and that good great City, the Magazine of our
Kingdom, I rest, Your truly loving friend.

Postscript. It is now reported by messengers from Minyard, that the great ones
are escaped in a flat boat, and left all the common soldiers and ammunition
behind them.

The Lord Paulets Speech to his Soldiers at Sherbourne, on Wednesday before
the fight, being the seventh of September. 1642.
FEllow soldiers, our Spies are returned with news so good as that I can
scarce find in my heart to wish for better, our adversaries being so naked in a
defencable condition as that I do as certainly assure my self of victory, as
if an Angel from heaven had fortold it. The Earl droops and is exceeding
melancholy for these undeserved Ielousies, and rumors, with which my subtle
instruments have filled the heads of his soldiers. Their Colonels and
Captains that looked so high at their setting out against us, are now
crest-falne; their soldiers are most stolen home, and those which yet stay
behind, are possessed rather with a double stupidity then security, looking so
sleepily, as if they could be content to have their throats cut. To avoid any
farther trouble, they are not like to be put to a second beleaguring of us.
Their numbers are few, and those too decreasing every day and hour by
hundreds, that if we make not the more haste; we shall not have a considerable
company on whom to exercise our revenge. Their spirits and courage are quite
lost and broken, in so much that I am afraid we shall hardly meet with much
show of resistance, to make our attempts seem valiant. I may very well spare
all arguments of encouragement, when I compare your valorous resolution with
their weakness and cowardice: only I shall entreat you to observe these
following directions in and after the victory: Give quarter to none that wears
the sword, no not to the Earl himself; deafen your ears, and harden your
hearts against all cries and prayers for mercy: But if you meet with any of
their Clergy, reserve them for more exquisite torments, and a lingering death;
I intend to have them flead alive. But if any of you can find a more
tormenting and weightier punishment, I shall give place unto it. Be favorable
to the town and townsmen of Yeavel, for they are most of them our
well-wishers. As for the Roundheads that are among them, they shall be to
morrow singled out for the slaughter. But when you come to the Puritanicall
Towns, Taunton, Chard, Crukchorne, Bristoll, Dorchester, and Exon; then let
your swords cruel it without difference of age, sex or degree. Some must fall
to make up the number, as some the prey. Let those three Counties of Somerset,
Dorset, and Devon, be fatted with the blood and dunged with the carkases of the
inhabitants, that they may not make head against us. I am even ravished with
delight, when I consider the renowned glory, great plenty, rare pleasure, rich
and brave booties that court you. There is not the meanest soldier among you,
but shall have more wealth then he can tame or overcome; more choice and
delicate booties then the great Turk has in his Seraglios. These things will
invite you beyond any eloquence of mine. Therefore dear hearts comfort your
hearts with this, that you are able to look them dead.

Coventry in Warwickshire, Sept. 17.
HIs Majesty advancing into Staffordshire, sent two or three troops of horse,
came to Killing worth Castle to conduct those soldiers that were there, (under
the command of Serjant major Willis) unto His Majesty's other Forces: Our
Coventry Soldiers having notice hereof made haste to give them an onset, but
the rogues were got past Coals I ere they could reach them, and then such as
could go fastest on horseback, which were not above 30. rid amain, overwent
their foot, and adventured stoutly, i will not say desperately, to assault the
other army. Sergeant Major Willis, seeing the force so small that came to
encounter them, gave order that the Carriages and foot should march forward,
and they with their horse (though well wearied) would give battle to Coventry
horse, as indeed they did to our grief, for besides the prisoners they took,
which were three or four, and men they wounded which were two, (one whereof
lies at Curdworth, yet I think alive,) our men were forced to retreat, which
made the adverse party insult notably, and unless men did by miraculous faith
believe that God would destroy their adversaries with Rams horns, I know not
what should put such boldness into them. They got two or three horses from
their adversaries, some say also a prisoner or two, but the major body of the
Killingworth Army with their Carriage which was in four wagons came safe to
Tamworth, and after one days rest went from thence, in one of which Cap:
Scudamore lay, (such state his friends put upon him) he was wounded at Coventry
siege, and is very like to perish therewith.

Walsall in Staffordshire, Sept. 24.
MAster Comberford of Tamworth sent three or four cart loads of goods and
Ammunition, with many cattle lately toward Dudly Castle for safety, but
Birmingham men having notice hereof seized upon them: This Comberford is a
great malignant, this and other things makes Birmingham extremely threatened.
Some Cavaliers were lately apprehended here at Walfall for endeavoring to
levy soldiers, for which dreadful menaces are denounced against us also. The
Rebels have taken and plundered Namptwich, Sir Will: Brerton, that worthy
patriot of his Country, his house is pillaged and seven or eight horses taken
from him. So is the Lady Bromlyes reverend Parson Fishers, Mr. Charlton an
excellent Gent: Mr. Rawley of Rawley by P. Robert, and diverse others, which
makes good people fly apace.

Kendall in Westmerland.
THe Commissioners of Array are ready here to put their Commission in
execution, but dare not for fear of the Country, for our Country stands close
to their Petition and Protestation.

Lancashire, Sept. 23.
THere came under command of Cap: Legs brother 3000. Musketeers of horseback,
and much powder and shot from New Castle through this County to go to Chester,
which the Country was not able to make stay of, having no forces. The Lord
Strange has drawn his Forces to Waringdon, being about 2500. and intends to
go and pillage Manchester, he has compelled his tenants to pay 3. years rent
beforehand, for to support the King in this service, insomuch that poor men
are forced to sell their Cattaile and goods to pay it. Manchester keeps a
strong watch night and day, some places being plundered near them by Sir
Francis Wortley, and other Cavaliers as Knutsford, Oldham, etc. The Lo: Strange
draws along with him the train bands, but sore against their wills.

Chester, Sept. 24.
THe King having left his Army, bilited about Shrewsbury, came to White church
upon Friday, and was welcomed into the County of Chester, by the Lo: Rivers,
L. Chamley, and Sir Thomas Aston, and then went toward Chester with two
Troops, being his guard, besides Sir Tho: Astons Troop, and the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Recorder Brerewood, received him into Chester in great pomp,
presenting him ith 200. l. and the Prince with 100. l. The Court is kept at the
Bishops house. The next Tuesday His Majesty intends to depart from this City
toward Rixam, thence to Elsmore, and so back to Shrewsbury. He has imprisoned
some of our Noble Gent: for obeying the Parliament. Before the King came out of
Shropshire, he sent down the River Severne 6. pieces of Ordnance to
Bridgenorth to secure that place, but it is hoped that the Lord General will
in good time take that place, and those Pieces, and Shrewsbury to boot.

Yorkshire, Sept. 24. by a special Post.
THe honest part of our Gentry and Commonalty now begin to pluck up their
spirits, make head against the Parliaments Forces, have received many men and
Arms from Sir John Hotham, whose son commands them: They have chose the Lord
Fairefax their chief Commander, and their Army daily increases: They have
taken some very strong holds already for the service of the Parliament, and
resolve to seize upon all the Parliaments enemies in all the County, whereupon
Sir William Savile and many other malignants are fled to Pomfret Castle for
refuge.

In Lincolneshire also the Lord Willoughby of Parham, the Earl of Lincoln,
and many others, make head, join their Troops together, and intend to join
with Yorkshire, whereby it is hoped through Gods great goodness all the North
part of England will be shortly secured for the King and Parliament.

FINIS.

