THE Last Will and Testament OF Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn: With his Speech
to some Friends in Jersey a little before his Death: Also certain Legacies
given to diverse persons of Note.

Together with his ELEGY and EPITAPH.

First taken in Shorthand by Sister Abigail Lemmon, and since published by
Ruth Dox.

Printed in the Year, 1654.

The Last Will and Testimony, etc.
In the Name of all the Saints, Amen.
I John Lilburn of the County of Esquire, being in perfect memory, and good
health of body (only something factiously disposed) Do make this my Last Will
and Testament, in manner and form following; revoking all former Wills, Deeds,
or Claims whatsoever.

Inprimis, I give and bequeath my soul into his hands to whom it is due, hoping
however though it has been turbulent on earth, yet it may live and reign
peacefully in Heaven.

2. I give and bequeath my Body to the Earth, whereof it was first made;
desiring my Friends that it may be carefully imbalmed, and afterward decently
wrapped in a double sheet of Lead, and laid in some place where no Worm may eat
thereof; nor that it be covered with earth; lest it cause either mutiny in the
Creatures, or Earthquakes; it yet never being quier in life, it may now rest in
death, and all Creatures receive no prejudice by it.

3. J bequeath my Brains and Scull, to my old Friend Mr. William Pryn, and the
rest of his honored Tribe and men at Law, and though we (like Samsons Foxes)
have been tied together, and drawn several ways, yet now that we bury all
differences in the silent grave of forgetfulness: provided he manage my said
Headpiece to the best advantage in pleading of Magna Charta, without taking
any unlawful Bribes, or Angelical Fees, upon pain of forfeiture of both his
Ears: Also I bequeath unto my said old Friend Mr. Pryn, one Statute Book at
large, one Littleton, one Poulten, Dr. Bastwicks Let any, Mr. Burtons Appeal to
Caesar, Martin Marprelates works in Quarto; News from I swich, Nativity of
Presbytery, by Nick Culpepper. A Looking glass for proud Prelates, by W. P.
together with my own works in Folio, by what names or titles soever
distinguished: so that they make not use of any Treatise more then my own: it
being a common use with me (to gain the affection of the People) to father
other men's Works, which error or failing I now disclaim, wishing all people to
shun the vain applause of men, or people, that like a broken Reed runs into
that hand that thinks he trusts to be supported by it, of which too late, I
find sad experience.

4. I bequeath my lips to sister P. to employ them in holy salutations, not
after the flesh, but Spirit, and so to be communicated to all the Saints of the
Femininine: no Masculine, after that salutation or impression, to presume to
deface the same in two hours space, upon pain of being excommunicated out of
the Congregation of the Saints.

5. I give my Eyes to Argus to be mended, that they may never more squint after
the applause of people, nor the pomp, riches and glory of a transitory and
fading world.

6. I give and bequeath my burch of Tallyes to the next Brewers Clerk, that can
learn the Art of keeping within compass, and so be free from breaking.

7. I give my Needle and Thimble to the next Cloth-drawer, that is resolved to
follow his Trade and Calling, without intermedling with other men's occasions,
or State affairs.

8. I give and bequeath my means and estate unto my beloved wife, to have and
hold the same to she and her Heirs for ever.

9. For my State policy, I leave it to the discretion of C. S. that it may be
by him cancelled, and turned into true obedience, and submission to higher
powers.

10. For my Trade of Soap-boyling, I leave to all those variable Mechanics,
that being weary of one Trade resolve to try another, though it be never so
much to their loss or prejudice.

11. I give and bequeath my Gratitude to all those that have supplied my
necessity during my Banishment, or since my imprisonment.

Lastly, I give my good Counsel to all men, to be careful, and rest content in
their Callings, without meddling or intermedling with that which belongs not to
them, or is too high for them, or beyond their proper sphere or element, to
shun popularity, or vain applause of men, to hate covetousness and fraud, and
to envy none that are in authority, but to live peaceably and quietly with all
men, to fear God above all things, and next him his Ministers, and the Peoples
Magistrates, acknowledging the necessity of a diversity and pre-eminence in
degrees to be amongst men, for the necessary direction and preservation of them
in conformity of living: even Nature her self in Bees, Birds and Beasts,
teaching the same: Wherefore I desire all my Friends to learn that short, but
hard lesson, Know thy Self, Which is the way to know thy Duty to Magistrates,
and the excellence of Justice, and how needful it is: which that you may
seriously consider, is the humble desires of your Cordial departing

Friend, John Lilburn.

The Speech of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn before his Departure.
Gentlemen,
WE are all debtors to Nature, and know not how soon we are to Cancel that
Obligation we owe: sometimes our own selves hastening on our own ends: sometimes
our ends coming by one accident, sometimes by another: however our time is full
of danger, short and uncertain; and therefore it behooves us all to prepare for
our desolution: You know as tha Tree falls, so it lies, yet before the Fall,
it was subject to the wind, or other means or accident, that was the cause
thereof: I trust I have a good Conscience toward God and man; I fear not
death, nor the means to it, not mistrusting, but I shall have more valor in
patient suffering what ever is inflicted on me for my sins, then the dread of
such punishment can be unto me. And seriously I am as ready and willing to
leave the World, as you can be to fancy me dead before my time: For preparing
our selves thereto, and in expectation thereof, desiring the same from your
selves.

I rest, yours to Command, John Lilburn.

An Elegy on Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn, supposed to be Mortus Est.
PHaeton and Icarus, Typheus breath
Shall blow Fames Trumpet at John Lilburns death,
The Rose-cheek'd Sun, maskt in a pitchy cloud
Shall be close Mourner, wait upon his shroud,
Shril whistling winds, shall dash impetuous waves
Up to the Skies, whose fall shall drowned the Graves
For Lilburns loss; and teach the dead to weep,
And Ghosts to walk, even in deaths gentle sleep.
Some said, that John with Lilburn was at odds,
But death can make him peaceful, as the gods.
Sure he is not dead? it cannot be, if Law
Could but redeem him from Deaths powerful jaw.
Killed by Report, it is true; Dead with a lie,
Most happy John, that living so could die;
All Faction ends in Death, Ambition, Pride,
Death humbles all; had these with Lilburn died
He had been famous, and died full well,
And escaped his Anagram, I burn in Hell.
His Epitaph, being in bed asleep.
Here lies a man; no Woman can deny it
Which died in peace, but never lived in quiet.
Here Is a man so skilled in Law and Reason,
He could convert the sense o'th Law to Treason;
The People pray, if over his Grave ye walk
For to tread softly, if he wake heel talk.
By Mr.

FINIS.

