THE LATE Eclipse unclasped:

Or the mistaken Star-gazers UNMASKED.

Wherein is manifested seven seve rall Reasons whereby these Astrolegers have
deceived the People. By a learned Divine near London.

O! B^other Star-gazer, what shall we do?

Isa. 47. 13, 14. Let now the Astrologers, Stargazers, and monthly
Prognosticators stand up and save thee; But they shall not be able to save
themselves.

Printed in the year, that many did fear,
that Doomes-day it was nigh:
But now we do see, what Star-gazers be,
for they have foretold a Lie.
1652.

TEXT, Mark 13. 24: But in those days, after that tribulation, the Sun shall
be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light.
THe Foregoing Verses show the destruction of Jerusalem, from whence Christ
makes a Transsition of the destruction of the World.

The Connection of the Suns eclips, with the words, in those days after the
Tribulation, do make all time to present with God, because time is not fluent
to God, but always fixed; and because God would have us to wait for the Last
Day, every day.

Concerning the Suns darkness, some Expositors expound it Mistically, and some
Allegorically, as Ezekiel. 32. Chap. Is an elegant expression of Pharoahs
destruction; So by an Eclipse, they would understand the miserable events in
the World, either by great perplexity on men's minds, or a darkning of the Truth
by Error and Heresy.

But it is a Rule in Divinity, where there is no necessity of a figurative
construction, there the Litterall sense may stand, and therefore the words as
the Text are to be understood littelally; yet a Mystical sense is not quite
excluded, but from an accurate consideration of the visible Signs which shall
be in the Sun and the Moon, it cannot be figuratively applied to a general
Apostacy from the true Faith; or a perplexity on men's minds, because Christ
does distinguish between Tribulation of time, and the times of perplexity on
men's minds, Luke 21. 24.

The best Interpreters though they understand these words literally, yet deny
not, but by Gods Ordination they may have a Metaphysicall Interpretation, as
the Rainbow, though it proceed from a Natural Cause, yet God designed it to a
Spiritual use, viz. to signify the Covenant between God and all flesh, Genesis
9. So that the concurrence of Divine Providence is not seen nor considered in
the World, because Astronomers may foresee Eclipses from Natural Causes, both
by Rules of Art, and also because they have been from the Creation.

The Eclipse at Christ's death was Praeturnaturall in two respects. First,
because the Moon was then at the full, then the Passover was kept on the
fourteenth day of the Month, and therefore the Moon was at the farthest
distance from the Sun. And secondly, because that Eclipse continued for three
hours without increase or decrease of darkness, which is contrary to other
Eclipses.

Lucian a Martyr made the said Eclipse an argument to convince the Heathen of
their Infidelity, and to bring them to repentance.

At the death of Charles the Great, in the year 814. was a most horrid Eclipse,
by reason of a fuliginous matter arising out of the Earth. And in Anno 1575.
there appeared a new Star which Astronomers never knew before; therefore
toward the end of the World God can show prodigious Sgnes as forerunners of
his coming to judgment: and the terrifying of men's minds at this time, which
is not usual in other Eclipses, confirms this Eclipse to be prodigious.

When the eyes of the body grow dim, it is a sign of death approaching, as in
Ecclesi. 12. so when the Eye of of the World, the Sun grows dark, it is a
sign the world is near confusion.

Let us not think that ordinary things in nature have no extraordinary
signification in the mind of God; for God speaks somewhat to the world from
natural bodies, as Micah 6.9. The Lords voice cries to tae City, etc. hear
ye the Rod, etc.

I conceive that ordinary Eclipses are by Christ ordained, to foretell his
coming to Judgment, for the signs praedicting the destruction of Jerusalem
were natural, and why may not Christ deal so with the World now?

Christ does not call them prodigious, but only signs, which have a rise out
of nature, and are not hyperphysicall: And Christ says not that any one of
these signs, singly considered, are signs of his coming, but all these
jointly together; so that Eclipses, and roaring of the Sea, conjunctively
considered, do foretell Christ's coming.

Observation, Is there any aptness in the eclipse of the Sun to foretell
Christ's coming to judgment?

I answer, Gods clouding of light, seems contrary to his own institution, so
that an eclipse may seem proeternaturall; therefore in Eclipses the Heathens
used to heat Basins, and Kettles, and to make a great noise to aw^ken the Sun
when it was eclipsed: and in respect of the alteration whi^^ may fall out among
men, this Eclipse is very fear^full, for in Anno. 1645. followed the sweating
sickness here in England, whereof many thousands dyed; and prrsently after
that, the disease called the Scurvy; so that which has an aptness to cause
great changes, may Prognosticate Doomes-day.

Secondly, An Eclipse may singnifie the future condition of wicked men, to be
cast into utter darkness, and separated forever from the true light God.

Quest. But what shall we think of this present Eclipse?

Answer, We are not to neglect the influences of it, because it is a great
work of God, and very visible to our eyes; now God speaks of his own great
Works, Psalm. 111. 19, He has made a Tabernacle for the Sun. And God acconts
that man a Fool that will not heed bis Works, Psalm. 92. 2. and in Isa. 5. 12.
God speaks against such as drink away their fear, and make merry, but regard
not the works of his hands.

Now God sets this Sign over our heads, and makes the Sun to be a more propper
Significator to England, than any other part of Europe; therefore we ought to
take special notice of Gods Acts in this matter, since our Fathers never knew
the like; For whereas the Sun is divided into twelve parts, to morrow there
will be but half a part of the twelve visible to our sight.

Again, in respect of the Conjuncture of time: it is now a time of Change,
Danger, and Trouble, at home, and abroad: and also a time of most grievous
sins, as Blasphemy, Perjurie, Libertisme, Oppression, Pride, Sensuality,
Error, and Herisies, these may make us to shake at the shaking of a Leaf,
much more, when God shakes his Rod over a Nation.

In Philosophy, those things may be profitable in the General, which are not
in the particular, as Frostie weather is good for the Earth, but it is pinching
to Man; but I never read of any good effect that followed an Eclipse.

But as the Jews were enjoined to make Battlements in building their Houses to
preservemen from falling: so must Minnisters give warning to their Auditors,
what thoughts to entertain concerning the events of Eclipses, that they be not
distracted with Curiosity, or Stupidity: but to conceive with Christian
consideration of some great change to ensue; but whether this change will be
from Health to Sickness, from Liberty to Slavery, from Truth to Heresy, or
from Peace to War and Destruction; I will not take upon me to Divine or
foretell; for foolish people give more credit to judiciary Astrologers, then
to Gods Word; but Gods Ministers may aver, that it is not in the power of any
Astrologer to foretell what the Events or Influence of this Eclipse will be in
particular.

Objection. Astrologers have oftentimes spoken truth and foretold events, as
one foretold that Nero should be Emperor, and should murder his own Mother,
and another foretold that Augustus should be Lord over the whole World, and
another praedicted that Picus Mirandula a very learned man should die in the
thirty three year of his age, and so he did.

Answer. Grant they do tell truth sometimes, but how false are they ten times
for once telling truth? and albeit they may speak truth, yet it is not out of
rules of Art, but out of seven false ways they may ^roedict future events.

As First* Out of a secret communion with the Devil in their Spirits, though
the Party himself knows not the power of the Devil working in him and so
Ambrose, Austin, and Origien d^e affirm, that by a secret impulse of the
Devil, they may disclose Events. II. Out of a Natural Magic; as Thales the
Philosopher, from the consideration of Waters then abounding, did foretell a
great plenty of Oil in the World; and the Egyptians, from the observation of
the Ebbing and Flowing of Nilus, could foretell Plenty or Scarcity. III. They
do oftentimes foretell things, wherein they themselves are Actors, as in case
of Marriage: when they are well rewarded for telling of a good Fortune to
befall a Person by such a Match, they will labor to bring it to pass, and so
it falls out. IV. When a thing is doubtful how it will fall out, they may
guess at that Contingence which is most probable: and so Old Men and Women may
foretell by hap-hazard. V. Because they speak in an Ambiguous sense, and so
deceive the People: and so the Devils Oracles at Delphos threatened many
thousands in Old-time. VI. From a natural Segacity and observation of a
Persons temper, and disposition, they may guess what will befall him. VII.
From an over Credulity in the Consultors with these Astrologers: as if one were
to fight a Duel, the Astrologer tells him he shall have the victory: and
here-upon the Consulter has his courage heightened and so prevails.
By these seven false Ways, and not by Rules of Art, Events are foretold many
times.

Let us now make Holy use of this Eclipse, by considering it as a forerunner
of Doomesday; and let us know, that He that Eclipses the Sun now, will ere
long, take the Sun quite from us, or us from the Sun.

And let the goodness of God in admonishing us by Signs and Tokens of the
general Judgment, make deep impression on our Spirits.

Christ gives warning to the World by his Sword, as well as by his Word.

Now Christ is said to wear his Sword three ways.

First, his Sword is girt to his Thigh, importing that he is ready to avenge
himself upon the ungodly, Psalm. 45.3.

Secondly, He is said to have a Sword in his Mouth, Revel. 1. 16* and this is
his threatening Sword.

Thirdly, He is said to have his Sword in his Hand, Psalm. 7. 12. to kill and
slay. Now his Sword in his Mouth, he threatens, and to morrow he will shake it
over our heads.

This Eclipse affords matter of Meditation.

I, Concerning the Nature of Sin; For if darkness (which is no physical
Entity, but a privation of Light) be so uncomfortable to Sense: how Odious and
Disconsolate a thing is Sin which is a privation of the Light of Gods
Countenance, even the very life of the Soul.

Secondly, consider that as the Sun is not the cause of the darkness which
will be to morrow (which is Black-monday, as our Astrologers is pleased to call
it so*) in our Horizon, but the Moon, by reason of the interposition between
the Body of the Sun and our sight; So God is not the cause of Sin, which is
the darkness of the Soul: neither can there be any efficient, but a deficient
cause of Sin, but Sin being as it were interposed between God and the
Soul, hinders the light of his Grace; Again, it is said Isa. ^9. 2^. (...)
have made a (...) between God and your Souls.

II. A second Meditation may be much of the misery of the Creature, when God
hides his Face from it; for all our Strength and Joy is from the Light of Gods
Countenance: God therefore tells Moses* Deuteronomy. 31. 17. That He would hide his
Face from the Israelites; (...) that the hiding of Gods Face from the Soul, is
the Suburbs of Hell: and perplexity without the Light of Gods Countenance, is
but a Curse, And if it be so sad a thing to want the light of the Sun for a few
hours, what a woeful thing is it to endure everlasting darkness in Hell. III.
A third Meditation may arise from Christ's Death; then was the Sun of
Righteousness Eclipsed, when Christ's suffering flesh was interposed between
the Deity and the Eye of flesh; but as the Sun in the Firmament suffers nothing
at all by an Eclipse, nor is robbed of the least part of his brightness: no
more did Christ's Deity suffer the least Diminution of Glory: for all the
Passion fell on the Humane Nature. And as the Sun to morrow (as the Astrologers
calls Black-monday.) after the Eclipse will be brighter then before, so Christ's
Body after his Resurrection, was more vigerous than before. IV. This Eclipse
may be to our Meditation, as an Emblem of these Apostaticall times, wherein
Gods Truth may be darkened with Heresies, and Persecution; And this should be
matter of grief to us, that it should come to pass in our days. V. We should
study thankfulness for the Suns light, and the benefit we enjoy by it; For if
we be troubled at the absence of it, how great a blessing is the enjoying of
it?
Use. This should teach us to avoid all Superstious fear in respect of
Astrologers Praedictions: for God forbids us to be afraid of the Signs of
Heaven, Jer. 10. 2. But yet it is good always to have a fear of Evitation,
but not a fear of Desperation. II. It is a dangerous thing to be regardlesse
of of the opperation of Gods hands; therefore let the fear of God be always
that Spiritual Antidote against the fear of all changes and events of the
world. III. And as we ought not slavishly to be afraid of their Praedictions,
so we ought not to put any confidence in their cunning; For the Lord upbraideth
the Israelites with their confidence in their Astrologers, Isa. 47. 13. Let
now, (says God) the Astrologers, Star-gazers, and monthly Prognosticators
stand up and save thee; and verse 13. God tells them they should not deliver
themselves; for Balaam that great Sorcerer, who was slain with the Sword,
could not foresee his own (...) to believe Astrologers. IV. And set not your
affections on things beneath Eclipses; For sickness, or casualties may deprive
us of all outward things in a moment; but to a pious Soul, as Crosses abound,
so Comforts abound, 1 Cor. 1. 7. (...) your (...) blotted out in the sense of
your Conscience, and then no Trouble or Calamity will make you dismayed; For as
that which is written with the juice of Lemmons is not legible, unless you
hold it to the fire; so if your sins do remain unblotted out of the Book of
Conscience at the time of Death, Hellfire will make all the Sins that ever a
Man has committed in his life legible and plain to him, and what a ghastly
sight will that be.
Let us fear Solemn Justitice, the Son of righteousness, and then we shall
not fear the Suns influence.

FINIS.

