A True RELATION Of the taking of Sherburne Castle, AND The treachery of the
town malignants.

As it came in a Letter written by a Captain who was at the taking of it.

Dated from Sherburne, and received here the 24. of April, 1643.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand. 1643. April 25th

A true Relation of the taking of Sherbourne Castle.
Noble Sir,
AFter my humble service presented unto you, these are to let you understand
that we marched out of Bristoll on the 11. of this present with all our Troop,
and with one Company of Dragooners which did consist of about 40* men. Col.
Popham and his brother also marched along with us, having no Forces with them
but their usual attendance. So then we marched into the lower parts of
Somersetshire, to seize on the rents of the Lo: Capel, and the Lo: Pawlet, and
of the Marquis of Hartford, and partly our journey was for the speedy
expediting of sending away the provision which was raised in that Country to
send into Ireland. In the lower part of Somersetshire we found men to
contribute unto it very cheerfully, but that part which is next adjacent to the
County of Wilts, has been very cold in their contribution toward the
Parliament and Ireland, but now we shall make them contribute unto us.

We also marched to Wells, where we found Colonel Strowd with about an hundred
Musketeers, and there was some falling out between Col: Pophams men, and one
of Col: Strowds Captains, but it was quickly pacified, for Col: Strowds men
left the town the next morning.

We did also make search in the Bishops house of Bath and Wells, and there we
found one of the Bishops gods, which was the Lady Mary with the Babe in her
arms, and she was bound up in a linen cloth and laid in a coffin, this we
found in the Bishops closet, and my father does intend to send it to the
Parliament.

At Wells we received order from Col: Fynes to make all the haste we could
toward Sherbourne, for as much as he had received intelligence that the
Marquis of Hartford and the Lord George Digby were on their march from Oxford
to come to Sherbourne to raise Forces in Dorsetshire. So we according to our
order left Wels, and marched toward Sherbourne with as much speed as we could
to come thither before the Marquis, and we marched to Sherbourne that night. We
sent a party of horse before us to Sherbourne, in all about 20. Horse and
Dragoneers', and gave them order to stay for us at the towns end, and not
enter into the town till we came to them, because we knew it to be a very
malignant town. But they it should seem forgot our order, and marched into
the town, and when they were in they drew themselves up into a Battalia, and
made a stand in a broad place in the town, and then they presently sent for
the Constable to provide them and us Quarter. The Constable came presently to
them, and told them he would do them the best service he could in providing
them quarter; but this Constable returned no more again to our men, but in
stead of getting quarter for us, sought all the means he could to raise the
town against us, so we presently came in to our men, and asked what was the
news? they told us there was all peace to us. As we were marching into the
town, we heard a bell ring, and I asked a man what was the reason that the
bell did ring? he told me it was the nine of clock bell. So we marched down
toward our quarter, for we were come within their chains and their turn pike,
then (little dreaming of any opposition that should be made us) we marched
down into the middl^ of the town, it being very dark; when we came against
the butchers shambles, Master Hugh Popham, Captain Smith and my self were in
the Front a little before any our men. And then some men called unto us, and
bade us stand, and asked us for whom we were? our answer unto them was, we were
for the King and Parliament: they told us they were for the King against the
Parliament. Then we called for our men to come up unto us, but in the mean time
we gave fire upon them, and they likewise gave fire upon us, and then they gave
fire out of all the windows upon us, and came running out of every door with
Muskets and great Bills, saying one to another, Kill the Parliament dogs. Some
ten of our Dragooners were between our Troop, and Master Hugh Popham, my self
and Captain Smith. Master Popham and Captain Smith carried themselves very
valiantly, but those Dragooners of ours had not above three matches lighted
amongst them, which forced them to fly back again upon our Troop, and so made
the Troop give back a little way out of the strait place that they were in. So
Master Popham, my self and Captain Smith were forced to retreat; Master Hugh
Popham being so wounded that he rode not 100. yards from the place before he
fell down dead; Cap. Smith being so much wounded, that it is very doubtful he
will not live; and my self was shot through one of my arms, close by the
shoulder, and had I had no arms, I had been killed like one of them. But
thanks be to God I am as well as ever I was in my life, but was never so dry
beaten with bills and pikes as I was then. We drew our selves up into a Body
again with all speed, and made our Trumpets sound a charge upon them
presently, and so we marched down again upon them. And then we dismounted our
40. Dragooners, and they marched down with us, and fought very valiantly, so
that we presently beat them from that place of the town, and within one
hour we beat them quite out of the town, they being in number 300. and we
not above 120. but there was one of our soldiers which was shot out of a
window, who being in heat of blood shot up his pistol into the thatch of a
house (unknown to any Officer there) and the house was presently on a light
fire, and it was in the very heart of the town; we had but one man killed in
the place which was Master Popham and six or seven wounded, so at last we could
not find one man in the Town, and we rod up and down from one house to another
to cause the people come forth to put out the fire, but they being very
diffident of our mercy would not appear. So we were forced to leave the town
for that night; for if we had stayed no body would have come to put out the
fire, So we marched to a Town called Evell some three miles from Sherborne and
there we quartered all night. The next morning the men of Sherborne beat up
their drums for the Cuntrymen to come in to them and stood again upon their
guard, and we sent into the Country for what forces we could get, and we
have gotten within three days 3000. very able men and very well armed, and
now are some 500. strong in horse so that now we have a brave Army, on the
19. of this present we marched tovvard sherborne again and when the enemy
heard of it they ran quite away, So we have possession of the Town of
Sherborne, the Castle and the Earl of Bristolls house, where I believe we
shall have great store of wealth; There was a Rogue hired by some of the men
of Sherborne to kill one of the Lieutenant Colonels of Somersetshire which man
we have taken, and he has confessed unto us whom set him a work, we have
taken some Colors there, and now we have spoiled the party whereof they had
great hopes there, I pray present my duty to my uncle. I rest,

From Sherborne Castle 21. April 1643. Your humble servant, L.L.
There were about ten men killed that night in Sherborne of the enemies.



FJNJS.

