Delaun Revived, Viz. A Plain and short discourse of that Famous DOCTOR'S
PILLS, Their Use and Virtues. With Choice Receipts for the Cure of the Scurvy,
Dropsy, Jaundies, Venereal and other Diseafes.
Before I speak to this Famous Medicine, I will declare who Delaun was; Then,
the Price of his Pill and how to take it, and of its several Virtues in order,
in such Plain words, as the weakest capacity may understand:


And I entreat those who hope for help hereby, would thoroughly Read this short
book, and observe my Directions for their own good and the Authors's Credit.

THis Famous Author was not like any the Quacks of this Age, whom the
Honorable London Colleagues could comptrol, who Delaun was
as they did Bromfield of Fetter Lane most deservedly, and compelled him to pay
Forty marks; for that, that he, though the chief of the Pill-sellers, was never
bred to Physic, or had Learning enough to understand his Accedence; Mr. Scott
in Grubstreet Attorney for the College, who prosecuted many others, will averr
this truth: which, if Bromfield (or any for him (ca^se he cannot spell) deny,
in Print, my Next will give you a farther account of the man and his Medicine.

No, Delaun was the honor and Ornament of this College, and the Apothecaries
Company;
he was first and Founder of their Hall where his Effigies is now erected, he
was Doctor and Apothecary to Queen Ann, King James, and Charles the first; he
had thirty seven children by one wife, lived 97 years and died worth more
thousands of pounds which he bequeathed to Hospitals and his numerous
Offspring, amongst which, he was attended with no less than sixty Grandchildren
at his lamented Funeral in Blackfriars.

My own knowledge in Physic I acknowledge to Pharmacy, being bred under that
great Inquirer into Nature Dr. Willam Harvey, as his Apothecary, who above all
Catharticks, having Experimented this Pill, commended it to the world, as the
most friendly to Nature, and effectually in sweetning the blood, and
maintaining it is Circulation, whereof (to England's glory) he was the true
Author.

And, this Pill having before and since, past the Test of the most Scrutinous,
and in such esteem now, that not only the City, Court, and Country, Allowed by
the College.
prefer it, but the very Collegiate Doctors prescribe it to their Patients; and
they themselves and Families actually take it, from my own hands: which I deny
any other to be thus graced, thus Justified.

The Price of, and how to take this Pill.
Note, that in and about London the Poor (who may fetch them every day, The
price and reasons thereof.
as they use them) may buy one single Pill closed in a Paper box gilt with
Gold, and costs but six pence, yet is a sufficient Purge for most
Constitutions, but, to remote parts I send only whole Boxes or half boxes of
Tin, containing 6 or 3, Price three shillings, or eighteenpence, sealed with
three Scallop shells on a Bend Ingrail'd, and it is hoped, that none will murmr
that every Pill should cost six pence. A Lark excels a Kite; And who can expect
a pleasant Purge, (prescribed and allowed by a Consult of the most towering
Judgments, and Compounded of the most costly Ingredients that Art or Nature
ever yielded) for less than six pence.

Note further, The bigness of the Pill.
that this Pill is so inviting to the Eye and Smell and of such easy Operation,
that those who once take it bid adieu to all other Physic; and it is bulk is
but as a gray Pea, and may be divided into two, ten, or twenty Pills at
pleasure, and then, sure none will quarrel at their Number.

These Pills are always as soft wax, A lasting Pill.
never grow dry, or decay in their Virtues, which makes them in such esteem
with Seafaring men, and in the Indies, Virginia, France, Ireland, and this
Island, where the spreading Scurvy would otherwise eat up the Inhabitants.

Directions low to take these Pills.
Which I earnestly entreat all persons concerned to peruse well, as they tender
their own Health; and, if by their own neglect any miscarriage happen, they
will not blame the Author, and through Jesus, the grand Physician of the soul,
none may have cause to complain.

First then, Cautions
it is desired that none should covet large Doses or many Stools, but rather
take ten times too little, than once too much, for if this Pill should chance
not to purge at all, yet it is even then acting in the body as a Balsom,
fighting against some hidden Malady, and by the oftener taking of easy Doses,
diseases are more certainly overcome, nature strengthened, long life and health
secured.

Note also, that tho this Pill should not work as you expect it should, this or
that day; you must not blame the Physic, but impute it to the temper of your
bodies; for, what will work with the same person to day, may not work at all
another day: the Pill is always the same exactly Prepared, but our bodies
alter.

Coutions and time of Taking the Pin.
Next this, note well, I do not commend this, Cautions Worms, Rickets,
Convulsions in Children
nor any Purging Physic (as some do, that neither know nor care what they say
or do) to weak, wasted constitutions, nor to women young with child, nor to
Infants less aged then three or four years (these Pills being absolute against
Worms, Rickets, and Convulsions,) and, to such I warn that none give above the
third or fourth part of a Pill, having strict regard to Age and strength,
although I assert it to be the most safe, pleasant, best corrected Physic in
the Universe. Directions to take this Pill.


Persons of indifferent strength, may take One, the stronger one and half, the
weaker, half or two thirds, of a Pill, and by degrees, more or less, as they
desire (and find) them to work.

The Time of taking all quick Physic ought to be in the morning, especially in
cold weather, least (if taken over night) the Patient, Time of taking Physic.
forced to rise, catch cold.

You may take half over night, and the rest next morning; but, the old and best
way is, to take them after the first sleep, or at any time from one or two a
clock till seven, eight or nine, in the morning, take them alone, or in the pap
of an Apple, Egg poched, Beer, Ale, Coffee, Tea, or other liquor you can best
swallow them in.

You may stay at home, what to eat or drink,
or go abroad, drink, or not drink after them, at your pleasure: but, certainly
a warm chamber with tender persons, and some warm Ale, Broth, posset, etc.
suits best with all purging Physic.

The Patients may eat their usual food to Dinner and Supper, but hot and fresh
is most suitable.

Those whose Diseases have been of long standing, Inveterate diseases require
much physic.
ought to take a dose every other day for four or five days or longer, as
strength permits, and the Disease abates. Many persons take them going to Bed,
with great Ease and Convenience, especially such as go late to Bed, and have
business next day.

VIRTUES of this PILL.
This Pill is chiefly appropriated to the Stomach, Stomach
and with such Effects, that though other Medicines may sometimes succeed, yet
no other is Aequivalent in healing, cleansing, comforting, and settling this
bowel: and, at the same time, reaching the very Head.

This Physic, The head's excellency.
and this only, has prerogative to examine that Noble part, that seat of
Reason, wherein are lodged the internal senses, the will, memory, imagination,
understanding, etc. and all the external senses also depend on this Tower of
Pallas the Head.

The Brain is the offspring of all the Nerves and Fibers, which distribute
themselves and convey the Animal spirits to all the distant parts of man.

The very Heart it self owes its affections and motion (I do not mean the
pulsific motion) to the annimal spirits.

The Head, Head is the All of man.
in a word, is the All of man, and, this Prince of Pills being sole Ruler
there, who shall doubt it is power in managing the meaner parts of that
microcosm.

HEADACHE
(...) or pains or Aches in the whole, Head pains.
or any part of the Head, are removed with six or eight Pills, taken in twice
so many days, according to the first Directions.

But, if the Disease has been habitual, and inveterate, the sick person ought
to try this method again, and again after a week or ten days discontinuance,
according to strength, etc.

In the same manner, are cured these following Diseases, of the Head, Eyes.
Ears. Teeth. Taste. Smell.
Viz. Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Dropsy of the Brain, Madness, Frenzy, Ideotisme,
swimming, or noise in the head, weak memory, Giddiness, stupidity, weak or sore
Eyes, Deafness or Drumming noise in the Ears, or Head, want of smell or Taste,
Toothache, Kings Evil, swelling about the Neck, Throat, Jaws, or Gumms,

Lethargy, which (vi vocis) denotes a sluggish forgetfulness, and is an excess
of sleep and eclipse of Memory, with a Fever, as the famous Willis describes
it, if I mistake not his Sense.

Vertigo which is a confusion of the Animal spirits, when the sight is
persuaded that all its objects turn round.

Palsy, which is a Laxation of the Nerves from their true bent and tensity,
whereby Motion or Sense, or both, in the whole, or any part of the body,
cannot, as usually, be exercised.

And, besides these Diseases of the Head there are other, which are rather ill
habits, viz. A Coma or, continual sleeping, Pervigilium, or a restless
watching, an Incubus, or Nightmare, Hard Drinking.
which is a disease of the Breast and brain, Melancholy a Disease of the Heart,
and Head.

And be assured (Good Fellows) that nothing in Nature can carry off Sottish
dullness after hard drinking, like this Pill, which settles both brain and
stomach, Sweetens the Drink-Tainted Breath, and Creates an Appetite to
Admiration.

GOUT
Which though it seize parts far remote from the Head viz. the hands or feet,
etc. Willis de Morb. Capit.
and then the joints only (inter internodia Ossium) is a Disease of the Head
and Nerves, which arise thence, and (consequently) (I hope) none dare dispute
this Pills Prerogative and approved Effects in this Distemper.

CHOLICK
Which does not only afflict the Colon, or great Gut, Cholick a Disease of the
HEAD.
(as some think) but also the whole Region of the belly, and chiefly the
Mesentery, (where there are many great Nerves) is also a Disease of the Head,
and cured with these Pills, taken in Clysters, in the fit as well as
afterward, Viz. thus.

Take of Camomise flowers, Certain ^ase or cure for Colic Wind Gripes.
Iunsper herries bruised, of each half an an Dunce, Firr tops, Mallows of each
half an handful, Anuis and Feuelseeds of each owd drachms; boil them in two
ouarts of Posset ale; take three quarters of a Pint of this liquor, and half an
Ounce of Turpentine dissolved in the yolk of an egg, six of Delauns Pills, one
Dunce of Clyster Sugar, administer it: and again, and again, if need require;
drink the rest of the liquor sweetened with Sugar, three or four Dunces at a
time, and when the pains cease, purge frequently with this Pill, which will
root out the very seeds of this miserable distemper.

This method also Cures, Gripes, Wind, Stone, Colic, Ulcers in the Kidneys,
etc. Deo soli gloria.

SCURVY:
It Is not possible to describe it in its several Shapes, Description of the
scurvy.
being a Distemper that insinuates, creeps into, and mixeth it self with all
other diseases; some Authors assign forty, some fifty, others seventy
symptoms thereof, which I have not here room enough to recount; but, since
it is certainly caused through the fault of the stomach and Pancreas and the
blood's being degenerated from its spirituous balsamic condition, into a sharp
salt liquor, and complicating it self with all the aforementioned diseases of
the Head, it is too true, too apparent, to be a disease thereof.

For when the teeth grow loose, hollow, black, rotten, the gums foul, Seurvy
differs little from the French Evil.
stinking, the mouth and lips black, dry, ulcerated, the tongue raw, swollen,
discolored, what else is the canse but the sharp Recrements of the Nerves,
that come from the brain? black, blew, reddish, (less and bigger) spots,
scurffs, pimpled face, arms or breast, tetters, pains in the limbs, shortness
of breath, pursiness, pricking, shooting, itching, shifting pains in the arms,
shoulders, legs, knees, anckles, restless fearful dreams, sour belching,
reaching, and vomiting in the morning, weak stomach, nautious appetite, and
many other signs there be of this mischievous malady, which appearing so often
like the POX and often as dangerous, the scorbutic husband or wife, are apt to
suspect themselves infected by their Chaste bedfellowes, and one friend to
accuse another of unchaste embraces, cause the effects of the Scurvy differ so
little from those of unclean Venery.

And, inasmuch as no Pill or other Physic on earth has succeeded like this,
no Pill, but this only, The Colleges Allowance.
is approved of by the most Learned College in the World, and in such request
in Court and City, sure the hitherto deluded Country, will now see it is error,
and embrace this safe and certain Physic, which so firmly Conquers this
Rebellious Pest, and with a friendly close with Nature, thrusts forth the
Excrements with ease and safety,
seperating the diseasy matter from the mass of blood, rendering the heavy body,
brisk, active, and lively, giving a vital oil to the Lamp of the heart, in
order to health, being the sublime bliss on this side Heaven.

But this Taint admits of a more speedy Conquest, if the Patient use brisk
Exercise, and every Morning and Afternoon drink the Juice of Scurvy Grass,
Watercresses, Brooklimes, with Oranges, or this

Receipt for the Scurvy.
Take of Scurvy grass six handfuls, Watereresses, Brooklimes, Receipt for the
Scurvy.
ElderNowers, Broom tops of each threehandfuls, Horse radish, Parsley, and
fennel roots, winter bark (if you have it) of each three Ounces, Coriander,
Pustard, Carrot seeds, of each two Dunces, the roots being sliced, herbs cut,
seeds bruised, steep them in six or seven Gallons of Ale, for foud or five
days, drink half a Pint three or four times a day for twenty or thirty days.
The Poor will praise, and pray for me, for this cheap but excellent Receipt,
the Rich may infuse them in white or Rhenish wine, or distill them, and if they
add of Guaitum, China, Snssafras, of each half a pound, of Nutmegs four ounces,
6 Oranges sliced, it will be more effectual, and (possibly) one of the best of
Medicines: insomuch that continuing this Drink as aforesaid, and taking Melauns
Pills, two or three times weekly, and both before and after this Method, as
also eating the first mentioned three herbs as Sallad, with Elder Vinegar,
Rubbing the gumms and mouth daily with Olive pickle, scaling the teeth, etc.
This Scurvy Pest (open vivina) will soon submit and vanish.

Receipt for the Dropsy, Jaundies, etc.
In diseases of the Liver, and Spleen, Agues, Dropsies, Jaundies, Liver Spleen
D^osy Jaundies Stomach Choler phlegmes
add to this Receipt more White Wind, good store of Turmerick roots, Barberry
bark, Celandine and Vine leaves, more Broom; some Saffron, and with frequent
taking of this Pill (which purges Phlegm and Choler, warms and strengthens the
Stomach, creates a good appetite and Digestion) under God you may depend upon
relief.

Diseases of the Breast.
It is very effectual in disquiet Coughs, Catarrhs, Phthisic, etc. as far as
purgation is requisite; and nothing better after Fevers, small Pox, Measles,
Agues, etc.

Worms, Piles, etc.
It kills all worms in the Stomach and Gutts, in all Ages, Sexes, and
Constitutions, Cures Piles, anointing the infected part with Ointment of Roses
and Aegyptiacum (which the Apothecaries sell) equally mixed.

WOMEN'S DISEASES Women's diseases. barrenness.

As to Distempers that afflict this Sex, this Pill claims Priority, inasmuch as
Hysteric Passions or Mother Fits are caused through the vice of the Nerves, and
consequently the overstuffing of the Ventricles of the stomach, as the
uncontradictable Famous Willis affirms, and from the same Cause, Barrenness,
Green Sickness, want of Monthly benefits,
(and for that reason this Pill is dangerous for Women with child) it
strengthens weak backs, Cures Whites, etc. Reducing the Womb to an excellent
state, in order to Procreation, which causes Experienced Midwives and Heirless
Dames to flock from all parts, for these Pills which are especially proper to
be taken with Tunbridge, Epsom and other Mineral Waters, being so great a
Cordial and warmer of the Genital-parts, which hundreds can Attest.

GONORHOEA.
Or involuntary issuing of Foetid matter from the Privities, Running of the
Reins.
with Sharpness of Urine; swelling in the Testicles, Warts, painful erection of
the Privities, weeping remainders after ill begun and uneffected Cures by
unskilful pretenders. This Pill, though it has not in it one Grain of Mercury
(which many think to be the only Specific against Venereal Distempers, Running
of the Reins.
but I deny and dread it) most effectually Cures; the Patient being temperate
and purging freely every day, or as often as strength permits, for about twenty
days, less or more, as the case presents.

But, both in this and a Confirmed Pox when not only the Mass of Blood is
corrupted, but also the bones tainted and tortured with restless night pains,
Shankers, Warts, swelling in the Groin, Pox.
the Nose or Palate sinking, or Ulcerated, Nodes, and dreadful Memorandums in
the Shins, Arms, Shoulders, Head, etc. I advife the sick to twenty or thirty
days Diet-drink, which I have always in readiness, at two shillings the
quart, or the Ingredients which may be sent to any part of England, with
directions to make it at home, Diet drink and sweating necessary in the Cure of
the Pox and Scurvy
since it will not keep long enough to be sent into the Country. Which
pleasant liquor, with the help of this Pill, taken twice a week, and sweating
as often, perfectly roots out the Venereal venom; and in truth, the same drink
is no less Effectual against the Gout, Rheumatism and Scurvy, for, Omne majus
continent in se minus: wherefore, those squeamish Dames, who disdain Medicines
that cure this Malady, are blame worthy, inasmuch as (if they be not Mercurial
ones,) they are as safe, and render the blood as sweet as milk, and,
consequently, cannot but cure less dangerous Diseases. To those that cannot
attain to my Diet drink, I commend this Cheap but very effectual one. Receipt
for Diet drink for the Pox.


Take of Sarsaparilla white and mealy, twenty ounces; of trude Antimony in
powder twelve ounces, tied up in linen: of Flinty China five ounces, of
Sassafras, Guaicum, Mastick-wood, Hartshorn, Ivory, of each three ounces, of
Bark of Guaicum, of red and white Saunders, of each an ounce; steep them in
twenty pints of spring water over a gentle fire, in a vessel close stopped, and
Luted, for twelve hours then boil them as long, strain the liquor and add to
the same ingredients eight pints more water, three ounces of Liquorish;
Nutmegs, and Coriander seeds of each one ounce, boil them four hours, strain
and mix both together, let them settle; drink every day two quarts for thirty
days, (refraining all other liquors) I commend this easy firm way of cure to
the world, hoping the Diseased will sin no more, least a worse thing befall
them. observing also these following directions. The same Drink in many other
Diseases.


Those who have Ulcers in the Privities or Throat, may tonch them daily three
or four times, with a little Alum water, or burned Alum, mixed with honey, or
Ointment called Aegyptiacum. And by degrees, being patient and penitent, and
using soberly, the former directions Dyet-drink and Pill, the Preserver of men
may avert his judgments, and a Cure will come in course.

Those who have any swelling in the Testicles may apply this or the like
Pultis, A Pultis for sweld Members


Take of grated bread, three ounces, of Linseeds and Camomile flowers in powder
of each one ounce, of Mallows leaves cut, two handfuls, boil the bread and
leaves in water two hours, till there be but little moisture, then add the
powders, and two ounces of Ointment of Roses, use part of this morning and
night, spread it thick upon a thin bladder and linen over it, bind up the
affected parts, Trus-fashion, and, if possible, with a Truss, to appease,
discuss and cure that torturing tumor.

Swelling in the Groin requires the same, or some such like Pultis, adding,
three ounces of White Lilly roots boyld to mash, one ounce of Foenigreek seeds,
allowing as much fresh hogs Lard or Butter, as will keep it very moist. Pultis
for a Bubo.
This will ripen and break the painful swelling, which must be Lanc'd (or ought
to be) and kept tented, with Basilicon, and emplaistered with Melilot, till the
tumor be quite abated, then cured as a wound; but in this Distemper, take no
Pills save only to keep the body Laxative; till the swelling be near well, then
purge freely with this Pill, and drink the Diet Drink for a fortnight or longer
as need requires.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Beware of pretenders to this Pill especially one Sandbrook Apothecary near
Delaun's head in Blacksryers, Counterseits exposed.
who vends a Pill called De Duobus, for Delaun's which (I call God to witness)
has above twenty Ingredients more than that called de duobus has in it, which
that Conscientious Gentleman sells. (his own servants will averr the same) And
I declare that the true Delaun's PILL, is not sold at any Apothecaries in
England, and am ready to justify the same; and dispute the Preparation and
Effects of this or of any thing here inferted, according to the Art of Physic
or Pharmacy, in the presence of the College, with the greatest Critic or
Detractor.

And, as to inserting names, and Letters of Cures as many do, I have not room,
but, if I should do so, Lought to speak also of miscarriages, which Sennertus,
Rivrrius, Willis and all true Physicians did, whilst Quacks (that read their
works) being translated into English, (else they could not) pretend to make men
immortal, Quacks are friends to Sextons.
though I can prove plentifully; they have been great friends to all Sextons,
and to some Persons who were weary of their wives, and yet sell Bromfields
Pills: oh Covetousness! oh Ignorance! the Parents of Murder; who shall trust to
his Medicine who was neither bred to Physic or Brammar, nor knows how to choose
a Drugg, and yet pretends to be a Physician, an Aesculapius in a month? They
now not Drags.
when the most acute, must serve Eight years Apprentiship, laboriously, and
then, not one in three able to undergo his Examination, or qualified only to
compound, not daring, (in seven years more) to administer or prescribe a dose
of Physic: I leave it to any sober man to judge, but, since (...), I will
desist.

In Laudem Authoris.
Medicine Apollo clayms, Spagyrick Art
Is Thine Great Laun; Now Chemists do not Thwart
The Galenists; all Reconeil'd by this
Thy Posthume Pill, the Rich and Poor Man's bliss.
Sr. Robert Sprignel Knight and Baroner, one of Delaun's Grandsons
So shone the Sun, and Python did destroy,
As you those Ills which Mankind do annoy,
Do Conquer, since these Arts you do Employ.
A. Oldis Delaun's God-son.
These Pills are Sold
At Delaun's Head a Feather-maker in Blackfriars, next door to my former
Habitation by Ludgate.

By Mr. Horn at the North Entrance of the Old Exchange. Mrs. Hope at the South
Entrance. Mr. Leech at the Crown in Cornhill. Mr. (...) under St. Dunstans
Church. Mr. Carter at the flying Horse in Fleetstreet, Mr. Battersby at Thavies
Inn Gate, all Booksellers.

Mr. Leeson in Bow lane the Famous Tooth-drawer. Places for Sale.
Mr. Searle in Pye-Corner the Great Operator in Deafness. Mr. Appleby at the
Apple Tree in Pickadilly, nearthe French Church. Mr. Charles Branden
Cheesemonger in Clare Market. The five Bells in Chancery lane, Cutler. Mr.
Mountague in Fleetstreet, Tobacconist. Mr. Morgan the Kings Grocer in Henrietta
street Covent Garden. Mr. Weatherspoon Barber Chyrurgion in Long Acre. Mr. Eads
Distiller in Leather lane. Capt. Grant in Moor-fields. Mr. Lovell on London
bridge, (Distillers.) Dawes Coffee-house at Smithfield Bars. Mrs. Hatton
Vintner. Mr. Seager Tobacconist. Mr. Parruck Grocer. Mrs. Harvey Thred-shop,
(these four in Holbourn.) Mr. Fages in St. James's Market, Grocer. Mrs. Milward
at Westminster Hall Gate. Mrs. Rookes in Kingstreet, and at her shop at White
Hall Milliner. Mr. Only Grocer in Red-Cross street. Mr. Hubbert Tinman in Upper
Shadwell. Mr. Smith over against the Kings Bench at the Bird Cage in Sonthwark.
Mr. Smith stationer next Temple Church. Places for Sale.
Mr. Lion at the Dog within Newgate. Mr. Gardener Herbalist in Newgate market.
Mr. Smith a stationer over against Bow street in Covent Garden. Mr. Page
Drugster at Charing Cross. At the Tobacconists next to the Cock-Alehouse at
Temple bar. Mr. George Shipside Distiller in stocks market.

Jonathan's Coffee-house in Exchange Alley. Jo's in Fuller's Rents. Smith's in
White Friars. Sold beyond Sca.
Dison's Coffee House at Limehouse corner Sandford's in salisbury Court.
Carliles near Guild Hall. Richard's by Temple gate Man's at Charing Cross, (all
Coffee houses.) And at most other Eminent Coffee-houses and Noted Cities and
Towns in the Kings Dominions and Plantations.

And at Delaun's Head in Baldwin's Gardens in Holbourn, (being lately removed
thither from Black Friars) where also are Sold,
and exactly Prepared,

Dr. Tern's Cordial Purge, which Hind, D^ssy, and others call Elixir Salutis,
or The Never Failing Cordial: Dr. Willis's Lozenges, which Buckworth and
Piercy call their's: Elixir Proprietatis, Matthew's Pills, an absolute
Worm-Powder: The Lady Ivye's Drop, for the Eyes, Spirit of Scurvy Grass,
Gripe-Water, with Printed Directions.

I mean the Compound Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Prepared according to the Famous
Dr. Le-Febure, which, as the Learned London College does not only Approve of,
but Applaud and Prescribe, I hope none may Condemn.

And, Note, that six or more Vendors of this Spirit, do all pretend to be the
Inventors of it, when alas! this Person exposed it in Print (for the Public
Good as plain as Mithridate, in the London Dispensatory) Many Years before any
of these self-ended Men offered it to Sale: And I farther Averr, that it is so
far from being a Secret or Rarity, that it is as easily made as common Rose
Water.

This I Sell (either Plain or Purging) at six pence the Glass, by Wholesale,
with Printed Directions, to be sent to any part of England, or Retail in London.

I also give Advice for Love, and proper Medicines in any Disease, very Cheap;
and to such as have Apothicaries to their Friends, I Prescribe Bills in Latin,
which none but those that cannot will Refuse; And hereby you may distinguish
Artists from Impostors.

DELAUNS PILLS
( Prepared only by N. L. Approved Physician in Baldwins Gardens near Grays
Inn, at Delauns Head) Are also Sold


