The Last WILL AND TESTAMENT OF SIR JAMES INDEPENDENT.

Who lies now dangerously sick of a Disease, called by some, The Resolution of
the Parliament and City, to oppose their mutinous Army; by others, The
impossibility of Independencie.

With his Confession, Admonition, and Legacies left to his dear Children, in
and about the City of LONDON.

With his Death, Burial, and Epitaph.

Printed in the year 1647.

The Last Will and Testament of Sir James Independent.
Noverint Universi,
I JAMES Independent; my Native City, Babel, of the Tribe of Corah, of the
Lineage of Cain; being at this time of perfect Memory, and health of Mind,
though dangerously sick of Body, do make this my Last Will and Testament, in
manner and form following:

Imprimis, I give and bequeath my Soul to him that has the fairest claim,
either God or the Devil; for truth to say, in my health and well-being of
body, I served them both equally, though I think the Devil the greatest
sharer.

My Body I give to the Earth, which I ordain to be wrapped or shrouded in
twelve Sheets of Paper sowed together, taken out of the Books heretofore
written by my dear Sons, to wit, The Arraignment of Persecution. Bloody
Tenent, and, Comfort for Believers; my Coffin to be framed by my dear Son,
and long-breathed Preacher, Ives the Box-seller, whose Christen Name I shall
not nominate, for that I conceive he never had any: then my Obsequies to
solemnize with all Luster, thus; My Body to be bonne, from Guild Hall to
Paul's, by six of my dear Sons, the expounders of Gods Word, to wit, Wiet
the Cobbler, Sammon the Shoemaker, Tue the Girdler, Lamb the Sope-boyler, Howes
the Broaker, and Hobson the Tailor; Mr. Burton, Mr. Knowles, and Mr. Simpson, I
ordain as my chief Mourners to follow my Hearse, Mr. Goodwin, and Mr.
Saltmarsh before the corpse, and then the whole rabble of my dear children to
follow after, howling like Wolves, chattering like Pies, and houting like
Owls: My dear Daughters, the Independent Sisters, who know well, both how to
move, and to allay the Spirit, I order to follow next, all clad in sable weeds
their faces veiled, their hair disheveled, and to cry so bitterly, that their
tears may wash the stones as they pass, and to sigh so dolefully, that men
may think they with me are going to the land of Darkness: for the aid and
assistance, Daunus Daughters being entered the Temple, Lordaine that Mr. Goodwin
preach my Funeral Sermon, (for him I esteem of above any of my dear sons,
especially since the time I read his blasphemous HAGIO MASTIX) his Text I would
have to be Jude, verse. 11. Vaeipsis, nam vram Cain ingressi sunt, and
deceptione mercedis, qua deceptus fuit Balaam effusi sunt, and contradictione
Core, perierunt.

Next, I desire, that a Petition be framed by some of the wiser beads, the same
to be presented to both Houses by Mr. Burton and M. Knoles, the heads whereof
I would have to be, that a tolleration Cum privilegio might be granted, that
all sat Benefices, fair Structures, and wealthy Granges may be bestowed on
religious zealots, whom the Presbyters know (and I my self, though I would not
have the world to take notice) to be irreligious factious, treacherous and
impious Independents, that they may be encouraged to go on in forcing the
Parliament, contemning of his Majesty, and in setting up all licenciousnesse
and profaneness.

In the next place, I will and bequeath (as to the first worthy to receive)
unto my dear Son M. Goodwin, the whole house in Bell, Alley, Colemanstreet,
where he privately instructs, which I would have him to enlarge, for that his
Audience for want of room thrust so fore, that many Sisters while he bawleth,
are got with child, to their apparent danger afterward.

Secondly, I bequeath to my venerable son M. Knoles a larger stipend, to be
extracted out of the purses of his Auditors, for that he the said Knoles has
formerly often much rejoiced my heart, while I have heard him in one Sermon,
and that but of two hours long, utter pure nonsense, divellish Divinity, and
lame Latin.

Thirdly, I be queath to my dear son Mr. Burton, a pair of those large
ears, for the supplement of his own, which Apollo bestowed on Midas, for that
he has hitherto very well merited them, and may by the help of those for the
future, hear better then it seems he has formerly done.

Fourthly, I give and bequeath the little wisdom I have, to be distributed so
far as it will reach, to my dear sonne's and daughters of the Independencie,
do the end they may be animated still to proceed in their irregular courses;
and that so, that which my self could not bring to pass, may by them be
effected, which when I shall hear and some light spirit shall certify the
newe^ to the Prince of darkness, I am sure both he and all hell will rejoice
with me.

Fifthly, I give my treasure and household stuff to my venerable son M.
Simpson, for that notwithstanding he has a constant annuity, and such vast
sums abroad, he lately complained of his poverty, but I bestow it with this
proviso, that he the said M. Simpson shall be persuaded for the future, to
that which hitherto he has (...) a very grievous crime, to wit, sometimes
(...) entreated to bestow a single halfepenty on the poor.

Sixthly, I give and bequeath all my foolishness and zeal, contrary to
knowledge, all my headiness and giddiness, to the ruder sort of Soldiers in
the Army, to the end they may be encouraged still to go on in their
perverseness, to the disturbance of the whole Kingdom.

Seventhly, I being now at the point of Death, and my thread of life almost cut
in two, cannot depart till I have made my Confession; and therefore now hear O
Heavens, and witness thou Earth, to what my last breath shall utter.

Sir JAMES Independent his Confession.
I Confess to my own shame, that I have hitherto been a close hypocrite, and
have strugled for liberty of Conscience, not out of zeal to the Truth, but to
advance my own factious end: I confess moreover, that I have rayled against
the Presbytery, against my own clear and destinate light of knowledge; I
confess that I have used all means and ways to advance Libertinisme, and to
that end have unskrewed the Jaws of my dear Sons, M. Goodwin, M. Knoles,
cum multis aliis, to rail against all Order and Government, to surrender all
into the hand of Christ, who himself in express words has left the ordering
of his Church to the Heads and Leaders thereof: I confess also, that I have
stirred up and animated diverse turbulent Spirits in the Army, contrary to the
mind of the worthy General, and the major part of that valiant Army, to seek
all ways, and attempt by all means to forment Discords and Divisions, to
cause Debates and Jealousies to arise between the Army and the two Houses of
Parliament: for all which I confess my self altogether unworthy of a being in
this life, and intimately meriting a share of those torments which my great
Patron Beelzebub himself partaketh of into whose hands I commit my self;
desiring my dear Sons and Daughters, whom to my unspeakable grief I shall
leave behind me on Earth, not to be amaned or smitten with fear, either for my
sudden departure, or for the unhospitablenesse of the place whither I depart,
but that they would still constantly persever in those courses to which I have
hitherto inured them; and when they shall leave their earthly being, I shall
bespeake them as ample and fair accommodation as spacious Hell affords: and so
with my Blessing to my dear Sons and Daughters, I bid them farewell.

Postscript.
LEt the mountains dance, and the hills skip like Rams; Rejoice, O England,
thy desolation is protracted, for James Independent is dead: Thou shall now
have a settled Government, maugre its strongest opposers, and shall not be
subjugated to the lawless wills of a few Schismatics: Thou shall now be as
glorious as ever; the enemies of thy welfare shall not bear rule over thee,
who whet their tongues as a sword to speak lies, and their feet are swift to
shed blood: And now farewell Libertinisme, and Socianisme; farewell Petitioning
for tender Consciences, --

(Qui curii simulant, and Bachanalia vivunt) Farewell assembling in private
Chambers; and for ever farewell good Sir James Independent.

Fatis Agimur, credit Fatis non sollicitae possunt curae, etc.
His EPITAPH.
HEre lies James Independent, you may know it and wink,
For his Corpse, alike to his Name does stink:
A Dresser with him was a Communion Table,
And Gods House accounted no better then a Stable;
He bated all Order, as he did decent Carriage,
And that Man and Wife should be joined by Marriage;
He said, that the Scriptures this sense would afford,
Their Wedlock was lawful, took they each others word.
He seemed pure to the sight, but within was a Devil,
He daily caused Discords, yet would be thought civil;
He also pretended great love to the King,
Yet never intended any such thing:
But while he would seem to settle his Crown,
By underhand workings pulled Monarchy down.
He had thoughts he should live his hopes for to see
Effected, but died for grief when 'twould not be.
With speed to Gehenna his flight late he took,
Where Beelzebub liked him, and made him his Cook,
And added a Promise, that for his sweet sake,
His Sons that should follow, should in Office partake;
Which the Independents took so much in gree,
They strive which the foremost in Office shall be.
FINIS.

