The last Will and Testament of P. RVPERT, Wherein he disposes of all his
estate here in England, and makes Sir Thomas Fairfax Executor, and Lieutenant
General Crumwell, Major General Brown, and Colonel Massey Overseers of the
same will.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1645. October. 7.

The last Will and Testament of Prince Rupert.
Jn Martis Nomine, Amen.
I Rupert, Plundermaster Genenerall, being most dangerous sick, yet of perfect
memory, and calling to mind the impatiality of the times, am very well assured
by common computation, the time of my continuance cannot be long; And whereas I
have been prodigal, both of the innocents lives and estates, and being
desirous so near as I can (now I can do no more mischief) peaceably to
depart, and give every man his due: Do constitute and ordain, depute and make
this my last Will and Testament in manner and form following.

Inprimis, My Will and pleasure is, and my most hearty suit and request to my
Executors hereafter named, that they will be pleased to see my Body decently
carried beyond Sea.

Item. All my Cities, Towns, Castles, Forts, and every of my Garrisons by what
name or title soever they be known or called, together with their and every
of their rights, members and appurtenances, ( Bristow only excepted) my Will
and pleasure is, shall be disposed of as the Two Houses of Parliament in their
discrestion shall think fit and appoint.

Item. Whereas His Majesty was graciously pleased heretofore, as well in
consideration of my good service then done, as for encouragement for the
future, to confer, upon me Ex more moti^, not only the Dominion of Wales, but
other great and vast, Revenue to be by me peaceably enjoyed when I had utterly
destroyed Round-headisme both root and branch; and now in regard I find that
work infinite, my will and pleasure is, that the same be peaceably enjoyed by
the true owners, and that all the moneys and plunder I have here, with a great
deal of industery gotten, be restored to the true owners, except what I have
hertofore transported beyond the seas.

Item. Whereas my whole estate being disposed of as aforesaid to my poor
friends, I mean all my friends, I can will and bequeath nothing; only this,
to my confounding Damee Lords, my proud papistick and Athistick Prelates and
all other of my high qualited friends, which were more rich then honest, more
leaned then religious, I will and bequeath unto them, contrition and
repentance, and wondrous submissive Petitions: and for my second sort of
friends that were excellent swearers, gallant drunkards, and most notable
plunderers, that killed poor contrymen with mouth gunns, I will and bequeath
them new Ropes to hang themselves, for it is much suspected the old trade of
Pimping will never come in fashion again. And for the third sort of Vermin,
if Sir Thomas should be merciful unto them, I know not what service they can
do him, only they will serve to keep bullets from better men.

Item. My last Legasie is, my admonition to Aulicus my Secretary, which is,
with speed to repair to Britanicus, and desire his assistance in drawing a
Petition for him to the Baregarden, for the man is very ingeneous, and in time
may come to be Clerk of the Challenges.

Item. I do by these presents constitute, and ordain Sir Thomas Fairfax sole
Executor of this my last Will and Testament, and for his trouble and charge in
Execution hereof, I will and bequeath him all my Horses, Ammunition and Arms
whatsoever, whether they be Cannons, Demecannons, Culverines, Sacres,
Morterpeeces, Murderers, Petars, Muskets, Pikes, Swords, Drums, Trumpets, etc.

And last, I do hereby ordain Overseers of this my Last Will and Testament;
Lieutenant General Crumwell, Sergent Major General Brown, and leave each of
them a Legasie, which shall be at the discretion of my Executor.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal, the 29. of
September. 1645.
FINIS.

