TWO SALLIES Forth by the Lord GORING AND Sir Charles Lucas AT Coulchester, on
Monday and Tuesday last; the manner of the several Fights, and the number that
were killed and taken prisoners on both sides.

The taking of the Enemies Court of Guard, the setting fire thereof, and
burning down the Wind-Mills.

With the Examination of Mr. Osburn, touching the Kings Majesty; And the Speech
of Alderman Avery, at presenting the City Petition; And the Answer to the same
by both Houses of Parliament. June 29

London, Printed by B. A. Anno Dom. 1648.

C R
royal insignia
A LETTER From COULCHESTER.
SIR,
THis morning a party of the Enemies sallyed forth at the South gate, and
approached near our horse Guard, but were quickly beaten back, and pursued by
our party to the turn-pike, where they kept a Court of Guard, who upon our
approach gave fire and fled away. So we entered this Guard, took such arms as
were left there. This Guard of theirs was kept near the Almel-houses, at the
entrance of the Suburbs of the town: in this action three of the enemy were
killed, and many wounded. We also took 12. prisoners, and 15 or 16 horse with
arms, two horses of ours were killed, and one man cut in the head, but the
wound not mortal, nor any one of the rest of our men receiving any hurt at
all. Provisions begin to grow scarce in the town, especially bread, and how
they are provided with corn I know not, but I am certain they are ill provided
of mills to grind it if they have any. For this day we have fired and burnt
down their Wind-mils to the ground, diverse soldiers steal away from the enemy
daily, and come into us, especially since the Lord General sent in a Letter,
proffering conditions to such as should come to him, and unto all, if they
would embrace and yield up the town, which conditions were. 1. That within 24.
hours after the receipt thereof, the officers laying down their arms, should
have passes to travel beyond Sea, etc. 2. That the common soldiers, and all
men of that rank, shall have liberty to depart to their own homes, submitting
to the authority of Parliament. 3. That the Inhabitants of the town shall be
free from plunder and violence.

These conditions not being accepted of, the Lord General is resolved not to
offer so good again to those which are the chief in action amongst the Enemy.
Our army is in a very good condition and full of resolution, and although the
Genesis is very unwilling to storm the town (for that as much as in him is, he
would avoid the shedding of blood) yet if the Enemy will have any more
provisions in the town, they must fight for it, and are like to go without it
too. We hope to give a good account of this business shortly.

Your affectionate Friend, R. L.
From the Leaguer before Colchester, June 27. 1648.
A Petition was presented to both Houses of Parliament from the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Commonmon-councell of the city of London, containining these
particulars, viz. 1. An acknowledgment of former favors, in granting their
Petitions. 2. Their deep apprehensions of the present miseries of the City and
Kingdom, by the growth of Superstition, Heresy, etc. and likewise by the
commotions in several counties, and the falling off of a considerable part of
the Navy. 3. That they apprehend no way to avoid these miseries which threatens
a decay of Trade, and imminent destruction, but by a good understanding and
agreement between the King and Parliament. And therefore prays, First that
there may be a personal Treaty either at London, or some other eminent place.

And 2. That our Brethren of Scotland may be invited to this treaty.

At the presenting of this Petition to the Lords, Alderman Avery made a speech;
wherein he said, That as the hearts of Kings were in the power of the Lord to
dispose of as he pleased: So the City of London desired the Lord to dispose of
the hearts of the King and the honorable Houses of Parliament, that they may
agree and join together as one man, in settling the peace of this distressed
Kingdom.

The Answer of the House of Peers to the City Petition.
Die Martis, 27. Iunii, 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to return you thanks for the continuance of your
good affection to the Parl. and inclinations to the peace and settlement of the
Kingdom; and to let you know, that they were upon consideration of that which
is contained in your Petition before they received it, and they will employ all
their endeavors effectually for the speedy obtaining thereof, as may best
conduce to the contentment, safety and happiness of the King, City, and the
whole Kingdom.

Io: Brown Cler. Parl.

The Answer of the House of Commons.
Die Martis 27. Iunii, 1648.
THe House being informed that the Sheriffs, Aldermen, Common Counsel, and
Citizens of London were at the Door, they were called in, and Mr. Speaker by
command of the House returned answer to the said Petition in these words, viz.

The House has read your Petition presented to them in the name of the
Common Counsel of the city of London, wherein they take notice of their
affectionate acknowledgments which the city expresses of the houses
concessions upon their former Petitions, and of their christian and prudent
desires of a safe and well-grounded peace according to the covenant, and of
that means which they propose in order thereunto of a personal Treaty. In
which, as in the other particulars of your petition, the House especially
observes the confidence and trust which the city reposes in them in leaving the
consideration of their peace and security to their wisdom and care. To all
which the House has commanded me to give this answer.

That they have the same fellow feeling with the City and Kingdom of their
sufferings by war, and the same desires with them to attain to a safe and well
grounded peace: They have for that end spent a great part of this last month
in considerations of peace, and have made some progress therein.

And for the more speedy dispatch of what remains further to be done, the
Houses have appointed a Committee to consider what the King has offered, and
what is further to be offered to the King, for his satisfaction for settling of
a speedy and wel-grounded peace; and to consider of time, place, and other
circumstances for convenience of address to be made to his Majesty; and they
doubt not but what they have done, and speedily shall do herein, will be fully
satisfactory to the city of London, and to all others that desire to see the
troubles of this Kingdom ended in a safe and just peace.

And for your good affections to the Parliament and Kingdom, manifested by
your actions in the late War, and in your present Petition for a safe and
wel-grounded peace, the House has commanded me to give you thanks.

Hen. Elsying Cler. Parl.

Another Letter from Coulchester.
SIR,
THis present Tuesday a party of the Enemies forces sallyed out of the town
upon the Suffolk forces on the North-East side, but Col. Whaley joining with
them, charged them, killed two, and put the rest to a disorderly retreat, took
ten prisoners, and some very good horses. This Evening another party of the
Enemy attempted to go out on Harwich road, to fetch in provisions, and were
fallen uqon by a party of ours, which routed them and took diverse prisoners,
one of which that was wounded says, that they begin to be exceedingly
straightned in the town for provisions, especially for horse-meat: three of
their Wind-mills are burnt down, they have two Water-mils which we are cutting
off, and have scaling Ladders ready to storm, but the Morter-piece is not yet
come up.

From the Leaguer before Colchester, June 28. 1648.
Mr. Richard Osburn is come in, and was examined by the House of Peers on
Tuesday last, he stands in justification of what is mentioned in his Letters
concerning the King; and the further examination thereof is referred to a
Committee.

Imprimatur

G.M.

FINIS.

