THE FRENCH COOK.

Prescribing the way of making ready of all sorts of Meats, Fish and Flesh,
with the proper Sauces, either to procure Appetite, or to advance the power of
Digestion.

Also the Preparation of all Herbs and Fruits, so as their natural Crudities
are by art opposed; with the whole skill of Pastry-work.

Together with a Treatise of Conserves, both dry and liquid, a la mode de
France.

With an Alphabeticall Table explaining the hard words, and other useful
Tables.

Written in French by Monsieur De La Varenne, Clerk of the Kitchen to the Lord
Marquess of Uxelles, and now Englished by I. D. G.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Adams, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Sign
of the Talbot near St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet* 1653.

printer's or publisher's device London, Printed for Cha: Adams at the Talbott
in Fleet-streete over agt St. Dunstans Church



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN Earl of TANNET, etc. My very good Lord.
My Lord,
OF all Cooks in the World, the French are esteemed the best, and of all
Cooks that ever France bred up, this may very well challenge the first place,
as the neatest and compleatest that ever did attend the French Court and
Armies. I have taught him to speak English, to the end that he may be able to
wait in your Lordships Kitchen, and furnish your Table with several Sauces of
haut goust, and with dainty ragousts, and fweet meats, as yet hardly known in
this Land. I hope your Honor will forgive my boldness of begging your
Lordships Patronage, in his behalf, entreating your Honor to consider, that
having first set out his skill in French, under the protection of a French
Marquess, he now as a stranger does humbly crave to be sheltred under the
luster of your honorable name, that so with the more credit and confidence, he
may impart his skill for the public good, in teaching every body how to
continue and prolong comfortably by a well relished diet, the sweet marriage of
Soul and Body. Besides, my Lord, your former commands are indeed the first and
chief cause of my presuming thus far, esteeming it to be a part of my duty,
which will never be satisfied, until some better occasion do furnish me with
a more serious subject, whereby I may let all the world know, that all my
ambition is to deserve the glorious title of

Your Lordships most humble Servant Du Fresne.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Was desired by a noble Knight to English this Book; besides being solicited
and entreated about the same, by many of my Friends, and persons of good
quality, I have taken the pains to do it, as punctually and exactly as the
matter could give me leave, endeavoring to make it intelligible for every
body. As concerning some few words which are not Englished, they are words of
things which are not in England, or some words of art, which you will find
explained in a Table set before the Book. I have had all the care possible to
make it complete and easy, to the end that it may be useful, not only for
Noblemen and Gentlemen, but also for every private family, even to the Husband
man or Laboring man, wheresoever the English tongue is, or may be used. If you
do accept of it for your own use, as kindly, as I do give it heartily to the
public, I am fully satisfied for all my labors, wishing that you and I may
long enjoy the comfortable refreshments prescribed therein. Farewell.

FOR THE High and Mighty Lord, Lewis Chaalon Du Bled, Counselor of the King in
both his Counsels of State and Privy-Counsell, Knight of his Orders, Baron of
Tenar, Marquess of Uxelles, and of Cormartin, etc.
My Lord,
ALthough my condition does not afford me a Heroic heart, it gives me
nevertheless such a one, as not to be forgetful of my duty. During a whole
ten years employment in your house, I have found the secret how to make
meats ready neatly and daintily. I dare say that I have exercised this
profession with a great approbation of the Princes, of the Marshals of France,
and of an infinite number of persons of quality, who did cherish your Table in
Paris, and in the Armies, where you have forced Fortune to grant to your Virtue
some Offices worthy of your courage. I think, that the public ought to
receive the profit of this experience of mine, to the end that it may owe unto
you all the utilitie, which it will receive thereby. I have therefore set down
in writing what I have so long practiced in the honor of your service, and
have made a small Book of it, bearing the title of the Clerk of your Kitchen.
But, as all what it does contain, is but a lesson, which the desire of pleasing
you has caused me to learn, I have thought that it ought to be honored with
your name, and that without sinning against my duty, I could not seek for it a
mightier prop than yours: It is a token of the passion which I have always
had, and which I shall have all my life time for your service. Therefore, my
Lord, use your accustomed generosity, do not despise it, though it be unworthy
of you. Consider that it is a treasure of the Sauces, the taste whereof did
once please you; and, to conclude, that it is the Masterpiece coming from the
hands of him, who will be all his life time,

My Lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and most obliged Servant, Francis
Peter, (alias) La Varenne.

Friendly Reader,
I Have thought it fitting to give you some advise concerning the design and
the use of this Book, whereof I am the Author, without vanity. My intention is
not to displease or offend any body, though I do not doubt, but that some
ill-willers, or some envious, will speak of it at random; but my intention is
to serve and succor them who shall stand in need of it, whereof many having
not the experience, and the memory in readiness, will not, or dare not presume
to learn what they know not, partly through pride, and partly also through
some other consideration. Some do believe that they wrong themselves, in taking
counsel concerning that thing, which, belike, they ought to be skillful in.
Some others having no acquaintance with those who could teach them, are ashamed
to present themselves without a reward, which their want cannot give them leave
to reach to. Therefore because I love dearly them of my calling, I have esteemed
it of my duty to impart unto them that little which I do know, and so to
deliver them out of this trouble.

As for the use, I have made you up four services; before each of them, you
will find the Table, and then the discourse following after; and have divided
them according to the several fashions of the meals used in Flesh days Fish
days, and Lent, and specially Good Friday. I have added many other general
things, whereof you have the tables and discourses. I have intermixed the Table
and the making of Pastry works according to the seasons, and other small
household curiosities, useful for all sorts of persons. If you find some
Articles in the Tables, which be not in the discourse, blame me not, I have
omitted them because they are common, and I have put them in the Tables to put
one in mind of them. Lastly, for a recompense, dear Reader, I do ask you
nothing else, but that my labor may be profitable and agreeable to you.

The French Stationer to the Reader.
COurteous Reader; This Book, the matter and the title whereof do seem new,
because the like was not as yet printed, will not be, as I thinck, unfruitful
for you. There has been many Books, and which have been well accepted of, as
the charitable Physician and others, for remedies and the healing of sicknesses
with little cost, and without the use of Apothecaries But this book which
tends only to the preserving and the keeping of health in a true and constant
course, in teaching how to correct the vicious qualities of meats by contrary
and several seasonings; the scope whereof, I say, is only to afford unto man a
solid nourishment, well dressed, and conformable to his appetites, which are in
many the rule of their life, and of their (en bon point) looking well, ought,
as I think, to be of no less consideration, since that it is sweeter by far
to make according, to one's ability an honest and reasonable expense in
sauces, and other delicacies of meats, for to cause the life and health to
subsist, then to spend vast sums of money in drugs, medicinal herbs,
potions, and other troublesome remedies for the recovering of health. This has
persuaded me, after many solicitations of my friends, to let it see the light,
and to set it forth in this great City, which makes profit of all, rejects
nothing, and where what is not fit for one, is useful for another. It Is author
has told you in his word of advise what use and profit it may bring; And I
dare boldly enhanse it, and say, that it is not only useful, but also
necessary, because that he does not only set out the finest and the daintiest
fashions of making ready meats, pastrie works, and other things which are
served upon great men's tables, but he gives you also the precepts of the most
common and most ordinary things, which are used in the food of households,
which do only make a regulated and moderate expense, and in the making ready
of which, many do amiss in the too much or too little; He does teach you the
fashions of a thousand kinds of herbs (and legumes) and other victuals, which
are found plentifully in the country, where the most part are ignorant of the
means of making them ready with credit and contentment: and thus it is clear,
that with great reason I have done this good service to the public, not only
for daintiness, but also for necessities sake: Considered also, that France
carrying it above all other Nations in the world in point of civility,
courtesy, and comeliness in every kind of conversation, is not less esteemed,
because of it is comely and dainty fashion of feeding. And the City of Paris
carrying it far above all the other Provinces, as the Metropolitan head City,
and the seat of our Kings, doubtless her inferiors will in this follow the
esteem that she will make of it. And I hope, that since that I do give her
the first fruits of it, she will accept of them kindly, and others will imitate
her: After which other Nations may very well be stirred forward to conform
themselves to her, who as she does excel in all what belongs to life, cannot
be ignorant of the means how to preserve it contented and peaceable, by the
use of the things which do maintain it, and cause it to subsist. I may assure
you that for my part I have had a most special care to set it in its luster,
and to enrich a little its matter, which perhaps will seem to some Critics,
to be less worthy of precepts; but the most judicious will judge otherwise,
and will consider, that all the books both ancient and modern, being for the
most part for the nourishment of the spirit: There was a good reason, that the
body, without the good disposition of which it cannot act, should have a share
in it, and specially in a thing so necessary for its conservation. Enjoy it,
Courteous Reader, whilst I will study how to put forth to sale something which
will deserve your more elevated and more solid occupations.

A Table referring to all the particulars contained in this Book.
A Table of the Potages that can be made for to serve up in the Flesh days
fol. 2 A Table of the several potages fol. 19 Potage of Entrees (or first
courses) which can be made in the Armies or in the Field fol. 24 A Table of the
meats which may be served in the second course fol. 57 A Table of the
Intercourses (or middle courses) for the Flesh days fol. 74 A table of the
Pastry-work which is served up all the year long fol. 107 A Table of the lean
potages out of Lent fol. 123 A Table of the Entrees (or first courses) of the
lean days out of Lent fol. 149 A Table of the Eggs for the Entrees (or first
courses) as they are now served up fol. 177 A Table of the second of Fish fol.
184 A table of the Intercourse of the lean days out of Lent fol. 195 A table
of what may be found in gardens, which one may use upon occasion, and serve up
in the first courses, and intercourses of the lean days, and other flesh
days, or in Lent. fol. 202 A table of the Pastry work of fish for to be eaten
warm, containing the Pies and Tourts fol. 210 A Table of things to be salted
for to keep, specially for a Cook of Pastry, fol. 230 A Table of the Potages
for Lent fol. 235 A Table of the Entrees, or first courses in Lent, without
Eggs fol. 241 A Table of the second course fol. 249 A Table of the Intercourse
(Entremets) of Lent fol. 250
An Alphabeticall table for the explaining of the hard and strange words
contained in this Book.
A.
Abbatis, or Abatis. They are the purtenances of any beast viz. the feet, the
ears, the tongue, etc. They are also the gibblets of any foul. viz. the neck,
wings, feet, gisard, liver, etc. Andovilles. They are the great guts of porke,
or beef, filled up with thin slices of tender meat, or small guts of porke
well seasoned with peper, salt, fine herbs, etc. some do call them
Chitterlings. Andovillets. They are balls, or roundish small pieces of minced
flesh well seasoned. Aricot, or Haricot. It is mutton sod, with a few turnips,
some wine, and tostes crumbled among; It is also made of small pieces of
mutton, first a little sodden, then fried in seame with sliced onions; and
lastly boiled in broth with parsley, Isop, and sage; And in another fashion,
of livers boiled in a pipkin with sliced onions and lard, verjuice, red wine,
and vinegar, and served up with tosts, small spices, and sometimes chopped
herbs. Arbolade* It is a kind of French Tansie. Allose. Some do call it a
shad fish.
B.
Beatilles. They are all kinds of ingredients, that may be fancied, for to be
put together into a pie, or otherwise. viz. Cock's combs, stones or kidneys,
sweet breads of veale, mushrums, bottoms of hartichocks, etc. Beatilles of
pullets. They are the gibblets. Barde. It is a sheet of lard or bacon. To Bard.
It is to lay a sheet of lard about, or upon any meat. Barbillons. They are the
second skin of the pallats of beef. Brignols. They are a kind of plummes which
grow beyond Sea.
C.
Cervelats. They are a kind of saucidges made beyond sea. Chibols. They are
sives, or young small green onions. Cards. Cardons. Cardeaux. They are the
ribs of beets, of hartichocks, and such like. Chapiteau. It is any work set
over the lid of a pie. Coquemare. It is along brazen pot. Cornet. It is a
Coffin of paper, such as the grossers do put and wrap fruit, or spices in.
E.
To endore. It is to wet, or daube with some liquor, as one does a pie or cake
before it be put in the oven.
F.
Fleurons. They are small pieces of puffed paste fried. Fricaslee. It is a frying
with a sauce. Farce. It is any thing made up for to stuff any meat with. To
farce. It is to stuff, or fill up any meat.
G.
Gaudiveaux. They are forced meat of veale, that is, meat of veale minced,
seasoned, and wrought into small long pieces like chitterlings. Grattin. It is
that which does stick to the basin or pipkin, when pappe is made; or else a
kind of skin which gathers about, or at the top of the pappe, when it is
sodden enough.
H.
Hash. It is minced meat.
L.
Lard. It is fat bacon. Lardons. They are small long slices of Lard. To lard.
It is to stick any meat with slices of lard. Mean Lard. They are slices of
lard, of a middle sise. Great Lard. They are big slices of lard. Litron. It is
a measure of one pint, or a little more. Legumes. They are all kinds of pot
herbs, as also any fruit growing in a garden, as cowcombers, artichocks,
cabbidge, meloens, pompkins, etc.
M.
Morilles. They are a kind of excellent Mushrums. Marrons, or Marons. They are
the biggest kind of chestnuts.
P.
Pignons. They are pineapple kernels. To Pass in the pan. It is to fry a
little, or to parboile in the frying pan.
R.
Ragoust. It is any sauce, or meat prepared with a have goust, or quick or
sharp taste. Ramequin. It is a kind of toste.
S.
To stove or soak. It is to cause to boil very softly before, or over the
fire, that so the juice or liquor may be imbibed, or drunk in by degrees, to
the end that the potage, or sauce, may be well allayed, of a good consistence,
or well thickened. A straining pan. It is a pan made much after the form of
a warming pan, but that it is without a lid or cover, and that it is round at
the bottom, and full of small holes cullender-like.
T.
Trouffles, or Truffles. They are a kind of Mushrum. Tourte. It is a kind of a
great cake. A Tourte-panne. It is a pan made of purpose for to bake a tourte
in.
W.
To Whiten. It is to steep in water, either cold or hot, for to make plump, or
white, or both. There are some other strange words, but the several articles
do sufficiently explain what they do signify, so that it had been needless
to put them in this table.
The French Cook.
The manner of making the breath for the feeding of all Po^s, be it of Potage,
first course or intercourse (middle service.)
TAke knuckles of beef, the hinder part of the rump, a little of mutton, and
some hens, according to the quantity of broth that you will have, put in meat
proportionaly, sees it well with a bundle of parsley, young onions, and thyme
tied together, and a few cloves; keeping always some warm water ready to fill
up the pot again. Then after all is well sodden, you shall strain them through
a napkin for your use. And as for roasted meat, after that you have taken the
juice out of it, you shall set it to boil with a bundle of herbs as
abovesaid; sees it well, then strain it, for to make use of it at your first
courses, or for brown potages.

A Table of the Potages that can be made for to serve up in the flesh days.
BIsque of young, Pigeons. 1 Potage of health. 2 Potage of partridges with
coleworts (or cabidge) 3 Potage of Ducks with turnips 4 Potage of pullets
garnished with Sparagus 5 Potage of marbled partridges 6 Potage of fricandeaux
7 Potage of marbled quails 8 Potage of stockdoves garnished 9 Potage of
profiteokes (or small vailes) 10 Queens potage 11 Princesse's potage 12
Jacobin's potage, (or after the Jacobin's fashion) 13 Potage of young pullets
14 Potage of teal with hypocrast. 15 Brown potage of Larkes. 16 Potage of young
pigeons. 17 Potage of teal with the juice of turnips. 18 Potage of beatills. 19
Potage of pullets with coliflowers. 20 Potage of pullets with ragoust. 21
Potage of young pigeons roasted. 22 Potage of goose with pease-broath. 23 Potage
of goose-gibblets. 25 Potage of goose with green-pease. 2 Potage of salted
goose with pease-broath. 26 Potage of pullets with green-pease. 27 Potage of
pigeons with green-pease. 28 Potage of salted pork with pease. 29 Potage of
young rabbets. 30 Potage of purtenances of lamb. 31 Potage of larks with a
sweet sauce. 32 Potage of knuckle (or leg) of Veal. 33 Potage of breast of
Veal. 34 Potage of thrushes. 35 Potage of tortoise. 36 Potage of sucking-pigge.
37 Potage of minced mutton. 38 Potage of knuckle of beef. 39 Potage of capon
with rice. 40 Potage of pullets with rice. 41 Potage of knuckle of beef with
tailladin 42 Potage of the great pot. 43 Potage of a calfe's head fried. 44
Potage of fried mutton with turnips. 45 Potage of knuckles of shoulders of
mutton with ragoust. 46 Potage of roasted woodcock. 47 Half a bisque. 48
Jacobin's potage with cheese. 49
How to make all kinds of Potage.
1. A Bisque of young Pigeons.
Take young Pigeons, cleanse them well, and truss them up, which you shall do
in making a hole with a knife below the stomach, and thrusting the legs through
it; Whiten them, that is, put them into a pot with hot water, or with pot
broth, and cover them well; then put them in the pot with a small twig of fine
herbs, and fill up your pot with the best of your broths, have a special care
that it may not become black; then dry your bread, and stove it in the Pigeon
broth; then take up after it is well seasoned with salt pepper and cloves,
garnished with the young pigeons cock's combs, sweetbreads of veale, mushrums,
mutton juice, and pistaches; serve it up, and garnish the brims of the dish
with slices of lemon.

2. Potage of Health.
Take Capons, cleanse them well, truss them up, and put them in the pot with
broth, and cover them, lest the broth do wax black; season them well with
salt, sees them well with store of good herbs; in winter, white succorie;
then take up and garnish with your herbs, viz. with cards and parsley roots,
or succorie, and serve.

3. Potage of Partridges with Coleworts.
Cleanse them well, lard them with great lard, truss them up, and put them in
the pot with good broth; put also your coleworts in the pot with your
Partridges; after they are sodden, you shall pass into it a little melted lard,
and season them with cloves and pepper; then stove or soake your crusts,
garnish them with sweet breds of veale, or with Saucidges, if you have any,
then serve.

4 Potage of Ducks with Turnips.
Cleanse them, lard them with great lard, then pass them in the pan with fresh
seame or melted lard; or else roast them on the spit three or four turns, then
put them in the pot, and take your turnips, cut them as you will, whiten them;
flower them and pass them in fresh seame or lard, until they be very brown;
put them in your Ducks, sees all well, and stove or soak your bread well, to
the end that your potage be thickened; If you have capars you shall mix some
with it, or a little vinegar; take up, and garnish with Turnips, then serve.

5. Potage of Pullets with Sparagus.
After they are well trussed up, whiten them well, and put them in the pot with
a sheet of lard over them; fill your pot with your best broth, and season them
with salt and a little pepper, and set them not sees too much, dry you bread
and stove or soak it, and garnish it with your pullets, with sparagus fried and
broken, mushrums, combs, or with the giblets of your pullets, with a few
pistaches, and juice of mutton, and garnish the brim of your dish with lemon,
then serve.

6. Potage of marbled Partriges.
When your Partridges are well trussed up, lard them with great lard, and
whiten them, then put them in the pot; sees them well, and season them with
salt, then put in your bread and stove or soak it; garnish your potage with it,
and with mushrums, boil them a little on the fire, putting therein some white
almond broth and some mutton juice, pistaches and lemon, then serve.

7. Potage of Quelckchoses, or Liverings.
Take a fillet of Veale, cut it very thin, stuff it very well, and cause it
to take color in a tourt pan, or between two dishes; put the slices thereof
into a small pot with some of the best broth; season them, stove or soak your
bread, and garnish it with your liverings, mushrums, truffes, sparagus, mutton
juice, pissaches, if you will, or lemon, then serve.

8. Potage of marbled quails.
After they are trusted up and whitned, flower them, and pass them with lard or
fresh seam, then put them in the pot, sees them well, and season them with
salt; stove or soak your bread, and garnish it with your quails, with truffes,
mushrums, combs, lemon, and pistaches, then serve.

9. Potage of wood pigeons garnished.
Take wood pigeons or big pigeons, whiten, and lard them, with middle sised
lard, then put them in the pot, and sees them well with seasoning of salt, and
a twig of time stove your your bread, then garnish it with your pigeons,
bottoms of hartichocks, and sparagus, then serve.

10. Potage of small vayles.
Take four or six small loaves, take out of them all the crumme through, a
small hole made on the top, take off the top and dry it, with the bread, fry
them with fresh seam or lard, then stove or soak your bread with your best
broth, and besprinckle it with almond broth, then put your loaves to garnish
your potage, and fill them with combs, sweetbreads gibblets, truffles,
mushrums, and cover them; put some broth therein until the bread be soaked;
before you serve, power on it some juice, and what you have then serve.

11. The Queens Potage.
Take Almonds, beat them, and boil them with good broth, a bundle of herbs,
and a piece of the inside of a lemon, of crumbs of bread a little, then season
them with salt, have a care they burn not, stir them very often, and strain
them. Then take your bread and stove or soak it with your best broth, which
you shall make thus. When you have taken the bones out of some roasted partridge
or capon, take the bones and beat them well in a mortar, then take some good
broth, sees all these bons with a few mushrums, and strain all through a
linen cloth, and with this broth stove or soak your bread, and as it does
stove, besprinckle it with broth of almonds and with juice, then put into it a
little of some very small hash, be at of partridge or of capon, and always as
it does stove, put in it some almond broth until it be full; then take the
fire-shovell red hot, and pass it over it. Garnish your potage with cocks
combs, pistaches, granates, and juice, then serve.

12. Princesse's Potage.
Take of the same Broth of the Queen's Potage taken out of the roasted bones,
stove a loaf of bread with the crust, and after a small hash of Partridges,
which you shall strew upon your Bread, so thin as it may not appear: stove it
and fill it by little and little, Garnish it with the smallest Mushrums,
Combs, Stones, or Kidneis, Pistaches, Lemon, and much Juice, then serve.

13. Jacobin's Potage.
Take Capons, or Partridges, roast them, take our the bones, and mince the brain
of them very small, take also the bones of them, break them, and sees them
with Broth in an earthen Pot, with a bundle of Herbs, then strain them through
a linen cloth, stove your Bread, lay on it a bed of Flesh, or of Cheese, if
you will, a bed of Almond Broth, and boil it well, and fill it bid egr^s, then
Garnish it with the small ends of Wings, without bones at one end; take three
Eggs, with a little or Almond Broth, if you have any, or of other, beat them
together, and power them on your Potage; pass the fire-shovell over it, then
serve.

14. Potage of Cockerels.
Dross and whiten them, steeping them a while in fresh Water, or in Broth,
then put them in the Pot with some other Broth well seasoned with Salt; Take
up, and Garnish them with all that you have remaining of Garnish, upon a loaf
stoved, and serve.

15. Potage of Teales with Hypocrast.
Take Teales, dress and cleanse them well, whiten them as above said, and being
sticked within with some Lard, fry them a little with Lard or fresh Seam, then
put them in the Pot; When they are almost sodden, you shall throw in it some
Brignolls, with a piece of Sugar, and shall Garnish your Potage with the Teales
and Brignolls:

16. Brown Potage of Larkes.
Take Larkes, and draw them, whiten them, flower them, and pass them in the pan
with Butter, Lard, or fresh Seam, until they be very brown, then put them in
the Pot with good Broth and a bundle of Herbs, and sees them; Stove well a
loaf, which you shall Garnish with your Larks, Beef Pallats; Mutton juice, and
Lemon, then serve.

17. Potage of young Pigeons.
Take young Pigeons, scald them well, and put them in the Pot with good Broth
and a bundle of Herbs; Sees them well with a sheet of Lard, then take them
upon a stoved loaf, and Garnish them with Hartichokes and Sparagus fried, green
Pease or Lettice ^hen serve.

18. Potage of Teal with the juice of Turnips.
Take Teales, and roast them, then put them in the Pot with good Broth, next
take some turnips, whiten them, flower them, and pass them in the pan, so that
they be very brown, put them with your Teal and sees them together, and when
you will take up, strain the Turnips through a linen Cloth for to take out
the juice of them, wherewith you shall Garnish your Potage, together with your
Teal, and with Pomgranats, then serve.

19. Potage of Beatilles.
Take your Beatilles, scald them well, pass them in the pan as a Fricasse of
Pullets, put them in the pot with good Broth, and let them consume well, stove
a loaf which you shall garnish with your beatills, with much juice of Mutton
and Rams-stones, then serve.

20. Potage of Pullets with Coliflowers.
Put them in the Pot with with good Broth, sees them with a bundle of Herbs,
and season them well with Salt, Clove, Pepper; And grate a little Nutmegge or
crust of Bread, when you are ready to serve, Garnish with them your loave
stoved with Coliflowers, and Mutton juice, and serve.

21. Potage of Pullets in Ragoust.
When they are roasted, cut them into quarters, then put them between two dishes
after the manner of a Ragoust, with some Broth from the Pot; Stove your Bread
in crust, and Garnish it with your Pullets, putting about a few Mushrums and
Sparagus, then serve.

22. Potage of young Pigeons roasted.
Put them in the Pot with good Broth well seasoned with salt and clove, sees
them: then stove your crusts and garnish them with your pigeons, and what you
shall have to put in it; have a care that your potage be brown, then serve.

23. Potage of Goose with Pease-Broath.
Take Geese or other, as you will, put them in the Pot and sees them well,
then take your Pease and sees them well, then pass them through a strainer
very fine, and put your Pease Broth into a Pot with a bundle of herbs, pass a
little Lard in the pan, and when it is melted, throw it into the Pot, and when
you will serve, stove your Bread with your Geese-Broath, then power your
Pease-Broath over it; Which to make green, you must not let your Pease to sees
outright, but when they are half sodden, stamp them in a Mortar, and strain
them with good Broth; or if it is in winter, take Peetes or Sorrel; stamp and
strain it, and power the juice about your Potage when you are ready to serve.

24. Potage of Goose-giblets.
Whiten them well, and put them in the pot with broth, a bundle of herbs and
a sheet of lard; sees them well, so that being sodden they may show white,
stove your bread, and garnish it with your giblets, which you shall whiten if
you will, and put on them a few minced capars, then serve.

25. Potage of Geese with Pease.
Put your Geese in a pot with Broth, after you have dressed and whitened them
well; Sees and season them well; Fry your Pease a little in the pan, then put
them into a small Pot with a little Broth, and when they are well s^dden,
stove your Bread, and Garnish it with your Geese and with their Giblets, and
with your Pease whole or strained, then serve Garnished with Lettice.

26. Potage of Salt-Goose with Pease-Broath.
Your Goose being well salted, and cut into four quarters, if it be too much
salted, make it fresher, then Lard it with great Lard, and sees it well; When
your Pease are sod, pass them through a strainer as Pease Broth, and season it
well according to your Palate; Boil your Goose a very little in this
Pease-Broath, stove your Bread with other broth if you have any in another
Pot, and over the Pease-Broath you shall power a little Mutton juice for to
Marble it, then serve.

27. Potage of Pullets with green Pease.
After your Pullets are well scalded and trussed up, put them in the Pot with
good Broth, and scum them well; Then pass your Pease in the pan with Butter or
Lard, and stove them with some Lettice whitened, tha is, which you have steeped
in fresh Watert Stove also your Bread, and then Garnish i^ with your Pullet,
Pease, and Lettice, then serve. and serve.

28. Potage of Pigeons with green Pease.
It is made like that of Pullets, but that, if you will, you need not strain
your Pease into Pease-Broath.

29. Potage of salt meat with Pease.
Sees well your salt meat, be it Pork, or Goose, or any other; take up and
power your Pease-Broath over it, then serve.

30. Potage of young Rabbets.
When they are well dressed, whiten them, and pass them in the pan with Butter
or Lard, then put them in the Pot with good Broth, and a bundle of Herbs, and
sees them as it is fitting, stove well your Bread, and Garnish it with your
young Rabbets, Mushrums and Truffles, and with what you have, then serve,

31. Potage of Abatis of Lambs.
After your Abatis are well whitened, put them in the Pot with good Broth, a
bundle of herbs, and a sheet of Lard, that is a sheet of fat Lard or Bacon,
sees them well, and stove your Bread, and when you are ready to serve, power a
white Broth over it that is, yolks of Eggs and Verjuice, then serve.

32. Potage of Larks with a sweet Sauce.
Plume them, and draw them, then flower them, and pass them in the pan with
Lard or fresh Seam, then put them in the Pot with good Broth, half a pint of
white Wine, and half a pound of Sugar, and sees them well; stove your Bread,
Garnish it with your Larks, and serve.

33. Potage of Knuckle of Veal.
Put your Knuckle of Veal in the Pot with good Broth, Sees and scim it well,
put therein some white Succorie; Stove your Bread, Garnish it with the Knuckle,
Succorie and Mushrums, then serve.

34. Potage of a Breast of Veal.
Whiten it in fresh Water, then put in the Pot with good Broth, sees it, and
put therein some good Herbs, and a few Capars, and all being well seasoned,
take up on your stoved Bread, then serve,

35. Potage of Mav^s, or Thrushes.
Truss them up, and draw them, then flower them, and pass them in the pan with
Butter or Lard, then put them in the Pot with good Broth, and sees them well
with a bundle of herbs; Stove your Bread, and Garnish it with your Thrushes,
Beef-Pallats, and Mushrums, then serve.

36. Potage of Tortoise.
Take your Tortoises, cut of the Head and Feet, sees them in Water, and when
they are near sodden, put a little white Wine therein, some fine Herbs, and
some Lard. When they are sod, take them out of the shell, and take out the
Gall, cut them into pieces, and pass them in the pan with good Butter, then
stove them in a dish, as also your Bread, with some of your Broth, Garnish it
with your Tortoises well seasoned, with Sparagus cut, with juice and with
Lemon, then serve.

37. Potage of sucking Pigge.
After you have dressed him neatly, cut it into five pieces, whiten them in
some Broth or fresh Water, and put them in the Pot with good Broth, put some
fine Herbs to it, and a piece of Lard, but have a care they do not boil dry;
Stove your Bread, and Garnish it with your Pigge, the Head in the midst of the
quarters, and the Purtnances or Abatis round about the dish, then serve.

38. Potage of mine'd Mutton.
Take a joint of Mutton, mince it with beef suet, or Marrow, and stove it in a
Pot, stove also your Bread in a dish with the best of your Broaths; After this,
Garnish it with your Ach^s, or minced meat, together with juice, Combs,
Beat^lles filled with dry Bread, otherwise Tailladins, that is, pieces of Bread
of the length and bigness of a finger, in the shape of Lardons, which you shall
pass in the pan with good butter, until they be brown, and as it were roasted,
and stove it well also, then serve.

39. Potage of Knuckle of Beef.
Smother it well in a Pot, until it be almost boiled to pieces, and well
seasoned with a bundle of herbs, Cloves, Capers, Mushrums, Truffles; Then
stove your Bread, and Garnish it with your Knuckle and it is implements.

40. Potage of Capon with Rice.
Take a Capon, dress it well, and put it in the Pot with good Broth well
seasoned, take your Rice well picked, wash and dry it before the fire, then
sees it by degrees with good Broth; Stove your Bread, put your Capon on it,
and Garnish it with your Rice; if you will, you may put some Saffron to it, and
serve.

41. Potage of Pullets with Rice.
It is made after the same way as the Capon; Dress them, truss them up, put
them in the Pot, and season them alike; Make your Rice ready the same way, your
Bread being stoved and Garnished as above said, serve.

42. Potage of Knuckle of Beef with Tailladins.
Whiten your Knuckle, sees and season it well, and with the Broth sees also
your Tailladin; You shall put with it an Onion stuckt with Cloves, and a little
thin, then stove your Bread, and Garnish it with the Knuckle and with your
Tailladins, which are pieces of Bread of the length and bigness of one finger,
passed and fried in the pan with Butter, or Lard, as above said, in the 38th.
Article; If you will, you may put some Saffron in it, then serve.

Capon with Tailladin, and all other meat is done the same way, and being made
ready thus, it shall be called such meat with Tailladin.

43. Potage of the Boyler, or great Pot.
Stove some crusts of brown Bread with some good broth of your boyler, great
pot or beef pot, seasoned with pepder, salt, and a little minced parsley, then
serve; the first cuttings of loafes are served in the like manner, without
parsley or pepper if you will.

44. Potage of a Calfs-head fried.
When it is sodden, take out the bones, and cut it into as many pieces as you
will, then flower it and fry it with butter or lard, then stove your bread, and
garnish it with what you have fried; serve the dish well filled and garnished,
as with mushrums, pom-granats, or sliced lemons, and juice of lemons.

45. Potage of fried Mutton with Turnips.
Take the upper ends of the breasts of mutton, fry them, and sees them well,
until they be fit to receive the turnips, which after you have cut them into
slices or pieces, and also well fried, you shall put with your mutton well sod,
and seasoned with clove, salt, and a bundle of herbs; stove your bread, and
take up; If your potage is not thick enough, fry a little flower into the broth
for to thicken it, and mix with it some white pepper and vinegar, then serve.

46. Potage of the handles or knuckles of shoulders with Ragoust.
When your handles or knuckles are whitened in fresh water, flower them, and
pass them in the pan with butter or lard, sees them in an earthen pan with all
the implements which can abide seething, as sparagus, mushrums truffles, stove
your bread or crusts with good broth, and garnish it with your handles or
knuckles, sparagus, mushrums, and all what you have, then serve.

47. Potage of roasted Woodcocks.
After they are roasted, put them in the pot with good broth and a bundle of
herbs, and sees them well; then stove your bread* and garnish it with your
woodcocks, and all what you have, then serve.

You may also do in the same manner, as of the marbled partridge.

48. Half a Bisque.
Take pigeons somewhat big, open them, and sees them as the Bisque, whereof
you will easily find the making, if you have recourse to the table, garnish
and season them also the same way, so that it may be as good as the bisque, if
you can, then serve.

49. Jacobin's potage with cheese.
Take a Capon garnished with his bones fitted, as wings and legs, and some
cheese, whereof you shall make as many beads as of flesh, and you shall
besprinkle all with almond broth, if you can; If it be not thick enough, allay
two or three eggs, and give it color with the fireshovell. Now to make your
broth the better, stamp the bones, and boil them with the best of your
broaths, well seasoned; stove your bread, which you may garnish with pistaches,
lemons or pomgranats, then serve.

A Table of the farced Potages.
POtage of farced capons. 1 Potage of young pullets without bones farced. 2
Potage of pullets farced. 3 Potage of young pigeons farced. 4 Potage of farced
ducks. 5 Potage of knuckles (or legs) of veal farced 6 Potage of breast of
veal farced. 7 Potage of calfe's head without bones farced. 8 Potage of lamb's
heads without bones farced 9 Potage of joint of mutton farced. 10 Potage of
farced goose. 11 Potage of farced partridges. 12 Potage of turkey farced. 13
2. How to make Farced Potages.
1. Potage of Capons farced.
After they are well dressed, take out the bones at the neck, and fill them up
with all kind of beatilles, as young pigeons, the flesh of capon well minced
with beef or mutton suit, and when they are well seasoned and trussed up, put
them in the pot with good broth, sees them, and stove your bread, which you
shall garnish with your capons, and all sorts of beatills, and serve.

2. Potage of farced cockerels without bones.
After they are dressed, take out the stomach bone, fill them with godiveaux,
which you shall make with the flesh of veale minced with raw yolks of Eggs,
chibbals, parsley, pepper, or spices according to your taste, all seasoned with
salt, and after they are trus'd up and whitened, put them in the pot, and
garnish them with good seasoning, then stove them well, take up, and garnish
with what you have, and serve.

3. Potage of pullets farced.
When they are well dressed, whiten them in fresh water, take up the skin of
them with the finger, and fill them with a farce made of veal or brawn of
capon, with suet and yolks of eggs, all well minced and mixed together, truss
them up, and put them in the pot with good broth; stove your bread, garnish it
with your pullets, hartichoks, bottoms, and sparagus then serve.

4. Potage of young pigeons farced.
After they are well scalded, dressed, the skin taken up, and filled as the
pullets, whiten them in fresh water, and put them in the pot with good broth,
sees them proportionably, and season them with a sheet of lard, then stove
your bread, and garnish it with your pigeons with their livers and wings with
the juice of a leg of mutton roasted at the spit, and serve.

5. Pottage of Ducks farced.
Draw them at the neck, fill them up with all the good things you have, as
young pigeons, mushrums, trufles, sweet-breads, and other like, make your farce
of a lean piece of fresh pork, minced with raw yolks of eggs, parsley,
chibols, pepper or spice, as you like best; sow your Ducks up again, whiten
them in fresh water, and put them in the pot with good, broth, sees and
season them well; allay a little flower with broth for to thicken your potage,
then stove your bread, and garnish it with your ducks, and all what you hare,
then serve.

6. Potage of legs of veale farced.
Cut these legs as far as the loyne, take up the skin of them very neatly,
and truss up the end of the handle or knuckle, then steep them in fresh water;
take the flesh of them and take out the sinews, mince it with beef or mutton
suet, lard, yolks of eggs, and fine herbs; when all is well minced and
seasoned, fill them, and put them in the pot with good Broth, sees them, and
put in some Herbs according to the season, or a little white Succory; stove
your Bread, and Garnish it with these legs, which you shall whiten with yolks
of Eggs, and Verjuice if you will, then serve.

7. Potage of a farced breast of Veal.
Take a breast of Veal, open it at the nether end, make a farce with a little
meat and suet, the crum of a loaf, and all kinds of good Herbs, mince and
season all; whiten this breast, and put in the pot with good broth; Sees it
with Capers, Succory or Herbs minced, stove your Bread, Garnish it if you
will, and serve.

8. Potage of a Calfe's head farced without bones.
After it is well scalded, take up the skin thereof, sees it, and when it is
sodden, take out the bones, take out the brains and the eyes, for to set them
in their place again; mince well the flesh with Beef Suet or Marrow, and raw
yolks of Eggs, for to thicken the farce, then set the brains and the eyes into
their room again; When it is farced, sow it neatly up again, whiten it well in
fresh water, and put it in the pot with good Broth; sees it well; and next,
take some Calfe's feet, and fry them into Ragoust, sees them half in water,
cleave them in the middle, and pass them in the pan with Butter or Lard, put
them into your pot with some Capers; then stove your Bread, Garnish it with
this head and feet with the Capers, and serve.

9. Potage of Lamb's heads without bones farced.
Do as with the Calfe's head; after they are well scalded, take up the skin,
sees them, and when they are sodden, take the meat of them, and mince it with
suet and Lard well seasoned according to your likeing; Farce them with a piece
of Liver, and of lights of Lamb, Beef Suet or Marrow, raw yolks of Eggs,
parsley and fine Herbs, all well minced together, and whiten it, then put it
in the pot with good Broth; sees them well, and season them with fine Herbs;
Stove your Bread, and Garnish it with the heads and Purtenances, which you
shall whiten if you will with yolks of Eggs allayed with Verjuice, and serve.

10. Potage of a joint of Mutton farced.
Take a joint or two of Mutton, take out the bones, and mince the flesh very
small with suet and Lard, then farce the skin with it, and sow it up very
neatly, so that the end of the knuckle be very clean, and all well seasoned
with salt and spice according to your taste; put it in the pot, and sees it
well with a bundle of Herbs, Capers, and Turnips; Stove your Bread, take up,
and Garnish it with your Turnips, then serve.

11. Potage of Geese farced.
After they are dressed, take out the brisket, and farce them with what farce you
will, then flower them, and put them in the pot with good Broth; Stove your
Bread and Garnish it with your Geese, with Pease, Pease-Broath, or what you
will and serve.

12. Potage of Partridges without bones, farced.
Take out the brisket, and take some Veal or some Capon-flesh, mince it, and
season it according to your liking with Salt and Spice, or fine Herbs; Farce
your Partridges with it very neatly, put them in the pot with good Broth, and
sees them well with a bundle of Herbs, stove your Bread, and Garnish it about
the dish with Sparagus, and bottoms of Hartichoakes, then serve.

13. Potage of Turkey farced.
After it is well dressed, take out the brisket, and take some Veal and some
Suet, which you shall mince very small; thicken your farce with Eggs, and mix
with it some Beatilles, or young Pigeons, raw yolks of Eggs, put it in the pot
with good Broth, and sees it well: put some Chestnuts in it, Mushrums, and
Truffles; stove one loaf of Bread, and Garnish it with what is in your pot,
then serve.

For to make the bundle of Herbs, take Chibals, Parsley and Thime, and tie
them together.

Potage of Entrees (or first courses) which can be made in the Armies, or in
the field.
TVrkie with rasberies. 1 Joint of mutton after the Cardinal's way 2 Knuckle
(or leg) of veal after the Epigramme. 3 Loin of veal with pickle. 4 Ducks
with ragoust. 5 Young pigeons with ragoust. 6 Young hens with ragoust 7 White
pudding 8 Saucidges of brawne of partridges 9 Andouilles Chitterlings 10
Servelats 11 Pickled pullets. 12 Knuckles of shoulders after the Olivier 13
Piece of beef after the English way 14 Breast of Veal after the Estoffade. 15
Roasted partridges with ragoust. 16 Neats tongue with ragoust. 17 Porcks tongue
with ragoust. 18 Tongue of mutton with ragoust. 19 Rump of mutton with ragoust.
20 Joint of mutton after the Daube. 21 Turkey after the Daube 22 Cive of hare.
23 Breast of mutton with aricot. 24. Lamb with ragoust. 25 Surloin of veale with
ragoust 26 Piece of beef after the Daub 27 Joint of mutton after the Legates
way 28 Piece of beef after the Marotte 29 Rump of mutton roasted 30 Piece of
beef and rumps of mutton after the natural 31 Pigge after the Daub 32 Geese
after the Daub 33 Geese with ragoust 34 Teale with ragoust 35 Turkey with
ragoust 36 Pigge with ragoust 37 Loine of Veale with ragoust 38 Larks with
ragoust 39 Liver of veale fried 40 Veals feet and trotters with ragoust 41 Fat
tripes with ragoust 42 Fried pullets 43 Young pigeons fried 44 Fricandeaux 45
Veale fried (or a fricasse of veale) 46 Fillet of veale with ragoust 47
Shoulder of veale with ragoust 48 Shoulder of mutton with ragoust 49 Breast of
veale fried 50 Loyne of roe-buck (or wild-goate) with ragoust 51 Small ribbs
(or steakes) of mutton with ragoust 52 Beef after the mode 53 Beef after the
Estoffade 54 Young rabits with ragoust 55 Loyne of pork with sauce Robert 56
Partridge after the Estoffade 57 Capon with oisters 58 Young duck with ragoust
59 Tongue of mutton fried 60 Liver of veale with ragoust 61 Stewed pullets 62
Calves head fried 63 Liver of veale sticked 64 Purtnance (or giblets) of turkey
65 Shoulder of wild boar with ragoust 66 Legs of roebuck (or kid) 67 Joint of
mutton after the Legates way 68 Farced pig 69 Sheeps trotters fried 70 Tongue
of mutton roasted 71 Hash of roasted meat 72 Attereaux haslets 73 Hash of raw
meat 74 Poupeton 75 Tourte of lard 76 Tourt of marrow 77 Tourt of young
pigeons 78 Tourt of veale 79 Pie of Capon without bones 80 Pie of gaudiveau 81
Pie of assiette 82 Pie after the marrotte 83 Pie after the English 84 Pie after
the Cardinals way 85 Pullets with ragoust in a bottle 86 Slice of beef very
thin with ragoust 87
3. The way of making meat ready for the first courses.
1. Turkey with Raspis.
When it is dressed, take up the brisket, and take out the flesh, which you
shall mince with suet and some little of Veal-flesh, which you shall mix
together with yolks of Eggs and young Pigeons, and all being well seasoned, you
shall fill your Turkey with it, and shall season it with Salt, Peper, beaten
Cloves and Capers, then you shall spit it, and turn it very softly; When it is
almost roasted, take it up, and put it into an Earthen pan with good Broth,
Mushrums, and a bundle of Herbs, which you shall make with Parsley, thime, and
Chibols tied together; for to thicken the sauce, take a little Lard sliced,
pass it in the pan, and when it is melted, take it out, and mix a little flower
with it, which you shall make very brown, and shall allay it with a little
Broth and some Vinegar; then put it into your Earthen pan with some
Lemon-juice, and serve.

If it be in the Raspis season, you shall put a handful of them over it, if
not, some Pomgranate.

2. Joint of Mutton after the Cardinal's way.
Take a Joint of Mutton, beat it well, and Lard it with great Lard, then take
off the skin, flower it and pass it in the pan with some Lard, and sees it
with good Broth, a bundle of parsley, thime and Chibols tied together,
Mushrums, Truffles or Beatiles well fried, and let the sauce be well thickened,
then serve.

3. Legs Or Knuckles of Veal Epigramme way.
After they are well whitned in fresh water, flower them and pass them in the
pan with melted Lard or fresh Seame; then break them and put them in a pot well
seasoned with Salt, Peper, Cloves, and a bundle of Herbs; put an Onion with it,
a little Broth and a few Capers, then flower them with some past, and smother
them with the Pot-lid, sees them leisurely thus covered for the space of three
hours, after which, you shall uncover them, and shall reduce your Sauce until
all be the better thereby; put some Mushrums to it, if you have any, then serve.

4. Loin of Veal with Pickle.
Beat it well, and Lard it with great Lard, Pickle it with Vinegar, Peper,
Salt, Spice, Clove, Lemon, Orange, Onion, and Rosemary, or Sage; after that,
spit it and roast it, and baste it with the sauce until it be roasted; When it
is roasted, stove it in the sauce, which you shall thicken with Chipings or
clean flower allayed with Broth, and shall Garnish your dish with Mushrums,
Beef palats, or Sparagus, then serve.

5. Ducks wiih Ragoust.
Lard them with great lard, and pass them in the pan, then put them into an
earthen pan or into a pot, and put therein some good seasoning with salt,
beaten spice, chiboles, and parsley according to your pallat; sees them well,
and garnish with what you shall find to come nearest to the color, then serve.

6. Young Pigeons with ragoust.
Plume them dry, draw them, and pass them in the pan with lard, or fresh seame,
put them in the pot with good broth, and sees them with a bundle of herbs;
when they are sodden, garnish them with their livers, and with sweetbreads of
veale, let all be well seasoned with salt and spice, then serve.

7. Young Henns in ragoust.
Take them after they are well mortified, and lard them with great lard, then
pass them in the pan, after you have cut them into halfes, put them in the pot
with good broth and a bundle of herbs; season and sees them well with
truffles, mushrums, or some small pieces of roasted meat, to wit of mutton or
fresh porke, for to give them savor; garnish them with their livers,
pistaches, or lemon, then serve.

8. White puddings.
Take the gutts of mutton, and scrape them so that they be very clear, then
take four pounds of fresh porke suet, and mince it very small; take also the
brawne of two capons, mince them as dust, and mix them with your Suet, next
put to it fifteen raw Eggs, one pint of Milk, the crum of half a white loaf,
season all well with the spice of Saucidges, and a little Anisseed; the spice
for Saucidges is prepared thus; Take Peper, Cloves, Salt, and Ginger, beat them
well together, then power all into the guts with a brass or white lattin
instrument made for that purpose, and whiten them in milk and roast them on the
Gridiron with a fat paper under them, then serve.

9. Saucidges with the brain of Partridges.
After your Partridges are roasted, take the brain out of them, and mince it
very small, take some fresh porck suet, four times as much as of minced meat,
mix all together, well seasoned as the white pudding, put also some milk to it
proportionably, and power all into some mutton guts, as the white pudding,
which you shall also whiten in milk, and shall tie them at the ends; roast them
leasurely upon some fat paper. If you will, you may power it into the guts of a
sucking Pig, or Turkey, then serve.

10. Andovilles, Chitterlings.
Take Chaldrons of Veal, and mince them (or cut them small) with some Pork
suet, some Lard, and some Porks flesh, stove them all together in a pot; it
being sodden and cold, you shall mix with it a little Milk, and some raw Eggs,
then you shall power it into the great gut of a Hog, with the same seasoning as
the white pudding: Make some with half milk and half water; when it is made,
roast it on the gridiron with a fat paper, and serve.

11. Servelats.
Take a Beefs gut, and scrape it well, take some lard, some pork, or mutton
flesh, or any other you will, and after you have minced it well, stamp it with
peper, salt, white wine, clove, fine herbs, onion, and a little of fresh porks
suet, then power your implements into this gut, cut into pieces according to
the length of a Servelat, which you shall tie at the end, and shall hang it on
the chimney. When you shall use them, sees them in water, and about the latter
end, put into it a little wine, and some fine herbs; when they are sodden, you
may keep them one month. Serve.

12. Pullets pickled.
Take your Pullets, cut them in two, and beat them, then steep them in
Vineager, well seasoned with salt and spice. When you will serve, flower them,
or else make for it a small paste with two raw eggs, and a little flower allayed
with these eggs; fry them with melted lard or fresh scame; and after they are
fried, put them in their pickle to stove a little, then serve.

Knuckles, or Handles of Shoulders, Oliveir way.
Break them, and whiten them in fresh water, and wipe them, after they are
flowred, pass them in the pan with lard, or fresh seame. When they are well
fried, put them in the pot with very little broth, and put a bundle of herbs
with it, a little onion fried with mushrums, capers, stones, and beefs palats,
all well seasoned with salt, spice, or peper; cover them with the lid, and make
a piece of soft paste for to close up the pot, lest it does take vent, put it
on some few coals, and sees them leasurely, then serve.

14. Piece of Beef after the English, or Chalon fashion.
Take a piece of beef, of the breast, and sees it well; when it is almost
sodden, take it up, and lard it with great lard, then spit it, with a pickle
under it in the dripping pan. The pickle is made as for the loyn of veal; with
this pickle you shall baste it with a bundle of Sage, if it sticks not fast to
the spit, take some sticks, and tie it at both ends. After it is roasted take it
off, and put it into an earthen pan, then stove it with its pickle, until you
are ready to serve. Garnish it with what you will, with capers, or turnips, or
with both together; or with beef palats, or parsley, or with the pickle it
self, so that it be well thickened, then serve.

15. Breast of Veal after the Estoffade.
Let it be of a Veal very white and fat, put it in the oven in an earthen
pan, and underneath some sheets of lard, and season it, then cover it, until
it has taken color, and that it be more than half baked: Afterward fry into
it some mushrums, palats of beef, capers, and sweet breads, so that they may
mix, and make an end of baking together.

16. Partridges with ragoust.
Dress them, and stick them with three or four Lardons of great lard, then
flower them, and pass them in the pan with lard or fresh seame, then sees
them in an earthen pan, let them consume well, and season them well with salt
and spice. When you will serve, take some lard, and beat it in a mortar, mix
it with your ragoust, and serve.

17. Neats tongue with ragoust.
Lard it with great lard, then put it in the pot, sees it, and season it with
a sharp sauce; when it is almost sodden, let it cool, stick it, spit it, and
baste it with its ragoust, until it be roasted, and after you have taken it
off, stove it in its sauce with a little onion stamped, a little lard, and a
little vineager, then serve.

18. Porks tongues with ragoust.
Take them fresh, and pass them in the pan with lard, then sees them well in
a pot, and season them with a haut goust; when they are almost sodden, you
shall mix into them an Onion stamped, truffles, dry meal, and a little white
wine, and shall stove them in their own broth; when they are sod, serve.

19. Tongue of Mutton with ragoust.
Take many of them, and after they are well sodden, flower them, and pass them
in the pan, stove them with good broth, and pass in them a little onion,
mushrums, truffles, and parsley, all together, well seasoned with salt and
peper according to your own palate, with a little verjuice and vineager, then
serve.

20. Loin of Mutton with ragoust.
Take it sticking to the joint, lard it all over with great lard, and sees it
with a piece of beef; when it is half sodden, take it up, flower it, and pass
it in the pan, then put it into an earthen pan with good broth, and season
it well with mushrums, capers, beef palats; cover it, and let it sees well,
then serve.

21. Joint of Mutton after the Daube.
Lard it well with great lard, th^n put it in the pot, and season it well; when
it is almost sod, put to it some white wine proportionably, and make an end of
seething of it with fine herbs, lemon or orange peele, but very little, by
reason of their bitterness; when you will serve it, garnish the brims of the
dish with parsley, and with flowers.

22. Turkey after the Daube.
It is done after the same way as the joint of Mutton, except that you must
bind it fast before you set it a seething, plentifully garnished with salt, and
all kind of spice, the same seasoning, white wine, etc, Serve it with parsley.

23. Cive of Hare.
Take a Hare, cut it into pieces, put it in the pot with some broth, sees it
well, and season it with a bundle of herbs when it is half sodden, put a little
wine to it, and fry into it a little flower with an onion, and a very little
vineager; serve with a green sauce, and readily.

24. Breast of Mutton into an aricot.
Pass it in the pan with butter or melted lard, then put it in the pot with
broth, and season it with salt; when it is half sodden, pass also in the pan
some turnips cut in two, or otherwise, mix them together, without forgetting a
little lard, fried with a little flower, an onion minced very small, a little
vineager, and a bundle of herbs, serve with a short sauce.

25. Lamb with ragoust.
Roast it, then put it into an earthen pot with a little broth, vineager, salt,
peper, clove, and a bundle of herbs, a little flower, a little onion stamped,
capers, mushrums, lemon, orange peele, and all being well stoved together,
serve.

26. Surloine of veale with ragoust.
Cut it into ribs, flower them, and pass them in the pan with lard, then
put them in the pot, and sees them with a little broth, capers, sparagus,
truffles, and when all is well stoved, serve.

27. Piece of beef after the daube.
After it is half sodden, lard it with great lard, and put it to sees again
with the same broth if you will; then after it is well sodden and seasoned, not
forgetting the wine, serve as the leg (cut shoulder wise.)

28. Joint of Mutton after the Legate's way.
After you have chosen it well, beat it well, take off the skin and the flesh
off the knuckle, whereof you shall cut off the end; lard it with mean lard,
flower it, and pass it in the pan with lard or fresh seame. When you see it
very brown, put it in the pot with one spoonful of broth well seasoned with
salt, peper, clove, and a bundle of herbs; you may put in it capers, mushrums,
truffles; smother it with a lid closed up with flower, neither too soft, nor
too hard, allayed in water, and sees it on a few coals the space of three
hours. When it is sodden uncover it, and garnish it with what you have to put
to it, as stones, bottomes of Artichoaks, sweetbreads, and a short sauce, and
about the dish lay cut lemon, or pomegranate.

29. Piece of beef after the Marrotre.
When it is almost sodden, lard it with great lard, then make a pasty of brown
paste of the bigness of your piece of beef, well seasoned of all what you will,
and garnished alike with capers. After it has been seething a very long while
with broth, pass into it onion and garlic stamped, then serve.

30. Loine of Mutton roasted.
After it is well roasted, take off the skin, cover it with salt, crummes of
bread, and minced parsley; then pass it in the pan before, not on the fire,
then serve with verjuice and parsley about the dish.

31. Piece of Beef, and Loine of Mutton after the natural.
Take a piece of Beef from the Shambles, powder it with a little salt, not too
much, lest you may have occasion to use the broth; sees it well, and take off
what has been salted, as the skins: If you will, salt it again, and powder it
with small salt; serve with parsley, or fried bread about the dish, and
sometimes with small pyes, or some thickning of ragoust.

The Loyne of Mutton after the natural is done as the piece of Beef; when it is
well sodden, take off the skin, powder it with salt, garnish the dish about
with parsley, and serve it warm.

32. Pigge after the Daube.
After it is well dressed, cut it into five parts, then pass on it a little of
great lard, and put it with broth, white wine, fine herbs, onion, and being
well seasoned with salt, and other ingredients, serve with parsley about the
dish.

The short sauce remains with it into a gelee to serve cold; you may put to it
some Saffron if you will.

33. Goose after the Daube.
Lard it with great lard, and sees it well, then put to it a pint of white
wine, and season it well with all what is fitting for a Daube. If you will pass
it on the gridiron, and serve cut into four, with a Sauce Robert over it, you
may.

34. Goose with ragoust.
Take a Goose, cut it into four; after it is well beaten, flower it, and pass
it in the pan, then sees it with some broth, season it with all kinds of
spice, and with a bundle of herbs, garnish it with all its Abatis, or Giblets,
which are the liver, gisard, wings, and neck; let the sauce be short and
thickened, with yolks of eggs allayed in verjuice, then serve.

35. Teales with ragoust.
After they are dressed, lard them with middle laid, pass them in the pan,
and stove them with well seasoned broth, then put them again with a little lard
and flower, onion, capers, mushrums, truffles, pistaches, and lemon peele all
together, then serve.

36. Turkey with ragoust.
Cleave it, and beat it, then stick it, if you will, with great lard, flower
it, and pass it in the pan, and then stove it in an earthen pan with good
broth, well seasoned and garnished with what you will; sees it to a short
sauce, and serve.

37. Pigge with ragoust.
After it is dressed, take off the skin if you will, then cut it into four,
flower it, pass it in the pan, being well seasoned for the taste; garnish it
with capers, truffles, mushrums, and serve with a short sauce.

38. Loyn of Veal with ragoust.
After it is well beaten, lard it with great lard, and sp^t it, then when it is
half roasted, stove it with good broth, and make a sauce with flower and onion
fried, garnish with mushrums, artichocks, sparagus, truffles, and its kidney
sliced, serve.

39. Larks with ragoust.
After they are dressed, draw them, crush down their stomachs a little, flower
them and fry them with lard; after they are very brown, stove them, and season
them with capers and mushrums; you may put in them some lemon peele, or some
juice of a leg of Mutton, or some orange, or a bundle of herbs; take off the
fat, and serve with what you have to serve.

40. Liver of Veale fried.
Cut it into very thin slices, then pass them in the pan with lard or
butter, well seasoned with salt, peper, onion minced very small, and one drop
of broth, vineager, or verjuice of grapes; and for to thicken the sauce, put
therein some chippings of bread well fried; you may serve it without stoving,
lest it should harden, with capers, mushrums, and garnished about the dish with
what you have.

41. Calf, and Sheeps trotters with ragoust.
After they are well sodden flower them, and pass them in the pan with lard,
or fresh seame; then stove them with a little broth, a little verjuice, a
bundle of herbs, a piece of lemon, and some flower fried, all well seasoned,
and the sauce short, mix some capers with it, and serve.

The Sheeps trotters are done the same way, after they are well sodden, and the
worm taken away, flower and fry them with lard or fresh seame, and stove them
with a little broth and verjuice, a bundle of herbs, a piece of lemon, and
flower fried, all well seasoned, and a short sauce, mix some capers with it,
and serve.

42. Fat tripe with ragoust.
After it is very white, and well sodden, cut it very small, fry it with lard,
parsley, and chibols, and season it with capers, vineager, flower fried, and an
onion; stove it, and serve.

You may also another way, mix with it yolks of eggs and verjuice for
thickning.

Another way.
Take it very fat, cut it and powder it with salt, and crummes of bread, roast
it on the gridiron, and season it with verjuice of grapes, or vineager, or
juice of orange, or of lemon, then serve.

43. Pullets fried.
After they are dressed, cut into pieces, and well washed, boil them in good
broth, and when they are almost sodden drain them, and then fry them. After
five or six turns, season them with salt and good herbs, as parsley, chibols,
etc. allay some yolks of eggs for to thicken the sauce, and serve.

44. Young pigeons fried.
After they are well scalded, cut them into pieces, and pass them in the pan
with lard and butter, half one, half other; when they are well fried, throw
into it chibols, parsley, sparagus, peper, salt, beaten cloves, besprinkle them
with broth well seasoned, and serve them whitened, or not.

45. Fricandeaux.
For to make them, take some veale, cut it into small slices, and beat them
well with the knife heart, mince all kinds of herbs, beef, or mutton suet, and a
little lard, and when they are well seasoned, and allayed with raw eggs, roll
them among those slices of flesh, for to sees them in an earthen or tourtie
pan; when they are sodden, serve them with their sauce.

46. Fricasse of Veale.
Take some veale, and cut it into thin slices, flower them a very little, and
pass them in the pan, and season them with salt, with an onion stuck with
cloves, then stove them with a little broth, and the sauce being thickened,
serve.

47. Fillet of Veale with ragoust.
Lard it with great lard, spit it, and roast it a little more than half; stove
it with a little broth, and a bundle of herbs, and cover it well; when it is
sodden, serve with a sauce thickened with chippings of bread, or with flowers
and an onion; serve it garnished with truffles and mushrums.

48. Shoulder of Veal with ragoust.
Whiten it, and flower it, then pass it in the pan, when it is very brown,
stove it in an earthen pan when it is almost sodden, season it with a bundle
of herbs, all kinds of beatilles, mushrums, fry into it a little flower, a
little onion minced, and a little vineager, then serve.

49. Shoulder of Mutton with ragoust.
Beat it well, and take off the skin, then flower it, and pass it in the
pan with butter or melted lard, then stove it with good broth, a bundle of
herbs, and a good seasoning, garnish it with what you have, among other things,
with capers, and serve.

50. Breast of Veale fried.
After it is whitened, sees it in a great brass pot, or in another pot; it
matters not if it does sees with other meat; after it is sodden, open it
between, and make a liquid paste with a little flower, eggs, salt, and a
little parsley, then wet it with this seasoning; next, fry it with fresh seame,
or melted lard; when you have taken it out, throw over it one handful of very
green parsley, and very dry, that is, passed in the pan with butter very hot,
and very brown, serve.

50. Loine of Roebuck with ragoust.
When it is well stuck, spit it, and when it is half roasted, baste it with
peper, vineager, and a little broth; thicken the sauce with some chippings of
bread, or allayed chippings, then serve.

52. Small ribs of Mutton with ragoust.
Slice them, then beat and flower them, then pass them in the pan, after
they are fried, put them with good broth and capers, and all being well
seasoned, serve.

53. Beef a la mode.
Beat it well, and lard it with great lard, then sees it in a pot with good
broth, a bundle of herbs, and all kind of spices, and when all is well
consumed, serve with the sauce.

54. Beef after the Estoffade.
Cut it into very thin slices, and being well beaten, flower them, and pass
them in the pan with lard; then put them in an earthen pan, or in a pot
with good broth, all well seasoned, serve with a sharp sauce.

55. Young Rabbits with ragoust.
You may fry them as Pullets, or pass them in the pan with a little flower
mixed with the butter, then stove them with good broth, and season them with
capers, juice of orange or lemon, and a posie, or chibol; serve.

Another way.
After they are roasted, cut them into pieces, pass them in the pan, and
stove them in a dish with juice of orange, capers, a few chippings of bread;
let the sauce be of haut goust, and short; serve.

56. Loine of Fork with a sauce Robert.
Lard it with great lard, then roast it, and baste it with verjuice and
vineager, with a bundle of sage. After the fat is fallen, take it for to fry an
onion with, which being fried, you shall put under the loyn, with the sauce
wherewith you have basted it. All being a little stoved together, lest it may
harden, serve. This sauce is called sauce Robert.

57. Partridges after the Estoffade.
Lard them with great lard, and pass them in the pan with butter or melted
lard; when they are very brown, put them in the pot with good broth, and sees
them well seasoned. For the garnish, you shall have truffles, mushrums, fried
sparagus, wherewith you shall stove them, serve with lemon and pistaches. If
the sauce be not thickened enough, take a little flower, or of your thicknings,
and do not thicken it too much, left it be too thick.

58. Capon with Oysters.
After your Capon is dressed, and barded with lard, and with buttered paper
over it, roast it, and as it rosteth, put under it a driping pan; after you
have well cleansed your Oysters, you shall whiten them, if they are old: when
they are well cleansed and whitened, pass them in the pan with what is fallen
from your Capon, and season them with mushrums, onion stuck, and a bundle of
herbs. After they are well fried, you shall take out the bundle of herbs and
the rest, you shall put it into the body of the Capon, which you shall stove
with a few capers, then serve.

59. Young Ducks with ragoust.
After they are dressed, pass them in the pan with butter or lard, then stove
them in an earthen pan with good broth, and a bundle of herbs, all well
seasoned; when they are well sodden, and the sauce well thickened, put in it
capers, mushrums, truffles, and serve.

60. Tounges of Mutton fried with ragoust and fritters.
Take your Tongues, cleave them in the midst, then pass them in the pan with
butter or melted lard, and season them well, then put them into a dish with
verjuice and nutmegge; afterward take a little flower and allay it with an
egg, and the sauce which is under your tongues, which you shall power into
these implements; fry it with melted lard, or fresh seame; after it is fried,
throw into the pan one handful of parsley, and have a care that it may remain
very green; serve them dry, or with a pickle, and the rest of your sauce.

61. Liver of Veale with ragoust.
Lard it with great lard, and put it in the pot well seasoned with a bundle of
herbs, orange peele and capers; and when it is well sodden, and the sauce
thickened, cut it into slices, and serve.

62. Stewed Pullets.
Cut them very small, and sees them with a little broth, white wine, and very
new butter, season them with chibols, and parsley minced together; when they
are sod, allay some yolks of eggs, with some verjuice for to thicken the
sauce, and serve.

63. Calfes head fried.
After it is dressed and sod, you shall take out the bones, then you shall make
a liquid paste with eggs well seasoned; dippe this head into it, and fry it
with fresh seame; after it is well fried, powder it with salt, juice of lemon
or verjuice; then serve it with fried parsley.

64. Liver of Veale sticked.
Stick it very thick with Lardons, then spit it, and make a pickle under it,
wherewith you shall baste it as it does roast, to the end that the pickle may
turn it self into a sauce; after it is roasted, stove it with capers, and serve.

You may use Veale liver for to thicken sauces; and at other times for to make
Gray pudding.

65. Abbatis, or Purtenances, or Giblets, of Turkey.
Whiten them in fresh water, and sees them with good broth, when they are
almost sod, pass them in the pan with lard, and good seasoning; let the sauce
be short, and serve.

66. Shoulder of Wildboare with ragoust.
Lard it with great lard, then put it into a kettle full of water, with salt,
peper, and a bundle of herbs; take heed you do not season it too much, because
the broth must be reduced to a short sauce: When it is more than half sod, you
shall put to it a pint of white wine, clove, and a leaf of laurel or bay, or a
twigge of rosemary; then when it is well sod, and the sauce short, you shall
thicken it, which for to do, you must melt some lard, and fry a little flower
into it, then put to it an onion minced very small, give a turn or two in the
pan, and power it into your sauce, which you shall stove with capers, and
mushrums, after all is well seasoned, serve.

67. Legs of Roebuck, or Wild-goate.
They may be done as the shoulder of Wild-boare; as also the loyne and the
shoulder; or else after you have larded them with great lard, you may pass them
in the pan, likewise with some lard and flower, after which you shall sees
them with broth, and shall thicken the sauce alike.

68. Pigge farced.
Take him from under the sow, blood him in water ready to boil, scald him, cut
him between the thighs, take up the skin, the tail, the feet, and the head,
then let them steep till you have use for them; let the body alone, you will
find it afterward well enough; for to farce it take some veale and beef suet,
rufle them well after the way of Gaudiveaw, then fill the skin with it, with
mushrums passed in the pan, young pigeons, sweetbreads, a bundle of fine
herbs, and with all what you have, until it has the shape of a pigge, sow up
what is open, truffe it up, and whiten it in water, ready to spit it. An hour
and an half before dinner spit it through the head, wrap it up with buttered
paper, and tie it at both ends with splinters of wood, and as it is rosting
baste it with butter. When it is roasted, take off the paper and the thread, so
that it may not seem to have been farced, then serve.

The body of this Pigge being dressed, whiten it but very little, stick it
well, and roast it as if it were whole, or like a Lamb; when it is roasted, you
may serve it with a green sauce.

69. Calfes feet fried.
After they are well sod, cut them very small, and pass them in the pan with
lard or butter; after three or four turnings, put to it chibols, and parsley
minced together. Immediately after put into it a very little of b^oth, and
season all well. When it is ready to serve, allay some eggs proportionably to
your meat; as for four feet, three eggs, with verjuice of grapes, or common
verjuice; you may use Gooseberries instead of verjuice of grapes; then your
sauce being short, mix your thickning with it, and serve.

Sheeps trotters are done the same way, take them very white, and well sod, cut
them very small, and take out the worm which is in them, then fry and season
them with parsley and chibols minced together; make your thickning as
abovesaid, mix it, and serve.

70. Mutton tongues roasted.
Dress them and cut them in the midst, then bestrew them that some crumbs of
bread, and small salt may stick on them, and put them on the gridiron; make a
sauce with little broth, new butter, chibols and parsley whole, a few
chippings, salt, peper, nutmegs, all passed together in the pan, then stove
the tongues with the sauce; when you are ready to serve, garnish your plate or
dish, if it is in winter, with capers, lemon juice, or mushrums, then serve.

Another way.
After they are sod, season them, and cut them in the middle, then fry them
with a liquid paste. Serve with lemon juice, and fried parsley, then garnish.

Another way with ragoust.
Cleanse them well, take off the palats, and cut them in the midst, put also on
them crumbs of bread, and small salt, roast them, and after they are roasted, put
them in the dripping-panne under the roast meat; make a sauce with parsley,
chibols, or onion minced small, fresh butter, and verjuice of grapes, and when
you are ready to serve, allay the yolks of eggs in your sauce, and power it on
your tongues, then serve readily.

Another way.
Take your Tongues half sod or roasted, dress them, then stove them in a pot
with some broth, and pass them in the pan with melted lard, a little meal,
some minced onion, all well seasoned, serve them garnished with what you have,
among the rest, with minced capers, with a short sauce.

Another way.
After your Tongues are roasted and sticked, serve them stoved in a short sauce,
thickened as above; or else you may stove them with a sweet sauce.

71. Achis of roast meat.
The Achis of roasted meat, be it Gallimaffree, or other, is thus made. After
you have taken up the skin, cut the shoulder near the handle, take out the
bones out of the handle, and put the skin before the fire; you shall also
take out the spade bone, and mince the meat very small with capers and parsley;
which being done, stove it with a chibol or an onion sticked, all well
seasoned; and to the end that your Achis be the more dainty, put in it a little
crummes of bread and new butter, if you will; put it into a dish or on a plate,
and besprinckle it with its juice, or with some other, and the skin over it,
then serve; you may garnish it with pomgranate, lemon, or sod bread.

The Achis of Partridge is done the same way, except that you may feed it with
juice, and garnish it with what you will think fit.

72. Haslets.
Take a fillet of Veal, cut it into very thin slices, where there is no
strings; stick your slices with lardons, and bake them in a tourtre pan
covered, then stove them with a little broth, thicken your sauce, and serve
them garnished.

73. Achis of raw meat.
Take what meat you will, take out the strings, and mince it well, whitened or
not, mince with it twice as much of beef suet near the Kidney, having taken out
the fillet; then, when all is well minced, and well seasoned, allay it with
broth, and stove it, you may garnish it with Chestnuts, or what you shall have
fit to garnish with; when it is sod, serve with fat.

74. Poupeton.
Take some flesh of veale, and beef suet, or mutton suet, mince them well
together, and season them, mix some eggs with it for to allay the farce, and
then cut three or four bards of lard, over which you shall spread your minced
flesh, which you shall cover with young Pigeons, b^atilles, sweetbreads,
sparagoes, mushrums, yolks of eggs, stones, combs, hartichoaks, and over all
that, you shall yet put some flesh, and all being well seasoned, bake it, then
serve.

75. Tourte of lard.
Take some Lard, cut it, and melt it between two dishes, season it like the
Marrow tourte, which you shall find in the next article; when it is baked,
serve.

76. Tourt of Marrow.
Take some Marrow, and melt it, after it is melted, fry it, and mix it with
sugar, yolks of eggs, pistaches, or almonds stamped; next make a very thin
sheet of fine paste, on which you shall lay your implements, bind it if you
will; bake it, and serve it sugared.

77. Tourte of young Pigeons.
Make your paste fine, and let it rest; then take your young Pigeons, cleanse
and whiten them; if they are too big, cut them, and take gaudiveaux, sparagoes,
mushrums, bottoms of hartichoaks, beef marrow, yolks of eggs, cards, beef
palats, truffles, verjuice of grapes, or gooseberries; garnish your Tourte with
what you have, without forgetting the seasoning, then serve.

78. Tourt of Veale.
Take a piece of Veal, whiten it, and mince it with twice as much of beef suet,
after it is well seasoned, make a sheet of fine paste, put your meat on it, in
the middle of which you shall put what you have, as beatilles, etc. Sugar it if
you will, and when it is baked, serve.

79. Pie of Capon without bones.
After you have taken out the bones, farce it within with all kinds of
beatilles, and ovillets, mushrums, truffles, marrow, capers, cards,
sweetbreads, and gaudiveaux, when it is farced, dress it up on fine paste,
bind it with buttered paper, tie it with a thread, and cover it well seasoned,
when it is baked, serve.

80. Pie of Gaudiveau.
Dress up your paste into an ovall, garnish it with your Gaudiveaux, in the
midst of which you shall put all kind of garnish, as mushrums, the livers of
fat capons, cards, yolks of hard eggs, sweetbreads, and season all well, bind
it at the top with paste, and when it is baked, serve with a sauce of verjuice,
yolks of eggs and nutmegs.

81. Pie of Assiette.
Take some flesh of Veal and Beef, or Mutton suet, make with them a kind of
gaudiveaux, then dress up your paste very neatly half a foot high, and fill it
with a bed of flesh, and over it another bed of mushrums, another of cards or
cardeaux, or of young Pigeons, beef palats, stones, and yolks of eggs, so that
the upper bed be of your gaudiveaux, cover and season it, then serve.

82. Pie after the Marotte.
Take some Rye flower, which you shall salt, make your paste with it, and
dress it up in the shape of a pie, then take a hare or two, or two joints of
mutton with a little beef suet, which you shall mince together very small, and
season it, then make up your pie, on the top of which you shall leave a vent;
after it has been baking three hours, take it out, and fill it with good
broth, put it into the oven again, and when it is quite baked, serve.

83. Pie after the English.
Take a young Hare, or a Hare, mince it well with beef, or mutton suet, or even
with the brawn of Capon, mix well all together, and season it, put in it, if
you will, capers and sugar. Make your paste thus; after it is flowred, spread
it, and plate it into three or four doubles, as a napking, laying some new
butter on each bed of the paste, so that to one pound of paste, there be half a
pound of butter proportionably. After it is thus made, let it rest a while, and
then make up your pie, which you shall garnish at the outside with buttered
paper; bake it well, endore it with the yolk of an egg, and serve.

84. Pyes after the Cardinal's way.
Make up your Pies very high and very narrow, fill them up with gaudiveaux, and
covr them so, as the lid be also very high; then serve them, specially for a
garnish to a piece of beef, or upon a plate.

85. Pullets with ragoust in a bottle.
Take all the bones out of a Pullet, put the skin thereof into a bottle
without of^er, and leave without the overture or hole of the neck, which you
shall tie to the neck of the bottle, then make what farce you will, with
mushrums, truffles, sweetbreads, young pigeons, sparagus, and yolks of eggs,
wherewith you shall fill up the Pullet or Capons skin, which you shall tie
up, and let slip into the bottle, which must be stopped with past; sees your
Ragoust well seasoned in the great pot, out of which you shall take it, a
little before you serve, and stove it before the fire, and when you are ready
to serve, cut this bottle with a diamond, so that the bottom may remain full
and whole, then serve.

A note of the meats which may be served in the Second.
THe pheasant 1 The Wood-henne 2 The Rouge 3 The Turtle dove 4 The young Hare 5
The Quail 6 The partridge 7 The Capon 8 The young pigeons 9 Crammed pullets
10 Turkey 11 Young Ducks 12 Wood-pidgeons 13 Young pullets 14 Lamb 15 Teale 16
Goose 17 The young Wild-boare 18 Young rabbits 19 Thrush 20 The Rail 21 Young
partridges 22 Young Quails 23 Young Turkies 24 Plouvers 25 Loine of Stag 26
Filet of stag 27 Loine of Roebuck (or of Wild-goat) 28 Ortolans 29 Fieldfares
30 Woodcocks 31 Snipes 32 Stockdoves 33 Loine of Veale 34 Pigge sticked 35
Wild-goose 36 Tame goose 37 Water-hennes 38 Capon with watercresses 39 Sucking
pig after the natural 40 Cus blanes (white blanes) 41 Heron 42 Chine of Hare 43
Shoulder or loine of Wildboare 44 Tame pork 45 Fawn of a Hind 46 Fawn of
Roebuck 47 Fillet of Roebuck 48 Breast of Veale farced 49 Surloine of Mutton 50
Loine of Mutton 51 Ribbe of Beef 52 Neats tongue fresh 53 Joint of Mutton
after the Kingly way ( a la royale 54 Joint of mutton farced 55 Fat young Hen
56 Bauters de pave 57 Shoulder of Veal roasted 58 Liver of Veale 59 Larks 60
Wild-duck 51
The way of dressing and serving meat for the second Courses.
1. The Pheasant.
WHiten it on the fire, that is, plump it on the Gridiron, and leave it one
wing, the neck, the head, and the tail, stick it with lardons, and wrap up
what has feathers with buttered paper; roast it, serve, and unwrap it.

The Hen, and the Rouge are done the same way.

2. The Turtle dove.
When it is dressed, stick it, and spit it.

3. The young Hare.
After it is dressed, whiten it on the fire, endore it with its blood, stick
it, and spit it; when it is roasted; serve with a Poiurade, or with a sweet
sauce.

4. The Quail.
After it is dressed, whiten it on the fire, and barde it with a barde of lard,
which you shall cover with vine leafs in their season; when it is roasted, serve.

5. The Partridge.
After it is dressed and whitened on the fire, you must stick it well, roast it,
and when it is roasted, serve.

6. The Capon.
After it is dressed, if it be exceeding fat, barde it with a fat paper, and
put into it an onion stuckt, some salt and a little peper, when it is roasted,
serve.

7. Young Pigeons roasted.
As they come out of the Dovecoat, blood them in water, then scald and dress
them; you may barde them if you will with Vine leafs over them, or stick them;
when they are roasted, put a poivrade under them, and serve.

8. Pullets fed with corn, or crammed Pullets.
You must plume them dry, dress them and whiten them on the fire, then stick
or barde them, roast them, and serve.

9. Turkey.
It must likewise be plumed dry, whiten it on the fire, roast it, and serve.

10. Young Ducks.
Dress them, and whiten them on the fire, and if you will, stick on them four
little roses of lardons upon the four joints; when they are roasted, serve with
a Porvrade.

11. The Wild-pidgeons.
After it is well dressed, stick it, spit it, and serve.

12. Cockerels.
Dress them, and whiten them on the fire, then stick and roast them, and serve.

You may serve them dry, or with a sauce made with water, salt, peper, and
chibols minced.

You may also serve them with ragoust, as the Sea-henne, of which hereafter.

13. Lamb.
If it is fat, after it is roasted, throw on it the crumbs of bread with a little
salt and parsley, if you will, and serve.

14. Teales.
After they are well dressed, spit them, and when they are roasted, serve them
with Orange.

15. Goose.
As it comes from the mother scald and dress it, cut off the neck close to the
body, and the legs, and after it is whitened on the fire, and trussed up, set
it a rosting, and make a farce to put under it, with its liver, and store of
good herbs minced together, which you shall pass in the pan with lard or
butter, and some yolks of eggs, all well seasoned, and serve.

16. Young Wildboare, or Grice.
Take off the skin as far as the head, dress it, and whiten it on the fire,
cut off the four feet, stick it with lardons, and put in the body of it one bay
leaf; or some fine herbs; when it is roasted, serve.

17. Young Rabbits.
Dress it, whiten it on the fire, stick and roast it with verjuice under it,
and serve.

After it is roasted, you may put some salt, a little peper and juice of orange
in the body of it, and stir all well together, then serve.

18. The Thrush.
After it is pulled, truss it up, and whiten it, stick it and spit it; put a
tossed under it, and a sauce with verjuice, a little vinegar, onion, and orange
peele, then serve. So is done the Fieldfare.

19. The Rail.
It is done as the Thrush, without drawing it, serve.

20. Young Partridges.
Dress them and whiten them on the fire, stick them with lardons, roast it with
verjuice under it, then serve.

21. Young Quails.
They must be barded with vine leafs in the season.

22. Young Turkies.
Pull them warm, let them mortify, then dress them, and whiten them on the
fire, stick them and roast them, then serve.

23. Plover.
After it is pulled, truss it up, and whiten it, then lard it, and roast it;
serve with a sauce and a tossed under it.

24. Loyne of Stagge.
Take off all the skins, stick it, and spit it, serve with a Poivrade.

The Fillet is done up like the Loyne with Poivrade.

The Loine of Roebuck is also done the same way.

25. Ortolan.
After it is dressed, truss it up, and barde it with lard, and vine leaves over
it in the season; In the Spring it must be drawn; after it is roasted, serve.

26. The Woodcock.
When it is pulled, trusse it with its bill, which is instead of a prick,
whiten it on the fire, and stick it; roast it with a tossed under it, in the way
of a Poivrade, with juice of orange, then serve.

The Snipe is done after the same way.

27. Another way for the Snipe.
Dress it as the Ortolan, only that some do draw them, which is very fitting at
any other season but Winter, because these birds, in the Spring, Summer, and
Autumn, live on nothing but Caterpillars, Ants, Lice, Herbs, or Leaves of
trees; but howsoever, drawn or not, barde it with vine leaves in the season,
spit it and roast it, so that it be not too dry, and serve.

28. The Stockdove.
After it is dressed, whiten it on the fire, stick and roast it, with a Poivrade
under it, and serve.

29. Loyne of Veale.
After it is mortified, and whitened, stick it very thick, roast it, and make a
ragoust with verjuice, a little water, a little vinegar, orange peele, and
chippings of bread, then serve it well seasoned.

30. Pigge sticked.
Take off the skin, cut off the head, and the four feet, whiten it in warm
water, and stick it, or if you will, barde it half; when it is roasted, serve
with crumbs of bread, and salt upon it.

31. Wild-goose.
After it is dressed, whiten it on the fire, and lard it only on the quarters
like a little rose, roast it and serve.

The tame Goose is done the same way.

32. Water-henne.
After it is pulled, draw it, whiten it on the fire, stick and roast it with a
Poivrade under it.

33. Capon with Watercresses.
Barde it with lard, and roast it, season your Cresses with salt and vinegar, or
otherwise, dead it in the Capon sauce with a little vinegar, then serve.

34. Sucking Pig to the natural.
Take it from the Sow, scald it, dress it, and roast it with a bundle of herbs,
salt, and peper in the body of it, then serve.

Another way.
Take it also from under the Sow, blood it, water ready to boil, and when it
is scalded, empty it at the side, trusse up the fore feet toward the neck, and
they behind with a prick, whiten it in warm water, and slice it on the body;
for to roast it, put into the stomach of it an onion sticked with cloves, fine
herbs, a little butter, salt, and a little peper, then sow up the overture, of
hole, and roast it: That you may not be troubled with basting of it, rub it with
Olive oil, thus he takes a good color, and the skin is very tender; when it
is well roasted, serve garnished with flowers.

You may baste it with salt and water, or else rub it with some lard.

35. Cus blanes or Thiastias.
Pull them, and leave them their heads, and draw them, truss up their legs as
the Woodcocks, then whiten them on the fire, and stick them, or if you will in
little roses on the thighs; when they are roasted, serve with a Poivrade under.

36. Heron.
Pull it, and draw it; then seek our six galls which are on the body of it, and
a seventh which is within, ttuss up the legs along the thighs, whiten it on the
fire, and stick it, wrap up the neck with buttered paper, then roast it, and
when it is roasted serve.

37. Chine of Hare.
After you have taken off the skin, and emptyed him, cut him chine-way, that
is, as far as the shoulders, then take off three skins which are on it, then
trusse it up behind, stick and roast it, and serve with a Poivrade.

38. Shoulder or loyn of Boar.
After you have beaten it well, take the Venison out of it, which is commonly
called the Lard; then stick it roast it, and serve with a Sauce Robert, or with
a Poivrade.

As for the Loine, lard it with great lard, and pass it in the pan with fresh
scam and flower, then sees it with broth and water in a great earthen pan,
or kettle, season it well, and when it is almost sod, put into it one pint of
white wine, and all being reduced to the proportion of a sauce, you may serve
it under the shoulder, or if you will serve it dry, it must be of a more haut
goust.

39. Pork.
You may disguise it near hand like the Boar, that is, that after you have
beaten it well, you shall endore it with blood, and a while after stick it, and
spit it, not forgetting well to endore the feet with blood before it be roasted,
serve it as the Boar, with sauce, or without it.

40. Fawn.
Before it be mortified too much, dress it very neatly, truss it up, and take
off some skins which are on it, and look like slime; then whiten it on the fire
for to stick it, so that it be not too much whitened, because it would put you
to too much trouble; take heed also lest you burn the head, or lest the hair of
it become black, spit it, and wrap the head with buttered paper; when it is
roasted, serve with a Poivrade.

41. Fawn of Roebuck.
Dress it as the above written, trusle it up; and lard it, wrap up the head
also with buttered paper, and when it is roasted, serve it with a poivrade,
orange, or sweet sauce.

42. Fillet of Roebuck.
After you have stuck it, roast it wrapped up with buttered paper, after it is
roasted, serve it with a poivrade.

Another way.
You may lard it with mean lard, and stick it on the top with smaller lardons;
when it is at the spit, make a pickle under it, and after it is roasted, stove
it, and serve.

43. Breast of Veale farced.
Take it white and fat, and let it steep in water till your Farce is ready,
which you shall make thus; Take of the flesh of a Fillet of Veale, beef suet,
crumbs of bread boiled, capers, mushrums, a few fine herbs, and yolks of eggs,
mince all together well seasoned, and farce the breast with it; which being
done, close it up with pricks, or sow it up, and whiten it in warm water; this
is to serve it boiled.

For to roast it, put into your Farce palats of beef and other things, and fill
it not so much as for to boil, after you have stuck it, and spitted it, make
under it what ragoust you will; after it is roasted, and the sauce well
seasoned, stove it with it, and serve.

44. Surloine of Mutton.
To serve it with ragoust, into stakes, or whole, you must pass it in the
pan with butter, or melted lard, being flowred, then stove it with broth, a
bundle of herbs, and some capers, and for to thicken the sauce, fry a little
flower with some lard, and when the flower is brown, put to it a minced onion,
and a drop of vinegar; let all stove together, and serve garnished with what
you have. You may roast it stuck with parsley, and when it is roasted, serve it
dry, or with verjuice of grapes.

45. Loine of Mutton.
After it is well mortified, lard it with great lard, and spit it; make a
pickle with onion, salt, peper, a very little of orange or lemon peele, broth
and vinegar; after it is roasted, stove it with the sauce, which for to thicken,
you shall use a little flower passed in the pan with some lard, as abovesaid;
garnish it with what you have; capers are good for it, and some Anchovis. You
may give it the thickning of turnips strained, serve.

46. Ribbe of Beef.
Take a rib of the first piece well interlarded, with the fat very white, spit
it, when it is almost roasted, take up the Fillet, and baste it with a little
broth. For to make your ragoust, cut it into very thin slices, with two or
three chibols, whole or otherwise, salt peper, a little of chippings of bread,
or any thickning you have, then mix all together, and stove without covering;
serve the ragoust with a little vinegar, or juice of a leg of mutton; you may
mix it with what you have; have a care that the rib of beef be not black with
too much rosting.

47. Neats tongue fresh.
Sees it, dress it, stick it, and roast it on the spit, after it is roasted, cut
it along in the midst, and serve with such ragoust as you will.

Another way.
Stove it with a little wine, sugar, and clove, until the sweet sauce be made;
and if it is not strong enough, put in it a drop of vinegar, then serve.

48. Joint of Mutton after the Kingly way.
Take a good joint of Mutton, big and short, beat it well, take off the skin,
and take out the Knuckle bones, flower it, and pass it in the pan with lard
or fresh seame; then sees it with a little broth well seasoned with mushrums,
trousfles, and beatilles; when it is almost sod, fry a little flower with an
onion, a drop of vinegar, and a little beaten lard, stove all together, serve
with a short sauce, and garnisht with pomegranats, or lemon sliced.

49. Joint of Mutton farced.
You shall find the way of farcing of it in the discourse of the Potages;
after it is farced, stove it with good broth and a bundle of herbs, fry into it
flower, mushrums, and stakes for to garnish, sees well all together, and
thicken the sauce well, with what sharpness you will, lemon, orange or
verjuice, serve garnished with what you have over your small stakes.

50. Fat hen.
Dress it, cut off the extremities of it, and lard it with mean lard; after
it is flowred, pass it in the pan with lard or fresh seam, then stove it
with good broth, and season it, when it is almost enough, fry into it mushrums,
fat liver, a little flower, and an onion stuckt with cloves, after all is well
sod, and the sauce well thickened, you may serve it garnished with pomegranate.

Another way.
You may farce it with Oysters, or with young Pigeons, and with all other
Beatils; sees it the same way, and garnish with what you have, then serve.

Another way.
Cut it in half, pass it in the pan, season it, and garnish as before, then
serve.

Another way.
After it is sticked or barded with a paper over the barde, roast it; when it is
well roasted, powder it with crumbs of bread and small salt, then serve it with
poor man's sauce, verjuice or orange, and in winter with cresses.

51. Batteurs de pave.
To put them with ragoust, cut off the head and the feet; after they are
dressed, lard them with mean lard, flower them, and pass them in the pan
with butter or melted lard, then stove them with broth well seasoned, a bundle
of herbs and mushrums; fry into it a little flower and onion, and after that
all is well stoved, serve with a sauce thickened with what thickning you will.

52. Shoulder of Veale roasted.
After it is well whitened in water, or on the fire, which will be the fitter
and better, stick or barde it with lard, or if you will, as it rosteth, baste
it with butter, after it is roasted, strew on it crumbs of bread, and small salt,
and serve.

You may serve it roasted with a Poivrade.

53. Liver of Veale.
Lard it with mean lard, then stick it, warm the spit about the place where it
ought to remain, and as it does roast, baste it with a Poivrade, compounded of
chibols, salt, onion stuckt, peper, and a little broth; after it is roasted,
stove it in the sauce, then serve it whole, or into slices, and let the sauce
be well thickened, with what thickning you will.

54. Larks.
Roast them stuck or barded with lard; after they are roasted, if they are
barded, bestrew them with crumbs of bread, and small salt, and serve.

55. Wild-goose.
You may put it the same way as the batteur de pave, and with what garnish you
will.

You may also roast and serve it with a Poivrade.

You may take this advice, that you are to garnish your dishes with flowers,
according to the season and commodity.

The way of making ready some sauces.
The sauce called Poivrade is made with vinegar, salt, onion, or chibols,
orange, or lemon peele, and peper; sees it, and serve it under that meat, for
which it is fitting.

The Green-sauce is made thus; Take some green corn, burn a tossed of bread, with
vinegar, a little peper and salt, and stamp all together in a mortar, and
strain it through a linen cloth, then serve your sauce under your meat.

The sauce for the young Rabbit, or for the Rabbit is such. After they are
roasted, you put some salt and peper in the body, with some orange juice, and
stir all well together.

For young Partridges, orange, or verjuice of Grapes.

Another sauce for the Thrush and the Rail, is to put some tosts under the
spit, and when your birds are almost roasted, you take away your tosts, and set
them apart, and take vinegar, verjuice, salt, peper, and orange peele, boil all
together, and having put in your tosts, serve.

The Fieldfare, and the Woodcock are served with tosts, and a Poivrade under.

The Plover is served with a sauce made with verjuice, orange or lemon peele, a
drop of vinegar, peper, salt, and chibols, not forgetting tosts.

The Snipe will have the same sauce.

The Stockdove with a Poivrade.

The Pig and Lamb with a green sauce.

A Table of the Intercourses (or Middle-courses) for the Flesh days.
FEet and ears of Pork 1 Small vails of stag 2 Venison pasty 3 Slice of pasty 4
Pasty of Gammon of bacon 5 Trouffles with ragoust 6 Dry trouffles 7 Trouffles
after the natural 8 Omelets of Purtenances, beatilles. 9 Sweet breads of Veale
fried. 10 Sweetbreads sticked 11 Sweetbreads with ragoust 12 Liver of Roebuck
13 Liver of Roebuck in omelet. 14 Vdder of Roebuck 15 Cows udder 16
Colliflowers 17 Cream of Pistaches 18 Gammon with ragoust 19 Gammon roasted 20
Gammon in slices 21 Thrush 22 Pickled Pullets 23 Purtnances, Abatis of Lamb 24
Larks with ragoust 25 Gelee 26 Gelee of Hearts horn 27 Green gelee 28 Red gelee
29 Yellow gelee 30 Gelee of color of Violets 31 Blew gelee 32 White meat 33
Salat of Lemon 34 Hash of Partridges 35 Rissoles fried 36 Rissoles puffed 37
Fritters of Marrow 38 Fritters of Apples 39 Fritters of Artichoaks 40 Pets de
putain (the farts of a Whore 41 Paste spunne 42 Lemon paste 43 Almond paste 44
Paste of Pistaches 45 Ramequin of Kidneys 46 Ramequin of flesh 47 Ramequin of
cheese 48 Ramequin of soot 49 Ramequin of onion 50 Ramequin of garlic 51
Ortrlans 52 Neats tongue with ragoust 53 Tongue of pork with ragoust 54 Tongue
of pork perfumed 55 Tongue of pork boiled with ragoust 56 Neats tongue 57 Young
Pigeons 58 Fat liver 59 Fat liver on the gridiron 60 Fat liver baked in the
ashes 61 Fat liver fried into fritters 62 Purtenances 63 Tourte of Franchipanne
64 Nulle 65 Nulle with Amber 66 Green Nulle 67 Fricasles fried Artichocks 68
Fried Artichocks 69 Artichocks with Poivrades 70 Artichocks bottoms 71 Mushrums
72 Mushrums farced 73 Mushrums fried 74 Mushrums after the Olivier 75 Omelet of
gammon 76 Tortoise 77 Tourte of Pistaches 78 Eggs after the Portingals way 79
Eggs minions (or delicate) 80 Eggs spun 81 Eggs after la Varennes way 82 Eggs
of snow 83 Eggs after the Huguenots way 84 Cardons of Spain 85 Sparagus with
white sauce 86 Sparagus with ragoust 87 Sparagus with cream 88 Tongue of mutton
with ragoust 89 Tongue of mutton sticked 90 Tongue of mutton on the gridiron 91
Salat of Pomgranate 92 Head of Wildboare 93 Slice of head of wildboare 94 Slice
of head with ragoust 95 Green pease 96 Rams-stones 97 Falats of beef 98
Arbolade (tensie) 99 Young Pigeons 100 Fieldfares 101 Young Patridges 102
5. Discourse of the Entre-mets or Intercourse.
1. Ears, and feet of pork.
AFter they are well sod, pass them in the pan with butter or melted lard,
and little onion, and season them well. Stove them in a little pot with a
little broth, and when the sauce is well thickened, put to it a drop of vinegar
with some mustard, if the season be of it, and serve.

2. Small purtenances of Stag.
After they are well dressed, sees them in a pot, and when they are well sod,
stove them with wine, next pass them in the pan with some lard, all being
well seasoned; then stove them again between two dishes with a little onion,
and good broth, and when the sauce is very short, serve.

3. Venison pasty.
If the flesh is hard, beat it, take off the skins of the top, and lard it
with great lard, seasoned with salt, peper, vinegar, and beaten cloves. If it
is for to keep, make your paste with Rye-meal, without butter, salt, and peper;
bake your pie for the space of three hours and an half, after it is baked,
stop with paste the hole which you have left for to give it vent, and serve
into slices.

The manner is to seek out the side, where the lard is most seen, and being cut
very thin to serve it.

4. Pasty of gammon.
Unsalt it well, and when it is unsalted enough, boil it a little, and take off
the skin round about, then put it in brown paste as Venison, and season it with
peper, clove, and parsley; you may also lard it as venison; bake it
proportionably to its bigness; if it is thick, five houtes; if it is less,
less time will serve. After it is cold, serve it in slices.

5. Trouffles with ragoust.
Peele them very neatly, so that no earth may remain on them, cut them very
thin, and fry them with a little lard, or with butter, and a little parsley
minced, and a little broth; after they are well seasoned, stove them, so that
the sauce be little thickened, and serve them on a plate garnished with
pomegranat and lemon, if you have any, with flowers and leaves.

6. Dry trouffles.
Wash them well in Wine, sees them with thick or gross wine, a little vinegar,
salt, and peper in abundance; after they are well sod, let them rest in their
broth, that they may take salt, then serve them in a napkin foulded or no.

7. Trouffles after the natural.
After they are well washed with wine, sees them with salt and peper, and when
they are well sod, serve them in a folded napkin, or on a plate garnished with
flowers.

8. Omelets of beatilles.
Take your beatilles, which are, combs, stones, and the wings of young
pigeons, sees them well, and after they are sod, and seasoned, drain them;
take some eggs, whereof you shall take out more than half of the whites, beat
them, and when they are well beaten, put into them your beatils very clean;
then take some lard, and cut it into pieces, pass it in the pan, and with
your melted lard, or even with the pieces if you will, make your Omelet very
thick, and not too much fried, and serve.

9. Sweetbreads.
Let them not be too old, steep them in water, and whiten them well, and dry
them; cut them into slices, and season them with salt, flower them, and fry
them with fresh seam, or melted lard, so that they be very yellow and dry, put
to it the juice of an orange or lemon, and serve them readily.

10. Sweetbreads stuck.
Take the fairest you can get, and best shaped, whiten them in cold water,
stick them, and put them on a prick, roast them very neatly, and after they are
roasted, serve them with the juice of a lemon upon them.

11. Sweetbreads with ragoust.
After they are whitened, cut them into slices, and pass them in the pan, or
whole, if you will, with lard, and well seasoned with parsley, chibol whole,
mushrums, and trouffles, and after they are well stoved with good broth, and
the sauce being short and well thickened, serve.

12. Liver of Roebuck.
As it comes warm out of the body of the Roebuck, cut it into small slices,
pass it in the pan with lard, take out the mammocks, fry it well, and season
it with a little parsley, and a whole chibol; stove it with little broth, then
serve with the sauce well thickened.

13. Liver of Roebuck in Omelet.
After it is taken out of the body of the beast, mince it very small, and make
your Omelet of it with lard, and let it not be too much fried, but let it also
be enough, and serve.

14. Vadder of Roebuck.
After you have whitened it well in water, cut it into round slices, and fry it
with juice of lemon, or sees it with some ragoust. After it is fried, or sod,
mince it very small, and make an Omelet of it with lard, as that of the beatils
above written, then serve with the juice of lemon.

15. Cows Vdder.
Sees it well, and when it is well sodden, cut it into slices, and garnish
your entrees with it, or pass it in the pan with fine herbs, and chiboll
whole; season all well, and stove it with the best of your broths; so that it
be of a high taste, and the sauce well thickened, then serve.

16. Coliflowers.
After they are well cleansed, sees them with salt, and a piece of fat or of
butter; after they are sod, peal them, and put them with very fresh butter, one
drop of vinegar, and a little nutmegge, for garnish about the dish. If you
will, serve them alone, do them alike, and when you are ready to serve, make a
sauce with good fresh butter, one chibol, salt, vinegar, nutmegge, and let the
sauce be well thickened: You may put in it some yolks of eggs; then garnish
your plate warm, and put your sauce over it, and serve.

17. Cream of Pistaches.
Take one handful of Pistaches stamped, and a quart of milk, boil it with an
implement of meal, which you shall mix with it; when it is almost sod, allay
six yolks of eggs with your Pistaches, and a little butter very new, put all in
a pan with store of sugar, and a little salt. If you will, you may put in it
Musk or Amber also, with much sugar, but very little Musk; beat all well
together, and serve garnished with flowers.

18. Gammon with ragoust.
Sod or not, cut it into very thin slices, then put them in the pan with
very little wine, then stove them with a little peper, few chippings of bread,
and very small, and juice of lemon, then serve.

19. Gammon roasted.
Cut it into slices, and steep it into a little broth, and a drop of vinegar;
make it lukewarm, then take it out, and put crummes of bread upon and under it;
roast it well, and after the sauce has boiled a very little, put it under it;
then serve well garnisht with flowers or leaves.

20. Gammon in slices.
After it is well sod, cut it fittingly, and very thin, then serve.

21. Thrushes.
Dress them neatly, cut off the wings, the legs and the neck, and draw them,
flat them a little, then flower them, and fry them with lard, then stove them
with broth well seasoned, and a small bundle of herbs; when they are enough,
and the sauce well thickened, serve them with the juice of lemon on them, and
garnish about with a whole lemon sliced.

22. Pickled pullets.
After they are well dressed, cleave them in two, if they are small, break
their bones, and set them a pickling with vinegar, salt, peper, chibol, and
lemon peele; let them steep therein, till you have occasion to use them, and
then set them a draining, flower them, and fry them in fresh seame or lard;
after they are fried, stove them a very little with their pickle, then serve
with a short sauce.

23. Abbatis of Lamb with ragoust.
Take the feet, the ears and the tongue, pass them in the pan with butter or
lard, a chibol, and some parsley, then stove them with good broth, when they
are almost enough, put in it some minced capers, broken sparagus, the juice of
mushrums or trouffles, and season all well; serve neatly with a sauce well
thickened with what thickning you will, and a garnishing of leaves and flowers,
and above all, let your Abbatis be very white.

24. Larks with ragoust.
After they are well pulled, draw them, flat them, flower and pass them in the
pan with butter or lard, then stove them with good broth, a bundle of herbs,
and a few minced capers, all well seasoned; after they are enough, and the
sauce well thickened with what thickning you will, serve with pistaches, or
pomgranate, and slices of lemon.

25. Gelee.
For to make Gelee, take a Cock, take off the skin; take also a leg or
knuckle of Veale, and the four feet, break and whiten them, then put them into
a new earthen pan and sees them for the space of three hours and a half; and
when all is almost sod, put in it some white wine very clear; when you have put
it in, strain your meat through a napkin; take your broth, and put it in a pan
or pipkin on the fire; when it is ready to boil, put in it five quarterns of
sugar, and when it boyles, power into it the juice of six lemons, and the
whites of a douzen of very new laid eggs; after all has boiled, put it into a
very clear strainer, and mix in it what color you will, musk it, and serve.

26. Gelee of Hearts horn.
Take Hearts horn rasped; for to make three dishes of Gelee, you must take two
pounds of Hearts horn, sees it with white wine two hours, so that after it is
boiled, there may remain to make up your three dishes with; strain it well
through a napkin, and then put it in a pan with one pound of sugar, and the
juice of six lemons; when it is ready to boil, put in it the whites of a
douzen of new laid eggs, and as soon as you have put them in, power all into
the strainer, and set it up in a cool place; serve it natural, and garnish it
with pomegranates and lemon slices.

27. Green Gelee.
Take your ordinary Gelee, as it is above described, and take some green
color, which you shall mix with your Gelee, then serve.

28. Red Gelee.
As your Gelee comes out of the strainer, steep it with very red Beets, well
sod, and rasped, strain all together through a linen cloth, and set it a
cooling, then serve, and garnish with other color.

In the like manner you may make Gelee yellow, violet, and blew.

29. White meat.
Take the thickest of your Gelee, make it lukewarm with Almonds well stamped;
strain them together through a napkin, and mix a drop of milk with it, if it
is not white enough; after it is cold, serve, and garnish with other color.

30. Sallat of Lemon.
Take Lemons, what quantity you will, peele them, and cut them into very thin
slices, put them with sugar, orange, and pomegranat flowers, then serve neatly.

31. Achis of Partridges.
After your Partridges are roasted, take up the brawn, mince it very small,
allay it with good broth, and season it; then stove it with a chibol, and when
you will serve, add to it the yolk of an egg, and the juice of a lemon, and
garnish it with what you will, as Pistaches, Pomegranate, and Lemon sliced,
then serve.

32. Rissoles fried.
Take the brawn of Partridges, or of other meat, mince it very small, and
season it well; then make your sheet of paste very thin, and dress up your
Rissoles with it, which you shall fry with fresh seam or melted lard.

33. Rissoles puffed.
They are made the same way, but that the meat of them must be a little fatter;
after they are well seasoned, fry them neatly, and serve.

You may also make Rissoles in the same manner with any other kind of meat;
serve them with sugar, and sweet waters on them.

34. Fritters of Marrow.
Before the specifying the several kinds of Fritters, it is fitting first to
give here a general model of them.

Take some Cheese, stamp it well in a mortar, or in a dish, and if it is very
hard, put a little milk with it, then some flower and eggs proportionably;
season all with salt, and pass it with fresh seame, or refined butter for the
lean days; serve with abundance of sugar, and a little orange, flower water,
or rosewater on it.

If you will make Fritters of Marrow of Beef, take the biggest pieces of Marrow
you have; after they are steeped, cut them into slices, fit them in your paste,
fry them, and serve in the like manner.

Apple Fritters are done the same way.

35. Fritters of Artichocks.
Take the bottoms of Artichocks, and sees them half, and after you have taken
out the choke, cut them into slices, make a preparation with flower and eggs,
some salt, and a little milk, then put your Artichocks in it, and when your
fresh seame is hot, put them into it, one slice after another; fry them well,
and serve.

36. Pets de putain.
Make your Fritters paste stronger than ordinary, by the augmentation of flower
and eggs, then draw them very small or slender, and when they are fried, serve
them warm with sugar and sweet water.

37. Paste spunne.
Take Cheese, and bray it well; take also as much flower, and a few eggs, all
seasoned, sees it in a Pipkin, as pappe well sod, that is to say, something
firm, and pass or strain it through a passing or straining pan, upon some fat
paper; after it is sod, spinne or draw the paste in what sort you will, then
fry it, and serve it pyramid-wise with sugar and sweet waters.

38. Lemon paste.
It is made the same way, but that you mix Lemon with it, you must serve it as
abovesaid, well garnisht with flowers.

The Almond paste, and the paste of Pistaches are made the same way.

39. Ramequin of kidney.
Take out the Kidney of a Loyn of Veale roasted, mince it with parsley or
garlic, and the yolk of an egg, then spread your implements well seasoned
upon bread; which you shall tossed in the pan, or on the gridiron, and shall
serve all dry; you may put sugar on it if you will.

You may make tosts of Kidney of Veal almost the same way, but that you must
put to it neither parsley nor onion; but the Kidney being well seasoned, you
spread it on your tostes, which you shall also cause to take a color in the
pan before the fire; and when you serve, you may sugar them, and even mix
some sugar in the implements if you will.

40. Ramequin of flesh.
Take what meat you will mince it very small, and after it is minced, allay it
with an egg, and season it as it ought, roast them in the pan, and serve with
the juice of a Lemon.

41. Ramequin of Cheese.
Take some Cheese, melt it with some butter, on onion whole, or stamped, salt
and peper in abundance, spread all upon bread, pass the fire shovell over it
red hot, and serve it warm.

42. Ramequin of soot of chimney.
After your bread is passed in the pan with butter or oil, powder it with soot,
with salt, and much peper over it, and serve it warm.

43. Ramequin of Onion.
Take your Onions, and stamp them in a mortar, with salt and much peper; you
may put to it some Anchovis, well melted with a little butter, your onions
being upon the bread fried in oil or butter, pass the fire-shovel red hot over
it, and serve.

The Ramequin of Garlic is done the same way.

44. Ortolans with ragoust.
Dress them, and pass them in the pan with butter, or melted lard; after
they are fried, stove them in a small pot with a little broth, and season them
well; for to allay the sauce, mix with it sweetbreads, the juice of meat, and
mushrums, and when all is well sod, serve garnisht with Pistaches and
Pomegranate.

45. Tongue of pork with ragoust.
After it is salted and sod, cut it very thin, and stove it with little broth,
then pass it in the pan with melted lard, onion stamped, and one drop of
Vinegar; after this serve with the juice of a Lemon, and garnish with Capers,
and with all what you have. Mix with it in the season verjuice or gooseberries.

46. Tongue of pork perfumed.
After it is sod, serve it dry, and garnish with what you will, be it flowers
or other thing. You may open it in the midst.

47. Tongue of pork boiled with ragoust.
Sees it half salted, then broyl it; make for it also such sauce as you will,
so that it be well thickened, and well seasoned, then serve.

You may stick it with lard, and roast it on the spit, basting it with a pickle,
which you shall make under it well seasoned, and with such, quantity of salt as
you shall judge fitting; when it is roasted, serve.

48. Neats tongue.
Sees it salted, with water, and toward the end put in some wine; after it is
sod, peele it, and when you are ready to serve, cut it into round slices, or
cleave it, then serve.

49. Young Pigeons.
To put them with ragoust, take them as they come from under the mother, kill
them, and scald them, then after they are dressed, whitened and flowred, pass
them in the pan, and then stove them in a pot with good broth, well seasoned,
and a bundle of herbs; let them be well sod, and the sauce thickened, serve with
minced capers, mushrums, sweet-breads, and all what you can have of assortment
for young Pigeons.

50. Fat liver with ragoust.
Take the fattest and clearest, cleanse them, and put them into warm water, to
take away the bitterness, but take them out again presently; after they are
dried, pass them in the pan with butter or fresh seame, and stove them with
little broth, parsley, and whole chibol; when they are enough, take out the
chibol, and serve with a sauce well allayed; you may put in it trouffles,
mushrums, and sparagus.

51. Fat liver on the gridiron.
Put it on the gridiron, and powder it with crummes of bread and salt; after it
is broyled, power the juice of a Lemon upon it, and serve.

52. Fat liver baked in the ashes.
You must barde it with lard, and season it well with salt, peper, beaten
cloves, and a very small bundle of herbs, then wrap it up with four or five
sheets of paper, and set it a baking in the ashes as a Quince; after it is
baked, take heed you do not lose the sauce with stirring of it, take the upper
sheets of paper off of it, and serve it with the undermost, if you will, or on
a plate.

53. Fat liver fried into fritters.
You may judge how it ought to be done by the foregoing discourses, concerning
ragousts, frying, and fritters.

54. Beatilles.
Take wings, livers, and con bes, all being well whitened in water; sees the
combs by themselves, and when they are sod, peele them, then stove all
together, with good broth well seasoned, and when you are almost ready to
serve, fry the combs and beatils with good lard, a little parsley, and chibols
minced; put them again to stove in their broth, until you be ready to serve;
you may mince with it some yolks of eggs. Serve.

55. Tourte of Franchipanne.
Take a milk cadle, that is, boiled milk, and make thus your preparation for to
make your Cream. Take a little flower, which you shall boil with your milk,
when it is enough, took five yolks of eggs, and mix all together, with
stamped Pistaches, Almonds, a little salt, and much sugar; then make your
paste; work it with the whites of eggs and salt, and let it rest; make of it
six very thin sheets of paste, and butter them one after another; spread your
cream upon your six sheets, and make other six, and lay them one after another
well buttered, and specially the uppermost, for to give it a color; after it
is baked in a tourt pan, or on a plate, change it into another, and sugar it,
then serve with flowers.

You may make the Tourt of Franchipanne with any other tourt of Cream, and
serve it as abovesaid.

56. Nulle.
Take one dosen of yolks of eggs, and two or three whites, put in it a little
cream, a little salt, and much sugar, beat well all together, and then pass
it through a straining pan, then lay it upon a plate, or in a dish, and when
you are ready to serve, sees it on the chafing dish, or in the oven; when it
is baked, serve with sugar and sweet waters, and garnish with flowers.

57. Nulle with Amber.
Take some Cream, or very new milk, allay the yolks of eggs, very little salt,
sugar, musk, or amber; and when you are ready to serve, make a bed of your
implements, and one bed of juice of orange, and so successively to the number
of five or six, then pass the fireshovell red hot over them, garnish with
sugar or musk, or water of orange flowers, and serve.

58. Green Nulle.
It does differ from others only in the color, which you shall give it as to
the gelee.

59. Artichocks fried.
Cut them almost into bottomes, take out the choke, and throw them into boiling
water for to whiten them, dry them, and flower them, then fry them with fresh
seame, or refined butter; serve them warm, and garnish with fried parsley,
which to fry, it is necessary that it be very green, and that it be not wet.

60. Artichocks fried.
Cut them into four quarters, cleanse them, and take out the choke, then whiten
them in warm water, and drain them, flower them with flower and small salt; let
the fresh seame, or refined butter, or melted lard be very warm, and then put
your Artichocks in it, and fry them well, then set them a draining, and put
into your frying one handful of very green parsley, which you shall put on
your Artichocks, when it is very dry, and serve.

61. Artichocks with Poivrade.
Cut your Artichocks into quarters, take out the choke, and whiten them in very
fresh water, and when you will serve, put them on a dish with peper and salt,
then serve.

62. Bottoms of Artichocks.
Take off all the leaves, and cut them as far as the choke, then sees them
with broth, or with water, butter and salt; after they are sod, take them out,
pick them, and take out the choke; then put them with butter and salt, and when
you will serve, make a sauce with very fresh butter, one drop of vinegar,
nutmegge, and the yolk of an egg, for to thicken the sauce, then serve, so
that they be very white.

63. Mushrums with ragoust.
After they are well cleansed, pass them in the pan with very fresh butter,
parsley minced, and chibol, season and stove them, and when you are ready to
serve, put into it the juice and peele of lemon, and a little white meat, then
serve.

64. Mushrums farced.
Choose the best shaped for to contain the farce, which you shall make with
some meat, or good herbs, so that it be dainty, and allayed with yolks of
eggs, then your mushrums being farced and seasoned, put them into a dish upon
a barde of larde, or upon a little butter, sees them, and serve garnished with
juice of lemon.

65. Mushrums fried.
Whiten them in fresh water, and then dry them, then pickle them with a little
vinegar, salt, peper, and onion; and when you are almost ready to serve, make a
liquid paste allayed with yolks of eggs; fry your mushrums, serve and garnish.

66. Mushrums after the Oliver.
After they are well cleansed, cut them into quarters, and wash them in several
waters, to take off the earth; when they are well cleansed, put them between two
dishes with an onion and some salt, then set them on the chasing dish, that
they may cast their water; press them between two plates, take very fresh
butter, with parsley and chibol, and fry them, then stove them, and after they
are well sod, you may put to them some cream or white meat, and serve.

67. Omelet of gammon.
Take one dosen of eggs, break them, take out the whites of half a dosen, and
beat them; then take of your gammon as much as you will think fitting, mince
it, and mix it with your eggs; take some lard, cut it and melt it, power your
Omelet into it; let it not be too much fried, and serve.

68. Tortoises.
Cut off the feet, the tail, and the head, set the body a seething in a pot,
and season it well with fine herbs, when they are almost sod, put some wine to
them, and boil them well; after they are sod, take them up, and cut them into
pieces, and take a special care to take out the gall; then fry them with butter
or lard, parsley and chibol, then set them a stoving with a little broth, and
when you are ready to serve, allay the yolk of an egg with some verjuice, mix
them together, and serve well seasoned.

69. Tourte of Pistaches.
Melt some butter, and put in it six yolks of eggs with some sugar; stamp one
handful of Pistaches, and mix them together with a corn of salt, then make
your sheet of paste, and dress it up, put your implements in it, make or shape
up your tourt, and bind it with buttered paper; when it is baked, serve it
with sugar, and garnish it with lemon peele preserved.

70. Eggs after the Portugals way.
Take many yolks of eggs, and one pound, or half a pound of sugar, with which
you shall make a sirrup, which being made, you shall mix it with your eggs,
with one drop of orange-flower water, and sees them; after they are enough,
make a cornet with butterd paper, and well doubled, put your eggs in it, and
being cold, then take off the paper, and put these eggs on a plate the sharp
end upward, sugar it, and garnish it with the pear called nompareill (or non
such) cinnamon, lemon peele preserved, and flowers, then serve.

Another way.
Make a Sirup, as above said, then break one dozen of eggs, or more, and beat
them well, warm your sirup, and when it is very warm, mix your eggs with it,
pass all together through a strainer, and sees it; After it is sod, serve it
with biscuit cut and dressed up piramide-like, sweet waters, musk or amber gris.

71. Eggs minion.
Make your sirup as above said, and take the yolks of eggs, allay them well, and
put them in your sirup; after they are sod, put them on a plate, with a drop of
orange flower water, and of musk, then serve.

72. Eggs spun.
Take a quart of white wine with a piece of sugar, boil them well together,
then break some eggs, and beat them, pass them through a strainer, then put
them in a pipkin or pan, where your white wine is and your sugar ready
boiling; thus they are sod in a moment, and are found linked; take them out of
the sirup, and set them a draining, then serve them piramid like with sweet
water.

73. Eggs after the Varenne.
Have a sirup well made, fry some whites of eggs in the pan with butter, and
put them in your sirup; when they are sod, serve them with orenge-flower water.

Another way.
Make your sirup, and mix a little new milk with your fried eggs; when they
are sod, serve them very white on a plate, and garnished with sweet waters.

74. Snow eggs.
Boil some milk with a little flower well allayed, then put in it more then
the half of one dosen of whites of eggs, and stir well all together, and
sugar it; when you are ready to serve, set them on the fire again, and glase
them, that is, take the rest of your whites of eggs, beat them with a feather,
and mix all together; or else fry well the rest of your whites, and power
them over your other eggs; pass over it lightly an oven lid, or the fireshovell
red hot, and serve them sugared, with sweet waters.

You may in stead of whites, put in it the yolks of your eggs proportionably,
and the whites fried upon. The cream after the Masarine way is made in the
same manner, except that you must put no whites of eggs on it.

75. Eggs after the Huguenote.
Take the juice of a leg of mutton, put it on a plate, or in a dish, take very
new laid eggs, and break them in your juice, sees them with little salt; after
they are enough, put more juice to them, and some Nutmeg, then serve.

75. Cardons of Spain.
After they are whitened, take off the skin very neatly, and set them a
steeping in fresh water, then serve them with peper and salt.

77. Sparagus with a white sauce.
Choose the biggest, scrape the foot of them, and wash them, and sees them in
water, salt them well, and let them not sees too much; After they are sod,
draine them, and make a sauce with very fresh butter, a little vinegar, salt,
nutmeg, and the yolk of an egg to thicken the sauce, have a care that it do
not curd or (turn) and serve garnished with what you will.

78. Sparagus with ragoust.
Take sparagus, break them very small, then pass them in the pan with butter
or lard, mix with it some parsley and chibol, all well seasoned; set them a
stoving till you be ready to serve; you may put some cream to them, or yolks
of eggs, or of the juice of a leg of mutton, and may garnish other things
with it.

79. Sparagus with cream.
Cut them very small, and leave nothing but the green, fry them with butter
very fresh, or melted lard, parsley and chibol, or a bundle of herbs; after
that, stove them a very little, with very new cream, and serve if you will
with a little nutmeg.

80. Tongue of mutton with ragoust.
After it is well cleansed, cut it in two, then flower it, pass it in the
pan, and put it in ragoust, with vinegar, verjuice, salt, peper, juice of
orange, and minced capers; when it is well stoved, and the sauce well thickened,
serve.

81. Tongue of mutton sticked.
Take it sod, and cleanse it, stick it with small lardons, and roast it, then
serve with the juice of a lemon, or some orange.

82. Tongue of mutton on the gridiron.
Slit it in the middle, and put it on the gridiron with salt and crummes of
bread up, on it, then make a sauce with verjuice of grapes, or goose-berries, a
few chippings of bread, some parsley and chibol minced very small, and when it
is well broiled, serve.

83. Satlet of Pomgranat.
Pick your granats, put them on a plate, sugar them and garnish with lemon,
then serve.

84. Head of wild boar.
Cut it off near the shoulders, to make it fairer, and of better show, and for
to preserve the neck, which is the best of it, so that it be well seasoned;
after you have cut it off, burn it, or scald it, if you will have it white,
then cut the skin off round about the head four inches from the nose, least it
may shrink and fall on other places; sees and season it well, and when it is
half sod, put to it white or red wine, and make an end of seething of it,
again well seasoned with peper, onion, cloves, orenge-peele, and fine herbs.
You may sees and wrap it well with hay, least it may fall to pieces; after it
is well sod, serve it cold, whole, and garnished with flowers; If you have
wrapped it up, you may serve it in slices, which you may disguise with several
sorts of ragousts.

85. Slice of wild boare's head.
Cut it under the neck, or near it, or under the ear, and serve.

86. Slice of wild boare's head with ragoust.
After you have cut it as above said, boil it in wine, and a few chippings of
bread; when it is enough, and the sauce thickened, serve.

87. Another way.
After it is cut as aforesaid, powder it with crummes of bread, and put it on
the gridiron; after it is broiled, serve with juice of lemon, in the season of
vine leaves, wrap up your slice in them, and serve readily with verjuice of
grapes.

87. Green pease.
Paste them, if you will, in the pan with butter, and sees them with
cabidge, lettice, or with purslaine; after they are well sod with a bundle of
herbs, and well seasoned, serve them garnished with lettice.

You may dress and season them with cream, as the sparagus whereof mention is
made above, in the article 79. of sparagus with cream.

88. Ram's stones.
Whiten them well in fresh water, take off the skinns of them, and cut them
into very thin slices, paste them in the pan with butter or melted lard,
season with all what you have, then stove them with mushrums, and the juice of
a leg of mutton, then serve.

Another way.
Cut them as above said, and steep them in a little vinegar and salt; a while
before you serve, after you have dried them, pass them in the paste of
fritters, and fry them, and throw on it some lemon juice, or orange juice, and
serve.

89. Palats of beef.
Take them well sod and soft, and withal boil them a little, for to take away
the tripe taste; then cut them very thin, pass them in the pan well
seasoned, and stove them; let your sauce be allayed with the juice of a lemon,
then serve.

The beef palats for garnish are fried alike, but that you cut them piece
mealing.

90. Arbolade, or tensie.
Melt a little butter, and take some cream, yolks of eggs, juice of pears,
sugar, and very little salt, sees all together, after it is sod, sugar it,
with waters of flowers, and serve green.

91. Young Pigeons.
After they are well whitened in water, flowred a little, and passed in the
pan, stove them with good broth, mushrums, troufles, and a bundle of herbs,
all well seasoned, and serve the sauce being well allayed, and garnish with cut
lemon.

The same ragoust may be made for young pigeons roasted.

92. Field fares.
Draw them, fry them as the young pigeons, and sees them longer, because they
are harder, after they are sod and seasoned alike, serve garnished with
pomegranate, or cut lemon.

93. Young Partridges.
Take some pieces of slices of beef, and beat them well with lard, season it
with salt and peper, and pass it in the pan, until the lard be very brown,
then stove these implements with a little broth and an onion stamped; then
strain all through a linen cloth, you will have out of it a very red juice,
with which you shall mix a sharpness of verjuice, a little flower baked, or
some chippings; then take your young Partridges, take off the legs and the
wings, and stove them with your sauce; adding to it mushrums, and troufles,
until the sauce be well thickened; sees, and serve readily, lest they wax
hard.

The Partridges are done the same way.

A method for to make gammons of Westphalia-bacon.
After your porke is dressed, take up the gammons, and stretch them well, for
to cause them to take the shape; put them in the cellar for the space of four
days, during which there will come forth a water out of them, which you must
wipe off very often; If the weather is moist, let them ly there but twice four
and twenty hours, then set them in the press between two boords, and let
them be there so long a time, as the porcke has been dead; after that, salt
them with salt, peper, cloves, and anis seed stamped; let them be take salt for
the space of nine days; after this take them out, and put them in the lees of
wine, for the space of other nine days; then wrap them up with hay, and bury
them in the cellar, in a place which is not too moist; after you have taken
them out, hang them in the chimney, at the side where there is least smoke,
and fail not to perfume them twice a day with Juniper; after they are dry and
a little smoky, hang them at the feeling, in a chamber which is not too moist,
and until you have occasion to use them, visit them often, for fear they
should rot.

For to sees them; take of them which you will, cleanse it, and set it to
unsalt, into a great kettle full of water, season it with fine herbs, and put
no wine to it; after it is sod, take up the skin, spread it over with peper
and minced parsley, and stick it with cloves, then put down the skin again, and
lay it in a cool place, till you have a mind to serve it, which you shall do
garnished with flowers, if you have any.

The way of making, allaying, or thickning to be kept for sauces, to the end
that one may not be put to the trouble of making them on every occasion, when
one may have need of them.
Thickning of Almonds.
PEele well your Almonds and stamp them in a mortar, then put them with good
broth, crummes of bread, yolks of eggs, juice of lemon, an onion, salt,
cloves, and three or four mushrums; sees all these a very little while, pass
them through the strainer, and put it into a pot to use it upon occasion.

Thickning of Mushrums.
Take the stalks of Mushrums, with a few stamped Almonds, Onion, Parsley,
crumbs of bread, yolks of eggs and capers; boil all with good broth, and season
it well, mix with it a slice of lemon, then pass it through a strainer, and
put it into a pot to use it upon occasion.

Thickning of flower.
Melt some lard, take out the mammocks, put your flower into your melted lard,
sees it well, but have a care it stick not to the pan, mix some onion with it
proportionably; when it is enough, put all with good broth, mushrums, and a
drop of vinegar; then after it has boiled with its seasoning, pass all
through the strainer, and put it in a pot; when you will use it, you shall set
it upon warm embers for to thicken or allay your sauces.

Thickning of trouffles.
Take dry flower, which you shall allay with good broth, trouffles, onions,
mushrums, and a twigge of thime, stamp all together, and boil it with your
flower allayed, pass it through the strainer, and put it in a pot; it will be
useful for the thickning of your Entrees (or first courses) or ragousts.

You may use these thicknings in Lent, so that you put no eggs in it: They may
also be useful for all, as for the first and second courses, and for the
Entremets (or Intercourses.

Method for the making the juice of Mushrums, of Beef, or of Mutton, which may
be useful for many Sauces and Ragousts.
Juice of Mushrums.
TAke the least of your Mushrums, wash them well with their skins and stalks,
without taking off any thing, boil them in a pot with good broth, as they are
boiling, put in a bundle of herbs, an onion stuck with cloves, and some pieces
of roasted meat, all well seasoned with salt; after they are well boiled, pass
them through the strainer, and put it into a pot, for to use it at need. It may
be useful for all kinds of Ragousts, even for potages; and it does often pass
for juice of Mutton.

The juice of beef, or of mutton.
Roast your meat a little more than half, be it beef or mutton, prick it with a
knife, and press it in a press if you have any, it will be the better; after it
is pressed, and the juice taken out, take one spoonful of good broth,
besprinkle your meat with it, and take out of it again what juice you can; put
it in a pot with a little salt, and mix with it the juice of a lemon when you
are ready to use it.

The way of garnishing with Pistaches.
Peele your Pistaches in warm water, put them in cold water again, and for to
use them mince them a very little, for to put them about your dishes.

The garnish of lemon.
You must take out the seeds, slit it long wise, and cut it into slices, after
this put it into some water, ready to use it upon and about your dishes.

The garnish of Pomegranat.
Take the reddest, take out the peele and the seeds, for to garnish upon and
about your dishes.

A Method for to take out the juice and waters of flesh, for to give unto the
Sick.
The juice of mutton, veale, or capon.
AFter they are roasted and pressed, take out the juice, and because that the
juice of Mutton is hotter than the other, it must be corrected and mixed with
that of Veal; and of either of them thus made ready, cause your sick body to
take one spoonful every two hours.

Another way for the same water.
For such as have need of much cooling, take a bottle without osier, and with a
very wide neck, cut your meat, veale, and pullen, small enough, so that it may
go into the bottle; this done, you shall stop it carefully with a piece of
paste firm and hard, and some parchment over it, tie it well, and put it in a
kettle full of hot water as far as the neck: Boil it well for the space of
three hours; after it is sod, unstop your bottle, and take the juice out of
it, which you shall cause your sick to use (or even they who are in full
health, and stand in need of cooling) with other juice of roasted meat, or with
some broth, all according to the need and strength of both. You are to observe
that the juice of roast meat is much stronger and more nourishing than that of
boiled meat, though it be in greater quantity.

For want of a bottle you may use a Coquemare, stopping it well with paste, and
with parchment over it.

Water of pullet.
Dress your Pullet, and when it is very clean, fill it up with barley, and
sees it in a pot with a good quantity of water, so that it boyles to a quart;
after it has boiled until the barley is burst, pass all through a strainer,
and let it cool. It must be used cold, and this water may be given to sucking
children.

Panadoe.
Take some good broth, and crummes of bread very small, boil them well
together, and at the latter end, put in it some yolks of eggs, very little
salt, and some lemon juice.

Other Panadoe.
Take the flesh of Capon or Partridge well minced, stamp it well in a mortar,
then allay it with broth of health, that is, broth of the great pot, a few
crummes of bread, and salt, after it is stoved, mix with it some yolks of eggs
for to thicken it, and some lemon juice.

A Table of the Pastry work which is served up all the year long.
VEnison pasty. 1 Pasty of a joint of mutton 2 Pie after the English way 3
Pasty of Wildboare 4 Pie of Capon 5 Turkey pie 6 Pie of Gaudiveauxs 7 Pie of
Partridges 8 Pie of gammon 9 Pie of breast of Veale 10 Pie of Assiette 11 Pie
after the Cardinals way 12 Pie after the Marotte 13 Pie of young Rabbits 14 Pie
of Pullets 15 Pie of Larks 16 Veale pie 17 Pie of Quails 18 Pie of Woodcocks
19 Pie of Blackbirds 20 Duck pie 21 Pie of Macreuse with lard 22 Lamb pie 23
Pie of tongues of mutton 24 Pie of Kid warm 25 Goose pie 26 Pie of knuckles of
shoulders 27 Tourte of young pigeons 28 Tourte of lard 29 Tourte of marrow 30
Tourte of veale 31 Tourte of purtenances 32 Tourte of Sparrows. 33 Tourte of
Larks 34 Tourte of sweetbreads 35 Tourte of brawn of capon sugared 36
A Method how to make ready and to serve up the Pastry works which are made
mention of in the foregoing Table.
1. Venison pastie.
IF the flesh is hard, beat it, take off the upper skins, and lard it with
great lard, seasoned with salt, peper, vinegar and beaten cloves. If it is for
to keep, make up your paste with Rye meal without butter, salt and peper; let
your pasty bake the space of three hours and a half; after it is baked, stop
up with paste the hole which you have left for to give vent, and serve in
slices.

2. Pasty of a joint of mutton.
After it is well mortifyed, beat it well take off the skin, take out the
bones, and if you will, lard it with great lard, and season it with salt,
peper, and a little vinegar; you may let it lie in the sauce three or four
days, well covered, until you put it into paste; which you shall do then in
paste fine or course; season it well with salt, peper, beaten cloves, nutmegge,
and a bay l^af, and also a clove of garlic crushed if you will: After it is
closed up, and endored with the yolk of an egg, let it bake the space of three
hours and a half, and do not forget to give it vent on the top, a little
while after that you have put it in the oven.

3. Pie after the English way.
Take a young Hare, or a Hare, mince it well with beef or mutton suet, or even
with the brawn of Capon, mix well all together, and season, put in it if you
will, some capers, and some sugar. Make your paste thus; after it is flowred,
spread it, and fould it up into three or four doubles like a napkin, putting
some fresh butter upon every bed of paste, so that for one pound of paste there
be half a pound of butter proportionably; after it is thus made ready, let it
rest a little while, and then make your pie up, which you shall garnish at the
outside with buttered paper. Bake it well, endore it with the yolk of an egg,
and serve.

The Wildboare pasty is made the same way as that of the joint of Mutton.

4. Pie of Capon.
After it is well dressed, lard it with mean lard, and put it into fine paste,
and make up your pie. If you will serve it up warm, it must not be so much
seasoned, as for to serve it cold.

To serve it warm therefore, make it up and garnish it with what you have, you
may also farce it. You must bake it two hours and a half, and if the sauce be
wanting, make a white sauce for it, or put into it any juice, and serve it
warm and uncovered.

5. Pie of Turkey.
After it is well dressed, beat it and trusse it up, lard it with great lard,
and season it, then put it into fine or brown past fed with butter or lard, for
this flesh is very dry when it is baked; season it as a venison pastie, bake
it proportionably to it is hardness or bigness, and serve it warm or cold.

6. Another way.
Dress your turkey, take off the skin and the brisket, then season it, and
farce it with young pigeons, beef palats, mushrums, troufles, bottoms of
hartichocks, combs, ram's-stones, and sweet breads. This farce it fit, in case
you take out the brisket only.

If you take off the whole skin; take the flesh of your turkey, mince it very
small with beef suet, season it with all what you have, and with yolks of eggs,
fill up the skin with it, sow it up again, and put it into fine paste, garnish
your pie with small beatilles, mushrums, and all the remnant of your farce.
Bake it, and serve it warm with what sauce you will.

7. Pie of gaudiveau.
Dress up your paste into an ovall, garnish it with your gaudiveau, in the
midst of which you shall put all kind of garnish, as mushrums, livers of fat
capons, cards, yolks of hard eggs, sweet breads, and shall season all; bind
it with paste at the top, and when it is baked, serve with a sauce of verjuice,
yolks of eggs and nutmeg.

8. Pie of Partridge.
After they are dressed, lard them with mean lard, and season them, then put
them into a fine paste, and make up your pie well fed with lard or butter, bake
it for the space of three hours, and serve it warm.

9. Pastie of Gammon of bacon.
Steep it well, and after it is unsalted enough, boil it a little and take off
the skin about it, then put it into brown paste, as venison, and season it with
peper, clove, and parsley; you may also lard it as you do the venison. Bake it
according to it is thickness; if it is big, five hours, if less, less, and so
according as it is bigger or lesser; after it is cold, serve it in slices.

10. Pie of a breast of Veale.
After it is very white, you may farce it with what you will; you may also put
it into very fine paste very well seasoned, and garnished, or if you will, cut
it into small pieces, make up your pie well, bake it, and serve it with a white
sauce, made up with yolks of eggs allayed with verjuice.

11. Pie of Assiette.
Take the flesh of veale, and beef or mutton suet, make a kind of gaudiveaux,
then dress up your paste very neatly half a foot high, and fill it with one bed
of flesh, and over it another of mushrums another of cards or of cardeaux, or
young pigeons, palats of beef, stones, and yolks of eggs, so that the upper bed
be of gaudiveaux, cover it and season it, then serve.

12. Pies the Cardinall's way.
Make up your pies very high and very narrow, fill them up with gaudiveaux, and
cover them so that the lid be also very high; then serve them; specially for a
garnish to a piece of beef, or on a plate.

13. Pie after the Marotte.
Take Rye meal, which you shall salt, make your paste with it, and make it up
like a pie; then take one hare or two, or two joints of mutton, with a little
beef suet, which you shall mince together very small and season it, then make
up your pie, on the top of which you shall leave a vent, after three houre's
baking, take it out, and fill it with good broth, put it in the oven again,
and when it is quite baked serve it.

14. Pie of young Rabbits.
After they are dressed, lard them with great lard, and make your paste like
that of venison; if you serve it warm, make it a little sweeter, and serve.

15. Pie of pullets.
Dress and flower them, if you will; garnish and season them, and put them
into very fine paste, serve warm with a white sauce of yolks of eggs allayed.

If your pullets are big, you may thick them with mean lard, and season them,
garnish and bake them alike.

16. Pie of larks.
Dress them, draw them, and flat them, then pass them in the pan with
mushrums, troufles, beatills, and stones, all well seasoned, then put them into
fine paste, bake them the space of two hours, and a half, let the sauce be
well allayed and fed; you may put some sugar in it hypocrast-like, and so serve
it cold; if with ragoust, serve it warm.

17. Pie of Veale.
Take the fillet, and dress it like the wild boar, that is, well larded and
seasoned, put it into fine or brown paste, as you will, serve it in slices,
warm or cold.

Another way.
Mince such flesh of veale as you will with beef suet, and season it; make up
your paste, and make the bottom of your pie, or the whole, with this meat thus
minced and seasoned, which moreover you shall garnish with mushrums, bottoms of
hartichocks, stones, sweet breads, and hard yolks of eggs; after which you
shall cover and bake it; after it is baked, serve it uncovered with a sauce of
yolks of eggs allayed with verjuice of grapes.

18. Fie of Quails.
It is made for to eat cold like that of partridges, and for to eat warm, like
that of larks, make it up with fine paste, and serve it warm with ragoust.

19. Pie of Woodcocks.
Dress your Woodcocks, draw them, lard them with mean lard, and season them
like the partridge pie, for to be eaten warm or cold; if you serve it warm,
garnish it with what you have, and season it as you think fitting; bake it the
space of two hours and a half, and serve it warm or cold.

20. Pie of thrushes.
Dress your thrushes, draw them, and put them into paste, season and bake them
as the larks, for to be eaten warm, or cold.

31. Pie of Duck
After it is dressed, lard it with great lard, and season it well, put it into
fine or brown paste for to keep it; bake it for the space of three hours;
serve and garnish it for to eat it warm.

The pie of Macreuse with lard is made the self same way.

23. Pie of Lamb.
Take the four quarters, and mince them very small, whiten them in fresh
water, then put them in a fine paste and well made up, with a little parsley
and fine herbs minced; after it is well baked, and well seasoned, serve it
with a white sauce.

Another way.
You may take your lamb whole, or in quarters, without cutting it, lard it
with great lard, and put it into paste seasoned with minced parsley, salt,
peper, beaten cloves, and garnished with mushrums, morilles, and capers; and
after it is baked, serve it with a white sauce of yolks of eggs allayed with
verjuice.

24. Pie of mutton's tongues.
Wash them with lukewarm water, and cleanse them, then put them into paste;
take mushrums, small pallats of beef cut, beatilles, a little parsley, and
chibols; pass all in the pan, power on it some yolks of eggs, bottoms of
hartichocks, beaten lard, or fresh butter, and put them into your pie, which
you shall bake for the space of two hours, and shall serve with a sauce of
yolks of eggs allayed with verjuice.

25. Pie of Kid warm.
Dress it, and take off the head, lard it with mean lard, and season it, put
it into fine paste dressed up, or not, garnish it with beatilles, mushrums,
morilles, troufles, mousserons, and serve. If you will serve it cold, let it is
seasoning be stronger.

Another way.
If you have two kids, or rocbucks, taken out of the body of the wild goat, or
of the hind, lard them, and season them, and put to them abundance of sugar,
which will make both your meat and sauce full of sugar.

If your kids are small, put them into dressed paste, and sever them, putting
the one into sugar, and the other in ragoust, serve warm.

26. Goose pie.
After it is dressed, lard it with great lard, and put it into paste seasoned
as the venison pastic; serve it alike, warm, or in slices.

27. Pie of knuckles of shoulders.
Dress the bones of your knuckles, whiten them, break them and lard them with
great lard, or lard stamped, then put them into fine past; garnish and season
your pie with all what you have, bake it for the space of two hours and a
half, when it is baked, serve with what sauce you will.

24. Tourte of young pigeons.
Make a fine paste, and let it rest, then take your young pigeons, cleanse
them, and whiten them. If they are too big, cut them, and take gaudiveaux,
sparagus, mushrums, bottomes of hartichocks, beef marrow, yolks of eggs,
cards, pallats of beef, troufles, verjuice of grapes, or goos-berries; garnish
your tourte with what you have, not forgetting the seasoning, then serve.

Another way.
After your young pigeons are well dressed and whitened, make a sheet of fine
paste or puffed paste, put in the bottom some gaudiveaux, and the young pigeons
at the top; if they are small, whole; if big, cut them into halfes; garnish
your tourte with combs, palets, mushrums, troufles, cards, morilles,
mousserons, yolks of eggs, sweet breads, botomes of hartichocks, and minced
parsley, all well seasoned with salt, peper, clove, and nutmeg; Cover up your
tourte, and bake it the space of two hours and a half; After it is baked serve
it uncovered with a sauce of yolks of eggs, allayed with verjuice of grapes,

29. Tourte of lard.
Take lard, slice it, and melt it between two dishes, season it as the tourte
of marrow next following; when it is ready, serve it.

30. Tourte of marrow.
Take marrow, melt it, when it is melted, strain it, and put some sugar to it,
yolks of eggs, pistaches, or almonds stamped; then make a very thin sheet of
fine paste, on which you shall put your implements, bind it, if you will; bake
it, and serve it sugared.

31. Tourte of veale.
Take a piece of veale, whiten it, and mince it with twice as much of beef
suet; after it is well seasoned make a sheet of your fine paste, put your meat
on it, in the midst of which you shall put what you have, as beatilles, etc.
Sugar if you will; then when it is baked, serve.

Another way.
Garnish a sheet of fine paste or puffed paste, and fill it half with your minced
meat, put over it mushrums, stones, combs, bottomes of hartichocks, cards,
yolks of eggs, and all well seasoned, fill up your tourte with the same meat,
cover it, and endore it with a raw egg allayed; bake it the space of one hour
and a half, and serve it uncovered with a sauce.

32. Tourte of Beatilles.
Whiten your beatilles, put them into a sheet of paste seasoned and garnished
as the tourte of young pigeons; bake it also alike, and serve it with a white
sauce, or juice, or some ragoust of costs; you may put to it some pistaches
peeled, and minced.

The tourte of sparrowes is served like that of young pigeons with a white
sauce.

34. Tourte of larks.
You may make it as that of the young pigeons; But here is yet another way.
Dress them, draw them, flat them, and pass them in the pan with lard,
parsley, and mushrums, then put them into your paste, and season them with
yolks of eggs, capers and all what you have. Cover up your tourte, and bake it
two hours. After it is baked, serve with a good sauce, or some juice.

35. Tourte of sweet breads.
You may put them into fine or puffed paste, sticked and roasted, well seasoned
and garnished, or else fry them with mushrums, combs, troufles, morilles, yolk
of eggs, bottoms of hartichocks, or some broken sparagoes, and thus make up
your tourte, which you shall serve with an allaying of mushrums upon it.

36. Tourte of brawne of Capon.
Take some quantity of brawnes of capon, mince them very small, and allay them
with two yolks of eggs, fresh butter, a little salt, pistaches, much sugar; a
little juice, or good broth; make up your tourte with fine or puffed paste,
sugar it well, and if you will, you may add to it besides some pignons and
corants.

Advise.
Your pasties for keeping, or to carry far off, may be made with Rye meal.

They that are to be eaten readily, make them with a paste more then half fine.

The English pie is made with puffed paste.

The tourte of Franchipanne is made of paste allayed with whites of eggs.

All kinds of tourtes are made with fine or puffed paste.

If you do not find here all sorts of diverse pastrie work, do not wonder at
it, for the intention is not to make a whole book of them, but only to speak
of them by the by, for to give some instruction of what is most necessary, and
what is served up most ordinarily, for to intermingle and diversifie the
Courses.

A Table of the lean Potages out of Lent.
POtage of herbs 1 Potage of Crawfish 2 Potage of Carps 3 Potage of Tenches
farced 4 Potage of farced Carps with turnips. 5 Potage of roasted Carps 6 Queens
potage 7 Princes potage 8 Potage of Tortoise 9 Potage of farced mushrums 10
Potage of Soals without bones farced 11 Potage of Smelts 12 Potage of Sparagus
13 Potage of Haslets (atteraux) of fish 14 Potage of Lettice farced, with pease
broth 15 Potage of Coleworts (or cabidge) with fried bread 16 Potage of
Coleworts (or Cabidge) with milk 17 Potage of Coleworts (or Cabidge) with pease
broth 18 Potage of pumpkin with butter 19 Potage of pumpkin with milk 20 Potage
of turnips 21 Potage of milk with yolks of eggs 22 Potage of profiteoles (or
small vailes) 23 Potage of pease 24 Potage of herbs without butter 25 Potage of
onion 26 Potage of Cowcombers farced 27 Potage of snow 28 Potage of Mussels
with eggs 29 Potage of oysters 30 Potage of Grenosts 31 Potage of salmon with a
sweet sauce 32 Potage of frogs with saffron 33 Potage of bran 34 Potage of hops
35 Potage of rasberries 36 Potage of parsnips 37 Potage of leeks 38 Potage of
farced macreuse 39 Potage of lottes 40 Potage of broken sparagus 41 Potage of
coliflowers 42 Potage of Fidelle 43 Potage of rice 44 Potage of Tailladine 45
Potage of pease broth of green pease 46 Potage of pease broth, of old pease,
served up green 47 Potage of Macreuse with turnips 48 Potage of Macreuse
garnished 49 Potage of leeks with pease broth 50 Potage of flounders 51 Potage
of herbs garnished with cowcombers 52 Potage of onion with milk 53 Potage of
Losches 54 Potage of Wivers 55 Potage of Gournet 56 Potage of farced mushrums
57 Potage of Almond milk 58
7. A Method for to make ready and serve up the Lean Potages.
1. Potage of herbs.
WArm some water with butter and salt; then take sorrel, buglose, burredge,
succory, or lettice, and beets; after they are well cleansed, cut them, and put
them into an earthen pot, with the first cut of a loaf; boil all some while,
until it be well consumed; then stove your bread, take up and serve.

2. Potage of Crawfish.
Cleanse your Crawfish, and sees them with wine and vinegar, salt and peper;
after they are sod pick the feet and tail, and fry them with very fresh
butter, and a little parsley, then take the bodies of your Crawfishes, and
stamp them in a mortar with an onion, hard eggs, and the crummes of a loaf; set
them a stoving with some good herb broth, or some other, if you will use pease
porridge, it must be very clear; after it is boiled, strain all together; after
it is strained, set it before the fire, then take some butter, with a little
minced parsley, and fry it, then put it into your broth well seasoned, and
stove it with your dry crusts, covered with a dish or a plate, put also on your
bread, a little of a hash of Carp, and juice of Mushrums; fill up your dish,
and garnish it with your feet and tails of Crawfish, with Pomegranat, and juice
of Lemon, and serve.

3. Potage of Carp.
Take out the bones of a Carp, and put the bones to boil in pease porridge,
with some onion or hard eggs, and crummes of bread, after they are boiled,
strain them, fry them with little parsley, and put them in the broth again.
After they have boiled, dry and stove your bread, make a hash of the flesh of
your Carp; and when it is sod, put it upon your bread, and fill it garnished
with Andovillets, and all well seasoned, serve with lemon juice, and mushrums
upon it.

4. Potage of Tenches.
Take your Tenches, take out the bones and the flesh, then farce them with
their flesh minced very small, after this you shall close up again neatly the
hole whereat you have put in your farce, all being well seasoned. As for the
broth, take it, if you will, of pease porridge, or of turnips, or of herbs, or
of tenches, or of almonds, or of carps, or of crawfish it matters not, so that
it be good; stove your bread, and garnish it with tenches either farced or
roasted, with what other garnish you will, then serve.

5. Potage of Carps farced.
Take out the bones and the flesh of your Carps, and farce them with their own
flesh, sowing up again very neatly the place whereat you have put in your
farce, as at the tenches, sees them in a dish with broth, butter, verjuice,
chibols, and peper; sees the bones, and take out and strain the broth thereof,
which you shall have seasoned with salt, peper, and crumbs of bread, and garnish
it with your farced carps, capers, and mushrums, then serve.

6. Potage of roasted Carps.
After they are dressed, slit them on the top, melt some butter, and endore
your Carp with it, put it on the gridiron, and broyl it without scails, make a
sauce with butter, parsley, chibol, a drop of verjuice and vinegar, all well
seasoned and stoved with broth taken out of another pot, or with pease
porridge. Then take some turnips, cut them in two, after they are whitened,
flower them and fry them; after they are fried, put them into a pot with some
water or pease porridge, and when they are sod and seasoned, stove your bread,
and garnish it with your carps, turnips, and with capers, then serve.

If you do not put in turnips, you may garnish with mushrums, or cut sparagus,
and with the Omelets of Carps.

7. The Queens pottage.
Take Carps or Tenches, sees them with water, some salt, and an onion, some
parsley, hard eggs, and the crummes of a loaf; when they are sod, strain your
broth, and put it into another pot, with as much butter as you would put into
another broth; take some almonds, and stamp them well, mix them with the half
of your broth, and after they have boiled together a while, strain them, and
put in an onion sticked with cloves, and set it upon a few warm cinders; stove
your dish with a little of your first broth, and fill up your dish with white
broth, with the yolk of an egg allayed with verjuice, and the juice of
mushrums, so that it nevertheless be not too much thickened; then serve
garnished with Pomegranate, and slices of Lemon.

8. The Princesses potage.
Take pease porridge very clear, in it sees the bones of Carps with some yolks
of eggs, and a bundle of herbs, all well seasoned, then dry a loaf and stove
it, fry into it a very little of hash of Carp, and the juice of mushrums; fill
up your dish by degrees as it is stoving, and garnish it with mushrums,
trouffles, melts, liver of Lotte, with all kind of herbs, Pomegranate, and
with Lemon slices, then serve.

9. Potage of Tortoise.
Dress them, and cut them into pieces, pass them in the pan with butter,
parsley, and chibol; after they are well passed and seasoned, set them a
stoving in a dish on the chasing dish with little broth. Which for to make, you
shall cleanse well your Tortoises, and shall sees them in water, well seasoned,
and shall use it. Have a care you do not burst the gall in cutting of them;
stove your bread, and then garnish it with your Tortoises, and with their
sauce, with sparagus broken about the dish, mushrums, troufles, lemon slices,
and the juice of mushrums, then serve.

10. Potage of Mushrums farced.
Take the pickings of your Mushrums, and wash them well; sees them in water,
or in some other broth, with an onion sticked and a twigge of thime, all well
seasoned; strain your broth, and put it into a pot, then pass also your
mushrums in the pan with butter, parsley, and capers, and put them in the
same pot again, you may make the bottom of your potage with some Carpe bones,
which you shall boil with your mushrums; stove your bread, and when it is well
stoved, put on it a bed of hash of Carpes, and then fill it up with your
implements by degrees as it does stove; after it is filled, garnish your potage
with your mushrums farced with the same farce where with you have made your
hash sod between two dishes, and with melts; and when you are ready to serve,
put about it Pomegranate, or Lemon, then serve.

11. Potage of Soals without bones farced.
Fry them almost outright, and open them along the bone, which you shall take
out; take Melts, oysters, capers, mushrums, troufles, and pass them in the pan
with parsley and whole chibols; farce your soales with these implements, and
after they are farced, stove them with a little broth, fresh butter, lemon or
orange juice or verjuice, stove your bread with the broth of any fish you have,
as you will and garnish it with your soales, with mushrums, troufles, melts,
and juice of musherums, and set about the dish some of slices lemon, serve.

12. Potage of smelts.
Make broth with Almonds, or with fish, or with mushrums, or with pease broth;
all being well seasoned, stove your bread, and put a little white broth over
it, with yolks of eggs allayed, and the juice of musherums; take your smelts,
fry them, and garnish your potage with them, or if you will, before you
garnish, put them with ragoust; which to do, you shall take some parsley,
chibols, butter and verjuice, you shall fry them together, and then shall
strain them, and after they are strained, you shall put them with your smelts;
serve garnisht with pomegranate and lemons.

13. Potage of Sparagus.
Take store of herbs, put them in a pot, with crumbs of bread, and season them
well, then fry them, and after they are fried, put them again in the pot; stove
your bread, and garnish it with sparagus, which you shall have caused to sees
with water and salt, and being drained, put them with fresh butter, salt and
nutmeg; over your potage, you shall serve fried broken sparagus, then serve.

Another way.
Use the same broth, put upon it a little of hash of carpe garnished with
fried sparagus, and other mushrums, and melts, then serve.

Another way.
After your bread is well stoved, garnish it with herbs and sparagus, with
capers and yolks of eggs, and serve. You may whiten your potage if you will.

14. Potage of haslets of fish.
Take carpes, take out the bones, and make a hash with butter well seasoned
with good herbs, take the bones, and boil them with pease broth, or other
broth, with a bundle of herbs, butter and salt; then with your skins of carps,
make some haslets, that is some pieces of skinns of carpe spreading them, and
putting them upon your hash seasoned, and eggs for to allay them, then roll
them up like small chitterlings; after they are thus rolled up, sees them in a
dish with butter, a little verjuice and a chibol, after they are ready, garnish
your bread with your hash and haslets, and put upon it mushrums and broken
sparagus, then serve.

15. Pottage of lettice farced.
Take lettice, whiten them in fresh water, make a farce of fish or of herbs,
and after you have farced them with it, set them a stoving in a pot with some
pease broth, or some other broth, and season them well with butter, with
salt, and with an onion sticked with cloves; stove your bread, and garnish it
with your lettice, which you shall cut into halfes; you may put to it a bed of
a hash of fish, then serve.

16. Pottage of Cabidge, (or Coleworts,) with milk.
Cut them into quarters, and whiten them, then put them in the pot with water,
store of butter, some salt and peper, and an onion sticked with cloaves; after
they are well sodden, put some milk to them, stove your bread, and serve it
garnished with your coleworts (or cabidges.)

17. Pottage of cabidge, or coleworts, with frried bread
Whiten your coleworts, or cabidge, and put them in the pot, as abovesaid, and
serve garnished with fried bread.

18. Potage of coleworts, or cabidge, with pease broth.
It is made as abovesaid, but instead of water, you put them in the pot with
pease broth: garnish and serve alike.

19. Potage of pumpkin with butter.
Take your pumpkin, cut it into pieces, and sees it with water and salt; after
it is sod, strain it, and put it into a pot with an onion sticked with
cloaves, fresh butter and peper; stove your bread, and if you will, allay three
or four yolks of eggs; and power them over it with some broth, then serve.

20. Potage of pumpkin with milk.
Cut it and sees it as abovesaid, then pass it through a straining pan with
some milk, and boil it with butter, seasoned with salt, peper, an onion
sticked, and serve with yolks of eggs allayed as abovesaid.

21. Potage of turnips fried.
Scrape them well and cut them into quarters, or in two, whiten them, flower
them, and pass them in the pan with refined butter, which you shall take
away when it is very brown, and then you shall put them in the pot with some
water, or with some pease broth, let them sees well, and season them; stove
your bread, and garnish it with your turnips, and with capers, then serve.

Another way.
After your turnips are scraped, cut into quarters, and whitened, sees them
with water, butter, salt, and an onion sticked with cloaves; after they are
well sod, stove your bread, and after you have put your turnips with some fresh
butter, and stirred them often until the butter is melted, garnish your potage
with them, and serve.

22. Potage of milk with yolks of eggs.
Take very new milk, and boil it, season it with salt and sugar; when it is
ready to boil, allay seven yolks of eggs for one great dish, and for a small
one proportionably, put them into your milk, and stir it well, in making of
it is broth, take biscuit or bread, and make your potage with it, which you
shall serve sugared.

Another way.
Make your milk ready and garnish it with eggs poached in water, well chosen
and very new, to the end they may poach the better, then serve.

23. Potage of Profiteolles or small vailes.
Stove your bread with the best of your lean broths, then take six small loaves
made for the purpose; dry them well, and open them on the top about the bigness
of one shilling whereat you shall take out the crum; when they are very dry, fry
them with refined butter, and after you have drained them well, set them a
stoving upon your bread, when you are ready to serve, fill them up with all
kinds, as with melts, mushrums, broken sparagoes, troufles, hartichocks, and
capers, cover up your loaves again with their covert, and garnish with melts,
mushrums, pomgranates, and lemon slices, then serve.

24. Potage of green pease.
Pass them in the pan with butter or melted lard, the smallest and newest
you can find, and set them a stoving into a small pot, well seasoned with a
little parsley and chibel: then stove a loaf with some herb broth, or some
old pease broth, after it is stoved, garnish it with green pease, and serve.

Another way.
Take the biggest, and sees them, then take out the broth of them, and fry
some butter into it with a little parsley and minced chibol, and season it
well; stove your potage, and put capers into it, and garnish it with fried
bread.

25. Potage of herbs without butter.
Take a great quantity of good herbs, when they are new, break them, put them
into boiling water, with the first cut of a loaf, and season them well, so
that they may be something sharpish with store of sorrel; stove your bread,
take up your potage, and mix some capers with it, if you will, then serve.

For to make your potage somewhat sharp, take half of the herbs half sod, and
strain them; and for to make it green, you must ^ampe some sorrel.

26. Potage of onion.
Cut your onions into very thin slices, fry them with butter, and after they
are fried, put them into a pot with water or with pease broth; after they are
well sod, put in it a crust of bread, and let it boil a very little, you may
put some capers in it; dry your bread, then stove it; take up, and serve with
one drop of vinegar.

27. Potage of cowcombers farced.
Take your cowcombers, pare them, and empty them very neatly, whiten them; and
after they are whitened in fresh water, draine them; make a farce with sorrel,
yolks of eggs, and whole eggs, all well seasoned, and power it into your
cowcombers; after this put them into a pot with some water or pease broth,
sees, and season them well, with capers if you will; then stove your bread,
and garnish it with your cowcombers, which you shall cut into quarters, then
serve.

28. Potage of snow.
It is made with milk well seasoned with salt and sugar; when you are ready to
serve, take the whites of the yolks of eggs which you have allayed for to put
into your milk; fry them well, and power them into your milk, serve and
sugar.

Another way for flesh days.
Stove your bread with some almond broth, a little minced meat and juice of
mutton altogether; when you are ready to serve, fry some whites of eggs, and
put them upon your potage, and pass the fire-shovell red hot over them, and
serve.

29. Potage of mussles.
Scrape and wash them well, then boil them in a pan with some water, some
salt, and an onion, after they are boiled, take them out, and pick them,
taking off the shell to some, and leaving it to others for to garnish after
they are thus picked, pass them in the pan with a little minced parsley; as
for your broth, after it is settled, leave the bottom, least there be some
gravel, then boil it, and when it boiles, fry into it a little parsley with
some very fresh butter; stove your bread; after it is well stoved, take up your
potage, garnish it with your mussles, and whiten it with yolks of eggs allayed
in verjuice, if you will, then serve.

30. Potage of oisters.
After your oisters are well whitened and flowred, pass them in the pan with
a little parsley, then stove them in a pot; stove your bread in other broth,
as white meat; after it is well stoved, garnish it with your oisters, whereof
you shall fry some, like fritters, for to garnish with pomgranat, lemon
slices, and juice of craw-fish, then serve.

31. Potage of grenosts.
Dress them and sees them after the manner of stewing, season it with all
kinds of good herbs, with butter, and a drop of white wine: stove your bread,
and garnish it with your grenosts, capers, mushrums, and melts of carpes, if
you have any then serve.

32. Potage of salmon.
Cut salmon into slices, and fry it, then stove it with a little white wine
and some sugar; stove also your bread with any other broth you have, so that
it be well seasoned; garnish it with your salmon, the sauce upon it, and thus
let it boil a little, then serve.

33. Potage of frogs with saffron.
Trusse up your frogs, and boil them with broth, or with pease broth, and
season them with parsley, an onion sticked with cloaves, and a twig of thime;
stove your bread, and garnish it with your frogs whitened, with saffron or
yolks of eggs, then serve.

Another way.
Trusse them up cherrie-like, fry them, and stove them between two dishes with
a little fresh butter, a drop of verjuice, the juice of an orange, or of a
lemon, and season them well with a bundle of herbs, then for to make your
broth, boil some with pease broth, or water, salt, parsley, chibols, one
handful of stamped almonds, and yolks of eggs; after which you shall strain
altogether; stove your bread, upon which you may put a little of the hash of
carpe, or other fish; fill up your dish and garnish it with your frogs, lemon,
and pomgranate, then serve.

34. Potage of bran.
Take wheat bran the biggest you can find, boil it well with water, with one
handful of almonds, and a bundle of herbs, and season it well; then pass it
through a strainer, and put it again to boil; stove your bread, and fill your
dish with this broth, which you may whiten if you will, with eggs allayed with
verjuice, and garnish it with fleurons if you have any, then serve.

35. Potage of hops.
Take good store of herbs, which you shall season as a potage with the crumbs of
a loaf; fry all, and put it to boil in a pot, fry also into it some fresh
butter in the pan with a little parsley, and a bundle of herbs; and power it
into your pot, stove your bread with your broth, after this, sees your hops
with water and salt; after it is sod and drained, put it with butter, and
garnish your bread with it, then serve your potage whitened, if you will, with
yolks of eggs allayed in verjuice.

36. Potage of Rasberries.
Allay some eggs with some rasberryes, and strain all together, boil some milk,
well seasoned with salt and when it boyls, power your implements into it, and
stir it well, take it up, garnish it with rasberries, and serve.

37. Potage of Parsenips.
Cleanse them well, and choose the middle ones, sees them with butter and a
bundle of herbs, and season them with salt, and clove sticked, then take them
out, and take off the skin if you will, and then put them with butter, and a
drop of broth; stove them, and you shall find your sauce allayed; your bread
being also well stoved, and your potage filled, garnish it with your Parsenips,
then serve.

38. Potage of Leeks.
Take the white of your Leeks, and cut them very small, keep some of them,
which you shall cut in length for to garnish, and shall tie them together;
whiten them, and sees them with pease broth or water; after they are sod,
stove your bread, and garnish your potage with the Leeks you have cut in
length, then serve.

You may whiten them with yolks of eggs allayed with verjuice.

You may also put to it some milk and peper, and serve forthwith.

If you will serve them without whitening of them, you must sees them with
pease broth, put some capers to them, and season well; stove, and serve
garnished as the other.

39. Potage of Barnicle farced.
After it is well dressed, take off the flesh, and mince it well with butter,
mushrums, yolks of eggs, salt, peper, fine herbs, as parsley, chibols, thime,
an egg raw for to allay the flesh, then farce your Barnicle, and close it up
with a scure, or a thread; put it in the pot with pease broth, the clearest you
can get, and sees it well, it thickneth but too much with boiling; stove bour
bread, and take up your Barnicle with what garnish you have, then serve.

40. Potage of Lotts.
Flower them, try them, and garnish your potage with them, after that your
bread is well stoved with the best of your broths, when it is very full,
garnish it with what you have, as mushrums, trouffles, sparagus, melts, and
whiten them with almond broth, or otherwise with the broth of Crawfish.

41 Pottage of broken sparagus.
Dry some crusts, and stove them with the best of your broths, garnish them
with your sparagus and mushrums, and if you will with sparagus in length, then
serve.

If you will have them to relish greenenesse, whiten them in the broth
wherewith you stove your bread.

42. Potage of Coliflowers.
Fit your Coliflowers as for to put them with butter, and whiten them but very
little, then make an end of seething them, and season them well; stove your
bread with any broth you have, and garnish it with your Coliflowers fried in
butter, salt and nutmegge, and besprinckle them with broth of almonds, then
serve.

43. Potage of Fidelles.
Peele five or six onions, and mince them, boil them with water and butter;
after they are sod, strain them through a linen cloth, and sees your Fidelles
with the broth, and season them with salt and peper; after they are sod, stove
your bread, and garnish it with them, then serve.

You may sees them with milk.

44. Potage of Rice.
Whiten your Rice, and when it is very clean, burst it in water or milk; sees
it; after it is sod, take some proportionably, and strain it, for to make your
broth; being seasoned as the Fidelles, stove your bread, put a little Rice upon
it, and garnish it with puffed Tailladins, and Fleurons; then serve.

You may make a potage with milk the same way, and serve it, if you will,
sugared, and garnished with Macaron.

45. Potage of Tailladins.
Make a paste seasoned only with salt, spread it, and cut it as thin as you
can after the form of Tailladins, paste them in the pan, and stove them with a
very little of good broth, after they are well stoved, take very little bread,
and garnish it with the rest of your Tailladins, seasoned as the Fidelles, then
serve.

Another way.
If you have a little of fine paste, or of puffed paste, spread it, and cut it
into Tailladins, fry it in refined butter, garnish your potage with it, and
serve.

46. Potage of broth of green pease.
Sees your pease but a very little, beat them in a mortar, and strain them
with the broth of herbs well seasoned, and a bundle of herbs, then take
chibols, parsley, and butter, and all being fried together, power it into your
pease broth, which you shall boil.

For the garnish, cleanse some lettice, succory, or cowcombers, and small pease
fried, and sod with butter, salt, and a little peper; when you are ready to
serve, stove your bread with your pease broth, and garnish with what you have,
or with Artichocks in bottomes if you will, then serve.

47. Potage of pease broth of common pease served green.
Sees them with water, to have done the sooner, take your pease broth out very
clear, and when you are ready to use it, fry into it parsley, charvel, young
sorrel, butter, and capers, then boil it with all these seasonings; stove your
bread with some of your broth; and if you have nothing to garnish with, garnish
it with fried bread, or with Fleurons, then serve.

For to serve it green, stamp beets or sorrel, and drop it about your dish.

48. Potage of Barnickle with turnips.
After your Barnickle is dressed, larde it with Eele or Carpe, then pass it in
the pan, and sees it with half water, and half pease broth well seasoned with
butter and a bundle of herbs; when it is almost sod, cut your turnips, flower
them and pass them in the pan with butter, and when they are very brown, sees
them with your Barnickle; when it is sod, stove your bread, and garnish with
it, together with your turnips. If your potage is not thickened enough, fry a
little flower into it, some capers, and a drop of vinegar, then serve.

49. Potage of Barnickle garnished.
It is done as the other, but that if you will have your turnips to make a
show, you may fry them, and season them with a bundle of herbs or onion, and
good butter; after it is well sod, serve your potage well garnished with
mushrums and artichocks, and a little thickened.

50. Potage of Leeks with pease broth.
Whiten them a very little, and sees them with pease broth, well seasoned with
butter and salt, stove your bread, garnish it with your leeks, which for to
whiten, allay some yolks of eggs with broth, and power them on it, then serve.

Another way.
After your Leeks are sod, and reduced to little water, put to them some milk
well seasoned, and serve.

51. Potage of Flounders.
Take off the tails and heads of your Flounders, and half fry them, then put
them in raux or castrolle with a very long sauce, and well thickened; stove your
bread with some of the best of your broths, and garnish it with your Flounders
at the top, with mushrums, and capers, then serve.

If you have no fish broth, the pease broth is good.

52. Potage of herbs with cowcombers.
Take all kind of herbs, cleanse them well, and stove them with butter and a
bundle of herbs, over a small fire, then by little and little fill them with
warm water. After they are well boiled and seasoned, put in it the first
cutting of a loaf, with an onion sticked, and some capers, if you will, and you
may garnish it with sodden lettice; and you may also sees some pease among the
herbs; serve readily, and garnish with cowcombers.

53. Potage of onion with milk.
After your onion is cut very thin, and fried with butter till it be very
brown, sees it with a little water, well seasoned with salt and peper; after
it is enough, put milk to it, then boil it, and serve readily, stoving your
dry crusts.

54. Potage of Lofches.
Being whole, farce them with a little sorrel, yolks of eggs, and milk, and
season them well with melted butter, mix all together, without flowring them
but of themselves, and sees them with butter, parsley, salt, and peper, and
stove your crusts with the best of your broths, and garnish them with your
Losches, which you shall whiten with the yolks of eggs, then serve.

You may serve them at the Entree or first course, or fry them; you may also
garnish some potage with them, or use them that it may be brown, and garnish as
soon as they are fried.

55. Potage of Wivers.
After they are well cleansed, boil them with a little pease broth and white
wine, onion sticked, or a bundle of herbs, all well seasoned, then take out
your Wivers, and put them with ragoust, taking some thickning or troufles; let
them stove well seasoned with salt, fresh butter, minced capers, and one
anchovie, and cover them; pass the broth through a strainer, and boil it with
fresh butter, paste, parsley, and minced capers; stove a crust of bread, and
put over it a few minced musherums, and of the flesh of a Wiver; when it is
well stoved, garnish it with your Wivers, and the ragoust upon, then serve.

The potage of Gournet is made, served, and garnished alike.

57. Potage of Mushrums farced.
It is made the same way as that of the Princess; garnish it with your mushrums
farced, and with melts; fill up with the best of your broth, with such other
garnish as you will, and serve.

58. Potage of Almond milk.
After your Almonds are stamped, stove them with milk and the crummes of one
loaf; then strain them, and season them with salt and sugar; when you are ready
to serve, put some sugar in it again, and serve.

A Table of the Entrees (or first courses) of the lean days out of Lent.
SOales with rogoust 1 Pike with ragoust 2 Tenches with ragoust 3 Farced
Tenches with ragoust 4 Tenches fried and pickled 5 Stewed Carpe 6 Carpe farced
with ragoust 7 Carpe fried with ragoust 8 Carpe roasted with ragoust 9 Carpe
with a half short broth 10 Hash of carpes 11 Breame with ragoust 12 Salmon
with ragoust 13 Stewed salmon 14 Troutes salmoned 15 Lotte with ragoust 16
Lottes fried with ragoust 17 Oisters with half shorth broth 18 Oisters with
ragoust 19 Oisters in fritters 20 Oisters with ragoust 21 Vilain with ragoust
22 Vilain with a short broth 23 Vilain stewed 24 Soies roasted and farced 25
Soies roasted without farce 26 Soies stewed 27 Barbels with ragoust 28 Barbels
roasted 29 Barbels with half short broth 30 Barbels with short broth 31 Stewed
barbels 32 Barbels in Castrolle 33 Flounders in castrolle 34 Fried flounders 35
Fried flounders with juice of orange 36 Plice in Castrolle 37 Plice roasted 38
Barnicle with ragoust 39 Barnicle with short broth 40 Barnicle roasted with
ragoust 41 Barnicle without bones, farced 42 Allose roasted with ragoust 43
Allose with short broth 44 Allose stewed 45 Lamprey with ragoust 46 Lamprey on
the gridiron with ragoust 47 Lamprey with a sweet sauce 48 Eele roasted, with a
green sauce 49 Stewed Eele 50 Eele like servelast 51 Eele with ragoust 52 Sea
Eele 53 Sea Eele stewed 54 Sea Eele fried with ragoust 55 Lobster with short
broth 56 Lobster with a white sauce 57 Langouste with short broth 58
Langouste with a white sauce 59 Pike farced 60 Pike roasted on the spit 61 Fresh
mackerell roasted 62 Fresh herring roasted 63 Herrings with a brown sauce 64
Pilchers 65 Gournet with ragoust 66 Grenosts with ragoust 67 Fresh cod roasted,
with ragoust 68 Cod with half short broth 69 Fresh cod with ragoust 70 Green
fish 71 Soupresse of fish 72 Gammon of fish 73 Mussels of fish 74 Raye fried
with ragoust 75 Smelts with ragoust 76 Tripes of cod fried 77 Scutties fried 78
Poor John fried 79 Poor John with a sauce Robert 80 Joale of salmon with a
sweet sauce 81 Joale or chine of salmon in sulat 82 Tons pickled 83 Mackerels
salted 84 Herrings salted 85 Red herrings 86 Common troutes 87 Pie of lottes 88
Eele pie 89 Pie of Grenosts 90 Smelt fish pies 91 Pie of places 92 Tourte of
melts. 93
8. A Method for to make ready the service of fish for the first courses in the
lean days out of Lent.
1. Soales with ragoust.
TAke your soales, scrape and empty them, draine them, and wipe them dry,
then flower them and pass them in the pan half fried; afterward open them,
take out the bone, and farce them with capers, mushrums, troufles, melts, very
fresh butter, a few chippings of bread, a chibol, a little verjuice and broth,
stove all together, and serve with the juice of a lemon over it.

2. Pike with ragoust.
Cut it into pieces, and put it with white wine, a bundle of herbs, and butter
very fresh, and season it well with capers and mushrums; then after the sauce
is very short, and well thickened, serve with slices of lemon and pomgranate.

3. T^nches with ragoust.
Scald and dress them, cut them into round slices, and wash them well, then
boil them in a pipkin, with salt, peper, and an onion; put in it half a pint
of white wine, and a little of minced parsley; and the sauce being very short,
thicken it with yolks of eggs, then serve.

4. Tenches farced with ragoust.
Scald them, and take out the bones, then make a farce with the flesh, which
you shall season, and with it farce your tenches, with the yolks of hard eggs,
then set them a stoving in a dish with a little broth and white wine, a few
chippings of bread, mushrums, if you have any; sparagus, melts, and troufles,
then serve.

5. Tenches fried and pickled.
After they are dressed, cut them in the middle, then pickle them with salt,
peper, onion, and lemon peele; after they are pickled take them out and dry
them, flower them with flower, or allay two or three eggs with a little flower
and salt, and fry them with refined butter; after they are fried, set them a
little a boiling with their pickle, then serve, and garnish with what you have.

6. Carpes stewed.
Dress your carpes, take off the scales, and cut them proportionably to their
bigness, sees them in a pot, kittle or pipkin, with white or claret wine, and
season them well with salt, cloave, peper, minced onion, chibol, capers, and
some crusts of bread; sees all well together: and when it is enough, and the
sauce thickened and short, serve.

7. Carpe farced with ragoust.
After your carpe is well scailed, empty it and cut it along the back bone,
take off the skin and take out the flesh, which you shall mince very small, and
season it with parsley, fresh butter, salt, peper, yolks of eggs, milk, and
melts then make a ragoust, with broth, verjuice, fresh butter, mushrums,
sparagus and chibols; after it is well sod, and the sauce well allayed with
chippings and capers, serve.

8. Carpe fried with ragoust.
You must scaile it and empty it, then sly it, and take out the bone, powder
it with salt and flower it, then fry it in refined butter; after it is fried,
serve it dry with the juice of an orange over it.

9. Carpe broyled with ragoust.
Empty it as it comes out of the water, slice it on the top, butter it, and
put it on the gridiron; when it is broiled, make a sauce with fresh butter
passed in the pan, parsley and chibol minced very small, verjuice vinegar,
and a little broth, season all well, and sees it with capers; If you will,
serve with a green sauce, and serve as soon as you have put it in.

10. Carpe with half short broth.
Take your carpe as it comes out of the water, empty it and cut it
proportionably to its bigness, put it with vinegar, a very little salt, peper
and minced onion, then put it with capers and very fresh butter, sees it in a
kettle with it is implements; and when the sauce is thickened, put it into a
dish, least it should smell of the brass, and serve.

11. Hash of carpes.
Take carpes, scaile them, empty them, and take off the skin, cutting it at
the gills, and taking it off beneath, after they are unskinn'd, take out the
flesh, and mince it with parsley, then allay it with some broth and very fresh
butter, season it well, and sees it with a bundle of herbs; when it is well
sod, put to it cream or milk with yolks of eggs, if you will, and serve, well
garnished with sparagus and melts of carps.

12. Breame with ragoust.
Empty it, and put a bundle of herbs into the body of it, melt some butter,
rub it with it on the top, and put it on the gridiron; after it is broiled,
make a sauce with fresh butter, capers, parsley, and minced chibols, stove it
well with vinegar, and a little broth; after the sauce is well thickened, serve.

13. Salmon with ragoust.
Roast it sticked with cloaves; after it is roasted, put it with a little very
fresh butter, wine, salt, peper, and sugar, stove all together, until the
sauce be short, and almost into a sirup, then serve.

14. Salmon stewed.
Cut it into slices of the thickness of two or three fingers, and put it after
the way of stewing, sticked with cloves in a kettle with white or red wine,
well seasoned with butter, salt and minced onion; sees it well with capers, if
you have any, when the sauce is short and thickened, serve and garnish with what
you will.

15. Troutes salmon'd.
Sees and pickle them, and serve them the same way as the common, of which
have the direction here under.

16. Lotts with ragoust.
Scrape them in warm water until they be white, empty them, and put them in
white wine, fresh butter, salt, peper, onion, and capers; stove them, and have
a care that your sauce may not turn, that is, that it do not become oilie;
garnish with mushrums and melts, and serve.

17. Lottes fried with ragoust.
After they are dressed, if they are big, slit them on the top, and flower
them, then fry them half with refined butter; put them with ragoust, and fry
into it fresh butter, capers, juice of mushrums, parsley, chibols, salt and
peper, and the sauce being very short and thickened, serve.

Another way of lottes stewed.
After they are scalded, many do flea them, cut them, or leave them whole, and
stew them with white wine, a little onion, which if you will not have it seen,
you may stick whole with cloves, salt, peper, butter and a twig of fine
herbs; after they are sod, and the sauce very short and thickened, serve; you
may put to it capers or anchovies.

18. Oisters with half short broth salted.
Whiten them well in water, then pass them in the pan with butter, parsley,
chibols, and season them well, store them with a little white wine; after they
are sod, and the sauce well thickened, serve.

Another way.
As they come out of the shell, put them on the chaufing dish with fresh
butter, nutmeg, chibols sticked with cloves, thime, a few chippings of bread,
and the juice of an orange, or of a lemon; after they are sod, serve.

Another way.
Take them dead or alive, cleanse and whiten them well, then pass them in the
pan with an onion very small, good fresh butter, and capers, season them well,
when they are sod, serve; you may fry them with lard, and the same seasoning.

19. Oisters with ragoust.
Take them very new, open them, and take heed they be not altered, with
striking one against aonther; for they which sound hollow, and which are
altered, are only good for to be salted; after you have taken them out of the
shell, take the gravel out of them, and put them into a dish with their water,
and fry them with fresh butter, onion, parsley well minced, capers, and a few
chipings of bread, when they are enough, serve.

20. Oisters in fritters.
Take them very new and whiten them, drain and dry them well; make a paste with
verjuice or milk, wherewith you shall allay your flower seasoned with salt,
with one egg or more proportionably; put your oysters into these implements,
and take some refined butter, heat it well, and put your oysters therein one
after another; after they are fried, drain them, and strew on them a little
small salt, and fried parsley, then serve.

21. Oysters roasted.
Open them, choose the best, and let them lie in their shell, for to eat them
new; to them which are something altered, put a very little fresh butter, with
a little bread fried, and a little nutmegge, then set them on the gridiron,
after they are roasted, pass the fire shovel red hot over them, that they may
have a color, and take heed they be not too dry, and serve.

22. Vilain with ragoust.
After it is dressed, broyl it on the gridiron with a bundle of herbs in the
body of it well seasoned; after it is roasted, pass in the pan an onion minced
with fresh butter, chippings, capers, and anchovis, all well seasoned according
to your taste; stove all together, and serve.

23. Vilain with short broth.
Roast it after it is taken out of its broth; make a sauce Robert, and stove it
with it, and serve with parsley.

24. Vilain stewed.
You may stew it as a Carp, and season it well with capers, chibols, parsley,
and good fresh butter, the sauce being very short, serve.

25. Soies roasted and farced.
Dress them as they come out of the water, and endore them with butter, then
put them on the gridiron, with a little farce, or with some salt, and a twigge
of Sage, or fine herbs.

For to make your farce take sorrel, parsley, and raw yolks of eggs, mince and
season all together with a twigge of thime, then put it into your Soies, and
make a sauce with fresh butter, salt, vinegar, peper, chibol, and parsley, all
passed in the pan, and the sauce very short, serve with a little nugmegge
upon it.

26. Soies roasted without farce.
Roast them without farce, make a sauce a like; to which you shall add some
capers, then serve.

27. Soies stewed.
Put them as a Carp, thicken the sauce well, garnish it with your Soies, and
serve.

28. Barbels with ragoust.
If they are small, stew them, sees them well, and serve; it is all the
ragoust that one may give them.

29. Barbell roasted.
If they are meanly big, dress them, and broyl them on the gridiron, and serve
with a sauce of haut goust.

30. Barbels with half short broth.
Take them big enough, put them with the half short broth, with white wine,
fresh butter, salt, peper, chibols, parsley, and capers, after they are well
sod, and the sauce thickened, serve.

31. Barbels with short broth.
Sees them in their short broth, after they are sod, take off the skin, and
put them on a dish, then make your sauce thickened, and put it over it; which
for to make well, take half a pound of new butter, with a drop of vinegar, or a
little of half short broth; melt it, and as it melts, put into it one or two
yolks of eggs proportionably thicken it well, and take heed it becomes not oily.

For to make it with vinegar alone, take nutmegge, salt, gooseberries, or
verjuice; sees all in butter; when it is sod, take it out of your butter, and
put it with your sauce, then serve, for the sauce will not be warmed again.

32. Barbels stewed.
They are done as the Carp, either whole or cut, with verjuice of grapes.

33. Dabs in Gastrolle.
Dress them, and empty them under the gils, cleanse them well, and drain them;
after they are drained, put them in a basin or a pipkin, with butter, chibols
under, beaten clove, salt, peper, capers, a little white wine or vinegar, and
mushrums, sees all together leasurely, lest the flesh break off; after they
are well sod, and the sauce thickened, serve the white side underneath, and
garnish with your mushrums.

34. Flounders in Castrolle.
Dress and fit them as the Dabs, and serve alike.

35. Flounders fried.
Fry them, and put them with ragoust, with the juice of orange, fresh butter, a
whole chibol, and minced capers, then serve.

36. Flounders roasted.
Roast them on the gridiron, and make a sauce with butter, onion, parsley, salt,
peper, and vinegar; after all is well fried together, stove it with your
Flounders, let the sauce be well allayed, and serve.

37. Plice in Castrolle.
Dress them as the Dabs, but on the other side, sees, and make them ready
alike, and serve.

38. Plice roasted.
The Plice are roasted as the Flounders.

39. Barnickle with ragoust.
Pull it well, and dress it as a Duck, then lard it with great lardons of Eele
or Carp, spit it, and in turning of it, baste it with butter, vinegar, salt,
peper, chibols, and lemon peele; after it is half roasted, put it in a pot with
water, and with the sauce wherewith you have basted it; after it is well sod,
and seasoned, put to it mushrums, with capers, and serve.

40. Barnickle with short broth.
Dress and lard it as above, then sees it with water, and season it well,
when it is half sod, put to it a quarte of white wine, and sees it well, then
serve it with parsley over it.

41. Barnickle roasted with ragoust.
Roast it on the spit; after it is well roasted, put it on the gridiron, and make
to it a sauce Robert, or such other as you will, then serve.

42. Barnickle without bones farced.
Farce it with what you have, mixed, and minced with the flesh of it, and put
it with ragoust, after it is sod, garnish it also with what you can, as
mushrums, troufles, sparagus, andevillets, melts, or rissoles, or fleurons,
season all well, and serve.

43. Allose roasted with ragoust.
Empty it at the gills, and put in it a little salt, fine herbs, and an onion,
roast it; after it is roasted, make a sauce with fresh butter, chibols, minced
parsley, capers, gooseberries, or verjuice, all pasted in the pan, and well
seasoned, stove it with your Allose; allay the liver of it with the sauce, if
it is not thickened; or garnish with it, then serve.

44. Allose with short broth.
Sees it with a short broth, and when it is half sod, take it out, and set it
on the gridiron, then stove it with a brown sauce, and serve.

45. Allose stewed.
Scald it well, sees it after the way of stewing, after it is stewed very
well, and the sauce allayed, so that it be not oily, serve.

46. Lampraye with ragoust.
After is dressed, make it ready and serve it as the Alose stoved.

47. Lampraye on the gridiron with ragoust.
After it is dressed, cut it proportionably to its bigness, then put it on the
gridiron; after it is broyled, make to it such a sauce as you will, so that it
be of haut goust, then serve.

48. Lampraye with sweet sauce.
Dress and out it alike, make a sauce with vinegar, sugar, two or three
cloves, a little butter, and little salt; stove, and serve.

Another way.
Cut it into small pieces, and feeth it with wine, and sugar, and season it a
very little, because of the sugar, mix with it a little butter and capers,
then serve.

49. Eele roasted with a green sauce.
Cut it in length, and roast it on the gridiron, then take sorrel, or beets,
and take out the juice, fry an onion very small, seasoned with salt, peper, a
drop of vinegar, minced capers, and orange peele; stove your Eele with this
sauce, and when you are ready to serve, and your sauce well allayed, power your
juice over it, then serve.

50. Eele stewed.
Cut it into pieces, and stew it with parsley, capers, white wine, fresh
butter, all well seasoned, then serve.

51. Eele-like Serve last.
Dress your Eele, and skin it; which to do, take it next to the head and
cut it, then with a clout draw the skin downwards; after it is skinned cleave
it in two, and take out the bone, beat it well, and slice it in two, spread
your two slices; and put to it peper, salt, butter, and parsley, roll them up,
and tie them very fast, put them into a pot with white wine, well seasoned, and
sees them well; after it is well sod, take it up, and cut it into slices,
garnish a plate with it, and serve.

52. Eele with ragoust.
Cut it into pieces, and put it in a pan, or pipkin with white wine, butter,
chibols, minced parsley, capers, salt, peper, and a few chipings of bread for
to allay the sauce; after it is enough, serve, and, if you will, whiten with
yolks of eggs in verjuice.

Another way.
You may fry it with refined butter, or with oil; after it is dressed, cut the
sides, and take out the bones, pickle it a while, and if you will garnish with
it, fry it as soon as you will; if it is to serve warm, fry it only when you
have use for it; which you shall do after you have dried it well, cut very thin
and flowred, or fried in a paste. Serve with juice of orange or lemon.

Another way.
Roast it as the Lampraye, and season it with haut goust, with what garnish you
will.

53. Sea Eele.
Make it ready as the first ragoust of common Eele.

54. Sea Eele stewed.
After it is dressed, cut it into lumps, and season it as the other stewings.

55. Sea Eele fried with ragoust.
Make it as the second ragoust of common Eele, then serve.

56. Lobster with short broth.
Sees it with short broth, well seasoned with what is necessary; after it is
sod, cleave it in two, and serve it with vinegar and parsley.

57. Lobster with a white sauce.
After it is sod, take out the bones, and cut the flesh into pieces, which you
shall fry with butter, minced parsley, and a drop of verjuice; which being
done, take three or four yolks of eggs with a little of nutmeg, and put them
in the pan, serve forth with and garnish with the feet of your lobster.

58. Langouste with short broth.
Sees it, season and fry it as the lobster, and garnish with the feet of your
langouste, then serve.

59. Langouste with white sauce.
It is done the same way as the lobster, serve it dry with parsley.

60. Pike farced.
Slit it all along the back, and take off the skin from the head to the tail;
take out the flesh and the small bones, leave the back bones for to keep it
the firmer when it is farced. Which to do, take half of flesh of pike, and
half of carpe, or of eele, mince it very small with parsley, raw yolks of eggs,
salt, peper, fine herbs, butter and milk mixed together, with mushrums; farce
your pike, and sow it up again, then sees it in a dripping pan, make your
sauce with fish broth, or pease broth, a drop of verjuice, and a little
vinegar, which you shall pass in the pan with parsley, capers and mushrums,
which you shall season and sees well; serve and garnish with what you will,
after it is well sod.

61. Pike roasted on the spit.
Dress it the same way, and spit it; to the end it may hold fast, wrap it in
with buttered paper, and when it is roasted, take it off of the spit, and stove
it in the same sauce as the other, and garnish it with mushums, melts of carpes
pistaches, troufles, and broken sparagus, and have a care that the sauce be not
too fat; then serve with pomgranat, or lemon peele.

62. Fresh mackerells roasted.
Roast them with fennel, after they are roasted, open them, and take off the
bone; then make a good sauce with butter, parsley, and gooseberries, all well
seasoned; stove a very little your mackerells with your sauce, then serve.

63. Fresh herring roasted.
Empty them at the gills, and roast them on the gridiron, moistened with butter;
after they are roasted, make a sauce with fresh butter, a drop of vinegar, salt,
peper and nutmeg, mix some mustard with it, and serve.

64. Herrings with brown sauce.
After your herrings are roasted, make a brown sauce, making your butter brown
in the pan with parsley, and chibols minced, which you shall put into your
brown butter with a drop of vinegar; if you will, put to it capers, and serve.

65. Pilchers.
After you have scailed them, make them ready as the herrings roasted; serve
with a white or brown sauce with mustard.

66. Gournet with ragoust.
After it is well dressed, put it into a dish, and season it well with butter,
salt, peper, a bundle of herbs, mushrums, minced parsley, verjuice and broth;
sees it between two dishes; after it is sod, serve it with a sauce thickened;
as for the garnish, you shall put some if you have any, if not, you shall let
it alone. You may also make at ready as the grenost which follows.

67. Grenost with ragoust.
Dress and slit it, then butter it well on the top, and roast it on the
gridiron; after it is roasted, make a brown sauce, with which you shall stove
it, for to cause it to take salt, and the savor of what you have put to it,
serve.

68. Fresh cod roasted with ragoust.
After it is dressed, you must butter it, and roast it on the gridiron, seasoned
with salt and clove sticked; As it is rosting, baste it with butter; after it
is roasted, make a sauce with very fresh butter, into which, after it is half
brown, you shall put some minced parsley, and if you will, some onion or
chiboll, which you may take out, because of the fantastical; mix a little
broth with it, a drop of vinegar and minced capers; stove your cod in its
sauce; when you are ready to serve, put some mustard in it, if you will, then
serve.

69. Cod with half short broth.
Sees it with white wine, salt, peper, a bundle of herbs; after it is sod,
drain it, and make a sauce with butter, a drop of its short broth, a little
nutmegge, and salt, set it on the fire, and turn it well; in turning of it
allay with it two yolks of eggs, and power it on your Cod, then serve.

70. Fresh Cod with ragoust.
After it is scailed, empty it, slit it at the top, then put it into a dripping
pan, or into a flat basin, with good butter, salt, peper, and beaten cloves,
some chibols under, some broth or pease broth; boil all, and put to it some
parsley, a drop of vinegar, and a few chippings of bread over it; sees it
before the fire, or in an oven for the better; after it is sod, serve.

71. Green fish.
Take it unsalted, scrape it, and sees it in a kettle with fresh water, boil
it a very little, and scim it; after it is scimmed, take it off of the fire,
and cover it with some table cloth in double; when you are ready to serve, set
it a draining: make a sauce with some butter alone, take heed that it turn not,
put it upon your fish, and serve with parsley on it, and about it.

72. Soupresse of fish.
Take the flesh of Carp, Eele, and Tench, mince them together, and season them
with a little butter very fresh, with capers, and fine herbs; set up all into a
linen cloth, and tie it, then sees it with white wine like a short broth;
after it is sod, set it a draining; after it is drained, untye it, cut it into
slices, and serve it on a place as a gammon of bacon.

73 Gammon of Fish.
It is made the same way as the Soupresse, but that you do wrap in your
implements with Carp skin, over a wrapping of buttered paper, and over it yet
a linen cloth; sees it alike, and serve it cold, as a gammon of bacon.

74. Mussles of fish.
Cleanse them, and boil them a very little with a bundle of herbs as soon as
they are opened, take them up, and take them out of the shell, then fry them
with fresh butter, parsley, and minced chibols, seasoned with peper and
nutmegge, then allay some yolks of eggs with verjuice, and mix them together,
serve, and garnish with the best shaped of their shells.

75. Raye fried with ragoust.
Dress it, wash it well, and take off the slime which is upon it, then empty
it, and take out the liver very neatly, and the gall also; if your Raye is big,
take off the two sides, and leave the body; sees them with white wine, or
verjuice, salt, peper, onion, and fine herbs; when they are sod, let them take
salt a little, and take heed of the relish of the brass; after that, take
them out, and take off the skin, make a brown sauce with butter, parsley, and
chibol, very small, and passed with brown butter; put a drop of vinegar to it,
and a piece of liver, and stove it with it; serve with gooseberries, or
verjuice in the season, and garnished on the top with the rest of the liver
which you had in the kettle, your Raye being half sod, and cut it into slices.

76. Smelts with ragoust.
File them up together into rows, thrusting a small rod through their eyes,
flower and fry them, put to them a little small salt, and take off the rod as
you put them in the dish, then serve with orange or lemon.

77. Tripes of Cod fried.
Sees them, and after they are sod, fry them with butter, onion minced, or
chibols, parsley, salt, and peper, and at the latter end some vinegar, and a
little nutmeg. You may whiten them with yolks of eggs and with verjuice, and
serve.

78. Scuttles fried.
Boil them, after they are enough, cut them, into pieces, and fry them as the
tripes of Cods, and serve.

79. Foor John fried.
After it is well unsalted, cut it into pieces and sees it, after it is sod,
drain it, and fry it with butter, onion, peper, and vinegar, then serve.

80. Poor John with a sauce Robert.
You may put it with butter, a drop of verjuice, and some mustard, you may also
mix with it some capers and chibols.

Another way.
You may serve it with oil, vinegar, and onion minced.

81. Joale of salmon with brown sauce.
Unsalt it well, scaile it, boil it in water, and sees it proportionably, as
it is thick, then let it rest; when you will use it, make a brown sauce, with
butter, onion, peper, vinegar; put it over it, and serve.

Another way.
After it is sod, draine it, and let it cool, and serve it with minced onion,
oil and vinegar.

82. Joale or chine piece of salmon into salat.
After it is sod, put it with oil, venegar, cresses, or other such salat as
you will, and some capers, if you have any, then serve.

83. Tons pickled.
Dress them, and cut them into slices or pieces of the thickness of three
inches, stick them with cloves, and put them into a pot with salt, peper,
vinegar, and some bay leaves; cover it well, and when you will use it, unsalt,
your pieces, and sees them with wine; serve them dry, or with a brown sauce,
seasoned with what you will.

84. Mackerels salted.
Slit them along the belly, and salt them; for to use them unsalt them, and
sees them in water, after they are sod, serve with parsley, vinegar and peper,
you may put some oil if you will.

Another way.
After they are sod, make a sauce to them with butter, onion, vinegar, peper,
and mustard, stove and serve.

85. Herrings salted.
When you will use them, unsalt them, draine and dry them, then roast them and
serve with mustard or with pease.

Another way.
You may serve them stewed, cutting them into pieces, and seething them with
onion and butter.

86. Red herrings.
After they are half salted, file them, and set them a smoking in the chimney;
when you will use them, open them and steep them in milk; for to serve, take
them out, and roast them a very little on the grid iron, and serve, if you will,
with mustard.

87. Troutes common.
Dress them at the gills, pickle them; after they are pickled, slit them
according to their bigness, and sees them leasurely with a short broth,
seasoned with all what is fitting, and whereof you shall find the making in
several places of the fish services; and take heed that their flesh do not
break from the bones; after they are sod, serve them whole with parsley, in a
plated napkin.

88. Pie of lottes.
After they are dressed and well whitened, cut them into pieces, and put them
in fine paste or puffed past, with some garnish, as melts of carpe, capers,
broken sparagus, mushrums, yolks of eggs, and season all well, then serve.

89. Eele Pie.
Cut it into round slices, and put it in your sheet of paste, well seasoned
with yolks of eggs, parsley, mushrums, sparagus, melts, verjuice of grapes, or
gooseberries, in the season; Do not spare the butter, salt nor peper; cover
your pie, and endore it; for to keep it up, take some small bindings of paper,
butter them, and put them round about it, and tie them softly with a thread;
bake it, and after it is baked, allay three yolks of eggs with a drop of
verjuice and a little nutmeg, and when you are ready to serve, put it in and
mix it well, then open it, and serve it garnished round about with the crust
cut into four.

90. Pie of grenost.
Dress your grenost, or many if you have them, and slit it at the top, make a
sh^et of fine paste, of what shape you will, make up your pie, and when it is
made up, put your fish in it, garnished with what you have, as mushrums,
capers, parsley minced, hard yolks of eggs, bottoms of hartichocks, and broken
sparagus, all well seasoned with butter, salt, peper, and nutmeg, then cover
and endore it. If it is rised up, bind it with buttered paper; bake it, and
forget not to give it vent, as soon as it has taken crust, for it would take
it of it self, and it may be, beneath, and so all the sauce should be lost,
which you could not put in again in the same way. After it is baked, make an
allaying with yolks of eggs raw, and a drop of verjuice, and put it into your
pie at the top with a funnell, and mix it well on all sides with stirring of
it; serve it warm, and garnished about with the upper crust, cut as you will.

91. Small pies of fish.
Take out the bones of a carpe, and of an eele, mince the flesh with parsley, a
small twig of thime, and some butter; after it is well minced, and seasoned
with nutmeg, make a fine paste, and make up your pies of what bigness you will,
fill them, cover them and endore them; upon the big ones you may put a
chapitean; after they are baked, serve.

92. Pie of plices.
After they are dressed make up your pie of the bigness of your plices, and put
them in, slitted only on the top, and garnished with mushrums, sparagus,
hartichocks, capers, and hard yolks of eggs, all well seasoned with very fresh
butter, salt, peper, minced parsley, and a slice of lemon, or of orange, cover,
and bake it; when it is baked, mix with it some yolks of eggs allayed with
verjuice, then serve.

93. Tourte of melts.
Whiten them well, and draine them, then make your sheet of paste, and garnish
it with your melts of Carpes, mushrums, trouffles, capers, hard yolks of eggs,
broken sparagus, bottomes of artichocks, salt, peper, parsley, and fresh
butter; cover it, and bake it in the oven, or in a tourte pan. Endore it with
eggs, if it be in flesh time; after it has taken crust, give it vent; when it
is baked, uncover it very neatly, cut the lid into four, put it round about,
and serve.

A Table of the Eggs for the Entree or first course, as they are now served up,
EGgs farced 1 Eggs with bread 2 Eggs of the Moon shine (au miroir) 3 Eggs wite
black butter 4 Eggs with milk 5 Eggs with sorrel. 6 Eggs fried into slices 7
Eggs poached in water 8 Eggs with cream 9 Omelet of cream 10 Omelet of
parsley 11 Eggs with verjucie 12 Eggs with anchovies 13 Eggs with cheese 14
Eggs mixed, or stirred together 15 Eggs of the moon shine (au miroir) with
cream 16 Eggs made ready in glasses 17 Omelet farced 18 Eggs into snow 19
The way of making Eggs ready for the Entrees, or first courses, as they are
now in use.
1. Eggs farced.
TAke sorrel, alone if you will, or with other herbs, wash, and swing them,
then mince them very small, and put them between two dishes with fresh butter,
or pass them in the pan; after they are passed, stove and season them; after
your farce is sod, take some hard eggs, cut them into halfs, a cross, or in
length, and take out the yolks, and mince them with your farce, and after all
is well mixed, stove them over the fire, and put to it a little nutmegge, and
serve garnished with the whites of your eggs, which you may make brown in the
pan with brown butter.

2. Eggs with bread.
Take bread, crum it, and pass it through a straining pan, if you will, melt
some butter, after it is melted, put it with your bread, and some sugar, then
choose some very new laid eggs, as many as you have occasion for, and beat them
well with your bread, sugar, butter, salt, and a little milk; for to sees
them, melt a piece of butter very hot, put your implements into it, and sees
it; for to give them a color, pass the fire-shovell red hot over them, and
serve your eggs sugared. You may make them ready in a dish, or in a tourte pan.

3. Eggs after the looking glass, or an miroir.
Take them very new, melt a piece of butter in them very fresh, put in your eggs
and a little salt; when they are enough, put a little nutmeg on them, and take
heed the yolks do not break, nor be too hard, then serve.

4. Eggs with black butter.
Break very new laid eggs in a dish, and have a care that the yolks do not
break, put salt to them, make some butter brown in the pan, and sees them in
it; after they are enough, put a drop of vinegar in the pan, pass it over
the fire, power it on your eggs, and serve.

5. Eggs with milk.
Break your eggs, salt them, and sugar them if you will, beat them well, and
mix your milk with them; for to sees them, melt a little fresh butter in a
dish; after it is melted, put your implements in it, sees them, and give a
color with the fire shovell, when they are enough, sugar and serve.

6. Eggs with sorrel.
Take very young sorrel, after it is very clean and drained, put it between
two dishes with butter, salt, and peper, when it is well consumed, allay the
yolk of an egg with it, and garnish it with eggs cut into quarters, or as you
will, and serve.

For to keep your eggs always fresh, put them into fresh water.

7. Eggs fried into slices.
Make them hard, take them out of the shell, and cut them into slices, then fry
them with good butter, parsley, chibols minced, peper, gooseberries, or
verjuice of grapes; after they are well fried and seasoned, put them into a
dish with a drop of vinegar passed in the pan. If the sauce is too shoort,
put in it a drop of broth, then serve with nutmeg; if you will, mix with it
capers, mushrums, broken sparagus, fried before you mix them, as also the
mushrums, for it would not be good otherwise.

8. Eggs poached in water.
Take the newest you can get, boil some water, and when it boyles, break your
eggs in it, let them sees a little, striking on the handle of the pipkin, lest
they stick in the bottom, and that they burn, then take them out softly, and
drain them. For to serve, make a brown sauce, or green, with a handful of
sorrel, whereof you shall take out the juice, then melt a little butter, with
salt, nutmeg, and the yolk of an egg, all well seasoned and allayed together;
after this, you shall put your juice in them, and stir them, and serve
forthwith.

9. Eggs with cream.
Break some eggs proportionably, take out half of the yolks, and beat them well
with sugar and a little salt, mix your cream with them, and sees all in a
pipkin, after it is sod, serve upon a plate, and sugar. If you will give a
color, you may do it with the fire-shovel; and if you do love sweet odours,
you may put some.

10. Omelet of cream.
Break some eggs, take out half the whites, season them with salt and cream,
and beat all well together, warm some butter, a little more than ordinary; and
when it is enough, serve it in square, or triangle, or as it is, and sugar it
well if you will.

11. Omelet of parsley.
Break your eggs, and season them with salt, parsley minced small, and chibols,
if you will, beat them well with butter, and make your Omelet; after it is
made, you roll it if you will, and cut it into round slices, garnish a plate
with it, sugar, and serve as readily as you can.

12. Eggs with verjuice.
After you have broken your eggs, season them with salt, and beat them well,
take out the treads, and take out some embers, over which you shall turn them,
in putting into them some butter, and verjuice of grapes beaten, and passed in
the pan; when they are enough, serve, but have a care they be not too thick.

13. Eggs with anchovies.
Cleanse well your Anchovies, and unsalt them, changing often their water or
wine; take out the bone, and melt them in a dish with very fresh butter; when
they are melted, break some eggs according to the proportion of your sauce;
and after they are sod and mixed, serve them with a little nutmeg.

14. Eggs with cheese.
Take butter and cheese, and melt them together, which you may do easily,
cutting your cheese very small, when they are melted, break as many eggs as you
think may sees in what you have melted; after they are well beaten, put them
over the fire, and stir them as they sees; and when they are sod not too
thick, serve with a little nutmeg.

15. Eggs mingled or stirred together.
Melt some butter with eggs in a dish, seasoned with salt and nutmegge, when
they are on the fire, stir them with a spoon until they be enough, and serve.

16. Eggs in the moon shine with cream.
Make a bed of butter in your dish, and break your eggs over it, after they are
broken, season them with salt, then put some cream to them until they be
hidden, or some milk, so that it be good, sees them, and give them color with
the fire-shovel red, then serve.

17. Eggs made in glasses.
Make a preparation like that of the eggs with bread, and add some cream to
it, which be not lowre, and a little sugar, and a little of crummes of bread,
then take some furne-glasses, put them on a plate near the fire, with a very
little butter in them; when the butter is melted, put also your implements in
these glasses, as they are before the fire they do sees, but as they do
sees, turn them; after they are sod, power them out upon another plate, they
will come out of the glasses the sharp and upwards; serve them thus, and
garnish them with cinnamon and lemon peel preserved.

18. Omelet farced.
Break your eggs, and put more yolks than whites, put to them some remnant of
farces, if you have any, or make one of purpose, with all sorts of herbs
according to your taste, and sees it before you mix it with your eggs,
season all with salt, and if you will, with sugar, beat it well, and sees it
with butter or lard, then serve your Omelet sugared if you will and plate it
square, or in triangle, or roll it up for to cut it into slices.

19. Eggs with snow.
Break some eggs, sever the whites from the yolks, put the yolks in a dish
upon butter, and season them with salt, and set them upon hot cinders; beat and
whip well the whites, and a little before you serve, power them on the yolks
with a drop of rose water, and the fire-shovell over them, then sugar and serve.

Another way.
You may put the yolks in the middle of your snow, which is made with your
whites of eggs whipped, and sees them before the fire with a dish behind.

Table of the second of Fish.
TVrbot with short broth 1 Dabs with short broth 2 Wivers roasted on the
gridiron 3 Soales fried 4 Salmon with short broth 5 Sturgeon with short broth 6
Grenosts in castrolle 7 Bescard with short broth 8 Purpose with short broth 9
Purpose with ragoust 10 Flounders fried with ragoust 11 Sea Otter with short
broth 12 Sea Otter on the gridiron 13 Raye fried 14 Tenches with short broth 15
Allose with short broth 16 Allose roasted 17 Fresh cod 18 Breame roasted 19 Pike
in blew 20 Pike with sauce 21 Trouts with short broth 22 Troute salmoned 23
Perches with short broth 24 Lotts 25 Lotts in castrolle 26 Carpe in blew 27
Carpe farced 28 Smelts 29 Plice 30 Macreuse 31 Macreuse with ragoust 32 Dabs in
castrolle 33 Pike farced and roasted 34 Salmon with a sweet sauce 35 Lotts with
ragoust 36 Carpe with half short broth 37 Tenches fried with ragoust 38 Barbels
with ragoust 39 Barbels in castrolle 40 Soales with ragoust 41 Vilain with
ragoust 42 Vilain with short broth 43 Joale of salmon 44 Gammon of fish 45
Gournet 46 Fresh mackerels 47 Allose roasted 48 Fresh herrings 49 Filchers 50
Lamprels of all sorts 51 Eeles of all sorts 52 Lobsters of all sorts 53
Langoust with short broth 54 Oisters roasted 55 Fried carpe 56 Barbels with
sauce 57 Plice roasted with ragoust 58 Plice in castrolle. 59
10. Discourses and Method how to serve the second fish.
1. Turbot in Castrolle.
DRess it and empty it under the belly, slitting it there very neatly, or
otherwise at the gills; put it into a pan with white wine, until it steeps,
and season it well with salt, peper, cloves, fine herbs, as rosemarie, thime
and onion, and let it sees leasurely, least the flesh should break off from
the bones; after it is sod, let it rest a very little, least it should take the
taste of brasle; serve it garnished with flowers and parsley.

You may cut it before you sees it thus.

2. Dab with short broth.
It is made ready the same way as the turbot, but that the short broth must
not be of so quick a taste, because it takes salt sooner, being thinner;
after it is sod, serve it with parsley upon it.

3. Wivers roasted on the gridiron.
They are dangerous, by reason of three prickles, which they have about the
head, therefore when you dress them, remember to scrape them, and to cut off
these thorns, and the head at the gills, whereat you shall also empty them
when they are thus dressed, and emptied, slit them on the top, and melt some
butter, and fry some into the slits, with salt and clove, then see them on the
gridiron; when they are roasted, make a brown sauce with fresh butter, salt, and
peper, minced parsley, gooseborrids, or verjuice of grapes, and a drop of
vinegar, stove them with your sauce, and serve.

4. Soales fried.
After they are dressed, dry them, and if they are big, slit them along the
back, flower them, and fry them in salat oil, or refined butter, when they
are fried, powder them with salt upon them, and serve with orange.

5. Salmon with short broth.
Empty it at the gills, and slit it along the back, and put it in your short
broth well seasoned; when it is enough, serve.

6. Sturgeon with short broth.
You may serve it roasted on the gridiron, but in the second, you must put it
with short broth, and serve it as the salmon, except that when it is sod you
take two or three napkins plated, and put them over it bespread with parsley,
and thus, you serve.

7. Grenost in Castrolle.
Although it is commonly served with short broth, yet for the second, it may be
served in castrolle, which to do, you must put it into a pipkin, season it
well and garnish it with mushrums and troufles; have a special care that when
it is sod, the flesh do not break off from the bones.

8 Bescard with short broth.
Make it ready and serve it as the sturgeon, above.

9. Purpose with short broth.
It is served and made ready the same way, as the sturgeon and Beccard above,
but that the seething of it is much longer; when it is enough, serve.

10. Purpose with ragoust.
Cut it in pieces, and roast it on the spit, as it rosteth, baste it with
butter, salt, vinegar, and peper; after it is well roasted, baste it with
another sauce made with butter and minced onion, then mix all together, and
stove it, mix a little flower with it, and serve.

11. Flounders with ragoust.
They are made ready the same way, as in the discourse of the first courses of
fish.

12. Sea Otter, with short broth.
Dress and prepare it for to put it with short broth, which you shall make
ready the same way as that of the barbells; when it is sod, serve it dry with
parsley in a napkin over it.

13. Sea Otter on the gridiron.
Dress and roast it; when it roasted make such a sauce to it as you will, so that
it be of a quick taste, and because those great lumps take hardly a taste,
slit them or slice them on the top, stove it with it is sauce, so that it be
almost imbibed, or soaked into it, then serve it, and garnish with what you
have.

14. Ray fried.
After it is well dressed and cleansed, pickle it with vinegar well seasoned,
and a little before you serve, fry it with refined butter, or with salat oil;
when it is well fried and crispe, set it a draining, and bespread it with small
salt, then serve it whole, or the two sides set together again, with orange.

15. Tenches with short broth.
After they are well scalded, you may put them with short broth, as above said,
and serve them with parsley.

16. Allose with short broth.
You may also put the Allose with short broth, serving it with the scailes,
well seasoned with parsley in a napkin over it.

17. Allose roasted.
As it comes out of the short broth, put it on the gridiron; when it is roasted
make a sauce like sauce Robert, and stove all together, but a very little, then
serve, and if you will, put some capers to it.

Another way.
After it is scailed and dressed at the gills, well cleansed and dried, fry it
in fresh butter, and roast it well, then slit it all along the back, take out
all the bones, and close it up again, take the melt, and with store of good
herbs make a sauce something sharp because this fish is sweet of it self; put
into it capers, anchovis, mushrums, and thicken your sauce with a few chippings
of bread passed in the pan.

Or otherwise make a farce with sorrel well seasoned, and after it has boiled
a very little, serve.

18. Fresh cod.
Put it after the way of short broth, and let it boil but a very little, and
take it out again; then let it rest, and cover it with a table-cloath or
napkin, and when you will serve, draine it, make a sauce thickened, and serve
with parsley.

19. Breame roasted.
After it is dressed, roast it on the gridiron, and butter it on the top; when
it is roasted, make a sauce with fresh butter, parsley, and chibols; vinegar,
salt, and peper, stove all together, and serve.

Another way.
You may put it with short broth, and then roast it, and after, a sauce with
very fresh butter, parsley and chibols minced, pass all in the pan; and when
you will serve, mix with it some sorrel juice, and serve.

20. Pike with blew.
Dress it as it comes out of the water, and cut it, or let it whole, and in
this last water, slit it all along the back, then put it in a basin, and take
salt, vinegar, onion, peper, and lemon, or orange peele good store, boil all
together a very little, power it on your pike, and presently it becomes blew;
for to sees it, boil your white wine well seasoned with salt, put your pike
into it, and let it sees; taste your short broth, if it be strong enough, and
let the pike rest into it, until it has taken a taste, have a care that it
do not remain too long in it, and in this case, take it out until you be
ready to serve; which you shall do warm, with parsley, in a napkin.

21. Pike with sauce.
After it is sod as above said, take off the skin, and take a drop of your
short broth, put it in a dish with half the yolk of an egg well allayed, some
very fresh butter, and nutmegs let the sauce be well thickened, and well
seasoned with salt, chibols and peele, and if you will, put in it anchovis; but
take heed it become not oilie, and serve your pike her.

22. Troutes with short broth.
Slit them proportionably to their higness, and give some strength to your
short broth; before you sees them, dress them at the gills, and pickle them;
after which let them sees leasurely, least the flesh leave the bones; after
they are enough, serve them with parsley in a napkin plated, which you shall
cover with flowers in the season.

23. Troutes salmon'd.
Make them ready, and serve them as the common troutes above written.

24. Perches with short broth.
As they come out of the water, dress them at the gills, and put them in a
short broth of white wine, well seasoned with all kinds, as peper, salt,
cloves, lemon, or orange peeles, chibols and onion; after they are sod, take
them out, and take off the skin; make a sauce with a drop of your short broth,
allayed with vinegar, the yolk of an egg, an onion in quarters, fresh butter,
salt, and a very little of white peper, mix all together readily over the
fire, power it on your perches, and serve.

25. Lottes.
Make some water lukewarm, put them in it, take them out a while after, take
off the slime with a knife, and thus you shall make them all white; then dress
them, wash them, put them between two linen clothes, and dry them; set a
side them which are big, and slit them on the top, for to serve to the oil
or refined butter, with salt and orange, serve.

26. Lottes in Castrolle.
Put your lottes in castrolle, and season them with butter, salt, beaten
cloves, peper, peeles; a bundle of herbs, verjuice, a drop of vinegar, and a
very little broth; when they are ready, serve, and garnish, if you will, with
anchovis, capers, mushrums, and any other garnish you have.

27. Carpe with blew.
The best sort of carpe is that with melt; take it alive, and season it for to
put it with short broth, in the same manner as the pike above written in the
20th article. If it is big, ye^ may cut it into four, or slit it along the
back, and put it in a basin into blew; if you will, sees it in a fish kettle,
put a leaf in the bottom, take your carpe with a clout, season it well with
onion, peper, salt, cloves, peele, and all well wrapped in your linen cloth,
set it a boiling, the leaf under it, least it do burn with much boiling, or
that the linen cloth stick to the kettle; let not your short broth be
altered with any thing, but let it be well seasoned with all what is fitting.
When it is boiled leasurely, serve it with parsley in a napkin.

28. Carpe farcde.
Take up the skin over the back as far as the belly, take out all the small
bones, the tripes and melts, and take out of the head the gills and the tongue,
then make a farce with a little flesh of carpe well minced, and seasoned with
as much butter as flesh, a little parsley, chibols, and a twig of fine herbs;
allay all with an egg, or mix with it mushrums, melts, or mussles, capers,
and bottoms of hartichocks, chibols, and tongues of carps; put your farce into
your carpe all along, and leave a hollow, for to put what you have fried;
season all well, and close it up, sees it in a basin, or in a castrolle,
(which is a kettle made in the form of a great tourte pan, or as a kind of
dripping pan) or into a dish before the fire, with a drop of verjuice and a
little broth, butter, and what you have remaining of your mushrums, troufles,
or melts; stove all together leasurely, and, least it sticks, put some chibols
under it with a little verjuice, and some yolks of eggs, allay the sauce, and
serve.

The carpe thus farced may be put into fine, or puffed paste, and garnish with
what you have.

29. Smelts.
Take them very new, file them, and dry them well; when you are ready to
serve, flower and fry them, with oil, or butter, take off the rod, and powder
them a little with small salt, and serve with orange.

30. Plice.
This article is in the discourse of the Entrees, or first courses of fish.

Thus you are put in mind of what may be served, out of which you may choose
what you like best, and intermingle pies or tourtes, proportionably to the
dishes you have, observing to serve a pie or tourte after six dishes of service.

A Table of the Intercourse of the lean days out of Lent.
MOusserons 1 Mushrums with cream 2 Troufles 3 Eggs spunne 4 Nulles 5 Eggs
minions (or delicate) 6 Tourte of Franchipanne 7 Omelet with cream 8 Fritters
9 Pets de putain 10 Paste spunn 11 Servelats of Eele 12 Melts of carps fried 13
Melts with ragoust 14 Livers of Lotters 15 Gelee of fish 16 White meat 17 Green
gelee 18 Fried artichocks 19 Sparagus with a white sauce 20 Sparagus with
cream 21 Celeris 22 Coliflowers 23 Gammon of fish 24 Tortoise with ragoust 25
Fritters of Apples 26 Fritters of artichocks 27 Almond pie 28 Ramequin of all
sorts 29 Eggs with cream 30
11. A Method for to make ready the Intercourses for the lean days out of Lent.
1. Mousseron.
TAke it very new, take out the gravel, and wash it with water, or white wine,
then put it in a dish with fresh butter well seasoned with salt, white peper,
chippings of bread, take heed it burns not to; after it is enough, put to it a
little nutmeg, the juice of orange or lemon, then serve.

Another way.
Pass it in the pan with very fresh butter, parsley, a bundle of herbs,
peper, salt, and stove it in a dish, or in a pot, and when you will serve, put
some cream to it, or the yolk of an egg, or a few chippings of bread, a little
nutmeg, and serve.

You may garnish it with what you will proportionably to the quantity you have.

2. Mushrums with cream.
Take them very new, and the smallest, for they are best, peele them dry, and
wash them in water, and take them out forthwith, and draine them, cut the
biggest; and, together with the smallest, fry them with fresh butter, parsley,
chibols minced very small, salt, and peper, then stove them in a small pot
until you be ready to serve, and then you may put some cream to them, which
when it has boiled a little while, and the sauce being thickened, you may serve.

3. Trouffles.
Sees them with a short broth, when they are sod, serve them in a plated
napkin.

Another way.
Serve them the same way as the Mousseron, and put a little broth to them, some
cream, and some juice; when they are cut very thin, and sod, serve.

Another way.
Peele them, and cut them very small, and very thin, then pass them in the
pan, and season them with a very little salt, because they must boil long
with some broth, which you judge to be good; after they are sod, unfat them,
and let the sauce be somewhat allayed, with some thickning, or with some
chippings of bread, then serve.

Another way.
As they come out of the sand, wash them with white wine, sees them with
strong wine, much salt and peper, after they are sod, serve them with a plated
napkin.

4. Eggs spunne.
You shall find them in the Intercourses of the flesh days, and the way how
to serve them.

5. Nulles.
Take four or five yolks of eggs, some very fresh cream, much sugar, a little
salt, beat well all together, and sees it on a hollow plate, or on a dish,
pass the fire-shovell red hot over it, besprinckle it with sweet waters, serve
and sugar, with sugar musked.

6. Omelet with cream.
Take store of yolks of eggs, few whites, and a littl cream, some salt
proportionably, beat all together, and a little before you serve, make your
Omelet, and, if you will, sugar it, and serve.

7. Fritters.
Take four small cheeses, white and soft, six eggs, half a pint of flower, and
a little salt, b^at all together, and try it, for the cheeses are sometimes too
soft, or too dry, etc.

8. Pets de putain.
Make them the same way, but that you must put a little more flower; draw them
out very small with the handle of a spoon; after they are fried, serve them
sugared, and besprinkled with orange flowers.

9. ^ervelats of Eele.
Dress your Eele, and slit it in two, take out the bone, beat well the flesh,
and season it, roll it up, and bind it; after it is bound, wrap it up in a
small linen cloth, and sees it in a pot with wine, salt, peper, cloves,
onion, fine herbs, and let the sauce be reduced to a short one; after it is
well sod, unwrappe it, and cut it into very thin slices, then serve it dry, or
with some sauce.

10. Melts of carp fried.
Cleanse them well, and whiten them in water, and dry them, when you will
serve, flower and fry them; when they are fried, serve with salt and orange.

11. Melts with ragoust.
Whiten them in water, and put them in a dish with a drop of white wine, well
seasoned with butter, salt, a bundle of herbs, peper, some juice of mushrums, a
few capers and anchovies; after the sauce is allayed, serve with orange or
lemon juice, and nutmegge.

12. Liver of Lotte.
Take it out of the fish, and put it into a dish with very fresh butter, a few
of fine herbs, parsley minced very small, mushrums also small, of the best of
your broths, minced capers, and an anchovie, when it is well sod, and the sauce
allayed, serve.

Another way.
Fry it, if you will, and serve it with salt, juice of orange, or of lemon.

13. Gelee of fish.
Take some scailes of Carp, half a dosen of Tenches, three pints of white wine,
sees all well together with a little salt and cinnamon, and four cloaves, pass
all into a napkin, that is, strain it, to have the juice out of it, and put to
it one pound of sugar, take a dosen of eggs, fry the whites of them; let your
strainer be ready and very clean; warm your gelee, and when it is ready to
boil, power into it the juice of five lemons, and the whites of your eggs; when
it begins to boil, power it into the strainer, and strain it again, until it
be very clear; put it after the natural upon a plate or in a dish, and serve.

14. White meat.
Make it of the remnant of your gelee, and put into it some stamped almonds,
and a drop of milk, strain it, and make it into white meat. and when it is
cold, serve.

15. Green gelee.
It is made the same way; pass it with a very little juice of beets, and serve
cold.

16. Artichocks fried.
Cut them as for to eat with peper, cut off also the sharp ends, and whiten
them in warm water, then set them a drying, and flower them for to fry when you
have occasion; serve them garnished with fried parsley.

17. Sparagus with white sauce.
As they come from the garden, scrape them, and cut them equally; sees them
with water and salt; take them out, as little sed as you can, it is the better,
and set them a draining, then make a sauce with fresh butter, the yolk of an
egg, salt; nutmegge, a small drop of vinegar; and when all is well stirred
together, and the sauce allayed, serve your sparagus.

18. Sparagus with cream.
Cut them into three, and when you have whitened them, fry them alike well
seasoned; after they are fried, put your cream in, and stove them wlth it; if
the sauce is too thin, put some yolks of eggs in it for to thicken it, and
serve.

19. Celeris.
It is eaten with peper and salt, or with oil, peper, and salt.

20. Coliflowers.
Dress and whiten them, sees them with butter, water, and salt; after they
are sod, set them a draining, and make a sauce as for the Sparagus, then serve.

21. Gammon of fish.
Take the flesh of many carps, with a little of Eele, mince well all together,
season it with butter, and gather it together in the form of a gammon, fill up
the skins of your carps with it, sow them up again, and wrap them up with a
very fat linen cloth; sees them in a pot with half wine, and half water, well
seasoned with salt, etc. consume well your sauce, after they are sod, take them
out, and unwrap them all warm.

You may serve them warm and cold, and garnished as a gammon.

22. Tortoise with ragoust.
One may eat them at all times, you may make any thickning with them, and you
may use them for potages, for to garnish, and for many other things.

A Table of what may be found in Gardens, which one may use upon occasion and
serve up in the first courses, and intercourses of the lean days, and other
flesh days, or in Lent.
Skirrets 1 Pappe of flower of wheat 2 Hops 3 Lettice 4 Pumpkins of all sorts 5
Parsnips 6 Sersiphis 7 Carrots 8 Red beets 9 Jerusalem artichocks 10 Cowcombers
of all sorts 11 Turnips 12 Fried apples 13 Red carrots 14 Fried sparagus 15
White succorie 16 Cards of beets 17 Cards of hartichocks 18 Pease passed or
strained 19 Trouffle of Entreee. 20
12. A Method how to make ready is contained in the foregoing Table.
1. Skirrets.
Boil them a very little, then peele them for to boil in brown butter after
they are fried, serve.

Another way.
For the flesh days, make a past liquid enough with eggs; a little salt, and a
little flower; for to make it more dainty; mix with some soft cheese and white
(a petits choux) dip your skirrets into it, fry and serve them.

Another way.
For to fry them in Lent, allay your meal with a little milk or verjuice, and
more salt; dip your skirret in this, and fry them in refined butter, for the
better; If you will, garnish them with fried parsley, which to fry, when it is
very cleanr and dry, you throw it into your frying pan very hot, then take it
out forthwith, and set it before the fire, so that it be very green; serve your
skirrets with the parsley round about.

2. Pappe of flower of wheat.
It is made the same way, as that of flower of rice, and they will sees as
much the one as the other. For to make them, allay them with a very little milk
and salt, out of Lent put some yolks of eggs to it, a little butter, and some
sugar; sees it leasurely, so that a graitin may arise, serve, and sugar.

3. Hops.
Cleanse them well, and leave nothing but the green, boil it a little while in
water, then draine it, and put it in a dish with a little butter, a drop of
vinegar, a little of your best broth, some salt and nutmeg; stove it for to
use it in garnish, or for some other thing.

4. Lettice.
For to garnish with them all kinds of potages, be it of pullets, of pigeons,
of pease-broth, of herbs, or of health, whiten them well, and wash them; stove
them in a pot with some of the best of your broths; In the flesh days, season
them with what is fat; In the lean days, season them with butter, and when
they are sod, cut them into halfes, and garnish your potages with them, and
serve.

5. Pompkin.
Slice it very thin, and fry it with butter; when it has gotten a good
color, stove it between two dishes, with an onion, or a chibol sticked with
cloves, salt, peper, and verjuice of grapes, if you have any; when it is
enough, serve.

You may also put it with cream.

Another way.
Cut it into great pieces, and sees it in a pot with water, when it is well
sod, take out the water, strain your pompkin, and fry it with butter, and an
onion minced very small; season it with a drop of verjuice, and with nutmeg,
and serve.

Another way.
After it is strained as abovesaid, put it with very fresh butter, and let it
melt with the pompkin, some sugar, and almonds, put your implements into a
sheet of fine paste, in the form of a tourte, and bake it; when it is baked,
sugar it, and serve.

Many do put peper to it; put a very little salt to it; you may garnish it
with preserved lemon peele cut into slices.

6. Parsnips.
Cut off the strings of them, wash them well, and sees them; when they are
sod, pare them, and cut them as you will; put them in a dish with very fresh
butter, salt, nutmeg, and a drop of broth, or a drop of vinegar, or of
verjuice; stove all together, and stir it well; thus you will find your
sauce allayed, then serve.

Another way.
Make them ready as the skirrets above, and serve them with juice of ofence, or
verjuice, and a little salt.

7. Sersifis.
Sees them as the parsnips, after they are sod, make the sauce alike, and
serve.

You may serve them fried.

8. Carrots.
Cleanse and sees them; when they are sod, pare them, and cut them into very
thin round slices, fry them with fresh butter, an onion minced, some salt,
peper, and vinegar; then serve.

9. Red beets (or Beete-radish, or red parsnips.)
After they are well cleansed, and well sod in water, or in the cinders, pare
them, and cut them into round slices; fry them with a minced onion, well
seasoned with a drop of vinegar and good fresh butter; when they are well
fried, serve.

Another way.
After they are sod or baked, cut them as above, and put them with oil,
vinegar, and salt, then serve.

10. Jerusalem hartichocks.
Bake them in the embers; after they are well baked, pare, and cut them into
round slices; fry them with very fresh butter, an onion, salt, peper, and
vinegar; when they are well fried, serve with a little nutmeg.

11. Cowcombers.
Pare and cut them into round slices, fry them with very fresh butter; after
they are fried, put in an onion, some salt and peper, and let them stove well
on the chaufing-dish, then serve with the yolks of eggs, if you will.

Another way.
For to preserve or pickle them, take them very young, and very small; whiten
them in fresh water, and draine them; then put them into a pot with salt,
peper, and vinegar, cover them well, and do not forget cloves.

Another way.
Cut them very thin, then put them with onion, salt, peper, and vinegar;
after they are well pickled, draine them, and for to serve them, put some oil
to them, and serve them in salat.

12. Turnips.
Scrape them, whiten them, and sees them them with water, butter and salt;
after they are enough, put them in a dish with very fresh butter; you may put
in some mustard; serve with nutmeg.

13. Aples fried.
Pare and cut them into round slices, and fry them with very fresh butter;
when they are fried, serve, making a broth with a little nutmeg.

Another way.
Cut them into halfes, take out the seeds, and all what is about; serve them
under the skin, and put them in a dish with butter, sugar, and water and a
little cinnamon, let them sees thus; when they are enough, serve them sugared.

14. Sparagus fried.
Break them, cut them into small pieces, and wash them; after they are drained,
fry them with very fresh butter; and season them with salt, peper and minced
parsley; after they are fried, stove them on a chaufing-dish with an onion
sticked with cloves, and a drop of broth, then serve with nutmeg.

You may also put some cream if you will.

15. White succory.
Whiten it well in water, and draine it, then tie it, and sees it in a pot
with water, butter, and salt; when it is well sod, take it out, and draine it
again; afterward you shall stove it on the chaufing-dish, with butter, salt,
nutmeg, and a drop of vinegar; when you are ready to serve make a sauce
thickened, and serve.

Another way.
After it is whitened, prepare it into a salat, with salt, vinegar, and sugar,
then serve.

16. Cards of beetes.
Take off the strings, and whiten your cards in fresh water, then sees them
in a pot, or a kettle with water, butter, a crust of bread, and some salt; when
they are sod enough, take them out, and set them a stoving in a dish with some
butter, until you be ready to use them, and then warm them, and fit them on a
plate, then make a sauce allayed with very fresh butter, a drop of vinegar, and
some nutmeg, then serve.

17. Cards of hartichocks.
Choose the whitest, take out the strings, and whiten them; after they are
whitened, sees them with salt and water, a piece of butter and a crust of
bread; when they are sod enough, garnish your dish, and make a white sauce, and
serve.

18. Pease passed.
Steep your pease, wash them well, and sees them in hot water; and fill them
again with it; after they are sod, bray them, and pass them through a
straining pan, take some of the thickest pease broth, and stove it on the
chaufing-dish, with butter, salt, and an onion whole sticked with cloves, then
serve.

You may serve, and fry pease whole, with very fresh butter, salt, minced
onion, peper and vinegar, In lent garnish them with herrings.

19. Trouffles of Entree (or first course.)
Cleanse them well, peele them, and fry them with very fresh butter, an onion
sticked with cloves, a little minced parsley, and a drop of broth; stove them
between two dishes, and the sauce being a little thickened, serve.

A Table for the Pastry work of Fish for to be eaten warm, containing the Pies
and the Tourts.
SAlmon pie 1 Troute pie 2 Py of becare 3 Pie of carpe 4 Sturgeon pie 5 Pie of
dabs 6 Turbot pie 7 Trout pie 8 Plice pie 9 Eele pie 10 Pie of fresh cod 11 Pie
of carp without bones 12 The Cardinals pie 13 Pie of flounders 14 Pie of
grenost 15 Pie of soales 16 Pie of soales half fried 17 Pie made of hash of
eeles 18 Tourte of flounders 19 Tourte of new Oysters 20 Tourte of liver of
lottes 21 Tourte of melts of carpes 22 Tourte of lottes 24 Tourte of carpes 24
Tourte of crawfish 25 Tourte of frogs 26 Tourte of tenches 27 Tourte of butter
28 Tourte of spinach 29 Tourte of melon 30 Tourte of pistaches 31 Tourte of
almonds 32 Tourte of pumpkin 33 Tourte of pears 34 Tourte of cream 35 Tourte
of apples 36 Tourte of franchipanne 37 Tourte of whites of eggs 38 Tourte of
yolks of eggs 39 Tourte of Massepain 40
13. Instruction how to make the Pastry work for Fish.
THe puffed paste is made thus. Take four pounds of flower, allayed with salt and
water, very sweet nevertheless; after it is a little rested, spread it with the
quantity of two pounds of butter, join them together, and leave a third part of
your paste empty, for to fold it up into three, and when your butter is shut
up, spread your paste again very square, for to fold it up fourfold; after
this, turn it up thus, other three turns, and set it in a cool place, for to
use it upon occasion. And then spread your paste proportionably to the pie or
tourte which you have a mind to make up; and observe that this paste is harder
to be fed than any other.

The fine paste is made up with four pounds of flower, and one pound and a half
of butter, which you must allay very well together with salt, after this, let
it rest until you have use for it, and make with it pies or tourtes.

The paste with warm water is made the same way, but you warm the water and the
butter; after it is made, let it rest more than the other, and handle it but a
very little, lest it burn, make pie or tourte with it.

The brown paste is made with flower of Rye, with water and a little butter;
you may put to it, if you will, some salt and peper; when it is very strong and
rested, make venison pasties with it.

All kind of pies, fat or lean, which are eaten warm, are seasoned the self
same way, according to the meat. You may put in it the same garnish of garden,
as mushrums, troufles, sparagus, yolks of eggs, bottoms of artichocks, capers,
cards, pistaches.

For the flesh pies, besides the garnish of garden, you may put in them
sweetbreads, stones, combs, etc.

The flesh pies garnished, and of meat very tender, will not endure the oven
above two hours and a half; they of fish big or small, of the same size, as
long.

The pie of young hare will not be in the oven above two hours, be it in puffed
paste or other; it is served warm and uncovered.

The pies which you will keep, must be of a deeper taste or haut goust than
those which you make for to eat warm; if you carry them far, the paste must
be somewhat brown, and if it be fine, you must get a basket made for the purpose
for to carry them in.

You must lard your lean pies with Eele or Carp, well seasoned with peper,
salt, vinegar, and beaten cloves; make your paste fine, or otherwise, and
season your pie with cloves, salt, peper, fine herbs, and a chalotte; when it
is made up, endore it, in the flesh days, with the yolk of an egg; in Lent,
with eggs of pike allayed with water, and put it in the oven, and a while after
give it vent.

After the foregoing instruction or word of advise, follows the Method of the
Pastry-work for fish, concerning Pies and Tourts, according to the contents of
the foregoing Table.
1. Salmon pie.
AFter your fish is dressed, lard it with Eele or Carp, seasoned with peper,
salt, and beaten cloves, then put it in paste, and over it a bay leaf, and good
fresh butter, or beaten lard, according to the day as you will use it;
besprinkle it with lard, with a drop of vinegar, and close it up after the form
of the fish; after it is baked, serve it warm or cold.

The pies of Troute, Becare, Carp, and Sturgeon, are made up alike.

2. Pie of Dab.
Dress your Dab, and slit it on the top; if you will, lard it with Eele well
seasoned, then dress up your pie according to the bigness of your Dab, and
put it in it, well seasoned with salt, peper, cloves, fine herbs, mushrums,
morils, a little parsley fried with fresh butter, mousserons, bottomes of
artichocks, broken sparagus, and good fresh butter, cover it with open work,
and if you will, enrich it with some works, and bake it; after it is baked, and
well fed, serve it with a sauce made with verjuice of grapes, and yolks of
eggs.

The pies of Turbot, Trout, and Plice, are made the same way.

3. Eele pie.
Dress them, cut them into round slices, and season them, make up your pie,
and fill it up with eeles, hard yolks of eggs, mushrums, troufles, if you have
any bottomes of artichocks, and good fresh butter; serve it uncovered with a
white sauce, made with yolks of eggs allayed in verjuice, and a drop of
vinegar; lest it should fall down, bind it with buttered paper; when it is
baked, take the paper off.

4. Pie of fresh cod.
Make it as that of Dab, and serve it warm.

5. Pie of Carp without bones.
Farce it the same way as for a first course, and make your pie up, put it into
it garnished with what you will; bake it covered; after it has baked two
hours, serve it uncovered with a white sauce.

Another way.
Cut your Carp into pieces, and put it into paste, made up and seasoned with
what you have; bake your pie, and serve it uncovered with a white sauce.

6. Pie after the Cardinal's way.
Take the flesh of carpe and of eele, mince them well with butter, and season
with salt, peper, fine herbs, and a few mushrums, then make up your pies, as
small as you can; fill them up, cover, and endore them, and bake them, then
serve.

7. Pie of flounders.
After they are dressed, slit them, and put them in your sheet of paste, season
with salt, peper, beaten clove, mushrums passed in the pan with brown butter,
fresh butter, and all what you have, cover it, bake it, and bind it with
buttered paper; when it is baked, serve with a white sauce, nutmeg, a chalotte,
the juice and slices of lemon, or of orange.

8. Pie of grenost.
After it is dressed, slit it, and put it in your sheet of paste, seasoned with
salt, peper, fresh butter, mushrums, trouffles, mousserons, morilles, parsley
fried and bottomes of hartichocks; after the pie is made up and bound with
buttered paper, bake it, after it is baked, serve it uncovered with a white
sauce, or any other allaying you have.

9. Pie of soales.
It is made the same way as that of dab, because it is of the same kind of
flesh; It is eaten warm.

10. Pie of soales half fried.
Pass them half in the pan with butter, take out the bone, and farce them
with what you will, as mushrums, capers, trouffles, mousserons, bottomes of
hartichocks, fresh butter, all passed in the pan with parsley and chibols
minced very small; put them into paste made up, or into a sheet of puffed paste,
which you shall put in a tourte pan, and over it the remnant of your farce,
in stead of garnish, with yolks of eggs, and very fresh butter; cover up your
pie, and give it vent, a while after it is in the oven; when it is baked serve
it with what sauce you will.

11. Pie made up with hash of eele.
It is made the same way as that of carpe, but that because the flesh of eele
is fatter than that of carpe, it must not be allayed with butter, as that of
carpe; only mix them together, and season them well with salt, peper, a ^ew
of fine herbs, then make a bed therewith, and over it put mushrums, morilles,
trouffles, and a little parsley minced, passed in the pan with butter, and
over all that the remnant of your hash; then shut up your pie, and bake it;
after it is baked, serve it with a white sauce.

12. Tourte of flounders.
It is made the same way as the pie of flounders, above mentioned.

13. Tourte of new oisters.
After your oisters are cleansed and whitened in warm water, pass them in the
pan with very fresh butter, parsley, and minced chibols, and mushrums, all
well seasoned; put all into a sheet of what paste you will, and garnish with
hard yolks of eggs, bottoms of hartichocks, morilles, broken sparagus, all well
fried; cover up your tourte, and bake it; after it is baked, serve with good
sauce, which you shall make thus; paste in the pan two or three chibols
whole, salt, peper, a drop of verjuice or of vinegar, then when it is brown,
mix with it two yolks of eggs well allayed with verjuice, take out the
chibols, and put your tourte boiling hot, with a little nutmeg, stir it a
little, and serve it uncovered.

14. Tourte of liver of lotte.
After it is whitened a very little in warm water, very clean, and dried, put
it into a sheet of paste, then fry mousterons, morilles, trouffles, broken
sparagus, a little parsley minced, bottoms of hartichocks, cardons, or cards
sod, and yolks of eggs, all well seasoned; and in such a proportion as your
tourte may not change it is name, and that the garnish may not exceed the
principal, bake it, when it is baked, serve.

15. Tourte of laictances of carpes.
It is made as that of lottes here under, with such garnish as you have.

16. Tourte of lotte.
Whiten it well with water warm enough, for to take off the slime, until it
be white, then cut it into round slices as far as half the head, put it into a
sheet of paste with salt, peper, beaten cloves, capers, mushrums, hard yolks of
eggs, bottoms of hartichocks, parsley, chibols well minced, and upon, very
fresh butter, shut it up with a sheet of puffed paste, if you have any; When it
is baked, serve it uncovered with a white sauce, and garnished with the lid cut
into four.

17. Tourte of carpe
It is made and seasoned a like with that of lotte, but that it must not be
scalded, but well scailed.

18. Tourte of crawfish.
Sees them with salt, peper, and very little vinegar, take off the feet, and
the tail, then dress them, and pass them in the pan with very fresh butter,
mushrums, and all what you have to put in it, not forgetting some parsley
minced, season all well, and put it in what paste you will, fine or puffed; after
it is baked, serve it with a red sauce, which you will make, if you stamp some
bones of crawfishes, and after you have strained them through a linen cloth,
mix them with some broth, some yolks of eggs, a drop of verjuice, and a little
nutmeg; put this sauce in your tourte as it comes out of the oven, and ready to
serve, then serve it uncovered.

19. Tourte of frogs.
Pass the great legs in the pan with good butter very fresh, mushrums,
parsley, hartichocks sod and cut; and capers, all well seasoned, put it into a
sheet of fine or puffed paste, and bake it; after it is baked, serve uncovered
with a white sauce.

20. Tourte of tenches.
Scald them, and cause them to become white, then dress them, and cut them
into round slices, put them into your sheet of tourte, or pie, make it up and
garnish with all what you have, as very fresh butter, capers, and minced
parsley, bake them; after they are baked, serve with a white sauce, and a
little nutmeg.

21. Tourte of butter.
Melt a piece of butter; after it is melted, put some sugar in it, and some
stamped almonds with a little cream or milk allayed with flower sod, then
make a sheet of fine or puffed paste, put your implements into it, make a brimme
about it, bake it and serve it sugared, and with sweet water, if you have any.

22. Tourte of spinach.
Take spinach leaves, cleanse and whiten them: after they are whitened, draine
them, and mince them very small, after they are minced, allay them with some
melted butter, salt, sugar, and the weight of a macaron of stamped almonds;
then put all in your sheet of paste and bake it; after it is baked, serve it
sugared, and if you will, garnished about the dish with lemon peele preserved.

23. Tourte of meloone.
Grate your meloone, and stamp it in a mortar; melt some butter, and put it
with sugar, a corn of peper, salt, and a macaron, mix all together, garnish
your sheet with it, and serve it sugared.

24. Tourte of pistaches.
After your pistaches are peeled, beat them, and least they become oily,
besprinkle them with flower of orange water, or other sweet water; melt as much
butter as there is of piststaches and take as much sugar, a little salt, and
the crummes of white bread fried, and a drop of milk, and all being well
allayed together, put it into a sheet of fine paste, make the tourte and the
sheet very thin; bake it, sugar it, and serve it warm, and besprinkled with
what sweet water you will.

25. Tourte of Almonds.
It is made the same way, but that for to besprinkle it, you must use milk in
stead of sweet waters.

26. Tourte of pompkin.
Boil it with good milk, pass it through a straining pan very thick, and
mix it with sugar, butter, a little salt; and if you will a few stamped
almonds; let all be very thin, put it in your sheet of paste, bake it; after
it is is baked, besprinkle it with sugar, and serve.

27. Tourte of pears.
Pare your pears, and cut them very thin, sees them with water and sugar;
after they are well sod, put in a little of some very fresh butter, beat all
together, and put it in your sheet of paste very thin; bind it, if you will,
and bake it; when it is baked besprinkle it with water of flowers, sugar it,
and serve.

28. Tourte of cream.
Take very new cream, and allay it with a few beaten almonds, some sugar, and
a little milk pappe well sod; let all boil together a very little, and when
all this is cold, put it in your sheet of paste, and bake it; after it is
baked, sugar it well, and if you will, put musk to it, and serve.

29. Tourte of apples.
It is made the same way as that of pear.

30. Tourte of franchipanne.
Take the fairest flower you can get, and allay it with whites of eggs;
presently take the twelfth part of your paste, and spread it until you may see
through it; butter your plate, or tourte pan, spread this first sheet, dress
it up, butter it at the top, and do the same to the number of six, then put
what cream you will, and make the top as the bottom to the number of six
sheets; bake your tourte leasurely; after it is baked, besprinkle it with water
of flowers, sugar it well and serve.

You must have a care to work up your paste as soon as it is made, because it
dries up sooner then you are aware, and when it is dry, it is unusefull,
because your sheets must be as thin as cobwebs, therefore you must choose a
moist place.

31. Tourte of whites of eggs.
After they are well beaten, season them with a little salt and sugar, melt
some fresh butter with milk, mix all together, then put all into your sheet
of fine paste; bake it; when it is baked, serve it warm and sugared.

32. Tourte of yolks of eggs.
Allay together some butter, five yolks of eggs, some sugar, two macarons; a
little salt and milk; make up your tourte with them, and bake it, when it is
baked, serve it sugared with lemon peele very thin over it.

33. Tourte of Massepin,
For to make it full, glased, and broad as a plate; take half a pound of
almonds, and a quarteron of sugar; beat your almonds, and put some sugar in;
spread your paste, work it low enough, and bake it on a hollow plate, upon a
small fire; make a cream with milk, whereof you will find the making
hereafter; fill up this paste with it about the thickness of half an inche;
bake it, and pass the fire-shovell over it; put over it, either cherries, or
strawberries, or rasberies, or gooseberries, or verjuice, or preserved
apricoks, a little more then half; after it is filled, put it in the oven
again, and make a glasing with the half of the white of an egg, and six times
as much sugar well beaten together; when you are ready to serve, power it over
your tourte, and give is a quick fire and little, then serve upon a plate.

For to make the cream of which mention is made above, allay a very little
flower with a quart of milk, sees it well, and let it be very thin; then put
a little butter in it, four yolks of eggs, and two whites well beaten; stir
well all over the fire, and mix with it a very little salt and sugar, about
half the quantity of your cream.

For to make it green, put in it some beaten pistaches, or some of the grating
of lemon peele preserved.

You may serve your tourte glased without consits, and at the fruit, as well as
at the intercourse.

A Table of several sorts of roots, herbs, and other things to be preserved,
or pickled, for to keep in a household or ordinary.
MElted butter 1 Artichocks 2 Cowcombers 3 Purslane 4 Lettice 5 Trouffles 6 Red
beets 7 Sparagus 8 Green pease 9 Succorie 10 Mushrums 11 Coleworts (or cabidge)
12 Soales 13 Oysters 14 Combs salted 15
14. A Method how to pickle all them for keeping.
1. Butter melted.
WHen it is cheap, you may buy a quantity, and melt it for to use it upon
occasion; which for to do, put it into a pan, let it melt leasurely, until the
cream go to the bottom, and that it becomes clear at the top; put it into a
pot, and when it is cold, keep it for your use.

2. Artichocks.
Cut off the choke, and what is too hard about them (that is called artichocks
in bottoms) steep them in fresh water for to whiten them, drain and dry them;
after this, put them into a pot with salt, peper, vinegar, melted butter,
clove, and some bay leaf; cover them well, and keep them until you have use
for them; and then unsalt them in lukewarm water; after they are unsalted,
sees them with butter, or some piece of lard, or some fat; after they are sod,
serve them with a white sauce or garnished.

3. Cowcombers.
Take them very small, whiten them in fresh water, and stick them with cloves,
then put them in a pot with salt, peper, vinegar, and bay leaf; cover them so
close that no air may get in, and serve them in salat.

4. Purslaine.
It is pickled as the cowcomber, and you may serve them together.

5. Lettice.
Choose the hardest, and take off the great leaves, whiten them in fresh water,
and drain them; when they are drained, stick them with cloaves, and season them
with salt, peper, vinegar, and bay leaf; cover them well, and when you will
serve them, unsalt them, then sees them, and use them for garnish, or for
salat.

6. Troufles.
Boil them with the best strong wine you can get, salt, peper, and clove, then
take them out, and put them in a pot with salt, peper, vinegar, cloves, and
some bay leaves; cover them well; when you will use them, unsalt them, and
sees them with wine, and serve them in a plated napkin.

7. Red beets, or red parsnips.
Wash them very clean, and sees them; when they are sod, peel them, and put
them in a pot with salt, peper, and vinegar, for to use them when you will.

8. Sparagus.
Put them in a pot with melted butter, vinegar, salt, peper, and cloves; cover
them well, and for to use them, unsalt them; when they are unsalted, sees them
in hot water; when they are sod, serve them with a white sauce, either for to
garnish potages, or for salat, or for pastry work.

9. Green pease.
Take them as they come out of the cod, fry them with butter, and season them
well, as if you would eat them then, but do not fry them so much; then put them
into an earthen pot, season them again, and cover them well; put them in a cool
place, and when you will use them, unsalt them, and pass them in the pan, as
before.

10. Succery.
Tie it, and whiten it in sand; when you think that it may be kept, cleanse it
well, and put it in a pot with salt, peper, a little vinegar, and rosemarie;
when you will use it, unsalt it, to serve it for salat, or for to sees it for
to garnish, or for to farce.

11. Mushrums.
Take the hardest and the reddest you can get, fry them whole with butter, as
for to eat presently; after they are fried and well seasoned, put them in a pot
with more seasoning of butter, and a drop of vinegar, until they steep; cover
them so that no air may get in; for to use them, steep them in several waters
lukewarm, then fry them, as if they were but newly gathered.

Another way.
Take the biggest and largest, whiten them in their water between two dishes,
and draine them; after that, pickle them with vinegar, salt, peper, and lemon,
or orange peel; after they are pickled a while, take them out and fry them with
refined butter, and a little flower; after they are fried, put them into
another pickle, if you will keep them long.

You may use them for garnish, or for fritters, or for to farce.

12. Cabidge.
Take the hardest, and slit them into four on the side of the stalk, then
whiten them in fresh water, and dry them; put them into a salting tub, or into
a pot, with salt, peper, vinegar and bay leaves, or a little rosemary* You may
stick them with cloves, and when you will use them, unsalt them in lukewarm
water, for to put them in the potage, and not for salat; when they are sod,
serve.

13. Soales.
Take them very new, and cleanse them; if they are big, slit them on the top,
and flower them after you have dried them, then fry them half with butter or
oil, and put them neatly into a pot, with salt, peper, beaten clove, lemon, or
orange peele, and vinegar; cover them well, and for to use them, take them out
of the pot, and steep them in water; when they are unsalted, fry them with
butter, or oil for them that love it; forget not to flower them well; and serve
them with orange or lemon, or, if you will, after you have passed them in the
pan, open the bone, and put them with ragoust; which for to do, put in some
capers, anchovies, mushrums, troufles, and all what you can get; then stove or
soak them, and serve with a sauce thickened, and the juice of lemon or of orange.

14. Oysters,
Take them our of the shell, and whiten them, or as they are, put them into a
pot, and season them with salt, peper, beaten cloves, and some bay leaves,
cover them well, or if you will you may put them into a barrel; when you will
use them, unsalt them; you may garnish with them, or make fritters, or fry them.

15. Combs salted.
Let the blood be well taken out, and put them in a pot with melted salt,
peper, cloves, a drop of vinegar, and some bay leaves, cover them well, and set
them in a place which is neither cool nor warm; when you will use them, take
what you have need of, unsalt them in lukewarm water; and change them very
often, when they are well unsalted, boil some water, and scald them; when they
are very clean, sees them with broth, or with water; when they are almost
enough, put a bundle of herbs with butter or lard, and a slice of lemon: After
they are well sod, use them for to garnish what you will with them.

Another Table of things to be salted for to keep, specially for a Cook of
Pastry.
Cards of Artichock 1 Palats of beef 2 Tongues of mutton 3 Pickled pullets 4
Rams stones 5 Young pigeons 6 Butter salted 7
The Method.
1. Cards of Artichocks.
Choose the whitest stalks, cut them half a foot long, take all the strings
out, steep them in fresh water, and change them two or three times; whiten and
drain them, put them in a pot, and salt them; when they are salted, melt, and
refine one pound of butter, and power it over them, for to set them up, and use
them upon occasion.

2. Palats of beef.
Salt them, as they come out of the head, and set them up until you have
occasion to use them; then unsalt them; after they are unsalted, sees them,
and take the skin off, and the barbillons, then cut them into pieces, or into
slices; put them with ragoust, or garnish with them, all what you have to
garnish, even the Pastry work, wherein they may be very useful.

3. Tongues of mutton.
As they are taken out of the head, salt them; when you will use them, unsalt,
and sees them; after they are sod, dress them neatly, slit them, and put them
on the gridiron, with crumbs of bread and salt; after they are roasted, make a
sauce with verjuice, a drop of vinegar, minced parsley, chippings of bread, a
little of pot broth, and stove or soak them, then serve.

4. Pullets pickled.
After they are dressed, cut them into halfs, and dry them well, flower them,
and fry them half, then put them in a pot with salt, peper, vinegar, and fine
herbs; cover them until you will use them; and then unsalt them in fresh or
lukewarm water, which is the best; when they are unsalted, dry them, and
flower them, then fry them; after they are fried, serve, and if you will have
them to make a show; you must make an allaying with eggs and flower, fry them,
and put them in sauce with juice of orange.

5. Rams stones.
Take off the first skin, and flit them on the top, to make them take salt;
put them in a pot, and set them in a cool place; for to use them, unsalt them,
and sees them, then use them how you will.

6. Young pigeons.
After you have flatted them well, dry them, flower and fry them, then put them
in a pot; with vinegar, peper, cloves, and fine herbs; when you will use them,
unsalt them, for to put them with ragoust, or with potage, or into paste, or
for to serve them pickled.

7. Salt butter.
Wash it well in fresh water, and draine it, then put it into an earthen pan,
and knead it with white salt, clove, and some bay leaves, and some aniseed
stamped, if you will; after this, put it into a pot, and cover it well with
paper or parchment, after you have taken out the water that comes out of it,
set it in the cellar, and use it.

A Method how to make in Lent the broths of Fish, of Pease, of Herbs, and of
Almonds.
Broth of fish.
MAke your broth with half water and half of pease broth, take the bones of
Carp, or of other fish, with an onion sticked with cloves, a bundle of herbs,
and some salt, sees all well together, with crumbs of bread, and some butter;
then strain it, and use it for such broth as you will, except that of herbs,
the pease broth and many potages which are without fish.

You may use it for the potage of Crawfish, boiling it a while with the shells
of your Crawfish stamped, and strained through a linen cloth, by the means
whereof your broth will become red; afterward strain all, season it, and take
it up, and stove it.

Pease broth.
For to make pease broth clear, and that it be good, steep your pease from one
day to the next, after you have cleansed them well; then sees them with river
or fountain water lukewarm; when they are almost enough, take out your pease
broth, and use it for what you will.

You will find the broth of herbs in the potages for lean days.

Broth of Almonds.
Peel well your Almonds in very warm water, and stamp them in a mortar, and as
you stamp them, besprinkle them with fresh water; after they are well stamped,
put them with fish broth, and crumbs of bread, then boil all with salt, butter,
an onion sticked, and lemon peele, whereof the upper skin to be taken off;
after it is sod, pass it through a strainer, and put it into a pot until you
have use for it.

For to make Almond broth with milk, peel well your Almonds; stamp them, and in
stamping of them, from time to time besprinkle them with milk; when they are
well stamped, put them with very fresh butter, crumbs of bread, salt, a little
clove, and a little cinnamon, boil all a little while, and then pass it
through the strainer; when you are ready to serve, boil it with sugar, and
serve.

All the Lent Potages are made and seasoned as those for the lean days, but
that you put no eggs in them; but in some you mix some pease broth; in others
which you will serve white, or marbled, you put some broth of Almonds; stove
and garnish them as the others.

A Table of the Potages for Lent.
POtage of Crawfish 1 Potage of hash of Carps 2 Potage of herbs 3 Potage of
tenches farced, with turnips 4 Queens potage 5 Princesses potage 6 Potage of
Tortoise 7 Potage of mushrums 8 Potage of Soales 9 Potage of Smelts 10 Potage
of Sparagus 11 Potage of haslets (atteraux) 12 Potage of lettice 13 Potage of
coleworts (or cabidge) with milk 14 Potage of coleworts (or cabidge) with pease
broth. 15 Potage of pumpkin 16 Potage of pumpkin with milk 17 Potage of turnips
with white broth 18 Potage of fried turnips 19 Potage of pease broth 20 Potage
without butter 21 Potage of small vailes (profiteolies) 22 Potage of Onion 23
Potage of Mussles 24 Potage of Frogs 25 Potage of Grenosts 26 Potage of Salmon
with a sweet sauce 27 Potage of bran 28 Potage of frogs with almonds 29 Potage
of hops 30 Potage of turnips 31 Potage of leeks with milk 32 Potage of broken
sparagus 33 Potage of coliflowers 34 Potage of fidele 35 Potage of rice 36
Potage of tailladin 37 Potage of Macreuse with ragoust 38 Potage of macreuse
with turnips 39 Potage of leeks with pease broth 40 Potage of flounders 41
Potage of Gournet 42 Potage of lentils. 43
16. Discourse of the potages for Lent.
1. Potage of Crawfish.
Serve it with pease broth.

2. Potage of hash of carpes.
With pease broth and almonds.

3. Potage with herbs.
With a very little of pease broth.

4. Potage of tenches farced with turnips.
With fried flower, and a little of pease broth.

5. Queen's potage.
With broth of carpe, or of other fish mixed with pease broth and almonds.

6. Princesse's potage.
It is made with pease broth, which you sees with the bones of carpe.

7. Potage of tortoise.
With a little of pease broth.

8. Potage of mushrums.
With pease broth.

9. Potage of soales.
With pease broth.

10. Potage of smelts.
With good broth mixed with almonds.

11. Potage of sparagus.
With pease broth and herbs.

12. Poge of haslets.
Take it out of the best broth.

13. Potage of lettice.
With pease broth, or coleworts.

14. Potage of cabidge with fried bread.
With a little pease broth.

15. Potage of cabidge or coleworts with milk.
With a little pease broth, and much butter.

16. Potage of cabidge or coleworts with pease broth.
Put in your pease broth an onion sticked with cloves, peper, and salt; when it
is enough, serve it well garnished with your cabidge or coleworts, and some
piece of fried bread, which shall have boiled with it.

17. Potage of pumpkin.
Sees well your pumpkin, so that it be more thickened then ordinary, then fry
a chiboll with butter, and put it in it with salt, and serve with peper.

18. Potage of pumpkin with milk.
After it is well sod, pass it through a straining pan, and leave not much
broth in it, because of the milk which you must put in it; when it is well
seasoned with milk and a little butter, stove or soak your bread, and serve
with peper if you will.

19. Potage of turnips with white broth.
Scrape your turnips, and put them in a pot with water; when they are well sod,
season them with salt, and a bundle of herbs; when you will take up, take it
from off the fire, put in some butter very fresh, and stir it off the fire,
and do not put it to it again, then serve with a little almond broth over it.

20. Potage of turnips fried.
Scrape them, and cut them in two or otherwise, whiten, and flower them; after
they are dried, fry them, and sees them in water, with a little peper, and an
onion sticked with cloves; when you will take up, if your broth is not
thickened, you may put in it a little flower fried, with a drop of vinegar, then
serve.

21. Potage of pease broth.
Take the cleerest, and put it in a pot, then fry some sorrel, chervell, and
a little parsley, with some butter, put all in a pot, sees it well and season
it well; stove your potage, and serve it with parsley roots sod with it.

22. Potage without butter.
It is made with great store of herbs well seasoned, and sod with a crust of
bread; stove or soake, and serve.

23. Potage of profiteoles, or small vailes.
Take it out of many broths, then open six loaves made of purpose; make a hole
on the top, and take out the crum; fry them with butter, and fill them with
melts of carps, mushrums, broken sparagus, and observe, that they must be sod
before you fill them. After they are full, stove or soak them leasurely upon
your potage, which you shall garnish with melts, mushrums, broken sparagus, and
serve.

The potage of onion is made the same way as that out of Lent.

24. Potage of mussles.
It is made the same way, as that out of Lent, but that you put no eggs to it;
you may put in it some almond broth, or of some ragoust, serve it garnished
with mussles.

25. Potage of frogs.
Break the bones, and trusse them up, then whiten them, and draine them; put
them in a dish, until you have made some pease broth, fry into it a little
parsley minced, with butter; after they have boiled, put them into your broth,
and take them out forthwith; allay a little sastron, and put it in your pot,
stove or soak your bread, garnish it with your frogs, and serve.

26. Potage of grenosts.
It is made the same way as out of Lent.

27. Potage of salmon with a sweet sauce.
Cut it into slices, and pickle it, pass your slices in the pan with butter,
stick them with cloves, and put them between two dishes with some butter, a
bundle of herbs, sugar, wine, a little salt, and peper well beaten; stove or
soak them, then dry your bread, and stove or soak it also with some other
broth; garnish it afterward with your slices of salmon, the sauce over it, and
garnished, if you will, with figgs or prunes of brignoll.

28. Potage of bran.
It is made as that out of Lent, but that you put no eggs to it.

29. Potage of frogs with almonds.
It made as that out of Lent, but that no eggs are put in it.

30. Potage of hops.
Make some pease broth, and set it a boiling, pass a few good herbs in the
pan well minced, and put them in your pot, let your hops boil in it, after
it is whitened; a little before you serve it, take it up, and put it with
butter, salt, nutmeg, vinegar, and very little broth; when it is well seasoned,
stove or soak your bread, garnish it with your hops, fill your dish, and serve.

31. Potage of parsnips.
It is made as in the lean days out of Lent, but that you make it with pease
broth without eggs.

32. Potage of leeks with milk.
Cut your leeks very small, whiten them, dry them, and sees them with clear
pease broth; after they are sod, put in some milk, peper, salt, clove; stove
or soak your bread, and garnish it with your leeks, then serve.

33. Potage of broken sparagus.
Break or cut your sparagus, and fry them with good butter, salt, peper,
parsley, and minced chibols, stove well all together, then make a pease broth,
or of potage of herbs, which you shall strain; stove also your bread, and
garnish it with your sparagus, then serve. You may put in it the juice of
mushrums, and mushrums with ragoust.

34. Potage of coliflowers.
Dress them, and whiten them in fresh water, then put them in a pot with good
broth, or with pease broth, well seasoned with butter, salt, and an onion
sticked with cloves; After they are sod so that they be not broken, stove or
soak your bread, garnish with your coliflowers, and serve. You may put in some
milk and peper.

35. Potage of fideles.
Sees them with water or milk; after they are sod, and well seasoned, take
out a part of them for to fry, and make a potage with the remnant, with
butter, salt, peper, onion sticked, then take up and serve.

36. Potage of rice.
It is made as that of the fideles, let it sees until it be well burst, then
serve.

37. Potage of tailladins.
It is made alike, but that after they are sod, you may put to it a very little
saffron, and some very fresh butter; you may put in some milk also, for to make
them liquid, and when all is well seasoned, serve.

38. Potage of Barnicle with ragoust.
You shall find it in the lean potages, and shall make it alike, but without
eggs.

39. Potage of Barnickle with turnips.
After it is dressed, lard it with eele, and roast it a very little, or pass it
in the pan with butter, then put it in a pot with water, some pease broth,
and a bundle of herbs; when it is almost sod, pass some turnips in the pan,
put them with your barnickle, and season it well.

For to thicken your broth, pass a little flower in the pan until it be
brown, and allay it with a drop of vinegar; put it in your pot, and when it
has boiled a very little, stove your bread with your garnish, and serve.

40. Potage of leeks with pease broth.
When they are whitened in fresh water, put them with your pease broth, some
capers, and season them well, after they are sod, stove or soak your bread,
garnish it with your leeks, and serve.

41. Potage of flounders.
Stove or soak your bread with the best of your broths, and garnish it with
your flounders, fried in the pan, and put with ragoust, together with
mushrums, capers, and broken sparagus, then serve.

42. Potage of rougets.
Dress them, and put them in a pipkin, with a bundle of herbs, a little white
wine, and well seasoned; stove or soak your bread with other broth, and garnish
it with your rougets with their sauce, then serve.

43. Potage of lentilles.
After they are well sod, and seasoned with butter, salt, and a bundle of
herbs, take up, and serve.

You may put them upon the potage with some oil, after they are salted.

A Table of the Entrees, or first courses in Lent, without eggs.
SOale 1 Pike 2 Tenches farced 3 Fried tenches 4 Stewed carpe 5 Carpe farced 6
Carpe roasted 7 Carpe fried, and put in ragoust 8 Salmon 9 Hash of carpe 10
Stewed salmon 11 Lotte 12 Stewed lotte 13 Carpe with half short broth 14
Oisters 15 Oisters with ragoust 16 Oisters in the shell on the gridiron 17
Vilain with ragoust 18 Vilain with short broth and roasted 19 Barbels 20 Dabs 21
Flounders in castrolle 22 Flounders fried 23 Flounders roasted 24 Plice with
ragoust 25 Fried plice 26 Barnickle 27 Barnickle with short broth 28 Barnickle
roasted 29 Alose roasted 30 Alose with short broth roasted 31 Lamprell 32 Lamprell
on the gridiron 33 Lamprell with a sweet sauce 34 Lamprell stewed 35 Eele in
cervelat 36 Eele in the fashion of stewing 37 Eele with half short broth 38
Sea eele stewed 39 Sea eele fried stewed 40 Lobster with short broth 41 Lobster
fried with a white sauce 42 Langouste with short broth 43 Langoust with a white
sauce 44 Pike farced 45 Pike farced and roasted on the spit 46 Roasted mackerels
47 Fresh herring roasted 48 Fresh herring roasted with a brown sauce 49 Pilchers
50 Gournet 51 Grenost 52 Fresh cod roasted 53 Fresh cod with half short broth
54 Green fish 55 Soupresse of fish 56 Gammon of fish 57 Mussles 58 Fried ray 59
Ray with short broth 60 Fried ray with ragoust 61 Smelts 62 Cod tripes 63
Scuttles 64 Poor John fried 65 Poor John with oil 66 Poor John fried 67
Salmon with a brown sauce 68 Salmon with oil, onion, and vinegar, or salat, if
you will. 69 Mackerell salted 70 Stewed herrings 71 Red herrings 72 Salt
herrings 73 Pease 74 Pease broth 75 Red beets 76 Turnips 77 Jerusalem
hartichocks 78 Sersifis 79 Scirrets 80 Cards of beetes 81 Lentils 82 Spinach
73 Fried apples 84 Apples with sugar 85 Prunes. 86
17 Advise.
THe things contained in this table and the following, are made ready the very
same way, as at other times, except only, that no eggs at all are used, neither
for to thicken, nor any other way; But for to thicken, in stead of eggs, you
may take the flesh of carpe, or of eele, which thickneth far better with
butter, then the eggs do.

The following articles were not expressed in the Entrees of the lean days.
Lentilles.
AFter they are well sod, pass them in the pan with fresh butter, salt, peper,
a little of fine herbs, and chibols, when they are well fried, serve them.

You may serve them like pease broth; if you find them hard to be passed (or
strained) stamp them in a mortar.

They may also be served with salat oil passed in the pan.

Spinnage.
Take the fairest, and do not use the green ones, but for want of others,
cleanse them well, and wash them several times, draine them, and cause them to
cast out their water between two dishes, season them with half as much butter
as there are spinnage, some salt, peper, a chiboll, or an onion sticked with
cloves; pass all in the pan, and stove it in a dish covered; when you are
ready to serve you may put in some nutmeg and cream, otherwise serve them as
they are.

Some do boil them in water, but they are not so good, though you make them
ready alike afterward.

Apples fried.
Pare your apples, and cut them into round slices as far as the core; make
some butter brown, and fry them with a little salt and peper; if you have
some cream you may put some in, and serve after they have boiled a little.

Apples with sugar.
Take apples, cut them in two, take out the core, and prick them at the top
with the point of of a knife; fill your dish with them fralfe, with a little
water, cinnamon, butter, and much sugar; Let them sees leasurely with the lid
of an oven, or a tourte pan, when they are enough, serve them sugared.

Prunes.
Takes them of Tours, or the common, wash and cleanse them well; after they are
very clean, sees them leasurely in a pot; when they are half sod, put in
some sugar, and when the broth is ready to become syrup, serve.

If you will put in no sugar while they sees, when the syrup is well thickened,
bestrew them with sugar, and serve.

Advise.
There are many, who will eat nothing but oil; Now for to take off the smell
of oil, boil it with a crust of bread burned, and then you may serve it as
butter.

A Table of the second of Lent.
TVrbot 1 Dabs 2 Dabs in castrolle 3 Wivers 4 Soales 5 Soales with ragoust 6
Salmon 7 Salmon with sweet sauce 8 Grenost 9 Purpose 10 Becare 11 Loux 12
Troute salmoned 13 Raye 14 Smelts 15 Mackerels 16 Filchers 17 Gournet 18 Pike
19 Pike with a sauce 20 Pike farced 21 Carpe 22 Carpe farced with melts 23
Lotte 24 Lotte with ragoust 25 Perch 26 Tenches 27 Alose 28 Fresh cod 29 Breame
roasted 30 Plice 31 Macreuse 32 Carpe with half short broth 33 Tenches fried
with ragoust 34 Barble with ragoust 35 Vilain with ragoust 36 Dorasde with
short broth 37 Dorasde roasted 38 Fresh herring 49
17. Advise.
ALL the meat of the second service, as well as of the first, and intercourses
of Lent, and the pastry work, are served the self same way, and with the same
seasoning, as in the lean days of the rest of the year, eggs only excepted,
which must not be used; therefore you shall endore your pastry work with the
eggs of Pike stamped, or with melted butter; for saffron is naught.

A Table of the Intercourses (Entrements) of Lent.
MVsherume 1 Cardons 2 Cards 3 Scirrets 4 Troufles with ragoust 5 White meat 6
Fried Artichocks 7 Fried Mushrums 8 Tortoise 9 Paste spunne 10 Sparagus 11
Tourte of franchipanne 12 Gervelat of Eele 13 Gammon of fish 14 Melts fried 15
Melts with ragoust 16 Liver of lotte 17 Gelee of all kinds of fishes 18 Celeris
19 Ramequins of all sorts 20 Mushrums after the Olivier 21 Morilles 22 Prunes
23 Brignols 24 Serfifis 25 Scirrets 26 Small tourte of cream musked 27 Tourte
of Spinach 28 Rissoles 29 Lottes fried 30 Sparagus like green pease 31 Liver of
Lotte fried 32 Crawfish fried 33 Crawfish with ragoust 34 Fritters of frogs 35
Frogs with ragoust 36 Nulle of melts. 37
YOu will find in the lean days the way of making ready all the contained in
the Table above. The following Articles only are not set down.

Rissoles.
Take some remnant of hash of Carps, some mushrums, and melts, mince all
together, well fed with butter and cream, if you have any, season it with a
bundle of herbs, and boil it a very little, the better to thicken it, and use
it for to make your Rissoles with, which for to make well, take some puffed
paste, spread it, and put your implements in it proportionably to the bigness
you will make them of, moisten them about, cover them, and endore them with
butter, for want of eggs of pike; after they are endored, put them in the oven,
and after they are baked, serve.

The small Rissoles are made with fine paste, there must be less than for a
little pie; after your sheets are made, fill them proportionably; moisten them
about, and close them up, then throw them into refined butter very hot, until
they be fried, and yellow, take them out forthwith, and then serve them.

If you put in sugar, you must also put sugar on the top when you serve.

Fritters of frogs.
Choose the finest and the biggest, dress them cherrie like, that is to say,
scrape the thighs of your frogs, so that the bone be clean at one end, whiten
them a very little, and dry them; make a paste with flower, salt, milk, white
cheese, of each a very little; stamp all in a mortar, and make it liquid,
until it be like a paste for fritters; take your frogs by the bone end, and
dip them in, and put them in very hot butter, fry them as fritters, and serve
garnished with fried parsley.

18. A note of what may be served up on Good Friday.
POtage of health, which is to be made with sorrel, lettice, beets, purslain,
and a bundle of herbs; sees all with salt, butter, and the first cutting of a
loaf; stove, and serve.

Potage of pease broth very clear, which to make, you shall put in a few herbs,
some capers, a bundle of herbs, and an onion sticked with cloves; when it is
well sod, serve garnished with fried bread.

Potage of Almond milk, the making whereof you will find in the potages for
Lent.

Potage of Turnips, Potage of Parsnips, Potage of Sparagus, Potage of Pumpkins.

Potage of Profiteolles; for to make it, take five or six small loaves, open
them at the top, and take out the crumme, then dry them near the fire, or make
them brown in the pan with fresh butter; stove them with broth made of purpose
with mushrums, pease broth, onion sticked, all well seasoned, and before passed
in the pan. Use this broth for to make your potage, and garnish your dish
with your dry bread, then fill it up with small ragousts, as troufles,
artichocks, sparagus, and fried mushrums, garnish the dish round about with
pomegranate, lemon, and, if you will, besprinkle your potage with the juice of
mushrums, then serve.

Potage of Brocolis, they are the young sprouts of Coleworts. Sees them with
water, salt, pease broth, butter, onion sticked, and a little peper; stove your
crust, garnish it with your Brocolis, and fill your dish with it, then serve.

The same broth may be made with milk, and garnished alike.

The potage of hops is made the same way as that of Brocolis, and is garnished
alike.

The Queens potage is made the same way as that of Lent, but that you make a
hash of mushrums, to garnish your bread with; after it is filled, and passed in
the pan several times, garnish on the top with pistaches, pomgranate, and
lemons cut.

The Princesse's potage garnished with Fleurons, they are small pieces of puffed
paste.

Potage of milk. Brown potage of onion.

Potage of pease broth garnished with lettice, and broken sparagus.

Potage of fideles, or tailladins garnished with fried paste. Potage of
Coliflowers.

Potage of Rice garnished with a loaf dried.

Potage of green pease. For to serve it, sees them a very little, then stamp
them in a mortar, and fry and season them as the other, then serve.

Entree, or first course for the Good Friday.
REd beets, or red parsnips, cut like dice, with brown butter and salt.

Red beets with white butter. Red beets fried.

Red carrots fried with a brown sauce at the top.

Red carrots stamped and passed in the pan, with onion, crumbs of bread,
almonds, mushrums, and fresh butter, all well allayed, and seasoned.

Red carrots fried with brown butter, and onion.

Red carrots cut into round slices with a white sauce, with butter, salt,
nutmeg, chibols, and a little vinegar.

White carrots fried. Carrots in fried paste.

Carrots minced into ragousts with mushrums.

Tourte of pistaches. Tourt of herbs. Tourte of buttet. Tourte of almonds.

Parsnips with a white sauce, with butter. Parsnips fried.

Serfifis with a white sauce with butter.

Serfifis fried in paste. Spinach. Apples with butter. Apples fried. Pappe of
flower. Pappe of Rice, and Almonds passed. Prunes. Broken Sparagus fried.

Riffoles of hash of Mushrums, carrots, and pistaches, well fed with butter,
served warm, sugared, and with orange flowers.

Skirrets fried in paste. Skirrets with white sauce with butter,

Cards of beets. Cardons. Pumpkins fried. Jerusalem Artichocks. Artichocks
whole. Fideles. Rice with milk well sugared. Many do cause it to burst in water
when it is very clean, and then put the milk in it.

Others do sees it in a double pot.

The most expedient is, that when it is well washed, and very clean, you dry it
before the fire; when it is very dry, stove it with very new milk, and take
heed you do not drown it; sees it on a small fire, and stir it often, lest it
burn to, and put in some milk by degrees.

Mushrums with ragoust. Mushrums with cream. Mousserons with ragoust, garnished
with pistaches.

Troufles cut, with ragoust, and garnished with pomegranat.

Sparagus with a white sauce.

Troufles with short broth. Salat of lemon.

Salat sod, either of succory or of lettice.

Morilles with ragoust. Morilles farced. Morilles with cream.

Cream of pistaches. Tourte of cream of Almonds. Cakes of Almonds. Cakes of
puffed paste.

Artichocks fried.

A Method how to make several sorts of Preserves, both dry and liquid, with
some other small curiosities, and dainties for the mouth.
Apricots liquid.
Boil some water, and mix with it some old lees of wine proportionably, a
handful or thereabouts, for one hundred of Apricots, which you must put into
this boiling water, and stir them with a spoon, until you perceive that they
peel on the thumb; after that, take them out, put them into fresh water, and
peel them very clean; boil again some water, put your Apricots into it, and let
them boil in it four or five boylings; then steep them in water; and prick them
on the stalk; take sugar proportionably, dip your Apricots in it, and sees
them as it is fitting.

Another way of liquid Apricots.
Take such a quantity of Apricots as you will, peel them as well and as neatly
as you can, boil some water, put your Apricots in it, and let them boil a
little; take them out forthwith, and put them into fresh water, sees your
sugar into a preserve, pass your Apricots into it, and boil them a very little
while; stew them, and let them lie there until the next day morning, keeping
always a small fire under.

Dry Apricots.
Drain them, and turn them into ears, or in round, then bestrew them with sugar
in powder, and dry them in a stove.

Another way of dried Apricots.
Take the hardest, and drain them, then sees some sugar as for to preserve
with it, put your Apricots in it, yet something stronger; boil them over the
fire, and take them out; after that you shall glase them, and put them upon
straw; if they are not dry enough, bestrew them with sugar in powder, and dry
them before the fire.

Conserve of Roses.
Take Roses of Provins, the reddest you can get, dry them as much as you can in
a silver plate over a small fire, and stir them often with your hand; after
they are very dry, stamp them in a mortar, and then pass them through a very
fine sive; then allay them with the juice of lemon, over which you shall put
half an ounce of Roses beaten into powder; and for want of juice of lemon, take
verjuice: Take some sugar, and sees it to the first plume, that is, till the
first skin, or trust is seen on the sugar, when it is boiled enough; after it
is sod, take it off from the fire, and whiten it with the wooden slice, then
put in your roses until your conserve has taken a color; If by chance your
sugar was too much sod, mix with it the juice or half the juice of a lemon,
proportionably to what you think fitting; then let your conserve cool a while
and take it out.

Conserve of lemon.
Take a lemon and grate it, put the grating of it in water, and after a while
take it out, and dry it moderately before the fire. Take some sugar, and sees
it, the first plume or skin, as it shall make, take it off of the fire, and
put the grating of your lemon in it, and whiten it with the wooden slice, and
put in a little of juice of lemon, which is necessary for it, then make up your
conserve.

Conserve of pomegranate.
Take a pomegranate, and press it for to take out the juice; then put in on a
silver plate, and dry it on a small fire, or on some warm cinders; sees your
sugar until the plume or skin appear, and more then others; after it is
well sod, take it off of the fire, and whiten it; then put your juice in it,
and take out your conserve.

Conserve of pistaches.
Take pistaches, and stamp them, sees the sugar till the plume or skin
appear, and then whiten it; afterward put in your pistaches, and stir them
in it, then take up your conserve upon paper.

Conserve of fruits.
Take lemon peele, pistaches, apricots, and cherries, cut them into small
pieces, bestrew them with powder sugar, and dry them near a small fire; take
some sugar, sees it till the plume or skin appear somewhat strong, then
without taking it off of the fire, put your fruits in, and when you perceive
the same plume or skin, take it out, and whiten it, and when you see the
small glass (or ice) on it, take out your conserve with a spoone.

Slices of gammon.
Take some pistaches stamped by themselves, some powder of rose of Provins by
themselves, allayed with the juice of lemon, and some almonds stamped also by
themselves, and thus each by it self; sees about one pound and a half of
sugar as for conserve; after it is sod, sever it into three parts, whereof you
shall put, and preserve the two upon warm cinders, and into the other your
shall power your roses, and after you have allayed them well in this sugar,
power all together into a sheet of double paper, which you shall fold up two
inches high on the four sides, and tie it with pines on the four corners;
after this when this first sugar, thus powered shall be half cold, and thus
colored, take of your almonds, mix them into one of the parts of sugar left
on the warm cinders, and power them over this implement, and do the like also
of the pistaches; Then, when all is ready to be cut with the knife, beat down
the sides of the sheet of paper, and cut this sugar into slices of the
thickness of half a crown.

White fennel.
Take fennel in branches, and cleanse it well; dry it, and when it is dry,
take the white of an egg, and flower of orange water; beat all together and
dippe the fennel into it, then put some powder sugar over it, and dry it
near the fire upon some sheets of paper.

For to make red fennel.
Take the juice of pomgranat with the white of an egg, beat all together, and
dippe your fennel in it, put powder sugar to it, as to the other, and dry it
at the Sun.

For to make blew fennel.
Take some turn sol, and grate it in water, put in a little powder of Iris,
and some white of eggs, beat all together, and dippe your fennel into this
water, and then put in some powder sugar, and dry it as the other.

For to whiten geliflowers, roses, and violets.
Take the white of an egg, with a small drop of flower of orange water, beat
them together, and steep your flowers in it; then take then out, and as you
take them out, shake them, put powder sugar over them, and dry them near the
fire.

You may use the same way for to whiten red corants, cherries, respasses, and
strawberries.

Cherries liquid.
Take the fairest you can, and take out the stones, some sugar proportionably
to your cheries, and boil them together until the sirrup be well formed, and
sod as much as you shall think fitting: If you will at the same time take out
some dry, draine up a portion of the same cherries, and take some sugar, which
you shall sees into a conserve, put in your cherries, boil them, and take
them out.

Plummes of all sorts, liquid.
Take plummes and prick them, then throw them into a basin of boiling water,
and boil them softly a little while; let them steep in fresh water, and drain
them, then sees your sugar a very little, power your plums into it, and boil
them in it a while; then set them in the stove, if you will; or else, if you
find them not enough, boil again your sirrup a while, put in your plummes
again, and boil them yet a little.

Green Almonds.
They are made ready as the apricots.

Verjuice liquid.
Take the fairest you can get, and take out all the seeds; boil some water,
and let your verjuice steep a little in it, then put it into some sugar a
little sod, and boil it seven or eight high boilings, and take it out.

Dry verjuice.
Draine it well, sees some sugar into a conserve, and put your verjuice in;
set it on the fire, and cause it to take the same seething, as it had when you
have mixed it, so that the plume, or skin or crust of it be very strong.

Bottoms of hartichocks.
Take of bottoms of hartichocks what quantity you will, pare them altogether,
and take out the choke carefully, then boil some water, put your hartichoaks
in, and let them ly therein, until they be very well sod; then put them into
sugar, and boil them therein four or five boilings, and let them rest in it,
then draine them, and take them out.

Buttons of roses dry.
Take the buttons of roses, give them five or six pricks with a knife, and
boil them ten or twelve boilings in water; then take some sugar, melt it,
put your rose buttons in, and let them yet boil eight or ten boilings. For to
make them dry, use them as you do the orenges, whereof the making is set down
a little below.

Ponsif.
Take good ponsif, cut it into slices and put it into fresh water with one
handful of white salt; let them steep five or six hours, and then boil them
in water until they be sod; take them out, and draine them, then take some
sugar, and boil it, and put into it your slices of ponsif, sees them again
in the sugar proportionably, and take them out.

Lemons whole.
Peele them to the white, and cut them at the sharp end, boil some water, and
put them in, until they be half sod; Take them out, put out the water, and put
them in again in other water boiling very high, and make an end of seething
them in it. Take them out and put them in fresh water, then melt some sugar,
and put your lemons in it.

Orenges.
Take the reddest, and the smoothest, or the most yellow: Pare them and slit
them at the end, and let them steep two whole days in fresh water, which you
shall change twice a day, boil some water in a basin, put your orenges in it,
and sees them half, take them out, and make an end of seething them in other
boiling water; then set them a draining, and take some sugar proportionably to
your orenges, with as much water; boil all with your orenges with high
boiling, then take them out, and draine them.

How to make white walnuts.
Take walnuts, pare them to the white, and steep them in water six whole days,
and do not fail to change the water twice each day; then sees them in water,
and when they are sod, stick them with a clove, with cinnamon, and with a slit
of preserved lemon; then take some sugar, and sees it, put your walnuts in,
and let them boil in it ten or twelve boilings, then take them out, draine
them and dry them.

Paste of Apricots.
Take them very ripe, and pare them, then put them in a pan without water, and
stir them often with a scimmer, until they be very dry; take them off of the
fire, and mix them with as much sugar sod into a Conserve, as you have of
paste.

Paste of Cherries.
Take some Cherries, boil them in water, and pass them through a sive; on a
good quart of pap of Cherries, put four ounces of pap of Apples, which you
shall sees and strain also; mix all together; dry it, and make it ready as
abovesaid.

Paste of gooseberries and of verjuice.
They are made the same way as that of Cherries.

Paste of Quinces.
Take Quinces, sees them whole in water, and pass them through a course sive;
then dry them in a pan over the fire, as the aforesaid paste, mix them with
sugar, and give them five or six turns over the fire, without boiling, make
them ready half cold, and so of the rest.

How to make some Massepain.
Take Almonds and peel them, steep them in water, and change it until the last
be clear altogether, stamp them with the white of an egg, and water of orange
flower, then dry them with a little sugar over the fire, after this you shall
stamp them four or five blows in the mortar, and work them as you will.

How to make cakes of Cherries, of Apricots, of Pistaches, and of Almonds.
Take of Cherries, or of Apricots, what you will, stamp them in a mortar with
sugar in powder, until they be stiff enough for to be wrought; bake them
before you do glase them, and glase them at the top and underneath. The
Pistaches and Almonds are made ready more easily and are easier to make cakes
with.

For to make the sheets of them, steep some gum in water of orange flowers,
stamp your almonds or pistaches in a mortar with a piece of gum; allay all
together with sugar in powder, then make and work up a paste as you will.

You may of the same paste make a glasing very clear, mixing a little musk with
it, and be careful to cleanse it well at the top, then cut it in length, in
round, or into any other form.

The baking of it requires a great care and circumspection; put it in the oven,
or in the tourte pan with fire under and above, but a little less above.

How to make other light pasts.
Take the white of an egg, beat it well with a little water of orange flowers,
and allay it with a few pistaches or almonds, what you will. Work them very well
with some sugar in powder, and put in a little musk; bake this in a tourte
pan with a few hot cinders both above and under.

How to make a tourte after the Combalet.
Take three yolks of eggs without any whites, half a pound of lemon peel, with
some water of orange flowers, and some musk; stamp a lemon peel, mix all
together, and dry it with a handful of sugar, in beating of it; then put all in
a pan, and give it three or four turns over the fire; make up a tourte, and put
it in the tourte pan with some sugar in powder upon and under, and close it
up, and put some fire round about it; when it is half baked, take it up, and
set it a drying in the oven.

How to make some small sheets of paste glased.
Take all sorts of dry fruits, and stamp them with water of orange flowers, fill
your sheets of past with these fruits, which will form up a certain thickness,
capable and fit for to glase them, leave a little of it at the top, and bake
them in the tourt pan until the glasing be risen up: which to bring to pass,
put some fire upon, and none under.

How to make the sirrup of cherries.
Take some cherries, press them, and take out the juice, strain them, and give
them two or three boilings over the fire, then put in some sugar
proportionably, three quarterns for one quart of juice. The sirrup of
Rasberries is made alike.

How to make Lemonade.
It is made several ways, according to the diversity of the ingredients. For
to make it with Jasmin, you must take of it about two handful, infuse it in
two or three quarts of water, the space of eight or ten hours; then to one
quart of water you shall put six ounces of sugar; those of orange flowers, of
muscade roses, and of gelliflowers are made after the same way. For to make
that of lemon, take some lemons, cut them, and take out the juice, put it in
water as abovesaid pare another lemon, cut it into slices, put it among this
juice, and some sugar proportionably.

That of orange is made the same way.

How to make dry Quinces.
Take some Quinces, pare them, and boil them in water, take them out and put
them in to some boiling sugar; when they are sod, take them out, and power them
into sod sugar, out of which take them out, and dry them as the oranges and
other fruits abovesaid.

How to make white hypocrast.
Take three quarts of the best white wine, half a pound of sugar more or less,
an ounce of cinnamon, two or three marjoram leaves, two corns of peper
unstamped, pass all through the straining bag with a small corn of musk, and
two or three pieces of lemon, after that, let all infuse together for the space
of three or four hours.

The claret is made with claret wine, with the same ingredients, and in the
same way.

How to make whipped cream.
Take a quart of milk, and put it into an earthen pan with about a quarter of a
pound of sugar; take also one pint of sweet cream, which you shall mix with
your milk by degrees as you are whipping of it with rods, you shall by degrees
take off the sc^m, and put it in a dish after the form of a pyramid.

How to make cream sod.
Take some sweet cream, with one quart or two of Almonds well stamped, then
mix all in a pan, stir it, and sees it on a small fire and when you perceive
it to become thick, take two yolks of eggs, allay them with a little sugar in
powde, power them into your cream, and give it yet four or five turnings.

How to make the English cream.
Take sweet cream, and make it something lukewarm in the dish wherein you will
serve it, then take the bigness of a corn of wheat of runnet, and allay it with
a little milk.

How to make gelee of gooseberries.
Take some gooseberries, press them, and strain them through a napkin; measure
your juice, and put near upon three quarterns of sugar to one quart of juice;
sees it before you mix it, and sees again together; after they are mixed,
try them on a plate, and you shall know that it is enough, when it rises off.

That of Rasberries is made the same way.

How to make the gelee of verjuice.
Take verjuice, and give it one boiling in water, strain it through a course
linen cloth, and sees some apples, the decoction whereof you shall mix with
it, and the rest as abovesaid.

The gelee of Cherries is made the same way.

How to make the gelee of apples.
Make a decoction of your Apples, strain it through a napkin, and mix with it
three quarterns of sugar, or thereabouts to one quart of decoction, etc.

How to make the gelee of Quinces.
Make also a decoction of Quinces; make it also a little reddish, strain it
through a napkin, and put it with sugar as the others.

How to make biscuit.
Take eight eggs, one pound of sugar into powder, with three quarters of a
pound of flower, mix all together, and thus it will be neither too soft, nor
too hard.

How to make Maccaron.
Take one pound of peeled Almonds; steep them in fresh water, and wash them
until the water be clear; drain them, and stamp them in a mortar; besprinkle
them with three whites of eggs, instead of water of orange flowers, put in a
quartern of sugar in powder, and make your paste, which you shall cut upon the
paper after the form of Maccaron; bake it, but take heed you give it not the
fire too hot; after it is baked, take it out of the oven, and set it up in a
place warm and dry.

How to make the Marmalat of Quinces of Orleans.
Take fifteen pounds of Quinces, three pounds of sugar, and two quarts of
water, boil all together; after it is well sod, pass it by little and little
through a napkin, and take out of it what you can; then put your decoction in a
basin with four pounds of sugar, sees it; for to know when it is enough, try
it on a plate, and if it does come off, take it quickly from off the fire, and
set it up in boxes, or somewhere else.

How to make Strawberries.
Take the paste of Massepain, roll it in your hands into the shape of
Strawberries, then dip them in the juice of Barbaries, or of red Corants, and
stir them well; after this, put them in a dish, and dry them before the fire,
and when they are dry, dip them again three or four times in the same juice.

How to make the Caramel.
Melt some sugar with a little water, and let it sees more than for a
conserve; put into it some sirrup of Capilaire, and power all into fresh water.

How to make the Muscadin.
Take the powder of sugar, a little of gum Adragan, which you shall steep in
water of orange flowers, stamp all together, make it into Muscadin, and dry it
afar off before the fire, or at the sun.

How to make Snow paste.
Take powder of sugar, and gum Adragan proportionably, stamp all together;
and put in some good water, then make up your sheet of paste.

How make a cake of Pistaches.
Take half a pound of powder of sugar, a quartern of Pistaches, for one penny
of gum Adragan, and one drop of sweet water; stamp all together, and when the
paste is made, make your cakes of the thickness of a half crown, and bake them
in the oven.

Rasberries preserved.
Make your sirrup with the decoction of Apples, when it is well sod, put your
Rasberries in, give them only one boiling, take them out, and put them where
you will for to keep them.

Quinces liquid.
Take them very yellow, and without spots, cut them into quarters, and sees
them in water, until they be well sod, and very soft; then drain them, and put
your sugar in the same water, which you shall sees a little more than sirrup;
put your Quinces in again, and put in their seeds, taken out first and wrapped
into a linen cloth, for to give them a color, and when they are enough, take
them out.

For to make a composte of Apples.
Take some Pippins, and pare them very smooth, and without spots; if they are
big, cut them into four quarters, if they are small, cut them into halfes, and
take out the seeds, and all other superfluities; as you pare them throw them in
water; and after they are all in, put the water and apples in a pan, with
some sugar, to the proportion of a quartern and a half to eight great apples,
and a little cinnamon; instead of which in winter, when the apples have less
juice, you may put one glass of white wine; boil all until the apples be soft
under your fingers; then take them out piece by piece, and press them between
two spoones, and set them on a plate, then strain your sirrup through a napkin
folded in two; after it is strained, put it in the pan again, for to make a
gelee of it, which you shall know to be sod, if you take some with a small
spoone, and that the drops do fall like small pieces of ice; then take it off
from the fire, and when it is half cold, put it over your apples, that are set
on the plate.

Compost of apples John.
It is made the same way, but that the skin must not be taken off.

How to make the marmalat of apples.
Take ten or twelve apples, pare them and cut them, as you pare them, as far
as the co^^e, and put them into clear water; then take the apples, and the
water wherein they do steep, with half a pound of sugar, or less, if you
will, power them into a pan, sees them, as they sees crush them, least they
should burn; and when there is almost no more water, pass all through a sive;
Take what you have passed, and put it in the same pan again, with the grating
of half a lemon, or orange, before steeped above a quarter of an hour into
some warm water, and strained through a linen cloth, for to know, and take
out the bitterness of it; as they sees, stir always least your marmalat do
burn; you may know that it is sod when it is as into a gelee, and shows
less moistness; and when it is as it ought to be, take it off of the fire,
and spread it with a knife, the thickness of two half crowns.

How to make the compost of pears.
Take what pears you will, so that they be good, pare them, and take out the
seeds, the hardness which is at the head of the pear, and the other
superfluities, as of the apples; If they are big, cut them into halfes or
quarters; if they are small, into three parts; then put them in a pan, with
water, sugar, and some cinnamon; when they are half sod, power into them a
glass of strong red wine, and keep them always covered close, because it
causes them to become red; give them as much seething, or thereabouts, as you
would give to the sirrup of other preserves.

Another way.
Bake some apples in warm cinders, when they are baked, pare them, cut them
into halfes or quarters, according to their higness, and take out the inside;
make a sirrup with sugar, and the juice of a lemon, or the water of orange
flowers; power your pears into this sirrup, and give them one boiling, then
put them on a plate.

How to make marons after the Limosine.
Sees some marons after the ordinary way, when they are sod, peele them, and
in peeling them, flat them a little between your hands; set them on a plate,
and take some water, sugar, and the juice of lemon, or of water of orange
flowers, make a sirrup with it, when it is made, power it boiling upon your
marons, and serve them hot or cold.

Another way.
If you will whiten them, take the white of an egg and some water of orange
flowers, beat them together, dippe your marons into it, and put them in a dish
with some powder of sugar, Roll them until they be covered with it, then dry
them near the fire.

How to make the compost of lemon.
Make a gelee of apples, and sees it, after it is sod, take a big lemon, pare
it very thick, and near the juice, cut it in two, and in length, and divide
these two parts into many slices, take out the seeds, and throw these slices
into your gelee; give it yet ten or twelve boilings, so that your gelee may yet
have its first seething; take it off of the fire, and let it become half cold;
fill a plate with lemon slices, and cover them with your gelee.

How to make the lemon paste.
Take some sugar in powder, and some whites of eggs with a little of the
grating of the flesh of lemon, stamp all together in a mortar, and if perchance
there were too many eggs, put in some flower of sugar, so with stamping you may
bring what is in your mortar into a paste fit to be wrought with; work it
after the ordinary, and your cakes as you will, after the thickness of half a
finger, or less if you will. Bake them upon paper in the oven, or in a tourte
pan, with fire above and under, with mediocritie. Have a care that they become
not yellow, and as soon as you do perceive that they begin to take that color
take them out, for they are enough.

How to make the biscuit of Sav^y.
Take six yolks, and eight whites eggs, with one pound of sugar in powd^^
three quarters of a pound of good flower made of good wheat, and some anise
seed, beat all well together, and boil it; make a paste neither too soft nor
too hard, if it is too soft, you may mix with it some flower of sugar, for to
harden it; when it is well proportioned, put it into moules of white tin made
for the purpose; and then bake them half in the oven; when they are half
baked, take them out, and moisten them at the top with the yolks of eggs; after
that put them in the oven again; for to make an end of baking; when they are
so baked that they are not too much burned, nor too soft, take them out, and
set them in a place which is neither too cool, nor too dry.

FINIS.
(...) foote-steps are not known, Psalm. 77.19.

To this good and great God (from whose Ocean you borrow your Streams) I
recommend you and all yours, both by Sea and Land, humbly desiring him to bind
up your Soul in the bundle of Life, to let the blessing of him that was ready
to perish come upon you (as Job 29.13.) The LORD Register you into the number
of those whose bowels yearn to the distressed, whose hands open to the
Afflicted, and whom none is able to reward, but He, who has most and deserves
All, yet is contented with a little in sincerity, in whom I rest,

Your Honors often engaged And still indebted, Nathanael Church.

Prevention to the Reader.
FRiends, do not think that these brief Sentences were drawn out of those
Texts of Scripture quoted after them. For the Sayings were written some years
before any quotations were made. And those places of Script. were only set
down to show how near these rational Maxims come to divine verity, and how
near Kin Faith and Reason are.

I call my Fathers Golden sayings, and my own Silver, because his have the
priority not only of Time, but also of Estimate: and besides mine excel his in
nothing but number, as Children do the Parents, and as Stars do the Sun and
moon.

As for my own Sentences, they have little or nothing in them that I have
begged, or borrowed. Nay I fear, it will be said, that they have too much of my
self in them. But though they are like the Cobweb, spun out of my own bowels,
yet some of them well applied may stench a bleeding conscience.

They are most of them common Notions, but never the worse for that: For the
Sun, the Day, the Air, the Fire, the Water, the Earth and the Gospel are not
the worse for being common, but the better. Boni proprium est esse commune.
It Is proper to that which is good to be common: And that which does good to many,
is more excellent and more divine then that, that does good to one only.

They are Trilineals, or three lines a piece (most of them) and so more
portable for the memory. Not being some of them 2. lines, and some half a
page.

They are Pentad's, or just five in a page: so that a man, though straightened
in Time, notwithstanding may read to a Period presently, and carry a Theme to
think on with him, as an Antidote against worse thoughts.

The very blanck spaces between them will prove advantageous to one that has
any good husbandry, for there he may interscribe any other compendious
Apothegme, at pleasure and liesure.

As for my failings, I hope they will prove either but ordinary, or but few.
But I could wish this were the worst use I had made of my Pen, I hope it is not
the best.

And he that every day does mend,
Shall sure be perfect in the End.
Much good may they do thee, who ever thou art, Friend, or Foe, so says He,
who is in his prayers to God for thee,

Thine, whether thou will or no, N. C.

To the Reader.
READER, Thou Have here a little Cabinet
Of Jewels rare: a precious Ring be set
With richest Stones: a Nose-gay that does yield
A sweet and fragrant Smell. Each common Field
Has not such Flowers as these. To tell thee true,
Here Is nothing does accost thee, but what is new.
These are not Foreign provebs Englished:
No sure: they are all Britains born and bredd.
READER, thou wilt say, having read the Adag'es,
The Author's MASTER OF THE SENTENCES.
Edw: Hicks. M. A. utriusque Academiae.

To the Reader.
REader, Thou Have here a birth, which as I gather,
For it is conception ows to Son and Father.
An Issue which for'ts Mid-wifery does stand
Mixtly indebted both to Sea and Land.
A lawful Prize. But o the Devil of Gain!
One Pocket now two Churches can contain!
Well. Yet beware thou, how thy Censure blots
The Author: there is no Church without its spots.
He Is a Nathanael, credit me, and I Will
Avouch, when he wrote these, there was no guile
Possessed his heart. Come, show thy self to be
A Friend to Church, and I Will be so to thee.
But if thou have a place for wonder fit,
Give it the CHURCH and COMMONWEALTH of WIT.
C. F. M. A.


Authoris Amicus ad Lectorem.
MUch Profit, Wisdom, Learning in Few Words,
This Small, this Cheap, this Useful Tract affords.
On any Page vouchsafe to cast thine Eye.
And if thou can not like it, cast it by.
How e're despise not this Sententious Shoole;
Lest thou be sentenced a Censorious Fool.
Reader whatever, if thou honest be:
It merits to keep Company with thee.
Will: Bodham.

To his Ingenuous Friend Mr. Nathanael Church on His Pocket-Companion.
Whilst thou wast toss't upon the waving Maine,
Me-thought Noe's Arc was floating once again.
Thy Friends on Land were troubled much for thee,
To prove their Churches visibilitie.
Now if I want thy good society,
Thy Book meanwhile shall my Companion be.
Where whiles thy Hand speaks to mine Eye: so here
Mine eye becomes thy Hands Interpreter.
If great Books be great Evils, thou have shown
A remedy: Thine's but a little one.
Since Coyn's grown scant, 'twas wisely done by thee,
To keep our Pockets from vacuity.
Tho: Ford.

Author ad patrem jam 17. annos defunctum.
WEll, I Will drop one Encomiasticke, rather
Then by a Clownish silence robb my Father.
Lest, if by me that name be vilifi'd,
I Am named sacrilegious parricide.
Though Him to praise, there needs no Pains, or Skill,
Of whom his very Foes could not speak ill.
Here needs no Flourishes, go, cunning Pates,
Go, sleep: His own works prays him in the Gates.
(Nay all the Rhetoric I can devise
Is bist to multiply Tautologies.)
His Theologick Miscellanies can
Him studious prove, to know both GOD and MAN.
His Coffer long ago is dead and rotten:
The Good man's Treasure must not be forgotten.
His Christian letters most Elaborate,
Now out of print, I Would buy at any Rate.
Meane-while I will be thankful, not repine,
My Fathers Gold and Silver both are Mine.
N. C. (...) H. C. (...).

(...)
