THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD Unfolded, and Applied.

Wherein are handled The 1 Life Of GOD. 2 Perfection Of GOD. 3 Holiness Of GOD.
4 Benignity Of GOD. 5 Mercy Of GOD. 6 Truth Of GOD. 7 Wisdom Of GOD. 8 Power
Of GOD. 9 Justice Of GOD. 10 Love Of GOD. 11 Hatred Of GOD. 12 Anger Of GOD. 13
Independencie Of GOD. 14 Simplicity Of GOD. 15 Eternity Of GOD. 16
Infiniteness Of GOD. 17 Immutability Of GOD. 18 Immensity Of GOD.


Delivered in sundry SERMONS, at Tavistocke in Devon: By THOMAS LARKHAM,
Preacher of the Word of God, and Pastor of the Congregation there.

Divided into Three Parts.

They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, Psalm: 9.10. LONDON:
Printed for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the Marygold in Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

Dignissimis and Reverendis Theologiae in Academia CANTABRIGIENSI
Professoribus, gratiam and pacem in Christo sempiternam.
NEque tanti sunt (viri amplissimi) chartae meae, neque author ego,
pauperrimus, indoctus and mere edentulus, vix ulli noto notus; ut votis
undiquaque dignissimis and (...) ornatissimis, illas vel me ipsum commendare
aut praesentare praesumerem. Et videar forte praefrictae frontis and oris
nimium impudentis vos inani meo Epistolio turbare. Sed quoniam, cum me,
quamplurimis Dei boni and patris mei in Jesu Christo beneficiis and
benedictionibus refertum, and a multis and magnis meis inimicis liberatum,
componerem, ut ea quae de hoc omnipotenti, omniscio and incomprehensibili
Jehova persensissem, public and palam docerem and evulgarem; in veni tot and
tanta doctissimorum auribus non indigna, religios^ssimorum cordibus valde
consolatoria, and omnibus Christianis cujuscunque gradus ordinis and
conditionis tam utilia; ut non potui, tot and tanta gloriosa, paucis verbis
comprehendere; quin ut ab uno ad alterum Dei optimi maximi attributum
procederem, manu quasi de Coelo porrecta, perductus fui. Et cum tandem totum
annum de his sequentibus Octodecem Dei divinis nominibus sive attributis
consumsissem, eaque in Ecclesia parochiali (ut dicunt) Tavistocensi apud
Devonienses multis praelectionibus fin^ssem; partim ex rogatu auditorum
benevolorum, partime^ opprobriis, convitiis and calumnii: mate volorum
quorundum in Theologia Tyronum provocatus, me ipsum and hoc qualecunque opus,
levidense satis (fateor) and tenuiculum, Ecclesiae Christi prostituere decrevi.
Quod and (ut videtis) feci tandem. Et quamvis long infra gravitatem vestram
and dignitatem subsidere scio, spero tamen* ab (...) vestram veniam potius quam
ab (...) censuram me habiturum. Homuncionibus ingenii prurientis placere non
desidero? Plutarch: vita Alexandri
nec Momo nec Zoilo displicere curo. Regium est audire male quum been facias,
inquit Rex ille magnus: ideoque obtrectatores maledicos non moror. Tribunal
vestro (gravissimi patres) hunc tractatum humiliter, non tam ad docendum vos,
quam ad corrigendum a vobis, praesento. Verberent me homines audaciae calumnia,
modo vos me benign ubi lapsus fui corripiatis and retundatis. Errare possum,
haereticus esse nolo, spero hanc Academiam (Deus aspiret hoc votum) in
perpetuum pulchrae protis parentem fore, and invictos pugiles veritatis in
promptu semper hahituram. Deus vos dirigat in viam suam sicut jam and olim, and
ab omni errore sartos tectosque servet. Hoc unum in votis restat, ut audaciae
meae parcatis, and in bonam partem accipere dignemini hoc observantiae
testimonium Pusilli, almae matris Cantabrigiensis quondam alumni, and
dignitates vestras semper plurimum honorantis.

E musaeolo meo Tavistocensi in Comitatu Devon. T: L.

Ad amicum and fratrem suum reverendum in Domino, authorem hujus operis.
Thomas Larkamius
-- At hamo
Sim klarus. --
QVid si non alio sim Nomine klarus? at hamo
Sim clarus, mihi sat nominis illud erit.
Larkhamus si sim, si sim Diu vixit Oppidi hujus nominis in Comitatu Devon.
Northamus ab hamo
Gloria quaerenda est, non aliunde, mihi.
Det Deus ut faelix semper mihi pendeat hamus,
Quo possim pisces carpere Christ tuos.
Sint aliis alii donis (nil renuo) clari,
Vt mihi fit faelix hamus, id ipse precor.
J: W.

Ejusdem.
Currenti calamo parcat Larkhamus, and hamo
(Si mea vota valent) clarior esse queat.
(Si mea quid valiant vota) beatus erit.
Ejusdem, Anagr. aliud. L. and k omissis
Thomas Larkhamius.
Hamo artis hamus --
HAmo artis Christi precor (oh!) jungatur ut hamus,
Ars humana Dei fulta sit art precor.
Hamus erat Petro, nihil at cepisset, ab alto
Ni servo Dominus suppeditasset opem.
Jactus at ille semel, Christo mandante (quis unquam
Crederet?) innumeris piscibus actus erat.
Sic Larkhame tuo si Christi jungitur hamus,
Ars divina arti si quoque juncta tuae,
Innumeros capies (mihi credito) nec mora, pisces,
Hamus ut immensa mole gravatus erit.
Ergo preces precibus jungantur, ut hamus ab hamo
Divino humanus vim sibi quaerat.
AMEN
To the Reader whomsoever.
ALthough (so far as I know mine own deceitful heart) I differ with none but
such as differ with Christ; yet are there many differences between me and many,
even some of them such as are eminently holy. And many times I am apt to think
that they do not deal well with me, nor as it becomes christians: yea sometimes
I express so much, but it little moves discourse of them, for the Lord has
hid me from them; it would be to me even an heartbreaking affliction, were it
not that my hope is that God will uncover me again in due time, and give me
favor in the eyes of his excellent ones, in whom is all my delight. This
following Treatise is the substance of diverse Sermons preached by me in a time
of great troubles, when innumerable evils came upon me, which much dejected me:
I confess I wanted a Luther to chide me; for that holy champion writing to
Melancthon a godly learned man, yet too much dejected, has these words, I
vehemently hate those most miserable cares, wherewith thou art even consumed;
it is not the greatness of the cause, but of our unbelief; if the cause be
false, let us give it over, if true, why do we make him, (to wit, God) a liar
in so great promises? strive against thy self the greatest enemy, etc. and
although the difference be great between him and me, and (as many whom I
cannot but love and honor may think) between his cause and mine; yet I humbly
crave leave to affirm that it is evident to me it is the same, though not by me
so well, discreetly, and inoffenssively managed. For much of trouble comes by my
differing in judgment from some, whose lives I cannot tax; and although they do
mine; yet if hearsay and jealousies did not too much prevail, and men would
take up no more for truth then what is proved, I would stand higher in the
hearts of some ( I am confident) then now I do. But for the greater part of
mine enemies (which are to me yet far less grievou^) they are the profane and
ungodly, which are enemies to all such as truly fear God.

If it should be the will of my gracious Father to call me out of this mortal
life, as things now stand with me and concerning me, I should not dye esteemed,
nor much regarded by such as have been my great friends formerly, and shall by
me still be numbered among the best of men. It is not my lot alone to be less
beloved of such as were best loved of me. God will stain the pride of flesh:
Nos quoque flor^imus. I make of that Distich written to famous Bishop Jewel:
Olim discipulus mihi parve Juelle, fuisti.
Nunc ero discipulus te renuente, tenus.


It Is pretty (for all that) to see how gravely some young men (born since the
Lord put me in the Ministry first) do carry themselves. Surely the British
British Priests mentioned by Bid, would be ready to think and say of them as
the old Eremite had taught them concerning Austin the Monk, sent over by the
Pope to reduce the Clergy of England to the Romish yoke: But I hope the Lord
will keep me from a discontented spirit, and envious eye. Though I am low and
under many afflictions, yet blessed be God that it goes so well with his
people for the generality as it does, and with the public. The consideration
of that I trust, will quiet my grumbling soul, and swallow up my private
afflictions, which are many, and have been of so long continuance, and are like
to continue so long as any limb or part of Antichrist (though but his little
toe) remains. But come what will, my mercies are, will be more then my
afflictions, yet I wish mine advanced (once I durst call them) brethren, would
not be too rigid beyond rule. Arbitrary power has not stood long in any; let
laws be observed toward us as we are Commoners, and Christ's rules as we are
Christians and Brethren; and then some others as well as I, that have shared in
the common afflictions of Gods people, and the common wealth; and have been in
the number of instruments made use of by God in the day of Jacobs trouble; shall
find fairer dealing then we do. It is not meant that the earth should cover
our blood, or you wink at our sins; but that you would not make your selves
wiser then known wholesome Laws, nor more righteous in matters of religious
concernment, then the perfect rule of Christians, the Scriptures of God do
require and warrant you in. I confess it was very grievous to me, that had
been so tossed from post to pillar, in the time of the Prelacy, put into
Star Chamber and High Commission at one time. A Petition delivered to the Kings
own hand against me with twenty four terrible Articles annexed, importing
Faction, Heresy, Witchcraft, Rebellion and treason: Articles in the consistory
at Exeter, at the same time under a suit of pretended slander for reproving an
atheistical wretch, by that name of Atheist at the same time: Purssevants, or
messengers, one upon the back of another, no less then five at several times:
Now when the Lord had given his people rest, and advanced some to places of
power, to be dealt withal more illegally and irregularly then in those sad
times before hinted. But I confess it was by such as either then were in their
Coats, or under the Schoolmasters Ferula; or dawbing with untempered mortar,
and serving the times, if they were then come into the world in employments.
How do thou my Brother? and Hail Master, cannot choose but run in my mind,
when I consider how one Cringed to me, and after thanked me for my pains I took
upon an occasion, etc. and yet secretly had an information of above twelve
years age, to make me Odious: O my God, lay it not to his charge: And although
I have not so great a portion in wealth or honor, as many (once far below me)
have attained unto; yet I acknowledge God is aforehand with ^e abundantly. I
have swimmed through a sea of mercies, and shall not that Ocean swallow a few
discourteous dealings? This God (whom I here hold forth under such glorious
attributes as the Scripture gives him) is my God, and was my (iminently godly)
Fathers God, even while he lived, and I have great cause to say, he is already
my childrens God, and I trust will be the God of (not only) them, but their
children also, even so, Amen.

This Treatise, comes under many disadvantages unto the view of the reader.
Notes taken, of what was publicly preached, only over-looked by me, the
looked and over-seen Author; in nothing more (in a manner) then in suffering
such notes to be made public in such a queasy stomached age: delivered by me
unworthy creature, as God gave in. Badly written out for the Press, which has
caused mistakes of one word for another very often, besides mispointings and
mistakes of letters, (which I much weigh not, because such faults are as easily
amended as espied: I my self at my home, many scores of miles, whiles it was
printing, so that I could not view the sheets as they came out of the Press:
what shall I say; Infaelix, habitum temporis hujus, habet: it comes forth in an
habit suitable to the Authors present condition; I am contented to be a sufferer
in Printing, as well as in Preaching. And yet I am of an opinion some will get
some good; and may make use of this rough-hewed untrimed piece: There was great
calling upon me for it, by many that heard it, before I could be persuaded to
give it a let-passe: And now that it is abroad, God grant, that no spirit of
prejudice against the Authors person, may hinder the profiting any reader
hereof; It is a subject I confess, some have written of already, which yet I
saw not (all at least) until mine was finished: And I perceive I have rambled
in a method of mine own, being very apt to step aside to speak with any God
sends my spirit unto in my preaching: as the reader will quickly perceive. But
it is as it is. Quod factum est infectum fieri nequis. Charge not on me the
mistaken words or sentences, the mispointings and faults in Orthography, which
abound, but correct with thy Pen, or cover with thy candid ingenuity, what thou
find amiss: As for such, as are ready to deprave the labors of others,
though they cannot or will not produce better of their own: I wish them better
spirits; without paying so dear for their follys as I have for mine. And so I
commend this Treatise to Gods blessing and thy favor; And if thou will needs
have low thoughts of it, or of the Author, know that thou come too late to be
the first in order of that sort of men, among whom is first and chiefest
already.

Tho. Larkham.

The Contents of the First Part, the chief Points handled therein.
The first ATTRIBUTE. The Life of God.
THat the Attributes of God are either communicable or incommunicable, and the
Authors intent to speak only of the first. page 1. Of communicable attributes
something analogical is found in the creature. ibid The essence of God made out
by them from effects and workings. ibid These attributes are not in God
accidents, etc. ibid. Way made to the text taken out of Heb. 3.12. page 2 That
an evil heart of unbelief, is the fountain of all evil ibid. That faith is a
divine grace, that does submit to the command of believing, and does give glory
to God, page 3. That a heart possessed with unbeleif, is an evil heart and
causes men to depart from the living God, ibid. That all creatures are present
with God; and in what sense unbelievers depart from God, ibid. There are two
sorts of performances, and three sorts of positive duties 4. Not to come to
Christ, is to depart from Christ, ibid. That God is a living God and in what
respect, 4.5. There are three sorts of quick or living creatures, ibid. That
the reasonable soul does live out of the body, 7. What an Angel is, ibid. What
life is in God and what is understood in him thereby, 8. That no words are full
enough to set out the nature of God 9. Things or Properties about and of the
life of God.
1 Life not attributed to God and creatures univocally, but analogically. 2 God
has life complete, nothing is wanting to his life. 3 He has life of
himself, yea the very nature of life, not only the life of operation, which
creatures also have. 4 No end propounded to God by another in his life. 5 Every
thing understood is life in God. 6 Gods life infinitely transcends the life of
creatures. 7 Gods life is best to be known by negation. 9, 10, 11.
Uses of this doctrine of the life of God. 13. Use 1. That he is worth the
coming unto and keeping. ib. It is here showed what it is to draw near unto
and remain with the living God. 14. Use 2. That life is of precious account
with God, and that it is a great sin to abuse it. 15. That such abuse life, as,
1. Neglect to save it in regard of themselves or others. 2. Such as destroy
life in regard of themselves or others. ibid.
That men are negligent of their own life by 1. Carelessenesse to avoid
dangers. 2. Idleness and laziness. 3. Coveteousnesse of the life of others*
both Corporal and Spiritual. p. 16.
That life is destroyed,
1. By violent rushing upon dangers. 2. By immoderate eating, and drinking, and
surfeiting. 3. By satisfying libidinous desires. 4. By wicked practices casting
them into the hand of the Magistrate. 5. By an unquiet restless spirit. 6.
From a principle of Idolatry or Superstition. 7. By active malice. 8. By over
earnestness to avoid troubles. 9. Upon disapointment of hope by grief. p. 17,
18, 19, 20.
That men abuse life, not only in regard of their bodies and temporal
enjoyments but in regard of their souls. p. 21. That they are to be reproved
that abuse the lives of others both of their bodies and sou^^ (...) this is
done, ibid. Use. 3. That it is a worthy thing (...) life, ibid. Use. 4. To be
careful of life our own others. of the body of the soul
Page 22. Three Motives to move hereunto, Page. 22. 23. The second proposition
that life is a communicable Attribute, and diverse Uses made of it 1. That men
be thankful and live to the glory of God. p. 24. 2. Not to vex our selves with
carking and caring. 3. To take notice of this benefit and improve it, and here
are three Motives. 1. It is just. 2. It is necessary 3. It is profitable.
p. 25, 26. Three ways life improved to Gods glory,
1. By shunning sin and sinful ways. ib. 2. By setting our selves to the
works of holiness and righteousness. 27 3. To provoke others to good works.
ibid.
The third Proposition that God in this attribute of life is infinite and
incomprehensible. ibid. Reasons, 1. His life is independent. 2. It is his whole
essence, 3. In respect hereof, he is eternal.
28. Use 1. No want in God 2. God can give life both Temporal, Eternal.
3. Admire Gods excellency in this Attribute of To be humble, lively in
service, and to rely upon him, p. 29

The Second Attribute. Is the Perfection or natural Goodness of God.
THat Goodness is either created or increated, page 30. That in God it
signifies Natural goodness, Moral goodness, and beneficence or bounty,
ibid. That the Text Exodus 33.19. is meant of Gods natural goodness 31 The
dependency and interpretation of the words, 32. That goodness as it signifies
perfection, is an attribute of God, 33. That this Attribute comprehends all
other attributes, etc. ibid. Two arguments used to demonstrate this attribute
of God, 34. Four Reasons out of Dyonisius, etc. ibid. Use 1. That God is the
Author of all perfection, 35. Every Creature is good By Creation, By Ordination.
36 The nature of sin lies not in the action, but in the manner, 37 God is the
Creator and Ordainer of every action, whether it be good or evil. ibid. Use 2.
This truth is to be treasured up, admirable effects will follow, 38 He that
sees Gods perfections must need run to him, ibid. Use 3. Woe to such as seek not
to this perfection for happiness, ib. Use 4. Learn to build handsomely upon this
ground, 39 That this attribute is communicable, 41 That perfection in a strict
sense is that to which nothing can be added, 42 Use 1. That all things in the
world are good, 43 Use 2. Let none find fault with the works of God, ibid. Use
3. Go to God for all goodness and perfection, 44. That God is Infinite and
incomprehensible in goodness, 45 Use 1. Take heed how ye meddle with this
perfect God, ibid. Use 2. None has done any thing for the Lord, but by
himself, 46 Use 3. See the folly of such as seek happiness from creatures,
ibidem Use 4. Comfort to such as have made perfection their portion, 47.
The Third Attribute. The Holiness of God.
THat a thing is said to be holy when it is separated from common use to the
service of God, Page. 48. That (Secondly) holiness signifies purity, 49. None
properly can be said to be holy in this life, 50. He is holy whose affections
and manners agree to Gods eternal Law, 51. That in both the acceptations of
the word holy, holiness is a good ground of worshipping God, 52. Three
propositions spoken of touching this Attribute, ibid. 1. That holiness is an
Attribute of God, ibid. That as wise actions come out of Gods head, so holy
ones come out of his heart, 53. That the reason we love God no more, is because
we know him no better, ibid. God most conjoined to himself, must needs be
holy, ibid. God is holy in regard of his purity, yet without regard to an
eternal Law to be measured by, ibid. God said to be holy five manner of ways,
among schoolmen, 54. What it is to be holy radically and objectively, ibid.
What it is to be holy, exemplarily and formally, 55. God is holy in his works
two manner of ways, ibid. All the actions of God proceed from a spirit of
holiness, 56. The formality of Saints holiness is their love to God and Christ,
ibid. God must needs hate sin, as contrary to his eternal Law, ibid. And as
repugnant to his goodness, and how it is so repugnant. ibid. Four evidences of
Gods hating sin, 57. 58. 59 God is holy causalty, as the fountain, etc ibid.
God is the efficient formal exemplary and final cause of all, holiness in
the creature, 59. 60. Use. 1. Holiness not to be contemned, 61. Use. 2. God must
needs delight in holy persons, 62. Use. 3. Such as would become acceptable to
God must labor to become holy persons, ib. Motives to labor for holiness, 63.
2. Doct. That holiness is communicable to mankind, 64. Reasons or arguments to
make it good, ibid. Use 1. The true cause that many want holiness, is in
themselves and not in God, 65 Use. 2. Such as desires holiness may have it, etc.
ibid. Use. 3. To provoke to holy desires and endeavors, with diverse Motives
besides this Doctrine, 66. etc. 1. God commands it. 2. Directs what to do to
obtain it. 3. Has promised that they that ask shall have, etc. 4. Without it
we cannot see God. 5. We have excellent Coppies God and Christ. 6. The
Scriptures left to be a means of sanctification. 7. We have many outward
favors to allure us.
Two means to be used 1. Prayer, 2. To study this Doctrine,
68. That holiness is the renovation of the whole man. That secondly it is a
giving up our selves to God. That holiness is the better seen by its contrary
the old man and the former conversation thereof. Where in the old man stands
many particulars Page. 69. Another (to wit, an eighth) Motive, to labor for
holiness, 70. That holy men are the lest fearing men. ibid. Diverse instances of
the truth of his Motive, 71. That wicked men are called Magor Missabib. ibid.
3. D. That God is infinitely and incomprehensibly holy, 72. Three reasons
hereof: and Use. 1. That therefore men in seeking for holiness cannot exceed
measure, ibid Use. 2. That God will bear up holiness against all the world. 73.
Use. 3. They that will imitate God must never stand at a stay in holiness. Fifth
Motive to labor for more holiness, 74.75, The more holiness 1. The more
perfection. 2. The more comfort. 3. The more boldness. 4. The more acquaintance
with God. 5. The more glory in heaven.

The fourth Attribute The Benignity or useful goodness of God.
THat Goodness, benignity, usefullnes, is an attribute of God, p. 77. That Gods
goodness is communicated in a double sense, naturally to his only begotten
son, freely unto creatures, 78. That although it be natural in God to be
good, yet the acts of his goodness are free, 80. It is declared what the
benignity of God is, 81. That there was but one necessary and natural act of
greatness in God, to wit, the communicating of his whole essence to the son,
ibid. Gods goodness is General to all creatures. Special to mankind. Singular
to his Church.
p. 81, 82. That no evil is comparable to that of being without Christ, nor no
good, to the being in the number of redeemed ones, 84. Use. 1. That hurtful
dispositions and michievous natures must needs be displeasing to God, because
contrary to Gods disposition. ibid. Use. 2. It must needs be pleasing to God,
for men to be ready and willing to do good to every body, 85. To do good to all
is to walk in the fear of God, 86. Use. 3. To stir up all to become like
unto God, to be full of goodness. God is worth the imitating, ibid. Such as will
approve themselves good men must make it their study how to be most profitable,
this is a first advice, 86.87. Under this first direction are 2. things, 1. Not
to take delight in sinfully practices and courses, 2. Not to take delight in
others troubles and sorrows, 88. A second direction to labor to be cured of
froward dispositions, ibid. Five Motives to stir up to the doing of good. 1.
It is commanded. 2. It is excellent. 3. God will reward. 4. The contrary
threatened. 5. It may be done, and this proportion may be had. p. 89.
The second Doctrine, that goodness is a communicable attribute. Reasons or
demonstrations it was communicated at first, it is restored in regeneration. 90
it is commanded therefore. 91.
Use. 1. That men are unusefull and mischievous, is not to be charged upon God.
92 Use 2. Such as desire to be good, are in great possibility of it, ib. Use 3.
Seek it at the hands of God by prayer, 93 Motives upon this direction. Other
directions given touching this matter. 94 Three other Motives for conclusion of
this Point, 95 The third Doctrine, That God in goodness is Infinite and
incomprehensible, ibid.
Reasons 1. God is Summum bonum, 2. not subject to provocation 3. He is not
hindered from doing good to others by carking care, etc. 96. 4. he is
alsufficient every way. 97
Use 1. No man alive has cause to complain of God. ibid. Murmuring against
God under afflictions condemned. 3. Remedies given. 1. to consider that sin
causes evils. 2. other attributes must take place. 3. evils befalling Saints
are from the depth of goodness in God. ibid.
Use 2. Sinners and distressed souls are encouraged to come to God. 98. 5.
Particulars named in the close of the point. 1. come away and taste that the
Lord is gracious. 2. run to this infinite goodness in distresses. 3. be like
unto God in doing good. 4. be like God in the extent of goodness. 5. especially
to the Saints.
The Fifth Attribute. The Mercy of God.
THat mercy is Attributed to God, proved. p. 100. What mercy is in man, showed
at large. ib. Whether mercy be a distinct virtue from goodness and love. 101.
Distinct definitions given of goodness, love and mercy, 102. That mercy in God
signifies, 1. His inclination to show mercy. 2. The effects of this
inclination,
103 Gods mercy is, general to all creatures, special to mankind, more
special to the elect,
104 Three things in the general mercy of God to creatures, ib. The mercies of
God extended in this life reduced to 5. heads 105 Rewarding, Pardoning,
preventing, delivering, sparing, ib. Four degrees of sparing mercy in God, Not
punishing at all, 106 Deferring 107 Moderation and rebates 107 Groaning in
whipping, 108
That God spared not Christ at all, and why, showed in two Reasons, 109 Diverse
effects and acts of mercy, 1. the Incarnation of Christ, ib. 2. the Revelation
of Gods mind by him, 111
That the world was full of ignorance and sin, when Christ came, ib 3. Christ
given, a Copy for all good life and conversation, 112. 4. Freedom from the
guilt of sin, 113 from liking and lying in sin, 114
5. Freedom from eternal destruction, ib. 6. The grace of Adoption, in which
four Things are considered,
The state God has taken us from. The state to which he has brought us. The
good which thereupon we do expect. The means whereby this is effected. 115 7.
The benefits of all Christ's Merits, 116 8. The pouring out of the spirit of
grace, 117 9. The sweetness of Ordinances, ibid. 10. Particular
vouchsafements, 118 11. Communion with God, 116 12. Life everlasting, ibid.

Use 1. Then mankind is miserable, 120 Use 2. Not to despair in our afflictions
and Miseries, 121 Use 3. Nor of salvation though we fall into grievous sins,
122 Use 4. Let us render unto God the honor due unto his name, 123 Four things
are due to God. 1 To be mindful of his mercies, 124 2 Love to God, who is
worthy of it, 125 3 We should yield obedience and service to God, ibid. 4 The
praises of God should be in our mouths, ibid.
Use 5. Let us be merciful as our father which is in heaven is merciful, 126
Here are three Motives, 1 Such shall find mercy, 2 Their seed are blessed, 3
It is attainable if you desire it, ibid.
The second Proposition, That Mercy is Communicable, ibid. Made good by three
Reasons, ibidem Use 1. Unmercifull men want a very glorious and commendable
thing, ibid Illustrated in four thing, 1 They are wicked every way 1 They are
Covetous 2 Unbelievers 3 They have not the love of God 4 This sin has much
cruelty, 127
2 They are cursed persons, 3. They are unlike God, 4. Unmercifulness bars
audience of Prayers, 128 5. Unmercifulness is a kind of Murder, 129 6. It is
a shrewd sign of Reprobation, ibid. 7. Their end doleful that have no Mercy,
ib.
Use 2. An exhortation to be merciful as God is merciful, ibid. Three
Motives, 1. It is a blessed thing, 2. Ye give to Christ, 3. God will not die in
your debt, 130.
Three directions given for the obtaining this merciful property, ibid. The
third proposition of the infinitnes, etc. of Gods Mercy, 131 Many admirable
sayings of Gods mercy, 1. God enclines to it, 2. It is delightful to him, 3.
He does multiply to show mercy, 4. He will be exalted to show mercy, Lastly, It
is his proper work, 132
Use 1. Then there is no want of Mercy in God. 133 Use 2. Let us trust in this
merciful God for ever, 134 Choice mercies are not to be found out of the
Church, 135 Unbelivers are flatly excluded from these mercies, 136
The Sixth Attribute, Of the Truth of God.
THe diverse acceptations of the word Truth, and the several words used to wit
Kosht or Keshet and Emunatho. p. 137. That truth generally signifies the
conformity of a thing to its rule. ib. That there are two Positive properties
of an entity, to wit, truth and goodness. 138. That unity is not a property of
an entity, and why not. ib. That Gods being is a fundamental verity, not a
conformity, etc. ib. That the word truth is used for conformity of knowledge
to its object, 142. That an enunciation logical, cannot be true of what is
metaphysically false, 143. That formal truth in God is from the objective truth
of his essence. ib. That truth descends from God into creatures by revelation
and divine illustration, but in God it is not so, who is the first formal
truth, 144. Certain questions are propounded touching Arminian tenants ib. In
things that are not in esse, there is not properly truth. 145. That things are
said to be in posse, in a double respect, and how. ibid. That divine knowledge
is not terminated to things existing, but is extended to futuritious and
possibles. 146 That God avoucheth logical truths without the least error
ibid. Use 1. We must take heed of receiving truths hand over head, etc. ibid.
And as of falsi^ies so also of misapplied truths take heed. ibid. A third
acceptance of truth according to the word used in the text. ibid. Doct. That
truth and faithfullnes is an Attribute of God. ibid. 2. Reasons given. 1. God
has no after thoughts. 2. Punishes faithfulness in others. 147.
Gods faithfullnes and truth is either in regard of manners, promises.
148. Use 1. Let the people of God be confident upon this truth of God. 149.
Use 2. For reproof our doubtings of Gods truth and faithfulness. ibid. That
gracious ones sometimes are apt to question Gods truth, etc. ibid.
Misunderstanding or misaplying promises causes this, ibid. That some Promises
are made with condition and limitation, ibid. That promises are misaplyed
sometimes to persons. to state and behavior.
150. Use 3. Let sinners know that the God of truth has threatened. 151 Use 4.
Let us learn to be like God, to be men of truth, ibid. That truth in man has
relation 1 To God, 2 To Man.
152 2. Proposition, That truth is a Communicable attribute, ibid. Two Objects
about this point answered, 153 Use 1. The fault is not in God, that men are
falls and faithless, ib. 2. We must learn to seek for this quality of truth, at
the hand of of God by Prayer. 154 3. Honest men may take comfort in that they
are like God, to wit, men of truth. ibidem Third proposition, truth in God is
infinite and incomprehensible. ibidem. Use 1. To bear up the spirit of Saints
against all false dealings in men, God is faithful infinitely: 155. Use 2. A
cooling card to all such as have not made God their portion. 156.
Reader, Correct with thy Pen these faults, in the First Part.
PAge 8. line 7. read flows, p: 11. l. 32. r. is, p. 28. l. 33. r. at, p. 29.
l. 6. r. does l. 15. r. see, p. 35. marg. r. (...), l. 34 r. none, p. 36, l. 4.
r. by and in, l. words, p. 37.24. in sin besides, p. 38. l. 26. God (says one)
p. 42. mar. (...), p. 43. r. 43. summis negatum est aliquid addi, p. 45. marg.
ejus, p. 58. l. 1. miseries, l. 5. they, l. 39. extingui, p. 60. l. 11. then,
p. 63. l. 28. see, is not by nature, l. 31. are of a, p, 68. l. 4. kindness, l.
10. and so Paul, p. 70 l. 3. instrument, marg. eighth, p. 71. l. magor, p. 72.
l. 8. infinite, p. 73. l. 31. stature, 76. marg. peregrinabitur, l. 36. now, p.
78. l. 11. he is not so at all, p. 81. l. 18. produce to any, p. 94. l. 31.
Heb. 12.24, p. 95.21. that those curses, p. 96. l. 20. do revenge p. 105. l.
25. preventing, p. 117. l. 8. wholly: p, 118. marg. Luthers sentence quite
spoild, p. 132. l. 30. Perazin, marg. habet, p. 144. l. 28. intuitive, p. 147.
l. 9. dependency, p. 151. l. 18. one would, p. 152.23. unworthy.

OF THE LIFE OF GOD
Heb: 3.12. Take heed Brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God.
IT has pleased God (in whose hands is our breath, The first communicable
attribute of God.
and life, and all our ways) to put it into my mind to spend this Evening
hour in giving out some glimpses of his hidden self, as he shall be pleased to
enable me. Attributa dividuntur. in (...) and (...). Scharpius cur^^ Theol: 185*
This piece of the Lords day therefore is destinated to a discourse of the
Attributes of God, which are either incommunicable, or communicable. My purpose
is not (at least not yet) to meddle with the incommunicable Attributes of God,
but only with those that are communicable to the Creature.

I shall premise some General things.

First, that these communicable Attributes are such as of which something
anological is to be found in Creatures, I do not mean that those Attributes of
God are themselves communicated to other things, but that the like effects are
beheld in Creatures.

2ly. That these Attributes (called communicable) do make out unto us the
Divine Essence from effects, and workings of God

3ly. Essentiam divinam a posterior^:
That all these following Attributes are to be accounted (as the highest
incommunicable Attributes are) to be true of God, most simply, infinitely,
eternally, incomprehensibly, and immutably. And not as in Creatures, accidents,
diverse, finite, Ad nostrum tautum captum Deus haec nomina diversa sibi ^ribuit.
imperfect, and mutable. God is one most simple and infinite Essence.

The first that I shall speak of is of the Attribute of life, which seems to be
the first in order. This is communicated to the sons of Men (with other
creatures) not only the knowledge thereof, and of the other Attributes
communicable; for so the incommunicable ones also are imparted to the sons of
Men to be known, and considered by them: But the being of them at least
analogically, as has been already showed.

But that I may not preach without a Text, let us make way to the words read
unto you, and so find out (as God shall be pleased to assist) the mind of the
Spirit in them, and so come to that one word in which this first attribute of
life is held forth.

Know therefore that the Author of this profound Epistle, having set before the
eyes of these Hebrews or Jews to whom he writes, the obstinacy of their Fathers
does now make application of it to them that were now alive, in this Verse read
unto you.

Which I may call a prohibitive proposition, or dehortation, or conclusion of
the Argument formerly handled. As if he should say, your Fathers hardened their
hearts of old, and provoked God to their own destruction, take heed therefore
that ye do not do so, (...).
to your destruction also.

The word, take heed or see, or beware, is often used in Scripture; as Ephesians:
5.15. See then that ye walk circumspectly. Collos: 2.8. Beware lest any man
spoil you through Philosophy. Though the word do hold forth an act of the
eye, which is in the head, yet the Apostle means the circumspection of the
heart.

The thing or matter which he would have them take heed of is an evil heart of
unbelief, An evil heart of unbeleefe the fountain of all evil.
which is indeed the fountain of all evil. And then the heart is said to be
evil when it has in it unbelief, unbelief in the heart makes the heart to be
an evil heart. What Is the reason men refuse to hear Gods Word, to obey his
will, and in stead thereof maliciously oppose him? Is is it not because they do
not believe him. Do not men (I mean wicked men) make God a liar in all that he
says? Let God say what he will, whether by promises or threats, yet they show
that they do not believe any thing of it; they esteem it as the song of fools.
And among all the Truths which the Spirit holds forth, what is so sweet as
this, that God sent his Son into the world to save Mankind? And now then what
is the reason men be not saved by him, (more I mean then be;) because they do
not believe the testimony that God gave of his Son. At your leisure you may
read 1 John 5, 10, 11, 12 verses; There ye may see life and salvation is to be
had by Christ, (and indeed no other way,) and men have it not because they
receive not the offer. He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved. Now
if men would believe, they should be saved. So that Faith is that divine Grace
that does submit to the command of Believing, What Faith is
and does give glory to God. As the Virgin Mary did when she was told she
should have a Child, she submitteed to it; Luke 1.38. And Mary said, behold the
Handmaide of the Lord be it unto me according to thy word. So says God, I did
send my Son to dye for you, and he has been crucified for you; and I am
well-pleased with his all-sufficient sacrifice for you. Why do ye not make
application of it to your own souls? surely it is an evil heart of unbeleefe
which is the mother of all mischief and wickedness.

And here by the way ye see that a heart possessed with unbeleef is an evil
heart, and this is that that causes us to depart from the living God; and
therefore the Author of this Epistle does earnestly warn these Hebrews to fly
from unbeleefe.

But how can it be said that unbeleevers depart from the living God, seeing
they were ever from God a far off, strangers,

For answer hereunto, I say first, that all Creatures, In quo etiam omnia qua
non vivunt vita su^t Lessiac
Even all things are life in him, that have no life in themselves. And secondly
(because in this sense no man can depart from the living God,) you must know
that every man by nature is bound to serve God, and to praise God, and to give
credit to what God says. Moral duties lie upon all men, and the breach of Gods
Law is sin. And the Lord will pour out his vengeance upon the Nations that have
not known him, and upon the Families that have not called on his name. And so
to neglect or omit what God requires, is to depart from God; to depart from a
command of God, is to depart from God. performances of two sort^
There are two sorts of performances; there are some which every man stands
bound to perform as he is a creature; and some which men stand bound to perform
by positive commands, Three sorts of positive duties
whether the duties be moral, or positive, and of those that be positive;
whether they be ceremonial or Judicial, or evangelical, to whom the command
comes, from them is obedience due to the great and Sovereign Lawgiver: and not
to perform it, is to depart from God; that is, to disown God, to run away from
his service, to say in effect we will not be under his command. They that do not
call upon God, depart from God, that is, Not to come Christ, is to depart from
Christ.
they depart from his commands, such as professing themselves to be christians,
and living under invitations to come to Christ, and do not come to him to have
life by him, they do depart from him in scripture phrase; and all this comes
from a heart of unbelief. O this trampling under-foot the blood of Christ, is
a very great sin. Beloved: ye do here profess your selves to be Christians,
what do ye make here else to day? Now if ye believe not God, and his word to
walk answerable, what do ye else but depart from the living God? ye depart
from this invitation to take his Son, from his Commandment to believe, to
kiss the Son, from his holy injunctions, for which if ye repent not, God will
most certainly damn you; for ye are both Creatures, and in name Christians, and
therefore take heed lest there be in any of you a heart of unbelief to depart
from the Living God.

I have dispatched the manner and matter of the Exhortation, I now am to speak
of the description of God by the Attribute of Life; God in my Text (ye see)
called the living God.

In each Attribute that I shall speak of I purpose to do these three things,
first to show you that such an Attribute (as here Life which is the first to be
spoken of) is an Attribute of God; secondly, that it is communicable to
Mankind; Reasons of the attribute of Life.
thirdly, that God in each of them (and in this of Life) is infinite and
incomprehensible.

Know then that God (which all must take heed they do not depart from) is a
Living God; for the proof of it read Dan: 6, 29. 1 These: ^.9. Heb: 9.14. in all
which places he is called the living God

God is called the living God for diverse reasons:

First, because he lives of himself, and that everlastingly, Ps: 102.64. Thy
years are through all generations* and ver: 27. but thou art the same, and thy
years shall have no end. God always has been, and will be for ever. Never was
there, nor never will there be the least point of time, in which it might, or
shall be said, God is not the living God.

Secondly, every creature has his life from God, he is the creator of Life
unto us all, and all living things, Act: 17.28. In him we live, moove, and have
our being. He is the fountain and original of all Life. Get ye up as high as ye
can, and suppose the world were ten thousand times older then it is, yet at
last there must be a stop, Luke in his third Chapter carries along the
Generation of Jesus Christ as far as ever he could possibly, even unto Adam,
one was the son of another, but at last it is said, which was the Son of God;
there we must stop, we can go no further. 3. God is called the Living God;
because he gives life to his promises, but this is not so proper to this
matter.

4ly. He gives Grace to his Elect; this is called the life of God, Ephesians:
4.18. But to keep to the Attribute I am upon, and to the two former Reasons of
this Attribute; and yet more espetially to the first. It is necessary that I
should first show you what that thing is which we call life, and then we shall
the better understand what is meant by Life as it is attributed to God; for in
saying God is love, or God is a consuming fire, or any other analogical
expression, it is needful that ye know what those things are properly in the
first place.

Life therefore is self-motion naturally, that which moves of it self from an
inward cause, be it what it be, that is said to live or thus, Life is a vital
spirit by which al quick things move therefore Beasts, Birds, fish, and
creeping things are called living souls, or living Creatures, Gen: 2.19.20.
Other things that move from outward causes, as clocks, watches, carts, or
coaches, are not said to live, because they do not move from an inward
principle. And elements though they move naturally, yet it is only to their
proper place: heavy elements move downward, and light elements upward: And this
natural motion they keep, unless they be restrained as water in a Vessel.

There are three sorts of quick, or living creatures.

First, plants do hold the lowest degree of life, they do indeed live of
themselves, yet neither know the end of their motion, neither do they prepare
for it, they send forth their moares and roots to get moisture, and
nourishment, but they know not that, they do so.

Secondly, there is a degree of life somewhat higher then this which is the
life of sensitive creatures, these first move of themselves, therefore are said
to live; secondly, they of themselves acquire some form by sense, which is the
ground or beginning of their motion; but of themselves they know not the end of
their motion formally, neither do they propound it unto themselves distinctly;
but somerime break their neck, when according to their instinct they move to
good; they move to get better feeding, being led by sense, but because they
want reason to guide them; they meet with misery often, and therefore it is,
that men that are foolish, are said to be unreasonable men, and bruit Beasts,
because they are better like beasts, then like men endued with reason; yea all
men in the fallen condition of Adam are said to be like the Beasts that perish.
Psalm: 49. v: last. Man that is in honor and understands not, is like the
Beasts that perish.

Sentire appetere se movere est in anima and natura brutorum.
But yet of these bruit animals, some live, and move themselves more perfectly
then others, as they are endued with a more perfect faculty of sense to obtain
to themselves sensible forms, yet is their life even of the most quick of them
but a life of beasts, the knitting of that sensitive soul, and their body
together, As Philosophers in general, of all life, define it to be the Bond or
colligation of soul and body together, which are parted when blood or breath
are left out of the body, for when we cease breathing, we cease living; (...)
and life goes out when breath goes out, here the words both in Hebrew and
Greek, which are used for life do properly signify the soul, (...).
and are derived from breathing and respering.

Thirdly, There is a life of intellectual and rational creatures which comes
nearest to the life attributed to God. For first, such as live this life get
intentional forms, by which they variously are moved, and this proceeds from
this life of theirs. And secondly, they that live this life know the end of
their moving formally. And thirdly, by themselves do propound unto themselves
ends of their motions, and actions, and move and act with discretion, and
determine of things upon considetation. The life of man far excels the life of
other creatures, and yet it comes short of the life of Angels who are also the
living sons of God by temporal creation; Job 1.6. Now there was a day when the
Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord; If we were skilful in
the life of Angels, we should much the better perceive what is signified by
life in God, I therefore would a little speak of their life; they are of a more
excellent make and constitution then man, their very substance is vital; the
Angelical nature does at least so much excel the reasonable soul, as that does
the sensitive, or the sensitive the vegetative. Now the reasonable soul does
not only live in the body, but out of the body, for although the soul be the
first act of a natural instrumental body, eminently containing all the virtues
of a vegetative, and sensitive soul; yet over and above these, it has three
spiritual powers not bound to the body; an intellect acting, an intellect in
possibility of acting, and a will: by which ye may see the excellency of a
reasonable soul above a vegetative, and sensitive, either of which has all its
powers bound to an organical body, and cease to be when it is separated from
the body. Corrupto composito utraque desi^ net esse: Vi^gue, page ^ 14.
But a reasonable soul has three powers and faculties not bound to the body as
has been said. And therefore this reasonable soul lives when the man whose
soul it was is dead; and this comes near to Angelical nature, and the vital
operation thereof; I will give you the definition of an Angel, that I may be rid
of this matter speedily. An Angel is a created living substance, immaterial, or
incorporeal, invisible, incorruptible, and spiritual, of great understanding,
and mighty in will; so that ye see the two faculties natural of Angels, to wit,
the understanding, and the will; and this is Angelical Life; yet have they not
these glorious living natures of themselves, as God only has; also some end to
these souls, and Angelical natures is propounded from without divine ly, to
wit, chief happiness, and good, Per morte^ a^^rius stuitum est sperare salutem*
not to be imagined by man or Angel as a naked creature. And for man fallen,
the wisest of them have thought it a foolish thing to look for salvation by the
death of Christ. Hence that saying 1 Cor: 1: 23. We preach Christ crucified to
the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greek foolishnes. Yea the very Angels are
said to enquire after, or pry into these things 1 Pet: 1.12. The words in the
original are worth the marking. The mysteries and hidden things of the life of
the soul, (...).
and of Angels are not the subject I must fasten upon: only to help you in your
groping after Life, as it is an attribute of God, it was needful for me to say
something of Life in the creature. But now come we to speak of Life as it is
attributed to God. Life is a communicable Attribute of God, whereby is
signified that he does move simply, Deus est suum vivere Aquin^lege Scharpium
de vita Dei: pag^ 193, in Cursu Theol:
and infinitely, from, and of himself essentially, from, and unto eternity.

There is in creature Life, first vital substance, and then. Secondly, vital
operation, which remains in the subject, operating from whence it follows:
as to understand, love, desire, perceive, and move it self.

Now both those ways God is a Living God (excepting those imperfections that
attend creature-life.) For he is not only Life, but the first Life, and eternal
Life, and the very fullness, and universality of Life, the original of all Life,
and the consummation thereof, the beginning, and the end; in whom even all
things which do not live are Life. For he is a super-vital Essence, and a
super-essential Life, having beforehand, and containing in himself most
eminently, Sicut ipse est omnium existentium esse superessentiale, ita omnium
viventium vita supe^: vitalis: Dionys: cap: 6 de divinis nominibus.
most simply, and causally, all vital substance: and forming, preserving, and
perfecting out of himself every substance according to its kind. And this is
the first thing considerable in Life, to wit, its vital substance. Now
secondly, God is himself his vital operation, to wit, his understanding, his
Love, his joy, his blessedness. From that supernatural fountain all things
which any way do live, do draw Life, even thence the life of plants, brutes,
Men, and Angels, all Life natural, and supernatural, of this Life, and the Life
to come, Temporal, and Eternal

But espetially by life in God is understood his understanding and wisdom; for
this is the first and chief life, and vital operation, from whence all other
life does proceed. Therefore the wisdom of God is the life of all things, and
by it God lives to himself, and to all things, and all things live unto him,
and are present and shine, and immutably persevere in him from eternity to
eternity.

Yet life is not in God as in creatures, for in them the soul is the cause of
life (as has been said) and life the motion, but those in God are not so
distinct. Life is not attributed to God, and creatures univocally, but
analogically. Nor indeed can any thing be said of God and creatures univocally.
As when I say God is angry, or God is love, or that he has no pleasure in
wickedness, some there are that think that whatsoever is attributed to God in
scripture, is spoken properly of him, and of the creature by allusions, and
analogies. As when we say God is just, merciful, good, angry, etc. But I cannot
be of their mind; No words full enough to see out the nature of God
for there are no words or phrases used by or amongst men, full enough to set
out the nature of God. Neither, if there were, are men capable of such makings
out of God; for first there is no proportion between perfections as they are in
God, and those that are or may be in created things And therefore secondly, one
objective conception cannot be drawn from created and uncreated perfections,
which may univocally agree with both; but only analogically. And therefore
words being images of created things, cannot be used but analogically, of an
increated and infinite essence But to end this particular, and to proceed to
some other properties of the life of God. I say God is life; and all things in
God are life, to wit, that life which is God himself. Neither are vital
substance, and vital operation in him distinguished.

Secondly, God has life complete, every way complete, nothing We live and move
etc: though in God, yet WE live. I say we have of our selves a life of
operation both in nature and grace, when the principle of life in either state
is once bestowed, but God has the very nature of life in himself. For as the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself, Joh: 5.26. God is what he is of himself.

Neither fourthly, is there any end propounded to God by another; He made all
things for himself, even the wicked to perish in the day of evil, Prove: 16.4. A
gracious soul works for God. And God works for himself in him, not for him.
God lives to himself, propounds himself unto himself in all his vital
operations.

Fifthly, every thing understood is life in God, things that have life. He is
his own vital operation. The life of God is present with all Creatures to
continue their being; these very pillars that bear up this house of meeting,
although dead in them selves, are life in God; He is the super-essential of
existences, even of all. From his wisdom which is his life by attribution,
flows love, which also is his life, and by these two Attributes are al other
things made and formed; in his wisdom all things live. So some read that place
in John 1.3. the latter part, Quod factum est in ipso vita erat:
and the beginning of the 4th: That which was made was life in him. All things
have in themselves a quoddam esse intrinsecal to themselves: but this in things
created has a beginning, and is mutable; neither does it give life to
existences that live not. But besides this esse which they obtain in
themselves, they have in the mind and wisdom of God a certain extrinsecal esse,
Sapientia Dei est omnium intelligibilium esse, and vita, and lux, Lessius de
perfec: Div: page 51*
as it were infused, everlasting, and immutable. For to understand in God, is a
certain esse of intelligibles, by which as in a certain breathing world they do
exist, shine, and live. I might tell you many things which are as true as
glorious of this life of God. But this is not for every hearer to understand.
And it is usual for people to speak evil of the things they understand not.

Sixthly, the life of God does infinitely transcend the life of Adam have been
in all these kinds of creatures were brought together, and put into one life;
yet this life compared with the life of God, would be but as a picture or image
of a man is in comparison of a man. Secondly, if al Creatures that are in the
world, or ever were, could exist together; if God should but draw back the beam
of his influence, presently they would vanish to nothing, neither would any
footstep of them remain. For in God it is that we live, moove, and have our
being, and there is not the lest worm in the earth that lives, but there is an
influence that goes out from God to continue it is life: Yea, all existences
have their continuance from this Life of God.

Seventhly. To conclude, what life is in God is best to be known by negation,
and ablation of all that can be said of Life in the Creature. As for instance,
if ye should ask of me how God does live; I should thus answer, he does not
live like plants, or sensitive Creatures; he does not live like Men, or Angels:
but he lives a Life far transcending all Creature-life. I am not able to show
you better how God does live, then by teaching you how God does not live. As
when I say God is a living God, I mean, he lives and moves of himself from an
inward principle of life, and so you take my meaning. And when I say God is
good, ye presently run to the definition of goodness touching the Creature.
But yet these words are too short to set out either the Attribute of life, or
of goodness. When I say God is great, as Psalm: 1^5.3. David says, great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised. This word great will set forth the greatness of
a man, or of any other thing that has dimensions: But yet this word great is
not great enough to set forth the nature of God. There are four (as it were)
parts of greatness, latitude, longitude, sublimity, and profundity, which are
attributed to God, and in their manner may be considered in God. Although by
the ordinary rules in the Mathematics we make but three dimensions, to wit,
making sublimity and profundity one in that one word altitude. But because the
Apostle Paul, Ephesians: 3.18. guided by the spirit of God, speaking of the fulness
of God, makes four dimensions (as it were) so many parts of the grreatnes of
God. I say, I will a little consider how far these words relating to the word
great, will set out as part thereof the greatness of God, or the nature of God
upon account of greatness. Once David says God is great, and he praises God
for or in consideration of his greatness. What then may be this greatness of God?
I answer; First the essence of God is great, in regard of latitude, for he is
immense.

Secondly, he is great in regard of longitude, for he is eternal.

3ly: He is great in regard of sublimity, for he is most high.

4ly: He is great in regard of profundity, for he is incomprehensible.

Or if we take the word great (as sometimes it is used) for one of great power,
dominion, and authority, here also we have some help from the four dimensions
of the Apostle Paul, to under stand something of God, the Lord is great in
regard of latitude for all things serve him from the highest Angel, to the
least, and lowest worm. He is great in regard of Longitude, for of his Kingdom
there is an eternal duration. He is great in regard of Sublimity, for he
Reigns with the highest, and most absolute power. Also he is great in regard
of profundity, because he rules not only bodies, but hearts, and orders the
most inward thoughts and affections of all: neither is there any thing so
hidden, or secret, which the rod of his Kingdom, and greatness does not
penetrate. We may then understand somewhat by this word GREAT of God: but must
stop our mouths with the close of the Verse Psalm. 135.3. His greatness is
unsearchable; or, of his greatness there is no search. (...).
The Hebrew word does properly signify finding out, or searching after. The
Septuagint, there is no end of his greatness, and so the vulgar latin: For
therefore is no finding out of the greatness of God; because the end thereof,
neither is nor can be found; for in deed it is not, there is no end of his
greatness. And therefore in all predications wherein GOD is the subject, we
must know that their force is in negation, and exclusion. As when we say God is
a Spirit, we mean he is not a body, when we say he is a spiritual substance, we
mean he is not a corporeal substance. When we say he is he is a substance, we
mean he is not an accident. For properly a substance God, cannot be according
to the nature of that Lative word; for a substance is that that does stand
under accidents, and bear them up, which asserted of the essence of God is
blasphemy. Yet is that word substance often attributed to God, but by it we
mean essence according to the greek word Ousia, (...).
Essence, or being but in God properly, there is neither substance nor accident.



all that he is of himself. He is truly all that the Scripture teaches, and
the Saints conceive him to be; but not in that manner, or measure as men or
Angels conceive of him. He is all that we think him to be in our minds
according to scipture Attributes, and infinitely more. As now to speak of this
Attribute Life; as life is considered in the Creature, it is a principle of
operation: but in God all Attributes are his essence, and so is his life.
Remember what I have said, (and so I shall come out of these briars,) that we
have not words to set out God by, and if there were such a language found out,
it would be worse then greek to us; we should not have the capacity to learn
it; therefore with all humility let us bless God for those discoveries of
himself, he has been pleased to make; and for making our ears blessed to hear,
and our eyes to see so much of God as we do.

I have but one question to answer, and it is upon occasion of my close of the
former discourse. If it be so, God is so hidden, that he is so above our reach,
that such clouds and darkness are round about him, that he dwells in such
eye-dazling unapproachable light: why then (may some say) do you spend so many
words about such a subject?

To whom I answer, that if we can catch but one jot of what has been said, and
make it our own: why then, God be afforded to you, as your God in Christ, and
ye are all resolved with David That it is good for you to draw near to him,
and so ye purpose to do, and never to depart from him: why then I say let men,
Ps: 73: 28:
and Devils rage, and do what they can, ye are alive in God not only as
Creatures, but as new Creatures; ye shall be carried as upon eagles wings, ye
shall lie in the bosom of Life. Your life is hid with Christ in God. Collos: 3:
^.
Wonder not then that I have been so forward to expose my self to censure, and
to speak of things that are not easily understood in any measure. Difficilia
quae pulchra. There is beauty in these difficulties, and something I hope will
stick. All will not I hope run over the narrow-mouthed bottle. O draw near to
this living God, Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God. They that do so forsake their own
mercies. Study this Attribute of God, spend some time with prayer about it, and
so much for the Explication as I have been able. Come we to the Application.

First, Uses of this Doctrine.
The first Use*
then he is worth the coming unto by those that are yet afar off, and worth the
keeping, and holding fast by such as have him. Draw near to God therefore O ye
sinners that are far from him: For lo they that are far from thee shall perish
says the Psalmist, Psalm: 73.27. O cast not the law of this living God behind
your backs any longer: Make not your will, your humors, your lusts; your Law any
more. Refuse not the Lord Jesus the Son of the Living God any longer, lest he
be angry, and ye perish in the way. Reject not the Ordinances of Life, content
not your selves with them as dead Ordinances, let them be to you the Ordinances
of a living God. Take heed of a dead faith, as all faith is without works, Jam:
2.17. take heed of worshipping a dead God. Such as pretend to believe in God,
and in works deny him, do in effect take away his life: their faith is dead,
their works are dead, they have not a lively hope; they Worship a dead God.
Every bodies God is no bodies God:
A Traditional God, every bodies God, and that is no bodies God. Come to Christ
that ye may have God who is life. And ye Saints that have him hold him fast,
and choose rather to dye a thousand deaths, then to forsake the living God.

Be circumspect, take heed says my Text, we are in danger on every side; watch
over your hearts, take heed of an evil heart, that is the cause of departing
from God. If we have good hearts we shall never go away from God, it is
impossible. And then in the next place (mark the words that I have read in my
Text) an evil heart of unbelief: What is that makes the heart evil? Unbelief;
this is the cause peoples hearts be evil, because they want Faith. And if that
be a truth that faith (which comes by the hearing of the Word) is increased
daily by it, as also by the administration of the Sacraments, and prayer; Then
take heed of throwing away of Gospel Ordinances in these ranting times: Perkins
2d. principle* They that depart from Ordinances depart from God:
For this is the way to depart from the living God. In plain English they that
depart from Ordinances, do depart from God. And they that live under them only
as outward performances, do serve but a dead God. But David's soul longs for
the living God, Psalm: 42.2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, and
Psalm. 84.2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord: my
heart, and my flesh cries out for the living God.

God?

I Answer. God held forth in the scriptures; some of which I have made known
unto you in the Explication of this Attribute of Life. For whosoever savingly
knows that all things, even those that live not, are yet life in God: will
rationally conclude, that the fountain is worth al dishfuls, and that one God
is worth ten thousand worlds. Go ye then (may a Saint say) to your wealth, and
wit, and great friends, to the Nobles of the earth, and Princes; But the Lord
lives says holy David, Psalm: 18.46. and blessed be my Rock* and let the God
of my salvation be exalted, etc.

The spirit of a man is lively, outward things are dead things, they cannot
touch the soul, they are not fitted to the spiritual nature thereof. When all
our hopes be dead touching the comforting creature, they are alive in the
living God. Even stones are life in God though they live not, their existences
are in Gods Life, and by influence from it. What shall I say? I am as one
overwhelmed with the glory of this Attribute of the life of God. Such as know
this to be a truth that I have said will show themselves stark madd, if they
forsake this fountain, this living God.

Use 2.

And secondly, the consideration of this truth, that life is an at tribute of
God: does teach us that it must needs be of precious account with him
assuredly; Woe therefore to those who abuse it. What a fearful sin do they
commit in the presence of God? they do vilify this precious Jewel which is
honored with this dignity to be an Attribute of God.

But who be they that are guilty of this fault of abusing life?

I Answer, First,

And Secondly, such as are ready to destroy life, both in respect of
themselves, and others, and that either in regard of their outward or inward
estate.

First, they which neglect to save Life, that make no account of that which is
so precious, in which so much of God appears. A living Dog (says Solomon) is
better then a dead Lion. And there is more (I say) to be seen of God in one
blade of living grass, then in the most precious Jewel in the world. And the
reason is, because it comes nearest to God, it has life. I will show you who
they be that are negligent of the preservation of life, viz. First of their own
lives.

Secondly, of the lives of others.

1. Of their own, such as are not careful to shun danger tending to the hurt of
life, as to be careless of the preservation of bodily health. Careless to
avoid dangers:
2 To live like lazy drones idly in time of health, and prosperity; and not to
provide for times of sickness, and adversity. Idleness and leziness:
And therefore in the just Judgment of God, such do often feel the smart of it,
Prove: 6. ver: 9.10. There is a description of them. How long will thou sleep O
sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. And then ye have this
punishment, ver: 11. So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy
want as an armed man; and so want is his portion, Prove: 13.4. The soul of the
sluggard defireth, and has nothing. And besides the bitterness of poverty,
there is often bitterness upon the spirit; even checks, and gripes, and
groanings of Conscience, and a late and unseasonable repenting of their
carelessness, and idleness, which is a kind of a Hell unto them.

Such also as bereave themselves of the comforts of this life; out of a will to
be rich, Covetousnes
they will even starve themselves, and go a cold, and honor not life which God
has communicated to them; such often pierce themselves through with many
sorrows, and deny themselves necessaries; such wretches prepare a Hell for
themselves besides Tophet which is prepared of old. They are always either
carking how to get, or fearing lest they should loose, or grieving, and
mourning when they have lost.

Secondly, such abuse Life as are negligent of the lives of others; which is a
ready way to bring a famine upon the place; Such a famine as Amos. 8.11.
speaks of, not of bread but of the Word of God: Which is the greatest and
sorest of all famines, Cap. 8.11.
tending to the destruction of the soul, the life of which is in comparably to
be preferred before the life of the body. Yet wicked people by their neglect,
at least, of the good means of grace, if not open opposing them, do deprive
themselves and others of the food of their souls; By provoking the Lord to take
away their Spiritual meat from them. When Eliah was taken up into Heaven,
Elisha cried, my Father, my Father, the charet of Israel and horsemen thereof,
2 Kings. 2.12. But men are of another mind now, they think it no loss to be
rid of the means of grace, and the Ministers of Christ. And no marvel men
care not for the lives of the souls of others, they have no care of their own.
O consider this ye Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands and Wives, Parents,
Children, life is an attribute of God, the life of the soul is incomparably
more precious, then of the body. Therefore be not negligent either for your
selves, or others of the means appointed of God, for the saving of poor
souls, that are in danger to be destroyed in hell. So much for the first head
in in this reproof. Such as neglect to save life in respect of themselves or
others, either the life of the body or of the soul.

Secondly, And they fall more under this reproof and under

1. Such as violently rush upon dangers that they might avoid, the Jews took up
stones to cast at him: he hid himself, Joh. 8.59. Luke 4.29, 30.
and went out of the temple, etc. John. 8.59. And when as Nazareth they brought
him to the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast
him down headlong, he passing through the midest of them went his way. They
abuse life therefore, which run upon dangers wilfully and rashly.

2. Such also abuse life this jewel, as by imoderat eating and drinking and
surffetting do shorten their days. As some have dyed in their Cups, a fearful
sign and brand of Gods wrath and displeasure against their sin.

Capell.
wast their radical moisture, and thereby shorten life. It is noted by some
that David was bed rid in or about the age that his Father begat him. This is a
giving of our years to the cruel and our honor unto others. And it consumes
the flesh and the body: Prove. 5.9, 10, 11.
First, the giving of a man's honor to another. Secondly, their years unto the
cruel. Thirdly, their wealth to strangers. Fourthly, the bringing of sorrow,
and mourning upon themselves at last. And lastly, the consumption of the flesh
and body of such intemperate ones: And thou mourn at last, when thy flesh and
thy body are consumed.



as travail with pain all their days, Job 15.20. To wit, men of an unquiet
and restless spirits: The Original word for a wicked man, signifies an
unquiet motion; unquiet is his name, and unquietness is his, both practice and
portion: always are some raising stirs, and acting Tragedies. He travelleth
with pain, he is in pain as a woman in travel: and whereas women that have
hardest labor, are but in travel many days; some wicked men are in travel
all their days; painful throws daily; to bring forth mischief, which causes
death. O what an abuse of life is this! Cannot men be contented to go to
eternal pain in Hell; but they must keep killing of themselves all the day long
before they come there? Such have woe, sorrow, contentions, babbling, wounds
without cause, black and blew eyes: A contentious man never wants woe.

Moloch in the Valey of Benhinnom: and as seduced Papists whip and lash
themselves, like fools as they are; to whom God will say, who required this at
your hands? We read of Baals Priests, that they cut themselves with Knives, and
Lancers, till the bloodgushed out upon them, c. 18.18. This is the effect of
erroneous seduced Consciences. We have read strange stories of Eremites and
Anchorites: Of one I have read, that chose rather to be burnt than to save his
life, out of Conscience of his Religion: As in the West-Indians, they will
rather sacrifice their Children to their Hoggery Abamacho (the Devil indeed)
rather then seem to be irreligious. O what sorrows have men brought on
themselves and miseries; yea murders upon others from erroneous Consciences!
Hence such woeful doings of late in England, Scotland and Ireland: no
consideration being had of the worth of life.

7. Wicked men abuse life, by their own active malice. And that diverse ways:
First, by entrapping themselves in those Haman built a Gallows for Mordecai,
and was hanged upon it himself, Hest 7.10. Many out of malice dig pits for
others, and fall into them themselves: Notable for this Writes the Psalmist,
Psalm 7.15, 16. He made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which
he made: His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing
shall come down upon his own pate. So that many times none are greater enemies
to any others, whom they most malice, then such malicious persons are to their
own selves. Secondly, when men's malice makes them to weary, and tire out
themselves to do mischief: we read of some, Jer. 9.5. That did weary themselves
to commit iniquity; and we know many that do even spend themselves out to
nothing, to wreack their malice upon others: especially, upon such as are
godly, and Religious. Wicked men are often cruel in over burdening themselves.
The way of malice is often found to be a wearisome and destroying way to the
actors themselves: The Author of that History, The travels of the old
Patriarchs, Kings and Prophets; when he comes to write the motions of Antiochus
Epiphanes, who was a great King, but of a most malicious spirit against the
people of God. He observes that in pursuance of his bloody designs, he had run
more hazzards, and taken more tedious journeys to satisfy his malice and reach
his ambitious ends, then any of the Saints had done upon any command or service
of God: Upon which consideration, he makes this excellent conclusion; That
wicked men take more pains to go to Hell and eternal destruction, then godly
men do in the way to eternal life and salvation.

eating the labor of his hands, Psalm. 128.2. That is, the very work which he
does feeds him: and before he has any reward for his work, he finds a reward
in his work. On the other side, the labor of a wicked man eats him: The labor
of his hand, and the labor of his head, eat him out, Isa. 27.13. Thou art
wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. The Prophet speaks there of the
endeavor of the Caldeans to be rid of those evils, which are threatened to come
upon them: and in chapter 57.10. of the same prophecy, the Jews are said to be
wearied in the greatness of their way.

A dreadful sound is in his ears: Job 15.21. And sometimes (with Cain) they
think every one that meets them will kill them; Genesis 4.14. And so God sets
Cain's mark upon them, fear of heart and trembling of body. A fearful heart
and a shaking body, is often the portion of men that live in sin. Timor cordis
et tremor corporis. Pareus.
If ye compare the 2. of Habacuck 10, 11, 12. with Job 15. ye shall see this
for substance, that when men live in sin, they provoke God either to take away
their lives, or to make their lives miserable. Sometimes God takes away that
which they have ill gotten, and drives them to dwell in desolate cities, and
houses which no man inhabiteth; which are ready to become heaps, cursing the
stones of the wall, and the timber of their houses. And if they do leave any
thing, when they wretchedly die, they leave it with the appurtenances (as one
wittily said) to wit, the curse of God to have and to hold to their heirs, and
children after them.

And as wicked men abuse this Jewel of great worth, life in themselves, in
their readiness to destroy it, or make it miserable, in regard of their bodies
and temporal enjoyments: so also in regard of their poor souls: They live so
wickedly, so profanely, so disobediently to God and his Word, that they
provoke God to take away the means of grace from them, or to give them up to a
mind past feeling, and to bring upon them a famine of the Word, the greatest of
all judgment, except a reprobate spirit, and mind void of judgment under the
Word.

And Lastly they fall under this reproof and woe, that abuse the life of others
by oppression, when they throw down the right of others and thrust them out of
doors to set their own nest on high, their Tabernacles are Tabernacles of
bribery, Job. 15.34. and their houses are full of blood, which the earth shall
not cover, Et vae, vae, vae, illis qui causa sunt quod ecclesiae sine ministris
et verbo relinquuntur Luther.
but it shall ly as a record upon the file to be brought forth against them at
the last day. And some abuse life grossly by murder, of which crying sin, I
think it not needful to speak now. To conclude this use; Woe to such as
endeavor to drive a way from poor people, the word of God and Ministers
thereof, they are guilty of abusing life in regard of others in a very high
measure, the blood of poor souls that die, and perish for want thereof, will be
required at their hands: and also at the hands of such wretched formalists and
clawbacks of the Ministry, as do not do their utmost in sincerity for the
salvation of poor souls. We now come to an other Use: Is it so, that life is
an attribute of God, and such a jewel as has been showed: worthy of (...)
honor, whom God makes instruments of working, and preserving spiriual life: As
in 1. Tim. 3.1. This is a true saying, 1 Timothy 5.17.18
if any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work, or a worthy
work. And a promise of great reward is made to such as turn many to
righteousness, to wit, to shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan, 23
1 Pet. 5.4.
and when the chief shepherd shall appear, such shall receive a crown of glory
that fades not away: which may be matter of comfort to them in their calling.
O, to preserve men from hell it is a worthy, an honorable work: to be
instruments of converting, and bringing souls to the Lord, to live with him for
ever the life of glory; is a work that calls for great respect to the workmen:
and how they have it let God judge.

4. Use.
Fourthly, We are now come to a Use of exhortation, that we be all careful of
life, of our own life, and of the life one of another, of bodily life, and of
the life of the soul, for such a life, and death too there is, as may be
gathered out of Mat. 10.28. And fear not them which kill the body, and are not
able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body
and soul in hell: ye see mention there of killing and destroying the soul as
well as the body: Now in the prosecution of this use of exhortation I shall lay
before you some motives and considerations.

Jesus been at, to redeem it from Hell and Death? God about this, sent his only
Son into the World, to die a most shameful and painful death. He has suffered
many of his choice and eminent servants to endure exquisite torments, that
souls might be saved from death. And therefore let this prevail, let us be
herein like unto God; do all that we can to preserve life, and to save souls.
Let us be rich in good works of this nature; that is, in saving life, and give
comfort to those that have none. For otherwise we shall not show our selves to
be like to God. And the cry of the dying will enter into his ears.

Secondly, consider the necessity of this work of saving life. Hezekiah) death
cannot celebrate thee. They that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy
truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee Isa. 38.18.19. If we do not
what we can to preserve life, we do (as it were) bereave God of that honor
which he might have in our life, and in the lives of others. We have a proverb,
make much of your selves, good folks be scarce. This has some place here, if
it could be thought and spoken with holy gravity and seriousnes and in the fear
of the Lord. Ye that fear God, make much of your selves and one another, do
what ye can to preserve life, and to make your own and each others life
comfortable; that God may have the more glory by you.

Thirdly, Consider the excellency of this vouchsafement of viz. life. And seeing
I have such a jewel I should be careful to preserve it. Not as an Epicure or
Atheist that would fain live, because he knows no other happiness but this
life; but that I may glorify God, who is worthy of all, and much more, then
men or Angels can say of him, or do, to the setting forth of his praise and
honor. And thus much concerning the first Proportion or Doctrine, Of life
communicated to nature.
that life is an attribute of God.

Now I come to the second, viz. that it is a communicable one, to mankind and
other creatures. So we read Genesis 2.7. And the Lord God formed man of the dust
of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man
became a living soul. And Act. 17.25. Seeing he gives to all life and breath
and all things: and verse. 23. For in him we live, and move, and have our being.
And a most transcendent life, in comparison of the life of Plants and Beasts,
has God imparted to mankind: a reasonable soul full of excellencies. Yea, so
liberal has God been in the communication of this gift, as that even
inferior creatures have their portion; though in an inferior degree to
mankind: Unto whom God has vouchsafed a greater dignity in this respect, then
to any of his corporeal creatures else. In that he was created after the image
of God, to have rule and authority over the other creatures Genesis 1.26. And God
said, let us make man in our image, Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera
terra^ os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre jussit, et erectos ad sydera
tollere vulius Ovid. Meta.
after our likeness: and let them have dominion, over the fish of the Sea, and
over the fowl of the Air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and
over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth. Yet I say, although man
in his creation was far more glorious then other creatures; other creatures had
life too: Genesis 1.20. and 24. verses: there were moving creatures that had life,
and living creatures after their kind, Fishes, Fowls, Cattle and creeping
things.

Now therefore mankind that has received such a great benefit at the hand of
God herein, ought to be thankful to God for this gift of life: and carefully
and conscionably to endeavor to live to the glory of God the giver of it: But
O the wonderful ingratitude, and unthankfulness of mankind toward God for
this favor of his; the multitude of men do quite contrary, give up themselves
to live altogether to his dishonor, smite him on the face with his own
benefit, delighting in all manner of sin and ungodliness; whereby they make
themselves strangers from the life of God, perverting and altering their
creation in respect of the end thereof: For whereas God created men for his
glory, Ephesians. 4.18.
Isai. 43, 7. they live to his dishonor: and where as all other creatures (the
evil Angels only excepted) keep their first station, continue obedient to
their Creator, (as you may read at large Psalm. 104.5, 6, 7, 8, etc.) Mankind
is rebellious, and in the way of disobedience against his Creator; for which
rebellion of his, he must be sure to smart: for the most gracious God will not
by any means clear the guilty; but in his justice will surely reward them to
their face according to their wickedness, and although he may defer his
judgments for a time, Exodus 3, 4.7. Deuteronomy. 7.10. Prove. 11.21. 2 These. 1.9.
yet they shall be sure to meet with them at last. They shall not be unpunished
always, if not in this life, yet in the life to come they shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord and from the glory
of his power. They that receive not the love of the truth that they may be
saved, but have pleasure in unrighteousness; shall perish, shall be damned.

The Second Use teaches us, that since God has given me life I should not vex
my self with carking, and caring, 2. Use.
about means to maintain it; God will provide means for the sustentation of
life, for all those that by a true, and lively faith can rely upon him; yea
assuredly, For the life is more then meat, and the body then raiment. Mat.
6.35. Is it not? (says Christ in that place) doubtless it is, Therefore take
no thought for your life what ye shall eat, nor for the body what ye shall put
on. Luke 12.22. If God feeds the Ravens, and clothes the Lillies, will he not
feed and cloth his faithful servants? Yes undoubtedly, for he has promised
not to fail, or forsake them; Heb. 13.5, 6. For he has said I will not leave
thee, nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I
will not fear what man shall do unto me: They shall want nothing that is good
for them, for there is no want to them that fear him, the young Lions want and
suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Psalm.
34.9, 10. Verily they shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3. and God shall give them the
desires of their heart, ver. 4. and in the days of famine they shall be
satisfied: which may be matter of unspeakable comfort to the poor Saints of
God. It was the resolute faithful speech of one Elizabeth Young, a Confessor
mentioned by Mr. Fox in his Book of Acts and Monuments in the latter end of
the History of Queen Mary, When they threatened to starve her, quoth she, If ye
take away my meat the Lord will take away mine hunger. O Taste and see that the
Lord is gracious: Blessed is the man that trusts in him Psalm. 34.8.

And thirdly, it is every man's part to take notice of the benefit which he has
received at the hands of God; 3. Use. Molives to live to Gods glory.
and to walk thankfully toward God in the use of it, by a careful endeavor
to live to the glory of God. Let us, every one of us diligently labor to
perform this duty. For first, it is a just thing in respect of God, it is
meet that God that has given us life,

Secondly, it is a necessary thing in respect of our selves, for we shall live
to our one shame and eternal destruction most assuredly.

Thirdly, It is a profitable thing both in respect of our selves Math. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven. And 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles that where as they speak against you as
evil doers they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God
in the day of visitation. And as it is profitable to others, so also to our
selves abundantly. For as ye sow, so shall ye reap, if ye sow to righteousness,
your name shall be spoken of with honor when ye are dead and gone. The
righteous shall be honorable both in their lives and in their death. And
therefore while we live let us live to the glory of God, that so it may befall
us, that we may have honor in life, a sweet name after death, and that we may
be good examples to them amongst whom we live, that they also may glorify God,
when God shall visit their souls in mercy. Then will they (with David) bless
the Lord that gave us a life, and bless us, and our good examples: as he did
the Lord that sent her, 1 Samuel 25.
and her, and her good council.

But how should a man live to Gods glory may some say?



First, He that would live to Gods glory must shun all manner Pro. 8.13. The
fear of the Lord is to hate evil, pride and arrogance: and the evil way, and
the froward mouth do I hate, says wisdom there. Now, would you glorify God,
then hate evil, lay aside your pride, and let not arrogance come out of your
mouth: and so Prove. 14.16. A wiseman fears, and departs from evil: evil
courses must be forsaken, yea evil men that work wickedness: for both read
Psalm. 141.4. Incline not my heart (says David) to any evil thing to practice
wicked works, with men that work iniquity, and let me not eat of their
dainties: both evil works, and evil workers must be shunned, by such as
would live to the glory, and honor of the Author of their life.

Secondly, Such must carefully set, and settle themselves to That ye may be
blamlesse, and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked, and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world, says
the Apostle Paul. Phillip. 2.15.

Thirdly, We must labor all that we can, so much as lies viz. Heb. 3.13. But
exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfullnes of sin. And chap. 10.24. And let us consider one
another to provoke unto love and to good works. This is a special way to
glorify God in our lives, to exhort one another, to provoke one another, to
love and to good works. If people instead of provoking God by their sins;
and provoking one another to wrath by speaking and doing such things as they
know they cannot bear; Would study this commendable kind of provocation; we
should have a sweet time of it. In Isaiah 2.3. it is prophesied, that many
people should go and say, come ye and let us go to the mountain of the Lord,
etc. O that this prophecy might be more and more fulfilled among us. In the
use of these helps, we may some what, live to Gods glory, which who so does;
God lives in him, and he shall live with God for ever. Because I live (says
Christ Joh: 14.19.) ye shall live also.

The third proposition in this attribute is:

That God in respect of his attribute of life is infinite and incomprehensible.
This is evident in diverse respects.

First, because Gods life is independent, he has life in himself; he received
it not from any other. The Father has life in himself John 5.26. Whereas the
life of creatures depends upon him Deuteronomy. 30, 20. He is thy life and the length
of thy days says Moses there. And further as ye have heard already, out of
Acts 17.20 and 25 verses In him we live, move and have our being. God lives (I
say) of himself.

Deus est ita perse vivens ut ipse sit vita sua Zanch.
Secondly, Because life in God, is not a part of God, but his whole essence, life
is but apart of man, the bond or tie that kniteth the two essential parts viz
the body and soul of a man together. But it is not so in God. 1 John 5.10. this
is the true God and eternal life. Life and God is all one.

Dan 6.26. Darius is made to confess that he is the living God and steadfast
for ever. And so Nebuchadnezzar before, to wit, Cap. 4.34. honors him that
live, 1 These. 1.9. Heb. 9.14.
for ever etc. And in this regard he is said, Only to have immortality 1. Tim.
6.16. He is called a living God to distinguish him from all those other things
that are said to live: His life being eternal, as well as his whole essence,
and of himself. These are the three Reasons.

Job 22.13.14. And thou say, how does God know? Can he judge through the
dark clouds. Thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees not, and he
walks in the circuit of heaven. Hereupon wicked men are encouraged to go on
in their sinful way, Psalm. 10.13. Condemning God in their hearts, etc,
Thinking God 'cannot be present at all times. But always they are deceived.
Jer. 23.^3.24. Am I a God at hand says the Lord and not a God a far off. Can
any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him, says the Lord, do
not I fill heaven and earth says the Lord? And they shall find it to their
sorrow as the last, when God shall come to render vengeance to them for their
wickedness. O how woeful will their case and condition be! Deuteronomy. 32.39.40,
41.42. When God does lift up his hand to heaven and say, I live for ever, then
vengeance is not far from falling on the backs of them that go on their
wickedness, If he be a living God those that live in a sinful way shall die. The
soul that sins shall die. Ezekiel 18.20. It is a fearful thing to fall
into his hands, that is a living God. Heb. 10.13. Therefore methinks, sure, ye
should take heed of God. If ye have never so many adversaries in this world,
they may all die, and then ye need fear none of them: But this God that is the
adversary of sins, is a living God. Woe to them that does act as if God did
not see them.

Secondly. Seeing the life of God is infinite etc. it teaches Job comfort
himself with, Job 12.58. Psalm. 16.5.10 12.
and David. And in Psalm 36 9. He makes Gods being the fountain of life, the
ground of his joy and comfort. For with thee is the fountain of life, in thy
light shall we set light. Christ's being the reserection and the life is used,
John 11.29. to comfort Martha. And John 14 19. to Comfort all the Disciples.
Because I live, ye shall live also. So long as Christ lives his members live,
So long as God lives so long, shall the Godly live. The people of God that now
ly in the grave are alive in God and Christ. All are alive in God that are dead
and shall be brought forth of their graves, like toades out of their holls. But
the Saints shall be brought forth by Christ as their head to live with him in
glory.

Thirdly, Let Christians stand and admire the excellency of David is alive in
God still though his flesh see corruption. Let us rely upon the living God. Put
not your trust in Princes, for their breath goes forth, and their thoughts
perish. Nothing can do you either good or harm, but the living God, that
kills and makes alive. All things shall be as it pleases God, let men say
and vow, and plot, and confederate till their hearts ache. O that we could learn
this Doctrine, savingly, That Gods life is infinite and incomprehensible.

The end of the attribute of Life.
The Perfection or natural goodness of GOD.
Exodus 33.19. And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, And I
will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee, etc.
WE have formerly propounded unto you three things to be observed upon each
particular Attribute; the 1. whereof was, to show you that such and such a
thing is an Attribute of God. Now from this place of scripture which I have now
read unto you, ye may learn that goodness is an Attribute of God among many
others.

Triplex in Deo bonitas spectari potest, naturalis, moralis and bonitas,
benificentiae quae and benignitas dicitur.
The word passes under many acceptations, and is variously taken in Holy Writ:
Sometimes for an increated, sometime for a created goodness. Sometimes for
natural goodness or the due proportion of a thing unto the rule thereof, as a
good tree, and good fruit, and good money, and good wine, and the like.
Sometimes in a moral sense goodness is taken, and so created goodness is only
(of and among creatures) to be found in men and Angels: for in other creatures
there is only a natural goodness to be found, or at most, an useful, as by the
skill of man may happily be effected. That properly is called moral goodness
which is the essential integrity of the image of God: that is, the conformity
of the understanding and will, and of all qualities and virtues, thoughts,
endeavors, and actions, whether internal or external, with the rule of
goodness, to wit, the holy law of God. This created goodness, although it be
not any longer in its first integrity; yet in such as are regenerated; it is in
some measure restored, by the holy Ghost and the work of regeneration. Less. de
div. perf. page 52. There is a general or natural goodness in creatures, and a
more special or moral goodness.

Perk. Case of Conseience. (...).


And many good men and good works do we read of in scripture. But this is not
that goodness that I am now to speak of, either as in men, or as an attribute of
God. Although this acceptance also of the word good, be to be spoken of, when
I shall have finished this, viz. The Moral Goodness of God, or his holiness
or chastity (as some style it.) But besides these two acceptations of the word
good or goodness, viz. natural and moral; there is a third, which is useful
goodness, as the Greek word used for it does signify. And this will be found
to be another attribute of God, and shall be spoken of in due time. There is
yet a fourth, viz. when the Word is taken for Mercy or sweet compassion, which
also in regard of God, is to be referred to the attribute of Mercy. For the
present my work is to speak of the application of this word good or goodness to
God, according to the first acceptance, viz. as it is taken for natural
goodness: which some call the perfection of God to distinguish it from moral
goodness, which is sometimes also called perfection, though useful goodness
or benignity never has that name put upon it, nor mercy neither. Yet all four
have passed under this general word Goodness, as were easy to show if it were
to any great purpose.

The words which I have chosen to make my Text, do seem to me to speak of this
natural goodness or perfection of God. And I am much confirmed in mine
apprehension, by the concurrent judgment of Tremelius, so far as I can
understand him. For in his short Notes upon this place, upon these words tota
bonitas, all my goodness; he has these words in the margin, id est gloria ut
verse. 18.22. that is, my glory, referring to those verses, where mention is
made of the glory of God, that is, the Essence or perfect being of God: which
Moses unadvisedly did desire to see, v. 18. which is by God himself called his
Face, v. 20. And he said thou can not see my face and live. And v. 22. it is
by God himself called his glory. And it shall come to pass, that while my
glory passes by I will put thee in a clift of the rock, etc. And the same
Tremelius upon the words in 23. v. Thou shall see my back parts, has this
short Scholia (aliquam gloriae meae imperfectam imaginem) some imperfect
representation of my glory. And upon these words, but my face shall not be
seen, his note is, ipsissima mejestas mea retecta, my very hidden Majesty. So
that (me thinks) goodness in this text, cannot be understood, either of the
Moral goodness of God, which is his holiness, or of the useful goodness of
God, which is his benignity, or of that sweet inclination in God to succor
such as be in misery called sometime, the mercy of God, and sometime also the
goodness of God (as well as holiness and benignity: Therefore it remains
that they be understood of Gods natural goodness or perfection.

The words are an answer unto a demand of Moses, proposed as may be seen, v.
18. And he said, I beseech thee show me thy glory. A request somewhat like unto
that motion which Peter made, Mat. 17.4. Then answered Peter and said unto
Jesus, Lord is it good for us to be here, if thou will, let us make here three
Tabernacles, one for thee, Ipsissimam majestatem tuam, ab imaginibus nudam
admajorem rei confirmationem. Trem. in verse. 18.
and one for Moses, and one for Elias: of which motion the Holy Ghost bears
witness that he knew not what he said Luke 9.33 And so indeed may it be said of
this request of Moses here, he knew not what he desired. He would fain have
seen the very Majesty of God without representations or shapes; which had God
granted to him, he had been consumed in a moment: and so God tells him, v. 20.
And he said, thou can not see my face, for there shall no man see me and
live. The thing which Moses would have, was to see God as he is in himself;
which would have been a terrible and destructive sight unto him. But because
Moses made that request to a good end, (to wit, the confirmation of his Faith)
and from an honest and good heart: God passes by his unadvisednesse. And so he
tells him what he should not see, and condiscends to show him a gracious reason.
ver. 20. And then what he would do to gratify him, and to satisfy his desire
as much as was fit, partly in the words which are my text viz. ver. 19. and
partly in the three last verses of the cap. The sum of Gods answer in the
affirmative part thereof is. I will put thee in a cleft of the rock where thou
shall stand in a place by me, and while my glory, or my goodness (which is all
one here) Passes by, or before thee; I will cover thee with my hand. So that
you may easily perceive what is meant by this tota bonitas Dei, by this all
(or) complete goodness of God, which Moses could not see fully, but in part, the
back parts only of Jehovah: It is the natural goodness or perfecton of God. I
will leave the words under this more Paraphrase, as if God should say Moses, I
will do what I can for thee seeing thou meanest well, I know thou have a good
heart, and that it is to a good end, that thou desire to see my glooy. Thou
would be confirmed more in thy faith that thou might be the fitter to
lead a long my people. Thou desire to see mine essence without shape or form
and representation; But that cannot be granted. No man shall see me and live,
that is, while he lives here. That's reserved for glorified saints to feed
their eyes with unutterable delights in beholding my glory. Thou will be better
like me when thou shall see my face. 1. Joh. 3.2.
Thou shall one day be like me, for thou shall see me as I am. Thou shall then
be holy as I am holy, and happy as I am happy (according to the capacity of a
finite, though glorified being) Thou shall see the divine nature. But now
content thy self to see my back-parts for my face cannot be seen, to see me as
Abraham saw my day, viz. in the promise. To see me in mine, ordinance of
proclaiming the name of Jehovah before thee, In all my glorious title and
attributes, behold me, The natural goodness of God argued from his being the
efficient of all created perfections.
as thou shall shortly here them made mention of. Thou also shall see me in my
providence, Yea in some forms viz. of clouds and fire and noise of trumpets
and a sound of words thou shall see me: But my face cannot be seen. All my
goodness and natural perfections, thou a creature art incapable to see, yea to
understand, to see with the eye of thy mind. Goodness then as it signifies
perfection is (ye see) an attribute of God. Magis and minus dicuntur de
diversis, ut accedunt proprius vel longius ad aliquid quod maxim est tale
Greg. de Valen. 1 Tom. 86. Quod est maximum in uno quoque genere est causa
aliorum in illo genere, ut ignis est causa omnium Calidorum. Arist. 2. Metaph.
tex. 4. Goodness is twofold uncreated and created; uncreated is God himself,
who never had beginning, and who is goodness it self, (he speaks of his
natural goodness) because his nature is absolutely and perfectly good, and
because he is the Author and worker thereof in all things created. Perk. 2.
vol. 2.2. B. Bonitas naturalis in Deo est excellentia naturae divinae, per quam
habet omnem perfectionem in toto genere entis unde etiam complectitur
sanctitatem and benignitatem aliaque divina attributa, quatenus ad naturae
divinae perfectionem spectant. Lessius de bonitate Dei naturali, c. 1. in libro
7. de perfect. div: Deus non habet perfectionem suum ab alio, sed a se tantum,
ipse enim and prima perfectio. Idem Per viam sive modum affirmationis a
posteriori and ex consequenti possumus etiam pervenire in cognitionem
perfectionum Dei, juxta illud: Invisibilia Dei a creatura mundi (boc est ab
homine) per en quae facta sunt intellectu conspiciuntur Vigue: Granat. de Mist.
sanct. Trin. 251.
This totum bonum of God, is that excellency of his nature in regard whereof he
has all perfection in toto genere entis as the Schoolmen say. This attribute
comprehends all other attributes whatsoever, as they have respect to the
perfection of this divine nature. Now to demonstate this natural goodness or
perfection of God, (who is so good that he cannot be better) I will, fetch an
argument from the gradations of things according to perfection in this manner.
There is in the nature of things something which is best, most true, most noble,
the prime being, and which is the cause unto all other things of that goodness
that they have. There are entities more or less noble (as we have continual
experience) Now more and less are said of things diverse, as they come nearer,
or are more remote from that which is the rule and especially and perfectly
such. And this is God, the first efficient cause of all created perfections,
Per quod unum quodque est tale illudest magis tale.

A second argument or reason of Gods perfection.

Non ex vi ullius causae sed secundum suam quidditatem atque adeo ex se, etc.


which are more or less excellent as they come nearest or are most distant from
the goodness or perfection of God If all the goodness natural that is wrapped up
in the essence of all creatures, Angels, men, beasts, Fishes, Fowls, and what
ever else has a place in the creation, were gathered into one goodness or
perfection, God would infinitely transcend it. And the reason is because they
have all they have from God. God is the everlasting fountain of all the
goodness in the world, all Candles are lighted at his Candle: and by what any
thing is such as it is, that must much more be such: likewise the perfection of
God must be most complete, because he is the ipsum esse of himself. Other
beings hang upon the being of God, and did he not uphold them, they would fall
to nothing presently. But as for God, he is of himself, before the mountains
were brought forth, says the Psalmist, Ps. 90.2. Or ever thou had formed the
earth and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting, thou thou art God.

The former argument was strong. For since God does most perfectly act he must
needs be most perfect and good in all his actings, and therefore a most perfect
entity or being. But this second reason is more convincing. He is God of
himself, and not by the procurement of any other. Many other things, even to
the dazzling of the eyes of your understanding, might I say of this goodness of
Gods nature, and being: But that I am loath to puzzle you with dark things,
and notions, lest the words spoken by the Lord to Job, cap. 38.2 should be
applied unto me. Who is this that darkneth Counsel by words without knowledge?

Only those 4 reasons which Lessius brings out of Dionysius his 13 book de
divinis nominibus I shall briefly lay before you, to make it yet more plain,
Reasons out of Dyonisius.
that natural goodness or perfection is an attribute of God, and infinitely and
incomprehensible in him.

First Because he is perfect of himself, whereby is signified Qui est (...).
either as from an efficient cause or as from a formal cause, as it is done in
creatures; but he has all perfections in him from his most simple essence
alone. Where his perfection does not arise from the heaping or gathering
together of many things, as in creatures, of which not one can be said to have
in it self perfection: But from one most simple being, which is himself; and
so of him, according to every kind of perfection he is most perfect.

Secondly, Because God is more then perfect, that is above Est (...).
conceived. For nothing can be, thought upon by any created mind, so great,
noble, or excellent, but God is infinitely more excellent, and greater.

Thirdly, He containing in himself by his own essence, all Non potest augeri
vel minui.
but is still the very self same.

Fourthly, He is so full and more then full of all good things, Assidue omnia
suo influxu perfecit. (...).
by his giving out unto all creatures, and that daily and hourly, which
otherwise would vanish in a moment. He abounds (I say) with one and the same
unminishable giving, by which he perfecteth all things perfected, and fills
every thing with a goodness fit for it.

Whence it appears that God is the author of all natural perfection and
supernatural also. In all things from the highest, and those next unto
himself, unto the lowest of all, both in creation and providence he is present.
Math. 10.29. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your father says Christ to his disciples. Gods
beams of goodness do reach to all creatures and actions, not only once when he
made them, but daily and continually. He Romans 11.34.
whatsoever general goodness there is, either by creation to by ordination, it
comes from this perfect fountain. James 1.17. Every good gift and every
perfect gift is from above and comes down from the father of lights, with
whom is no variablenes nor shadow of turning.

First the substance of each creature has its goodness and perfection, be on
this good being of God and in this regard, says Mr. Perkins (whose ways I
will use, least I should be accounted a blasphemer, as out of ignorance and
malice I have often been for no more cause) Every creature is good, partly by
creation, and partly by ordination. Perkins in his Preface to his case of
conscience.
By creation, it is that the substance of each creature, as of the Sun, the
Moon, the Earth, Water, Meat, Drink, etc. is good. Having the being thereof
from God. Hence also, the essential properties, quantites, qualities, actions,
and inclinations of the creatures, in themselves considered, withal their
events are good. Things again do take unto them the condition of goodness, not
only by creation, but also by Gods ordination, whereby they are directed and
appointed to some certain uses and ends. Thus the evil conscience, hell and
death are good, because they are ordained of God, for the execution of his
justice, howsoever in themselves and to us they be evil.

And it must needs be so; Because (as we began this use) God is the author of
all things and actions, and his nature is absolutely and perfectly good. All
things that come to pass in the world are the fruit of that goodness that is
essentially in God. I mean as they are natural actions, for I speak not now
of the morality of them. And therefore that doctrine of general redemption
(as it must forsooth be called) so much cried up of late by some apostates and
self conceited men; Does discover it self to be a mere sottish opinion, And
very much below the heart and judgment of a man that is a sound Christian, or
indeed learned. For my part I cannot possible see God to be an infinite
perfect, and first-cause, if this doctrine be true and sound. I have been
almost thirty years enquiring for one Reason that I cannot Answer; and have not
yet met with it. But some may say this is strange doctrine, that all things and
creatures be good: What is the devil good too? we are sure he is called that
evil one or wicked one. Peccatum naturae, Et artis In peccato nihil positivum.
1 John. 3.12. To which I Answer, that God did not create the Devil as he is
considered a Devil, but an Angel. The soundest and most judicious, both
Theologicians and Metaphysicians do hold that sin is a Defect and has in it
nothing positive.

If ye be acquainted with the nature of the word Peccatum, sin, as it is to
be found in nature and in art, ye will easily be satisfied in this thing It is
in both when they do not attain that end for which either of them does operate.
As in nature, which never intends a monster, yet sometimes such a birth
comes: And in arts both liberal and mechanical; Often times faults and sins
do happen. And a Physician does sometimes kill when he should and would cure.
And a Carpenter sometimes spoils his timber in hewing or cutting it, which is a
fault. And so it is concerning the peccatum's committed daily against God's
law. There is a defect, a swerving from the rule. (Sin as the Apostle, John
says. 1 Epistle. 3.4) is an anomie, that is a want of confirmitie to the law
of God. I have showed you before now, of Adams fall, that three things are to
be considered in it, and in him first: Viz. the substance of his body and
soul, the faculties and powers of his body and soul, and the image of God
consisting in a conformity of the affections and powers to Gods will. So that
as in Music when the instruments are out of tune, there is discord, which is
the want or abscence of harmony, which we may call disharmony. So is it ni the
sin of Adam, there is only the want of conformity in the powers of the
soul. There is present substance and faculties of soul and body: But one
question more. Is there not sin besides the want of conformity in the powers
of the soul to the law of God, something else viz. an habit or presence of
evil? I Answer. If sin be considered by it self in its own nature, Sin is
not an inclination or action, but a want. But if we consider it with its
subjects, it is an evil inclination or action. As it is an action to take away
a man's life, to wit to move the body to lift up the weapon, etc. So it is no
sin properly for then the executioner that takes a way the life of a
malefactor should sin in so doing. It is therefore the disorder and
aberration in the action that makes it a sin. The nature of the sin then
lies not in the action but in the manner of doing the action, and sin
properly is nothing formally subsisting, but its a want of that which ought to
be or subsist, partly in the nature of man and partly in the actions of nature.
So that still it remains a most certain truth, that God is the creator and
ordainer of every thing and action whether it be good or evil. It is true lust
does draw the heart away from the service of God. And James 1.14. Every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and intised, and to intise or
draw away is an action that cannot proceed from a mere privation. But this is
still by reason of the subject in which this defect is. But I supose I have
said enough to give satisfaction about this thing. And to return, to close up
my use, That of things and actions, natural and supernatural, God is the
author and Orderer.

primu^ mobile in a gracious soul be well lodged, admirable effects will follow.
As for God his way is perfect, why so, because he is perfect, and what then? It
follows, he is a buckler to all those that trust in him. Psalm 18.30. And
then again. This perfect God will make our way perfect 10 ver. 32. It is God
that girdeth me with strength and makes my way perfect. He that sees Gods
perfection must needs run to him. What David prayed for touching Gods law,
Open thou mine eyes that I may behold the wondrous things of thy law. Psalm
119.18. That should we pray for touching God himself. Open thou mine eyes,
that I may behold the wondrous things of thine essence and nature. God says,
our is great without quantity, good without quality, Infinite without number,
beautiful without shape or figure, eternal without time, unmeasurable or
immense without multiplicity, most high without situation, the center of the
Uinverse to whom all things tend, in whom they quiesce, by whom they are
sustained, and (let me add with whom alone they can be satisfied.) In God is
allurement of all love, Consumation of all desire, termination of all motion,
satiety of all appetite; In God is the all of all.

Thousands are guilty hereof, even all such as forsake the Lord, the fountain
of living waters, and hew out to themselves cisterns broken cisterns that will
hold no water: what fools are such as will run to spunfuls, when they may enjoy
the Ocean, that forsake God in whom they may enjoy all things? what would ye
have that may make you happy, that is not to be had in God? would ye be safe?
His name is a strong tower, they that come to him shall dwell on high, their
strength shall be the munition of rocks: would ye walk wisely? come to him who
is wisdom it self, and ye may be wiser then your enemies, then your teachers,
then the ancient. I might enlarge my self upon several other particulars: But
I had rather help you to draw waters out of this deep Well, and this shall be
the next Use.

Fourthly, Therefore learn the skill to build handsomely upon is the chiefest
good must be trusted in, and brought home that way, and behold, a present
supply for all defects, a present remedy for all distempers, and a present good
for all sorts of men, and every kind of thing. To be men of hope, men of trust,
men of confidence, men of Faith. For now I must not care for criticismes. There
are differences and distinctions which sometimes have their Use. Faith looks to
the promises, Hope to the matter promised; trust or confidence is the strength
of hope, which being deferred causes waiting, waiting is hope and trust
lengthned out: We have many excellent phrases to set out this acting of the
soul; I will use them promiscuously: As first, of staying, secondly, of
resting; thirdly, of leaning; fourthly, of waiting; fifthly, of rolling our
selves upon God: And all these forms of words and expressions come to one end,
to wit, that goodness and perfection of all things is to be trusted and relied
upon. And according to the great mystery of Father, Son, and Spirit; we must
look upon God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them. 2 Cor. 5.19. Thus have we found a middle person a Mediator,
to bring perfection and emptines together: For supreme perfection does abhor
such as we are by sin, but our nature is made lovely to God in Christ: and Gods
exactnes and perfection is very dreadful, he is a consuming fire; but now it
is made lovely to us in Christ. Who has made up the vast gulf between God and
man. And now remember my Text, I will make all my goodness pass before thee. Do
but consider goodness and perfections in creatures, grace and holiness, sweetness
of affection, power and wisdom etc. And then abstract imperfections in your
understanding, incident to the best of men, consider that in men there be but
beams and sparkles of goodness no not in the best. But in God, fullnes which is
peculiar to him. And to help us to close with him, let us think upon his
incommunicable attributs, those glorious singularities (as one calls them)
which cannot be imputed to men. He is infinitely eternally and immutably Good.
He is a gracious God, a loving God, a powerful God, a wise God, etc. He is a
God, do but consider that. And lastly, further to draw us to put on this all,
in all, and to close with him; Consider for your ever lasting comfort that Gods
goodness and perfections are become fatherly. We must look upon him under that
sweet relation of a father, when we have occasion to make use of him. And both
these considerations are wrapped up excellently in that preface or introduction
Math. 6.9. Our father which art in heaven. Remember both, and resign up your
selves to his will, and trust in him. Thus we should strenghen our faith by
this perfection of God made useful for us in the hands of a mediator. It is
not enough for me to believe the sovereignty of God's will that whatsoever he
pleases that he does, that the will of God, is the necessity of a thing; and
so to see the perfection of his power: but also to know that his will is holy,
just, and good, and that he intends my good in all that befalls me, and
that his will is ever more most wise, guided by counsel, that he is a God of
judgment, and therefore to say the will of the Lord be done, not only
patiently, but faithfully, kissing the good rod with which he whips us,
trusting him for his skill and not calling at any time his good will to us into
question. Always to put our ready fiat to Gods placet, out of assurance that
no hurt shall befall us, that he can hinder, because he is our father: And that
he can hinder all things whatsoever, because he is in heaven. Thus I have
endeavored to teach you to climb Jacobs ladder, and to hold fast as you are
going up to your Father in heaven through Jesus Christ: and so much for this
Use, and also of this first Doctrine. That perfection is an attribute of God, I
come to the Second,

That this natural goodness or perfection is a communicable attribute. In
this sense at least in part, it is said Ecclesiastes 7.29. God has made man
upright, or perfect, or good. 2. Prop. or Doct.
It is true in one sense, Adam quickly lost that goodness which God gave him in
his creation, to wit the conformity of the powers of his soul to Gods most
holy will: but as yet as a creature he continued good, and all other creatures
are good as they are creatures. Fallen Angels and fallen men do keep that essential
goodness which God gave them in the creation. And that all creatures are good it
is evident Genesis 1.31. And God saw every thing that he had made: and behold it
was very good. And from the 119. Psalm and the 96. verse, where David says, I
have seen an end of all perfection: it must needs follow that there are
perfections, how else could David see an end of them? We cannot see an end of
those things that never were. Such things as have an end must of necessity
first have a being. Neither can the place in any case be understood of Gods
perfection, for of that there is neither beginning nor end. (...).
Of his greatness there is no end as the Septuagint and Vulgar latin read the
words, Psalm 145.3. Therefore it must be understood of created perfection that
David saw the end of: Magnitudinis sine non est finis.
therefore perfection is communicable, given out by God to creatures: such as
David had seen an end of. And although it cannot be true, that David had seen
an end of all perfection with the eyes of his body: yet with the eyes of his
understanding, Caryl on Job 5 part page 160.
he had seen an end (even) of all perfection. Doubtless the eyes of David's body,
had seen the end of many humane perfections. But by the ey of his
understanding, he had seen an end of them all. And so may every man else. For
the scaffold on which all worldly perfections are shown, must fall: and
therefore these perfections cannot stand. All our life is but an acting on a
stage, and God will be seen as perfect and excellent in those that act the
vilest parts, as in those that act the best. And though it be not good for
Judas to be damned; yet it will be good that Judas be damned in respect of God;
for in it, his justice will be manifested and declared. So then consider this,
the fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.29. Therefore we may see an
end of all those perfections, with the eyes of our souls; though not with the
eyes of our bodies. Therefore there are created perfections, and so
consequently, perfection is a communicable attribute of God.

But what do you mean by perfection may some say?

(...)
Ans. I Answer. The word has many acceptations in our English tongue, and the
word used in my Text is Tubh. And there are other words that are translated
perfection in our English tongue, as Thamim, and sometime Schalem. And this
word not (to my observation) at all: And therefore I will briefly tell you the
strict sense (first) of the word perfection, and then in what sense it must be
understood in handling this proposition. Perfection in a strict sense, is that
to which nothing can be added, What perfection is?
and from which nothing can be taken way: In this sense, there is no humane
perfection nor creature perfection. The utmost perfection is but the shadow of
perfection, there was seen by David an end of all. Whereas Divine perfections,
the end of them cannot be seen: when we have seen the most of them, there is
more of them unseen: of Creatures, it is true, they are frail and momentary.
But yet the word is used to signify all the works of God: which after their
kind are all perfect, so that nothing can be added by way of addition to any
creature in his kind to make it more perfectly such and such a creature, Sumos
negatum est staredici.

Omnia opera Dei sum perfecta.

Sicque perfectio summa creature re creta specie, est signum summae
perfectiones divinae in toto genere entis Lessius.

Duae proprietates entis veritas and bonitas. Praecipua bonitus ex ordine ad
finem ultimum.


speak of whatsoever ye will. And indeed the complete perfection of each
creature after his kind, is a sign of the divine perfection in the whole kind
of being in general. So that, that which God is the author of in all things
that have a being is their perfection. And this stands in two things, first,
their verity or truth; secondly, their goodness. Their verity, is their
conformity to that measure, and rule by which they are formed, and their
goodness is their perfect fitness for that end unto which they are ordained.
And these are the two proprieties of every created perfection. And every thing
is good and true; truly what it should be, as God from all eternity had
conceived in his eternal wisdom, and good and fit for those ends to which they
are made, which although they be manifold, yet is there one utmost end of all
things, to wit, the glory of God. And by how much more any thing serves to the
declaration of the natural goodness of God; it is truly to be called more
excellent and good entitative (as the Schools speak.)

And now to make some Use of this Truth: First, we learn Omne ens est bonum.
as they are essences and came out of Gods hands: and all actions are good as
they are natural actions; but of this I have spoken sufficiently out of the
former Doctrine.

Secondly, Let not any dare to find fault either with the creatures David, Ps.
104.24, 25. O Lord how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them
all: the earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide sea, wherein
are all things creeping innumerable: both small and great beasts. And for
transactions in the world, let us know that Gods providence is extended as far
as his creation: and that every creature in every Element and place whatsoever
is good and acts well; receiving a powerful influence from God, who
preserves them in their perfections and beings, and likewise in their
workings, and governs them to their ends. And should not God do so, by a
continued kind of creation; creatures would quickly lose their entitative
perfection, and come to nothing from whence they came. And should not God guide
things, Satan's malice and man's weakness would soon bring all to confusion. But
every thing made is kept to its work; even Devils and wicked men, who fulfill
Gods will while they rush against it, and do actions ordained even while they
trample ordinances under foot. Labor rather to submit to this truth of
communicated perfections to things and actions: Creatures work according to
their nature, man freely; others by natural instinct, those things are of God:
he maintains the power and manner of working; he stirs up our abilities and
actions as he pleases: He suspends or removes hindrances, and puts bars or
lets, Dr. Sibbs souls conflict. page 277.
etc. He is the cause of action in all things: Gods power and providence over
rules secondary agents so, that they shall execute his pleasure and not
disappoint it. All sufferings, all blessings, all ordinances, all graces, all
common gifts; nay our very falls, yea Satan himself, with all his instruments
as overruled and over mastered by God have this injunction upon them to further
Gods good intendment to us, and a prohibition to do us no harm. O that we could
see beauty and goodness in every providence.

James the Apostle says of wisdom, Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask of God, etc. So for all goodness and perfections, go to God, ask them
of him, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and they shall be
given you: pray for a perfect heart which Hezekiah had gotten. Isa. 38.3. I
have (says he) walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. And this
God requires of Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me and be thou perfect.
Beloved, God is a fountain, and he communicates to the creature: therefore ask
and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you: especially, I say, beg a good heart of God, a perfect heart. I know we
shall have some ignorant profane wretches make their boast of this: Though
they cannot talk as others do, and now and then rap out an Oath or two, and
take a cup too much or so; yet they have as good a heart as the best. But as
Christ said to the Devil, hold thy peace, etc. So must I bid such hold their
peace, never talk of a perfect heart: one may know by your tongues and actions,
what your hearts are, ever stark-naked, naught. And therefore do not deceive
your selves, in thinking ye have that which ye have not. But seek unto this
giving God, for a good and a perfect heart: the presence of which causes God
to look over and pass by many failings; and the abscence whereof was the
cause, that neither Cain nor his offering was respected. And to encourage you,
know that God has enough: And that is the last thing.

That God in this attribute of perfection or natural goodness is infinite and
incomprehensible. 3. Prop. or Doct.
I will not stand to prove the point; who doubts it? I have said enough here
and there in my former discourse to make this truth evident. God is absolutely
good without beginning, without end, without limit, Bonus dominus and amabilis
valde and bonitatis ens non est finis.
without manner and measure, anticipating, and alone containing every good:
Hence is it that all things suck their sweetness according to their capacity
from God. And the perfections of God have no efficient cause and want all
limits. So is Gods Pharaoh, and consider what the Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor.
10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealously? It is as if he should say, it will
not be for your ease nor profit so to do. For first, let men do what they will,
God is perfect in wisdom and cannot be deluded. Secondly, he is perfect in
power, and blessedness, and A good Note.
He suffers not by any thing, for he is infinitely and incomprehensibly
perfect. And this by the way may bear up the spirits of Gods poor servants,
afflicted and cast down for their sins. Their sins have not, cannot, touch God:
ye have not hurt God by your sins; there is no harm done (as we say) if ye have
made God in Christ your all. Thirdly, God cannot be hindered or Isay 43.13.
Says the Lord there: Yea, before the day was I am he, and there is none that
can deliver out of my hand; I will work and who shall let it? as if God should
say: If I have a business in hand, I would fain see that man that would hinder
me. But there be bars or nobles in the way, (for the word signifies either)
mark therefore the 14. verse. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, the holy one of
Israel; for your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their
nobles, and the Caldeaus whose cry is in the ships. If Bars be in Gods way,
Nobles, or Prelates, or Kings themselves: God does but laugh at them, Psalm
2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Heathen rage, People imagine; Kings set themselves, Rulers
take counsel. Bonds must be broken they be resolute. They will not allow of
Christ's ways and will. But he that sits in heaven shall laugh, the Lord
shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath and vex
them in his sore displeasure. He must be King in Mount Sion, in despite of men
and devils. What fools are men to blow feathers against Walls of Brass? to beat
water against the stream? to thrust fleshy feet against Iron pricks? that is an
expression, Acts 9.5. It is hard for thee to kick against the prick. And
therefore what mad men are they that run upon God, that run on his neck, upon
the thick bosses of his Bucklers, as Job speaks, Job 15.26. The folly of men is
seen first in thinking to match perfection. But secondly, it is far worse to
think to be too hard for God, who with one blast of the breath of his nostrils,
can blow all his enemies into hell, yea, all the world to nothing.

Jehovah blessed for ever. Sacrifice not therefore to your own nets and burn
not Incense to your own yarn; Give God the glory and praise of thy wit, wealth,
health, deliverance; and especially of saving grace; What have thou that thou
have not received?

pleasures, honors and the like. Might not all that these can do and much
more, be had in one most perfect? And yet how lamentably do men hunt after the
Butterflies of this world, Frustra sit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.
with labor, care, and danger of the loss of heaven: and yet if these things
together could make happy; it would be folly to have many things, when one most
united most pure, plentiful and perfect essence will do it; this is far the
further way about at best.

And lastly, for comfort to such as have made perfection their Habemus omnia
habentes habentem omnia.
There is in him to be had whatsoever can make us happy. If God and all the
world were divided into two shares, he alone is incomparably the best: blessed
are they that have him for their Shepherd, they cannot want; so David says of
himself, Psalm. 23.1. Because such have made the Lord most high their
habitation; no evil shall befall them, nor any plague come nigh their
dwelling. Psalm. 91.9, 10. God is the fullest fountain, and sweetness of all
things. By him they are what they are, and continue so to be. He commands
influence to stay or go. And happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his
help, etc. Psalm. 146.5. Be of good cheer, God is your portion, the more ye
spend on him, the more ye may. To conclude, take heed that none of you be
pointed at one day, that hear me this day, with a, Lo, this is the man that
made not God his portion. Ps. 52.7.
So much of the first Goodness, attributed to God, his natural goodness or
perfection: His holiness, benignity, and mercy, follows next to be spoken off.

The end of this Attribute.
The Holiness of GOD.
Psalm 99. v. 9. For the Lord our God is Holy.
I Shall speak of these words, as they contain a proposition asserting the
Attribute of Holiness, which is the third in order of the communicable
attributes of God, and now to be spoken of. For the formality of the words,
take only this. Jehovah is to be exalted and worshipped at his holy hill, why?
because he is holy: For the Lord our God is holy. But why might it not have
been said, exhalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill for the Lord
our God is, a good God, or a jealous God, or a merciful God? I answer, It is
true, there is enough in every attribute to draw souls unto God, and to move us
to exalt him, and to allure us to worship him: but yet when I shall have showed
you what holiness in God is, ye will easily be made to see that the
consideration of holiness will be a principal ground and cause to exalt him,
and to worship at his holy hill. A thing is said to be holy, first, when it is
separated from common use to the service of God. So the Utensils of the
Tabernacle, to the very Dishes, Tongs and Snuffers were holy; that is, were
separated unto God. And in this regard, the Lord our God is holy; for from all
eternity, he was separated from all other objects to himself, to love himself,
to take delight in himself: God is dedicated to himself from everlasting, and
his honor he will never give to any other: and therefore exalt him, worship
him, set him high, trust in him, honor him for he is holy, he is all for
himself, he is eternally dedicated to himself, and will make such know that do
not exalt him, what it is to displease so jealous, so holy a God. It is true,
self-love in men is very often inordinate, extremely, and so very vicious; but
in God it is a glorious beam, it is his holiness. And the reason is, because
there is none other meet to be an object of Gods love but himself. So this is
the first acceptance of the word holy, and you be according to this taking of
the word, God is holy, that is, dedicated to himself, and therefore that he is
to be exalted and worshipped, because he is so holy as has been said. He is
all for his own glory, all for himself; he never in the least action aimed at
any thing (nor will nor) indeed (can) but himself. There are many things which
asserted of men (as I hinted before) do render them very blameable yea unholy.
As to look after their own, Phillip. 2.4. To be lovers of there own selves 2 Timothy 3.2 and the like; Which ascerted of God do gloriously set out his
holiness. And so also in men, holiness is a separation from the world unto
God, holy persons, are persons dedicated to God. Thus have you the first
acceptance of the word.

Secondly, Holiness sometimes signifies purity. Yea know in our usual manner of
speaking, we do make holiness and purity Synonimaes, as in Luke 1.35. therefore
that (holy thing) which shall be born of thee shall be called the son of God.
To be holy is to be imaculate, that is, sine macula without spot, or blot, to
be agreeable and conform to the holy law of God. Holiness (says a late writer)
does consist in a complete uniformitie, and conformity to the will of God
wholly. Some are first table Christians, others second table Christians: Some
hot in acts of religion that are could in justice: some are very honest and
just to men that have no delight in communion with God, but James 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all. He that breaks one link of a chain, breaks the chain. One holy
nature gave every commandment, how can there be a state of holiness without
equal respect to all? Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all
thy Commandments says David, Psalm 119 6. And again, I have refrained my
feet from (every) evil way, ver. 101. To lose our will in the will of God is
holiness. So this in Christ, John 4 34. Jesus said unto them (to wit) to his
Disciples that had prayed him to eat some meat. My meat is to do the will of
him that sent me and to finish his work. And Math. 26.39. and 42. verses.
Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. And thy will be done, this was
holiness in Christ. In this sense holiness and rightousnes in Scripture do often
signify one and the same thing. I say (often) not (always) for where the two
words do come together, as Luke 1.75. In holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our life; we may understand most fitly by holiness the duties
of the first table, and by righteousness the yellding of obedience to the duties
of the second table. But I say holiness is sometimes put for righteousness, and
righteousness in like manner for holiness. As Psalm 16.3. David declares that
his delight is in the Saints (or holy ones) that are in the earth, which he
affirms to be the excellent, or such as excel in verture. And therefore some do
define holiness to be moral goodness which is a perfection of holiness in life and
conversation; a perfection of manners in act and habit as the Schoolmen call
it. So we account righteous livers to be Saints. And because there are none
perfectly holy in this life, we cannot gain say the Popish Schoolmen in that
sense, that aver and teach none to be properly holy in his life, I say if they
mean by properly holy, perfectly holy. For to make a man holy, there must be in
him a perfection of habit and conversation agreeable to the eternal law of
God. And as nothing is weight till it counterpose the weight that is set
against it; so no man's life is completely, that is perfectly holy; until it be
exactly answerable to the holy law of God, which cannot be said of any man in
this life until he come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the fulness of
Christ. Ephesians. 4.13. It is true Christ was full weight according to the
weight-stones of Gods eternal law, he was full measure according to that
met-yard, but so was never any man else holy or righteous, perfectly I mean
and exactly. This (by the way let me tell you) is one cause, why, when an
emenient person dies in Popish countries, whom they judge fit to be canonized
for a Saint; they let a hundred years pass after his death before they do it,
allowing a considerable time for the purgatory-purgations of his soul before
he pass for a Saint. But yet though properly, when by it we mean completely,
none be holy in this life: Yet are there holy one on earth, to whom the holy,
eternal moral law of God is a rule. And there are some, who though they cannot
keep all Gods Commandments; Yet they have respect unto them all. Such a one
was David Ps. 119.6. And ver. 111. he says. Thy testimony, have I taken as an
heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart and ver. 112 I have
inclined my heart to perform thy statute, always even unto the end. But to
proceed in showing you what holiness is according to this second use of the
word. I have said it is a conformity to the eternal law of God, and so it is.
For as the conception of the divine mind is the measure of natural perfections,
and of that being that is in all things; So the eternal law is the mesure and
rule of moral perfection, and of the holiness of a reasonable nature in all
good works. He is holy therefore whose affection and manners do exactly agree
to the eternal law of God. But here falls in a question by the way that calls
for an answer. To wit, whether all acts of obedience required now were required
ever, and such as have been required heretofore are still required? To which I
answer shortly. That Obedience to Gods mind is still required, Moralia sunt
aeternae veritatis.
and for all moralls they are still the same: But God has been pleased to make
positive laws, some ceremonical, some judicial which are now out of date. He
trained up the Jews under them indeed, but upon the dissolution of their
common wealth, their judicial laws ceased to be of use: And upon the coming
of Christ to be a sacrifice for the sins of mankind, the ceremonies as shadows
of good things to come did fly away. And so also we now in Gospel times, have
our proper Gospel laws, which the Jews had not. But yet the moral law is still
one and the same, and of it not one jot or title shall ever be altered or made
void. Well then, let us come to some issue. A man of an upright life and
conversation is a holy man. Ye see what holiness is in man, let us a little take
a view of Angels, those holy celestial flames: And we shall find that they are
holy in both the formentioned respects. For they make Gods glory, the end of
their actions, being given up to him, and to his honor: and there is no
blemish in their obedience: None in their nature, none in their lives. It is
true their holiness is but finite because created, and therefore perishable
holiness in it self: for they might fall if they were not supported, and those
Angels that fell at first were holy. Yea it is by the grace and decree of God
that these elect Angels do and shall continue holy, as it also is, that the
Saints-separate from the world unto God, do not return to the world again. Yea
this is true of the holiness and hapynes of Angels and saints in heaven. One
thing more, touching the holy Ghost who in this sense is called holy, not as he
is the holy God, but as he is the giver and worker of holiness and makes men
conformable to the law of God. And therefore he is called God the holy Ghost or
holy spirit, all the three persons, Fatner, Son, and Spirit are holy
essentially; but the third person is called the holy Ghost or holy Spirit,
because he it is that works holiness, and frames your Spirits suitable to the
holy law of God. Now if holiness be such a conformity in men to Gods law, what
glory is there in Gods holy conformity to his own mind and law, as you will
hear when we come to it. And in the mean time judge whether there be not
sufficient ground of calling upon men to exalt the Lord our God and to worship
at his holy hill, in the rememberance of his holiness, because he is a holy God,
because he never required any thing of any man that was not holy, just and
good; it is meet such a one should be exalted and set high, worshipped and
honored. Therefore Worship for he is holy both ways, in both acceptations of
the word he is dedicated to his own glory and so he is holy, and he is
perfectly, just and holy, righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works.
Ps. 145.17. Therefore exalt the Lord our God, therefore worship him. Ye see the
emphasis of the reason, and why the consideration of the attribute of holiness
is rather then of another attribute, made the ground of this inculcated
exhortation of exalting and worshipping God.

Now as in other Attributes formerly handled, so in this I shall speak of these
three propositions out of this Scripture.

1. That holiness is an attribute of God. 2. that it is a Communicable
attribute. 3. That Holiness in God is Infinite and incomprehensible.
For the first, that holiness is an attribute of God. Let those things be
remembered that have been spoken of the twofold acceptance of the word holy,
and we shall find that both are eminently true of God. He is all for himself,
he will not give his honor to another; Herod shall be smitten by an Angel and
eaten of worms for not giving God his glory, Act. 12.23. Self love (as you
have formerly heard) affirmed of men renders them ugly, but it is a glorious
attribute of God. And then also the conformity that is in God between his mind
and will (that I may so express it) evinceth this to be true, that the Lord
our God is holy. And thus we may say, the will of God, the actings of God, are
conformable to the eternal law of God; but yet the holiness of God is of a far
higher consideration then the holiness of men or angles. For the will of God and
his actings are not to be thought to be conformable in an accidentary manner to
an eternal law; but essentially and from within himself, not by diverse or
various virtues, but by his essence as it comes under the consideration of a
will, he is holy: even as the same one infinite essence coming under the
consideration of a mind, is said to be most wise, yea wisdom it self, so that
is (as it were) the ordering of Gods actions according to his understanding
which is called the holiness of God. There was never a wise action or word in
the world, but it came out of Gods head, nor never a good, right, or holy
action, but came out at his heart: Again whereas the eternal law does spring
from the divine essence which as it is the first original of all entitative
perfections: so also of all moral perfection, and of all the rectitude of the
affection and conversation: It then appears, that as holiness in men and
Angles does stand in conjunction with God in affection, so God most conjoined
to himself, both by nature and by the affection of love must needs be exactly
holy, according to the saying in the schools. Amor Dei est sanctitate, The love
of God is holiness, because in men it arises from the knowledge of his
excellency which draws their souls to God. Now therefore, no creature can be
holy as God is, because no man does know God as he knows himself. You know the
saying, ignoti nulla cupido of a thing unknown there is no desire. The reason
we love God no more, is, because we know him no better. All our want of love to
God, flows from our ignorance of him, he is holy among men that loves God most,
and he will love more then others that has a greater knowledge of God then
others. God knows himself and loves himself, and this is his holiness; Yea he
so adhears to himself, that he will cast down all things, rather then suffer
his honor to be abased. Lastly in the application of the acceptance of the
word holiness to God, you must know, that holiness stands in purity of soul,
free from all contagion and spot of sin; therefore God is holy in himself
without regard to an eternal law to be measured by. There is the holiness of
obeying a law, and the holiness of being a law. There is a created holiness and
an uncreated holiness. There is a regulating holiness and a regulated holiness.
Holiness in man is a complete conformity to the will of God: but in God there
is a complete essential will, and an essential freedom from the least spot
of sin. In Christ as man was an exact conformity and submission to his
father will, even contray to his creaturely will. But in God there is much more
for he essentially is holy, and therefore cannot be measured by a law. By this
time you perceive (I trust) what holiness is, which is an attribute of God: yet
for further Discovery of God unto you I will speak of the diverse ways, that
God is said to be holy, distinctly, properly, and perentically so, as none but
him can be so said to be holy as he is. Lessius.
God is said to be holy five manner of ways according to the doctrine of the
schools. First Radically, because the devine nature is the first root and
original fountain of all sanctity and purity. For from the essence of God,
in our manner of conceiving things, both the eternal law, and all love in God
of himself and all purity (called by some the chastity of God) does flow and
come. Schaerpius.
For although there be not in God a priority of nature in any regard; yet we
must conceive in him a prioritie of order. To clear up this by familiar
instances or similitudes, though the beams of the sun be as soon in, in nature
as the sun, yet we must account the sun to be the radical cause of those
beams. So also as soon as there is fire there is light and heat, yet is the
fire in order to be conceived before either of them. And so now, you may see my
meaning, when I say holiness is radically in God. I mean the essence of God is
the radical cause, root and fountain of that holiness which is in God. As God
the son has always been the son of God; and begotten from everlasting,
and is called the wisdom and word of God. So upon the same account the holy
Ghost is the love and holiness of the Godhead and divine essence and so
proceeds from the father, and the son; this helps us to discern some
what of the great mystery of the Trinity. And so although not the same truth
yet a truth like unto this would I hold forth in this Doctrine of radical
sanctity.

Secondly God, is objectively holy, because he is the object of all holiness.
For not only it is true of the holiness of angels men, but even of the holiness
of God, that it is placed in the love of, and conjunction with God. God is the
supreme of all things and most simple and pure, and the chiefest purity, is in
cleaving to him, and purity is holiness or the chastity of God therefore God is
holy objectively, as the measure of all holiness, and the fit object of self
love. For as in men impurity comes by touching things below, as when our
faces are soul or our garments dirty; And in our souls there is defilement by
cleaving inordinatly to the world and worldly things: so purity springs by
acquaintance with things above, when our affections do ascend to high and more
noble things, and do stick to them. And so God leaves to himself and is the
object and measure of his own holiness.

Thirdly God, is holy exemplarily in manner of a rule or copy. The conformity
of the soul and life of man to the eternal law is true holiness, such
conformity is in God to himself and law, though not because it is his law which
is the rule of holiness.

Fourthly, formally God is holy, he cleaves to himself who is most pure, and
is therefore formally holy. God is the love of himself this is his holiness,
and because he loves himself infinitely, as he is lovely infinitely, therefore
he is infinitely holy. Yea God in the love of all his creatures is holy, Psalm
145 17. He is holy in all his works.

1. He loves them for his own sake. Sanctum esse, est amare Deum, et gloriam
ipsius in omnibus procurare. To be holy is to love God and to seek his glory
in all things. And so he is holy in all his works.

And Secondly he is holy in all his works, because they are exactly conformable
to the rectitude of the eternal law. Quia tam perfect vult rectitudinem quam
perfect illam concipit. He works as perfectly as he conceives perfectly. As is
Gods judgment so is his will: And hence it is that the love of the Father is so
passing great to Christ, for the father loves the son, etc. Joh. 5.20. Why
should God love the son more then any other creature; but because he saw more
of himself wrought in the son, then in any other creature. Love is an
inclination of the will to that thing which is good, and thereupon the soul of
God runs out to Christ who was altogether lovely: this is formal holiness in
God, this is the formality of this attribute in God, he loves himself in his
love to the creatures. All the actions of God proceed from an holy spirit,
from a spirit of holiness: As has been said already, holiness is to love God,
to seek Gods glory, to love ones self in God, and in this sense God is
certainly holy for he loves none as himself and seeks and aims at his own
glory in every thing he does.

And here (by the way) let me speak a word of the formality of the holiness of
Saints. Is it not their love to God and Christ. And the Saints that makes them
to delight in beholding him whom their soul loves. Doubtless it is. My beloved
(says the spouse) is whit and ruddy the chiefest among ten thousand. Canticles
5.10. As it was said by the Queen of Sheba of Solomon. 1 Kings 10.8. Happy are
thy men, Happy are those thy servants which stand continually before thee, and
which hear thy wisdom: So much more may we say (as the spirit of holiness makes
us to say.) Blessed are they that know Christ, and have of the graces of his
Spirit. And here I must needs say once again if God be holy, because he loves
good men which are his choice workmanship; then so are the Saints therein holy
also, for they love wonderfully that choice master piece Christ, and all the
Saints which are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians.
2.10. And so by the rule of contraryes, as it is said Psalm 45.7. by way of
prophesy and mystically of Christ, Thou love righteousness and hate
wickedness etc. God must needs hate sin with an infinite hatred: for he loves
the rectitude of the eternal law, and therefore hates what is contrary to it,
for the sinfullnes of sin is its contrariety to Gods eternal law. And then
Secondly, God necessarily loves his own goodness and perfection, and therefore
necessarily hates sin which is contrary and repugnant to that goodness.
Repugnant I say, not as one form to another, but as an inordinate thing to its
rule and measure. Keep sin up and God must go down, keep God up, and sin
must go down. You may as well expect to see the Ocean sea burn to ashes, or
stones to fly upward, as look to see an union between God and sin, or that
God should not look upon it with highest indignation. What sin is, you
should find in every catechism almost, it is the transgression of the holy
law of God, even the least sin does turn aside Gods love, and because he is
holy, it makes his very soul to hate the persons in whom it is. Sin is like
Coloquintida in the Pot, and this I must tell you that when God smells it, he
cannot but throw away pot and all, it is so contrary to his holiness. Where ever
God sees sin he runs at it presently. If his own son do but stand in the
sinners steed, though he had no sin of his own, yet you see how the wrath
of God ran out against him. And the reason is, Gods love of his law, which is
his holiness, of which sin is the transgression, and upon this account God must
needs hate it. And this David a man of much acquaintance with God tells us,
Psalm. 5.4, 5. For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with thee, The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou
hate all workers of iniquity, and so Isaiah 1.24. Ah says the Lord, I will
ease me of mine adversaries and avenge me of mine enemies. By which words the
prophet means, that God will not be appeased, he will ease himself; here is
an allusion to the disposition of men, Calv. in loc.
for even as wrath is nothing else but a desire of revenge: so revenge it self
also is a kind of contentment: for when any is revenged he is glad and
satisfied. Thus the Lord says, that he will satisfy himself in chastising
his enemies, as if it were a kind of recompense. And because this holiness of
God does so glorious shine-out in his hating of sin, which is contrary both to
his eternal law and workings, in both Church and world, and also to the actings
of Saints, acted by the Spirit of holiness: I will a little fasten here and give
you some evidence of the bitter hatred which is in God against sin.

First, Therefore when we shall see an all-mercifull God to Evidences of Gods
hating sin.
certainly you must suppose there is some great cause and reason for it, why,
the fruition of God is the greatest good, and Angels and men were his most
excellent creatures: yet such is Gods holiness causing his hatred of sin that
he tumbles man out of Paradise, and Angels out of heaven, here is one evidence
of Gods hatred of sin and severitie against sinners.

But Secondly, God does not only deprive these prime creatures of such a
goodness, to wit, himself infinitely and eternally, And the Angels which kept not
their first estate (or principality) but lost their own habitation, he has
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great
day, Jud. ver. 6. And for men, who can be ignorant of these mysteries, sin
has brought upon all sexes and ages even in this life, besides those
everlasting burnings, to the which all wicked ones are reserved?

If the righteous turns away from his righteousness and commits iniquity,
etc. All his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned in his
trespass, Ezekiel. 18.24.
that he has trespassed; and in his sin that he has sinned, in them he
shall die. If a man should live many a year in serving God, and do great
things for the people of God; Yet if he give out and sin, and persist and die
in his sin, all his former good should be blotted out. Q. A.
But here comes a great question, can a righteous man fall from his
righteousness? To which I answer, It is impossible, Ratione Decreti and
promissionis, in regard of Gods decree and promise: Yet we must know that as
God only has immortality essentially and immutably: so likewise all kinds of
goodness are only in God firm and sure. Saints might fall, Angels might fall,
the Saints in heaven might fall and die also again, were it not that God holds
them to their estates, he has brought them unto, and will even as the Psalmist
says, Psalm 91.4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings
shall thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. But for more
clear and full answer to the place in Ezekiel. You must know that the Holy
Ghost means not truly gracious, neither is it the scope to prove falling from
grace, but to clear the Lords justice, and my scope is to show the deadly
hatred God bears to sin. And either by righteous in that place we are to
understand a moral, legal, righteous man, or else it is a caution to prevent a
righteous man's falling, if we will understand it of Gospel righteousness. Or
lastly, (as I intimated in the beginning of my Answer to his Question) it may
be true of a righteous man considered in himself, not in relation to God or
Christ, that he may turn from his righteousness as Angels and Adam did. We have
a rule conditional, suppositions are of things impossible, as well as of
possibles, and therefore make what ye will of the text, ye can never
necessarily conclude, either with Bellarmine, that a man may, Exuare cor novum,
put away a new heart, that faith may be lost. Lib. 3. de Inst. c. 14. Quid
clareus? quomodo quaeso avertitur justus a justicia, si fide sola justificatur
and fides semel concepta extergui non potest? or with Arminians that it is so
evident, that every one may see it, that a just man may totally and finally
fall away. Hominem justum posse totaliter de ficere. Ames. in antisynod. de
presen. Sanct. c. 2.
Christ tells his disciples that he would send the comforter, that he might
abide with them forever, that he might dwell with them, and be in them John
14.16.17. But I must end this business which is but by the by. God must needs
hate sin, seeing one sin in the evening of a man's age persisted in unto death
will make God forget, all former services done to him (this is the third
evidence.)

Fourthly, Gods willing the abased incarnation, and dolorous his soul an
offering for sin, to lay down his precious life that this ugly thing sin so
hateful to Gods holiness might be slain as well as satisfied for; and that Gods
soul might be eased and comforted, justice being satisfied which the holy
severitie of God did call for. I have been very long upon the formalitie of
Gods holiness, which as you may remember, is the fourth way or manner God is
said to be holy in.

A Fifth, and indeed the last way or manner is, that God is said to be holy,
Eminently, and causally; as the fountain and viz. of and unto his own holiness
and formally holy, also (as has largly been demonstrated, So likewise to the
creator of all creatures holiness? He is the and cleanses them from filthiness,
and planteth in them holiness by his holy spirit. And thus our God is holy as he
does effect holiness. Secondly he gives the very species of holiness. Holiness (as
I have told you) is placed in loving God, and his ways, Christ and his people:
Now it is God that forms Christ in us, and gives a spirit of conformity to him
in holiness. He is the formal cause of holiness in creatures, not informing but
in a higher way, and without imperfection, we are transformed by the renewing
of our mind, Romans 12.2 The (...) the new creature, the change of the soul, (as
the work is variously termed) is wholly from God. And so their people come to
be willing in the day of Gods power, in the beauties of holiness Ps. 110.3. Then
when they have a holy frame of spirit, they being to value ordinances, and run
too and fro for the increase of their knowledge, Daniel 12.4. they cleave unto
God, and one to another, praying in the Holy Ghost Jude. ver 20. and submiting
themselves one to another in the fear of God Ephesians. 5.21. Even as the father
loves the son, and the son loves the father, and God loves himself
because of the holiness in their divine essence: so it is with the Saints that
are made to be holy and are renewed.

Thirdly, God is exemplarily the cause of holiness in creatures, principum
exemplare. Not only the mind and will of God revealed in the scripture, but
also the histories of Gods dealings in point of holiness, who would have us walk
as he has, and be holy as he is holy. And yet this is not all, we have a
plain familiar copy, a demonstration before our eyes, I mean the behavior and
conversation of Christ in the days of his flesh, he has left us an example,
that ye should follow his steps. 1 Pet. 2.21. Such as walk according to these
coppies and this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Holy Israel of
God, Gal. 6.16.

Fourthly, All the holiness of the creature is directed unto Gods glory was that
which they aimed at; this was that spoild all. And therefore (Christians) well
is that we have a Christ, for seeing God will no further look upon us then we
perfectly aim at his glory in every thing; what would become of us had we not
a Christ? Seeing self ends will so mingle themselves with one best
performances, have we not cause to bless God for Jesus Christ; it is our duty,
and let it be our practice to bless God for Jesus Christ. To Sum up all.
Holy men have holy minds, their holy minds are fixed upon God. The will, word,
and works of God and Christ, are coppyes before their eyes; and lastly, holy
men aim at Gods glory and not themselves, (for they are swallowed up in God,
and know whom they have believed) therefore I commend in all these respects,
God to be eminently and causally holy. Now lets come to make some use and
application of this truth, Uses of the Attribute of holiness in God.
that the Lord our God is holy, that holiness is an attribute of Gods. And first
by way of information it teaches us, that holiness is not to be contemned, nor
such as labor after it is not to be set light by, nor holy persons despised. Woe
therefore to those that despise holy persons, this must needs be an heinous
offense; why Sirs, what do ye mean? Holiness is an attribute of God, and can
that be base or despicable, which God takes, and makes to be one of his own
attributes, one of his names which must not be taken in vain; much less not
trampled upon. Are such to be blamed that desire to be like God? to be holy as
their father which is in heaven is holy? what horrible wickedness is this! to
mock at holy people, as to twit them with holiness, is to mock at God: those
that do so, are like unto such wretched servants in a house, as will dog and
misuse a child in the family, because it is like his father, whom they yet
take wages off and live by, and can not live with out: little do men think to
what a pitch of sinfulness their carriage this way does amount unto: though
many think it nothing to mock at holy people, yet is it a very great sin: And
yet what is more in disgrace then holiness? who more despised then pure and
holy souls? Oh these are your pure folks, these are the holy sect, and the
like scoffing speeches. If a man do but look toward the ways of holiness, he
is streightway had in derision by profane people. How do parents abuse their
own children even among us in this place, if they do but look toward Sion,
and even weep for mad* Alas poor souls! Oh that I had but bowels to pity
you as there is cause. Do ye know what ye do? Let me tell you, ye mock at that
which must be in your selves or ye shall not see God. Heb. 12.14. and holiness
without which no man shall see the Lord; yea ye mock at that without which ye
cannot serve the Lord. Josh. 24 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord for he is an holy
God, etc. Such as despise holiness cannot serve God, so this is the first use.
If you should have thoughts of indignation against people because they be holy,
ye would plainly declare that ye are none of Gods servants, none of his
worshippers, and as first I said, that ye shall not see his face in mercy, so
much for that; they that labor to be holy are not to be condemned, nor
holiness which is an attribute of God contemned.

Secondly, If holiness be an attribute of God, then it further Jesse the root
of holiness. The spirit of glory and of God rests on you, says the Apostle
Peter, 1 Epist. c. 4.14. (which may rejoice under their reproaches for the name
of Christ, when a soul loves God, and is seeking to set up his glory, this is
matter of great joy, because they are partakers of his holiness; O well shall
it be with such, and happy shall they be, Psalm 128.2. The Apostles, Acts 5.46.
Departed from the presence of the Council rejoicing, that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name. And so may all holy ones be their outward
condition what it will.

Lev. 11.44, 45. and cap. 19.2. Ye shall be holy for I am holy; this is that
the Lord calls for from all persons, nothing will give him content but this:
you know the saying, likeness makes love. And here it takes place, if you will
have God to love you, you must labor to be like him. Nothing will please him
but holiness: if you would give the fruit of your body for the sin of your
soul, yet that will not give him content. But ye must be holy, the reason is
given, because the Lord your God is holy. Be exhorted therefore to labor for
holiness.

To move you, consider first, the excellency of this grace, Motives to labor
for holiness.
it is of the divine nature, it is most excellent: The excellency of a thing
will make a man to labor for it; excellent things are the objects of wise men's
desires and labors. Now there is nothing

Secondly consider this too, holiness is a thing which every Ever imagination of
the thoughts of man's heart is only evil continually, Genesis 6 5. How can man be
clean that is borne of a Woman Job 25.4. the interrogation there is a vehement
negation? How can, that is, it cannot be; But we are all as an unclean thing,
and all our righteousness are as filthy rags. Isaiah 64.6. There is none
righteous no not one, there is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God. Romans 3.10.11. Holiness you see by nature. Every man (says
one) is borne with his face to sin, and his back to holiness. And yet this
holiness is of absolute necessity: Riches life, health, friends are good
things? But yet they are not of no such necessity, but holiness is. Without it
no man shall see the Lord, Heb 12 14. A man may see the Lord without peace,
with out wealth, but not without holiness be sure of that. No holiness, no
heaven. Rev. 21.27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles. Those that are without holiness must abide without heaven. Heaven
Gates are shut against all unholy persons. They that do look for salvation
must be holy, must be washed, as says the Prophet Jer 4. cap. 14. O Jerusalem
wash thine heart from wickedness that thou may be saved. This is the second
motive to move us with earnestnes to seek after holiness, considering the
absolute necessity of it.

Reasons.
It is communicated as may Adam he was a holy man: And therefore we may well
argue that holiness is to be had, Ab esse ad posse valet argumentum.
because it has been had.

Secondly God has likewise communicated it in regeneration Ephesians. 4.24. And
that ye put on the new man which after God is So then, if God made man holy at
first and make many holy again, daily by renewing them in the spirit of their
minds Ephesians. 4.23. Then it stands for an unquestionable truth in both these
respects, that holiness is to be had, to be in themselves, and not in God. What
is the reason that so many are altogether destitute of this grace, that they
have not so much as one grain of it in their hearts, or the least sign of it
in their lives? Surely it is because people do not give themselves to use the
means to obtain it, they will not walk in those ways in which it is to be
had. The fault is not in God but in themselves. Souls, God call's you to be
holy, and sends his messengers to invite you to come to him, that ye may be
holy, he calls upon you to turn from your evil ways, he sometimes allures, he
would you should be holy, but ye will not, God has done his part. He may say
of you as once he did of Israel, Isaiah. 5.4. What could be done more to my
Vineyard that I have not done in it? There has been nothing wanting in God,
and yet instead of the sweet and pleasant grapes of holiness, he has had
nothing else, but wild grapes from us: instead of holiness, profanesse, and
wickedness: And that which is sad to consider, the more God calls men to
holiness, the further do they run from him into all sin and wickedness. Of what
punishment suppose ye shall such be thought worthy, that tread under-foot the
Son of God and count the blood of the covenant an unholy thing, and do despite
unto the spirit of grace; Heb. 10 29. How will men be able to answer this
before our God who is a consuming fire? How do ye think to stand in the
judgment: O ye sinners, and in the congregation of the righteous in that day?
How can ye ever expect to rest in Gods holy hill and continue in unholines.
What desperate madness is this? Surely, Christ will come and he will separate
between the sheep and the goats, he will devide the holy from the unholy: you
shall answer for your prophanes and base carriage toward the Lord and his
people. This is the first use, the fault is not in God, that people are not
holy, but the fault is in themselves, If now ye be damned ye may thank your
selves: your destruction will be of your selves. For God would have you holy,
he stands at the door and knocks, The Lord grant that this may be thought on,
that has been said. So much for the first use.

Secondly it teaches us for our everlasting comfort, that such as do desire
holiness may have it from the hands of God. Mat. 8.2. Lord if thou will, thou
can make me clean. That Jesus put forth his hand and touched him saying, I
will, be thou clean, v. 3. So will he put forth his hand and say, I will, be
thou holy. Ye cannot be more willing, nor so much neither, to have holiness as
God is to give it. We read of Paul, 2 Cor. 12, 89. How be sought the Lord when
the thorn in the flesh was sent him, and what answer he had, viz. to wit, that
God's grace was sufficient for him: Now have you bad natures? bad hearts?
remember God is both able and willing to give you new natures, and to creat in
you clean hearts. If you will cry unto him, and complain of your stony
hearts: he can take away these hearts of stone, and give you hearts of flesh.
If you groan under sin with a desire to be rid of it, know this for your
eternal comfort that the work of grace is begun in you already. The work I say
is begun, and he that has begun that good work will perfect it unto the day of
Jesus Christ. Never was there a soul that groaned after holiness, sincerity,
that ever perished for the want of it. These groans could not be, but by the
spirit of Christ, and where the Spirit of Christ is, there is Christ's dwelling,
and where Christ dwells, there is true faith. You that desire holiness that
hunger and thirst after righteousness are pronounced blessed. You are in Christ's
school though but in the lowest form.

Motives
Thirdly, this may provoke you to holy desires and endeavors seeing holiness is
to be had, and God both commands it, Lev. 20.7.8. Sanctify And moreover the
Lord has promised that they that ask shall have, that they that seek shall
find, and that to them that knock it shall be opened, Math. 7.7. And yet
again, consider the Without it we cannot see God, Heb. 12.14. no holiness, no
heaven. And therefore upon these and such like considerations, we should be
stirred up to put to it, to the purpose, and labor to be holy as God is holy.
I am loath to leave this point: therefore for an other motive; unto that which
he labors for: Now Beloved what a copy have we to walk by? Even the Lord
Jesus Christ who is sent from heaven to us that we might writ after him. God
(its true) is a copy. Be ye holy for I am holy. But that indeed was a very
hard one for us to writ by. But now he has given us a living law in the Lord
Jesus, who is made unto us of him wisdom and righteousness and sanctification,
etc. 1 Cor. 1.30. Now he has given us his own son to draw out every letter
before our eyes, that so we might the better write after him. Good men be
blessings, whose examples are to be followed: but there is no man so good, but
has his faylings and defects. But now Christ has neither spot, nor wrinckle,
nor any such thing in him: for he is full of knowledge, and likewise of the
fear of the Lord. All sorts may learn of him how to behave themselves.
Children may learn of him how to behave themselves toward their parents,
subjects and people to Princes and Magistrates, in him we have a copy for
prayer, how also to be doing of good upon all occasions, to love our enemies,
not to revile again when we are reviled. In things both concerning this life
and the life to come, we have patterns in Christ to immitate. In Christ I say
not as God, but as man endued with the graces of the Holy Ghost. And this is
that living ooppie, which the holy God has provided for us that we might be
holy too.

Sixthly, And yet this is not all. The Scriptures are left to be John 15.3 Now
ye are clean through the words, which I have spoken unto you. The word of the
gospel is that which cleanses people. By it they are sanctified as it is
expressed in that heavenly prayer of Christ John 17.17. Sanctify them through
thy truth, thy word is truth. And so also Ephesians. 5.26.27. That he might
sanctify it (speaking of the Church) with the washing of water by the word,
that he might present it to himself a glorious church not having spot or
wrinkle of any such thing: but that it should be holy and without blemish.

7ly. We have many outward favors, whereby God does allure us into holiness.
Every outward blessing and mercy should Luke 1.74.75. That he would grant unto
us that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. God would
by his blessings (as it were) get into our books: his love tokens are sent to
woe us to holiness. And therefore when we are tempted to sin, let us say as
Joseph did Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? O
let the minds of God engage us unto holiness: let his loving kindness
constrain us to labor after it. Psalm 51.7. purge me with Hyssope and I
shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter then snow. And again ver. 10.
Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. And to
Paul prays for the Thessalonians, That the God of peace would sanctify them
wholly, and that their whole spirit and soul and body might be preserved
blamless etc. 1 These. 5.23. This is the first means to be used for the
obtaining of holiness.

Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. Such as would have money must learn how to tell
it. Then are diverse sorts of moneys and coins abroad in the world, and
therefore labor to know the King of heavens coin. And learn to try it too
from counterfeit, there is much false money going.

I will a little speak of this holiness, which I am now persuading you to labor
for and to seek after.





We shall the better see what this holiness is, by its contrary to wit the old
man, and the former conversation thereof. Virtues appear the better and shine
the more gloriously, by those vices that are contrary to them. A fair beauty
is the more lovely in a comely woman, when a blackmore stands by. A soil sets
forth a Diamond. What the old man is;
And therefore that we may the better see the loveliness of the new man, we
will look a little upon the old man. That therefore which is called the old
man, is want of knowledge in the mind, and a delight in ignorance: A fullfilling
the desires of the flesh. Ephesians, 2. verse 3. Let us fasten here a little. A
blind mind, an ignorant soul, is not subject to the law of God; neither indeed
can be. Romans 8.7. And therefore though God forbid men of this frame to love the
world, yet they will love it still, they Peter deny Christ, he will weep
bitterly. If David step aside as he did in the matter of Vriah, he will water
his couch with his tears and make his bed to swim. But as for these poor unholy
souls their case is sad and dismal: Never tell me say some of holiness and
exactnes: I will not, no, I will not, I will die rather. What holiness is?
Such we read of in Jeremy, As for the words that thou speak, we will not
do. And again, Let us not give heed to any of his words. Well Sirs, since there
are among you such as will not hear us speak of God to you; Yet we will not
cease to speak to God for you.

And now let us see what holiness is. Three things in the soul.
It is indeed the restoring of all these defects which I have spoken of to you.
But before I go any further in that matter, let me show you three things in the
soul, First, the substance thereof. Secondly, the faculties or powers of the
soul. Thirdly, the qualities of these faculties. Ye have a fit resemblance of
these in an instrument of music, there is the instrument, the strings, and the
harmony. Now ye must know when Adam fell, the substance of his soul was the
same afterward that it was before. The devils have the same substance in hell
that they had when they were in heaven: Neither are the faculties of the soul
lost by the fall, but only the good qualities are defaced, that which we call
the image of God. As first for the understanding, knowledge, Collos. 3 10. And
have put on the new man, Says the Apostle there, Which is renewed in knowledge
after the image of him that created him; where we may easily gather that holy
souls are knowing souls, understanding what was lost is found again. And then
secondly, for the will and affections, Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new
man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness; knowledge
is opposed to ignorance, an ignorant person is an ungodly person: And holiness
and righteous to concupiscences and the lusts of the old man. To which if ye
add one thing, to wit, sincerity and truth, and an aiming at Gods glory, then
ye have the body of holiness. So now ye see that an holy frame of the soul
stands in the absence of the contrary evil and a positive quality and habit
of goodness. Some set it forth thus: Holiness respects God immediately, and
is contained in the duties of the first Table. Righteousness respects man and
the creatures, and compriseth the duties enjoined in the second Table; Truth
respects the manner how both the former are to be practiced. These make a
perfect harmony in all the faculties of the soul, and are that created
holiness which is communicated from God; as first to Adam in his creation; so
since to all regenerated ones.

A seventh motive to move us to labor for holiness.
Be exhorted I say, again to get holiness; and let me add one consideration
more to stir you up to labor for holiness, viz. That the most holy men are
the least fearing men: Paul was of great courage, he had much holiness: 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. Ye are witnesses, and God also how holily, and justly, and
unblamably we behave our selves among you that believe. Therefore when the
Viper leapt upon his hand he feared not: Polluted souls are full of fear. Saul
was afraid of David, because the Lord was with him, and was departed from Saul,
1 Samuel 13.12. And Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an
holy, Mark 6.20. Magnas vires habet pietas. Godliness has great strength. The
righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be
stronger and stronger: Job 17.9. so Prove. 28.1. The righteous is bold as a
Lion: Nehemiah was an holy man, and would not fly) Should such a man as I flee,
says he; Nehemiah 6.11. If God be sanctified by us, he will be a sanctuary to
us. If Fortitude were of such high account among Heathens, when it was but a
virtue; what esteem should it have as a grace? Do but get holiness, and ye
need not fear of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against you
round about, as David did not, Psalm. 3. v. 6. Though 40. men bind themselves
with an oath against a holy man; yet they can do him no harm. If Nebuchadnezzar
theaten the fiery furnace to the 3 Saints in Daniel; yet they will behold, An
Deus est in mundo pro nihilo Card. borrom. Silentiarius. Si Deus mei curam non
habet, quid vivo?
Daniel 3. from the 13. verse to the 19th. A holy man need not fear any thing.
Holiness will carry a man through the world. He that knows himself to be one
of Gods holy ones. May bid defiance to all fears and dangers whatsoever.
Holiness arms a man with armor of proof against all fears. What said a
Cardinal being told of great danger, is God in the world for nothing? And
another, if God have not care of me, why do I live? And now Christians arm your
selves against fears by holiness: fears of the world, fears of death, which
God knows how soon may seize upon us. God will be a sun and a shield to his
holy ones. Sum up all these motives that have been made use of first and
last. Holiness is that which God commands: For the attaining of it, he has
given direction. He has promised that they that ask and seek for it, forget
it: ye have seen the great danger they are in that want it: Ye have also heard
what a copy we have in Christ before our eyes, holiness acted before our eyes,
as well as directions given. We have the Canon of the Scriptures enlarged,
which God makes effectual for the working of holiness: Many outward gracious
vouchsafe-ments, do we live under, which should prevail with us. And lastly,
ye have heard what a shield and buckler holiness is, and what spirited, bold,
and courageous men Saints and holy men do use to be. Remember also that wicked
men have terrors and fears; their name is Mayor Missabib, fear on every side:
That they shall never see the face of God in mercy, but shall be without.
Depart part they must from God with his curse upon their backs into hell
torments with the Devil and his Angels, and that for ever more. When Saints,
Gods holy ones, shall sit at Gods right hand, where there is fullness of joy
and pleasures forevermore. The Lord give us holy frame of spirit and grace to
serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, Amen, amen.
It remains that we speak of the third particular in this attribute of
holiness: viz. That holiness in God is infinitely and incomprehensible. Or
thus, That God in respect of his attribute of holiness is infinite and
incomprehensible.

For first he is essentially holy. He is not accidentally holy. We read Isaiah
6.3. Of the cry of the Seraphins one to another. Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord
of hoasts, the whole earth is full of his glory. The glory of Gods holiness
fills the whole world. holiness in men is a quality, an accident, but it is not
so in God, his holiness is his essence, he is holy of himself.

Sanctitas creaturae ad illius puritatem comparatae est instar nihili and
veluti impuritas quaedam Lessius. de perfection. Divini p. 56. Tu solus sanctus
Tu solus dominus in Hymno antiquo.

Sicut una arenuta non addit aliquid notabile immensitati terrae Ad huc
continetur in Deo eminenter and idem numero.


Secondly, God is universally holy in all that he does, he is holy Psalm
145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works. No
man can be said so to be holy. In many things we sin all: and besides we may
act like creatures without consideration of this communicable attribute holiness.

Thirdly, God is said to be only holy. 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as the
Lord, for there is none besides thee. So that as it is said Math. 19.17. There
is none good but one, that is God. So may it also be as truly said, there is
none holy but one, that is God. So we have a passage in that song of Moses, and
of the Lamb which was sung by the Seven Angels, Revelation 15. In the 4.
verse. For thou only art holy. In God alone is the universaltie of holiness.
That holiness which is in any creature adds nothing worth the nothing to God:
yea it is in God eminently, and the same in number. God I say is infinitely,
and incomprehensibly holy. Therefore for the first use. Seeing this God is
propounded to us for a pattern that we should be holy, as he is holy: we learn
that a Christian in the imitation of God in the matter of holiness, cannot
exceed measure. It is impossible for a man to be too holy. Contrary to the
vain opinion of many that think a man can be to holy: and are ready to blame
others for their forwardnes this way. A fearful sin. A degree of blasphemy.
Do not they blasphemy that worthy name by the which ye are called James 2.7.
The Apostle Peter in his first Epistle 1 cap and 14. and 16. verses has this
exhortation. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation; Because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy. Which
shows how far he was from thinking any could be too holy.

But Solomon says, Ecclesiastes 7.16. Be not righteous over much. And if
righteousness and holiness signify the same thing, Sanctitas est bonitas moralis
quae etiam in scriptures justitia vocari solet.

Idem enim in scripturis est esse justum and esse sanctum, habere justitiam and
habere sanctitatem. Lessius page 54. De Div. Perfect.


it is most true, that if men will walk by wrong rules, and not by those that
God has left to his Church; They may be superstitiously holy, Pope-holy (as we
say.) But make the Scripture your rule, ye may then be as holy as you possibly
can, and need not fear of exceeding. Ye need not fear of being righteous
over much. Holiness is a Sea that has neither banks nor bottoms. Ye need not
doubt of wanting sea-room or depth of water. Ye need not doubt of being
straightened. But still remember that ye practice holiness according to rule.
That ye be holy as he which has called you is holy. As Abraham taught his
family, so do ye. God himself bears witness to Abraham, Genesis 18.19. For I know
him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment, etc. If Hester and
her maids, fast in the Churches trouble, so do ye. We read that she resolved
so. Hester 4.16. I also and my maids will fast likewise. Hear is a good rule
for such as she was.

But how long will it be until the Scripture rules be out of date?

I Answer, never until we come in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge
of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the nature of the
fullnes of Christ. Ephesians. 4. ver. 13.

And Secondly this Doctrine of the infinitnes and incomprehensiblenes of the
holiness of God, Though all the men in the world and devils in hell, should go
to cast it down; Yet stand it must: for God will uphold it. And such as oppose
it shall give account to him that is ready to judge both quick and dead. 1
Pet. 4.5. God will never be wanting to his church. The gates of hell (much less
poor worms breathing skind earth) shall not be able to prevail against it.

Thirdly, Seeing God is infinitely and incomprehensibly holy: Charl's the fifth
plus ultra, Once we can never be too holy I am sure of that. There is one woe
and fear gone of an extreme in holiness: O if we could as well avoid the danger
of being too dull, and slow and backward; It were well. I therefore will
provide some spurs, Motives to labor for more holiness.
some pregnant motives to stir you up to labor to be holy, yet more and more.

First, know this for your encouragement, the more holiness Daniel the third,
Daniel himself chap. the sixth, and many others.

Secondly, Take this too, the more holiness the more comfort, God and a Saint do
keep one table.
God cannot smile upon us while we are under the breach of any one of his
laws. Ye may see what became of David's comfort upon his fall, Psalm 51.11. He
there cries, Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit
from me. And in the foregoing tenth verse, he cries for a new creation. He has
so far lost his comfort that he thought he had lost his grace. Carelest
walking may cause us to be dealt with all, as if we were reprobates and not the
elect of God. For this (however some idle heads may prattle) I appeal to the
experience of all the Saints of God: whether ever they found so much comfort
and enjoyment of God, in their loose as in their close walking with him,
certainly the clouds of sin where ever they be, will make the beams of Gods
favor disappeare unto the sense of that soul.

Thirdly, The more holiness the more boldness. I remember I have read a story of
a Conjurer that would have, the devil affright Lawrance Saunders cry out
welcome life, when they are at the stake: The righteous is bold as a lion. Holy
Moses talks with God face to face. The more holiness the less fear. A holy man
knows that nothing can come amiss to him.

Fourthly, The more holiness the more acquaintance with God: Holiness makes men
great favourities in the court of Luther, he could do any thing with God.
Surely ye cannot imagine what power holy souls have in heaven. Hic vir potest
quicquid vult apud Deum.
Elias by reason of his holiness had great power: he prayed that it might not
rain, and it rained not; and he prayed again that it might rain and it did
rain. Holy Moses holds the hands of God, Ezekiel. 14.14.
and and God begs him to let him go. If any in the world can prevail with God,
it must be such as Noah, Daniel and Job.

5. The more holiness on earth, the more glory shall ye have in heaven. Though
God save us not for our works, yet he will reward us according to them. The
garland there will be greater or Esaus hands, if we expect Jacobs blessing. Esau
signifies working. No good is to be expected by us without doing good. He that
expects to carry earth to heaven, must first strive to bring heaven down to
earth. It is noted by some that the same word signifies reward and working, to
signify they cannot be separated. Holy souls shall dwell in Gods holy hill.
Holiness it called by some the Suburbs of heaven, and he that will enter into
the City must pass through the Suburbs? To conclude this motive, if we be
eminently holy here, we shall be eminently glorious hereafter.

Sum up all: God will protect his holy ones. Comfort and peace shall be their
portion even here, as Psalm 119.165. Great peace have they which love thy law,
and nothing shall offend them. And great shall be the peace of thy children,
Isaiah 54.13. No names shall be to them, Psalm 39.9. If we be all for God, God
will be all for us. If we dedicate our selves to God, we shall find that he
will be ours in the sweetest enjoyments. His special providence shall be over
us, others are under general providence only. Extra mundum sanctus
perigrinalitur cum Domino.
He may carry them on his back, but you shall be sure to ly in his bosom. His
eye and his heart both are always upon his holy ones for God. And at last,
fulness of joy at his right hand and pleasure for evermore.

Isaiah 1.11 and 14. verses:) then virtue comes not from them. We should
therefore labor to be lift up out of our selves, and above our selves, when we
are about holy exercises, we shall be exact in them: So shall we more and more
come toward that perfection of holiness which is still to be labored for,
though never to be attained. So much for the moral goodness of God, to wit, his
holiness. The other goodnesses follow. The end of the attribute of holiness.

The benignity or Useful Goodness of GOD.
Psalm 100. v. 5. For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth
endures to all Generations.
WE have under the good hand of our living good and holy Lord God, gone through
those three attributes of life, goodness natural (or perfection) and moral
goodness (or holiness) which was the last. This verse is not chosen to be handled
and to be spoken of, for the sake of three other attributes mentioned therein
viz. goodness (that is to say) benignity, mercy; a fourth sort (as I may call
it) of goodness; and truth which at last will come to be spoken of also, out of
this verse, which will be the Sixth in order of the communicable attribute of
God.

I shall now begin to speak of the goodness of God, as it is called by the name
of benignity, or sweetness, or useful goodness, out of these words; For the
Lord is good. The vulgar latin has it, Quoniam suavis Dominus.
By some it is read for the Lord is sweet: by others, for the Lord is gracious.
All comes to one at last, and will afford unto us a good ground to discourse of
these three propositions (as we have formerly done in handling the other
attributes) first, that goodness, or benignity, or usefullnes, or a readiness
to do good; is an attribute of God.

Secondly, That this attribute is communicable.

Thirdly, that God in respect of this attribute is infinite and
incomprehensible.

For the first of these, I shall not be long upon the proof of it. In the 36.
Psalm the fifth verse. For thou Lord art good, etc. Lament 3.25. The Lord is
good to them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him. The Church of
God was now brought to a low condition (which was the cause of the making of
this book of the Lamentations. Then did she yet bear up her self by this
attribute of God, his goodness. And this indeed is that Which encourages God's
people to seek unto him in all their streights, and in all their difficulties,
the remembrance of his goodness. This sets a gracious soul to seek him,
because he never shuts up his hand nor stops his ear to them. Nahum 1.7.
The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that
trust in him. And here by the way we are to take notice, that there is a
certain kind of proportioning out of this goodness, according to the workings
of the Holy Ghost in any. For though God be good to all, there is a goodness of
God over all his work. Yet he is not good to all alike. There is a general
goodness, and particular goodness, or peculiar goodness. He is good to all men and
to all things, with a general goodness. Just and unjust, evil and good, are
under his showers and Sun-blasts. For he makes his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust. Math. 5.45. And he
hears and feeds the young ravens when they cry. Psalm. 147.4. But yet there
is a goodness peculiarly appropriated unto his people that do wait upon him and
seeks unto him. For this same waiting upon God and seeking unto him, is as it
were a fetching up of the waters of goodness out of the deep well of that other
goodness (lately spoken of,) the infinitenes (I mean) and perfection of God, in
which they ly, Seeking God and waiting on him, is (as it were) the applying of
God. Ye know that if a wounded man had never so good plasters ly by him; if he
do not make use of them by applying them to his wounds: they may fester and
rot, and so perish, notwithstanding his good salves. And although God be the
most complete, utmost, and absolu^e good at all to any, unless he be applied.
O this is the goodness which is proper to the Saints that wait on him. It
arises from that which is called all his goodness, Exodus 33.19. And that is
communicated in a double sense.

First, as it is naturally communicated to his only son, and in this sense God
is only good to his son, the second person in the God head, to whom God
naturally Communicates the divine essence: and so he is from everlasting, the
begetting father, and the second person is from everlasting the begotten son.
This essential goodness is proper to the son of God.

Secondly, there is a free communication of the goodness of God unto his
creatures, (...).
according to their several capacities. And therefore if the creature be not
made capable it cannot receive of this goodness from him: and that is the reason
that beasts partake not so much of the goodness of God as men, nor natural men
as they that are gracious. Beasts have not the goodness men have, nor common men
that goodness the Saints have; because they are not capable of it. And not only
specifically but gradually too, is this goodness of God communicated to the
Saints: For the wider the mouth of the bottle is and the more capacious; the
more is it able to take in and hold of any liquor. A man can hold more in his
hand then a child in his. So according to the measure or degree of faith do we
receive, in, from and of the goodness of God. So that all our scantings and
straightnings are from our selves, not from God. God would still be giving out,
but our narrow hearts are not able to take in. If we could open our mouths wide
God would fill them full? It Is true, faith is the same in justification, be it
weak or strong, but it is not alike in enjoying good things from God. The hand
of a child or a palsiman serves to bring meat to his mouth to feed them, but it
cannot hold so fast, nor work so well as stronger hands can. God does
communicate many goodnesses to all his creatures, and some peculiar to
reasonable creatures: but as ye are Sts. ye are capable of other goodnesses,
and have such choice favors, as fly over the heads of other men and women,
because they are not capable of them. For instance, none are capable of the
love of God in Christ unto salvation, but such as have believed in Christ and
received him, and to as many (only) as have received him is power given to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. John. 1.13. It
is never the better that there is water in the Wels, if you have not a Well
bucket to draw it up for your use. David has a notable prayer, Psalm. 106.4.
Remember me O Lord, with the favor which thou bear unto thy people: O
visit me with thy salvation. And therefore let wicked men know this, that
though God be good, yet it is never the better for them in this sense. I mean
in regard of the love which he bears to his people. Alas; ye want faith, ye
are not of a perfect heart, what will ye be the better for the waters that ly
in the Well of Gods all-sufficient goodness? Satan will tell you. That God is a
good God, but he will leave out this, to them that fear him, and love him, and
wait upon him. This is his Sophistry, these be his tricks, he dealt so with
Christ in a quotation of Scripture, as ye may see Math. 4.6. He leaves out
those words (in all thy ways) He tells him of a promise to be kept and of a
charge given to the Angels concerning him? but if ye read Psalm 91.9. Ye shall
find the words are not faithfully alleged by the devil. He cares not, though
ye know that God is good: but he would not have you know or consider that it is
too such only as seek him and wait upon him. He cares not that ye know God is
merciful, but he would not have you take notice of his justice, and holy
severitie against sin; that he is a revenging God and a consuming fire (...)
transgressors. He would not have you take notice of everl^^^ing burnings and
devouring fire, in which sinners shall ly and be tormented during the long life
of God. It Is true, if he see that ye be in perplexity about your sins, and be
in to tremble and to be afraid of the wrath of God: then he will fast enough be
telling you what a terrible God he is whom ye have sinned against, that he may
drive you to despair. Thus would the devil separate what God has joined
together. Ye may see God putting both together Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, etc. And therefore when wicked men shall talk
of the goodness of God, I may say to them as Jehu did to Joram concerning peace,
what have thou to do with peace? etc. So, What have ye to do to talk of the
goodness of God, that do not seek him nor wait upon him. I may say to such, as
Elisha did to that Lord, on whose hand the King of Israel leaned (mentioned 2
Kings 7.2.) about the great plenty that should be in Samaria: Behold thou shall
see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof: So such may hear and
speak of the unspeakable goodness of God, but they shall have no share therein.
O! It Is true, there are rich and precious promises made, but only to such as
love God and keep his commandments, and take Christ to be their King, Priest
and prophet: but graceless wretches must know that nothing remains for them,
but a fearful expectation of vengence when God shall reveal his wrath upon
the breakers of his law, and upon the refusers of his Christ. And therefore
that Satan may not carry you along in a fools paradise, do not separate those
attributes of God, which from all eternity are joined in one in God. And
chiefly labor to be in a capacity of this attribute of goodness and
benignity. If ye will be welcome to God, ye must have the wedding garment, if
ye will profit by my discourse of the useful goodness of God which I am now
upon, ye must be the children of the promise, and have your vessels uncovered,
or else all the precious liquor of the goodness of God will run over. But I have
somewhat forestalled mine application, I have a few words more to speak of the
explicatory part of this dis^^^^se; and then I shall come to the Uses.

It is true, it is natural in God to be good, for it arises out of his
infinite perfection: but yet the acts thereof are free. From this disposition
comes another attribute, to wit, love; of which we shall speak hereafter,
when we shall have finished others, first in their order. But in the mean
time, It is my work to show you what this goodness of God is, which I am now
upon. It is in God a natural propension to communicate himself to creatures
according to their several capacities. What the benignity of God is?
And whereas I say it is a natural propension, yet I do not mean that the
acts of goodness are so, for they are free. There was but one necessary and
natural act of goodness in God: and that is the communicating of his whole
essence which is of infinite perfection and excellency: As inferior things are
naturally prone to procreate something like and equal unto themselves. But
because that which is altogether infinite cannot be multiplied, therefore the
Divine essence does not communicate it self by the production of a like
essence distinct in number, as created things do (in which the essence which is
in one suppositum does produce an essence in another suppositum distinct
innumber) but by the giving of himself, and as it were by replication, so as
the same most simple nature in number is in three subsistences distinct in
number. Yet this communication since it is natural, the pronenesse unto it; is
it not to be called benignity (of which I am now speaking) but it is a natural
production of a person and communication of a nature. And we may call it
fertility or fecundity. But goodness is a free communicating to inferior. Which
in God, although it spring from his infinite goodness or perfection, as the
former communication of the whole essence; and be also natural: yet the acts
thereof are free.

And this goodness of God communicated to creatures is general to all, Psalm
145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.
and verses 15.16. The eyes of all wait upon thee: and thou give them their
meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand and satisfiest the desire of every
living creature. But yet more especially to the rational and intellectual
creatures men and Angles, which only by understanding and will are made capable
of the divine goodness. These angelical and humane natures God has made far
more capable of his goodness, and has adorned them with many gifts of his good
will. And for man which he saw would stand in need of many helps, he made all
other things to be useful for him, out of Gods goodness and benignity is all
this done: That the goodness of humane being, night be hereby made the more
sweet and comfortable unto the sons of men. In this respect he is said to be
the Savior of all men 1 Timothy 4.10. preserving them from many dangers, and
relieving and comforting them with the service of his other creatures. Math.
5.45. He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain
on the just and on the unjust. Thus goodness is communicated to man as man. But,
Thirdly Gods goodness is not only general to all creatures, and special to
mankind: but singular to his Church; not only in giving them means of
salvation, and deliverance from the curse, but to many of them vouchsafing the
sense of his choicest favors, in remission of sins, gifts of the spirit, and
life everlasting, fullnes of joy reserved for us at the right hand of God. O
what a goodly garden of the goodness of God is the whole creation! Even Devils
have a share in regard of their natures, it is angelical, such a nature as the
best and wisest, and most knowing of the sons of men can little tell what to
make of it. In so much that even in Christ's time among the Jews it became
doubtful whether there were any such creatures as Angels at all, and by a
considerable sect, viz. the Sadduces was held in the Negative. I say the
wonderful goodness which God has communicated to Angels in general, as Angels
is beyond our apprehension. They are glorious intellectual creatures, they come
not by their knowledge of truths as we do: admirable shares have they in the
general goodness of God to that special kind of creature. And for the souls
of men first: as men I mean. The possession of that master piece is a most rich
possession, no Jewel so precious. It is a divine spark, capable of the devine
nature, and fitter to be a sanctuary and temple for God to dwell in, then to be
so basely used as it is by most men. They are eternal beings a part post. O
let me break out, I can go no further yet; until I have a little wept over the
souls of men that best jewel; of which men make so little account both of
their own and others. What indignity is this to abuse this good and glorious
gift of Gods goodness, that must live for ever either in bliss or torment. Alas
upon what poor terms do men hazard that, the nature and worth whereof is
beyond man's reach to comprehend? O how cruel are men to the souls of one
another; Do ye so vilify that which God breathed into man, and set his own
image upon, and gave so great a price for, and valves above all the world
besides; But no wonder men are so careless of, or rather cruel unto the souls
of others, that are so cruel to their own souls, giving them a way in a
manner for nothing, of this humor are not only the scum of people, but many
of the more eminent sort; quarelling and brawling against the good means of
grace appointed for the salvation of their poor souls. And employing all
their wit, and strength, and parts, and time, and friends to maintain and
defend their fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. O how do the most
forget their souls to satisfy their lusts. Is it not the business of the world
to satisfy their lusts, and to remove by proud violence, or close fraud,
whatsoever stands in their way. And yet to put colors and pretenses, upon
their soul murdering practices, to delude the world and themselves. Besides
other goodnesses are there communicated to the humane nature to men, as men
from a good God. Which should not be slighted, much less abused, seeing God
out of his goodness has given them unto us. O how many things have we given to
us, to make our life comfortable? And therefore (by the way) we should be
thankful: and demean and carry our selves so, at this large table which God
has given us; that it might not be a snare unto us, as it is usually to
ungodly men, who make the goodness of God an occasion to sin, and being Waxt fat
with Jesurun, kick and forsake God which made them, and lightly esteem the
work of their salvation. O it is sad, that the good of strength should be an
occasion of many sins, sometimes of murders. And the good of wealth the
occasion of pride, oppression and many outrages. And the good of knowledge
puff them up that have it: and often be abused to fight with it against the
truth of God, and his ways and worship. Thus do many turn the goodness and
blessings of God (as they are in themselves into evil, and make them so many
curses. And therefore (wittily says one) wicked men may have much wealth, but
they have no goods. But what is all these in comparison of that goodness which is
vouchsafed to the elect Angels and to elect men? of both which sorts of
creatures, Christ is the head and Savior; to keep the one in the goodness of
their created estate: (which some of them kept not, The Angels which kept not
their first estate, Jude. ver. 6.) And to bring the other back unto that
goodness which they had lost. And with this goodness Angels are a part of the
mystical body of Christ; and Christ is the head of Angels elect, as well as
of elect men. My Beloved in the Lord Jesus. Here are goodnesses indeed. For as
no evil that can be fall the sons of men is like unto that to be without
Christ: So no goodness comparable to this of being in the number of them that
are redeemed by Christ Jesus. What will pride profit, or what will the pomp of
riches avail, when ye must lose your soul. And suppose besides your riches ye
have art and learning, so had Aristotle. Suppose ye had great wisdom, so had
Achitophel. Suppose kingdoms, whose kingdoms were like those of the Assyrians,
Grecians, Persians and Romans. Suppose great knowledge in Divinity, so have
the very devils. The Devil is a great divine. Suppose moral honesty. So had
the Pharisees. Yet there must be another righteousness to bring us to God. Math.
5.20. For I say unto you that except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

Devil, who like a roaring lion goes about seeking whom he may devour. 1
Pet. 5.8. He is called Abaddon, and Apollyon Rev. 9.12. That is a destroyer.
The Hebrew word Tobb in my text, I told you was read in the vulgar Latin,
Svavis, that is sweet. Sour froward spirits are contrary to Gods sweetenes.
We read of such Prove. 2.12.13.14 15. To deliver thee from the way of the evil
man, from the man that speaks froward things. Who leave the paths of
righteousness to walk in the ways of darkness: who rejoice to do evil and
delight in the frowardnes of the wicked. Whose ways are crooked, and they
froward in their paths. And surely such are an abomination to the Lord, Prove.
3.32. And the Holy Ghost Prove. 4.24. Wills us, to put a way a froward mouth and
perverse lips. The sons of Belial are like thorns, they cannot be taken with
hands; he that shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a
spear: Such expressions there be, 2 Samuel 23.6 7. A man must get pikes and
prongs and freathing gloves to meddle with some men. But God is of a sweet and
good nature. He is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great goodness.
And such thorns and briers and furses he will set them on fire. They shall be
utterly burnt with fire, as ye have it in the forenamed 2 Samuel 23.7. We have a
good rule, Prove. 3.29. Devise not evil against thy neighbor seeing he
dwells securely by the* Wicked mischeivous men are at best but like bushes to
the sheep that come to them for shelter; They will be sure to pluck their
fleece, if they do not tear their flesh. These have not that Philanthropy which
is in God. They are not like him which is in God, they are not like him.

The Second Use teaches us, that if the Lord be such a sweet God, and so
willing, and so ready to do good to every body that come unto him, and are
capable of his goodness: then for us to be sweet in our speeches and words; and
good and useful in our carriage, serving our generations, and showing our
selves ready and willing to do good to all; must needs be pleasing to God.
Psalm 149.4. For the Lord takes pleasure in his people: he will beautify the
meek with salvation. We must needs please God in being sweet spirited and
useful to every body, for we are then like unto God: and it is a token that we
fear God. As we read Nehemiah 5.8.9. When Nehemiah had rebuked the Nobles and
the ^ulers, for exacting usury, when he and others had been enforced to
redeem their brethren after their abilities: says he, it is not good that ye
do, ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, etc. Ye see to do good, is
to walk in the fear of God. And it is a great commendation given to Hananiah
by Nehemiah cap. 7.2. That he was a good man (or faithful) and feared God
above many. And this is a sure rule, that such as be not good folks, have not
the fear of God before their eyes. We should be good to every body Gal. 6.10.
As we have therefore opportunity let us do good unto all men, especially unto
them who are of the household of faith. And therefore let such take comfort as
be good people, and useful in their generation: it shall not be forgotten of
God. For Math. 25.23. His Lord he that had improved his talents, his Lord, said
unto him, well done good and faithful servant etc. and from the 34. verse of
that chapter onwards. Then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, come
ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. What, what is the reason such must go to heaven? Because
(says the King, to wit, Christ) I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, etc. and
so such as do give to drink to one of those little ones (that do believe in
Christ) a cup of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, are assured not to
lose their reward, Math. 10.42. But on the contrary side, such as are not good,
and charitable (much more such as are pernicious and mischievous) must take
what is allotted for them. Math. 25.41. Then shall he say to them on the left
hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. Though men either cannot or will not order them and deal with
them yet God will. For such as are wicked and love violence, his soul hates
Psalm 11.5.

Math. 4.23. That he went about all Galilee teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness, and
all manner of disease among the people. And never any came to Christ, that had
need of any thing; but Jesus Christ did help them and was willing to do every
body good: So far as they were capable. It Is true indeed Math. 13.58. He did
not many mighty works in his own country, but it was; Because of their
unbelief. So far, I say, as creatures were capable and willing, he went
about doing all good both to soul and body. So I press this upon you, I would
have you study, which way ye may be doing most good. So when God shall take you
away by death, it may be said to your praise and honor, there is a good man
gone, there is one that a great many will find the want of, for he was a good
man, he did a great deal of good. Beloved in the Lord not they that have most,
but they that having it, do most good: are the best men in the Parish and Town.
Such as improve their authority, and wealth, and wit to the good of all these
are good men* these are like unto God. Good magistrates, good Ministers, good
Townsmen, good neighbors are like unto God, and will have honor in spite of
malice. But on the other side, let men quarrel and complain never so much,
that they are neglected, Honos fugientem sequitur and sequentem fugit.
and swagger what they will do: yet they shall never have the portion that
belongs to good men. The more they hunt after respect, the further off shall
they be from it, let men keep up their credit with God, and leave God to keep
up their credit with men. And therefore, if ye would be accounted the best men
in the places where ye dwell: labor to excel in doing good, I may say to some
which are discontented for want of that honor which they expect (for this ye
know is the great quarrel of this place) as God once did to Caine, Genesis 4* 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well sin
lies at the door. O be stirred up to do good, to be like unto God: to do
worthily in Ephrata and to be famous in Bethlehem. Ruth 4.11. That is where
your estates be, and your lands ly. O all of you be sweet be useful. Fathers
and M^sters be not like Tyrants and Bedlams in your houses. Provoke not your
children to wrath. Do not strike like madmen, ye care not how nor whom. Do
good well, that ye may be like your father which is in heaven.

And this if you do, and will approve your selves to be good folks: ye must
take notice of two things under this first direction, which every good man must
abhor to take delight in. For the contrary declare and plainly denominate men
to be evil.

First ye must not take delight in sinful practices and courses either your
own or others. This was that which was laid to the charge of the Gentiles Romans
1.32. Who knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such things are
worthy of death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.
It Is but a folly to talk of becoming good men, if ye will take delight in
sinful courses and in wicked men's company; keep not company (ye that are
under convictions at least) with pot-companions. It Is no safety (says one) to
be near those that are under the curse of God. O take heed of these coolers,
they will quickly take an order with your beginings, they will quench your
smoking flax quickly. Ye had more need go to such as will be as bellows to
blow up your begun fire.

Secondly. Ye must abhor to take delight in others troubles or sorrows. This
is a sure sign of a wicked man, of one unlike unto this Good God. Such a one
was malicious wicked Haman. Because Mordecai would not bow to him, he did break
out into such wrath and so swel in his toadish pride; as that he would be
revenged upon all the people of God. But for his labor was hanged upon a
gallows, which he had built to have Mordecai hanged upon it. The debts of
cruelty and mercy are never left unsatisfied. Raleigh. Hist. of the World.
And this is a most wicked disposition in any body, to delight in the sorrows
of any, especially, if it be of the servants and people of God. Ye may read
how this vile man pleads to destroy thousands without pity or mercy. Ester 3
8.9. So Moses brings in the enemies of Israel speaking. Exodus 15.9. The enemy
said I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust shall be
satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them. This is
that will make a man like unto the Devil of hell. If ye love to satisfy your
lusts here in the miseries and sorrows of others: it will be just with God to
satisfy his holy desire upon you hereafter for ever. 2. These. 1.6. Seeing it is
a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.
So much for the first direction in this third Use. viz. to make our study to be
good.

Secondly, Ye make labor to be cured of and so lay aside froward dispositions,
which are contrary to that sweet spirit which makes us like unto God. Su^^
(...) are spoken of 2 Samuel 23.67. they are like thorns, pricking, scraching
things. And there also ye may see what will become of such. They shall be
utterly burnt with fire in the same place. O Therefore let this doing of good
be thought upon. And according to these two directions let us set about the
practicing of it. Motives to do good.
And the more to blow up the fire in you into a holy flame, Consider these
Ensuing Motives,

First that it is commanded of God to do good to all men, Gal. 6.10. Romans
12.9.10. Let love be without dissimulation: abhor that which is evil and
cleave to that which is good. Be kindly affectioned one to another with
brotherly love, in honor preferring one another. And yet more ver. 20.21.
Therefore if thine enemies hunger feed him: if he thirst, give him drink, for
in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not over come of
evil, but overcome evil with good. And cap. 16.19. says the Apostle there, I
would have you wise unto that which is good and simple concerning evil. And 1
These. 5.15. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow
that which is good, both among your selves and to all men.

Secondly, Consider the excellency of this property, to be of Psalm 145.9. And
the Devil does good to none. His name is Abaddon and Apollyon, that is
Destroyer. Rev. 9.11.

Thirdly, God will reward all good folks, both in themselves Their seed shall
be blessed, Psalm 37.26.

Fourthly, The contrary to doing of good is abundantly threatened to be
punished. Their seed that are wicked shall be cut Psalm 37.28. and in the 38.
verse. But the transgressors shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked
shall be cut off.

Fifthly, And lastly, to move you and encourage you to labor for this sweet
temper of spirit, that ye may be full of

And so I come to the Second proposition which the last Motive does cast me
upon. viz.

That Goodness is a communicable attribute.

The second Doctrine or Proposition.
For, First it is a branch of that uprightnes in which God made man, mentioned
Ecclesiastes 7.29. This was that which Adam lost in his fall. This is that
image of God spoken of Genesis So God created man in his own image, in the image
of God created he him. Man was created and had communicated unto him by God, a
good frame of spirit, to be useful and helpful to all. And this Adam lost,
though he kept his natural goodness of being, and we all still keep and
retain the goodness of our kind. We are all perfect in our kind. But for this
goodness of usefullnes, both Adam and the fallen Angles lost it. Yet was it once
communicated as ye see, which is enough to serve our purpose, that it is
communicable.

Gal. 5.22.23. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffring,
gentleness, goodness, etc. The word there used for goodness is (...), and the word
(...) is the word immediately forgoing, and is translated gentleness; which yet
is very often translated goodness too. It is as it were goodness. Luke 16.25.
Is upbraided for receiving (...), his good things, a word of the same theme and
nature, with that which is made here to be a fruit of the spirit. To which I
say, there are diverse sorts and acceptations of goodnesses in God himself by
attribution, which was civilly or morally good. But his time and strength was
laid out, for these things that were good for the body, and as some use them,
scarce good for that. Yet the things of this life are called by that name good,
or goods, or goodness: In reference to the common opinion of the world. In
regard that they have an entitative goodness, they are the good creatures of
God; these he made, and he made all things good (as has been said upon the
second Attribute.) And yet again, they have not only a goodness of entitie, but
a goodness of use in them; the Lord had made them very suitable to the needs,
relations, affairs and businesses of this life: This is that goodness, wicked
and worldly people have much of, and this is that which is meant in that place
of Luke: We may likewise in the third place, reason from a command, that such a
goodness there is to be had, and therefore it is communicable. And that it is
commanded, it is evident. Gal. 6.10. And as we have therefore opportunity let
us do good unto all men, etc. Yea we are expressly commanded to do good to them
that are our enemies, to do good to them that hate us. Math. 5.44. These
precepts would not have been, if goodness had not been to be had among men. As
for those common places objected. First out of Math. 19.16.17. Where Christ
blames the young man for calling of him good, upon this ground, that there is
none good but one, that is God. And then that in Ecclesiastes 7.20. Where the
preacher says. That there is not a just man upon the earth, that does good and
sins not. I answer, that understand the places of what kind of goodness ye
will, it must always have this help for the making out of the sense of them,
that there is none absolutely good, none perfectly good, none compleately good,
but God. Yet be there some that have attained unto some good degree of goodness,
in regard whereof, they may have the title of good men. And if people would use
the means and lay aside those impediments that hinder them from doing good,
they might do a great deal more, and be more useful and beneficial; whereas
now the most are rather like Devils then men one unto another. And alas! even
in a manner the best but unprofitable servants, that shall be cast into outer
darkness: I speak of unregenerate men, and so would be understood.

Now the first use that we are to make of this truth, is, to teach us that
there is no fault in God; That men be so bad and mischievous; at best so
unprofitable generally. It is their own naughty and corrupt heart, and that
cursed self-love and secret atheism, and distrust of God, and want of the
image of Christ; that makes many such unprofitable and pernicious persons, that
do so much hurt in their generation. And therefore let the fault be laid where
it is, and the sadle be put upon the right horse (as we say:) and let us not
charge a good and gracious God, with our froward and crooked natures as too
many are apt to do. Men might choose whether they would be such (as it were)
pricking and galling thorns one to another. God is good and would make men
good too, if men were willing. Why do ye not strive against the evil of your
heart and labor to root it out? And here we may note a sad effect of Gods
bounty upon many that take liberty as it were by grant to be mischeivous to
others, because they have more of these outward good things then others. As if
God had delight to provide bellows to blow up unruly lusts, Hosea 13.6.
According to their pasture, so were they filled, they were filled and their
heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me. O when the heart of men is
once lifted up with the creature, they are very near the Devils fall and
frame of spirit. Then men think they are out of the reach of contradiction and
controlement, and no wickedness so gross, no mischief so great, which they will
make any bones of committing. They cannot look a jot beyond the service of
their devilish spirits and hellish lusts. The righteous shall be sold for
silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes, Amos 2.6. O that this evil
disposition were not to be found so generally among us, as it is; If it were
the blessed will of God: When God puts in good things into men's hands: The
Devil is at hand to put wickedness into their hearts. Well neighbors, this is
one warning more; it will not be lost altogether. Look how many teachers ye
have had: so many condemners will ye have, if ye will not consider and amend.

says God, agreed, a match: you and I are of one mind. I stand with my
communicable goodness to bestow it. A clean heart, a right spirit, a loving
temper, will ye have this? O sirs, if ye be willing, what a comfort is this! If
ye be sensible of your barrenes, uselesnes and unprofitablenes, of your
self-love and destrust of God, and fear that ye shall want, (the usual
causes of the former malady) of the sowrenesse of your nature; up presently to
anger and revenge: God he gives more grace, he gives all grace, and this of
benignity is a lovely one. If we then humble our selves under the want of this
disposition and under our unprofitablenes, and yet more under our
gunpowder-like dispositions set on fire upon the least provocation; I say if we
be humble before the Lord and seek unto him to be like him in goodness, and
sweetenes, and readiness to help all: We shall be sure to speed in our suites.
God is a giving God, therefore seek unto him for grace. God is a giving God,
he gives to all liberally, therefore labor to be like him: and let such as
are groaners under their cursed, crooked, and froward natures, take comfort in
hope, because goodness is one of Gods communicable attributes.

Thirdly, But it is not enough for us to see our want of goodness, to groan
under it, to take comfort in the possibility of having Phillip. 2.13. It is God
that works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. It is a
fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5.22. Motives upon the first direction.
that which is done by a man that has not the spirit, cannot be good because
the man himself is naught. And it is neither our own power, nor the power of
any creature that can give us the spirit; it is a new creation. He only can
make us good that is good himself, even he that can of stones raise up
children to Abraham. give their goods to feed the poor, 1 Cor. 13.3. Yea all
their goods, mark the place well. And here I might spend much time to show
what nature may do.

But that goodness which makes us like God and excepted of God, is only a fruit
of the spirit. It has not only the Lineanents of goodness, but the life of
goodness. It comes from a principle of life in the soul, whereby men do good
works with facility and constancy, as natural actions of life: when likewise
they grow in them; for where there is life, there is also growth; And they
desire that which feed their life, and then the good works and charitable
actions that are done, are not lead works. But there is no trusting flesh and
blood no not ^n the most complete graceless man in the world. Their goodness
will quickly be changed into mischevousnes; when temptations come that are
above the principle they act upon. Ye judge your selves brethren that ye be
not judged of the Lord. Take your sin of self-love which makes ye such
unprofitable, if not pernicious men and women: and stay it and so ye will the
better put on to the work of obtaining this gift and grace.

Re. 12.14. The word in the original signifies to follow after peace, (...).
as the persecutor does him whom he persecuteth; Sirs it is a God like
property, though we are wronged by others, yet to be forward to seek peace. Ah
you froward, sower, doged pieces, that whet your tongues like a sword, and bend
your bows to shoot your arrows even bitter words: Are ye like unto God? Psalm.
64.3.
I am persuaded your own consciences tell you otherwise. Secondly avoid needy,
pernicious; much more mischievous companions; lest they infect you and teach
you to be like unto them. Lest ye learn their froward wicked ways, take heed
ye come not near them. Thirdly let sweet, meek, good, merciful, bountiful
people be your delight, among whom ye may learn to be like unto God. Fourthly,
study places of Scripture and dwell upon such passages in books and Sermons as
are of this subject of useful goodness. Fifthly, and lastly, upon this last
direction, consider these two things as special properties of good folks
indeed: First be good to peoples souls, prefer them before their bodies. Our
Savior Christ preferres the soul before the body, Math. 10.28. And fear not
them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul etc. The account
for our own souls and the souls of others, is the greatest account; and
therefore the care of souls should be the greatest care. Dr. Sibbs soul
Conflict. page 70. Secondly prefer the household of faith in thy doing good
Gal 6.10. Good must be done Especially to the household of faith. Above all men
do good to the godly. And above all bodies have a care of peoples souls. To
close up all that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven, and
show your selves like unto him. Motives
Secondly, That ye and your offspring many be the blessed of the Lord.
Thirdly, those curses which hang over the heads of oppressors and their
children may never light on you or yours, but that both ye, and they may
always escape them: labor to do good to be useful and helpful to all
according to the rule; and take heed of being evil men and evil doers. And so
much for the second particular. That goodness is a communicable attribute. The
third and last point is. Psalm 36. ver. 5. etc. to the 11 verse, glorious
things are said of the goodness of God; called by diverse other names: as mercy,
faithfulness, righteousness, judgments, preservation, loving kindness, the
shadow of his wings, the fatness of Gods house. Rivers of pleasures the
fountain of life, light. And of these things (which are Gods goodness and
benignity) it is said; that it is in the heavens, it reaches unto the clouds,
it is like the great mountains, a great deep, his preservations extend to man
and beast, it is excellent, abundantly satisfying, a fountain of life: what can
be imagined meet to set out the transcendency of Gods goodness, that ^s not made
use of one where or another in Scripture. And it must needs be so that Gods
goodness is infinite and incomprehensible.

Summum bonum, the total good: and therefore of necessity his goodness must be
infinite.

Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy; and the word be used in many
places, of provoking God: yet the Lord is never provoked properly, as
provocation can hang upon him. For provocation argues mutation, but God is
always the same. Gods spirit cannot be brought to a distemper by all the
wickednesses in the world. All the blasphemy posible of men and Devils, cannot
raise a storm in the breast of God. Fury is not in him. And when God is said
to be provoked to be angry, to be furious and the like; these things are spoken
of God by way of allusion to men, as it is in assertions of Gods eyes, hands
and ears, and the like: not that God has either passion or affection, soul,
or limb, or member, or body. In allusion I say to men. For as provoked men to
revenge affronts, wrongs, and injuries. So when God finds men in sin, though
he be of a calm spirit, and a good God; Yet he causes sorrows to fall on the
wicked, and unto all eternity shall workers of iniquity be tormented. Yet
this will be true for ever, that God is good to all though men be damned. What
is this kindness to send people to hell? We may say to God, is this thy
kindness to thy creature? James. 1.17.

and omnipotent, and wants no sufficency. Genesis 17.1. I am God alsufficient,
Says he to Abraham.

And Fourthly, it cannot stand with the alsufficiency of Gods essence to have
it, and not to dispense it. He is alsufficient He is kind unto the unthankefull
and to the evil, Luke 6.35. He endures with much long suffering the vessels
of wrath fitted to destruction, Romans 9.22.

Surely then (for the first Use) no man alive has cause to complain of God,
as if he wanted a good disposition. Deuteronomy. 28. verses 1.2. etc. And curses for
the contrary ver. 15. etc. It is impossible God should take displeasure against
any without a cause. The Lord is righteous in all his ways. Ps. 145.17.
And we should for further remedy (in the second place) rather admire goodness
in our worst condition: since the attribute of justice and power must take place
too. Lamen. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not. Souls conflict p. 425.
In the worst time says (Dr. Sibs) there is a presence of God with his
children. When we are at the lowest, yet it is a mercy that we are not
consumed, we are never so ill, but it might be worse with us; whatsoever is
less then hell is undeserved.

Thirdly, We are to know that if we be Saints those evils that befall us,
which seem to cross this Doctrine of the infiniteness of Gods goodness; do
very much establish it. For affliction befall the Saints from the depth of
goodness in God. Not only upon such an ordinary account as we read, Psalms
119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word.
(Wherein two notable uses are expressed of afflictons, to wit, to reduce the
Saints from their straying, and to make them more exact in their conversation)
But I say further, ver. 75. I know Lord that thy judgments are right: and that
thou in faithfullnes have aflicted me. From faithfulness that no good thing
shall be withheld that may make us eminently hapy here and hereafter. In great
goodness was Joseph so afflicted, and Job and Daniel cast into the Lyans den,
that they might be prepared for great honors and employments, and also great
discoveries of God: It is much and sweet to an afflicted soul, to see a token
of the Lords love upon him, and a sign of his being received into Sonship.
Heb. 12.6. For whom the Lord loves he chastneth, and scourges every son whom
he receives. But more to see faithfulness and power in great deliverances out
of great straites; out of the Lions den out of the Whales belly, to carry
through the red Sea rather then to leave to Pharaohs pride and cruelty. But
yet I have a great deal more to say of the wonderful goodness of God to some
choice ones, whom he fiteth in the furnace of great sorrows for great
employments and enjoyments of himself in the creature here even in this life.

For the Lord is good. And if ye cannot tell what to say, I will teach you a
prayer which David taught me, Psalm 17.7. Show thy mavelous loving kindness;
O thou that savest by thy right hand them which put their trust in thee, from
those that rise up against them. Ye may have much comfort in the consideration
of Gods abundant goodness whether it be that our sins be very great or our
sorrows even (as it were) hellish, God gives much good with much goodness to his
people. He gives all with all his heart; he makes every step to them in blood,
and yet in delight parts withal to enrich them. Lockier.
or our condition never so obscure, great sinners has God received, great
sorrows has God removed, and beggars from the dunghell has God advanced. And
for such as have tasted the blood of Christ in their meat and drink and wear
clothes died therein, and have all their salvations and comforts swiming to
them on the streams of the blood of God: Let them say that the Lord is good to
the lowest; Saint affliction is but the pulling of the rop without to make the
bell to speak within: but to some it is a setting them in the highest steeples
as bells themselves to be heard a far ringing the various changes of an
unchangeable God. Let me heap up exhortations and so end this point and
subject. 1. Come away taste and see that the Lord is good, Ps. 34.8. Ye honor
God much, and ye shall be blessed that come unto him. 2. Run to this infinite
goodness in all destresses, Ad omnes etiam ad impios. Cum Dei bonitas praecipue
sit erga membra ecclesiae, ergo et nos domesticos fidei praecipue beneficijs
prosequantur. Harplus. 201.
fly to this present help in the needful time of trouble. 3. Be like unto God
and take heed of the doer of the unprofitable servant, Math. 25.30. Much more
take heed of being found among pernicious ones that delight to do mischeife,
which shall ^e torn in pieces when there shall be none to deliver. Ps. 50.22.
And 4. imitate God in the extent of his goodness, I mean so far as creatures
can attain. Do good to all even to those that have no goodness in them even to
your enemies. And lastly as the goodness of God is especially to his Israel,
Psalm. 73.1 Truly God is good to Israel, etc. So let us especially prosecute
with our goodnesses and helps, the household of faith, and above all we must be
mindful to do good to the soul, and so much be spoken of the attribute of
goodness or benignity.

The Mercy of God.
Psalm. 100.5. His Mercy is Everlasting.
OUt of this verse I have already spoken of the forgoing words for the Lord is
good. And have discoursed of Gods useful goodness one property of God, which
is used as a reason, why he is worthy of praise, There are three in this verse;
Suavis est Deus and quia suavis facilis miseretur quia miseretur promittit
liberationem; quia verax implet promissa Bellar. in hunc Psalm.
so joined that one flows from the other. The Lord is to be honored and his
name to be well spoken of, for he is good, and because he is good, he is ready
to show mercy from time to time, and has promised to be merciful; and because
he is true in his promises, therefore he will perform his promises of mercy
which he has made. Now having finished the property of goodness, I come to this
of mercy. And in handling of it shall insist upon the same three particulars
first propounded, Viz.

First, That mercy (as has been said of the rest) is an attribute of God.

Secondly, That it is a communicable attribute of God.

Thirdly, That God in it (as in all his attributes) is infinite and
incomprehensible.

To begin with the first of these propositions. Mercy ye see is attributed to
God, not only here, but in many other places of Scripture Psalm. 86.5. For thou
Lord art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto all them that
call upon thee, Psalm 106.1. For his mercy endures for ever, Psalm 118.1.
The same words, Psalm 136. ye have it Six and twenty times: And the same
expression is in Jer. 33.11. in that prophetical promise of the joyful estate
of the Church. And one place out of the new Testament Ephesians. 2.4. But God which
is rich in mercy, etc. Mercy (ye see) is an attribute of God.

But what is mercy? For Answer hereunto, it will be requisite, What mercy is in
man?
that before I speak of it as it is in God; I should first of all show you
what it is in men. In man (therefore know) mercy is a virtue inciting the will
to give succor to another misery and to endeavor to drive it away. In men
that which is commonly reputed mercy may be a vice, so it may fall out. For
such acts as are counted merciful, do not always proceed from the same
principle in all that it does in some, which are called merciful men. For
there are some which give alms (as the Pharisees did) to be seen of men, out
of vain glory and ostentations, which is no virtue but a vice. Or if that
which is naturally a work of mercy be done upon any other dishonest ground
whatsoever, or to any other unlawful end; it then appertains to that vice by
whose affection it is commanded, and takes the malignitie of that sin
(whether lust or error) that sets this inclination on work to succor the
miserable. But when the end is honest, the work is commanded by that virtue
which has regard to the honesty of it, whether it be one virtue or another.
Whether it be the love of God, or love of the brethren, or encouragement of
the godly; or if it be only a pitiful disposition to the creature, which is
the ground thereof. The end will much denominate the action, and refer it to
that error or vice from whence such a supposed act of mercy had its first
rise. Some that are Romish recusants are seemingly very merciful to the poor;
perhaps it may be to draw such to their religion: (As some Heretics are kind
and courteous, to draw others to the embracing of their opinions.) So many
likewise seem to be very forward to do good, when it may be to serve their
lusts of coveteousnesse* pride and wantonness. Such actions as these cannot be
called merciful or good: but must be referred to that vice which is the ground
of them. If one should tempt a poor man to steal upon consideration of his
poverty, or persuade one that is sick to go to Charmers or white Witches for
the recovering of health: these actions could not be merciful, but rather must
be referred to the head of cruelty, to the poor souls of such persons so
tempted so persuaded and advised.

But because it pleases the spirit of God in Scripture to use terms and words
promiscuously sometimes in predications both of God and men; Whether mercy be
in men a distinct virtue from goodness and love,
and even about the attribute of goodness lately handled, and this of mercy now
in hand; one word does signify either thing, mercy sometimes being used for
goodness, and goodness put to signify mercy: it will be worth our inquiry a
little to see what the difference is between these two virtues, and also that
of love which is often taken to be the same with goodness and mercy. As to make
this appear to be so I remember a passage in Dr. Sibs his soul conflict Page
446. touching love, goodness and mercy in God, which I will relate. It is good
to see blessings as they issue from grace and mercy, it much commends any
blessing to see the love and favor of God in it. In those words ye see he puts
a difference between blessings (which I take to be the same with good things
bestowed) and mercy, and grace, and the love and favor of God: and yet all
these four last words are used for one and the same thing; which in so
experienced an artist is to be taken notice of. As if mercy and love were one
and the same thing. And yet in many places of Scripture, we find goodness and
mercy taken in the same sense, and mercy and love sometimes distinguished, for
satisfaction herein, and clearing of this difficulty, we must know: that if we
restrain the word mercy to his proper signification, according to the etymon
of the word and the definition of the virtue; to wit to rid one out of a
notable distress or misery from an aflicted and compassionate heart toward
him: then mercy has a narrower object then goodness or love. But yet because
usually such works as we call works of mercy, proceed from the affection of
love, and that love which we call the love of good will toward our neighbor,
does in a sort wholly live in works of mercy (for the love of complacency is
of another nature) I say for this cause: love mercy and goodness are sometimes
used to signify one and the same readiness to do good to all, or help any, and
to be of a loving deportment. Howsoever therefore there may be use of
destinctions sometimes, to wit, when we speak particularly of them as virtues
in men, or graces in saints, or attributes in God: yet in ordinary popular
discourse they come all to one, and so are used by the Holy Ghost oftentimes in
Scripture, in passages both concerning God and also men.

But that nothing may be left unsaid to give full satisfaction, I will give you
distinct definitions of these three, goodness or benignity, love of goodwill,
and mercy as they are attributed to God, and found in men.

Goodness is the will of God, whereby he is inclined to do good to creatures and
the effects thereof

Love is the will of God approving what in his creatures is good and agreeable
to his holy mind and manifest^d by sundry effects thereof.

Mercy is the will of God whereby he is inclined to succor such as are in
misery and the manifestation of it in acts accordingly. In men, goodness or
benignity is a disposition and endeavor to make the lives of creatures
comfortable, Amore nihil est aliud qua^ bonum velle amata.
by affording all that may any way conduce thereunto. And love is a certain
propension of the appetite concupiscible unto what is accounted good and fit,
for him that loves and a manifestation of good will and friendship upon
occasion both in word and deed to such objects. And mercy said Philosophers is
a sickness of mind conceived from the misery of another stirring up to show pity
and compassion and to succor such a one. But lastly in saints these come to be
graces, and so acceptable to God, being fruits of the spirit, tending to God,
and having respect to him. So we are full of goodness toward the bodies and
souls of others, communicating what we have for their good and benefitt.
Showing love for Gods sake in both word and deed even to them that wrong us and
abuse us. And having bowels of mercy toward all that be in misery, and being
ready to do any thing for their succor. Now of all these three virtues in men,
graces in Saints, attributes of God; What mercy is in God Miseri cordia est
voluntas Dei qua ad succurrendum miseris and propensus. Sharpius. The mercy of
God some call the property or attribute of his nature, inclining him to
relieve the misery of his creature; some the essenee of God showing mercy.
Sclator on the 117. Psalm. Ira dicitur esse in Deo non ut turbidus motus animi
sed simplex voluntas ad ultionem.
we are to speak of mercy now as it is to him attributed.

One thing is very necessary to be premised in this discourse, to wit that
mercy in God, is not as it is defined by Philosophers (as has been before
hinted) A sickness of mind conceived from the misery of another. For sadness and
afliction of mind cannot be in God, though in Scripture there are such
metaphors used. But mercy in God is his very essence whereby he is infinitely
disposed to help succor and comfort such as be in any miserable condition.
Those expressions in Scripture. In their afflictions he was afflicted. And mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. Are borrowed
Phrases. As from the turning of the bowels in men at the fight of an object of
pity. And yet in men this is not mercy it self, but a companion of pity. Yet
because by it our mercy is made known, we call it by the name of mercy. We call
rolling of bowels mercy, and mercy rolling of bowels, which yet is but a
companion of it, and that in men only and not in God. Mercy may be without it,
and in God allwaies is; because God has no bowels to be turned, God is one
most simple essence, and has no qualities. And therefore when we say God is
merciful, we speak of him metaphorically, as when we say God is angry. Anger is
a turbulency of spirit, but there is no such thing in God. The effects of that
which is called anger in God, are often put for ang^r: as when we see the
punishment and scourges on the backs of wicked men we conclude that God is
angry. There is no real difference between his essence and attributes, save
only in our manner of conceiving. Sclater.
In like manner when we see the rod taken of and cast into the fire (which is
an effect of mercy) we say God is merciful. But mercy in God signifi^th two
things.

First an inclination in his heavenly Majesty to show mercy.

Secondly the effects of his supposed affection, which is his helping of the
miserable creature, or a making out of God to such as have need of help and
pity. The affection of mercy in men is known by that grief that accompanies
it, Tanquam a nobis notiori vertus ipsa nomen traxit.
but such a companion of mercy cannot be in God. O mercy is a glorious
attribute of God, he is a very sea of mercy, he is never dry. Amongst men he
that is fullest of pity is but a drop of it. Their pity falls infinitely short
of what is in God.

And this mercy of God is either general to all his creatures or special unto
mankind or more special and peculiar, that whereby he is said to be merciful
to his elect unto eternal life, and freedom from the wrath to come. Let us
view the general mercy of God to all his creatures. Three things present
themselves to be looked upon.

First the raising up of all creatures out of nothing. Genesis 1.1. In the
beginning God created the heavens and the earth.

Secondly, The extension of tender mercies of providence toward all creatures
wraped up in misery, of which see Psalm 145.9. The Lord is good to all: and
his tender mercies are over all his works. His mercy is over and upon all his
works, as the warmth of the hen is over all the eggs, to warm, and cherish,
and nourish them, so Gods mercy is over all his works, Dr. Preston of the
Simplicity of God. p. 54.
to cherish and nourish, and perfect them, that is, it is showed forth upon
them all.

Thirdly, When creatures be in destresse and cry in their kind, God hears them
and relieves them. Psalm 147.9. He gives to the beast his food: and to the
young Ravens which cry.

Next for special mercies toward men. As he has raised them with other
creatures out of nothing; so he has lifted up in the creation humanity to a
supernatural life. And although these two acts of God may more properly be
referred to the goodness of God: yet surely his provision made of other
creatures for their service, and his relieving their miseries with supplies;
makes it appear, that out of his mercy he is the Savior of all men, though
especially of them that believe. 1 Timothy 4.10. But now for this singular mercies
to his Church, besides those in which they are in commons with all other men
and creatures: whereof (with a little help) the reparation of that whole kind
may go for one of the common ones. God has showed his mercy in giving a
Savior to mankind, faith Mr. Perkines, Mark I pray, to mankind. And John
3.16. God so loved the world that he sent his only begotten Son, etc, I say
besides this, he shows his mercy to his Church and people, in delivering them
from the curse, and giving them the means of salvation, and vouchsafing them
secure of remission of sins here, and life everlasting hereafter. But that
these mercies of the Lord may not pass so: I shall here fasten a while, to
speak of the reparation of lost man fallen in Adam unto sin and natural
miseries, and liable by this fall to eternal death. The raising of them up,
and the underpropping of them with greater helps then before; sure here
abundant goodness and mercy does shine out very gloriously. Here we may by the
way speak of those several kinds of mercy which some have observed to be in
God, and so we shall next come unto the branches of that mercy, which is the
great mercy of all toward such of the fallen race of Adam, as by Christ are
raised up to enjoy everlasting life.

The mercies of God extended in this life may be reduced to five heads. There
is a fivefold mercy of God.


The First whereof, is rewarding mercy, This is when such as do well, though
they do ill also (as who lives and Mercy rejoices against judgment, James
2.13. And God passes by what is done amiss, and rewards what is well done.
He does good to his servants that fear him, and forgets not their works of
faith and labor of love and actions of obedience, but of his mercy rewards
them.

Secondly, He has also pardoning mercy. As he crowns with loving kindness
and tender mercies. Psalm 103.4. So he forgiveth ver. the third of the same
Psalm. This is that mercy which David prays for, Psalm. 25.7. Remember not
the sins of my youth nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy remember
thou me, for thy goodness sake O Lord.

Thirdly, God also has prevaling mercy, when he keeps us from those evils
either of sin or punishment that he Haman did concerning the Jews in Ester,
God hinders it. So when more then forty had bound themselves under a curse,
neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul Acts 23. God prevents it by
his providence, the story is obvious. This is Gods preventing mercy, to keep us
from sin; and so from the punishment due for sin, and from the Conspiracies
of evil men:

Fourthly, God sometimes shows mercy in delivering his on them for sin.
Though he sometimes let them fall into the evil of sin or punishment; yet he
is pleased to help up and take them out again. This is another merciful
dispensation of God. There cannot be greater objects of pity then men and women
that go on in sin. God comes and sees such and raises some up out of that
gulf, in which thousands do yet lie, that never met with this merciful hand
of God to help them out. In this sense, he has mercy on whom he will have
mercy. Romans 9.15. And therefore it is a great mercy of God to give men grace to
repent of their sins, and not to let them ly still in them. And doubtless such
as the Lord loves, he will one way or another fetch them off from their sinful
courses. He will do as kind and wise fathers do with their disobedient
children, he will double and treble his fatherly strokes on us until he amends
us, and make us stoop under him, and bring us off from our miscarriages. God
permitted David to fall into a woeful gulf of sin; but here was his great
mercy seen in helping him out again. And so for Peter, how did he thrice fall
most fearfully into that great sin of denying his master, etc. But in mercy
he was helped out again, he had grace to go forth and weep bitterly, and
recovered himself a gain in the Church of God, in regard of this esteem and
reputation. And so also it is true for grievous troubles, Psalm 34.19. Many are
the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of them all.

Four degrees of sparing mercy in God.
And shows it many and diverse ways. Sometimes by not punishing at all,
sometimes by deferring punishment. Sometimes by moderating his corrections, and
Mal. 3^17.
a merciful disposition, manifesting how unwilling he is to do what he does,
but that needs he must

Often God passes by the sins of his people, and does not reckon with them
at all for them: As a father spares his Son that serves him, even when the
day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud and all that do
wickedly shall be stubble, etc. Mal. 4.1. which is to be understood of some
general judgments that are upon the earth, then God packs up his jewels and
spares them in that day. Here is an allusion to men that have their houses
burning, who do not regard their lumber, their timber stuff: but look to
their chief writings, coin and jewels, to preserve them. So God in common
calamities has a merciful eye toward and hand over his beloved ones; yea
sometimes for the sake of them he saves, such as are near and dear unto
them. Genesis 19.29. And it came to pass when God destroyed the cities of the
plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt. So this is one
particular in which is seen Gods sparing mercy. When God hides his people in
times of indignation. And also when he forgets their sin and casts them
behind his back, and does not punish at all. These phrases of passing by, and
not passing by are usual in Scripture, and to set forth the mercy of God, in
this head of sparing mercy as one breach thereof.

So also Gods adjourning his punishments to a farther day, The long suffering of
God waited in the days of Noah while the Ark was a preparing. 1 Pet. 3.20.
When God was provoked by their sins, yet he waited one hundred and twenty
years. This deferrings of judgment is a branch of that sparing mercy of God
which we live under. But Sirs, the glass is running all this while, and there
is an appointed time for every purpose. The time appointed will be expired, and
though God may seem to have leaden feet: yet be sure he will have Iron hands at
last: Though he come slowly he will smite surely: O Do not be bold in sin, God
is merciful to forbear, to put off and defer his plagues but it will not be
wisdom for you to defer to put off your repentance. His spirit will not always
strive. He will be paid for forbearance, ye will be left altogether in
excusable if his forbearance work not at all with you.

And as if the Lord did study to be merciful in his dealing toward the sons
of men: what moderations and rebates Psalm 78.38. But he being full of
compassion forgave their iniquity and destroyed them not: but of this branch
we have spoken already. Mark therefore what follows, yea many a time turned
he his anger away. Here is another branch of sparing mercy; but yet further,
and did not stir up all his wrath. Here ye have all three in one verse. But
that which we have now in hand, is the moderation that is in this God of
judgment; when he must needs punish, he does it in judgment not in fury. He
does not make a full end, but correct in measure, even when he does not leave
his people altogether unpunished Jer. 46.28. Lament. 3.22. It is of the Lords
mercy that we are not utterly consumed. To wit, his sparing mercy.

Hosea. 11.8. How shall I give the up Ephraim, how shall I deceive thee Israel?
how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. Here is a conflict (as it
were in the very spirit of God. O how shall I do it? O what a sparing heart the
Lord has toward the sons of men? Where he must needs corect them, it is much
against his will. Truly he never dealt with Christ so as he does with the sons
of men. He spares not him in any regard at all. He spared him not in the first
way, he took not away the punishment, but he gave him up to death. The cup did
not pass away but it was drunk. Neither was it deferred, but when the hour
was come he suffered, he was sacrificed in the time set for it. And that
without mitigation. He had not one drop taken out of this bitter cup. Neither
was there any relunctancy in God against it. He did not weep over him when he
was suffering, He never cried how should I suffer thee my son to dye? How
should I endure to see thee so used? But it pleased the father. Isai. 53.10.
yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him. He had not only voluntatem but
voluptatem. He did as it were harden his heart upon him, which made him cry, my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?



spare Christ, Though he spare us continually.

For. First it delighted God to see his justice satisfied, Reasons why God
spared not Christ.
he would have a full satisfaction to it, It was expedient that all the mercy
should be toward the redeemed and none toward the redeemer. As Christ stood
in our steed he was to satisfy justice, and so to have what he paid for. Thus
justice is exact^d which God could not endure should be trampled under foot.
This must needs be a pleasant sight in Gods eyes. That we sinners might have
all mercy, he that saved us from our sins had no mercy. Sparing mercy is the
lowest degree of mercy, yet this was denied to Christ, that he might pay every
sort of mercy for us.

Secondly, He knew what his son could do. He laughed at the trial of him,
because he knew he would do well enough. It pleased the Father to see his son
tug with death so, and all sorrows, even as a General takes delight to see his
soldiers play the men bravely. But I am sensible of a digression and therefore
return to the matter in hand: that mercy of all kinds is in God. Ye have had a
discourse of a fivefold mercy. And now next I am to speak (as I promised) of
that great manifestation of mercy to mankind, fallen from his good estate. I
mean to the remnant elect, to the little flock: for whose sake glorious
doings and marveilous transactions have been in the world. For to the end,
that man so fallen in Adam, so miserable every way (as has been heretofore
showed:) might be raised up and freed from all sorts of sorrows and deaths;
from grief here and from eternal damnation hereafter: and be made fit to
enjoy grace and mercy here, and glory eternal in the heavens: God has diverse
and sundry ways showed his abundant goodness and mercy as shall now be declared.

And, Effects and acts of mercy.
First let us begin with the Incarnation of Jesus Christ the eternal Son of
God. In this God has declared his infinite love and mercy to us. Of this
admirable effect of working John 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten son: that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Who considering this in his mind can choose but be
astonished? who can hold tears in the consideration of so great mercy? That
God would send his Son out of his own bosom, even him who thought it not
robbery to be equal with God: Phillip. 2.6. ver. 7.
to be made of no reputation and to take upon him the form of a servant and to
be made in the likeness of men. Rather then man should be utterly lost. That
he (I say) of infinite majesty with the father and Holy Spirit, wanting
nothing; who created all things, whom so many millions of Angles serve, and who
in a moment of time is able of nothing, to create infinite other more excellent
then men to worship him: should be borne in a stable, laid in a mangre; that
man, wretched man, the lowest of rational nature, next of kind to the brute
beasts, addicted to earthly things, void of heavenly, unclean, unthankful,
rebellious, in whom there was nothing worthy of love, many things worthy of
hatred, and punishment: Should be freed from everlasting damnation, and reign
eternally with God in glory. Here is a rare effect and fruit of mercy indeed!
If a man riding a long the high way, should find a poor raged louzy wretch
almost dead grovelling and wallowing in blood and dirt; and beholding this
woeful sight, should alight from his horse, and take up this poor creature,
carry it upon his back or in his arm to some house, and take all possible care
for its washing, dressing and recovery: and in the mean time have his horse
stolen by thieves, himself persuing beaten and wounded; should yet rejoice
that he has saved the life of the poor creature: would not such a man be
noted for a good man, a merciful man? Beloved brethren, this is nothing in
comparison of what Jesus Christ has done for us. He did lay aside his glory,
and took part with our (even with the worst) miseries; and all in mercy to
deliver us from hell, and to bring us to glory. Stand amazed O ye sons of men!
If ye did but consider what ignorance of God, athisme, brutishnes, and hellish
cruelties are in Christendom (and ye must think there is much more out of it)
ye would conclude that the world is in a most miserable condition, being God is
righteous; And therefore to do as has been a little said for the salvation of
such, must needs proceed from unspeakable mercy even the mercy of a God. To
this head is to be referred the bitter passion of our blessed Savior. His
nakedness and poverty, his hunger and thirst, his labors and hardships of life,
his reproaches and persecutions, his buffetings and spittings, his whipings,
and prickings of thorns, his agony and bloody sweat; all kinds of opprobies
and dolorous sufferings even unto the accursed death of the cross. And this is
the first effect of Gods mercy, Christ Incarnation.

Behold next the revelation of the mind of God by this Lord Heb. 1.1.2. God who
at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the fathers by
by the prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his son. John 17.
ver. 3.
If to know God the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ be life
eternal: (which who dares question?) Then it must be another rare fruit of
mercy, to ignorant, blind, sotish, brutish, mankind to have such a glorious
Sun to shine, that people that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, may
have their feet guided into the ways of peace and salvation. And truly herein,
English men have a great share in this mercy, that when so many places in the
world are without the sound and saving discoveries of the Gospel: have such as
no nation under heaven does (or ever did) go beyond us, scarce any, (surely
very few) ever enjoyed the like. But that we may be somewhat taken with his
effect of mercy, let us look into it somewhat further by the consideration of
two things about it.

First, The condition the world was in when Christ came.
The condition that the world was in when Christ came, and then his coming and
behavior for the enlightening thereof. For the first, the whole world except a
very few was ignorant of Christ, and of its maker: of divine providence and the
government of the world, of the end of good and evil, to wit, eternal life,
and eternal death, heaven and hell. How few then, (and yet indeed) took notice
of the souls immortality, the evil of sin both in regard of his wages and
work, sorrow and deformity, the worth* and beauty of exact walking. The devil
the Prince of darkness being the God of this dark world, held all (as he does
the greatest part to this very day) under his government and discipline; behold
deadly darkness was upon the face of the whole earth, incomparably worse then
the darkness that was in Egypt mentioned, Exodus 10.21. All their beauty was
deformity, their potency, wealth, and eloquence with which they flourished,
were of no worth, because of no efficacy to the obtaining of eternal life or
freedom from hell. Now in this misery and blindness in which the whole world in
a manner lay, The Lord Jesus moved with mercy and pity came into this dark and
blind world, and dispelled these darknesses with his discovery of the mind of
his father. He detects errors, opens the frauds and tyrany of the Devil,
illuminates the world, and shows them the author of all things, his power,
providence, mercy and justice, the reward of good men in graffed into Christ,
and the punishment everlasting prepared for ungodly men and unbelievers. This
light shone three years and half in the person of the son of God in the flesh,
in diverse towns and villages, in the wilderness, in the mountains, in the
fields, on the land and on the sea of Galilee, publicly and privately, in
houses and in Synagogues, in the Temple and in the streets; in all places upon
all occasions. The excellency of this light, it contained nothing but what was
profitable to salvation, for the manner it was plane and familiar, that all
might be capable of it. It was pure and perfect, enlightening the understanding,
reforming the soul excluding sinfullnes and iniquity, directing in piety
righteousness and sobriety, composing the whole life, and conforming the whole
man within and without, to the divine will and eternal love of the most holy
God. This was done by Christ in the flesh, his humanity was the instrument made
use of in the administration of the Gospel of salvation. And therefore nothing
can be desired for matter or manner that is wanting, this mystery of salvation
coming out of so good a hand. The very particulars insisted on by Christ in his
sermons, have in them sublimatie and beauty. He commands self-denial, the
renouncing of all the world for his sake, a patient taking up of the cross,
the love of our enemies, The Lords prayer not to be used as a charm but to be
studied as a text. Math. 13.3^.
readiness to forgive, earnestnes and frequency in prayer, and has left a rule
or form full of heavenly glory and exactnes not to be used as a charm, but to
be studied as a text. Besides (to conclude this particular) how did he open his
mouth in Parables, and utter dark sayings, which had been kept secret from
the foundation of the world. But let us come to a third effect of mercy.

And that is the giving of this our Savior to be (as it were) learn of
Christ. Be zealous as he was zealous. The zeal of Gods house did even eat him
up, John 2.17. And his Disciples remembered that it was written, the zeal of thy
house has eaten me up: you know it was upon his driving the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple; Be meek and lowly as he was, he bids you learn of him,
Math. 11.29. We must learn both of these: Many pretend to be zealous, as
Christ was, but they have not his meekenes. And so some pretend to write after
his meekness, but want zeal: But we must look upon Christ and imitate him
in doing the whole will of his Father. Demonstration and practice is an
excellent way of teaching: Now Christ does not only teach us what to do, but he
does it before us. There is scarce any particular duty that God requires, but
we have a president in Christ, a sampler to work by: As for children that have
a precept, to honor their parents, you know in Christ they have a pattern,
Luke 2.51. And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was subject
unto them. And so for obedience to magistrates: And so for suffering in the
cause of truth and religion, he was as a lamb dumb before the shearer: And so
also for the Church, he made no schism or rent. He was circumcised, went unto
the feasts, joined in public worship, and did not rent himself from the
Jewish Church; though it labored under many corruptions. And therefore have a
care, how ye slight any thing, that ye see Christ was ready to perform: What
can ye wish to have a warrant for, that ye may not find in this Copy? Modesty,
Gravity, Sobriety, Affability, circumspection in words and deeds, benignity,
compassion, mercy, conformity to order, devotion, humility, any thing, every
thing that is required in the holy law of God. We have many vain talkers,
whose mouth must be stopped, because they are evil doers, as well as vain
talkers. This is a rare effect of Mercy in God, who well knew that our eyes are
more upon examples, then our ears attent to precepts: and therefore has
provided a notable one for us.

Fourthly, Another effect of mercy is freedom from sin, diverse ways; for
First, though we are not free from being merciful hand of God, from sinning
with a full and free consent of will. In this sense is it said 1 John 3.9.
Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin. It is true also, that if any
man say he has no sin, 1 John 1.18.
he deceives himself, and the truth is not in him. This therefore is to be
understood of liking sin and lying in sin. Peccatum quod repugnat divinae
bonitati est summum malum.
But behold this great mercy of God toward us, that whereas sin, which is
the greatest evil, because it is contrary to Gods goodness and holiness, and
calls for eternal sufferings; and likewise contains in it unspeakable
deformity and sinfulnes: A just satisfaction is given in the divine person of
the Son of God; and in mercy also the seeds are sown of another frame of spirit
in all that shall be saved. Whence comes a The wages of sin is death, but the
gift of God is eternal life: (of which particular I will speak, Romans 6.23.
when I come to it: But now behold, mercy in delivering us from so great a
death: Do but believe that what the Scriptures say of hell fire is true; and ye
must needs say that to be freed from that place or state, must needs be an
unspeakable, yea an inconceivable mercy. O when a man can say though I must die,
yet I shall not be damned; Though the pit of the grave shut her mouth upon me,
yet the pit of hell is by mercy shut against me; what an unspeakable mercy is
this? Truly Brethren, if to be freed from hellish misery, Perpende quid sit,
esse in illo teterrimo carcere, in illis horendis tenebris, semotum ab omne
luce, ab omni creaturorum amoenitate, ab omni solatio, in summis omnium sensuum
cruciatibus, in acerrimis illis incendijs; ibi torreri, ibi ardere, idque non
unum diem, non unum annum, non centum annos, non mill, non centum annorum
millia, sed infinitos annorum milliones, quamdiu stabit orbis, quam diu vivet
Deus, absque ulla spe liberationis, absque ulla daberum intermissionem Lessi.
de. div. perfect Page 118.
which is so intolerable, so everlasting, be a mercy, then we must needs see
that the Lord our God is a merciful God. The misery we were liable unto, is
imense and incomprehensible; and therefore that mercy must be infinite, by
which that misery is taken away: And this is done to our hand by our merciful
high priest, who by the infinite dignity of his person has matched that
eternity of our torments (which we should have layen under by his once
suffering death upon the Cross for us:

are become the very sons and daughters of this merciful God. Adoptio est
distinctus beneficium a condonatione peccati
This is destinct from the former. For as when a Prince that has pardoned a
Malefactor and given him his life, shall not content himself therewith, but
besides pardoning the injury freeing from the punishment, bloting out the
infamy; shall also take such a one to be his son, and give him right and
power to reign; this would tend much to the declaration of his noble mercy: So
is it with us in this effect of mercy; We shall not only be freed from wrath,
but be taken into Gods family. Now to the further consideration of this
adoption of sons, four things would be looked upon.

First, The state God has taken us from.

Secondly, The state to which he has brought us.

Thirdly, The good which thereupon we do expect.

Fourthly, The means whereby this is effected: We were enemies, unworthy of
the lest mercy, and liable to everlasting sorrows. But are advanced to union
unto and communion with Christ: Not to a moderate or mean estate of hapines of
humanes or angelical happiness natural. But to be the sons of God, the sons of
the eternal King, the heirs of God, and Coheires of Christ, consorts of divine
glory, and partakers of all divine good things with him, we are made one with
Christ not in conceit or imagination only; for this conjunction is in truth a
real conjunction. The prayer of Christ is, John 17.22.
That all believers may be one with him, as he is one with the Father, viz. by
one and the same spirit dwelling in Christ and in all members of Christ; 1 John
3.24. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has
given us. Perkins on the third to the Galatians Page 265. says. All the Saints
in heaven and all believers upon earth, having one and the same spirit of
Christ dwelling in them, are all one in Christ.
Not as if Christ and Saints were not destinct persons, or as if the properties
of the Godhead or qualities of his manhood were transformed into us; or as if
we were only by a bare consent (as friends are) one, or as, if Christ and all
the Saints were one substance. I say none of these ways are we one with
Christ. But as all the Members of the body natural have one soul: So have all
the Saints with Christ their head, own spirit. And this comes to pass on Gods
part by merciful donation, and on our part by faithful reception. Thus we see
how we are one with Christ, and so by consequence do possess Christ, and enjoy
him and his benefits: partly in this life and fully in the life to come. So
that from our adoption, we look for such good, so great joy, so much glory, as
eye has not seen nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man. O
what a gulf of distance is there between* that estate from which we are
taken, 1 Cor. 2.9.
and that whereunto we are brought: And the means whereby all this comes to
pass ye have heard already, is the son of man. For first, one man is taken
to be Gods natural son, the fullnes of the Godhead being substantially united
to him; By this man Christ Jesus, God adopteth and makes his sons, Eodem
spiritu vivunt (nimirum membra Christi) quo Deus ipse, and quo Christus filius
Dei naturalis vivit, et si hic spiritus diverso modo istis communicetur:
personis enim divinis communicator per identitatem, idque vel immediata
necessitate, ut patri; vel per aeternam generationem aut spirationem, ut filio
and spiritui sancto: huminitati vero Christi perhypostalicam vnionem, nobis per
quandam extensionem qua mediante dono gratiae justificantis incipit esse noster
spiritus, nostra vita, nos inhabitans, ornans, movens ergens, and omnes vitales
functiones Deo platentes in nobis excitans and edens. Less.
all those which are engrafted in to this trunk or stoke by the spirit of
faith: for as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God,
Romans 81.4. This previledge is given to them that receive Christ, to them that
believe in his name, to become the Sons of God. John 1.12. And according to
this privilege of Adoption, are we and all our weak endeavors looked upon and
esteemed. O behold what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the Sons of God. 1 John. 3.1.

if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, etc. 1 John 2.1. Here is a
most rich treasury, here are merits that can never be Drawn out. It is
impossible so many sins should ever be committed as might be beyond the
riches and worth of them.

Yet we must know that the worth of them is not drunk up by us, Quicquid
recipitur recipitur ad modum recipientis
for we are not able so to receive them to our use as they are in Christ. For
not in the like measure is the spirit received by all that are justified.
Although each Saint has the whole spirit, yet not in an equal manner and
measure. And so although each Saint has whole Christ made over to him withal
his merits; yet there is not one that has sins enough to take him up holy by
appropriation or to make a full proprotion between their misery and his merits:
but still there will be overflowings of the blood of Christ.

Eighthly, Mercy causes the powering out of the spirit of of his fullnes
receive, Joh. 1.16.
and grace for grace. So that as a little child is answerable in every part to
the tallest and stoutest man, so the little measure of graces in the weakest
Saints have a conformity to the graces that are in Christ, though the
difference in regard of degrees be exceeding great. There is wisdom, patience,
meekenes, etc. Which God gives out and adornes his chosen ones withal. Never
did a Queen present her self so beautiful in the eyes of the greatest
Monarck; as the Church the Spouse of Christ is rendered lovely in the eyes of
God. Solomon Song. cap. 7.1. etc. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O
Princes Daughter? Ye may at leisure read when ye please the rest. But such as
are proud, scornful, passionate, intemperate, covetous, etc. It is impossible
God should take pleasure or delight in them. O how beautiful is the spirits
work upon the soul? a soft heart, an obedient will, and the gifts of saving
and sanctifying grace. A man in the state of nature (says one) is like a pond
full of toads, a man in the state of grace is a paradise of God. Beautiful in
Gods eyes is a gracious soul from top to toe. O ye that wallow in the mire and
dirt and filth of sin, do ye think God can take pleasure in such as ye be?
But Gods people are made comely by the holy Ghost.

Ninthly, From the mercy of God in Christ, the people of God gracious and
merciful. The Saints upon whom the mercy of God is descended find sweetenes in
all religious exercises and holy ordinances. They have the sweetenes of prayer,
preaching, reading, conference: and when they come to break bread with the
Church, Mendicato hic pane vivamus annum hoc pulchrem sacritur in eo quod
pascimer pane cu^ angelis, etc. Luth. in Ps. Buroughs Moses choice. Psalm.
36.7, 8.
they are made to be in the sweet sense of their near relation to Jesus
Christ, they are in the spirit on the Lords day. Ordinances are like that
sealed book we read of in the Revelation, c. 5.1. John wept because no man was
found to open it and read it. But for them that are in Christ, mercy has
better provided. The seals are taken away, the book is opened, the nutts are
brokened the kernels are to be eaten, which are very sweet. O it is a blessing
and full of sweetenes to be joined in union and communion with the people of
God. Though we beg our bread, says Luther, is it not made up with this, that
we are fed with the bread of angels, with eternal life Christ, and the
Sacraments, etc. It is certain the servants of God find such comfort in these
prescribed practices, that they would not for any good be bereft of them.
Neither can they possibly free themselves from the guilt of profaneness that do
not highly prize and heartily rejoice in these things. Such as do believe
themselves, to be members of Christ's body, must needs desire those ordinances
that he has appointed for the building of it up, and do find thriving in grace
and comfort in spirit far beyond any creature comforts. Here they meet with
rivers of pleasures. And thou (says David) shall make them drink of the river
of thy pleasure, to wit in ordinances.

for our parts have no cause to complain, we eat and drink mercies, and wear
them upon our back. We have mercies above and mercies beneath us, and mercies
round about. If we want one kind we have it made up in another. Thou shall have
rubish to serve thy turn, which God throws away; for he has given thee gold.
There is no fear of having too few crusts, but of having good teeth to gnaw
nourishment out of them:

In the Eleventh place, this is a choice effect of Gods mercy, to The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God and the fellowship of the holy
spirit. Carolus plus cum Deo quam cum hominibus loquitur.
Are uprising and down-lying with a gracious soul. This is a mercy indeed. It
is said of Charles the great, that he spoke more with God then with men. Ah
Sirs, why should it not be true of us? Brethren it concerns us much to look
after this fruit of mercy. By this mercy we stand in times of temptation and
trial. A soul high in communion with God may be tempted, but will not easily
be conquered, such a soul will fight it out to the death. O this is a choice
mercy? It is Jacobs ladder where you have Christ sweetly coming down into the
soul, and the soul sweetly ascending up to Christ. It was a mercy vouchsafed
to holy and patient Job upon the dungil, that he knew that his redeemer lived,
and behold how he conquers the Devil both in black and white. Communion is a
reciprocal exchange between Christ and a gracious soul. And of this mercy
there is a continual ground in a gracious soul, for either I shall be praying
for what I want, or praising him for what I have, by both which I have
oppertunity to keep my acquaintance, and hold communion with the Lord my God.
Communion with God brings all Gods attributes to us for our use upon occasions.
Great is this mercy vouchsafed to the Saints and servants of God.

Lastly, From this merciful disposition, to lost, believing of God. Men in
desperate conditions may meet with mercy, for with the Lord there is mercy.
What more desperate condition then to be fallen in Adam's I could tell you many
things of other miseries and dangers, creatures have been in, and near unto;
and have met with a merciful God. Moses like to be drowned. The male Jewish
children to be ruined, and so by consequence in time the whole nation: Cruel
bondage upon them all. The heads of Gods people on the block, by Hamans plot
mentioned in Hester. The three Saints (commonly called the three Children) in
the fiery furnace, Daniel in the Lions Den. The Thief upon the Cross, even (as
it were) droping into hell. Yet Gods mercy was seen in saving all these. In
extremities is the Lord seen. Though the blow were, as it were in the giving to
the whole Church by Haman, yet when the people of God made work upon earth by
prayer and humiliation, that made work in heaven, and the issue of it quickly
came down. And when Christ will be exalted for his mercy, he will convert one
upon the Gallows, and save a thief at the last cast. And therefore we may
conclude upon this attribute of mercy that it is in God. That God is a God of
mercy, a God full of mercy, a God that delights in mercy, a God that is ready
to show mercy, a God that is never weary of showing mercy, a God that reserveth
mercy for thousands, even for a dead lift as we say. And so I have done with
the explicatory part of the point, and am next to make Use thereof.

Mankind is miserable.
for God which always works wisely never puts out himself in any useless
way: Man's misery is the object of Gods mercy. What need we make rates for the
poor, if there were none that had need to be so m^intained? what need were
there of the mercies of God if the sons of men were not in misery. O let this
sink down into your hearts, that ye are nothing else but miserable objects,
undone creatures. And that which mightily adds thereunto is this; that many of
us want eyes to see it. Alas! men are not only miserable but mad too: like
Bedlams we can laugh and sing when we are bound in chains, and our friends
weeping in corners for us. Ah Sirs, God's heart bleeds over us many times when
we laugh and sing it out. He sent his Son to die for poor souls when they
did not know their need of him: nay he made a plaster of his sonne's
heart-blood for them, to heat their poor souls, that wickedly spilt it. Man
is a miserable creature, and cannot assure himself of the least good or keep
himself for the least evil. There is no kind of sin that ever was committed
since the foundation of the world was laid, but we should run into it upon
every opportunity, did not God in mercy prevent it. O what poor nothing, dust
and ashes are we, that live as though we had no need of God; and yet cannot
live one minuite without him? The sons of men are miserable, and they most
that are least sensible. The book of the creatures (says one) is a great
volumne, Lockier on Collos. p. 34.
yet not a line in it smiles upon man; man no sooner looks into it, but all
the creatures fall a bleeding presently as having espied their own murderer.
O wretched man that have made miserable thy self and all thy fellow creatures,
and yet are not sensible of it?

Secondly, Seeing God is such a merciful God, this should teach us in our
afflictions and miseries, not to despair, not to be Prophet Eliah said to
Ahaziah the King, that sent to inquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron about his
sickness, 2 Kings 1.6. Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, etc. Why
should ye be cast down in your low estate? Is not God a merciful God? Exodus
2.7. Says the Lord there to Moses, I have surely seen the affliction of my
people which are in Egypt and have heard them cry, etc. There is no suffering
condition that Gods people be in, but God himself does (as it were) suffer
with them. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his
presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare
them and carried them all the days of old. Isaiah 63.9. If they be sick on
their beds he lies down by them, yea He will make their bed for them Ps. 41.3.
He must needs ly easy who has God to make his bed. If they be in prison he
will be with them there. The merciful and gracious Lord God has always
yerning bowels to them that fear him, and therefore will in due time succor
them. Their persecutions he takes as his own Acts 9.4. Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me. He is a present ready help in the needful time of
trouble: more willing to ease us then we can be to be eased by him. This
merciful disposition of God to help poor miserable creatures, should induce
us all always to come to God for help, into what strait so ever we are cast.

Thirdly, And although we fall into grievous sins, yet let us sum miseriors
merciful to the uttermost. He who has loved us freely in his son, when we
were his enemies, will much more pity us and pardon, now that we are his
already. Romans 5.8, 9, 10. While we were yet sinners Christ died for us, much
more now being justified by his blood we shall be saved from wrath through him,
etc. This is a very useful consideration? It Is true God is a just and severe
judge against the wicked: yet he gives place to his mercy, and is never so
sharp in making the wound, but he is as gentle in asswaging the smart of it,
and in the end takes it clean away. And even wicked men and godless persons,
reprobates themselves taste of Gods mercies. Hear what a master in Israel
says concerning God to this purpose. If any tender hearted man should sit but
one hour in the throne of God Almighty (if it be sit so to suppose) and look
down upon the earth, Bolton his walking with God 102.
as God does continually, and see what abominations are done in that hour: he
would undoubtedly in the next set all the world on fire, and not suffer his
wrath to be pacified or the fire to be quenched. And if such bowels and
unwearied patience be in God to all; O then what a one will he be to those,
whom he has adopted in Christ Jesus for his children, and wait upon God in
troubles, and dwell in Sion by faith: for they that look for mercy of this
high sort, must dwell in Zion. Isaiah 30.18, 19. And therefore will the Lord
wait that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted that
he may have mercy upon you: For the Lord is a God of judgment, blessed are all
they that wait for him. And again he will be very gracious unto thee, at the
voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it he will answer thee. They are blessed
that wait for Gods mercy. Calvin upon the place.
It is a confirmation of no small weight, when he adds that God will show a
sign of his glory in pardoning his people, he will be exalted that he may have
mercy upon you (or as some read it) when he shall be merciful. God seems to
be a sleep or forgetful; but in due time he will be exalted in showing mercy.
Therefore though our sins are never so many for number, or never so heinous
for nature, Dr. Sibs souls conflict. 358.
yet hear is comfort, God is merciful. Will ye hear another great man of God?
All the aggravations that conscience and Satan helping it, are able to raise
sin unto, cannot rise to that degree of infiniteness, that Gods mercy in
Christ is of. If there be a spring of sin in us, there is a spring of mercy
in him, etc. And again, says he, that Lord thinks himself disparaged, when
we have no higher thoughts of his mercy then of our sins, etc. And again
another passage we have to this purpose from another shining light. As the eis
is not weary of seeing, nor the ear of hearing, no more is God of showing
mercy; mercy is natural to him. Let it be considered, Dr. Preston.
for our unspeakeable comfort. The mercies of God are the mercies of a God.
Mercy exalts it self against justice. He will blot out your iniquities, and
remember your sins no more. But let no swine trample upon this Jewel? It Is
true when his people sin he will visit them with stripes; but yet he will
forbear when they are washed in the tears of repentance. The God of Israel is
a merciful God, come then with ropes about your necks, and ly down at his
feet, and he will pardon. As the Jailer washed the stripes of Paul and
Barnabas, when he was converted; so when men repent and are humbled, God will
wash their's. External mercies are vouchsafed to all. He sends rainny
Showers and Sun blasts on the good and bad, on the just and unjust, and feeds
Ravens; nay even those very mouths that do curse and blaspheme him, yet have
many a good thing put into them, and wicked ones have many mercies from his
hands. And if God have such mercies for his slaves; what mercies then (think
ye) has he reserved for his Sons and Daughters? Then let all take comfort in
this Doctrine of Gods mercy, notwithstanding their sinful miscarriages, let
not such as have sinned dispare of mercy.

4. Since mercies is in God as has been said, let us render to Quatuor
potissimum a nobis gratitudo, quae ei rependamus deposcit membriam, amorem
servitutem seu obsequium, and perpetuam cum gratiarum action laudem. Less.
and by many of acknowledgement and thankfullnes. These four things are due
unto God. First to be mindful of his mercies. It is the least we can do to a
benefactour to retain in memory a benefit whereby we may show, that we did
esteem it, and that it was accepted of us. He surely is most ungratfull that
will not so much as remember a curtesy. Therefore seeing we have had so many
mercies from God, let them not be all forgotten. The truth is we should forget
none of them. Forgetfulness of mercies is a sin that goes near to the heart
of God. We find God often putting men in mind of his mercies. Ye have a large
discourse of Joshua, c. 24. v. 3. etc. even unto the 14. v. And Exo. 20.2. God
puts them in mind of his bringing them out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of Bondage, and puts it in the head of the decalogue; ye see to hint thus
much to us, that unles we be mind full of Gods mercies, there is little hope
that we should be obedient to his laws, and so Ezekiel. 16.6. etc. He puts the
Jews there in mind of what he had done for them. And when I passed by thee and
saw thee polluted in thine own-blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy
blood live. I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, etc. Surely
we of this nation have cause to look back to those bloody days of Queen Mary
and to remember what God then did, and has often since done for us. He put out
the fires in Smithfield and elsewhere, etc. And remember what he did for us in
Eighty-eight, and concerning the Gunpower plot in 1605. And in these last past
years, even to admiration and astonishment. O that we could remember his
mercies, that have been ever of old. Must we not confess that the Lord has
been to us a merciful God? Yea surely: And if we look upon our selves that
desire to serve God according to the prescribed rules of his word. Have we not
had many mercies worthy to be remembered? How has God kept up a despised
handful notwithstanding the wrath, pride, profanesse and cruel spite of some
that live among us? How has he kept the burning bush (his Church in this
place) from being consumed? Besides personal mercies which each one his own
soul is most privy unto. Some have been sick, and God has restored health.
Some have been forced from their habitations, and God has brought them back
again. Some have been unjustly molested under pretense of being disorderly
persons, peace-breakers, Riotors (how truly God will one day make appear) and
God has yet freed you from the cruel spite and crushing might of wicked men.
Behold ye stand before the Lord unde many a mercy, let them never be forgotten
for by remembering what God has done, ye will be the fatter and readier to
love the Lord and obey him, and praise him with acknowledgement that his mercy
endures forever. But these three latter particulars are next to be considered
under this fourth Use. Next to remembrance therefore of Gods mercys; we must
inquire for our love toward God For since we have nothing to give in
satisfaction of the least of Gods mercies, being as old Jaacob said, less then
the least of them all: We should yet love God and let our affections run out
toward him, who is worthy to be loved: by a daily commemoration of mercies,
this fire of love may be kindled. As the beams of the sun gathered in a
burning glass into one, do stir up and cause great heat sometime fire; So
the mercies of God gathered in our mind seriously considered, will kindle the
fire of love in our souls toward God, and to that end let these three things
still run in our mind. Our unworthines, Gods eminency, and the greatness and
multitude of his mercies; and if yet this will not do, rub up particular
mercies which like a blast of small wood, may set thy soul on fire, that then
the other three considerations like great billots or sheeds may keep it in. Ps.
116.1.2.
So David, I love the Lord because he has heard my voice and my supplications:
because he has inclined his ear unto me, Fenner in his Treatise of
Justification p. 87
therefore will I call upon him as long as I live, etc. If we would (says one)
busy our thoughts and rememberances about God, this might win our affections
to God.

3. We should yield obedience and service to God, Luke 1.74, 75 being delivered
out of the hands of our enemies we should serve him without fear, in holiness
and righteousness before him all the days of our life. We should do the will of
this merciful God and study to please him in all things. And in the last place
the praises of God must continually be in our mouths. Mercies calls for praises,
Psalm 104. ver. 1. etc. Bless the Lord O my soul, Dr. Sibs Souls Conflict.
45.
and all that is within me bless his holy Name. And the causes follow verses
3, 4, 5 Who forgets all thy iniquities: Who heals all thy diseases: Who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, etc. A thankful heart to God for his
blessings is the greatest blessing of all. This is a duty which none can except
against, because it is especially a work of the heart. All cannot show their
thankfullnes in giving or doing great matters, but all may express the
willingness of their hearts. Ps. 103.
All within us may Praise his holy Name, though we have little or nothing
without us. That ye may be enabled to this great work, consider deeply Gods
favoures, how miserably had we been without his pardoning mercy? Think upon the
freeness of it. Think upon the multitude of his mercies. Think upon Gods
singling of s out for the glory of his rich mercy, and (to conclude this point
and use) consider Gods mercies to us, and care for us, are such as if he had
none else to be mercifuil unto, or to care for in all the world besides. And so
much for the Fourth Use.

For the last Use of this point. Let us labor to be like unto as our Father
which is in Heaven is merciful. To move you to be merciful, consider such as
are If we care not to be merciful to others that we may be like God, let us at
least be merciful to others that God may be like us. Sr. Richard Baker.
Such as show themselves merciful to others have a good ground of hope that
God will be merciful to them. Merciful men shall find a merciful God: Nay it
is asigne they have found him already.

Psalm 37.26. He is ever merciful and lends and his seed is blessed.

The second Proposition.
it is a communicable attribute and so we are put upon the second proposition.
That this merciful disposition is communicated to the sons of men. Which may
be evidenced many ways. As first, because we read so many passages in
Scripture of merciful men. Psalm 41.1, 2. Psalm 112. Ye know it is the very
scope of the whole Psalm, I will not spend time in naming places. Secondly it
is commanded also in many places, and this shows that it may be attained. God
would not bid us to seek after it, and to practice it if it were impossible to
be had or practiced. Thirdly we read of many promises made to merciful men, and
therefore such there are: Such have a promise never to be moved, Psalm 112.6.
That their horn shall be exalted with honor, ver. 9. that their seed shall
be blessed. Psalm 37.26. That it shall preserve Kings and uphold thrones also
is averred, Prove. 20.28. What is so frequently spoken of, what is commanded,
what is commended, what is so beneficial; by Scripture Testimony: surely it is
to be had.

1. They that want mercy are every wicked.
that unmercifull men do want a very glorious, commendable and profitable
thing, which may be had, and which some have to their everlasting praise, and
which they that want are every way wicked. For First, 1. They be Coveteous.
they that be covetous men, shall never enter into the kingdom of Heaven. 1
Cor. 6.10. And the Lord abhors them Psalm 10.3. But covetousness is a grand
cause of unmercifulnes, as daily experience proves.

And then Secondly, Unmercifull men are unbelievers, 2. Unbelievers.
and such shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Now that such as are unmercifu^l are in
deed unbelievers, may easily be made appear: for whereas God has said, He that
gives to the poor shall not want, Prove. 28.27. These want faith to believe
that promise. For did they believe it, they would act accordingly. And Faith
without works is dead, Jam. 2.17. God who is truth it self, has engaged
himself to merciful men in many promises, but coveteous men will believe never
a one, and so they are unmercifull. They shall be without that are unbelievers.
Rev. 21.8. But the fearful and unbelieving, etc. shall have their part in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

Thirdly, It is also certain, 3. They have not the love of God in them.
that unmercifull men have not the love of God in them; for, 1 John 3.17. Who
so has this worlds goods, and sees his brother want (or to have need) and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him? Such as are unmercifull men, do neither love God, nor are beloved of God.

Fourthly, This sin has much cruelty and unnaturalness in it. For whereas the
Lord is the maker of both rich and poor, 4. This sin has much cruelty and
unnaturalnes.
Pro. 22.2. The poor are looked upon and dealt withal by the rich, as if God
had not made them. Therefore Isa. 58.7. Such are said, to hide themselves from
their own flesh. And Malachy 2.10. Each man is said to be brother to another.
Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother? We have a command,
Prove. 25.21. That if our enemies hunger, we must give him bread to eat, and if
he be thirsty, we must give him water to drink. But unmercifull men are far
from hearkening to this command: Ye see what wicked creatures such are, by all
these particulars that I have mentioned.

Secondly, And as they are wicked, so also they ly under a curse, Prove. 28.27.
As, He that gives to the poor shall not lack. 2. They are cursed persons.
So, he that hides his eyes shall have many a curse: And surely, though the
poor that curse unmercifull men, do not do well, yet there is something of God
in it: This scripture must be fulfilled; though it be the sin of the poor, yet
it is a just judgment of God upon merciless men. And not only the miserable,
but God himself curses such. So much is employed, Ps. 41.1. For if he be
blessed that considers the poor; then by the rule of contraries such as do
not are cursed. They are cursed upon this account, because they are wicked.
Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. And Math.
25.41. At the last day they shall be pronounced cursed, and shall hear that
woeful sentence, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. The curse of God like the Leprosy of Naaman does
cleave to them and to their seed for ever. Thus ye see this truth manifested by
two evidences the one taken from their great wickedness, the other from their
cursednes.

3. They are unlike God.
Thirdly, It appears, that unmercifull men want a glorious commendable and
profitable thing, by this, that they are altogether unlike to God. O this
dissimilitude to God makes men look uggly. God is the Father of mercies. 2 Cor.
1.3. God loves them that are like unto him, but so are not wicked men. They do
not show themselves to be the children of this Father which is in heaven. We
read of God, Psalm 10.17. That he does hear the desire of the humble (or
poor,) etc. And that he gives food to all flesh because his mercy endures
for ever Psalm. 136.25. and Luc. 6.36. He commands that (we) be merciful,
Mat. 5.45.
as (our) Father also is merciful. And he made laws for mercy. Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8.
If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within thy gates in
thy land which the Lord thy God gives thee; thou shall not harden thy heart
nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother. But thou shall open thy hand wide
unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in that which he
wants. And God is so merciful that he takes order that the poor, the maimed,
the lame, the blind be called, when men make feasts. Luke 14.13. But
unmercifull men have not such a disposition, they are altogether unlike God and
therefore want a glorious property.

4. Unmercifulnes bars audience of Prayers.
In the Forth place, we read Prove. 21.13. Who so stops his ears at the cry of
the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. Unmercifulnes
bars audience of prayers. Certainly they want a glorious commodity that want
that which makes the ear of the Lord to be open, to cries and calls in the time
of need? It Is no ordinary privilege to have access and welcome to the throne
of grace; and therefore to want it whereby prayer becomes an abomination to
the Lord must needs be a very great want. O when unmercifull men, hard-hearted
wretches, shall ly and cry on their death beds, O Lord show some mercy, O Lord
show some comfort, Lord help me, Lord help me, Lord forgive me, Lord Jesus
receive my soul: let them be sure God will turn the deaf ear to them, as
they have formerly to others. Oh this is dreadful!

Fifthly, Unmercifullnes is a degree of murder, Job 24.14. The murderer rising
with the light, kills the poor and needy, 5: Unmercifulnes is a kind of
murder. Qui non tollit injuriam cur potest facit.
and in the night is as a thief. That place is to be understood of such a
murder as the rich man (mentioned, Luke. 16.21.) was guilty of. He that
devises ways how to oppress, suck, squeeze, yea not to succor a dying man
in Gods account, is a murderer. Not to give meat to the hungry has a
sentence of, go ye cursed, Math. 25.42. If people be in misery and want, and
such as are able, will not pity and succor them, and supply their wants, they
are in a sort before the Lord murderers.

Sixthly, It is a shrewd sign of a reprobate condition: 6. A shrewd sign of a
reprobate condition.
For we read in the third chapter of the Collos. ver. 12. That bowels of mercy
is put among those properties which do belong to the elect of God. Put on
therefore as the elect of God (holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness of
mind, meekness, long suffering, etc. Who can think but such do belong to the
state of reprobation that have not the marks and sign of Gods elect upon
them? Who can hope that they have relation to the God of mercy, that in their
place and to their power, do not labor to make it evident by relieving such as
be in misery?

To conclude this use, Lastly, their end doleful, that are unmercifull.
surely we may agree from the woefulness of their future condition, from their
doleful end. That they want that, which is of great concernment, that want a
merciful disposition. James. 2.13. For he shall have judgment without mercy,
that has showed no mercy. They must look to drink of the wine of the wrath of
God which is powered out without mixture into the cup of his indignation.
Without mixture, mark that phrase, that is without allaying of it. God will
not moderate it at all. They shall have judgment without mercy.

We have yet another use, and it is of exhortation: We have Job was, ye may
read cap. 29.16. I was (says he) a father to the poor: and the cause which I
knew not, I searched out, etc. cap. 31.17. He did not eat his morsels alone,
but the fatherless did eat with him. and ver. 20. The loins of the prore
warmed with the fleece of his sheep blessed him. Ye read of Dorcas. Act. 9.39.
that She made coats and garments for poor widows while she was alive. Dives had
been better to have given all that he had to Lazarus then have fared as he
did. To move you to be merciful.

Motives to be merciful 1. It is a blessed thing.
First, it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive. Acts 20.35. It makes
such as practice works of mercy truly noble and honorable, and that in the
account of God himself. The Lord Jesus said, and his words are to be
remembered, that it is more blessed to give them to receive. Consider the
forementioned place in the Acts of the Apostles.

2 Ye give to Christ.
Secondly, Christ takes all acts of mercy as if they were done unto himself: He
takes them all to his own account. And this ye may be sure of, he is a good
paymaster, and sooner or latter will quit scores and reckonnings with you. He
will not forget that when he was hungry ye fed him, etc. Math. 25.42. And if
the Paps are blessed which gave him suck, then shall that table also that has
fed him: Luc. 11.27.
Ye have plain Scripture, that in as much as ye have done, works of mercy, to
the least of these, which he is not ashamed to call his brethren, ye have done
it unto him. This is the second motive ye give to Christ.

3 God will not die in your debt.
Lastly, read Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the poor lends unto the
Lord; and that which he has given, will he pay him again: God will not die in
your debt. If all sufficiency can make requital, ye shall surely have it.



James 1^17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the father of lights. Pray therefore to the Lord to give you
merciful hearts. Prayer ye see is the Bucket to fetch up some of this mercy
out of the deep Well that can never be emptied. Secondly you must consider,
what has been said formerly, you must lay it to heart and think upon it. And
Thirdly and lastly, ye must fall upon the practice of mercy. By using your
selves to acts of mercy, you shall come to be more merciful: many acts will
beget a habit. You must cast your bread upon the waters; for ye shall find it
after many days: not only in Gods rewarding, Eccles. 11.1.
but your own disposition and inclination, which will be to you a kind of a
heaven upon earth. I am now at last come to speak of the infiniteness and
incomprehensiblenesse of the mercy of God. Upon this proposition: The third
Proposition.


God in this attribute of mercy is infinite and incomprehensible. He is in this
as in other attributes, Indeed he is God. Heaps of places I might bring in,
the Bible abounds with passages of the merciful inclination of God. Exodus
34.6, 7. The Lord God merciful and gracious, etc. And again. Keeping mercy
for thousands. Deuteronomy. 5.10. And showing mercy unto thousands. Ps. 36.5. Thy
mercy O Lord is in the heavens or unto the heavens. So that we need not ask as
Esau did of Jacob his father about a blessing. Genesis 27.38.
Have thou but one blessing my father? So have thou but one mercy, O God? For
come there never so many there is mercy for all. The bottomless Ocean of Gods
mercy can never possibly be drawn dry by the creature. Many admirable sayings
have we touching Gods mercy. First God enclines to it, it comes naturally from
him: not as waters out of the pump but as showers from heaven. It Is but open our
mouths and God will fill them. Yea secondly (to use the words of a painful
and learned Writer.) It is not only not troublesome and painful (to wit
because it is natural to God to show mercy) but also pleasant and delightful
for God to show mercy, etc. And a little after. Downhams Christian Warfar. p.
204. lib. 2. c. 34. sect. 4.
And contrary wise it should be troublesome and irksome, If I may so speak
(says mine Author) for God not to show and exercise his nature and mercy etc.
And once more. For as the eye is delighted with seeing, and to be restrained
there from is grievous unto it: as the ear is delighted with hearing, and is
much molested if it be stopped; and as every part and faculty of the body and
soul are delighted in exercising their several actions and functions; and are
much vexed and combred if by any means they should be hindered; so is the Lord
delighted and well pleased, in showing and exercising his own nature and
attributes. God weeps when he strikes, but smiles when he strokes. It does his
heart good (as we use to say of men.) Certainly God will not be barred of his
pleasure, he rejoices much to have an occasion offered of exercising his
mercy. Psalm 147.11. David says, that the Lord is delighted in them that fear
him, and attend upon his mercy. When men wait for mercy, God is delighted to
exercise it toward them. Caryl on Job 5. part Page 37.
Judicious Mr. Caryl. To show mercy pleases him more then it relieveth us.
Thirdly, God is said to multiply, to show mercy. Single acts of mercy cannot
give him content: He shows mercies by thousands, unto thousands of his people.
Fourthly, ye have an expression Isaiah 30.18. And therefore will he be exalted
that he may have mercy upon you. But what do I speak of that which is infinite
and incomprehensible? Sooner can we number the stars of heaven, dropps of the
Ocean, sands on the shore, yea Atoms in the sun; then give you a true
account of the mercies of this most merciful God. What is a drop to the Ocean?
Quantum scintilla ad mare se habet, tantum hominis malitia ad Dei clementiam
imo vero non tantum. Chrysostom.
And what are our sins to the mercies of God. Infinitenes cannot be limited.
Gods thoughts of mercy are exalted above the thoughts of our unworthiness,
far higher then the heavens are exalted above the earth. Mercy is as it were
Gods fetching of breath. His infinite and incomprehensible goodness, does in a
sort wholly live in works of mercy; For all the world are object of Gods mercy
since Adams fall: For all have sinned, and have come short of the glory of God.
That famous Man, H. Zanchius. Has notable stuff about this matter. I will
take notise but of one passage, Upon Exodus 34.6, 7. Where it is said, Zanch. de
Attrib. lib. 2. c 1. quest. 2.
that God is slow to anger. He writes, And therefore we must note, although
anger be attributed unto God, it is in God nothing else, but the chief goodness
and justice, whereby he abhors evil, and according to his just judgment,
does at lengh punish it, if it be not amended by his long suffering and
patience. This here hence appears evidently, speaking of revenge, which is an
effect of anger, he does not say that he does presently inflict punishment, or
that he is so ready to inflict it as to show mercy: but he says, that he is
slow to anger, etc. And upon the 28th. of Isaiah 21. Where the words are, for
the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perahim; he shall be wrath as in the valley
of Gibion, that he may do his work; his strange work; and bring to pass his
acts, his strange act. The prophet (says Zanchy) makes two sorts of Gods
works, his proper and strange works. The proper work of God is to show mercy,
and to spare or forgive; his strange work is to be angry, and to punish: So
far he. I have been somewhat long about this quotation. The weight lies upon
this, that mercy in God is his nature, and therefore infinite; it is the very
life of God, his drawing of breath in his proper works. Mercy, goodness, long
suffering are according to the nature of the deity, which is far remote from
all unjust severity, cruelty, tyranny, and pride. All providence have mercy in
them. It Is of the infinite mercy of God that the world is borne up, which would
else sink into its first, nothing. It is mercy respites the damnation of wicked
men, and saves the elect; yea, behold I tell you a mystery, mercies brings
calamities. 1 Cor. 11.32. But when we are judged we are chastned of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world. O let me draw breath a little!
Consider, what unexpected, even incredible mercies God sometimes breathes out.
Even when he seems to breath out smoke and flames; yet he is angry that he
may bring his work to pass, that is to say, his Proper work; that is, that he
may have mercy and preserve. The Devil he breaths out Deaths, Miseries and
Mischiefs, but God loads us with mercies, and (as I said) the attribute of
goodness sets God on work to put himself out in endless mercies and tender
bowels, beyond what man or Angel can possibly imagine.

Learn then we may hence, that there is no want of mercy in that ye might have
life. And what would ye have more? I say again, if any of you be damned, it is
not God, but your selves that cause it. See what God has done to others: men
saved already next the devils, have been the greatest objects of pity that
could be, because vile sinners and enemies to God in their mind by wicked
works; bloody Manasseth, persecuting Saul, abominable Mary Magdalen, and the
Thief upon the Cross, even dropping into the jaws of Hell. And for Saul who I
named but just now, when he was breathing out threatenings and slaughters
against the disciples of the Lord: Act. 9.1.
Even then was God breathing out his mercies upon him. These are glorious suns
that shine in the crown of our merciful God. He has mercy of all sorts, for
all conditions: and nothing displeases him more, then when men take up narrow
thoughts of his infinite bowels.

Then secondly, Let us trust in this merciful God for ever, Isa. 55.7.
etc. and turn to the Lord, for he is merciful. He will have mercy, he will
abundantly pardon: stand it not out with God any longer; ye know not if ever ye
may have another such a tender of mercy from God again. O then close with God;
labor to come into the Covenant, and keep under it ye that are in. Otherwise
ye may live long enough under mercies offered. Come to Christ, God is a Father
only to such as have Christ for their Lord and King. Beloved, consider what I
say, Gods works are glorious and to be sought out. I say we come not to heaven
in a way of mercy only, but through a Mediator: for out of Christ God is
nothing else but everlasting burnings. For though his nature and property be to
have mercy and to forgive; yet he is forced to take punishment by our
impenitency, and our impenitency cannot be taken off, until we be united to
Christ by the spirit working repentance. If ye be not in the Covenant, ye are
out of the sphere in which Gods mercics to eternal salvation move; though many
ordinary showers of mercies and Sun-blasts of comfort, are to be had upon the
account in general of the satisfaction of Gods justice by Jesus Christ
elsewhere; yet choice mercies, the sure mercies of David are to be had no where
else but under the Covenant, Psalm. 89.28. Mark I pray, My mercy will I keep for
him ever more: How comes that to pass? It follows. And my Covenant shall
stand fast with him. By David in this Psalm, is signified Christ of the seed of
David, of whom David was type. And Gods mercies to us in him are firm and sure:
Verse 34. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips. And much more ye may read in the following verses, to the same
purpose. The sum of all is, that Gods mercies in Christ are firm to the whole
body mystical. To them they are like the waters of Noah: It Is a Covenant of salt
that cannot be broken. Get once assurance that thou art in Christ, and never
doubt of the mercies of God more. Be thou never so weak in parts or grace.
Those that are so weak that they cannot apprehend Christ, he is ready to
comprehend them. But still we must be perfect in this truth, Dr. Preston Sts.
Infirm. page 52.
that Justification, Redemption and Salvation (which are these sure mercies of
David) are not to be found out of the Church; nor extended to those whom God
never received into his Covenant. But here it may be objected, Titus v. 2. That
eternal life which God that cannot ly has promised before the world began:
cannot be appropriated to those who do believe, and bring forth the fruits of
their Faith in obedience: because there were none such before the world began.

To which I Answer, first, That that place may be Englished, Sol.
from the times of ages: And then the sense will be, that God in all ages from
the beginning has made promises of eternal life to such as come into the
Covenant and are believers. (...).
A parallel place in some what a clearer phrase we have, 2 Thessalonians 2.13. God has
(from the beginning) chosen you; that is, all along from the beginning, ( God
has chosen you (and such as you are) to salvation, through sanctification of
the spirit and unbelief of the truth: Or, if according to the latter
Interpretation of Piscator (which Dr. Twisse embraces:) we read ante tempora
soecularia, Quemad modum etiam verum est. Deum, sicut neminem adultum nisi
resipiscentem, and bonis operibus invigilantem salvum facit, ita etiam non nisi
resipiscentem and bonis operibus deditum, statrisse salvum facere: unde
conficitur resipiscentiam and bona opera causas quidem esse salutis, idque ex
ordinatione Dei, quippe qui nos elegit ad salutem in sanctifatione spiritus and
fide veritatis; sed non sequitur resipiscentiam and bona opera causam esse
ordinationis ipsius divinae. Twiss. 233. fol.
before times of ages, that is, before many ages, to wit, in the beginning of
ages (which seems fitter then to say before eternity, for God neither promised
nor decreed to promise any thing before eternity:) this sense will answer this
Objection well enough, to wit, that whatsoever Gods decree or purpose be of
men, and means; sure I am that God has promised eternal life only to such as
be in Christ; and that all mercies (belonging to life eternal) are appropriated
to such new creatures as are in Christ Jesus.

But secondly, for satisfaction in this point, if ye that are pleased to
consider what I say, are resolved to read the words either in the Epistle to
Titus, or to the Thessalonians; according to the usual reading of them in our
English Bibles, and according to Beza and others: and will make the sense to
be, before the world began: (although it will be hard to make the place in in
the Epistle to the Thessalonians so to sound;) yet still it will stand for a
truth, that Christ laid down his life only for his sheep, (...). Ioh. 10.15.
and not for his enemies; for the company of Believers, and not for wicked
unbelievers: And as is said, Heb. 5.9. He is the author of eternal salvation to
all that obey him.

Nay not only are Christ and his benefits restrained to the faithful, but
also unbelievers, and such as continue in their wickedness, are flatly
excluded from the participation of them. He that believes not is condemned
already, Joh. 3.18. He that obeys not the Son shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him, verse. 36. If any man have not the spirit of
Christ, the same is none of his. Romans 8.9. And he that commits sin is of the
Devil. 1 John 3.8. But to return, and so draw to an end.

Let us take notice of wonderful condiscension in God, to make a Covenant with
any, and of the unspeakable happiness of such as be enabled to come into this
Covenant. To doubt of mercy, and profess our selves Christians, is a very
great sin. God that cannot ly has promised eternal life before these ages,
even from the beginning. Know therefore, that he is faithful, which has
called you, who also will do it. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Gods mercifulness is continued
upon the account of his truth and faithfulness, which Attribute is next to be
spoken of out of this very Text.

The end of the Attribute of Mercy.
Of the Truth of God.
Psalm 100. Verse the last. For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting:
And his truth endures to all generations.
WE are come now to the third property, mentioned in this Text; the sixth in
order of the communicable attributes of God. And this truth indureth to all
generations. In handling of which, I purpose to keep my self to those three
propositions, or rules, which I have observed in the other five, that have
been spoken off.

This word (Truth) has diverse acceptations, and no marvel; for in the
original Hebrew, there are more words then one, rendered in our english tongue
by this word Truth. The usual word in the Bible which signifies truth, is Kosht
or Keshet: (...)
But the word here used is Emunatho, by reason of the pronoune affix. His truth
it is. It comes from the same root that that common word among us does, viz.
Amen. Which in the form Niphal, signifies to be true, firm or stable. And
here in my text it denotes the truth, firmness and faithfulness of God, as ye
shall (God-willing) hereafter hear.

Truth, Generally signifies the conformity of any thing, with its measure or
rule, according to which it ought to be formed or made: as true Gold, true
Silver, true Water; Veritas est conformitas seu adaequatio rei ad missam, Vig.
gra. p. 8.
because it is conformable according to its kind, and agreeable to the
appointed proportion or allay; and is not false. The measure of each created
thing, is that which is sometimes called an Idea: to wit, the divine conception
of God, in himself of each thing, according to which as a rule, by virtue of
this conception of his, he gave being in time. For in the wisdom of God, from
everlasting has the form of every thing not only specifically (from the
highest Seraphim to the lowest Ant) but in their particular individuum's. If a
creature should be otherwise, Veritas est proprietas entis creati sicut and
bonitas Less.
then is so conceived in the mind of God, it should not be true, but false. And
as each thing is said to be true, by its conformity to its exemplary cause; so
to be good by its agreement unto its final cause. And therefore we say truth
is one, although goodness be manifold, as there are many ends subordinate one to
another: yet nevertheless there is but one utmost end, and in that regard but
one goodness neither. There is nothing which God has made concerning which we
may say, Natura nihil fecit frustra.
it is good for nothing. For what the heathens according to their skill, say of
nature, that it made nothing in vain; we may much more truly say of God. It is
agreed upon in the Church of Christ, that God made all things, and all persons
in particular, for certain ends whereby he may be glorified. So Solomon says,
Prove. 16.4
The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked for the day
of evil. And look as a thing serves more to declare the excellencies of God;
so it is said to have in it more goodness. Take all the jewels in the world,
they have not in them that goodness in a true consideration that has one blade
of grass, which has life, though of the lowest sort, yet it has life. Grass
and plants, not so good as sensitives that have a better kind of life. Lions
and Eagles nothing comparable to the poorest man. And (to speak in the words
of Chrysostom) Take all the men in the world, and they are not worth one Saint
or gracious soul, though never so mean in regard of outward. And what is the
reason of this, surely because they are they by whom God attaines his end of
making the world; and from them alone has his glory in the world. And
therefore I conclude, the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. Duae
proprietates entis verum and bonum.
There is a greater goodness, better a greater conformity to the end of being.

Ye see the two positive properties of an entitie; the truth of it, and the
goodness of it. But it may be demanded, whether onenes or unity be not another
property of an entitie or being? To which I answer, No. Because the oneness
of a thing, adds nothing unto the being of that thing; Unitas supra rationem
entis nihil dicit nisi divisionis negationem. Less. veritas uniuscujusque rei
est proprietas sui esse, Avicen. and vigue. Grav. Instituit. f. 8.
neither does it affirm any thing, save oneness which is a negation of
division. For that which is one, is a thing undivided, and divided from all
other things: And therefore has no place among properties: But I hasten from
these notions lest I should offend the judicious: I have spoken of the property
of goodness, as it is attributed to God, and now to speak of truth; though this
be not that acceptance of the word, which I purpose most to insist upon. Yet
take this by the way. Our God is a true God, that is, he is truly God. But here
it may be objected, if truth be a conformity of a being unto its rule: or as
Augustine says, a true similitude of the beginning, which is without any
dissimilitude: what rule is there for God to be conformed unto? To which I
answer. Truth as it is (in this first acceptance) attributed to God, is not in
him a conformity of being, to a rule or pattern, (for then God should not be
eternal, Veritas est vera similitudo principii, quae sine ulla dissimilitudine
est. Aug. de vera religione.
and something should be before God, according to which his entitie being
conform, should make him a true God:) but in this, that his nature is such as
that it ought to be, the exemplary cause and measure of all things. This being
of God then is veritas fundamentalis (as the Schoolmen call it.) In this sense
he is the true God, and there is no other besides him. Isaiah 45.22. I am God,
and there is none else. This shows the falsenes of all other Gods, and of all
other religions. Zeph. 2.11. The Lord threatens Idolaters, to famish all their
gods. Jehovah the true God will make hungry false gods. For his truth endures
for ever; neither can his true being cease: nor his meat whereupon he lives
be taken from him. But ye will say, what meanest this? What meat God eats?
What meat is that which God which is a Spirit eats? To which I answer. God
is Holy and lives in seeking his own honor, which none can take from him,
though thousands go about it. He is a jealous God, and his honor he will not
give to another. And therefore although such as deny the true God his due honor
and worship, do what they can to famish him; yet it is impossible, he will live
and be glorified in despite of men and Devils. It is true of all other
dunghill gods, God will famish them: for when the word comes to be preached
among nations, it turns them from false gods to worship the living God: and so
God is said to famish false gods. As take all the religions that ever have
been in the world, besides that which we profess; take all the gods that have
been set up by others, before or since Christ; they are all famished and even
their own worshippers and writers have said enough to make them vain and
rediculous. But our God, the God of Christians is the true God. When things
come to loose their esteem, their leanesse rises up and they go down: As it
is with man, his leanness may be said to rise when his credit falls. But what
an horrible sin is this to go about to starve God; as all they do, that do
deny unto him due honor and worship? But who do so? Sirs, I will speak no
more of the gods of the Gentiles; those dead vanities are long agone exploded:
nor of the absurd religion of Mahomet with his barbarous Alcoron so full of
nonsense. Nay I can scarce afford a look to Rome, in those things wherein we
have left them; for our difference is only about what men have added. But O ye
Protestants that are taught to know and worship the true God, and live under
the profession of the true religion: to you I have something to say of great
concerment. Are not some of you profane and superstitious, and very ignorant of
this true God, which we preach unto you? Nay are not most of your ministers (at
least round about us) such? What means else, such hunting after benefices,
such chopping of places, such doings about preferment and the world? And then
no marvel people generally are so cold, formal, perfunctory and superstitious
in worship; and so vain, loose, worldly, and profane in their conversation.

Now I beseech you all, consider whether it be answerable to the true worship
of the true God (which ye profess to be willing to know and practice) to be
careless of worship prescribed by Christ, superstitiously zealous about
additions and inventions of men; and loose and worldly in conversation and
carriage. Well I will not say much. We should cleave to this God whose truth
endures to all generations, even in this first sense, that he is true and not
falls. And therefore all that profane, worldly and superstitious people make
their god; and love, honor, esteem and trust unto; shall be dealt withal as
the gods of Egypt, Exodus 12.12. And against all the gods of Egypt, I will
execute judgment: I am the Lord. Let a good principle therefore be laid and
then though religion, and peace, and prosperity, should not walk in one path
(as yet by the goodness of God they do;) yet ye will cleave to the true God. But
though ye have all outward happiness, much of the word and of the earth, which
is so much desired and esteemed: yet if ye have not much earth spoken off,
Mark 4.5. If ye want root; ye will at last come to nothing. Yea, This true
God will famish all your gods that ye have trusted too, and make their
leanness to arise, and take away the honor and credit which was given and to
your forms and formal blind guides. And this is done already according to the
prophesy Malachy. 2.9. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base
before all the people, Mr. Greenhill on Ezekiel 1. part p. 47.
according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law. I
confess it is the portion of the Prophets and Ministers of God, to be derided
and scorned. Yea not only in Babylon, but in Israel (as godly preacher yet
living observes, speaking of those words out of Isaiah 8.18. I and my children
are for signs and wonders in Israel; yea, not only so, but to be made the
filth of the world and offscouring of all things to this day. 1 Cor. 4.13. Men
get up all every where, on every side, so the word carries it. The men of the
world (says mine Author) were like unto a man that raked every where to get a
basket of filth, (...).
dirt and dung to throw in some ones face; so they scrape in the doctrines,
lives and passages of the servants of God, do catch all advantages, do seek
every where, to pick up something, that they may have wherewithal to upbraid,
reproach and revile them: We have experience of the truth hereof daily. We have
plenty of these Chanel-scrapers and dirt-throwers: yea some of them Ministers
at least so called and accounted, have learned of Zedekiah to smite Michajah, 1
King. 22.24.
etc. But yet alas! Have not we our selves been perfidious to God and men, and
gone about to rob him of those souls, which he sent us to get into him? I am
loath to say what I know and observe; only pray you to read, Isaiah 9.16. For
the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led of them
are destroyed. We may not therefore wonder that our leanesse does so arise: If
we go about to famish God, God will famish us. And (to make an end of this
point,) let all know, that if they give that love, trust, respect and honor
which is due to God unto creatures, which he has made, and love the world and
the things that are in the world; it is a sign they have not received this
anointing, which teaches us to know the true God, etc. Which to do is life
eternal. And while the men of the world brag that they have friends, wealth,
riches and honor; Let the people of God, give God his meat and honor him, and
say we have a God: Even as the story goes of the French Herald, when the many
titles of the King of Spain were reckoned up (which indeed were many:) He
causes these words King of France to be said over and over as often; intimating
thereby, that one France was better then all those petty Kingdoms and
Lordshipps; and (that) (one) title more honorable. So we see David starving
and famishing all the gods. Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put gladness in my heart,
more then in the time that their corn and their wine increased. Thus he makes
the leanness of the gods of worldlings and foolish people (that know not the
true God) to appear. And so much for the first acceptance of the word True,
and the application of it to Jehovah, who is the only true God, and that
fundamentally without conformity to a rule.

But neither the word in my Text used (Emunatho) nor the scope of the place,
nor indeed the subject I intend in my descourse; is for this acceptance of the
word truth. Therefore we must seek another. Therefore, Secondly, (leaving this
object and fundamental verity, this chief intelligible, among all
intelligibles, the first and supreme measure of all measurables; in whom every
intelligible and measurable, is most eminently contained, as in the bottomless
depth of all truth, and the first determinating and modifying rule of all
things:) We have another truth, to wit, formal truth. This is the conformity
of knowledge, with the object, as with its measure, when a thing is judged such
as indeed it is: when our knowledge obtaines its object, this is truth. This
truth also is attributed to God, whose knowledge attaines it due object, and
his wisdom infinitely surpasses all created wisdom. The Lord knows the
thoughts of men that they are vain. Vain and false thoughts lodge in men, none
in God: we may say of men, ye miss think, and ye say false; we cannot say so
of God. I speak not of lying against conscience, but of coming short of the
truth, of mistaking truth and taking falsehood for it: we make use of two
words, concerning learned men and opinions, which will help much to the
understanding of this logical truth: Orthodox and Heterodox: an Orthodox man,
is one that is sound in his judgment, and holds the truth, and does not take
errors instead of truth: When there is a conformity of the conc^ptions of the
mind with things, as they are, this makes a man Orthodox. But a Heterodox man
is one that apprehends otherwise of things then they are; I take it, that
place Romans 3.4. Is to be understood of this truth. Yea, let God be true, but
every man a liar. Who then is an Orthodox divine? surely such a one as thinks
of things held forth to be known, as they are. Thus ye have a second use of the
word truth as it is the English of the Hebrew word Keshet or Kosht: In which
acceptance also; God is true truly conceiving and ennunciating things as they
are. That ye may be full of this in your understanding, consider that if all
the holy and excellent men that ever were in the world, or are, or shall be,
were brought together; we might say of many thousands (as was said of John
Baptist, John 5.35.
he was a burning and a shining lamp:) They were and are Orthodox and true
judging men: but we cannot say of so much as one, all that he holds, or
believes, or says, is true. For this only is proper to God, who only is
completely Orthodoxe: of men we must say (as James the Apostle does in many
things, we offend all) In many things we err, and do not hold the truth, even
every one, even the most sound and most knowing Christian or Minister that ever
was. The first kind of truth, was (as I may call it) Metaphysicall truth,
whereby things are truly, what they seem or are conceived or reputed to be,
having the reality of that essence which they have the name of: But this truth
(which I have called logical) is the knowing and saying of things in mind and
tongue, as the truth is. In this sense the Scriptures are the Scriptures of
truth, and in them is no ly nor error. And so God only, I say, is the true
God, or the God of truth. But although God be in this regard the only true God,
and the God of all truth; from the truth of whose divine wisdom all truths
descend to men and Angels: Yet the truth of things which he knows, do not
pass from the things into his knowledge, as the measure thereof, as in men (ye
know) things are true, and therefore afterward known so to be: But in God from
the objective verity of his essence, two manner of ways do the knowledge of
things true in themselves, come to be said to be true, in regard of God. First,
by Creation, for by wisdom all things are made and formed; their truth does
consist in their conformity with that wisdom and divine art. Psalm. 104.24. O
Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all: Now to
endeavor to make you understand somewhat, of this coming of things to be true:
ye must know that in regard of us, truth passes into our knowledge; because
the truth of things (as I said before) is the measure of the truth of our
knowledge: Therefore what thing is Metaphysically false, an enunciation
logical thereof cannot be true. But there is necessarily required a truth of
the thing before I come to know it to be so. And so after, truth passes from
my knowledge into my affections, and so into my manners and conversation, in as
much as they are subject to the judgment, wisdom and knowledge of the divine
law. And lastly, it passes for truth into our words and writings, in which are
beheld the least footsteps, the smallest sound, and (as it were) the last
farewell of truth. Now in God whose wisdom, infinitely surpasses all wisdom,
every notion of truth is most eminently contained, his wisdom and knowledge
attaining and penetrating most perfectly and most distinctly every objective
truth. And this formal truth in God (as well as we can conceive it) arises in
God from the objective truth of his essence; which is the measure of divine
wisdom: and the truth of wisdom stands in conformity or adequation with his
essence, and consequently with all things which in it are eminently contained.

Secondly, Whereas truth descends from God, unto creatures, by revelation and
divine illustration; for this truth is not drawn from the objects, but directly
communicated by the infusion of light: (in which manner the truth of faith and
the blessed vision of God, is derived unto us:) In God it is not so. For he is
not only the first object and fundamental truth, but also the formal truth,
the very universalitie and fullnes of wisdom, and so he comprehends without
revelation all truths by reason of his infinite knowledge: For more then twenty
years, I could not perceive how a man could be in judgment an Arminian, and
in truth an understanding Christian: as ye will confess (I am persuaded) with
me, that are not unreasonably engaged in those controversies, or miserably
entangled in those snares of unsanctified wits; the desciples of Pelagius and
Plato; Not of Augustine or Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ. Feign would I have
answers to these few ensuing questions, that I may have a better opinion (if
it be meet I should) of that ruffling generation, that are gotten into these
Arminian tenants. First, whether God Foreknew this truth from eternity, of each
Son and Daughter of Adam numerically, personally, and by name, that such a
one, and such a one, should believe and be saved; and such, and such remain in
unbelief and be damned? Secondly, (according to the matter in hand which put
me upon this digression) whether this were first a truth before God knew it,
and so passed into the foreknowledge of God, Tam impossible est Deum falli
circa rem minutissimam: (verbi gratia circa cogitationes aut intentiones cordis
humani, and minimus ejus circumstantias) quam est ipso scribite illum falli
circa propriam essentiam, Less. de perf. div. 50.
as the Metaphysicall truth of the thing, to cause a logical truth in Gods
understanding? Thirdly, in general, whether the intitive knowledge of God,
extending it self to creatures, may in any sort be said, or thought to depend
and draw truth from them; so as to move the divine mind, and to form knowledge
in it? Fourthly, what difference is in God, between his foreknowledge and
purpose? Fifthly, whether it can stand with the wisdom of God to purpose
salvation alike to all, and yet to know that only such, and such, as he
foreknew should receive it. Sixthly, What difference there is in God between
knowledge and foreknowledge? And when I shall be satisfied about these quaeries
(which I suppose will not soon be done) I shall perhaps incline to think
Pelagians, Arminians (Generalists as they now would be called) have taken
pains to know God according to Scripture discoveries, concerning his infinite,
al-knowing, al-ordering, al-wise, Quid est praescientia futurorum? quid autem
futurum est Deo, quia omnia supergreditur tempora? Si enim res ipsas in
scientia habet non sunt ei futurae sed praesentes: at per hoc non jam
praescientia sed tantum scientia dici potest. August. lib. 2. ad simplician.
al-powerfull, al-just, al-good, and al-mercifull essence.

But to go on a little more upon this logical sort of truth; in things that
are not in esse, there is not properly truth, but it may be there; before the
world was made, man was not in himself true man, nor substance, nor being; but
only he might be these: that is, it was not contrary to that objective
conception, which is apprehended in the formal notion of a man; and abstracted
from both, esse actu, and non esse: But in the divine intellect, and by his
eternal notion; by which all things are apprehended and formed; the totum esse
of all things, was no other thing, but to be understood to be fashioned and
formed in the divine intellect.

But things may be said to be possible, or in posse esse, in a double respect.

First, as it were from an intrinsecall potentialitie, which is no other thing,
but a non-repugnancy, by means hereof, although there be nothing, and that it
have in it nothing of entity; yet it is not repugnant to them to be and to have
a true entitie shape and form.

Secondly, a thing may be said to be possible by extrinsecall denomination,
from the divine power and wisdom, by which they may be brought forth in to
being: Therefore as in these, there is no actual entitie, but only possible;
so no actual truth but one possible: and this wholly how little-soever depends
upon divine verity. For that the objective conceptions of things, or the
things which are said to be possible, may be truly things, and have a true
entitie and form; comes herehence, that the divine essence is imitable in
those manners and measures: and by the same wisdom, with which they were
conceived, they may be made and formed.

Ye see then truth in God, is the first root from whence all truth is hatched
and derived, to all other things, whether existing, or not existing: and that
divine wisdom is the measure of all objective verity in created things: In
oculis divinae sapientiae no^minus lucient possibilia quam existentia.
Yet does not the evidence of things or any efficacy from them, form knowledge
in God, but by reason of Gods comprehending essence: Yet we may say it is a
condition, sive qua non. For Gods knowledge would not be terminated or directed
to particular existences, if this will had not been they should have been: I
have but a word more and I have done. Divine knowledge is not terminated to
things existing, but extended to futuritiones; yea to possibles that neither
are in praesenti, nor ever shall be hereafter. Of all logical truths take
this for a most certain rule: Note.
That the Lord truly; and according to the very truth of things, avoucheth
whatsoever he avoucheth; and that without any, the least error or mistake
whatsoever. All the teachings of God are teachings of truth. And therefore John
says. 1 Ep. 4.2. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the
world. We must take heed how we receive doctrines hand over head, from those
that stand in the place of Gods ministers, and profess their zeal in seeking
our salvation. The Beraeans are justly commended, because they did not
instantly believe those things which they heard from the Apostles themselves,
but first searched the Scriptures to see whether they were so or no. What folly
and madness is it to believe the Devil and our flesh, who are notorious
liars, that seldom speak the truth, and when they do, it is with a purpose to
deceive. And so also we had need take heed as of false doctrines so of
misapplied doctrines, whereby truths in themselves become lies to us: As if
Satan Suggest that we are in a good estate when we are not, or that we be
hypocrites when we are sincere, or that we may be negligent in holy duties, as
many poor souls now adays are deluded by the Devil, to the laying aside of
divine ordinances, to the great peril of their souls. But our word is
Emunatho, his truth or verassitie, his stabilitie and firmness, in all that he
says. His ethicall truth (as I may call it:) This here only (at least
principally David means. It is most true, that in men ethicall truth is either
to speak truth without lying: Or to promise with their mouth what they int^nd
without dissimulation, or to fulfill what they have promised and said they will
do. This latter I purpose to treat of, the answerablenesse of Gods doings and
dealings, That truth and faithfullnes is an attribute of God. And this said to
be to all generations. That is, for ever and without alteration, God is
faithful, and true, and unalterably in all times, makes good whatsoever he
has said and promised. If it be objected that after this life when all
promises are fulfilled,

I Answer that we may distinguish the property from the exercise of it: or
else, and rather, This I say:

This truth I say will stand when all that oppose it or slight it shall fall,
and such as doubt of it shall be without. Fides depenetiae.
Numb. 23.19. God is not a man that he should ly, nor the son of man that he
should repent: shall he say and not do? or shall he speak, and not make it
good? Malachy 3.6. For I am the Lord I change not: therefore ye sons of Jacob
are not consumed. And the Apostle James says with him, is no varablenesse nor
shadow of turning. Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God,
the faithful God which keeps Covenant and mercy with them that love him,
etc. Proofs are plentiful in the history of the Scriptures: Gods truth and
faithfullnes is the ground of the Saints security and the sinners destruction.

And this must needs be in God, who first knows what he says to be good and
fit, and truth in a logical sense (of which ye have already heard) and
therefore he need not repent: he has no after thoughts.

And Secondly, He hates and threatens, and punishes the want of faithfulness in
others: Ezekiell 17.15, 16. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that does such
things? or shall he break the covenant and be delivered? As I live says the
Lord God, surely in the place where the king dwells that made him king, whose
oath he despised and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of
Babylon he shall die. Now put these two together: First, What God says, is so
good and true according to the just rule, as that he has no cause to alter the
thing that is gone out of his mouth. Secondly that he hates and punishes
faithfullnes and want of truth in others: and it will be surely concluded, that
God is a God of truth and faithfullnes.

Now what God says, is either by way of menace or promise, as may be
abundantly read in Scripture; and of both it is true, as it is written of the
law, Mat. 5.18. One jot or title shall in no wise pass from it, till all be
fulfilled. God watches over his word to perform it: It is a note of Mr. Capel
upon the fifth verse of the first of Zachary; Your fathers, where are they? and
the Prophets, do they live for ever? That the power of Truth of Gods word
depends not on any men's persons, nor is limited to one age. Their Fathers were
dead, that were threatened, and the Prophets were dead too, that did threaten
them: but the truth of their prophesies was not buried with them, but was in
every point fulfilled, according to their preaching: That follows, v. 6. But my
words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the Prophets, did they not
take hold of your Fathers? And they returned and said, like as the Lord of
hoasts thought to do unto us, according to our ways according to our doings, so
has he dealt with us. It is confessed by them selves; the hand of God upon
them did draw a confession from them, that they were punished, as God had
threatened, and as they had deserved: and they returned, that is, were
convinced, better advised: as Mal. 3.18. Then shall ye return and discern
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not. Men will know one day to their sorrow, that God is a God
of truth: not a word goes out of his mouth, but is exactly performed. Yea,
circumstances exactly observed: ye find Genesis 15.13. a promise made to Abram,
that after four hundred years his seed should be freed, and come out of the
land of Bondage with great substance; And compare that place with Exodus 12.41.
And ye shall find great exactnes: And it came to pass at the end of the four
hundred and thirty years, even the self same day, it came to pass, that all
the hosts of the Lord went out of the land of Egypt. The Lord is most true,
yea truth it self: And all his promises in Christ are yea and Amen. 2 Cor.
1.20. He is a faithful witness, and whatsoever he has spoken, shall be
accomplished; so that though the heavens decay and wax old like a garment;
though the sun lose his light, and the moon be turned into blood; though the
earth tremble and quake, and the foundations of the mountains be moved and
shake; yea though heaven and earth, and all things therein contained perish and
pass a way; yet all that God has threatened, or promised, shall be
accomplished: God is Jehovah, he has his essence and being in and from
himself alone, gives being unto all things else; especially to his word and
promises.

And therefore for the First Use, Let the people of God be confident upon this
truth of God. Light is sown for the righteous, and Psalm 97.11. And Gods
Testimonies are very sure. Psalm 93.5. He has promised to all believers and
repentant sinners, that he will in Christ Jesus pardon all their sins, and
will receive them into his grace and favor: and that he will be a sun and
shield to them, and that no good thing will he withhold from them: And
therefore let us believe, and rest upon our Savior Christ alone for salvation,
truly repenting us of all our sins, and build upon Gods truth, that though
our sins be never so many and grievious, yet the Lord will pardon and forgive
them: and though our distresses and misery be never so great and woeful, yet
he can and therefore will, because he is a God of truth, deliver us from all.
Truth and faithfulness is one of Gods names, a part of his title; let us not
therefore call it into question, it is a great dishonor to God. It is an error
in the foundation to subsistitute falls objects, either in religion or in
christian conversation: We must not build upon works, but rely upon promises
made by the God of truth: God can neither endure falls objects, nor a double
object: His (faithfulness or) truth must be our shield and buckler. And
therefore in the second place, Ps. 91.4.
this reproves our doubtings sometimes churlish enough, concerning the truth and
faithfulness Titus 1.2. A God that cannot ly. (...)
Yet is often charged with breach of promise to his children, by his very
children. 2 Pet. 3.4, 5.
If only scoffers walking after their own lusts, should say, where is the
promise of his coming, and should call in question Gods truth; it were not so
grievous to be borne: But this is said, that such as are gracious, should say,
as David did, in his have, Psalm 116.12.
all men are liars.

But whence issues this, that we may see the grounds of this sore evil?

Surely either from the misunderstanding of the promises; good estate at least:
not considering that God may be true, and we gracious and in Christ: though
neither assurance, nor peace of conscience, nor temporal favors be our
portion. For these promises have conditions and limitations: Such as will have
assurance, must give diligence to make their calling and election sure: And
such as will have peace of conscience, 2 Pet. 1.10.
must have care to walk exactly, according to rule. As many as walk according
to this rule, peace be on them, etc. Gal. 6.16. And surely temporals are many
times reached out to gracious souls, with a straight hand, for ends best known
to God, and worth the enquiring into (at least sometimes) by us. No marvail
then, ye are so forward to charge God, ye misunderstand thing, ye err, not
considering the promises with their limitations. And likewise misapplication of
promises, causes much mischief: for promises are misapplied, sometimes to
Persons, sometimes to state and behavior: For the former we read, Mal. 3.14. of
some that complained of want of care in God, to reward them that served him.
They said, it was vain to serve God; and asked, what profit there was to have
kept his ordinances, etc. They considered not, that some are called Jews only,
and that he is not a Jew, that is one outwardly only. The promise is not made
to the ceremony, but to the substance of Religion. Many think themselves Gods
children, who are not so: Now shall God be charged for want of truth,
concerning such as he never promised any thing unto? O study to make your
calling and election sure, and to find that ye are the children of the
promise: Likewise ye that are the children of God indeed, must take heed how ye
be careless of childe-like conversation. For many times though ye be sons and
daughters, yet if ye break out into scandalous sins, or be proud of your
graces, or negligent about cherishing Ordinances, and so fail in your due
qualifications and demeanor; ye may find God otherwise in his dispensations
toward you then he would be, if it were not your fault. But if we be well
instructed in Gods nature and dealings with his people, and with hypocrites;
and careful to get good evidence of our sincerity; such as will not shrink in
the wetting; and also to walk exactly, and be kept in a good decorum: We may be
sure, all good things promised shall be performed accordingly, seem Devils, men
and nature never so opposite: When no means, when no means competent, when weak
means, when means opposite do all cry down the truth of God; yet God will be
true, and it is our duty to trust God, and to rest on his bare word and promise.

And now let us make some Use of the truth of Gods threats Unto whom I swear in
my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. How dare ye take Gods name
in vain, as all do that make him a liar, yea perjured? It is a kind of
blasphemy not to fear, when God threatens, or, believe what he promises: When
men are perfidious and violate Oaths, they are in credit, neither with God nor
good men; their very names stink, and they live under perpetual infamy: What a
sin is this to rank God, blessed for ever, with the worst of men. Yet so do all
wicked men in effect, and by consequence; for they dare do that which God
forbids; and to the doing of which, he has made threats, that are able
(over one think) to shake both heaven and earth. Go too Sirs, let me close up
this Use, with Deuteronomy. 29.19. and 20. And the Lord set it home upon your souls.
And it come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart saying; I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart; to add drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not
spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book, shall lie
upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. God is a God
of truth.

And for the fourth and last Use of this point, since truth and But thou O God
shall bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men,
shall not live out half their days. Such shall not prosper, 2 Chronicles. 24.20.
Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper?
Because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. This attribute is
among those virtues, which admit resemblance in the creature: the faithful God
owns not perfidious children. It is a mark of one, that shall be with God in
glory to swear to his own heart, and not to change; Psalm. 15. v. 4. that is, to
be true and faithful, though he lose by it: from these two latter places, ye
see that truth in man, has a twofold relation. First, to God; for as God has
bound himself to us by promise, so we have covenanted our obedience to him:
Remember therefore your Baptism, and take heed of walking loosly in the
Covenant. And secondly, to man, we are bound to support the credit of fidelity,
though with loss: What a shame is it for such as profess themselves
Christians, to be like the Jews, in Jeremy cap. 9.4, 5. Take ye heed every one
of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will
utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders. And they will
deceive every one his neighbor, Sacerdos est non fallet, christianis est, non
mentietur.
and will not speak the truth, they have taught their tongue to speak lies,
and weary themselves to commit iniquity. It was wont to be a saying. He is a
Priest, he will not deceive; he is a christian, he will not ly: O how comely
were it: that it might be so now, is rather to be wished then expected. Read
the Turkish History page 287. The battle of Varna between Vladislaus and
Amuroth: And consider how God bore witness from heaven against falsehood. The
story is obvious: It is also storied of the ancient Romans that they were very
conscientious in observing their leagues, covenants, and oaths. And such as
violated them (says mine author) were held for damned and cursed creatures,
and accounted worthy to live in humane society: Be careful of your promises,
and covenants that ye make with men: God is a God of truth, do ye be men of
truth: It is a communicable attribute, it is to be had: and this must now be
spoken of in the second place, etc. Ye know we have done in handling the other
attributes: this is the second proposition. That truth is a communicable
attribute.

For God did communicate it to Adam in his innocence, it was a part of that
uprightness mentioned, Eccles. 7.29. And it is again vouchsafed and
communicated in the work of regeneration: for God makes such to be as he
requires they should be. Rev. 2.10. to be faithful to the death. And he says
his people will not ly, Isaiah 63:8. For God looks and causes the
conversation of his servants to be answerable to their vocation, he makes them
to be men of truth and faithfulness. And such as are otherwise be of the devil.
John 8.44. Who abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. Such
are not for Sion nor heaven, Psalm 15. For they speak the truth from their
heart that shall abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill. and
verse. 4. He that swears to his own heart and changes not. By all which
places and passages (and many more that might be named, and observed) we see
that truth and faithfullnes is communicated by God unto men, which is the point
that we have in hand to make good unto you. Let God be true and every man a
liar, and out of the 13. verse. With their tongues they have used deceit. Sol.
In both which places all men without exception are spoken off. For answer, ye
must know that the first place shows the certainty of Gods truth in opposition
to all men that doubt thereof, Gods faithfulness and truth is always
accompanied with stedfastnes and assurance. Calvin on Isa. 22.23
And for that cause (as Mr. Calvin notes) the Hebrews take truth for a thing
sure and certain. Wherefore this being the scope of the former verse, that God
will be as good as his word, and true and faithful in all his sayings; it
makes nothing against the point we have in hand. And for the other passage in
the 13. verse of the same chapter, It shows (as well as the former) man's
natural inclination until he be regenerated. But it may be further objected.
Truth may be found among heathens, that were no christians.

To which I Answer. It is true of a virtue, but not of a grace, Sol.
and therefore not acceptable to God: and sometimes turned into a vice, when
ill circumstantiated; and always a sin, because not acted upon a good
principle, nor to a good end, viz. Gods glory. And therefore we must take the
extent of this communicated attribute or property, and we shall find, that no
man has it since the fall of Adam in every respect in its extent, but only
such as are regenerated. For it signifies and comprehends three things.
Sincerity, a due proportion of a thing, and stability and firmness. In hoc
genere tria potissimum hujus vocabuli significata esse videri que aut alias
enim significat animum, ejusque cogitationes and actiones sinceras minique
fucatas: alias plenae seu justae cujusdam quantitatis: alias denique certas
ratas, ac permanentes. Flac: Illyric. Clav. Script. 1575.
So God does not only do what he says, but loves the truth, and hates
hypocrisy. God is truly, and sincerely, and constantly, all that he is in his
excellencies. Now it is impossible for the compleatest moral man in the world
that has not the work of the new birth, to walk before God in truth in this
sense. This is proper to Saints such as Hezekiah. Isaiah 38.3. Remember O Lord
I beseech thee how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart.
And so much for that objection.

And now for Application. The fault is not in God that men are so a brother.
This contrary property is to be had from God, if men had a mind to it. And it
is an evident sign that there is but little true religion going, because there
is so little truth and honesty going. But where there is deceitful dealing,
and want of truth and honesty, men may take it for a truth, that they have no
religion, and that they have not sought to God from whom this good gift and all
others come. Saul mentioned in the 2 Samuel 21.2. Who sought to slay the
Gibeonites in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, and so to violate
the oath which the children of Israel had sworn to them. Ye see God was angry,
a famine of three years came upon the people, and an atonement must be made
by the hanging up of seven of Saul's sons unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul,
ver. 6. And the other place is Ezekiel 17.15, 16. Where grievously does the
Lord threaten the rebellious house (as he calls Jerusalem) and their king, for
falsenes and covenant breaking. We have touched upon this before Men of truth,
hating coveteousnesse, and dealing truly are Gods delight: for such fear God,
whereas knaves, and false men, are odious both to God and men. And so much
briefly for the second Proposition, that truth is a communicable attribute. 3.
Propos.
The third comes in hand that God in this (as in the rest) is infinite and
incomprehensible. His faithfullnes reaches to the clouds, Psalm. 36.5. He never
broke with any in his life. For his faithfullnes is essential: when God shall
not be true of his word he shall be God no more. The best of friends may prove
unfriendly, and be like a broken reed of Egypt: men are but men and so they
act: there is no repose upon the wisdom, affection, word, of the creature:
they are mutable and liable to temptations, and may fail of their purposes and
promises, which yet ought not so to be: But God will not leave, fail, or
forsake. Heb. 13.5. For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.
He is the Amen, and all his promises in Christ are yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20.
To eternity and without alteration, he is faithful and true, and that
essentially. God is immutably what he is, and therefore must needs be true; but
his immutability is a singularity, it is proper to God and communicable to no
creature. God also is eternal and by him all things are defined and determined
and must stand and be without the lest alteration. Let this for every bear up
the spirits of the Saints against all false dealings of men, God is faithful:
And especialy in such times foot of his enemies shall slide in due time; so
Psalm 37 5, 6. Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass: and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgment as the noone day. God is not only true but truth it self. Nay
this is a sore affliction that sometimes befalls the Saints, that good men
disagree from God about truth touching things and persons. I say this is a
great affliction to some misjudged Saints. But Gods truth will stand, and in
due time, it shall be fulfilled: and then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a God
that judges in the earth. Psalm 58.11. Mr. Caryl upon Job.
Give leave a little to ream my heart. The best of men may sometimes be
undervalued, and that by good men. There is no judging of men or matters now a
days by what is said of them: should we, how contemptible would many precious
souls appear to us! But since God has promised honor and esteem to his
servants, how comes it to pass that they have such evil favored faces? I
Answer, sometimes by their outward condition of lowness, and where the style is
low every one will go over; sometimes men that in their pride do not care what
they say or do; do so be dabble them; yea sometimes such ugly vizards as men not
only evil, but good put upon them do cause the Saints to be in great contempt:
But God (says mine Author) will trim up his Saints in due time, as he did Job:
his truth will stand however, for truth it self cannot ly or be deceived in
what it has promised or said. But me thinks I here some poor distressed
gracious soul say, promises of temporal things are made 1 Timothy 4.8. As well
as of those things that do belong to the life to come. But for their part they
are even faint in expectation, etc. O dear sirs, consider no thing is so sure
as that all that God says is true: But ye must take all truths together, and
then ye will see that it is not want of truth in God, but of wit in you, that
makes you so to be perplexed. Take the promises of temporalities with their
intended modus (as one says) and ye shall see they are all exactly performed.
For First, God having many wheels to turn, must order things so that he may
work all his will and fulfill all his mind. Therefore he reserveth a power to
himself to try the graces of his servants in and out among, as he dealt with
Job, And so gives a hundred fold with persecutions. Mark 10.30. Sometimes he
chastises the particular delinquencies of his children: For it is intended
that we should demean our selves as becomes Gods children, see Psalm. 89.31,
32. also there is a limitation of expediency employed, viz. so far as outward
comforts may advance our spiritual good. So thought Agur, and made his prayer
accordingly, Spiritual blessings of two sorts
Prove. 30.8. Give neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient
from me. And yet again, God does not always pay his debts in kind, but in
equivalents, and sometimes in things of far greater worth and value. But sure
it is, that never went there a word from God, in the fulfilling whereof he ever
failed or ever shall, or indeed can: it is impossible. Here I might be large
about the truth of God, touching spiritual blessings, which are not all of one
sort, and therefore are not all alike absolutely promised. Some are
qualifications and some are rewards. Faith, repentance, hope and love are
absolutely promised to the elect in Christ, but yet their perfection is not in
this life to be expected, nor a freedom from mixture with their imperfections
promised. Faith and doubting may stand together in a gracious soul. And many
more considerable truths there be that might here be brought in. Peace of
conscience, comfort in believing, joy of the holy Ghost, are not absolutely
promised, nor generally given. And sometimes it is better for us to have the
fear of Gods great name, then peace of conscience. But. Secondly (to make an
end of this subject) I would present a coling

The end of the attribute of Truth.

