THE JUSTICE OF THE ARMY Against Evill-Doers VINDICATED: BEING A brief
Narration of the Court-Martials proceedings against ARNOLD, TOMSON, and LOCKYER,
with the Causes and Grounds thereof.

By which the impartial Reader may plainly judge, how hardly and unchristianly
these men deal with the Army, to call that Arbitrary, Tyrannical, Barbarous
Murder, in them; which they could not omit without eminent neglect of their
duty, and apparent danger of the most desperate events to the Parliament,
Kingdom, and Army, that can be imagined.

He that is first in his own cause, seems just, but his Neighbor comes and
searches him. Prove. 18.9.

They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders. Jer. 6.28

London, Printed by T. Pain, 1649.

Christian Reader;
I Should not have troubled my self with Writing, nor You with Reading this
following Discourse, had it not been for their sakes, who ignorantly without
any malicious intent, speak evil of things they know not: This being a time,
wherein this way of Controverting things by printing, is become one of the
greatest vanities; but considering how all manner of Evil in the World, has
clothed it self with Impudence, and more especially that Spirit which rages at
this time in this Kingdom, against all persons, and things that do not bow
before it; I could not any longer, finding all other silent in this business,
forbear the vindication of Truth and Justice, against the clamors of men, at
the just and favorable proceedings of the Court-martiall, in the following
cases.

And this I could not have forborne so long, had it not been out of tenderness
to those things which these railing revilers have pretended to, who have dealt
with the Army and their friends, as the most barbarous of their Enemies in some
Garrisons, have done in time of War in detaining some persons, whom they Judged
were highly esteemed of by them, in their Custody, to set in places of most
danger, to hinder them from assaulting, this is the chiefest use, these men
have made of the words Justice, Righteousness, Liberty, and Freedom, etc to
place them, in the Frontispice of their lies and slanders, that none might kill
the latter, without wounding the former, and if J have in anything Interfer'd
in this Discourse, against those good things; charge it upon my weakness, not
upon my will, and the reason why I only give you the Relation of these three,
and not of those other since Executed for this last mutiny, is:

First, because the misrepresenting of the Armies proceedings against these
first, have been made use of to fit the Soldiers for, and to stir them up
unto this last.

Secondly, because I expect it will be done by some other hand, more able then
my self, to observe and relate it.

Thirdly, because I have not met with any such clamors and misrepresentations
of the latter, as against the former, which if I should, I might well forbear
answering, there having been some persons of Eminent integrity and ability,
ensnared in the business, whom God has made fully sensible of their evil
therein, and will therefore be most fit and able, to give a representation
thereof; I refer thee to what follows, and shall rest thine, in the cause of
Truth and Justice,

R. L.

The Justice of the Army against evil doers vindicated.
HOw tender the ruling part of the Army has been in taking away life by
Martiall-law: Is so notorious, it needs not my testimony; there being not
executed to my best remembrance, above five or six, since the General had his
Commission, besides these Mutineers.

And for the first of these, viz. Arnoll, who was shot to death at the
Randevouze near Hartford, I shall referr you to the Narration of Captain Bray,
delivered in writing to the General, and Council, and subscribed by him, he
being then an Officer of the same Regiment, and an Eye-witnes of all their
miscarriages and outrages; the substance whereof is, as follows.

The Regiment being ordered to march to New Castle, when they came at St.
Albans, had the paper called the case of the Army stated read unto them; upon
which they resolved unanimously not to march, saying, it was contrary to their
Engagement, to be divided, etc.

The next morning, according to the Orders I had received, I caused the Drums
to beat, etc. but few or none would come to their Colors, but they flocked
about me, and told me, they were resolved not to march, whereupon I used all
the Arguments of persuasion that I could, as many witnesses can testify, etc:
But it would not avail, they generally and unanimously seized upon the
Colors, and set them in the Wagons, and set a strong guard upon them, etc.

At a Council of War held at Hockley, I gave my Vote for their marching, it
presenting it self, reasonable to me also, etc. I returned from the Council of
War, and told them I had received Orders to march, and the reasons thereof,
and gave as many Arguments as I could to persuade them, but they combined and
consulted together what to do, murmuring among themselves, etc and that night
they came furiously into my Quarter, and demanded the Colors of me, but I
denied them my Colors, telling them that it was most reasonable, the Colors
should remain in my Custody, etc: But they told me, they could not believe any
of their Officers; nay, that they could not believe their own fathers, etc. So
they went into the Chamber, and fetched the Colors, and set a strong guard
over them at the Wagons, etc.

And when I came to Olney, etc. they all determined not to march further; yet
the next morning I commanded the Drums to beat, intending to march according to
my Orders, etc. but the Companies came together, and unanimously resolved not
to march, though I propounded unto them all the Arguments of obedience and
reason that I could; professing, that though I was a friend, and ever would be,
God willing, to all just desires, resolutions, and mutual engagements, yet I
was an enemy to irregularity. Whereupon they were suspicious of me, that I was
an enemy to justice, and the liberty and freedom of the people.

Not long after, the same day, came more Colors from Northamptonshire, which
made them more and more exorable; and by my pressing, I received an affront by
a Cavalier, etc. who swore by the Name of God, they must not believe any of
their Officers, and that they must fight against Independents, etc. Whereupon I
fearing a design destructive to the Army, General and Kingdom, I told them
the case of the Army stated, came from such hands who were resolved enemies to
such persons, etc. so that I was bound in judgment and conscience to the
Nation, and to the Generals just authority, to continue with them in this
distemper, to keep off that unjust design which I fear persons did endeavor
to carry on, whom God has in some measure discovered, and will more in due
time, etc.

Whereupon they marched back, according to their own determinations, to
Dunstable, many of the Horse also having been among them full of distempers,
etc. and there they received a Letter, the substance whereof was, that they
should stand (as I remember) to their honest engagements for Soldiers rights,
and Englands freedoms; and the party that brought the Letter to them, told
them, the General, and Lieutenant General would not oppose them, though they
were not satisfied in the way yet: and these expressions made the Soldiers
more and more exorable.

After that, the Lieutenant Colonel and Major came to Dunstable, and brought
another Order from the General, and read it to them, but could not prevail,
etc. But the Officers voted, that some of the Captains, with my self, should
go through their Quarters with Orders for them to march into Buckinghamshire.
But when we came to Luton, we heard the Soldiers had a Randevouz off and from
themselves.

The said Officers went to Captain Talhursts quarter, and found a Guard set on
him and his money, by his own men, and there the said Captains wounded or
killed one or two men, and one Lieutenant was also wounded.

So I parted from the Captains (after we had procured a Surgeon) and told
them, I would go to the Randevouz though I lost my own life, (as it was
probable enough as they confessed) and give them my Orders received of the Major;
and accordingly I came to Dunstable, and read my Orders to my own men in the
Town, the Randevouz being broken up, and gave them all the Arguments that was
in me to march; but they told me their general determination at the Randevouz
was, that they would march to Readborne to a Randevouz; and so they did
accordingly, without my consent or approbation, etc. as many witnesses can
testify: and that night before they went to St. Albanes, they set a Guard upon
me and my Colors, etc. and so they marched to S. Albanes, and lodged the
Colors of the whole Regiment together, and so they went toward Hartford the
next day.

I receiving a Letter from the General upon our march, commanding me and the
Soldiers to stay where that Letter should come to us. I told the Messenger, I
did not continue with them as commanding them, but to hinder an unjust
influence, or the enemies design upon them, and to keep as much as I could,
the Generals authority among them, which I was and am tender of. And I
communicated my Orders to the Soldiers, and they all cried out, they could not
go to that Randevouz, and that they were betrayed, if they did. Whereupon the
Soldiers petitioned the General, who sent me a particular Order to march to
Ware Randevouz.

William Bray.

THis Relation of Gaptain Bray I rather choose to make use of, then any of the
other testimony, because from him may be expected a more favorable relation
then from any other, himself being very much suspected to be an a better, or
at least a favourer of the Mutiny: these things following being testified upon
oath by Henry Lilburne, John Topping, William Dod, Rowland Stewart, William
Hallowes, James Heart, Ethelburt Morgan, and Gabriel Erwood. Most of whom were
then considerable Officers in the same Regiment.

That at a Court of War held at Richmond, after the General had ordered the
Regiment to march to Newcastle, he said that it was not fit for the Regiment to
march thither, but to stay near London, until the Parliament had confirmed
the proposals of the Army, and the freedom of the people.

And that when the Regiment did march, the Colonels Company mutinying at St.
Albanes, Captain Bray did say that it were better for the Regiment to march
back, then to go forward, and that if the Colonels Company would march back,
he would march in the head of them.

And when the Company did return back in a mutiny, he did march back in the
head of them, and issued out Warrants under his own hand to the Country, to
bring in Horses to draw the Wagons back, when they should have marched forward.

And the said Captain Bray in the height of the mutiny at Dunstable, did
speak to this purpose, That the Parliament were our professed enemies, and that
there was no visible Authority in the Kingdom but the General; and that the
General was not infallible: His Lieutenant Colonel desiring to know of him,
whether he would go to the head of his Company, and acquaint them, what orders
he had received from the General, he answered, I shall not: and gave it as his
opinion, That the way to get the Regiment to march, was to send a fair letter
to the Agents of the five Regiments of Horse, and to get an Order from them.

Notwithstanding these things, with much more of the same nature, was proved
against him, yet he pretending he stayed with them, only to prevent the
influence of others upon them, as in his foregoing Narrative, the Court
Martial was willing to take the best sense of him they could, and did not
proceed against him upon this charge, which they would hardly have done, if
they had been so much inclined to arbitrary tyranny, as himself and others
have endeavored to represent them.

For if the circumstances of this mutiny be impartially considered, what a
distemper it wrought in the whole Army, necessitating a general Randevouz to
satisfy the Soldiers, etc.

What opportunities it gave to evil minded men to put both Army and Kingdom
into a flame. Nay, how industrious and active the Cavaliers agents were on the
one hand, and our discontented friends on the other (who have always pretended
better things then their desperate and bloody endeavors at that time, and
often since do demonstrate they intend) there is not any man that ever knew in
the least measure, what belonged to the government and discipline of an Army,
or of any other well governed Society, but will rather wonder, that every tenth
man of them did not suffer, then think such a storm could be allayed with the
executing of one man, though they should understand no more of the Story, then
what has been related by Captain Bray.

Who in his Narrative takes no notice of their insolent barbarous carriage
toward their Officers and the Country, which was so horribly wicked and
barbarous, that all the Felons which have suffered at Tyburn these twelve
months, are not really guilty of so many horrid outrages, as they were in that
time toward the Country and their Officers, the particulars thereof are too
tedious to relate. Not any of their Officers except Captain Bray, the
Quartermaster, and one more, as I remember, durst come near them, some of
them being pursued many miles by their own Soldiers, who swore as they
pursued them, they would be revenged on them, and did violently take away
diverse Horses in the Country in this pursuit of their Officers, pretending
their Officers were run away with their money, when they were forced to run to
save their lives, there being one Lieutenant dangerously wounded by them. And
at that time when this man, viz. Arnoll, was executed, there were diverse other
Officers could not be heard of, and the rest did fear, that they were
murdered and made away by their Soldiers.

And they did not exercise their rage and cruelty toward such in the Country,
as were enemies to the cause, they were raised for, and paid to maintain, but
on the contrary where ever they came in their march, inquired if there were any
Roundheads in that Town, and against them did they exercise their cruelty.
Some honest men at St. Albanes, etc. informed me, that they were never so used
by the Cavaliers as they used them, and did affirm, that if Captain Bray and
the Quartermaster had not been with them, who had a little influence upon
them, they had been certainly plundered, if not murdered; many of whom have
been, and still are, as faithful to the interest of the people, as the highest
clamourer against this piece of necessitated justice.

In this insolent distemper did they march to the Randevouz, where they were
drawn up by their Captain Lieutenant Bray, and there stood with white papers
in their Hats, as if they had been going to engage with an enemy. When the
General had viewed the rest of the Army, he came to them, attended with his
Officers, who commanded them to pull their papers out of their Hats, but they
refused. Whereupon some Officers rode in among them, and plucked out the papers
of some that were most insolent, and then the rest began to submit.

By this time some of their own scattered Officers were gotten up to the
Randevouz, of whom the General and Officers enquired, who among them had been
the principal Leaders and actors in this mutiny, and commanded them as they
could espy them, to single them out, and accordingly they drew out as I
remember, eight or nine. A Court-martiall being called in the place, they were
all found notoriously guilty of particular facts in this business, and were
there adjudged by the Laws and Ordinances of war to dye; and accordingly
sentence of death was pronounced upon them, and afterward referred to a Lot,
all pardoned but one, on whom the Lot should fall, which was this Arnoll, who
was presently shot to death in the place. And I well remember some of the
Officers of that Regiment, did much rejoice in the just hand of God, directing
the Lot upon that man, whom they had observed to be more notoriously guilty
then any other in this business. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposing thereof i^ of the Lord, Pro. 16.33.

The next person for whom the Army has been clamoured against, for their
procedings with, is William Thomson, a Corporal in Captain Pichforts Troop, in
Colonel Whaleys Regiment, who was questioned at a Court-martiall in the
Regiment, for drunkenness, gaming, and quarrelling, The story follows: The
said Thomson being at a Tavern in Colebrooke, after some time spent in drinking
and carousing, he fell into play for money; finding himself in danger to lose,
he began to quarrel with the man he played with, who perceiving his design,
took the stakes into his hand: Upon which Mr. Thomson laid violent hands upon
the Gentleman, tore him by the hair, and by force possessed himself of the
stakes. In the mean while the Gentlewoman of the House being putting her
husband to bed, hearing a great noise of quarrelling below, came running down
among them, and endeavored to part them: upon which Thomson threw her down,
kicked her on the face, and most grossly beat and abused the servants for
striving to part them. And he being not able to have his will on them himself,
goes away, and not long after returned again with some other of his
companions, and in the dead time of the night forced into the house with his
drawn sword, wounded three or four of the servants, laid felony to the charge
of the Mistress of the House, and two others, for robbing him of 20. l. of
gold and silver, took one man away prisoner, viz. William Mouse, threatening
him to tie him neck and heels together, if he would not confess his money;
notwithstanding by his own confession afterward he lost none. All which is
testified at large against him by Mr. Miles of Colebrook and his wife, Thomas
Winall, and George Wear, and most of it confessed by himself.

Upon debate of the premises, he was adjudged by the Council of war, to be
cashiered at the head of the Regiment the next Randevouz: which sentence he
would not submit unto, but endeavored to get the Soldiers of the Regiment to
stand by him in this quarrel: from which irregular mutinous carriages
proceeded that which follows.

Upon the 28. of October, the Regiment had a Randevouz upon Odiam Heath in the
County of Surrey, the said Thomson still abiding with the Regiment,
notwithstanding he was cashiered six weeks before, and had received several
orders to depart the Quarters.

The Major of the Regiment did there endeavor according to the judgment of the
Court, actually to cashiere him at the head of the Regiment, which he in a
peremptory mutinous manner refused to submit unto. Upon which there was a new
charge exhibited against him, consisting of several Articles, the heads
whereof are as follows.

First, that the said Thomson at or about the tenth of September, 1647. did
assume the title of a Soldier in the Army, under the command of his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and came to the Regiment of Colonel Fleetwood, being at a
Randevouz, and there spoke to and in the hearing of all the Soldiers, several
seditious and mutinous words, and delivered several seditious papers, some
written, others printed.

Secondly, he endeavored to make mutiny in the said Regiment, by pretending he
had brought a letter from the Agents of 15. Regiments, and said he came to the
Soldiers, and not to the Officers, affirming there were accusations against
the Officers of the Army, laboring thereby to make a division between the
Officers and the Soldiers, pressing the Soldiers to subscribe his papers. All
which were proved upon oath by Captain Griffith Loyd, Captain Gilmond Tailor,
and Thomas Scot Trooper, all in Col Fleetwoods Regiment.

Thirdly, that upon the 20. of October he endeavored to make a mutiny in
Colonel Whallies Regiment, as follows, The said Thomson being adjudged by a
Court-Martiall to be cashiered at the head of the Regiment, Major Swallow, the
Major of that Regiment, required him to dismount at the head of the Reigment;
but the said Thomson refused, charging the Regiments Council of injustice, and
appealed to the Soldiers of the Regiment for justice, pretending it was
against their engagement, to suffer any Soldier to be cashiered without
satisfaction, with many more words to this purpose. All which is proved against
him by the depositions of Colonel Whalley, Major Swallow, Captain Evanson,
Captain Dale, Corner Steward, and Anthony Law: All which mutinous carriages,
words and actions, comes within the letter, and equitable sense of the eighth
Article of duties toward Superiors and Commanders; None shall utter any words
of sedition, uproare or mutiny, upon pain of death.

Fourthly, the said Thomson, after he was cashiered and discharged the Regiment
by his Major and Captain, did still continue in the Quarters of the said Troop
for above the space of ten days. In all which time he was not enrolled in any
Troop, or Company: All which is proved against him by Capt. Floyd, Capt.
Tailor, Capt. Pichfort, Benjamin Yates, and Thomas Scot, which brings him
within the eleventh Article of Duties in the Camp and Garrison.

No man that carries Arms, and pretends to be a Soldier, shall remain three
days in the Army, and not be enrolled in some Company, upon pain of death.

This charge being thus proved against him, he was apprehended and brought
prisoner to Winsor; from whence contrary to his engagement to the Matiall
general, he made his escape, and was afterward again apprehended at
Westminster, and sent prisoner to White Hall, and adjudged guilty of his charge
by a Court-Martiall, and had the sentence of death pronounced against him
according to Law. After which the General inclined to mercy toward him, and
reprieved him from present execution, but continued him in prison. But the Army
being marched from London, and he left at White Hall in the charge of a
Martials man, did there make his escape the second time. Since which time he
gathered together a company of men in Arms, whom he quartered upon the
Country, calling them his Troop, and they him Captain; with whom he marched
to a Gentleman's house in Essex, who had a suit depending in Law with another
about a Title in land, whom he by force and violence dispossessed, taking his
Tenants and Servants prisoners, driving them before him in miery way in the
night, pricking them on with his swords point in a most barbarous and cruel
manner. For which he was brought prisoner to White Hall, sent by the
Court-Martiall to the civil Magistrate, who took Bail for his appearance at
the Assizes. He no sooner had his liberty, but without cause or provocation,
stabd one Mr. Hayden with a Dagger, of which wounds he is since dead. And
within a few days after, he was again taken on the Road, with a party of other
men, whom he had deluded into his evil courses; and had found about him a
great black Periwig, and a false Beard, which they brought back again with him
to White Hall. From whence he was sent in safe custody again to the civil
Magistrate, bailed by Lieut. Coll. Lilburne out of prison. And what his actions
and end has been since, is so notorious, I shall not trouble you with the
relation of it here. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, but
the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness, Pro. 11.5.

The third person of this number that has been proceeded against for mutiny,
and for whom so many are offended, is Robert Lockyer, a man unknown to me
until the time of his imprisonment: since which time I have inquired of him,
and have heard a very ill report from the mouths of such, who spoke it with no
delight, and yet had cause and opportunity to inquire into, and observe his
demeanor: but there being a relation of the proceedings of the business
against him, with the cause thereof, already printed, I shall not trouble you
with any thing of that again; only I must observe to you his unstable demeanor
in the time of his sufferings, while he was before the Council, the witnesses
giving their testimonies against him viva voce, he could not deny any thing of
that which was laid to his charge, but did endeavor to evade it, with such
critical cross interrogatories to the witnesses, as discovered more of wit
and subtilty, then of godliness or integrity in him.

The next morning after he was sentenced, he seemed to be very sensible of his
miscarriage, and sorry for his fault, and did desire directions, what should be
the best way for him to make his mind known to the General, etc. And there
being then a Petition drawn, which the other five that were to cast lots, had
subscribed, he desired to set his hand to it, and join with them in it; he was
advised to be careful what he did, and was told, that it was not a time to
dissemble neither with God nor Man, and that the words of the petition which he
desired to subscribe, and his former discourse, did not agree. Upon which,
having heard the petition read several times to him, he set his hand to it, in
which he has these expressions, That the General would be pleased, out of his
wonted clemency and goodness, to pass by that unwise and unlawful action of
theirs, and give them their lives for a prey; and we do vow and protest before
the Almighty God, that we are heartily sorry for our faults, and do promise,
as in his all-seeing eye, never to do the like action again, nor suffer it to
be done, if we can hinder it with our lives.

Then within a few hours after, there being a warrant signed for his
execution, he changed his mind again, as if he had not been the same man, and
began to speak evil of his Judges, and the Law by which he was judged, etc.
and to justify himself as an innocent sufferer in a good cause, etc. and so
continued until he died.

Now that which I should desire the Reader to observe in this brief narrative
of these three men's faults and punishments, is this: First, what ground there
is for these great clamours against the Army, for murder, and barbarous
illegal proceeding? etc. Have they not all had fair and legal trials, by
that authority, which they voluntarily placed themselves under, and submitted
to, and that with so much lenity and tenderness, as the most able of those,
who have taken Satan's work out of his hand, to be the accusers of their
brethren, are not able to produce one president of the like. Had the same
faults been committed by such numbers, tending to such an apparent hazard of
public ruin in any Army, that ever was in Christendom before this, the
suffering of every tenth man would hardly have excused them; and yet here was
but one man of one thousand in the first, and one out of three or fourscore in
the last; and the other, though notoriously guilty, yet spared: and yet here
must be murder and barbarounesse and tyranny, laid to the charge of those, who
desired nothing less then their deaths, if they could have answered their duty
to God and Man, in sparing them their lives. Then stood up Phineas and executed
judgment, and so the plague was stayed, and that was accounted unto him for
righteousness unto all generations, Psalm 106.30.

The second thing I desire may be minded in the narration is, what ground the
great pretenders of Englands liberties can have to think, their good cause is
either, interested in, or prejudiced by, the punishment of these evil actions,
unless that which was punished in these men, be the liberty they so much
contend for, which must needs be a liberty in particulars to the prejudice of
the general.

And for Mr. Lockyer, whom they are pleased to canonize a Martyr since his
death, there is less to be said for him upon that consideration, then for
either of the other two: for he and those which mutined with him, did not so
much as pretend common right and freedom, nor had the least color of any one
grievance lay upon them, except their not having their pay before it was either
received by their Officers for them, or due unto them, which is a new grievance
never heard on before in an Army. And this is acknowledged by the Author of the
second book entitled, The Armies Martyr, page 6. as follows, Many persons
that formerly knew him, came to visit him, much lamenting his sad condition,
being condemned for nothing, but for asking his pay, and indeed that was the
thing which most troubled him, that so small a thing as contending for his pay,
should give his enemies occasion to take away his life, which as he often said,
had it been for the fredome and liberties of this Nation, it would have added
much to his comfort, etc. For he knew it was malice that prevailed over him,
not justice. I cannot pass by these words, without observing something from
them: His friends lamentation over him is, that he should be condemned for
nothing but asking his pay, and his own words are, For contending for his pay.
But it was for neither of these that he suffered, for they are neither of them
faults.

A Soldier may lawfully ask his pay of his Officer, and if he deny it, contend
with him for it; nay, if he can prove his Officer have defrauded him, or
unjustly detained from him one days pay, he may have him punished for it, and
that with the loss of his place, by an express Article of war. And I
challenge any Soldier of the whole Army, or other, to produce one instance,
that ever they appealed to the General, or Court-Martiall, against any
Officer, and had not a speedy and legal trial: and if it were useful in this
place, I could instance in many hundreds of cases, where the Soldier has been
righted against the Officer, and such extraordinary reparations given, as no
Court in England would do between man and man. Nay, in many cases where the
Soldier has causlesly and wrongfully prosecuted his Officer at a
Court-Martiall, and yet has not had the least reproof from the Court, so
tender have they been of discouraging the Soldiers in this particular. But if
a Soldier shall demand his pay of his Officer before it be due, or when it is
due, in a peremptory mutinous way, it is punishable according to the manner and
measure of the fact. For it is possible, a Soldier may demand his pay in a
peremptory insolent way of his Officer, and yet not deserve much punishment: As
for instance, ten, or twenty, or more, may go together to their Officer, and
demand their pay of him, if it be due; and admit they will not be satisfied
with a reasonable answer, but shall there give him provoking, reviling, nay
threatening language, no man will say this is commendable, but blameable, if not
punishable; and on the other hand, if no worse consequence attend it, then that
Officer and his Soldiers falling out, no man will say, this deserves death.
Nay further, if Soldiers shall demand their pay of their Officers upon a
march, or at a Randevouz, or just when they are commanded upon service, in the
manner aforesaid, which is worse then the other, yet if they do not refuse to
march, or do their duty when commanded, though it come within the Article of
war, it is the more excusable.

But the case of Mr. Lockyer and the rest of his associates, are much different
from all these cases: For first, they had no pay due, they having been better
paid since they came last into London, then ever they were since a Troop, being
themselves before hand with the rest of the regiment, and the regiment
aforehand with most of the Army.

And further, they did not only demand their pay in manner aforesaid before it
was due unto them, but refused to march, disobeyed the commands of their
Officers, while they unjustly quarrel for their wages before they had earned
it, they refuse to do their work, for which they were paid* and did not only
disobey their Officers commands, but resist them in the doing of their duty,
forcibly seize upon the Colors, detain them from their Officers when demanded;
and this not done in a sudden hurly-burly, or an heat of blood, but with
deliberation, continuing in this posture near two days and nights, gathered
themselves together into a strong house, and there kept it against their
Officers. When their Colonel and Officers came in love and pity toward them,
persuading them by reason to consider with themselves, what sad events must
follow, if they necessitated them to use extremity; putting them in mind, how
comfortably they had ventured their lives together against the common enemy,
promising them all they either did or could desire, if they would be ruled, and
march after the Regiment. But all this would not prevail, Mr. Lockyer with some
other of their Leaders, furnished them with arguments to trample upon, and
insult over clemency. For when their Officers, (I mean their Colonel and
Major, and 2 or 3 Captains of the Regiment) had granted them all that they
could think to ask, they then told them in plain English, they had been too
long fed with words, they had trusted the^ so often, that they would trust them
no more. And all the while they thus capitulated with their Officers, they
stood drawn up in Galleries and Windows with their Swords and Pistols, as if
they had been treating with an enemy, and did not submit, until the yard was a
clearing, to make way for the Horse and Foot to force them.

These things considered, with the circumstances of time and place, if the Lord
had not wonderfully prevented it, by awing the hearts of a discontented popular
multitude, it might have proved as bloody a day to that great City, and more
fatal to the Kingdoms interest, then ever yet England saw, or thought of.

The next thing observed out of those words quoted of his, is this, Which as he
often said, had it been for the freedom and liberty of this Nation, it would
have added much to his comfort.

Truly I cannot blame him, If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are you,
but let none of you suffer as an evil doer, or a busy body, etc.

I hope there was not a man that had a hand in punishing him for his
miscarriage, but would rather have suffered with him in so good a cause; but it
is clear out of his own mouth, his conscience told him, he did not suffer for
those things: and if not, how come the great pretenders for Englands liberties
and freedom, to glory so much in his suffering? Is it an honor for a man to
suffer as an evil doer, because he is a good man, or rather the more shame? He
that knows the fathers will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. The more able and rationally principled the man was to promote good
things, the more he was to be pitied and lamented, but the less to be gloried
in.

But this kind of spirit at the latter end of the first war, raged in our
froward discontented brethren of the Presbytery, they having a jealousy,
though without cause, that the ruling part of the Army discountenanced men of
their judgment and principles merely for being such, they presently began to
be very inquisitive into the Armies proceedings against offenders. After which
the Army could not proceed against any Officer for the vilest offense, that
could be committed, were it plundering the Country, cheating the State, or his
Soldiers, drunkenness, swearing, etc. or for being countenancers of such
persons, or things, but presently they were said to be persecuting
Presbyterians: and so now, let Soldiers commit never so great offenses, as
Arnoll aforesaid, and afterward stick a paper in his hat with this motto,
Soldiers rights, and Englands freedom writ upon it, and that must be like a
Popes Bull to pardon all their faults.

And so for Thomson, let him drink, and game, and quarrel, to the scandal of
the Army, beat, fright, wound the country people, hale them out of their own
houses captives, like dogs through the dirt in the night, for no other fault
but endeavoring to keep the peace of their own houses. And after all this,
pretend to common right and freedom, and then all proceedings against him must
be barbarous and tyrannical, etc. Remember, He that justifies the wicked, and
he that condemns the just, are both an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 17.15

The third thing I must needs take notice of in his own words before quoted, is
this, For he knew it was malice that prevailed against him, and not justice.

How little ground himself or any other had to think so, was not hid from
themselves, and I desire it may be known unto others.

First, as I apprehended, the man was a stranger to all his Judges, not one
before that time had ever seen him, so as to remember him, if ever they had
heard of him: for I observed it every time his name was taken notice of in the
evidence, the whole Court desired to see which was that man, at least 3 or 4
times over, though he stood in their sight all the time; and all the Officers
of the said Regiment, from the highest to the lowest, were desired to withdraw
at the time of the debate, and came no more there. So in whose heart that
malice should rest that overcame him, is left to be judged. But as it fared
with Cain after he had murdered his brother, he thought every man that met him
would murder him; so does it with malicious evill-minded men, they think every
man that opposes them in their wickedness, bear hatred and malice toward
them; whereas I am confident, the Lord bears witness to the consciences of this
man's Judges, that if by sparing his life, they should have hazarded the ruin
of none but themselves, they would have chose to have done it with joy, rather
then have executed him. But the integrity of the upright shall guide them, when
the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.

Obj. But grant you, the fact was never so foul, and the offenders never so
guilty of it, yet the way of your proceedings against them, is illegal, you
trying them by Martial law in the time of peace, it being contrary to Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right, etc.

Ans. Truly, for Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, I never read more of
them, then what I have seen printed by L. Col. Lilburn, etc. in their papers,
in which I have observed a great deal of opposition to Martial Law in times of
peace, as in C. Brayes, Thomsons and Lockyers case, yet I could never find it
any way made good, that those things which were charged against Strafford, and
others in that point, were for their proceedings against Soldiers under their
immediate command and conduct, and for such actions as their being soldiers,
made them more capable of committing, then in another capacity could have been.
If so, I must confess, I could never clear it up to my own judgment, that
those laws in that particular, do provide for the peoples weal, but for
their woe: those laws in that case, do neither provide for Soldiers rights,
nor Englands freedom. As for instance, Would the Soldiers account it their
right, to be liable to actions at the Common law for every trivial offense,
which oftentimes their employments, as Soldiers, does necessarily put them
upon toward contrymen, would their small pay enable them to attend the
tedious trials at law, oftentimes far distant from their quarters and
business, in chargeable Courts, where they are necessitated to plead by
counsel? Or would they be willing to be liable to indictments at the Size and
Sessions, and there enjoined attendance for every suspicion a countryman could
have against him. For to be sure, if there were any mischief done by a man in
a red coat, with a sword by his side, the next Soldier the hue and cry
overtook in that habit, must needs be suspected, and there to be triable by
twelve of the neighborhood, where the offense is committed, though himself be
never so much a stranger in those parts. And all the knowledget, the Jury could
have of him, would be, that he was a Soldier, which would hardly procure him
more favor then is allowed to vagrants in such cases.

Again, would the countryman account it his liberty to be liable to the
injuries and violence of Soldiers, and have no other remedy against them then
the common Law? What Baily, or Officer, would undertake the serving of a Writ
on a Soldier in an Army, for his ordinary fee? And in case some would, and the
Soldiers should resist, and protect one another, and in a mutinous manner beat
or abuse the Officer, the plaintiff has no remedy still, but the common Law.
For it would be arbitrary tyranny in an Officer to exercise any power over the
Soldier in times of peace, so much as to rebuke or punish him for neglect or
disobedience: and what an Officer would signify in an Army, or an Army in
Kingdom thus disciplined and governed, I desire the prudent to consider; and
what a multitude of such inconveniences, attended with many unsupportable evils
and burdens, both to the Soldier and Country, may be enumerated, I leave to
your consideration.

2. Obj. But if it be granted, that there is a necessity of Martial Law in an
Army, yet why should it be so arbitrary and sharp? why are not puishments more
proportionable to offenses?

Ans. I could heartily with this objection might be answered by amending and
correcting what is amiss in that kind, which has often been desired and
propounded to be done by the ruling part of the Army; only want of opportunity
has prevented it, yet I must say this in answer unto it, That if any Soldier
in the Army, or other can produce one president, where the letter, or rigor of
the Article has been made use of against one man, when the equitable sense and
just and favourablest meaning of the Article has not been included in the
fact, there will be some ground for this objection to be made a present
g^ievance; but I am confident of the contrary.

And further, if any man will bestow the reading of them over, which he may do
in an hours time, he shall see, that the sharpness of the Articles ^n wholly
in the behalf of the freedom and liberty of the people, and against the
oppressions, violences and outrages of the Soldiers, which is the most
comfortable and choice freedom, that people can enjoy in time of war, or where
an Army lies in time of peace.

Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied
him, when ye say, every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord,
and be delights in them, or where is the God of judgment? Mal. 2.17*

The Lord is known by the judgments, which he executes, the wicked is snared
with the work of his own hands. Psalm. 9.16.

FINIS.

