THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF Carolus Gustavus KING of SWEDEN, etc.

Translated out of the Swedish Original by THOMAS SCOT, Esquire;

Printed for William Leadsom, 1660.

THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF Carolus Gustavus KING of SWEDEN, etc.
IN THE NAME OF OLIVER, BVLSTRODE, RAGOTZI, AMEN. I Carolus Gustavus, the most
victorious Sultan of the North-East, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of other Princes
Estates, as well as Archbishop of Bremen, being sick in body by a defluxion of
Rhewm, called, pouring down hot waters into my stomach, but of unreasonable
great mind, now wholly broken with so many unfortunate successes, one upon the
neck of the other, do make and ordain in writing this my last Will and
Testament in manner and form following.

Imprimis, I bequeath my last breath (by Philosophers termed the Soul) to my
new initiated, and ambitious friend, John Lambert Esquire, to redouble in him
the aspiring great conceits of sovereignty, if he already be not tumbled
headlong from that Precipice, which my presaging spirit divines.

Next, my body I will and require to be buried under the walls or Copenhagen to
appease the angry Ghosts of my slaughtered Soldiers there rashly by me put upon
that attempt, otherwise my said Corpse to be interred in the general ruin and
destruction of the Universe.

As for my worldly Estate, which Rapine, Fraud, and violation of Faith have
purchased me, with some little compunction of conscience, I do hereby dispose
(my debts which will never be paid, being first cast, up by my shifting Rex
Senators) as follows.

First, I do resign, surrender and quite claim of my Kingdom of Sweden to John
Casimer his Majesty of Poland, to whom of due right it does belong, if so be my
Son cannot keep it, and it be worth the cost and charges of the States of
Poland to regain it

Item, I will and require my Executor to redeliver unto the King of Denmark the
counter part of the Rotskield Treaty to be cancelled and made void, For that I
am sure the Dane will not allow an Article of it.

Item, I assign unto the Kings of great Britain my Arms, or Scutcheon of the
three Crowns, which more rightly appertain unto, and fitly resemble his
Majesty's right,

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Emperor of Germany a new pair of cross
Bells to be tied to the Roman Eagles Legs, that he may give warning, and not
suddenly surprise his neighboring States without notice or Declaration of war.

Item, I give and bequeath unto his most Christian Majesty of France a pair of
new Sweden Battledors to sport away the time with the Serenissima Infanta till
his other play things are fitted for her.

Item, I give unto his most Catholic Majesty of Spain one of my best
Copper-mines, to supply him with that sort of Money now he is to part with so
much silver for the portion of the said Lady Infanta, and the disbanding his
Armies.

Item, I give and bequeath unto my Kinsman his Highness of Brandenburgh all
the brandee Wine I have not drunk up my self; but he shall kiss the hinder
part of my Wife's B -- before he shall hold the hinder or any part of
Pomerania, unless the Swede be resolved to be worse than a Scot.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Hogen Mogen States a ships lading of black
wool to stop their ears against the cold and dangerous whisperings of the
Canish and Brandenburgish Minister against the Interests of my Kingdom.

Item, I give unto my dear Cousin Christina my Polish Socks which kept my feet
from sweating in all my long Travels, lest by coasting up and down from post to
pillar she stink in every Court she comes to.

Item, I give unto my Nephew, the Duke of Holstein the Scotch Kirks Stool of
Repentance.

Item, I give unto the great Czar Duke of Moseovy my City of Riga for lost, now
all my pretenses to Life-land are vanished into the shades of death.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Duke and Duchess of Curland their
liberty at the same time, desiring them not to mourn as without hope now I am
taken from them.

Item, I give unto Mounsieur Akakia the French Mercury, and Enroy my lightest
riding spurs, to make his heels as nimble as his headpiece, for quicker
dispatch.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Rump late of England abominable thanks for
their Designs and Councels in thrusting me into the world, and making me as
infamous as themselves.

Item, I give and bequeath unto my precious Lord Whitlock a Medal with my
portraicture, as a Charm and Spell to drive from him all dangers and diseases
except choking.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Sir William Lilly a piece of Love or Cypress to
wear my gold Chain I sent him in, that he may look like any Alderman, and be
dignified, distinguished and known by it as Dr. Lamb was by meaner tokens to
the Rabble.

Item, I give and bequeath my order of Knighthood called of Amarantha to all
the Knights of the burning snouts made by Oliver, to preserve their honor
untainted, and unperishable for ever.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Sir George Fleetwood and to the use of his
brother (that Imp) Charles Fleetwood, one of my best and longest brass Guns to
keep the Army Officers from his doors, or, if they come not, the beggars or
boys of the Town.

Item, I give unto the Crim Tartar one of my fattest Horses, to make him a good
meal on the day of my Funerals, as it is the London fashion for the Companies on
such times for supper to eat Capons.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Sir George Ascough 300 l. more per annum out of
my Crown Lands in the Island of Fuenen for addition and amends, to the same
value of his Rebels Lands in Ireland, for his good service done at the other
Barbados in Sweden.

And I do hereby declare, nominate and appoint the present Grand Signeur my
sole Executor of this my said Last Will and Testament, desiring him to use his
conscience in the execution of the premises; withal earnestly entreating and
obtestating him, by all our dear familiarities, intrigues, and correspondency,
to pardon my Comrade, that plundering Prince of Transylvania, for he and I will
never go shares again.

And lastly, I do hereby revoke and disclaim all other Wills by me made, or
hereafter to be made, unless I better understand reason of state in the other
world than in this.

Signed, sealed, and declared to be the last Will of the aforesaid Charles
Gustave, in the presence of CAROLVS GVSTAVVS. Vllefelt. Wrangel. Oxenstiern.



