The Copy of the Petition presented to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, by
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.

Wherein the said Archbishop desires that he may not be transported beyond
the Seas into New England with Master Peter's, in regard of his extraordinary
age and weakness.

portrait of william laud with city background

London printed for Io. Smith, near the new exchange. 1643.

THE Humble Petition of William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and now
prisoner in the Tower. To the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that
this grave Assembly would permit or give way, that the Petitioner might not be
transported into New England with Mr. Peter's in regard of his age.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners constant solitude here in this place, has given him
time to consider of Your Petitioners self and his actions, especially the
latter, which as they had diverse motives and ends from whence they sprung and
whither they tended, so according to them your Petitioner was generally
censured; your humble Petitioner therefore will here lay down what your
Petitioner did labor for, and upon what grounds, that every one may see that
humane intents are not always prosperous in their events, for which your
Petitioner is now exceedingly troubled and grieved, humbly desiring that your
Petitioners present sufferings and sorrow may be considered in mercy and
compassion. And whereas it is chiefly laid unto your Petitioners charge that
your Petitioner sought and endeavored to change the present Religion, and
instead thereof to introduce Innovation and Popery; which purpose was so odious
and hateful to the people, that being once possessed of this opinion, they
generally cried down your Petitioners purposes and intents, who knowing the
great diversity of Religions which have been and are in the World, and the
strange fantastical exorbitancy of some of them, which agreeing in many things
and in their chief principles and foundations, do yet exceedingly differ in
many points and Tenets which they do severally hold and maintain.

Upon those considerations your Petitioner thought it would become his place
being Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England, to show a fervent
zeal to Christianity, in reconciling as much as might be the Protestant and
Cotholique Religion together, that though the principles of both were
inconsistent, and in many things far different, yet they might be in some
sort made conformable the one to the other, and be brought at least to as near
a distance as possible could any way be devised, that so they should agree in
such points as formerly they varied about. And your Petitioner having made this
the Groundwork of your petitioners labors, hoping that if your petitioner
could effect that which your petitioner had propounded, her Majesty seeing that
all differences of opinion are not Fundamental and of Faith, might be
reconciled in some sort, her Majesty would more easily be drawn to adhere and
join with our Church; so your petitioners end and purpose of all your
petitioners endeavors was not Innovation of Religion, but to work such a
conformation and likeness in both, that her Majesty's opinion might be drawn
on and induced to embrace the Truth, holding thereby to be a speedy means of
her Majesty's conversion. If therefore your petitioners hearty zeal to Gods
glory, and her Majesty's conversion to the protestant Faith by that means and
may which your petitioner intended, did not work that great and good effect in
her Majesty as was expected, nor the petitioners endeavors in that kind were
held fitting and agreeable to the petitioners dignity and place: your
petitioner does emplore this grave and Honorable Assembly, that in Mercy, not
in Judgment your compassion may be showed, in pardoning those errors wherein
your petitioner has offended. For all men, especially such as are advanced to
these eminent Honors, (which your petitioner lately enjoyed) are subject to
the common condition of humane frailety in matters of Judgment, showing
themselves in the greatest estate to be but men ready to err, and fall from
the happiness wherein time and favor had invested them, and that most
commonly in age, wherein your petitioner deeply stepped forward even to the
years of 68. all his desires having proceeded contrary and thwart to those
grounds whereon they were builded.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly beseeches, that in his age and last part of
his Life, this grave and Honorable Counsel, now Assembled in high Court of
Parliament would look upon him in mercy, and not permit or suffer your
Petitioner to be transported, to endure the hazard of the Se^s, and the long
tediousness of Voyage into those transmarine parts, and cold Countries, which
would soon bring your Petitioners life to a period; but rather that your
petitioner may abide in his Native Country, until your petitioner shall pay
the debt which is due from him to Nature, and so your petitioner does submit
himself to your Honorable and grave Wisdoms for your petitioners request and
desire therein.

And Your Petitioner shall humbly pray, etc.
From the Tower of London, this 6th. of May. 1643.
FINIS.

