Predestination HANDLED and MAINTAINED, AGAINST Papists, Arminians, and
certain Churches also of Antipaedobaptists, who with much zeal, and industry,
impugn the same.

By HENRY LAVOR.

He calls things that are not, as if they were.

When He appointed the Foundations of the Earth, then was I by Him, as one
brought up with him, rejoicing alvvaies before him, etc. and my delights were
with the Sons of men, Prove. 8. verse. 29, 30, 31. Published by Authority.

London, Printed by I. Coe. 1646.

HAving perused this ensuing Dissertation, wherein the Author (without
provoking Language) judiciously opposes a reviving and growning dangerous
error, I do therefore appoint it to be made public.

June the 20. 1646. Joseph Caryl.

Predestination handled and maintained etc.
THE reviving and vigorous Errors of these days, General Redemption. Free
will.
too miserably heard asserted, and maintained, from the mouths of some of
those, who even pretend to greater devotion; abetted also with the confident
suffrages, and earnest acclamations of their Audients not a few, have somewhat
prematurely hastened to the birth, these our newly conceived meditations; which
should else have tarried for a more elaborate, and exact Recension. Howsoever,
we hope, there is none will reprehend; when he may, with us, consider, this may
prove also an occasion to others more able, of appearing in this same defense.
And so pass we to the intended matter, that is, Predestination: touching
which, for our more orderly progress, we begin our discourse from its
definition: which, in the sense we use it, may thus be formed. Predestination
then is Gods designing, and appointing severally, before time, a certain
number of persons, to grace, and glory; and that absolutely and of simple love
to them. That this designation is before time, is expressly by the Scriptures
intimated: as, he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World.
Ephesians. 1.4. and 2 Timothy 2.9. etc. And that in the act of Predestination, God had
before him, the certain distinct notions, and particular representations of
all the Elect, i. e. of all men that are, or ever shall be glorified; is not
only attested by the Scriptures, but by Reason also. And first, we allege
Scriptures. Revel. 17.8. the words are these: And they that dwell on the Earth,
shall wonder, whose Names were not written in the Book of Life, from the
foundation of the World. Here what have we hinted, 4 Phil. 3.10. Lu. 20.13 Rev.
8.
but a Registrie, or Catalogue of the names of the Elect? whose names were not
written etc. And that before time: For in the occasionally, or accidentally
intimating the negation of that privilege as to some, (a thing quite besides
the Authors chief purpose) is evidently, and clearly employed, a Grant, and
Concession thereof to some others. Again, Romans 8.29.30. Whom he foreknew he
also did Predestinate, etc. and whom he did Predestinate them he also called
etc. Here, by foreknowing what is intended? If the word you will have taken in
its vulgar, and ordinary sense, then will it follow, that all being of God
foreknowne, all likewise being accounted to the partnership of those glorious
dignities, Sanctity, Glory, etc. which sure none of any reason will admit. Some
to this word foreknew, would have adjoined, these words, [would believe] and
that in a way of causing. Which whiles they conjecture, how unwarily skip they
over a notable absurdity? For (by them) those same God foreknew would of
themselves believe, he also makes to believe: unless they will say believing, or
faith is not, nor any part of vocation, and Sanctification: nor they of it,
which were even to fly from a less unto a greater absurdity. We rather
conceive the Author by that word, to intend Gods eternal love in Christ to his
Saints, reflected upon by him with reference, and in order to those graduall
inferences: which love so reflected on, appeared like a Crown, intituling
those that wore it, to the Royal Preheminences, Calling, Sanctity, Glory. Nor
do we want other Scriptures, many, that clearly own, and confirm out said
interpretation; when the undoubted sense thereof does plainly exact such an
understanding of the questioned words, as we have delivered. GOD has not cast
of His People, whom He foreknew, Romans 11.2. and Mat. 25.12. I know you not.
See 3 Amos 2. with many others. It Is evident then that knowing in the
Scriptures Dialect, is put for loving: And as evident it is also, that Calling,
Justification, Glorification in the foresaid place mentioned, do receive
limits, Act. 2. last v. and 13.48
and measure from that foreknowing, or foreloving: which is in the text assured
us, by that often repeated Relative, whom. Those He foreknew, He
predestined, called etc. Those and no others; Those and no more. Which seeing
it is so, then vain and inconsiderate is that opinion of many, who think the
number, and persons of the foreknown, were to God in the said act of
Predestination not determinate, nor severally considered; but that they lay
deep sunk in the Abyss of obscurity, and confusion; either necessarily, or
willingly by God so suffered to be: So as any one has in himself Free Will,
and Power; by believing, to make himself of the number of those Foreknowne. But
to pass by this Error of theirs, we will add to this word foreknowne, another
of the same Apostles words used in the like matter and that is chosen 1 Ephesians. 4.
an act likewise placed before all time: (...), it is in the Greek culled out.
Now in choosing, or picking out as it were of some from out of others; is had a
discering, and distinction, else it is no choosing, no Election, and where
choosing is, there is also a taking out of some, a leaving of others. God then
did take some for his Sons, and heirs of glory, did he not know them? who
they would be? Psalm. ^39.15.16.
how many? But he knew David's substance yet being imperfect, and in his book
were written all his Members, when as yet there was none of them. If you will
have this to be spoken of David's Person, even so it does make much for us: If
of the Elect, (as more probable) then much more; yea then it amounts to no
less then a clear and plenarie confirmation of the point we assert. Romans
^.11.12.13.
He knew also Jacob and loved him yet unborne. Lu. ^.15.
He knew John the Baptist, Ier. 2.5.
and sanctified him in the womb. And Jeremiah did he know before he formed him
in the belly, and before he came forth out of the womb, he sanctified him, and
ordained him a Prophet, etc. All these you will grant God did foreknow severally,
See also 1 Gal 15. Act. 15.18.
did he not also know the rest? But known unto God (says the Apostle) are all
his works from the beginning of the World.

John 1.3. 1 Col. 16. Ephesians. 3.9. Act. 4.24.
Again, he forms and makes all things; witness the Scriptures: From whence
we will infer he foreknew all things; For he does either make things rashly,
and without precognition of their future Forms, or contrariwise: See Act. 4.28.
but doubtless the latter; else shall we put the Creator beneath that
perfection he has given his Creature: (for not man sets himself to operate,
without having a prescript, or preconceiv'd type, and pattern of the work he
intends to.) And then this precedencie of knowledge, to operation in God, was
before time: for a Creature it is not, but it is in God alone, and so God
himself, according to the Schoolmen; whatsoever is in God, is God himself.
Quicquid est in Deo est ipse Deus. And secondly, if this precognition was in
God not eternal, then did there something from without, occasion and beget the
same; (for God is one, simple, entire, and not mixed) and so it will follow,
God is passible, imperfect; yea, the first Cause then, shall in a manner be
the effect of a second; of its own effect; and so there will follow a
confusion of Causes: which all are most absurd. The like may be said also of
Gods love to men severally, in reference to that of Jeremiah, Chap. 31. Verse.
23. (I have loved thee with an everlasting love) if any would have it
restrained to the future only. But an irrefragable place also to our purpose
is, that in the Psalms, Psalm. 90. Verse. 1. Lord thou have been our dwelling
place in all Generations. Heb: From Generation, to Generation, the same in
sense.
What, would he be their dwelling place, so long, and yet not know them?
doubtless no. We say again, if God did not severally know, eternally, the
persons of those he preordain'd to life eternal, 'twas either because he would
not, or because he could not. That we embrace not the former, the admirable
love of God to them exhibited, more especially in the wonderful act of
Redemption. disswadeth: And the latter we now come to refute by reason.

If God therefore did not know the precise number of his Saints, before the
world made, and so upwards, then did he wait until he should be informed
thereof, either from the events, and determinations of his own Actions, or else
from some other Mind and Power, and this Mind and Power is either subordinate
to God, or coordinate with him: If subordinate; (as necessarily) then simply
and totally subordinate to him, or not: if not; then still must it be mounted
into the throne of a Deity: but if simply, and totally subordinate, then did
it, and does receive of God the Precepts, forms, rules, and precise measures
of all its actions: And other then such an Agent, (if yet even such a one) no
man but sees God would not ordain, to so great a detraction, and blemish, and
even emulation of his divine Sovereignty. (we speak of a Power procreative of
those we call Natural and Substantial Forms, as such) Nor would we by any
means admit of such a Preter-divine Agent, directly over the very persons, of
men. What may be brought against us out of Genesis 1.11. And God said let the
Earth bring forth grass, etc. Is limited to things vegitative only. The 24.
verse, where its said, Let the Earth bring forth the living Creature, etc. Is
declared by that which follows, viz. And God made the best of the, Earth. etc.
We then here find any Assignation, of delegation of such a Productive Power or
Faculty, as to the form substantial, extended to man: whose supereminent
Dignity is in the same Chapter pointed out in the words; Let us make man, etc.
Nor (as for the other member) is God to deduce such a knowledge, from the
events, and determinations of his own Actions: For then it may be truly to be
said of Him, He Is about to do he knows not how much: or he knows not the
quantity of his own intended actions, which were doubtless absurd. It will
then also be true, if one shall say at the period of humane Generation, or some
short time before; Now knows God somewhat of his noblest Creatures, which
before he was ignorant of. Nor may our discourse much stick at that Objection.
What then (may some say) did God know before time every blade of grass that
should be? every dust on the earth? etc. To step besides this block (which yet
we could undertake to clear the way of) we answer: Our Treatise is of man; whom
alone his Creator would have sublimed above others, by the Impresse even of
his own Resemblance: not of Plants or mere Animalls: of Immortalls not
mortals, and amongst these, of the Saints principally: members of the Lords
own mystical body: His Children, His Saints, etc. who, what if we should tell
you, have a Seminall or radical being eternal: which though (as being a thing
beside our scope) we shall forbear, yet is there enough said to mar the
consequence, viz. from things inanimate or vegetative only, to Intellectives:
from mortals, to immortalls; and all this in a certain respect of Dignity
also.

Again, Whatsoever thing most excellent can incur into, or be devised by the
Imagination of man, That ought we to believe to be in God, in some equal, or
eminent manner; else would it prove to the disparagement, and indignity of the
great Creator that he should have enabled his Creature to imagine that
Excellency, which is not in Himself; which is above Himself. Now this
numerical foreknowledge is easily by man both immaginable, and comprehensible.
But Eternity, Infinitude are without all doubt attributed to God: either of
them is greater then the contended for prescience of number: we grant him the
former, how can we deny him the latter? So much for this point, wherein if we
shall seem to any more prolix then is needful, let them have this answer.
Both they that assent, may have now more ground so to do; and they that
dissent, may hereby of this their Error be the more fully convinced. And now
pass we to the other branch of our Definition; namely, That the Predestination
aforementioned was absolutely, and of simple love.

Destination, or purpose (largely taken) is an act of the mind, begotten of
the understanding and will concurring, and is related to something by the Person
to be done. But this definition happily is too large for our purpose, which is to
treat of such purposes, as are about things of more considerable moment, and
consequence. We shall first therefore devide, and then describe them in more
ample, and familiar terms. Purposes then are either more perfect, or less
perfect; that is absolute or conditional. The more perfect or absolute are
when the Person purposing, having projected or cogitated something to be done,
and then rising up to a consideration, and pondering of things already happened,
present, or for the future happenable, (to wit) events, cases, non-events,
conditions, states of things; forcible and of importance, as to the destroying,
or impeding of the thing purposed, does at length sit down with a resolution
to do or execute. The Imperfect or conditional are, when the mind, projecting
or imaginating something to be done, and having made enquiry and estimation of
all important and forcible impediments, as to the execution thereof, and then
finding some possible but uncertain intervention, accident, defect, or state
of things, or thing, that in the judgment of the Person purposing, ought to or
will hinder and forbid execution, draws at length to this resolution that if
this or that intervene, or this or that intervene not, the purpose shall
proceed to execution.

To prove that one word, (uncertain) to be that only, which gives being to
the purpose conditional, as it is such; and that without this uncertainty, the
purpose, if it proceed and abide, must needs be absolute, is an easy task:
For why does one yet purpose to do this or that, when he is well assured there
has been, is, or will be something that (in this particular) ought and will
hinder its accomplishment? which cannot be. For examples sake, A Father
purposes to give his son by will 100. l. on condition he please him well in
the mean time. Here does the Father know or is he certain, that his son
will so please him? or is he not certain? if he be certain, to what then
serves the condition? (since default or defect in the condition must destroy the
purpose) If he knows he will not so please him, and yet so purposes, then this
is no more a condition, but the purpose may be, notwithstanding this, absolute
and prefect. Hence therefore may we with clearness deduce this conclusion:
That the reason why purposes are conditional is, a want in foreknowledge, or
an uncertainty in the person purposing, of all such things as will and ought to
destroy the purpose. So that it also follows to be inconvenient with the
properties of God, to purpose, or predestinate conditionally: it being a thing
clear that we ought to allow God such a foreknowledge, especially then too
when he does intend to such one; as happens in the case of purposes or
Predestination. Besides this, also it may be minded, that where a person
purposes or Predestinateeth to do any thing of free will, there the purpose
partaketh something of desire to execution. God now is both an absolute
purposer, and a desirous one too: then what is it can hinder him therein.

Argument.
But if the Predestination aforementioned, was caused by the foresight of Faith
to come, (as is by many fancied,) then did the Predestinator foresee some
unavoidable, and unfrustrable cause, or series, or order of causes necessarily
productive of the faith foreseen: else how could it be that God should pass
a certain act upon, or in reference to an uncertain, and unchangeable respect,
or motive? which once granted, it is granted also that God may be deceived. If
any say, this productive cause may be considered of God, though yet to come;
such do but trifle: For there must then also be granted some preceding cause,
equally certain and unfrustrable as to the producing of that; we have therefore
added, as above, (Order of Causes.) Now where was this cause, or order of
causes before the creation? It must needs be granted, it was in God alone. So
then, the next and immediate cause of faith, Causa causae est causa causati.
is but the remote effect of this its first cause.

Argument.
If the same that decreed glory to man, decreed also to work in him faith and
grace, then glory depends not really upon the preceding habit of faith. But the
former is true: Therefore the latter. Antecedent proved, Romans 8, 29.30. Ephesians.
1.4.5.11, etc.

Here me thinks it is by some objected: Though Glory to man simply, depend not
upon having of faith: Yet quoad hunc, as concerning this or that particular
man, it may depend on his having of faith.

Answ
God did then decree glory. To whom? Doubtless to those that are, or shall be
saved. But it is proved above, God knew them severally and all, before they
were existent. It will follow then, that God before decreed glory directly to
the several persons of men: For the indeterminatenesse of all purposes, is of
defect of knowledge, as above more at large.

Argument.
That which is not of Man, but is freely the gift of God, cannot, as such, be a
motive, or impulsive to God, of conferring another gift; especially that may as
much exceed the former, as infinite does finite.

But faith is not of Man, but is the gift of God.

Ergo, Faith, etc.

There is no ground here from which to fix on God an obligation: If affectation
you suggest, that is impious, nor can you with any color of reason, fly to
the merit of the gift. This for the Major.

The Minor is proved, Ephesians. 2.8. compared with Romans 3.24.36. Ezekiel. 22.26.27.
Phil. 2.13.

Argument.
If we are saved freely, then not upon condition.

But we are saved freely, Ergo etc.

The Minor is proved by the two last cited places, Ephesians. and Romans

Argument.
Those things that are equally related to God, as being their Author, and are
the next and immediate effects of the selfsame cause, cannot properly be said
to be the cause, or effect one of the other.

But such are Faith and Glory. Ergo.

For proof of the Minor, turn to Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. and 2.8. Romans 6.
ult. Iam. 1.17, 18. with many others. Where you read both conformity to the
Image of Christ, vocation, justification; and glorification as proceeding of
the same cause, viz. foreknowing, i. e. fore-loving. There also have you faith
called the gift of God; so likewise, eternal life.

Argument.
That, according to which men are saved, was before the world began.

But faith was not before the world began: Ergo, faith is not that, according
to which men are saved.

The Major proved, 2 Timothy 1.9. the words these: Who has saved us, and called
us with an holy-calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose, and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began.

Argument.
If Glory proceed from Divine love, as the only cause, and that freely; then
is Faith neither the cause (whether sociall or solitary) nor condition of glory.

But the former is true, therefore the latter.

That love is the only cause, may hence be demonstrated. Where good, as good,
is destinated to a proper and ultimate object; It is either so destinated from
some engagement, obligation, or respect of merit, or else out of pure love. But
on God lay no engagement, or obligation of predestinating good to man. Whence
should it arise? He was then alone. If you allege the very purpose itself,
what caused such a purpose?

Was it not love still? Nor is there much merit to be found in the Object, Man:
of who^ the person that predestined, bears witness, that Every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. Isaiah also
acknowledges, that All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, etc. chap. 64.
v. 6. Well then might Paul say, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely, etc. Yea,
and God pronounces, I will love them freely, Hos. 14.4.

Argument.
For which Objects sake simply, God had ordained, and to which he properly did
refer the greatest accident possibly, the highest demonstration, and most
excellent instance of his love could be given. To that Object, it is
incongruous, yea, absurd to affirm; He would think much, and refuse to add
also a gift of much lesser value freely.

But for man's sake God has done the precedents, viz. in the Redemption. Ergo,
etc. And this is in substance, the very Argument of the Apostle himself, Romans
8.32. where he says: He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all: how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?

Argument.
To whom God intended the bestowing of a gift, for durance, eternal; for
degree, most excellent: to them he did also intend to give a temporal, and far
less excellent gift; being yet such as ought necessarily to antecede the other.

But to some men God intended the precedent, (glory we mean:) Ergo, the
consequent also: Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world, Matthew. 25.34. This Kingdom is afterward called, Life eternal,
verse. ult.

Thus then you have it cleared to you from our foregoing dissertation, First,
(to wit) That God before time knew the future persons severally, of all those
(without exception) that are or shall be glorified. Secondly; that Gods
conferring of glory to the same persons, is, and was free, and absolute,
without having respect to any thing (as thereunto requisite) in, of, or for
them.

By the first, is refuted that opinion, according to which, even those (all or
some) who are dead, and For they hold not of suffering hells torments, till
after the day of judgment.
reserved for everlasting woe, might, and had power to have believed, and
consequently been saved eternally. For doubtless, such as are reserved for
hell, were never known of God, as being in the number of those he ordained to
glory, or accounted for such.

By the 2d Conclusion appears the falsity of their other opinion, namely: That
God preordained no man to life eternal, without respect to, and forsake of his
future believing. So we end.

FINIS.
Page 14. line 22, for then here, read no where.


