

The last and best news from IRELAND: Declaring First the warlike and cruel
proceeding of the Rebels who are all papists and Jesuits of that Kingdom.
Secondly, the entrance of some English and Scottish companies into the
North-parts of Ireland under the command of these four noblemen; the Lord
Grandison, the Lord Chichester, the Lord Conway, the Lord Cromwell; also the
late incounters which they have had with those Rebels. Thirdly, how the Rebels
would have fired and burnt up the City of Dublin with wildfire: And likewise
the taking of some Irish Lords and other Commanders prisoners, both of horse
and foot. Fourthly, Diverse letters from several persons of good worth in
Ireland touching the cruel proceedings of the Rebels to this very day.
Fifthly, Irelands complaint, and Englands relief sent by the honorable house
of parliament, to aid and assist their brethren; together with the names of
those Commanders that are appointed for this Religious design. Sixthly, The
proclamation made by the Lords and Justices of Ireland.




London Printed for F. Coules, and T. Bates. 1641.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Dublin, concerning the late proceedings of the
Rebels in Ireland.
SInce the last time I wrote unto you, there has not been any Town taken by
the Rebels but Dundalke; yet there are and have bin diverse Roberies done and
committed in the Country; this day about ten of the clock there marched 1000.
foot with complete Arms, and part of two troops of horse toward Drogheda
with 4. field pieces; and we hear that the Scots in our North parts, are
marching toward the Neury with 5000, foot well armed, and four Troops of
horse, viz. The Lord Grandisons, the Lord Chiehesters, the Lord Conwayes, and
the Lord Cromwels, so that we hope we are here all safe, now the danger is
past, the Army being on foot.

Dated at Dublin, Novem. 3. 1641.
A true Relation of the last proceeding's in several Provinces in the Kingdom
of Ireland. 1641.
ON Saturday being the 6, of November, a party of the Rebels were discovered by
my Lord Grandison, marching toward a Town called Grage, with an intent to
plunder it, but forces being sent under the command of my Lord Grandison
intercepted their paslage, being in Ambush in a wood called the Poal-Mounty a
dangerous and obscure passage through which they were discovered, and that my
L. Grandison was too strong for them, upon which sight, the Rebels all run
away, some over Bogs, others into the woods. Tuesday the 9. of November there was
a skirmish between a party of the Protestants forces, which gathered together
in Dungarvin, who hearing of some of the Rebels that were met upon a Heath
near adjoining, with intent to set upon some Village near unto it, these
forces issued out and slew some 50. of them, putting the reft to flight. Many
outrages are daily committed by the Rebels in several places of the Kingdom
which I cannot fully relate as yet only this the troubles of this Kingdom are
great, the multitude of out enemies daily increase, and our forces are yet but
small, God inorease ours, and send us peace.

A Proclamation made by the Lords, Justices, and Council in the Castle of
Dublin.
William Parsons, John Burlacy, Ad. Loftus, G. Shirley, L. Temple.


Whereas a Petition has been preferred unto Us by diverse Lords and Gentlemen
of the English Pale, in the behalf of themselves and the rest of the Pale, and
others of the old English of this Kingdom, showing that whereas a a late
conspiracy of Treason is discovered, of ill affected persons of the old Jrish,
and that thereupon, a Proclamation was published by Us, wherein among other
things it is declared that the said conspiracy was perpertrated by the old
Irish Papists, without distinction of any, and they doubting by those general
words of Irish Papists, they might seem to be involved, though they declare
themselves confident, that did not intend to include them therein, in regard
they are none of the old Irish, nor of their faction, or confederacy, but they
are altogether averse and opposite to all their designs and all others of like
condition: we do therefore to give them full satisfaction hereby declare and
publish to all his Majesty's good subjects in this Kingdom, that by the words
Irish Papists, we intended only such of the old mere Irish, in the Province of
Vlster, as have plotted and contrived, and bin Actors in this conspiracy, and
others who adhere to them, and that we did not any way intend or mean thereby
any of the old English of the Pale, nor of any other parts of this Kingdom, we
being well assured of their fidelities to the Crown and having experience of the
good affection and service of their Ancestors in former times of danger and
Rebellion, and we further require all his Majesty's loving Subjects, whether
Protestants or Papists, to forbear upbraiding matter of Religion, one against
the other and that upon pain of his Majesty's indignation.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, November 4, 1641.
A Letter sent by the Lord chief Justices of Ireland, Novem. 5.
THe calamity of the English and Irish Protestants in Ireland is great, and the
mischief that the Rebels have done, are many and so much the more ought to be
severely Executed by reason of a proclamation which the Rebels have put out,
commanding all those that are English protestants to be gone away immediately
after the publishing thereof, or otherwise to take what punishments the Rebels
shall inflict upon them as they do with all cruelty and inhumanity; they
assaulted Treda and plundered the Town committing many outrages therein, as
namely they entered violently into a house of Dr. Vshers there now L. primate of
Ireland, and carried away 4000. l. in plate and money, but we hope shortly they
will be suppressed.

A Wildfire Plot found out in Ireland.
IF there were ever found deadly enemies to true Christian Religion, they are
now found out in Ireland, that Mother of all treachery, and Nurse of Treason.
For their inveterate malice is grown to the full perfection of disloyalty: and
what they could not perfect in one nefarious Plot, they did now intend to
perform in another. Their late pretended Gunpowder Plot is not unknown to all
men which they being frustrated of (having much Powder by that means ready by
them) did make therewith many Balls of Wildfire, with which they intended to
burn the whole City of Dublin with a vast inflation. The number of all the
Rebels are conceived to be for certainry about 30000. and their multitude
increases daily: many of them lie in Caves of the Earth, some others are in
Dundalke, which they took the 30. day of October, others are in the Countries
of Vlster, Canaugh and Cavia, but especially in the Country of Manahom in great
number: But not to wander from my intent, I will speak more largely of the
Wildfire, which they plotted very lately for the ruin of the whole Kingdom.
About the dead time of Thursday night, being the 11. of Nov. 500. of them or
thereabout, came out of the Caves in the Earth, with balls of Wildfire in
their hands, casting and tossing them over the City Walls of Dublin. There were
five houses burnt down thereby equal to the ground, and the fire took hold
of many other houses, but (as it was Gods great mercy) they were suddenly
quenched by the great labor of the people, and thanks be to Almighty God, no
more hurt was done by them.

There was an English Merchant lived in one of those houses that were burnt,
whose estate was supposed to be no less then 35000l and he lost most of his
Estate there. The rest were all Protestants, men of very good fashion and
reputation: but by the reason of that calamity, were scarce worth any thing:
all whose Estates we do much deplore, and commiserate. But there are a 1000.
men do guard the City day and night: who hearing of this combustion, did
immediately march out of the Gates, and took three Lords, Lord Casmahowne, L.
Mackamaveire, L. Bohoune, with about the number of fifty other Rebels, whom
they committed all to the Castle, the other fled, and run about the fields and
woods, and raised a great number of Rebels presently; who were about nine
thousand the next day, and marched against the City: but the Lords and
Justices, having some suspicion before thereof, did that very night send a Post
to Scotland, and some English Colonels, who very lovingly did assist them.
There came from Scotland, and the Northern parts of England 4000. Footmen, and
400. Horsemen, who did in some manner qualify them. Sir Francis Willoughby
Governor of the Castle, commanded 50. pieces of Ordinance to be brought out,
which were discharged against the Rebels, he had 00. men under him. My Lord
Moore came from Broghedo with 700. Footmen. Sir H. Iuckbourne with ten foot
Companies in complete Arms, Sir Charles Coot with 1000 foot. So that in all
the number of the Rebels that were flaine, were about 3000. and 80. besides
many Arms, which the English, Scottish, and Irish Protestants did take from
them.

The Rogues are very resolute, for they put both man, woman and children to the
Sword, wheresoever they meet them, without any distinction of Sex with cruel
Tyranny, But they very seldom appear armed; so that sometimes they are not
known, and so under pretense of Protestants, they cut their throats; for they
bury all their Armor in Caves in the Woods: wherefore all things are excessive
dear in the City, neither can they scarce buy any thing for their money, for
the Country dare not venture to bring in any Commodities to the City, for fear
the Rebels should assault them, who lie in ambush almost every where
thereabout. They dare not travel in the day, much less in the night, for then
the Rebels are most obvious, and do range more frequently about. So that
things of mere necessity can scarce be had in the City to the great relief
of the Inhabitants thereof.

O egregious treachery! or rather Treason to the King, and Kingdom! These
things would make a very Democritus to cry out in doleful exclamations. But
let those that delight thus in such fire, fear least they fall into an
everlasting fire: and let them take heed, lest a sudden fire descend from
Heaven and consume them Praecipit^ously, like as the fiery Serpents did the
Jsraelites.

The true Copy of a Letter sent from Mr. Joseph Watson Merchant in Dublin, to
Mr. Waterhouse Citizen in London, dated November the 4. 1641.
Mr. Waterhouse:
AFter our loves remembered unto you, hoping of your good health, which the Lord
in his mercy long continue: this is to certify you concerning our condition.
I doubt not, but you have heard of the Papists which are risen in rebellion,
but God did deliver our City from their bloody device, else we had not a man
of us been a live this day. For they had intended to take the Castle, where
all the strength of the Kingdom was, and then they would have ruinated us, and
all the English in the Kingdom, had not God miraculously delivered us. The
discovery was but at ten of the clock on Friday night, and the next morning
they might have took the Castle, had not one in company revealed it to the
Lords: and though we seem to have been delivered, yet we are still in great
fear; for we know not who are our enemics, and friends. Many enemies we have
amongst us in the City, that should have been the first that should have cut
our throats, as it has been in the Country, in one of the hest plantations
of the English, that is now in the County of Manahom, and Cavin, and other
Counties. The whole County of Manahom, the Irish thereof are in rebellion, and
many English are destroyed, and lost their lives and all their means; some
worth a thousand pounds over night, and not a rag to cover them the next day.
There is by relation five hundred people of them now in our City, all stripped
of their clothes: no difference between rich and poor, only the rich were
worse dealt with. Now our Lords have sent out yesterday an Army down, and the
Scots in the North parts are risen to meet them. But it is thought the Scots
have met with them ere this, and have ^riven them from one place; but there are
a great number of them, but not a quarter of them armed men, but they have good
store of Arms: We hope the Lord will stay them. Many of them are taken, and
more every day, but it will be a great while before they be suppressed: and
our Soldiers many false, and still we every day and night witch them. There
is above five hundred men in Arms watch our C^tie everienight, Householders and
other men, are I may say a thousand. We have in our out-Streets two hundred.
They would have set our Town on sire, for they are mainly enraged, and daily
treacheries are found our, which is Gods great mercy to us. By this means we
have no trade in our City more than need requires, that is, for victuals, and
candles, and such like things, which men cannot be without; and we can get in
no debts, for men will pay no moneys. For my part, I shall be a great loser by
these times, for we are at a great charge, it is one man's work to watch, and
there is great distraction. Thus with my love to your prayers, which I know are
not wanting for us, I ever rest

Your loving friend, Joseph Watson.

The Copy of another Letter sent to a worthy Divine in this City.
Worthy Sir.:
AFter my best respects recommended unto you, I think it expedient to acquaint
you of all affairs, that belong to our Irish business. My Lord Moore is in
Drogheda with seven hundred Foot, and a Troop or two: some of my Lords children
are already come hither, and we exp^ct my Lady Moore and the rest of the
children this nignt. My Lord has sent hither several Trunks, they are this
day put into the Castle to be safely preserved. There is two hundred Soldiers
in the Castle, victualled for twelve months, and about fifty Pieces of
Ordnance mounted, to keep the City in awe. Sir Francis Willoughby is
Governor, and Sir John Borlacie lodges therein. The Justices sit at
Cork-house, to free the Castle from recourse of people thereto. This morning
have marched toward Drogheda, ten Foot Companies in complete Arms, under the
command of Sir Henry Iuckbourne. Dundalke was taken on Sunday. And the Scots
and some English have come upon the Rebels, and have restrained the Newsie from
the Rebels, with the loss of a few men, eighty of the Rebels are slain, and
good store of Arms taken. The Scots and English from the North are 4000 Foot,
and 400 Horse, and their Army increases. There are in the County of Cavan,
under the command of Sir Charles Coot, a thousand Foot. We are in good hopes
that tho Lords of the Pole will prove true, for they are here offering their
service daily. Great in number the Rebels are, and daily increasing both in
Vlster and Conaught. My Lord Moors Troops have lately taken about sixty of
the Rebels, and killed three of four, and rescued s^even score head of cattle
from them. We do not as yet hear of any rising in Mounster, or Lemster: so as
we hope these broils will cease, when the English Army as well as the Scots
fall upon them. Thus hoping I have satisfied you herein, I commend you to God,
and rest

Your loving friend, H. L.

A Relation of all the proceedings of the Honorable House of Commons coneerning
the settling of the Commotions in Ireland.
THe House of Commons sat these three days past, being the 15.16.17. of
November, till eight of the clock at night, ordring and providing for the
security of the Kingdom of Ireland, appointing all those Officors that should
be employed in this affair of such great and consequent importance.

Likewise it was this day ordered, that Forces should be ready with all
expedition to be sent into Ireland, to secure all those places which are in
danger of being plundered by the Rebels.

Likewise it was ordered by the House of Parliament in Scotland that General
Leshsly should go over with 400. Red-shanks to secure Dublin, until such time
as our English Forces be raised and sent over to join with the Scots and Irish
Forces and make a complete Army, so by that means to quell those Rebellious
Irish Papists, which so treacherously have revolted, from so gracious a King
under whose happy government they lived, secure and quiet, whose glorious
Reign the Lord continue, and bless, and prosper all his Royal offspring: so
that when it shall please out God to take him from his throne on earth, he may
be invested with a more glorious Crown in heaven: and let all true Subjects
say: Amen.

Likewise upon the 15. day of November, according to the command of the
Honorable House of Parliament, there went 4. wagons with 7. chests of money
drawn with 6. horses each wagon with 6. men well armed with fire locks and
pistols to guard it from stage to stage toward Weschester, and thence to be
shipped to Ireland, for the use and relief of our Forcees, which are ordained to
serve in this Employment, which God of his abundant mercy prosper: give them,
we beseech thee, courageous hearts, mixed with a religious fear, so that they
may courageously fight for the defense of the good, and religiously fear to
commit evil: so shall the religious war be crowned with a glorious victory,
and an united peace settled between the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland: so shall the Gospel have free liberty; So shall the Church
militant praise thee our God on earth, and in thy blessed time enjoy truo rest
with thee in the Church triumphant in heaven.

The Names of those Commanders that are appointed by the High Court of
Parliament, for this present Expedition.
SIr Simon Harcot, Colonel over the first Regiment. Sergeant Major Berry;
Commands 300. men with firelocks. Coronell Mandro, commands 2. Regiments from
Scotland which were not disbanded. Captain Atkins, commands a Regiment under
the Earl of Essex. Sergeant Major Howell goes with a Regiment under the
command of Colonel Merick.
Inferior Officers.
Captain Dossin. Captain Mullins. Captain Pain. Captain Smith. Captain
Langley.
FINIS.

