A LATE AND TRVE RELATION FROM IRELAND: Of the Warlike and bloody Proceedings
of the Rebollious Papists in that Kingdom, from November. 1. to this present,
1641.

Wherein is declared their barbarous and cruel Actions, the great and many
outrages and Robberies committed by them in diverse Provinces of that Kingdom.

With the entrance of some English and Scottish Forces into the North parts of
Ireland, under these Commandes, viz.

The Lord Grandison, The Lord Chichester, The Lord Conway, The Lord Crumwell.
And the late Skirmishes and Conflicts that has been between them.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS, 1641.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Dublin, November. 3. 1641.
Concerning the late proceedings of the Rebels in Jreland.
SInce the last time I writ unto you, there has not been any Town taken by
the Rebels, but Dundalke, yet there are, and have been diverse Robberies done
and committed in the Country, this day about 10 of the clock, there marched
1000 foot with complete Arms, and part of two Troops of horse toward
Drogheda with 4. Field pieces, and we hear that the Scots in the North, are
marching toward the Neury, with 5000 foot well armed, and 4. Troops of
horse, viz. The Lord Grandisons, the Lord Chichesters, the Lord Conwayes, and
the Lord Crumwells, so that we hope we are here all safe, now the danger is
past the Army being on foot.

Dated at Dublin, November. 3. 1641.
A True Relation of the last weeks proceedings in several Provinces in the
Kingdom of Ireland, 1641.
ON Saturday being the 6. of November. a party of the Rebels were discovered by
my Lord Grandison, marching toward a Town called Grage, with an intent to
plunder it, but forces being sent under the command of my Lord Grandison,
intercepted their passage, being in ambush in a Wood called the Poal Mountye, a
dangerous and obscure passage, through which they were to march, for the more
privacy, but finding that they were discovered, and that my Lord Grandison was
to strong for them, then they seemed to retreat, thinking by that means to
draw him out of the Wood, but finding that their hopes were frustrate, they
fell on very desperately, to force a passage, when straight the Earl of
Barrimore, a Protestant and noble Gentleman, having raised some 500 horse and
foot of his Tenants, and friends for the Kings service and his own desence,
and being marched abroad to see if he could meet with any of the Rebels, which
he heard were dispersed abroad in many parts of that County, happened by chance
to come into the hearing of their warlike Music, whose noble spirit soon
prompted him to engage himself in so just a quarrel, for meeting with some of
my Lord Grandisons Soldiers that were forct to fly, the Rebels being too
strong for them, he was informed of every particular, who instantly Rallyed his
Troops, and gave a fierce alarm, the Rebels seeing these unexpected forces,
straight began to fly, most of their foot were slain, which were about 800.
only their horse escaped the slaughter that were there also, then the
Protestant parties with those two noble Lords marched unto Grage, taking order
to secure the Town, least that the Rebels in the night should come and
plunder, and destroy it, likewise on Tuesday the 9. day of November. there was a
skirmish between a party of the Protestants forces, which gathered together in
Dungarvin, who hearing of some of the Rebels that were met upon a Heath near
adjoining, with intent to set upon some Village near unto it, these forces
issued out, and flew some 50 of them, putting the rest to flight, likewise many
outrages more are daily committed by the Rebels in several places of the
Kingdom, which I cannot fully relate as yet, only this, the troubles of this
Kingdom are great, the multitude of our enemies daily increase, our Forces are
but small, but there has 500 lately landed out of Scotland, and our Forces and
theirs are joined, God I beseech him give them a happy Victory.

A Proclamation made by the Lords, Justices, and Counce^l in the Castle of
Dublin.
William Parsons, John Burlacie.


WHereas a Petition has been preferred unto Us by diverse Lords and Gentlemen of
the English Pale, in the behalf of themselves and the rest of the Pale, and
others of the old English of this kingdom, showing that whereas a late
Conspiracy of treason is discovered, of ill affected persons of the old Jrish,
and that thereupon, a Proclamation was published by us, wherein among other
things, it is declared that the said Conspiracy was perpetrated by the old
Jrish Papists, without distinction of any, and they doubting by those general
words of Irish Papists, they might seem to be involved, though they declare
themselves confident, that did not intend to include them therein, in regard
they are none of the old Jrish nor of their faction, or Confederacy, but they
are altogether averse and opposite to all their designs, and all others of
like condation, We do therefore, to give them full satisfaction, hereby declare
and publish, to all his Majesty's good Subjects in this kingdom, that by the
words Jrish Papists, we intended only such of the old mere Jrish, in the
Province of Vlster, as have plotted, and contrived, and been Actors in this
Conspiracy and others who adhere to them, and that we did not any way intend,
or mean thereby any of the old English of the Pale, nor of any other parts of
this Kingdom, we being well assured of their fidelities to the Crown, and
having experience of the good affection and service of their Ancestors in
former times of danger and Rebellion, and we further require all his Majesty's
loving Subjects, whether Protestants, or Papists, to forbear upbraiding matter
of Religion, one against the other, and that upon pain of his Majesty's
indignation, Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, November 4. 1641.

R. Rantlagh, R. Dillon, Anth.Midensis, Ad. Lostus, Geo. Shurley, Gerrard
Lowther, L. Temple, Fr. Willoughby, Jam. VVare.

God save the King.
Another Letter dated at the Castle of Dublin, November. 5. 1641. sent by the
Lord chief Justices of Ireland.
THe Calamity of the English and Protestants in Ireland is great, and the
mischief that the Rebels have done, are many, and so much the more ought to be
severely executed, by reason of a Proclamation which the Rebels have put out,
commanding all those that are either English or Protestants, to be gone away,
immediately after the publishing thereof, or otherwise to take what punishments
the Rebels shall inflict upon them, and execute with all cruelty, by cutting of
the heads of all those that remain, and by burning their Villages, and putting
both man and woman, and child to the Sword, a great number of the Rebels did
assault Tredath, and plundered the Town, committing many outrages therein; as
namely, they entered violently in a house of Dr. Vshers there, now Lord Primate
of Ireland, and carried away 4000 l. in plate and money, but we hope shortly
they will be suppressed, for some forces from Scotland, is come to assist us,
they are now in the North parts of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

