The taking of WEXFORD A LETTER From an eminent Officer in the Army, under the
command of the Lord Leiutenant of IRELAND Relateing the number put to the
Sword, and the manner of the taking the said Town, with 71 pieces of O^dnance,
40 Ships, 1300 Prisoners, with store of Arms, Ammunition, Money, Plate and
Jewels, and the advance of the Lord Leiutenants army to ROSSE.

And the engagement between Colonel MONROE and Colonel OCONELLY who was slain
in the service.

LONDON Printed For Francis Le^ch 1649.

The Taking of Wexford, a Letter from an emminent Officer in the Army under
the command of the Lord Leiutenant of IRELAND
SIR,
I Doubt not but you have long since heard of the goodness of God to our Army
at Wexford, the second of October we sat down with our Army before Wexford,
and found from the Enemy a seeming Complement, Commissioners being oppointed to
treat for surrender, but so soon as they had got relief of men from Ormond,
they rejected all terms, all this while we continued without attempting any
thing, until on the 9th. instant, we removed to the South side of the town,
the 11th. we framed our Batteries against the Castle, which stands close by the
Works, and commands a great part of the Line; In this we made two good
breaches; after which the Governor of the Castle and three more were sent
forth to treat; the Governor We dealt with a part, who was sufficiently
affrighted, that we easily persuaded him to march out with his men, and let
ours enter, the Commissioners for the town had in the interim delivered their
Propositions to my Lord Leiutenant; who found them so unreasonable; that they
were instantly by him rejected and only a brief return made, offering
security from the violence of the soldier to the lives and goods of all, they
ingageing not to take up arms against the Parliament, but see our just God who
will not let the wicked go unpunished.

No sooner had our men, that possessed the Castle advanced our Standard, but
instantly the Rogues generally deserted the Line, and left our Soldiers at
liberty to use their scaling ladders without giving the least opposition, nay,
and before their Commissioners could return into Town to tell them of the
offers of mercy the whole work was accomplished. In the town were 1700. men at
the least, some say, three thousand, of whom we have a general belief that
there escaped not above four hundred at most: many were drowned endeavoring
to get over the River, and two boats sunk in which is said the Governor to
have bin, of ours not above 1 or two killed, in the town we found 51. pieces of
small ordnance, and 20 aboard the ships, good store of powder and ammunition,
about forty good vessels in the Harbor, 3 or 4 whereof, will be fit for
State-service, money, plate, and Jewels was much removed out of town, but
other plunder there was good store: tallow, hydes, salt, and such gross
commodities are reserved for the state; but all other things at the soldiers
devotion. Ormond is now joined with Inchequin, both are about Rosse, their
number we compute to be about 2000. horse and 3000 Foot, which is certainly the
utmost they can make, their main expectation is upon a conjunction with Owen
Roe; the Garrison of Youghall under the command of Sir Peircie Smith lately
declared for the Parliament, but for want of seasonable relief it was again
reduced by Inchequin, We begin our march to morrow to the Garrison of Rosse 12
miles hence, which we hope to obtein on composition; upon Ormonds advance
toward Wexford, colonel Jones was sent with horse and dragoones to impede his
march; Ormond hearing of it retreated, Jones pursued no farther then Enisorthy,
from thence he inclined to Rosse, and early in the morning lodged himself
under the enemies works, sent out a party to enter the town under the notion of
friendship, who past unsuspected, and had doubtless carried the business, but
that one amongst them fell upon the sentinel, and so alarmed the town.

We have lately had some loss in the North, Colonel Oconelly with a party of
horse about 100 marching from Belfast to Antrim, was set upon by George Monroe
with a bigger force, routed our men, Col. Oconelly and Capt. Rooper with about
twenty others slain, about the same number taken prisoners, the rest escaped;
The report of the country people coming out of the Enemies quarters is, that
they intend to give battle to our army within ten days, that all their Forces
are drawing toward Rosse, or those parts joined with Owen Roe Oneale for that
purpose, their forces besides his are reputed 6. or 7000. horse and foot,
Shirlock the chief of the Tories with 80. horse is laid betwixt Catterlaugh
and the Liffe to stop the running away of their men, who comes daily away from
them to us by 30. 40. and sometime more together, Inchequin dare not trust the
Irish, and is diffident of the English, they declaring their dislike of his
actions every day more and more. Youghal did declare for the Parliament and
Army, and had a plot to have secured Inchequin, and have sent him into safe
custody to the General, but being discovered was prevented, stood upon their
guard, three days against him and his forces, being not relieved was forced to
submit upon promise of pardon.

we hope before this time my Lord is so near them as to give them
encouragement to try once more; since which Inchiquin has dismounted all his
Munster horse, and has mounted Papists and Irish in their room; it is
reported Owen Roe is to have six months pay for his whole army, to be
commander in chief of all the Irish Natives, to have liberty to burn and
destroy all the english quarters and habitations, to have the custody of one or
two of the strongest garrisons yet in Ormonds possession, which if granted as
reported, Ormond and Inchiquin will signify little more then reformadoes in
their Army, and the war in Jreland will end where it did begin betwixt the
English Protestant and the Jrish Papist.

October the 20. 1649 faithfully thine, R. L.
October. 6 1649
Imprimatur,

JO. RUSHVVORTH.

FJNJS.

