To all the Honest, Wise, and Grave-Citizens of London, but more especially to
all those that challenge an interest in the Common Hall.
GRAVE CITIZENS
YOU cannot but account it an extraordinary great blessing from God, that a day
of Right, or rather of Inheritance (as I may call it to every Citizen) should
offer it self unto you, the 24. day of this instant June, for a Common Hall:
Time has now put that into your hands, which Petition upon Petition could not
obtain, for such is our miseries, that those which had Power had not Will to
grant our Requests, and experience has not only satisfied me, but (I think)
every honest man, that the ground of our neglects or rather denyalls, are self
interests, and private respects, which indeed are and have been, from time to
time, the very fludgates to let in our miseries, and the very choke Pear to
Peace, the blessed ground of all our happiness: for who more averse to any
motion or Petition for Peace in this City, then they that are invested in
places of power and profit, and what greater unhappiness can befall us then
this, that our grand Trustees, should as much as in them lies, bring King,
Kingdom, and City into an everlasting undoing; behold then you gallant and
brave Citizens, and know that it is yet in your power (through the mercies of
our God) to prevent a final ruin, of this distressed, distracted, dying
Kingdom; and the better to effect it, let it be your first work on the
Hall-day (and be sure to do it the first) remove the causes, and the effects
will cease, be not overpowered with policy, nor with enforcement of
arguments, nor with the approach of Soldiers, and Troopers; the two first may
seem to persuade you, the latter may terrify you into an everlasting undoing,
but I say first press on to the mark, lest you shut the stable door when the
steed is stolen; which is, to point out the Acans that trouble your City, for
it is to be feared, except those wicked (I had like to have said accursed)
things be removed, this City and Kingdom will hardly be established in
Peace; Oh! what maddesse is it for you to nurce such serpents in your bosoms
as would (not many months ago) have totally destroyed you? putting their
helping hands to introduce a merciless, and blood thirsty Army into the
bowels of this famous City, such now you have in high places and high Offices,
but root them out, and make choice of those that will (all sinister ends set
apart) act for the peace and prosperity of this languishing City, and
Kingdom, you may be hold to do this, for it is your right, granted in your
Charter, to locate, or dislocate, place, or displace, any Officer that is in
this City; therefore grave Citizens betray not your own immunities, loose not
your privileges, stand for truth and peace, and according to your oaths of
allegiance, your protestation, your late Covenant, pity the sad condition of
your most religious, and gracious King Charles, pressing hard that a petition
may be forthwith drawn, for a speedy Personal Treaty with his Majesty: the
best way in all humane apprehension to establish Peace, and prevent those
dangers, which seem to approach near unto us. Look, Oh look! with an
impartial eye, and yet with the eye of pity (before it be too late) upon
the distemper of the whole Kingdom, and consider how this City is almost
hated of all, beloved of few: What black curses there are against you abroad,
what distempers and murmurings within, your daily actions hourly dissever you
from the love of strangers, that know you not, and from the love of your
neighbors and friends that know you, witness Surrey, Kent, and Essex.

Besides look toward the North, and you shall see a cloud, so full of
darkness moving this way, that it seems to threaten our final ruin; but
some may say, we need not fear for we have money, and men, and Ammunition
enough, and this Fort, and that Tower; but good Citizens be not lulled asleep
with careless security, for what can money, and men, and Ammunition do, so
long as Acans trouble your City? go on then boldly (in the name of God) to
your own work, and in the election of Officers let me give you this caution.

In no ways to trust any General with full power in this great and populous
City, that dares not trust his Wife, Children, Family and Fortunes in it. Trust
not your Officers of Excise. Trust not any man that has place of great profit;
as you tender the peculiar welfare of your Selves, your Wives and Children;
and as you tender the welfare of this Glorious City, Let none snch bear
Office in this Choice: This done, a short time may make you and the Kingdom
happy in a well grounded Peace:

Which shall ever be the Prayer of your well-willing Friend and
Brother-Citizen A. L.
23. Junii 1648. Lastly, let me remember you of a brother Citizen one Mr.
Matthew Barker, who was taken out of his house the last week, and imprisoned in
several places, without Bail or Mainprize, not yet any Cause shown. Hodie
mihi, cras tibi.




