Legenda lignea: WITH AN ANSWER To Mr. Birchleys MODERATOR.

(Pleading for a Toleration of POPERY.) And a Character of some hopeful SAINTS
Revolted to the Church of ROME.

Lactan. lib. 5. ca. 9. Inst. Christianorum omnis Religio sine scelere, and
macula vivere.

Plin. Not. Hist. Lib. 14. Religione vita constat.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1653.

A Message from GOD: OR, An Advertisement to the City of LONDON.
BRETHREN,
GOD never intends a judgment upon a City or Nation, but he forewarn's them
of it first by some subordinate Means best pleasing to his Majesty, as the
examples of Jerusalem and Nineveh well inform us. In like manner his Divine
Excellency, having lately pronounced a most horrid and deplorable Rain upon
your City, has been pleased (out of the unsearchable riches of his grace) to
reveal the same (by way of supernatural or divine Vision) to Me the
unworthiest of men; which with all Love and Christianity I shall declare to you
as follows:

I saw in a vision by night (whether in the body or out of the body, I know
not, God knows) and lo a mighty black Bull, of most furious Countenance, rose
out of the North, and came along in the Air, about a furlong distant from the
Earth, directing his way in a very sturdy and swift posture, and with a
straight course, not turning to the right hand nor to the left, toward the
place where I stood ( I being then in London;) and, upon his nearer approach, I
discovered one of his Horns blazing with Fire; but the other I observed to be
a straight Horn, partly black and partly white, in Rings: At the sight of
which strange and formidable Apparition I began at first to be much skar'd, and
thereupon to make my addresses to Almighty God in prayer; by which means
finding my Thoughts immediately much settled, I resolved further to observe:
This said Apparition being come directly over me (Westward,) and standing
about a stones cast in height from the gound; there instantly appeared hard by
it (toward the South) another Bull, all over involved in a mighty Flame;
which, with great fend and violence, ran at this Northern Bull; but, after a
short and furious conflict, was in the end vanquished by him, and so vanished;
the other in short time vanished likewise: Which done, there suddenly came down
a voice to me (as the voice of a Man) saying, Thus shall your City of London be
burnt with Fire: Whereupon I started up in a kind of Ecstasy, and waked,
greatly wondering at so dreadful a vision.

These things I saw immediately upon the Scottish Defeat at Worcester, as
diverse of my acquaintance can testify, to whom I afterward revealed them;
which will most certainly be fulfilled in their due time.

Having now given you a true and perfect account of this my present Message or
Burden, and that I be not taken for any of those who are ready to conclude
every wandering Fantasma a Revelation, I shall proceed further to inform you
upon what Grounds I am thus bold to present you with these Lines, which are
briefly these Three.

First, from that faithful experiment I have lately had of sundry most strange
(nay, I may well say miraculous) Revelations touching my own private condition,
being all of them most exactly fulfilled. Secondly, from that extraordinary and
persuasive Manner that these things appeared to me in, above all other either
before or after them: And, Thirdly, from those restless Prickings of
Conscience, that have accompanied me, until I had now communicated these
Particulars to the World. For this Word was in my heart as a burning Fire shut
up in my bones, and I was weary with Forbearing, and I could not stay;
(according to that of the Prophet, Ier. 20.9.)
From this Subject, according to my Interpretation, from those strong
Persuasions in my Spirit (under Goa's sacred correction) there are plainly
denoted to us these Six Particulars: First, That, whereas there came a black
Bull, mighty and terrible in appearance, from ward the Northern Parts to
London; so there shall come in like manner a Man of black complexion, and of an
irefull and majestic Countenance, that is to say CHARLES called King of Scots,
shall infallibly come with a great and dreadful Power from Scotland (as is
most probable,) or from the Northern Parts of this Nation, where He and his
Army shall first Land, to this City of London. Secondly, Forasmuch as this
Apparition marced along betwixt the Heaven and the Earth, it does most
evidently promonstrate these Three things: 1. That the said King shall not
terminate his Designs on his own Earthly Interest, but on God's Glory and
Religion: 2. That high and magnificent Condition he shall come in: And 3. His
Abhorring (as it were) to defile his Feet with that Ground, whereon there have
been such abominable and unheard of Cruelties committed since that unhappy
time of his expulsion from his Native Country and Kingdom.
Thirdly, whereas it came straight forward, not turning to the right hand nor
to the left, and in a stout and swift posture, there will arise from thence
these Two Observations: 1. That the said King shall not turn aside to besiege
any petty Garrison, or to fight any Flying-Party; but shall march directly on
toward London, as the only confiderable Place of his attempts: And, 2. His
Policy in frustrating his Enemies Plots by a sudden Surprizall.
Fourthly, by the blazing Horn is expressly signified that flaming Sword of
Vengeance he shall bring with him; wherewith he shall confound his Enemies,
burn this City with Fire, and (consequently) destroy this present Government.
Fifthly, by the straight Horn, partly black and partly white, is to be
understood that straight Rule of Righteousness, whereby he shall square all
his Actions both of Mercy and Justice. Sixthly, and lastly, from the furious
combating of these two Apparitions, etc. I prescribe Thus; That the Inhabitants
of this City of London shall draw out their Total Powers against the said King
and His Armies, and there shall be a most desperate War, such as has not
been in England since it became a Nation: but they shall be utterly vanquished,
and this our Jerusalem shall be made Heaps, and an Astonishment, and a Byword
to all posterity.


Doubtless, there will be sundry Objections raised from the Strength, and
warlike Posture of this Nation, and the present Domestic Troubles of other
Christian Nations about us, thereby concluding an impossibility of so great a
change (and, by consequence, much obstructing those good Effects, I could wish
the aforesaid Premises might work upon Men's Consciences:) To this I answer, To
such an Intellect it seems (indeed) somewhat improbable, (as, according to
that Philosophical Observation, Falsa saepe probabiliora sunt Veris;) but, if
we look on GOD (who brings Princes to naught, and makes the Judges of the
Earth vanity, Isa. 40.23.) we shall find that his Hand is not shortened,
neither confined to Time or Means. Certainly, there is nothing that more
clearly argues the Desolation of a Kingdom or Commonwealth, then when once
they begin to be vainely-confident in their own fleshly Abilities. But let our
Governors beware lest such Terriblenesse and Pride of Heart deceive them, as
it did sometime the Edomites ( Ier. 49.16.) Alas! they will find these
Persuasions to be but false Enthusiasmes, consisting only in superficial
appearances without substance; or like to the Egyptian-Reed, on which if a Man
leaned it would pierce his hand.

As for the Time wherein this sad Presage shall be accomplished, though it be
not here punctually revealed; yet, by all probability, it must be suddenly.
(Neither let any Man think that I speak these Things by way of siding with
Parties; far be it from me; for I call Heaven and Earth to record this day,
that what is here written is written from the very truth and sincerity of my
heart.) Wherefore my humble Request upon the Premises is this, That we,
bearing Gods Image and the Names of Christians, might no longer devote our
selves, like Beasts, to Sensuality and uncleanness; that we might no longer
blaspheme that Worthy Name by which we are called, by such abominable Actions,
that the very Heathen blush at their remembrance: But that, whilst our Sun of
grace shines, we might have a speedy and general Reformation both in Church
and State; and that, from the highest to the lowest (having every man of us in
particular put away the evil of his doings, and removed the accursed thing
from him) we might (with the Ninivites) humble our selves before the Throne of
Grace with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning; crying mightily unto
GOD, that it would please his Divine Majesty to spare his Inheritance, and to
receive us graciously. Who knows whether the Lord may return and repent, and
leave a Blessing behind him?

I beseech you (my Brethren) in the Bowels of Christ Jesus, let this my
counsel be acceptable unto you; break off your sins by Repentance, and make
straight paths for your feet, Lest the LORD kindle a fire in Jerusalem, and
there be none to quench it.

Why these strange and prophetique VISIONS should thus appear to Me, above
many thousands beside (that I ever heard of) certainly I know not, neither can
give any other account of it, then from those Words of God, Exodus 33.19. I will
be gracious to whom I will be gracious: (Nor shall I here have recourse to any
man's private censure, it being a Matter (as I conceive) altogether
indeterminable, and not obvious to Humane Reason.)

To conclude; This Paper, I presume, will meet with many skoffing and
tumultuous Spirits (as the World never yet wanted them,) taking it perhaps, for
some mad Frensy or Diabolical Illusion; and thereupon (I say) taking occasion
some to mock it, and others to persecute it (as it is impossible but that
Strong Meats will be offensive to unsound Digestions (though those stomachs
(indeed) that are better constituted, will receive them according to their
native worth;) all which I cannot help, neither am I to observe: Howbeit,
These are to let all men know that Herein my Conscience is discharged. How
reproachfully so ever the Things signified may by the men of this Generation be
exploded and kicked at; yet, for those Types or Emblems, by which they were
represented to my understanding, if we compare them with the Types of sundry
Prophesies in Holy Scriptures, we shall find them in no measure contemptible.
To fear Persecution in this Matter, I should sin egregiously; This Burden I
must deliver, though Briars and Thorns be with me, and I dwell among
Scorpions: For Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me if I deliver it not.
Alas! let such Evill-surmizers consider, if these horrid Judgments befall this
City (as I am most confident they will, unless a speedy Reformation prevent,)
and I, being thus pre-inform'd of them, should nevertheless retain them
unreveal'd; I say, let them consider what Blood-guiltinesse I should draw down
upon my head by such silence: And let Such likewise beware, lest, in
persecuting me, they be found to fight against GOD.

Delivered in a Copy from my own hand this 26. of October. 1652. FRA. WILD.

THE PREFACE.
THE Broils, Quem bellum civil delectat, eu^ ex numero hominum ejiciendum, ex
finibus humanae naturae exterm nandum puto. Tullius Phil. 12. (...), Homer.
Iliad.
and Civil Wars of my own Country, caused my thoughts to wander abroad, to seek
Peace; Curiosity invited me to be a Traveller, and Mysterium Theologia, facta
est populare oblectamentnni: vir --. faeninae, senes paeri, quaestiunculis,
ludunt and sasciviunt. (...) Lipl. advers. Dialogist, lib.
(...), the dissension, and distraction in Religions, as well as Government,
has prompted my thoughts to more serious observations, left to much pleasing
my sense with fresh varieties, I might endanger my soul with the loss of
heaven; Apud nos etiam opificibus offusasunt arcana Theologiae; atque ^ta omnes
inhiant ratiocinatiunculis and sermonibus syllogisticis, ut herbae and pascu^s
armenta.
I cannot boast of any content that I have met with, by tasting of the several
waters so artificially distilld in other Countries. Though I have seen the
Popes Throne, and his crimson Conclave of Cardinals at Rome; Calvin's
Consistory, and his Presbyterian Succession at Geneva; Luthers rich Altars, and
Superintendents in Germany; the several Sects tolerated in the Netherlands,
and the Jewish Synagogu at Amsterdam: Nicep. Greg. hist. lib. 11. factionum
principes interse digladiabantur, and linguas contrase mutuo ^rmabant, non zelo
divino, sed itacundiae impetuducti. Idem Hist. lib. 6.
yet I left a poor Persecuted Mother at home, (the Truth and Religion professed
in the Church of England) which is more lovely, and truly venerable, than them
all. I stretched my Travells to view the Romish Inquisitions, and the Scottish
Assemblies, which have bended severities until they are ready to break; and it
is hara to Determine, whether of the two are more intolerable with their
extremities. In the multitude of these many objects, Haec in Graecia olim fuere
quando cum paulo post ruit.
my eyes have had many glances, but my thoughts have chiefly fixed themselves
on t^hse two great Enemies, who have (on different Interests) violently banded
their greatest strength, to ruin (if possible) my dear Mothers very being. It
was a piece of the Lord Archbishop of Canterburies Sermon before he dyed,
Venient Romani, the Romans will come, and will take our Country: That
Prediction proves now a true Prophecy; See the Politic Union of In illo vero
die, Pilatus and Herode^ facti sunt amici intersele, nam antea inter se erant
inimici Luke 23.12.
bitter Enemies, using the same They set a trap, they catch men. Ierem. 5.26.
means to contrary ends. The Quibus quies in seditionibus, in pace turbaesunt,
tumultum ex tumultu, bellum ex bello serunt.
Papist and the Presbyler both agree, That the Scaffold was fitter for an
Archbishops last Sermon, than a Pulpit. The news of his Execution was as welcome
to Rome as Edinburgh; the difference is not very much, in guilt or malice, when
the Jesuits invisibly whet the Edge, and the Presbyters visibly lift up the Ax,
Qui non came praemiis Periculor^i, quam ipsis periculis laeti, pro certis, and
olim partis, nova, ambigua, ancipitia malunt. Tacitus. Impetitos animos
impellunt, and nocturnis colloquiis, aut flexo in vesperam die, dilap sis
melioribus, deterrimum quemque Congreganres, l^serunt querelas and ambiguos
sermones de principe, quaeque alia turbamenta vulgi. Tacitus.
and give the stroke. The one party came in, as a violent Inundation, and
overswelling torrent, bearing all before it with a factious Covenant, and show
of Godliness: The other party steals, like a Thief, in the Night, swells their
streams by insensible degrees, insinuates their Roman Principles by whispers
and private insusurrations, and so gains many Proselit^s. The Covenant was a
bait for vulgar and more gross capacities; but the Romish lines are made of
finer twist, and the nets are laid to catch and ensnare the most considerable
Fortunes and best Capacities. Now, that the fruitful Vine may be delivered, as
well from the Iesuitical Foxes, as he Presbyterian Wild Bores; I have sent this
caution to my own Country, whereon I shall (where ever) wait with my best
Affections, and wish her Peace, Nescio qua natale solum, dulcedine cunctos
ducit. Ovid.
that I may be encouraged to leave Travels, and return to my Native * Soil.

The Epistle to the most Catholic, and best Reformed Christian Reader.
STartle not at this Examination of the Moderator, and his Legend; it is not a
temptation to lead you in, but a caveat to keep you out of the pits of error
and superstition. Lactantius told the world (long since) Lib. 5. Instit. c. 8.
Ideo mala omnia rebus humanis ingravescere, quia Deus mundi hujus effector and
gubernator derelictus est, quia susceptae sunt, contra quam fas est, impiae
rell^giones; That therefore all evils and mischiefs fall on humane affairs,
because the great Creator of the world was so little honored, and so much
neglected, and false opinions, and ungodly Religions, so much embraced and
received; and if ever any age did overflow with an inundation of wickedness and
folly, these later times seem overwhelmed and drowned (almost) without all
hopes of recovery; wherein Philo Jud. ad Canin.
Sua cuique videtur optima, and quae non ratione sed affectu dijudicetur
singulis, every one is drawn away with the fancy of his own soul, and uses
such a Religion as agrees with his own affection and choice, without any
grounds of sound reason, or solid truth. On this sea of distraction and
troubles, many have been shipped and stra^gely tossed and hurried; some, as
wandering travelers, have stolen away with curiosity to see some other
Countries; and others, as covetous Mercha^ts, Per mare panperiem fugiens, per
sana, par ignes. Horat.
have run any hazard for the hopes of gain, the Prince of Darkness puts on the
form of an Angel of Light, roareth as a Lion, and plays as a Lamb; and when
he cannot make a Judas (if he can get leave) he will make a Job; if he cannot
with his lies destroy, he will (if possible) disgrace or disturb truth. But
that you may knit faster this girdle about your loins, and neither have your
house (which is founded on a rock) shaken, * Nulla animae possessio sine
patientia. St. Cyprian.
nor your perseverance questioned, nor your patience tired; I have set down the
lives, interests, and doctrines of some slippery Saints, and pretenders to
piety, before your eyes, to this end, that as the calamities of your own Country
teach you to be more Religious and wise, the better to avoid future evils, so
the apostasy and impiety of some revolters may not prevail to seduce you to
their Superstitio error insanus est, amandos timet, quos colit violaet. Senec.
Epist. 124.
superstitious errors, and dangerous examples; the examination of Mr. Birchleys
Legend, and these Characters, touch none but such as have started aside, and
have violated and broken their oaths, vows and promises, with God and man; and
if their deviations from truth can serve to keep us more right in the way to
heaven, and their revolting preserve and fix us in greater constancy of Gods
true Religion, it is all that is desired by

An impartial honorer of truth, D.Y.

A Legend of Revolters to ROME.
1. SIr Toby Matthews, 2. Mr. Walt. Montacure, 3. M. Doctor Goft, 4. M. Doctor
Vane, 5. M. Hugh Cressie, 6. M. Dr. Tho. Baily, 7. M. Rich. Crawshaw, 8. M.
Will. Rowlands, 9. M. Simonet, 10. S. Kenelm Digby, 11. S. Francis Dodington,
12. M. Doctor Heart, 13. M. Doctor Johnson, 14. M. N. Read, 15. M. Rich.
Millesent, 16. M. Tho. Normington, 17. M. Bsaikston, 18. M. Eaton, 19. M.
Jackson, 20. M. Cooper, 21. M. John Crighton, 22. M. And. Yongston, 23. M. Hugh
Ross. 24. M. Tho. Johnston, 25. M. William. Simple, 26. M. Winter Grant, 27.
S. William Davenant, 28. M. Joynor, 29. M. Temple, 30. Major Carter, 31. Capt.
Thomas Cook, 32. M. Glue, Baliol. O^s, 33. M. Rich. Nicchols. ^^terhouse,
Cambridge. 34. M. Edw. Barker, Caius College, Cambridge. 35. M. Osburn, 36.
Cap. John Gileard, 37. Lady Marchioness of Worecter, 38. Lady Marchioness of
Clanrickard. 39. Countess of Denbigh, 40. Lady Killamechie, 41. Mrs. Bridget
Fielding 42. Mrs. Cross, 43. Mrs. Marsh, 44. Mr. Endimion Porter, 45. Col.
Marsh, 46. Lord Cottington, 47. S. Marm. Langoale, 48. S. Theophilus Gelby, 49.
The Lord Andiver, 50. The Lord Goring, 51. M. Charles Goring, 52. M. Will.
Crofts, 53. Sir Richard Lee, of Shropshire, etc.
It fama per Orbem.

Ezekiel. 2.6. Be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though
briers and thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions, be not
afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks. Psalm. 18.13. The wild
boar out of the wood, does root it up, and the wild beasts of the field devour
it. Presbyter opugnat Iesuitae, Roma Genevae,
Ut pedibus jaceant omnia strata suis.
Dum viperae lacerant venerandae viscera matris,
Papa, feras, auro, fraud, cruore, domat.
Legenda lignea. Together with an Examination of Mr Birchleys Moderator, etc.
CHAP. I.
IN these later, distracted times, many monstrous births have crept into the
world; and great swarms of Heretics Omnes vel insipientissimi haeretici
audacias figm niorum suorum, quac maxim exhorret sensus humanus, hac occasion
evangelicae sententiae colorare conentur. S. Aug. Tom. 97. in S. Joh.
and Sectaries; together with horrid Blasphemers, Atheists, and Apostates from
Truth, and sound Religion, (like Egyptian Plagues) have pestered and infected
Christian Kingdoms and Countries; the black designs of these evil days have
prospered too successfully; And Policy and Interest (the great Diana which
most men adore, and worship) have chased Innocence, Honor, and Religion out of
most men's breasts.

The Projectors have used the Serpents tongue to flatter, and insinuate; and
his tail to poison, and sting, both making one Circle to compass and besiege
the credulous deceived multitudes: and so (in the end) to subject all Power to
their own humor and obedience, drawn (by degrees) first, within the lines of
Fraud; and then of Usurpation and Cruelty. Tantum Relligio potuit suadere
malerum. Virg. Aenaeid.
The Church of Rome has been most Cunningly Active in this desperate work; and
from her inveterate malice to the Church of England, and her Reformation in the
Reign of King Edward the sixth, has either marched furiously, with her bloody
colors of Persecution, Fire and Faggot, Imprisonment or Banishment (as in the
Reign of Queen Mary) or secretly practiced mischief and ruin to all, who had
shaken off her superstitious yoke, and embraced the Ancient Primitive
innocence, and doctrine, and practice of the Holy Apostles: hating the
professors of Gods true Religion, not so much for their wiser choice of better
things; but because they had acquitted themselves from the intolerable
vassalage of the Romish Authority and Usurpation, and withdrawn themselves from
that blind obedience, which they had (too long) paid to the Sea of Rome, which
is not dainty of any dispensations either in doctrine or practice of Religion:
Provided always, that her Annates, Tenths, First Fruits, Peter pence, and all
pretended rights and profits may be continued and solvent: and a Soveraigntie
acknowledged to her, as the great Mistress and Queen of all the world. To
consummate the hopes, and attain the height of these ambitious aspirings; what
art, what craft, what plots have not been used? When in Queen Mary's days, the
Pope (by special Letters) solicited the Queen, to endeavor to recover, not
only the public practice of the Mass, and Romish Religion; but likewise
proposed to the Queen and her Chancellor, a restoration of all Churchlands,
Seigniories, Dignities, and Revenues, and that all Orders of Popish Abbots,
Priors, Monks, Friars, and all Orders of Regulars, (formerly planted in
England) and Pastoral Seculars, to be speedily reinvested and repossessed. But
this motion (before 'twas started by the Lord Chancellor in Parliament) met
with a private debate in a Cabinet Counsel and Consultation; where the Lord of
Bedford (being then present) was so venemously stung, that he burst soddainly
into great passion and choler, breaking his chaplet of beads from his girdle,
and flinging them into the fire: and he swear deeply to boot, that he valued
more his sweet Abbey of Wooburn, than any fatherly Counsel or Commands that
could come from Rome. Bedford parting away in such a high snuff and passionate
indignation; the Queen and her Lord Chancellor were able to guess at the
tempers and inclinations of other Subjects, and therefore concluded it greater
Policy to smother and conceal, than to publish and prosecute a motion, that
would prove so generally distasteful.

CHAP. II.
THese Great hopes of Restoration of Lands and Revenues being over, and
suspended, if not extinguished; The designs were laid, how to vex and torment
those who professed the Religion (Reformed in King Edward the sixth his Reign)
and there was no want of Invention to create sharp Laws, loud Proclamations,
cruel Edicts, and violent Resolutions, to raise bitter and bloody
Persecutions. Death and Martyrdom grew (suddenly) very familiar, and was the
common high way, wherein many Reverend Prelates and pious Clergymen walked:
whose patience and holy examples many thousands religious and devout people
followed, enduring rather the loss of life, Liberty, and of all things, than of
faith and a good Conscience. Imprisonment then was accounted but as a more
secluse Retirement, more fit for Christian tears and prayers; Banishment was
looked on as a more tolerable Burden, being so much the lighter, because born
amongst Strangers, in a far Country; and the Afflictions were the more
easy, because the Sufferers were permitted to live, as good Confessors, and
(though in a sad condition) thereby, were able to breath out, and testify the
truth, and justify their innocent Cause, both at home and abroad.

This storm being over (after 5 or 6 years) Queen Elizabeth succeeded to the
Crown, in whose prosperous Reign, what malice and mischief was contrived, and
acted by the Roman underminers; what scandals against the Queen, her Person,
her Honor, her Government, her Authority; All Histories (of those times)
describe very plentifully. All those malicious damps and vapors rose from the
venom of the Jesuits, and Romish vipers, and their Confederates; They did
breath and spit the same loathsome Poison on K. James, (whose Golden pen has
left a treasure to after-Ages, of his great Abilities and Learning) the dint
and impression of his skillful strokes, lies heavy on the memory of Cardinal
Peroon, and Cardinal Belarmine, and many others of that black Society, who have
been worsted and confu^ed by the most powerful arguments of his Reasons and
Learning; Collected out of undoubted Antiquities, Councils, Fathers, Histories,
and unquestionable Authorities. And when the Jesuits could not distemper his
Majesty's Remonstrances nor Replies, with most unmannerly scandalous Language,
nor interrupt his Pen with monstrous lies, nor convince him with their slight
and cunning Answers and Objections; they drove on their designs with a
Powder Plot, which, timely and providently discovered, and prevented, the
Contrivers and Actors had the reward of Traitors in England; (though Recorded
and honored as Martyrs at Rome) And the Countenancers of that black
conspiracy, are accounted by all rational men, and good Christians, no
otherwise than as Leopards and Blackmoores, whose sports and ugliness can never
be washed and wiped away.

CHAP. III.
THese Spiders have twisted their Webbs, made their Circumferences, and drawn
their Lines throughout the Reign of the late King Charles, and then (like
high-towring Eagles soaring aloft) they hoped (more confidently) to build their
houses sublime and stately: They judged the Advantage great, (if the foundation
not sure) because of a toleration of the Roman Religion in the Queens Chapel
and Court; under which privilege much mischief might be hatched and contrived,
and some part acted to the disturbance of the Peace, Unity, and Uniformity of
the Church of England.

And yet all sober-minded men may be easily satisfied and persuaded, that the
Inconveniences which rose from that toleration, neither thrive from the
connivency, much less encouragement or contrivance of his Majesty, who then
reigned; who gave his Queen, and her Ghostly fathers the Priests, and the Roman
Catholics of her Majesty's family, leave to enjoy the Roman Reliligion;
according to the Articles of Marriage, agreed on betwixt the two Crowns of
England and France: and if it be ugly, and most unhandsome in a Gentleman, it
were more ignoble and sordid in a King, to break his word.

It cannot be denied, but in the first 14 years of the late Kings Reign, the
Romish Engineers had more calm opportunities to frame their platformes, to bait
their hooks, and lay their nets; but the visibility of the Church of England,
was too splendent and glorious, to suffer any Fish to be caught (in those more
sere^e days) unless they were some silly Gudgeons, or avaritious and
ambitious Snarks, who hoped to live with more ease and luxury, or more
advantage and gain at Court, under the viz^^ and guise of Popish dissimulation.
But, the Winds beginning to ruffle more loud, and storms and discontents
growing very high, in November in the Year 1640. (Since which commencement of
troubles, greater violencies have succeeded) These profound Romish Artists,
have made a great advantage in the troubled waters of these angry times: And
whereas yet, they could not find out ground, to build to formal structure to
shelter their superstitions, and lick their designs into some loveliness and
form; they have craftily complotted vengeance, and carried slime and mortar,
though it be to serve to no other purpose, but to make Babel and confusion in
those rich English valleys, where Order, Peace, Plenty, Learning, and true
Religion flourished. And to carry this business on with greater ease and more
plausible facility, the cunning Artists, as they used (at first) thundering
Bulls and fulminations from Rome, so (they not effecting their work, but falling
like dull Bombards and Grenades never breaking) they moved, otherwhiles by
secret devices, and treacherous machinations, insinuating false doctrines into
the peoples ears, and (under a mask of holiness, and a sound and name of the
Catholic Church, and much pretended sanctity) they ensnare credulous and
ignorant auditors; and if they cannot, by the instillation of false principles,
withdraw them from their faith, and duty to just authority, yet they hope to
startle them, by puzling their Judgments and Resolutions: And rather than not
produce some notable Revenge, (where they must not reign and Lord it over
others) they will sail with any wind, and turn into any shape, of either a
demure Cloak; or a buffcoat, of a babbling Presbyter, or a Gifted Anabaptist;
and (for their own ends) bawl zealously loud in a solemn Congregation, or
exhort humoringly, (and pretend Revelations) to be the more prevalent in a
private Sisterly Conventicle.

CHAP. IV.
THese Temporizers, like curious Painters, carry all colors about with them,
comply with all tempers, and know how (like the Ape in the Fable) to put the
Dogs foot into the fire to take out the apple, and never so much as singe a
hair of their own; or if their craft fail, and the Serpent be caught, they
glory in their death, as if they were true Martyrs and Confessors; feeding
their desperate Resolutions, with the pride and vanity of being promised, by
their great Patron the Pope, to be canonised for Saints; when the World has
known them live, as most horrid malefactors, and seen them dye, as most
vainglorious impenitent offenders. These subtle Contrivers (like the old
Pharisees) have a most precise garb in their habits, heir collar'd cloaks, in
as exact order as their P^ilacteryes, not one hair amiss, their looks and
motions so regular, as if punctually measured; abroad (like Bees) they frequent
the fairest Gardens, and, in them, gather their Thyme, from the sweetest and
most fragrant Flowers: and at night they return to their own neat, plentiful,
warm Hives; where they feed on the most delicate provisions, and sleep securely
in their Colleges and Convents, immured, and cloistered from common view and
observation; And there, they hugg their own fortunate ingenuities, and despise
and scorn the ignorant World; whose greatest favorites and darlings, they
resolve to command, as Slaves, or mischief, as Enemies.

CHAP. V.
THese busy actors have been (in great numbers) transmitted (of late) out of
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, and other parts, to scatter their Romish seeds
in the three fair gardens of England, Scotland, and Ireland; where (the Scene
being so full of various troubles) they have acted a part on every Stage,
tugged an Oar in every Barge, whispered a Vote into many Councels, and got a
Quarter in every Army; there is scarce a Canton, or corner free from their
persons, their parties, or their interest. Their business is generally, like
the Athenians, to ask and tell N^wes; they cure and heal all falsities and
dissimulations* with their reservations; and swallow oaths (if for their
advantage) as a panting Crocodile the fresh air. They tune their notes, as an
Organist his pipes, to be very thundering and loud, or very easy, soft, and
gentle; if such a change be requisite. These Juglers can (when they see cause)
beat and bawl in the Pulpits, like whining-long-winded Presbyterians, and cry
down any power or authority that stands in their way, by their tacit
dispensations; they make use of the Presbyters tongues, their words, and
phrases; nay, their very groans and tears, thereby to put up, not (as the
dissemblers cant and cry) the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that is, (really and
truly) the General Assembly of the Presbyters (from whom they would not admit
of any appeal) but to put up higher; and in all Countries and Kingdoms, the
Conclave of Glorious Cardinals, refined Romish Statesmen, and above
themselves, and all the World, to lift up, and sublimat that power, to which,
each particular ambition interested, does aim and aspire, and that is, his
Holiness of Rome.

CHAP. VI.
THese Politicians, are more profound and mysterious in their ways and ends,
than others: more sharp-sighted; and see farther than the Presbyterian
buzzards, who can lie at learch, or, (like lean laboring Spaniels) hunt well
and retrive the Game; but catch nothing, but hurt, and disgrace, for all their
pains. The Puritan ambition may be as great as theirs of Rome, their minds as
bloody, and means as unlawful. They have (the World knows) bit, and scratcht,
and snatched, at several Kingdoms and Countries, but could never, yet,
vassalage them to their Classical, Synodical, Provincial, National, General
Assemblies, or get their sophisticated pretenses acknowledged Jure Divino, but
only in Scotland; where Knox, and his false Ministerial Tribe, deceived and
deluded the People, with the sacrilegious prey of Churchlands, and Tithes: and,
for the gaining of this sweet morsel, the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons quickly
assented to the Presbyters propositions; and, so they might enjoy the Lands and
Revenues of the Church, they were ensnared by their own avarice and
covetousness, and the Ministers pride, to submit to a Law, which was to inslave
themselves: whereby they acknowledged, the General Assembly of Presbyters to
be the Supreme authority on Earth; and this confirmed Jure Divino; from the
sentence of which Court, there was no appeal, or farther address. VVhiles the
Nobility, Gentry, and People of Scotland, greedily devoured, and swallowed the
pleasant Seats, Lordships, Rents, Tithes, and Lands of the Church; they did not
take notice of the bitterness that lay under the outside of the gilded Pill;
they did not perceive how rashly they created Laws, like new manacles, to
fetter and bind themselves; and how (though they gained the possession of
Lordships and Lands) weakly they submitted, and basely prostituted, not only
their Estates, and Fortunes, but even their Liberties, Honors, Bodies, and
Souls, to be censured, condemned, excommunicated, and finally concluded by the
humors, and pleasure of a few illiterate, hotbrain'd, fantastic Presbyters.
This flame and irruption broke forth in other Countries, as Geneva Whence Mr.
Calvin's Platform of rigorous discipline was sent to Scotland, where it quickly
took fire.
: Likewise in Germany, Holland, France, and other places, but never flashed so
furiously, nor grew so hot and high, as to get a confirmation by a Law, and to
be established, Iure Divino.

CHAP. VII.
IN other Countries and Cantons, the Presbyters have got a toleration for their
Religion, by Supplication, not by Laws, and they are permitted to preach and
pray; but still, salvo jure, are under a Permission; on which, if they once
entrench too near, they are speedily silenced. They presume sometimes, to
exhort and chide, or publicly to rail; or (at highest) to retrench; and
refuse a Brother, from the Communion: and not that neither, (probably) if a
rich, considerable benefactor and contributer. Those of Scotland are more piert
and impudent, daring (sawcily) to taunt their Sovereigns, and trample on the
greatest Nobles; chaining up the industrious Merchants, and ingenuous Artizans,
from their Traffic and Trade, if the Assembly fancy; and then sentence that,
a work worthy of their humorous consideration, and unlimited ambition. These
high-metald blades, would march at no rate, but an high speed; framing proud
thoughts to themselves, that the Scottish Covenant should spread, and be the
Catholic Religion of all the World; In this the Papists and the Presbyters
meet and concenter; uniting their ambitious lines in the same point and
thoughts of Universality of Doctrine and Obedience, of the Chair of Rome, or to
the Presbyters Assembly. Henderson, the prime late Ringleader (with his English
and Scottish Brethren) in this project, thought to be Alexander indeed, and
promised himself and others great matters, as to this effect: On this ground,
endeavors were made to introduce the same form, and power of Assemblies in
England, where the blew Presbyters designed to tyrannize over a Country, much
more fat and fruitful than their own nasty valleys, or barren Rocks.

CHAP. VIII.
BUt the English eyes quickly discerned the Scottish trapps, and though there
was a concurrence, (pro tempore) in a National Covenant, for some particular
designs; yet then, the play ended, the Curtains were drawn, no Presbytery
confessed, much less established, Iure Divino, to command all power ordained,
without dispute. This was but a dream of hot brains; A Castle in the air; an
Ambitious Tower, without any foundation; which is not only tottering, but fallen
and mouldring to dust: the Relics (at present) being the scorn and contempt
of all learned, and truly wise men in the world.

While these malicious, but unskilful Pyoniers were digging pits for their
Brethren, and thought of nothing, but pulling down (being themselves unable to
build;) and, to that purpose were very active, and busily intrenching; the
Roman Foxes countermin'd their weak works, and laboring day and night,
(without any intermission) as far outstep'^ the dull silly Presbyters, as Rome
exceeds Edinburgh, or the pleasantness of Italy the cold frozen misty Scottish
air. Some, these acute Sophisters staggered with subtle and fallacious
arguments; Others, they easily enticed, with the golden promises of good
Pensions, and Preferments, in these hungry and starving times. Some, they
fooled into a Resolution of opposing the present Government; into which
argument, the Presbyters slipped very easily, because they did not rule
themselves: and having blown the coals, and raised aflame of a Civil War, by
the tongues and bellows of the deluded Zelots, they still comply, and hunt with
great skill; but, if Presbyter be not Trump, they quickly cast out that Suit,
and observe, and follow the King of Clubbs; and shufflle, and cut, and cast
themselves into any shapes, or new Sect, pretending (for better advantage)
Revelations, and motions of the Spirit, in the habits of Butchers, Chandlers,
Shoo-makers, and other Mechanic Artizans, to insinuate their interest (if
possible) into all Councels of Peace and War; and into the secrets of Civil and
Martial affairs.

CHAP. IX.
BUt now the Roman Actors are grown more confident, not staying longer in the
Tyring house; but drawing the Curtains, enter boldly on the Stage, and plead
their Interest and Cause, at least for a toleration for their Religion, and a
Repeal of all the penal Statutes, as though there were no truth in the
Reformed Religion; nor reason, nor justice in those Laws. To which purpose Mr.
Will. Birchley, or some Romanists under that name, has lately Printed the
first and second Part of his Moderator, which piece, (like a venomous potion,
being full of dangerous ingredients, as well as infectious dissimulations of
truth, reason, and conscience) deserves a strict Examination, to prevent the
operation of that Poison which is administered as good Physic.

The Title is not to be slighted, but to be weighed in the Scales, which is,

CHAP. X. THe CHRISTIAN MODERATOR, Or, PERSECUTION FOR RELIGION CONDEMNED, By
The Light of Nature, The Law of God, Evidence of our own Principles.

But not by the practice of our Commissioners for Sequestrations.
Romans 2. We rest in the Law, and make our boast of God, we know his Will, and
approve the things that are more excellent, etc.

We therefore who teach another, teach we not our selves? we that Preach a man
should not steal, do we steal? etc.

-- Video meliora proboque Deteriora sequor. --

CHAP. XI.
IT matters not much, who was the Author of this mixed and patched piece;
whether it was the Cont^ivement of Will. Birchley, or the Birth and Offspring
or the Jesuits under that name. ROMAN INSINUATOR, had more truly become the
Frontispiece, than CHRISTIAN MODERATOR; unless Master Birchley would by
flattery, and his own Principles, creep into that Power in England, which his
great Patron claims of right, who sits so high at Rome. PERSECUTION AGAINST
RELIGION is cried down by all fundamental and sound truths of Holy Writ; but
then it must not be bare opinion, faction or fancy, but it must be evident,
that it is the true Christian Religion that is persecuted; which was taught by
Christ and his blessed Apostles, professing and maintaining the true, ancient,
orthodox, and Catholic Faith; Otherwise Mr. Birchley pleads as much for
Mahometism, Judaism, and Paganism, (for they are all under some Rules and
Forms, and so (though false) yet religions) as well as his Romaa Religion:
which Mr. Birchley, with all his Coherents, can never be able to prove to be
the truest, and so the best Religion, by the light of Nature, and the Law of
God, though they would make the World believe so, out of the Evidence of their
own Principles.

The next words which follow are quotations of Holy Scripture, Romans 2. wherein
the Author shows himself very full of Ignorance, as not knowing the
Scriptures; or very full of Impudency and Profaneness, presuming to change and
alter the very letter and phrase of the Text, as he does likewise the sense and
application: The words (pretended for Master Birchleys purpose) are taken out
of Romans 2. verse. 17. -- (...), rightly rendered in the second Person, and so
the translation has it; behold Thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law,
and make thy boast of God; and know his will, and approvest the things
that are more excellent: Thence Master Birchley passes with an etc. and
skippeth farther, augmenting his error at the 20 verse, changing there the
singular number to the plural, the second Person to the first (which is not
Grammatical) and Tu to Nos, saying, We therefore who teach another, teach we
not our selves? These are very bold Corrections, and savor of no ingenuous, and
humble spirit, but rather of profane Arrogance; as though the holy Scriptures
were indeed Nasus cereus, a very Nose of wax, which the Pope and Mr. Birchley
could turn to any form they pleas^d. Secondly, the sense and application is
most erroneous, and disorderly placed. For if Master Birchley intend by the
Nos, We the Commissioners for Sequestrations rest in the Law, approve the
things that are most excellent, etc. This is nothing but gross and odious
flattery. And if by the Nos in the second quotation Mr. Birchley intend the
Commissioners, Mr. Birchley approves himself a peremptory Moderator: his
application is very sharp, and without the rules of good manners or charity;
for he concludes them no better than Jews who rob and steal; but it may be
rather conjectured by any sober and judicious Reader, that Mr. Bi^chley applied
the first quota^ion with Reflection on himself, and his Roman party; concluding
Pharisaically that he and they rested in the Law, and approved the things that
were more excellent; And that those who were not or his opinion, and releeved
not him and his compar^ners, were as hard hearted as Jews, and robbed and stole.

The last words of the Title are, -- Video meliora proboque,
Deter^ora sequor. --
which, as they are the words of an excellent Poet, expressing the passion of a
frantic Queen; so are they as rashly applied, if to any other than Mr.
Birchley himself, who has scattered such desperate Popish poison into the
Countries more soundly reformed from the errors and superstitions of Rome.

The Title of Mr. Birchleys Moderator being thus past over, the inside of this
miscellaneous and monstrous building is to be viewed; which is likely to prove
as slight and treacherous, as untrue and dangerous.

CHAP. XII.
THe Introduction, or Preface, to the Moderator, is a discourse which
persuades much to Christian charity; to which purpose, our Saviors words are
quoted, John 13.15. By this shall all men kn^w that you are my disciples, if
you love one another. And that of St. Paul to the Galathians chap. 5. All the
Law is fulfilled in one word, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself: These
Advertisements are very heavenly Meditations, and the practice of this Duty of
Charity well becomes all professing Christianity. And it is a fad sight, to see
so much effusion of blood, and other sinful mischiefs, for differences in
Christian Religion. But the Quarrel in this Case is very ancient, the two first
Brothers in the World went peaceably to the Altar, but there, Cain grew first
in wrath, and his Countenance fell: Genesis 4.5. And after these Conceptions of
rage and malice, he acted his cruelty on his innocent Brother Abel: at a second
meeting, Cain talked with Abel his Brother, and it came to p^ss that when they
were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him:
Thus Jeroboam was inflamed, in an instant, against the old Prophet, who cried
against the Altar in Bethel: And it came to pass when King Jeroboam heard the
saying of the man of God, which had cried against the Altar in Bethel, that he
put forth his hand from the Altar saying ^^y hold on him, ^ Kings 13.4.
Jeroboam laid his groundwork and hopes for the Crown of Israel, on the
quarrel and differences in Relig^on, 1 Kings 12.28. Whe^eupon the King took
Counsel, and made two Calves of Gold, and said it is much for you to go up to
Jerusalem; behold thy Gods O Israel. The ancient Wars of the Heathens were
commenced and undertaken, as well pro Aris, as Focis their Gods, as their
Goods. And as for the Gospel, though it bring bonum nuntium, glad tidings of
Salvation, and that the causes and proceedings of Cain and Jeroboam were most
horrid and unjust yet Christ is pleased to tell us, That he came not to bring
Peace, but a Sword, Mat. 10.34, 35. And the History of the four Evangelists
relates to us, that Christ never spoke so wrathfully, nor struck so sharply, as
in his zeal for Religion, Mat. 21.12. Mark 11.15. Luke 19.45. John 2.15. And
when he had made a whip of small cords, he drove them all out of the Temple,
counselling them, not to make his Fathers house a house of merchandise, nor the
house of prayer a ^en of Thieves: And though St. Paul be quoted Gal. 5. as a
high perswader to Charity, yet if his Epistles be well examined, they generally
discover his great zeal and ardor, in order to the promotion and preservation
of all the Circumstances of Christian Religion, founded by Christ, and preached
to the world by his Apostle^. Saint Luke tells the Church, that the (...),
Contention betwixt Saint Paul and Barnabas was so sharp, that they parted
asunder, Acts 15. -- 39. And though St. Paul pleaded so much for charity, 1
Cor. 13. yet he accounted his duty to God, above all Relations to his Brethren,
and the zeal and love of Gods honor and service, above any thing else; and in
this holy Affection, the Apostle St. Paul was bold when St. Peter was come to
Antioch, to withstand him to his face, because he was to be blamed, and seeing
other Jews dissembling likewise, insomuch, as Barnabas was carried away with
dissimulation: he rebuked not only the Disciples and converted Jews, but St.
Peter and St. Barnabas, because they walked not uprightly, according to the
truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11.13.14. These truths thus cleared, Mr. Birchley
must not think it any breach of charity, nor disagreeing from the word of God,
if there be coercion used to draw and gain the erroneous to come to the truth;
and the superstitious, to the true Religion. To which, if men (out of wilful
obstinacy, or self-opinion) will not be persuaded, their submission to the
Power and Laws where they live, and a quiet posses^ing of their souls in
Patience, best becomes their Christian duties, according to the primitive rules
and practice of the best Christians; who first spread their Religion, by
persuading, and suffering; and when Kings and Emperors, and superior Governors
came to be converted, Ecclesiastical Laws and Rules were made, and exercised;
the Temporal still supporting the Spiritual juri^dictions and proceedings.

CHAP. XIII.
1 MR. Birchley in his Demonstrative Reasons against forcing of Conscience,
concludes, That the intolerable yoke of Popish infallibility, is shaken off,
and yet his whole discourse a^ms at nothing but a toleration, First for himself
and the Papists of the Kingdom and Country, and then he doubts no^, but in
time, either by Insinuation, or an Inquisition, all his fellow subjects may be
brought under the same yoke. He taxes the Parliament, charging them with the
Abrogation of the Articles of Faith Moderator, part. 1. page 2.
; and calls the factious swallowing of the Covenant (which was the work and
plo^ of some few and a Declared party, and the rash mistake of many) a
Reformation of Religion. He calls the late Assembly of Divines at Westminster a
Synod, which no Learning nor Antiquity will allow; but condemn either as a
seditious and schismatical, or ridiculous and impudent meeting: And as for the
Confession of Faith, the Assembly (after long sitting) presumed to hatch; it is
agreed, that as their Proceedings were preposterous, their Conclusions were
dangerous, as neither savoring aright of the Spirit of truth, nor humility.

And as for the persons of those who sat so long, and to so scandalous and
ill, as well as little purpose; the World knows they had most of them taken
former oaths, as that of the Allegiance and Supremacy, and then the
Protestation, but no engagements (as it appears) were strong enough to oblige
their fidelity, whose ambitious minds were inflamed with the hopes of high
authority, whose covetous expectations were fed with 4 s. per diem, and the
choicest B^nefices, and their Brethrens just legal maintenance and livelihood.

2 The Author argues from the word of God. That the Word being the sole Rule of
Faith, no humane Authority is empowered to bind up our assents in the
interpretation of that Word; a Conclusion so untrue an illogicall as may be:
For then the Commission, of Ite, and Praedicate, Go Preach and Teach, was given
to the Apostles to no purpose* Then the Wife must not learn of her Husband at
home: Nor the Father teach his Children, either the Commandments of God, or
the Articles of Faith, if there were not an authority in the Teachers rightly
and orderly sent, Romans 10.15. to oblige the Disciples, and Scholars, to the
right Interpretation of holy Scriptures; and if every ^ne be admitted, to
broach, and defend his own s^ns^ and opinion in divine Resolutions, as in
Baptism, the Lords Supper, or the like, there must needs follow, not a
Communion, but a Confusion amongst the Saints and best Christians. To prevent
which dangerous inconveniency, Saint Paul boldly rebukes the Corinthians,
charging them, That they were carnal; for whereas there is among you envying
and strife, and (...), divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as me^? For while
one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? 1
Cor. 3.3.4. And as the Apostle sharply rebuked the Corinthians for their
divisions, so he meekly entreated the Ephesians to accord in the Articles of
Religion, and to endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace;
for there is one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God, and Father of all: Ephesians. 4.4. Thus Saint Paul labors and pleads
for Unity in the Church, as the best preservation of Christianity: But Mr.
Birchley pleads for a toleration of diversity in opinions, and so in
practice; which Doctrine is neither true Divinity, nor sound Policy; unless by
the multiplicity of opinions Master Birchley and the Papists hope (at last) to
bring in Popery: which has much thriven by late endeavors of their subtle
insinuations.

3 In the third Demonstration Mr. Birchley answers himself, and seems to cut
his fingers with his own tools; when he urges, that straight is the gate, and
narrow is the path; and confesses, that here we see but in part, and know but
in part, and that the Spirit blows how and where it lists: from these
Texts, of Scripture concluding, that we must not despise the weak mistakes of
our brethren. This conclusion, like others, is brought in without Reason or
Logic: it had been more properly resolved, that because straight is the gate,
and narrow is the path that leads to life; Therefore it is necessary that some
faithful Pastoral authority, like that of Saint John the Baptist, Io: 3.5.
should level the Mountains of Pride, streighten the crooked perverseness of
carnal humors, and abate the swellings of self-opinion; that Pride being
humbled, and Mistakes rectifyed, the passage into the straight gate, and narrow
path, might be more easy and possible: And Mr. Birchley pressing, that here we
see but in part, and know but in part; therefore it is the more necessary, that
we should have Guides and Seers, as well as Lights and Lanthorns, to direct us
in the straight and narrow way of Truth, lest otherwise, following the glympses
of our own opinions, and dark lights, we fall into the dark fire of the
infernal Pit.

4 In the 4th Argument Mr. Birchley seems to speak rejoycingly, because of a
deliverance from the Slavery under the Prelates, and from the implicit faith of
the Papists; and yet, whiles he Plougheth his ground with these Heifers, he
Sowes the seeds of Popery, under whose Prelacy is truly the greatest Tyranny
that is imaginable. And it is to be admired, that Mr Birchley presses so
sharply against Compulsion of Consci^nce; and yet pleads for a toleration of
that Religion, wherein is not only taught a necessity of Auricular Confession,
but the Priest as well punishes, as rectifyeth the Conscience, erring, or
offending.

5 In the 5th, he tells us, That force is punishment, and consequently not just.
If this Position be true, Omnis denegatur haereticis facultas militandi quinimo
extra urbis moenia a centur. Lex fuit Imper. Theodosti, Val^nt. Arcad^i. Vide
Cod. Theodo. Tunc Episcopi, ne vi^us baereticum latius superet, eosdem public
pronunti^tos haereticos co porali disciplinae subdendos Catholico Principi
tradiderunt, qui Praecepit haereticae infamiae characterem frontibus little
inuri, and spectante populo; virgis exercitos, urbe e^pelli: Guliel.
Neubrigens. sub. Henri. 2. Rege Ang.
then Heresy and Blasphemy are not punishable: but Christ gave another Rule,
commanding his Apostles to shake off the Dust of their shoes, where their words
were not received, Mat. 10.14. And teaches, that if thy Brother trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault betwixt thee and him alone; if he
shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother, but if he shall not hear thee,
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses
every word may be established; and if he shall neglect to hear thee, tell it to
the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as a
Heathen or a Publican. And as Christ taught the way, the Apostles followed; St.
Paul exhorting the Corinthians, being converted to the Faith, not so much as to
keep company *, 1 Cor. 5.11.
if any that is called a Brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater,
or railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one no not to eat.
These are censures surely of sound authority, being the doctrine of Christ and
his A postles, and therefore to be denied by none, but A theists or Infidels.

6 If an erroneous Conscience may have liberty to conceive what Opinion she
pleases, and so Speak and Act what she will, there will be no end of scandals,
and offenses; nor no Woe to them by whom they are caused. The ancient Fathers
Multis profuit prius timore vel dolor cogi, ut possit postea doceri, aut quod
jam verbis didicerint opc^e Sectari: S. Aug. Ep. ad Bonif. Q^ jam sacro lava^ro
tincti essent, cogerentur ad servandam fidem quam acceperant. Decreium, pro
part rescissa, in IV. council. Toleta. Scitum est semper coerctionem in
Novatores suisse, J. Lip. advers. Dialogistam.
, and Writers were of another opinion; It was Tertullians judgment, writing
against the Gnostics, Ad officium Haereticos compelli, non illici dignum est;
that if they would not be persuaded, they should be forced to their duty,
Tertul. contra Gnost. cap. 11. He prosecuted that Argument with the same sense,
in another phrase. Duritia vincenda est, non suadenda haeresis: Heresy was to
be subdued with Power, where it would not be convinced with Truth; and though
Mr Birchley seem to argue, that no Compulsion is to be exercised on the
Conscience; yet he means certainly something else: knowing, the common censures
of the Romish Inquisitions, as well as the severities of the Assemblies of the
Presbyteries, which are both in high extremes, as not sparing the most
Sovereign authorities.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the next General head Mr. Birchley has ranged (as he calls them) his
invincible and unanswerable Texts of Scripture, against Coercency in Religion:
urging, 1 St. Paul, 2 Timothy, 2.24, etc. where the servant of the Lord is
directed to be gentle unto all men: but as there he counsels him to
gentleness and meekness, so 1 Timothy 4.1.2. the Apostle puts on him the spirit of
Courage; saying expressly, That in the later times some should depart from the
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils; And then the
Apostle tells his Disciple at the 6. verse, If thou put the Brethren in mind of
these things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ. And ^f those
places quoted, Jam. 4.12. Rom: 14.4. There is one Lawgiver, etc. and who art
thou that judge another? etc. be rightly examined, we shall find they do not
oppose the disquisition of Truth, nor the correction of erroneous offenders;
but they suppress all personal rancor and rashness, and all bitterness and
uncharitableness against the Brethren. But in the determinations of Faith, and
reformation of men's lives, the holy Scripture tells us, That their Inspiration
was profitable for doctrine, as well as Reproof; (...), for correction, as well
as instruction; and so the Bishop of Ephesus, was as well taught by S. Paul to
correct the errors of his Diocese; as to use meekness and gentleness to his
Flock. In the first Apostolical Council St. James passes a Determination and
Sentence (an argument of Judicial power) Act. 15.19. Wherefore my Sentence is,
That we trouble not them which from among the Gentiles are turned to God; but
that we write unto them that they abstain from Pollutions of Idols, and from
fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood: Thus St. James, who
forbids personal and private malicious censure and judgment one of
another, concludes it necessary to condemn the Sects of the Pharisees,
broaching the doctrine of Circumcision, Acts 15.5. And St. Paul, who so often
Preaches against rash and uncharitable judgment, takes a Power (as Mr.
Birchley closes the Text) (though to another purpose) of giving Laws and Rules
out of his Apostolical jurisdiction, to Husbands, Wives, Virgins, Widows and
Servants, as it appears in his first Epistle to the Cor. 7.17. where, speaking
with much tenderness to the infancy and primitive times of Christiani^y; yet
concludes, autoritative, So I ordain in all Churches. And though the Apostle in
his divine eloquence, denies a Dominion over the Corinthians faith, 2 Cor.
1.24. yet when he sees cause, he passes his Spiritual Censure and
Excommunication against the incestuous Fornicator, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.5. For I, as
absent in body, bu present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were
present, who has so done this deed, In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when
ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And though St. Paul
taught so many lessons of humbl^ness and meekness (qualities best becoming the
Ministers of Christ) to Timothy, yet he writes to him the manner of his
Proceedings against those who made shipwreck of Faith, 1 Timothy 1.20. of whom is
Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not
to blaspheme. And according to the Apost les rules, St. Augustine submits his
judgment to those who cried in his time, for freewill and liberty of
Conscience; Frustra dicis relinquar libero arbitrio: Cur enim non in homicidi
is and stupris, and quibuscunque aliis facinoribus and flagitiis libero te
Arbitrio dimittendum esse proclamas? quae tamen omnia justis le. gibus comprimi
utilissimum est. Dedit quidem Deus homini liberam voluntatem; sed nec bonam
infructuosam, nec malam voluit esse impunitam. S. Aug. lib. 2. contra Crescent.
cap. 51. When the people cried, where is the freedom of our minds, and liberty
of our Consciences? if we have it, why do ye restrain us from any thing, as
Murder or Adultery, or any thing else we judge lawful? which foul sins are
justly punishable by the Laws: and then that Father concludes, Although God
gives to men freedom of will and mind, yet he will neither suffer a good
Conscience to be unfruitful, nor a bad Conscience (and too many such there
are) to be unpunished. And although our Savior condemned the furious zeal of
James and John, Luke 9.54. knowing out of what spirit they moved for vengeance;
yet we have the examples of the two great Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, the
one exercising the vengeance of God on Ananias and Saphira, for lying against
the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.4. so mortal was St. Peter's sentence, Acts 5.9. How is
it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? behold the
feet of them that buried thy Husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out:
then fell she down straightway at his feet. And Saint Paul being at Paphos, and
meeting there a certain Sorcerer and false Prophet named Elymas, who seeking to
turn away Sergius Paulus from the Faith, Act. 13.9. St. Paul filled with the
holy Ghost set his eyes on him, and said, O full of all subtilty and all
mischief, thou child of the Devil and enemy of all righteousness; will thou not
cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? And now behold the hand of the
Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind, not seeing the Sun for a season,
and immediately there fellon him a mist and darkness. These instances demonstrat
a spiritual Power of Truth to rectify erroneous, and to punish, and to have
coercion for evil, and seared Consciences (for such there are) 1 Timothy 4.2. Some
speaking Lies in Hypoorisy, having their Consciences seared with a hot Iron;
And the holy Scripture lets us all know, that the Holy Ghost appeared in fiery
Tongues as well as in the shape of a Dove, Acts 2.1, 2. Mat. 3.16. to signify to
all the world, that as it presented innocence, and such are the fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22. so in the shape of fiery Tongues, it presented judgment and
indignation to those, who resisted the motions of that blessed Spirit. This is
told often in the holy Scriptures, but twice more emphaticatically in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and that with great terror. For it is impossible for
those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and
of the Powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them
again unto Repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. There is a second sting,
which is as equally sharp. Let us hold fast the Profession of our faith without
wavering, and let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good
works; not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of
some is, but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching: for if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, Heb. 10.26, 27.
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the Adversaries. By this time it appears very evident, that the
unanswerable Texts of the holy Scripture, so ill interpreted, or so ill
applied, do not take away all Coercion in Religion: because a Conscience may
be erroneous, and so ought to be rectifyed; or very bad, and seared, and so
ought to be coerc'd and punished: yet these Proceedings are to be guarded with
greatest spiritual care, and cautions, that the weak and erroneous Conscience
may be directed, and then comforted by the Word of God, and the bad and seared
Consciences (refisting the good motions of Gods Spirit, gathered by the
conclusions of found reason, and the right and true Applications of holy
Scripture) growing still more impenitent and hardened, may be punished, and
that God may be glorified in his judgments, where his truth and mercies have
been despised.

CHAP. XV.
IN the next succeeding Chapter the Author pleads against the constraint of
Conscience, pretending that all the godly and well affected of the Nation, are
of his Principle, who is introducing Popery into the Country, with his
Arguments of kinness to a tender Conscience; and to be more plausible and
complacent with the Soldier, he urges the Motto of the Armies, viz. Liberty
to all tender and oppressed Consciences: by which device, Mr. Birchley seems
forward to shelter his Popish Arguments under their Banners and Ensigns. But
this spiritual abuse, or rather cheer, is so palpable and visible, that all
ingenuous minds cannot but conclude such applications to be very odious, and
ridiculous, as no way encouraging Popish aims or ends, but rather an
extirpation of Papal, as well as Presbyterian Tyranny. As for other arguments,
either from reason or Scripture, they are not considerable; the discourse of
this Chapter being spun out with gross impertinent flattery, or repetition of
texts of Scripture, as Romans 14.15. formerly examined.

CHAP. XVI.
THe next tract, is a discourse (as it appears in the title) of tender
Consciences; wherein the Author (surely blushing for something said before)
seems to address himself to Excuses, and Apologies: confessing there, that
tenderness of Conscience is not an extravagant licentiousness for Blasphemy in
Doctrine, or Debauchery in manners. This part is a large Negative description,
what tender Conscience is not, then determining, (as the Doctor in the Chair)
he tells us, It is a Proceeding, bona fide, without sinister Respects or
dissimulation; seeking, before all things, to know God; and fearing above all
things, to offend him. This description (for it is not a Logical definition, as
neither having a proper Genus, nor Differentia specifica) is as large, and wild
in the Affirmative, as the other part was in the Negative; and thus M.
Birchley, after his great struglings telling us (but confusedly) what tender
Conscience is not, and not directly what it is, Resolves (for they are his own
words, Page 14.) It is the only means God has allowed our Nature, to guide her
Resolutions of judging of others: in which result this Builder pulls down all
the structure he had so artificially built up before; for his positions were
formerly out of misapplyed places of holy Scripture, James 4.12. Romans 14.4. Who
art thou that judge another? etc. And in this last clause the Sophister
concludes, God allows the nature of a tender Conscience to the Resolution; of
judging others: and this Pill once swallowed, other Physic is prepared, in the
signs of a tender Conscience; which he reckons to be, Regular lives, no
opinions of self-interest, severity against corrupt nature, steddiness of
judgment, constancy in their persuasions until death, dying not only in, but
for the faith; suffering all things to be taken away patiently, and for Christ's
sake. These are indeed Evangelical Counsels, and great perfections, and well
become all good Christians: but when the Application of all these religious
duties is more closely drawn to the Papists (as it appears in Mr. Birchleys a
Dialogue with his friend, page 16.) the secreted plots appear more plainly,
while it is insinuated, to please some parties, that tender Consciences have
the power of judging others, Mr. Birchley quickly determins that the Papists
are the men of the Regular lives, etc. and in the end, if his doctrine take
place, they must judge of all others; which is the present tyranny of Popish
usurpation, where it rules and reigns. As for the rest of the discourse of the
tract of tender Consciences, it is a tedious deviation to other matters; as a
complaint against the former Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, or the present
Oath of Abjuration, in which murmuring dislike, the Author fights most against
himself, pleading formerly for the Papists peaceableness, and humbleness of
submission to authority and laws; and then quarrelling at the oaths and laws
made by the supreme, and present authority: Amongst other stories, he brings in
the names of Sir Henry Beddingfield, Mr. Bodenham, and Mr. Gefford, as
Gentlemen who never bore arms since the wars began: but whether this be done
with their Consent, Honor, or Advantage, let them judge whom it may concern.
And as for the argument of the Papists more heavy afflictions than others, in
the common calamity of the late Civil Wars, it is a piece rather of Mr.
Birchleys inclination to his party, than any real truth.

CHAP. XVII.
THe next tract is a Quaere, or Question started, 1 Quest.
Whether Papists be guilty of Idolatry in the worshipping of Angels, Saints,
and Pictures?

And then follows another Question, 2 Quest.
Whether Papists be guilty of Idolatry in the Eucharist?

And Mr. Birchley concludes the first Part of his Moderator, Whether Papists
are consistent with Civil Government? 3 Quest.


1 These three Questions being very ample and Polemical Arguments, are fitter
for large Volumes, than petty Manuels, and rather require the subtilties of the
best Casuists, and Schoolmen, than the raw Resoluti^ns of any single and
private spirit. A learned, grave, judicious determination in the Chair, or
rather a sound and discerning judgment of an University (after great reading,
solemn disputations, and free discussions of the several points) were more fit
to satisfy the World in these particulars, than any one interested Party; which
very Theses have occasioned so many studious years, and so many Folio's, and
works of learned men. The arguments of this Epitome, like curtal'd narrow
shreds, will scarce show what the cloth or stuff was; and therefore, if the
judicious Reader have his stomach opened by Mr. Birchleys arguments, he may do
well to have it nourished, and so closed with the great satisfaction he may
find in the several Controversies and Tracts of Bishop Jewel against M.
Harding, in the Bish. Whites works, and the late Lord Archbishop of
Canterburyes discourse against the Jesuit; and in Doctor Whitaker against
Cardinal Bellarmin; or in King James his Book, De Iure Iuramenti fidelitatis,
against Bellarmin, with many hundred others, both English, German, and French
Divines, who have writvoluminously in these points. But that the three
Questions may not pass without their Answers, though briefly returned, 1 Resp.
It is evident (as to the first Quaere) That although the blessed Angels had a
more familiar community with men, and had a more visible conversation with them
(as it is granted in the History of the Old Testament) and that holy men of Old
presented some venerable honor and worship to them, as heavenly Spirits and
Guardians, and Messengers sent with some excellent news from God: Yet at the
coming of our Savior in his Incarnation in the Flesh, we do not read in the
holy Gospel, of such exact circumstances of honor and worship to the holy
Angels, by any outward adoration, but rather a cessation in that kind, all
honor, and worship, and glory, being reserved and united for the Person of our
blessed Savior. In this condition we find Zecharias the Priest, and Father of
Saint John the Baptist; Luke 1.10, 11.
And there appeared unto him an Angel of the Lord, standing on the right side
of the Altar of Incense; And when Zecharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear
fell upon him. It was even thus with the blessed Virgin Mary, who seeing the
Angel, and hearing the Salutation, when she saw him she was troubled at his
saying, Luke 1.29.30. Thus the good Shepherds abiding in the fields, and
keeping watch over their flocks by night, And lo the Angel of the Lord came
upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore
afraid. In these three Relations, there is only mention of trouble and fear:
And Saint Paul (as confirming this holy apprehension) Convocates the heavenly
Angels to a mutual Adora^ion, and Communion in worship with Men, in the
celebration of our Saviors Nativity, When he brings in the first begotten
into the world, he says, and let all the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6.
And finding the Col^ssians inclined or deceived into a worshipping of Angels,
without any command, if not against the word of God, the Apostle gives them a
double caution, Beware, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceit, after the traditions of men, Col. 2.8. and the Apostle ingeminates the
Caution at the 18. verse, Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary
humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has
not seen, vainly pust up by his fleshly mind. The resolution in this case is
yet more clear in Saint John's deportment toward the blessed Angel, who when he
fell at his feet to worship him, he said unto him. See thou do it not, I am
thy fellow Servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus
worship God, Rev. 19.10. And the cevout Apostle upon another occasion, making a
tender of his adoration to the heavenly creature, received a second Command, I
fell down before the feet of the Angel, Revel.
which showed me these things and he says unto me, see thou do it not for I am
thy fellow Servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep
the sayings of this book, worship God.

This is an expression (if well observed) of near and familiar communion, such
as the Patriarchs and Prophets, before the coming of Christ received not; the
Angels acknowledging men their fellow Servants, and giving direction not to
adore them, but to worship God. It is most true, that Christians are to believe
the protection of Angels, the Devil denies it not, Mat. 4.6. Psalm. 91.11. And
the consolations of Angels in great agonies and afflictions, Luke 22.43. and
the help and ministration of Angels Mat. 18.10. (...).
, Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of Salvation? Heb. 1.14. And as they help and comfort us in our
lives, their friendship and assistance continues after death, in a blessed
translation of righteous souls into Abraham's bosom; And it came to pass that
the beggar dyed, and was carried of the Angels into Abraham's bosom; for these
greater Relations of Protection, and high services, a venerable estimation, and
holy commemoration, may be due to these blessed Cherubims and Seraphins, as the
chiefest creatures in highest attendance about the Holy Trinity, Isa: 6.3. Rev:
4.8. and highly rejoicing at the conversion of Sinners, Luke 15.10. and the
Communion with the Saints: I beheld, and lo, after this a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all Nations; And all the Angels of God stood
about the throne and worshipped God, Revelat. 7.9, 10, 11.

So then, in all this discourse there is no restraint of a venerable deportment
in the Angels presence; nor a thankful valuation of their high assistance, and
services anywise inhibited, but only that Caution given, which the Apostles and
Angels themselves have charged, that men should not be beguiled into a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, but rather worship God; and by
obedience to these Counsels, we may better show our faith in the holy
Scriptures; and neither bestow that worship upon the Servant which is due to
the Lord, nor that adoration and honor to the creature, which is due to the
Creator, God blessed for evermore.

2 As for the adoring of Saints and Pictures, and the distinctio^s of Douleia
and Latreia, spiritual civility, and spiritual worship, they are but mincings
of the matter, and inventions and traditions of men, willing to warrant with
their Learning and Wit, what they cannot justify out of the Word of God. And if
a voluntary humility, and will-worshipping of Angels, be a sin, because
expressly against the canon of the holy Scriptures, certainly, a minore ad
majus, it is most true, that adoring of Saints and Images is a sin more gross
and more notorious; the latter being likewise expressly against the second
Commandment of the Moral Law; which the Papist foreseeing, has so mangled
that Commandment, that it seems very lame; or so cunningly left it out,
that, if it were possible, the worshipping of Images should appear no sin, and
consequently, not Idolatry: of which crime they stand guilty, as it is too
apparent to all the World, who view their Writings or their Practice in their
deluded Devotion.

As to the second Question, 2 Resp.
Whether Papists be guilty of Idolatry in the Eucharist? It is most true, that
no good Christian can compose himself too religiously in the administration, or
participation of the holy Communion of that blessed Mystery of Salvation;
wherein the worthy Receiver does by Faith, really, and spiritually, feed on the
Body and Blood of our blessed Savior: But, for men in their subtilties and,
and carnal wisdom, to conjure people to a new belief, that is, that Christ is
not only really and spiritually, but corporally and transubstantially there;
and not only received by Faith and Spirit in the heart, but likewise tasted by
the pallat, and digested, as other common food, this Doctrine is grofs and
damnable. Another distinction de modo, that the Elements are changed in the
Sacrament, and the Accidents remain in the Bread and Wine, is as impossible, as
irrational. These doctrines and opinions are great errors, which usher on
unwarranted worship, which brings in Idolatry; which upon these unwarranted
grounds is often committed: as, when the Priest is at the celebration of the
Mass, and the Tintinabulum, or holy Bell sounds, (as it always does at the
elevation of the Host) then the People (though no Communicants) in the Church,
are to fall on their knees and worship, being taught to believe, that not only
Christ is in the Sacrament, really and spiritually, but corporally, and
transubstantially. Again, when the Priest is sent for to visit the sick, and
comfort them with the Eucharist, having taken the Host out of the Pixis, or
Box, in the Tabernacle on the Altar, he descending thence, is covered with a
Canopy; and so moving toward the sick persons house, through the streets, Care
is taken that the tinkling Bell sound all the way, until the Priests return;
which sound is to summon the People to fall down and worship as he passes by
This is more than a civil and venerable deportment to the Priest in his sacred
Office.
. There is yet a higher degree of unwarranted worship than these: for the
Consecration of the Sacrament, and the Visitation of the Sick, in themselves
are pious and heavenly duties; but in the institution of the Feast of Corpus
Christi, when the Pope is carried in Procession in greatest Pomp and
Pontificalibus; And in all Roman Catholic Countries the Priests and Clergy
walk in solemn Processions, carrying the Host abroad to the greatest view and
ostentation, At the Elevation and sight whereof, all spectators are commanded
(if not voluntarily devoted) to kneel, and worship, and adore this great
Innovation and Corruption to true Religion. (For it is neither warranted out of
holy Scripture, nor imitated out of the examples of Apostolical and Primitive
practice, nor reasonably grounded upon any deduction out of holy Scriptures.)
As it has no great antiquity in it (being invented, and instituted about 400
years since, upon the Visions, or rather Dreams of two devout Sisters, Nuns,
if the Legend speak true;) so has it no solidity or authority to invite or
enjoin obedience, being in it self so scandalous, and irreligious; and being
attended with so many offensive circumstances, of Banners, Crucifixes, Bells,
Pageants, and other insignificant concomitants in that Procession, cannot but
offend God, as they scandalize all good Christians; who in zeal and love to
God, and his truth and worship, cannot but condemn the whole Proceedings
herein, as a work of flat Idolatry, notwithstanding the Moderators endeavors to
the contrary.

To the third Question, 3 Resp.
Whether Papists are inconsistent with Civil Government? It may be answered,
That it is not untrue, that Papists hold many Principles destructive to Civil
Government, however the Moderator strives to mitigate the matter; for that
Maxim of Fides non est habenda cum Haereticis, That faith is not to be kept
with Heretics, is defended by the Papists, where they are persuaded they can
maintain the Principle for their advantage: and as for aequivocation and Mental
Reservation, who ever is well acquainted with the Jesuits Conversation, or
their Patron Ign. Loyola's Institutions of that Order, will, too often,
experience both: besides they maintain in their secret Lectures of their
Instructions to their Novitii, and Disciples, That no Oath of Heretics
obliges them; because they who administer it, have no authority, if not
supremely derived from the Pope; and though the Moderator tells us, (glosingly)
that they are to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and are to be
subject, not only for fear, but for Conscience sake; Yet the Roman Doctors
teach us really, that the Pope is a Judge above all Caesar's, and Kings, and if
he judge them Infid^ls or Heretics, their People are absolved from their duty,
and owe them no Allegiance nor Obedience. And as for the instance of the
Papists and Protestants in the Cantons of Switzerland so well agreeing, it is
not to be much admired, united in the two common obligations of love to
themselves, rather than Strangers, and love of Trade and Gain, which is a
strong tie, that holds the distracted opinions in Holland, and other
Countries, that they break not forth into Civil dissentions; as a rich Merchant
of Amsterdam being demanded of what Religion they were there, his answer was
returned in a quick truth, Our Religion at Amsterdam is, to get money; for in
this all sects agreed.

And as for the pretended harmless, quiet, peaceable dispositions of Papists,
in any Kingdom, or Commonwealth, where they have not an influence in the
Government, it is well known how full they are of plots and designs, dispencing
with all obligations, to serve their ends. This cannot but be yet remembered
from the Reign of Queen Mary, wherein the Papists (supported with the
Sovereignty) were so actively and unmercifully bloody: as likewise in the long
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, against whom the Papists were so violently malicious,
that some contrived (as Campian, Sanders, Parsons, Lopez) to stab and poison,
her Honor, her Person, and her Sovereign power. Henry the third of France
tasted of the fiery, not quiet disposition, of the Papists; being most
barbarously stabbed by a desperate Jacobin Friar; and Henry the fourth of France
fell by the bloody hand and knife of Raviliack, for which Regicide and Murder,
the Order of Jesuits (as supposed most guilty;) were by the Edicts of France
banished out of France; and they could not get that Act repealed until ten
years insinuation, and humble soliciting to Lovis le Just, with many
Protestations of most peaceable comportment.

In fruitful England, the memory is yet fresh of 88. when the Spanish Invaders
should have joined with the English Popish Complotters; and the 5th of November
is an Annual Memento of the Popish Treason, so laid, that King, Lords, and
Commons, should have been blown up in an instant. These and the like desperate
designs and attempts, have forced, that, ex malis moribus bonae leges
nascuntur, many penal Statutes have been Enacted to bridle and subdue the
mischievous and black designs of these unquiet spirits, who are so dangerous in
their doctrines, and so restless and turbulent in their devices and endeavors.

Multorum, quia imbecilla, latent vitia, non minus ausin a cum illis vires suae
placue^int. Seneca Epist. 42.
And if the Papists in these later times have been more quiet, or less active,
it is not (probably) because they wanted will, but power and strength to
exercise their designs. And the Conclusions of Gregory the 7th, being 27 in
number, (called, dictatus Papae) set forth the unlimited arrogance of the
Papacy; the mentioning of two, may satisfy, if not astonish the World: that he
who calls himself, Servus servorum, should so Lord it over all the Baronius An.
1706. Number. 31, 32, etc.
World, as in a Synod at Rome, in the year 1706. to conclude resolutely, Quod
liceat Papae Imperatores deponere, that it was lawful for the Pope to depose
Emperors: and, quod a fidelitate iniquorum subaitos potest absolvere, that he
could discharge Subjects from Fidelity and Obedience to wicked Governors. These
Conclusions granted, no Government can be secure.

And as for the Moderators objections, or exceptions, against the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and that of Abjuration; If the Pope should contrive
one of the same kind, or the Council of Trent but have sent abroad such a
Canon; it may be presumed, the Roman Catholics would (with as much obedience)
have received such an Oath, and digested it, as others do, where they conceive
the Power of Sovereign authority to impose such obligations.

CHAP. XVIII.
IN the last Chapter of the Moderators first Part, a Conscientious way of
settling Religion is proposed; where, to gain some opinion and favor, Mr.
Birchley still harps on the word Conscience, which is a good word, if not ill
used; and then propounds a Collection of a body of Articles of Faith, as if
all the English, generally baptized into the Articles of the Apostles Creed,
were now to seek new ones, from the Council of Trent, or the Assembly of
Presbyters. And as the matter proposed, is a way to the very dissolution of the
Articles of Faith, and to shake the foundations, so long since laid; so is the
direction following, Page 47, That every one that will, may propose and discuss
those difficulties he meets with in Gods word; which motion, if once granted,
that quilibet dispute de quolibet, besides Heresy, Blasphemy, Impiety, and
Atheism, a general Confusion must needs follow. Which inconveniency, the
Egyptians (though Heathens) foreseeing in their State, ordained, That though
they tolerated several Religions, yet all things were kept in quiet; because
the People were under^ * sub potenti Domino, a mighty force: Jus. Lips. lib.
advers. Dialogist.
2 quia mutuo se non damnarent, because they were not permitted to dispute, or
rail at one another: 3 quia nullae illic publicae Conciones, nec Flabra, atque
incitamenta turbarum, because they were not allowed public factious Orations
and Sermons to stir up the giddy multitudes. And if every one should be
permitted to dispute and determine his own questions, and opinions, there would
be every day as many new faiths, as fancyes; and no end of vain and
unprofitable dissentions: so that Mr. Birchley aims, by this argument of
Liberty, that all Articles and Points of Religion may be unravel'd and
unsettled, that the Arguments of the Church of Rome may prove the more forcible
and prevalent, when General disputes are once admitted to every singular sense
and opinion.

CHAP. XIX.
IN another passage of the same Argument, the Moderator quarrels and girds at
the Lawyers, telling them, that they make shuffling and hypocritical
distinctions, Page 46. to deceive the common people, whose simplicity, and
innocence, they easily beguile, by pretending that none are Executed for
Religion, but for offending against the Laws; and then Master Birchley grows
fierce, and cries, What can be more palpably false or devilishly malicious,
than this? but the Lawyers will justify the Argument, that the English Subjects
are not Executed because they go out Subjects, but because they return not
Subjects, taking orders from the Prelatical power of Rome, whereby they vow
obedience to their spiritual Superiors, and to the Sea of Rom^: here is a
change of their natural duties from one Sovereignty to another; so that if the
case be rightly stated, it is plain, that against the Law of Nations, of
Reason, and Municipal Laws of a Country, the English Subjects becoming Romish
Priests, Rebus sic stantibus, are great violators to that Sovereignty to which
they owe natural loyalty and obedience: And Supreme power (as all the Schools
teach) is not a Communicable quality. Besides this Charge, It is not merely for
Religion the Popish Priests dye, but (if the Laws be executed in that kind)
for putting themselves into a prohibited capacity, and then, into a busy
activity, of seducing the people to obedience to a foreign Power; which, as it
is a great part of Irreligion, so is no less than a violation of Sovereign
Laws, enacted to the contrary, and so (the Lawyers can tell the Moderator) High
Treason, And though the penal Laws in this particular may be too sharp, and,
it were to be wished, that some other Remedies of more mild temper were
provided, that the English Subjects might not become Roman Priests; or if they
be so desperate and resolute to return, and so to seduce their fellow Subjects,
that they might be punished otherwise than by death: Yet, though the Remedy be
never found out, I shall not like M. Birchleys Optio, and wish, (though written
in great Letters,) Anima mea sit cum Jesuitis. But if he like that Prayer, let
him enjoy it without all envy, or emulation.

CHAP. XX.
IN the 53 Page the Moderator has a fling (and not without just cause; and
herein we agree) against the violent, and therefore short dominion of the
Presbyterians, saying, that never were more cruel torturers of the Conscience
than they; never a more tyrannical Tribunal, than their Jure Divino Assembly,
and Classical Inquisition: The Author might as truly apply all this to the
Papal Tyranny, and have done no Injury to Truth at all.

The Moderator closes his first Part, Page 54. with a prayer for a General Act
of Conscience-Indemnity: which, if once granted, it is not to be doubted, but
Mr. Birchley and the Papists would be as high in their demands, as they seem
now humble in their supplications.

CHAP. XXI.
THe first Part of the Moderator thus impartially examined, and the bottom of
the business sounded: The second may more easily and swiftly be waded over: In
the third line, Page 55. the Author pretends to light, which the Lord Christ
has infused into his soul: then publishes to the World his humblenes of
spirit, and then (Jesuit-like) offers, and dedicates his discourse to the
gracious Redeemer of Souls. If there be true humility where there is such
self-ostentation of light infused, and a noise of all humbleness of spirit, the
meekest spirit may, without him, easily judge; the rest of that Preface has
little more in it, than a continuance of self-flattery. Page 56. where the
Papists apply the marks of tenderness of Conscience in themselves, and
tenderness of Spirit to others; but with what truth this is spoken really, let
the Moderator himself be Judge: who in Page 44. brings in an example of the
Privernates, an ancient People of Italy, who having rebelled against the
Commonwealth of Rome, and being almost quite reduced by force of arms,
dispatched Ambassadors for terms of Peace: The Senate sternly asked them, what new
Peace they could expect, who had so insolently infringed the old? To which they
stoutly answered, we must now take such conditions as you please to give; if
they be moderate, you shall find us faithful, if too heavy, we shall observe
them only till we may fafely break them. It were an injury to the Moderator,
to leave out a tittle of this Story: wherein, by the example of the
Privernates, he shows to the life his own Picture, as well as of his Popish
brethren; with what light they are infused, with what humbleness of spirit
endued, and how resolved to shake off all burdens they judge too heavy; and
violate all obligations, which they will observe no longer, than till they may
safely break them.

CHAP. XXII.
AFter the Preface and Introduction to the second Part, the Moderator ( Page
57.) recites Petitions of some well-affected in the County of Leicester, and of
some Churches in London, but to what purpose, it much matters not. In the 58
Page he proclames, that he waits on God in humility of spirit, and presently
after undertakes to clear the Papists of all obstinacy, and non-submission to
the present Government, by representing an humble Petition of the Roman
Catholics to the House; and then adds his Explanation and sense of their
Humility, Civil Society, and Consistency with Civil Government: And then sets
down a platform of their belief; but that being not done according to the Canon
of the Council of Trent, the Moderator surely much forgets his duty, or else
gives himself a large dispensation for his present advantages. From hence he
wanders to a persuasion that many Papists of considerable quality are now in
London (as he is informed) who are agreed in an explanation of what they
believe concerning the Popes undervaluing, and overvaluing of the Church,
Invocation of Saints and Angels, Worship of Images, their opinion of Merits, of
Justification, and of the Moral Law. These are questions of very great weight
and consideration; and surely the Moderator is too bold, to tell the world that
some considerable Papists now in London, would undertake to explain and
determine their private sense and judgment, in points so exceedingly
controverted on all sides, by the greatest Professors, and Universities:
Besides this Report is surely an injury to the faith and modesty of the
Gentlemen, who have such obedience to their Church, as they presume not to
differ with the weakest Canon of the Council of Trent; which, as it determines
resolutions of Faith, in many of these questions, so it strictly requires
belief to them under an Anathema, and a Curse.

CHAP. XXIII.
IN the 69. Page the Moderator ^resumes to affirm, That many Papists were
smar^ly punished, for not taking the Oath of Allegiance, and peremptorily
concludes, That none were punished for not observing it: which is a strange
affirmation, and cannot be consonant to truth, if he had observed the
proceedings in Civil Courts in times of Peace, or the many evils of the late
Civil Wars; in another place he says, The utter ruin, which now endangers the
Papists whole estates, proceeds solely from their performing to the late King
that service, which he called Allegiance; and yet Page 18. of the first Part,
he says, That many Papists never did bear arms at all, but only sculk'd in the
Kings Garrisons for better security. Immediately after he presses to any
indifferent Judge to determine, (but upon suppositions neither proved, nor
granted) 1. That the Papists believing all the holy Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, (And yet the Lay. Papists are not permitted to read them, sine
permissu, nor the Clergy to receive a Translation, not to believe a word, but
as the Church of Rome believes, be the doctrine never so palpably dangerous,
and erroneous;) besides, how is it true, that the Papists believe firmly all
the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, when they prefer Tradition of
their Church above Scripture? and give equal authority (as Bellarmin, and
others) to verbum non scriptum, as well as to the holy Scriptures penned by the
holy Prophets and Evangelists? 2. The Moderator urges, That the Papists
worship and adore only one God, and that is otherwise proved, in the Tract of
their Adoration of Saints and Angels. 3. He urges, that they rely on the sole
mediation of Jesus Christ; and yet in all their Letanies, and at their daily
Masses, they invocate Angels and Saints, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and
Virgin, as Mediators for them; and plead their Merits in the close of the
Collects of the several Saints days, as it is evident in the Roman Breviary,
and the Office of our Lady.

CHAP. XXIV.
IN the next passage ( Page 77.) the Moderator sets forth his diligence, and
attendance at Haberdashers Hall; wherein he shows his Active curiosity, in
prying into those passages which perhaps may least concern his superintendency,
and Page 78. he concludes, That the Oath of Abjuration is not only against the
Papists Consciences, but against the National Laws; in which Retortion, the
Moderator seems, not only to strike at the matter and truth of the Oath, but
likewise at the Authority of the Imposers, who require obedience to it. And
after these Objections, reckons up (as he calls them) the undue proceedings
against diverse Papists, as Mr. Robert Knightley, Mr. Parker, Mr. James Hanham,
and others, and then tells a story of Sir Richard Minshall, and Dr. Friar, etc.
who have taken the Oath of Abjuration, and become outward Conformists; and in
this Point the Moderator dives so deep into the Conformists hearts, as to
conclude, probably they did not conform out of any Conviction of Conscience,
but rather against Conscience, merely to save their Estates from Sequestration.
This Censure is severe, and against the Moderators own Rules, who pleads so
much for charity and tenderness of Conscience; and, that Religion is an
intrinsecal act betwixt God and the Soul. And though Sir Richard Minshall, and
other staggerers and turncoates in Religion (bending out of self-interest)
deserve no Apology, nor excuse for their fickle, or rather subtle
alterations; yet why may not Sir Richard return as well to the Religion wherein
he was baptized, as fall from it to the Church of Rome, for personal respects;
and after a taste of his errors, love the truth ever better? The Moderator is
equally, or indeed too censorious, in the unfortunate death of Mr. Henry
Compton, attributing the desperate end of him (slain in a Duel by the Lord
Shandois) to a straining of his Conscience to too much compliance. For, though
Duels be sinful and damnable undertakings, condemned by all orthodox Churches;
yet it is a secret not revealed to the Moderator, that certainly Mr. Compton
was slain for leaving the Church of Rome; It being a true Rule in Divinity,
That (privata peccata saepius puniuntur per flagella manifesta,) Private sins
are often punished with public strokes. And as for the Application of those
words, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, only to the Papists, pretended to
be persecuted in the two Islands of Japan and England; it is an appropriation
too strict and narrow: For as the Primitive Christians knew not the Name of
Pope or Papist for many hundred years after the Apostles days; so, at this
present, many thousand Christians in the world suffering under bloody
persecution, comfort themselves in their Martyrdom and patience, and (though no
Papists) conceive they have a right and share in the Application of those
words, that The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of Gods Church.

CHAP. XXV.
FRom these personal observations, the Moderator digresseth to the composure of
a Legend, and reckons up how many Romish Priests have been executed at Tyburn,
York, Dorchester, and Lancaster, since the year 1641. and how many have died in
several prisons. In which List and Calendar, he only remembers, how many
English Subjects (after a breach and violation of many Municipal Laws of the
Nation) have hazarded their own lives, by a wilful breaking of those penal
Laws, which so much threatened their Liberties and lives; if after their taking
of Romish Orders, and an ultim at submission to the Pope^ Supremacy, they
adventured to return into these Countries, and here become active seducers of
their Fellow Subjects, from their just and naurall obedience.

This Legend of Romish Priests is garnished with a Catalogue of Romish
Converts, which the Moderator presents to all the world (as a more eminent
spectacle of future Romish hopes) and to invite other to that Church in these
staggering times: In number the Converts are reckoned twenty, with, etc. A
great Lady leads the way.

1. The Countess of Denbigh 2. The Lacy Kilamekin 3. The Lord Cottington 4.
Tho: Vane, Dr. of Divinity 5. Hugh Pawlin de Cressie 6. Sir Marmaduke Langdale
7. Sir Francis Doddington 8. Sir Theophilus Gilby 9. Mistress Bridget Fielding
10. Doctor Thomas Baily 11. Doctor Cosins only Son 12. Doctor Goff 13. Mr.
Peter Glue, of Baliol College in Oxford 14. Mr. Rich: Nicholls, Bachelor of
Divinity of Peterhouse in Cambridge 15. Mr. Rich. Crawshaw 16. Mr. Will:
Rowlands 17. Captam Thomas Cook 18. Mr. Edward Barker of Caius College in
Cambridge 19. Mr. Temple 20. Mr. Osborn, etc.
CHAP. XXVI.
THese Twenty Worthies are presented as more eminent Beacons to give light to
all their Neighbors, in these days of the many spiritual commotions of the
Souls; and are set up in Print on the highest hills of observation, to be more
conspicuous, as spectacles of greater admiration. But that the Moderator may
not too much increase, and ensnare Popular credulity, by this List of his
Romish Proselites, and so gain more Disciples; it is very necessary, as well to
examine the lives and interests of these numbered Converts, (as others likewise,
whom the Moderator conceals) That (their dissimulations, and seeming sanctity
being sifted) we may hold faith and truth the taster, by first detecting, and
then loathing the hypocrisy and pretenses to Catholic truths and sanctity, of
some, (if not all) of these late Converts to the Sea of Rome.

CHAP. XXVII.
BUt before the Examination of the Proselites, the Moderator may know, That
although the Papists in England may be under some severities of the Laws of
that Country, yet they are not in such an intolerable and horrid condition as
the poor Christians in Turkey: where the Grand Signior rules not by Conditions
and Laws, but by his own will and pleasure; and where, not only the Christians
Estates, but their Lives are at his book, and disposal; and he has not only
the choice of their children for his servants and slaves, but for a Turkish
education. And although the poor Christians sit down in Turkey, resting quiet
in a besotted ignorance, or a contented slavery, it is not because they wish
not Revenge, and the yoke of their bondage not broken; but because the Sword is
over them: and they have yet in memory, the violent and hard usage of the
Roman, and Western Christians, who (raising Armies, and marching to relieve
their sad condition from the Turkish slavery) proved not Relievers, but
Oppressors; and (being amongst them) appeared as great destroyers of their
content, their estates, liberties, and lives, as the very Turks and Tyrants,
who had so mightily inslaved them, and under whom they enjoyed the security of
some hard Conditions. And it is not to be accounted the Turks Mercy, but his
Policy, and very necessity, that forces the Turk to suffer the poor Christians
to live in his Empires: otherwise his vast Countries could not be sufficiently
peopled, and the Turk would want both Soldiers for his Armies, and Laborers
for his Fields, and want Mariners and Saylors; and so be neither able to fish,
or trade, or fight at Sea: And though the Christians under the Turk do spin
out, and lead a poor slavish life; yet, God forbid, that ever Christians should
swell to that Tyranny, and cruelty one against another: And yet Civil and
Christian Policy has ever approved of sharp Laws, to require exact obedience;
lest by remisness, and to much relaxation, the frames of Government should
suddenly dissolve into ruin and confusion. From this consideration, have the
number of the Penal Laws daily increased, to bind, and faster to incorporate
the nerves and ligaments of Politic Government; of which, the Moderator has
collected some into a Schedule, and presented to the Committee for the
regulating of the Laws, as far forth as they have any influence on Recusants,
and Roman-Catholiques.

CHAP. XXVIII.
THe Moderator closes his second Part, with Motives, Considerations, Reasons,
and Proposals of the Roman Catholics; which need no answer nor examination,
more than of the Reader in his transient perusal of them; as having been Cases
formerly stated: And as for those places of holy Scripture, quoted in the
conclusion, Matt. 18.23. 1 Kings 19.11, 12. Mat. 5.44.

It is agreed on by all Christians (on all sides) that being rightly
interpreted, and rightly applied: it is most true, that Christ has given and
forgiven us ten thousand talents, and therefore we ought to forgive our fellow
servant an hundred pence. And it is as true, that the Lord was not in the great
and strong wind, etc. but in the still and small voice. That we are to do unto
others, as we would that they should do unto us, that we should love our
enemies, and bless them that curse us: And it is to be wished, that as these
places of Holy Scripture, are alleged by the Moderator for more meekness, and
tenderness of one Christian toward another; so the Papists would be examples
in the practice of these holy duties: then, there needed not any erection, or
use of Romish Inquisitions in the Popish Territories, nor any disturbance, by
his fulminations and thundering excommunications abroad.

CHAP. XXIX.
THe Moderator thus viewed over in General Considerations, it may be now
seasonable to take a stricter view of his Legend and Romish Proselites, and to
find them out in their most abstruse, and darkest paths: it cannot be amiss,
but to the purpose, to observe how active, cunning, and resolute the Romish
Priests are in their seductions and tamperings with their fellow Subjects,
against the Laws of their Country, and therefore more justly liable to
Punishment.

The Lines of these politic Emissaries, and their Instructions are fixed at
Rome; but they are stretched and drawn, into most parts of the Christian, and
Heathen world; where these busy Flies are whispering their pernicious
infatuations, and smooth delusions.

And now, that the deceived multitudes may not be longer hooded and masked, by
the Art of these glosing Impostors, it cannot but be useful to these times, to
observe, what advantage these laborers promise to themselves, and what a
liberal Harvest (as they now confidently boast of publicly, and boldly brag
off, and tell the world) they hope to reap, very shortly, in England, Scotland,
and Ireland; and to this purpose, as these Sophisters are most pragmatick and
confident in their discourses, so are they nimble and swift with their Pens,
filling the Presses, with printed Books of all kinds; that may either exercise
or delude the courteous Reader, or greedy Novellist, to a deviation (if
possible) from his old Principles in Faith and Religion, formerly professed:
Their business consisting chiefly, not in calming, but inraging the angry Seas,
and present troubles; wherein, if the Church of England prove a wreck, they
despair not, but that of Rome shall quickly be Predominant.

These dissemblers, like the lying Greek, Fidens animi, at que in utrumque
Paratus,
Seu versare dolos, seu certae occumbere morti.
Sinon. in Virgil's Aenaead: 2.

can make loud out cries against their own Countrymen, and swear, and
forswear, prate, and lie, and endure the adventure of any misery or torture, to
perfect, and effect a desperate plot, and thereby to set a City, like Troy, or
a whole Country, and Kingdom on fire.

Nay, in a considerable design, these bold undertakers, like that false
Persian, Zopirus cum semetipsum flagis caecidisset, nasoque and auribus
mutilatis, Babylonios circumvenisset quibus sidem ei adjungentibus prodidit
Dario urbem: saepius est ex Dario auditum, malle se integrum Zopirum quam
centum potiri Babylonibus. Plutarch. Apotheg: can torture and whip themselves,
cause their own noses and ears to be cut off; and (in deep diffimulation) not
stick to rail at, and accuse their own King or State, their own Generals, and
Commanders; and not think it amiss (if to drive on their end) to call the Pope,
Antichrist, and Rome, the Scarlet Whore: Provided always, that this dark and
hellish hypocrisy, may inveagle credulity, or gain Proselites, and erect
higher, and enlarge more spaciously', the Towers and Territories of the Roman
Prelacy.

In this design they spare no cost, nor fear any danger, if any adventure or
endeavor may raise, and elevate more sublimely, their monstrous and ambitious
head: And having now (as they boast) put on their work to a very possible
Conclusion (the Monarchical power in England, being so abased and extenuated,
and the Hierarchy of the Church, and Episcopal Orders so much shattered and
disgraced, and the two Lamps and Lights of Learning so puzzled and dazeled)
they begin to magnify themselves, Cambridge, Oxford.
and glory in their Iniquity. And the Pope has already told the world, That
Ireland was Insula Sanctorum, an Island and Country of the Roman Saints, and a
part of St. Peter's Patrimony; and they vainly and falsely Prophecy, That England
and Scotland shall not enjoy Peace, until both Countries return to the
obedience of Rome, and render their choicest First Fruits, to support the pride
and grandeur of the triple Crown, and help more richly to embroider the
glorious Cross on his Holiness slipper.

CHAP. XXX.
TO compass these Imperial ends, and high thoughts, the plots in Ireland were
first laid in deeper acts of bloody cruel^y and Massacres of the poor innocent
Christians, professing their Faith and Religion, according to the Orthodox
Reformation of the Church of England, and the horrid murders and devastations
(committed there) were aggravated with the sting and venom of Romish Bulls,
Curses, and Excommunications: which (though they reached not the souls of the
innocent sufferers) yet thrust their persons into such an odium, with all of
the Roman Catholic affections and interests, that the poor creatures were
almost devoured, and swallowed up by barbarous cruelty in a moment, their lives
and fortunes being suddenly made a prey by the bloody and ravenous Wolves of
the savage Country. To countenance the bitterness of these proceedings, a
martial fiery Nun^io was sent from Rome, who brought with him as well S. Paul's
Sword, as S. Peter's Keys, born up with the Popes Commission, to burn, and kill,
and slay all opposers of that usurpt Authority. In this heat the Italian Jehu
marched furiously, kindling all Ireland into a hot combustion, and
conflagration, prosecuting the integrity of loyal obedience, with the most
prodigious violence of hostility, and a most merciless War. The breath of this
venomous Hyara being too hot, and violent, and (at length) his pride and
insolency gowing intolerable to the very Roman Catholics of the Kingdom, a
self-division fell amongst the confederate Roman Catholics themselves; which
grew into so hot a flame, that after the factions bickerings of some parties,
the turbulent Nuntio withdrew, and (entering aboard his Frigot) fled to Rome, to
give an account to his scarlet Masters, of his bloody endeavors, and ill
success, in Insula Santorum, as Ireland was termed: But the Serpent left the
dreggs of his venom and poison behind him; which has broken forth into the
continuation of most barbarous, and unheardof cruelties, perpetrated and acted
by a company of ambitious, ignorant, false, traitorous, Popish Prelates, and
Clergy; who have waded as deep in treason, Blood and V^llany, as their besotted
brains, and stupid, and seared Consciences could devise, and prosecute. These
false, dull wretches (having minds only set on mischief) nourished the seeds
of their rebellious enterprises, with rapine, murder, and blood; and (being
neither persons of honor or worth, nor regarding their Faith, or Oaths to God
or Man, and being destitute of courage and valor, art, wisdom and policy, to
acquire their unlawful and foul ends) they continue only famous and notorious
for their impieties; as having seduced many ignorant people, to become
Murderers, Rebels, and Traitors, and have wilfully delivered up themselves, and
their own Country to ruin and desolation, to wretched and endless miseries;
where the English Sword is not likely to be put up, until the Irish Woods are
dressed, and their traitorous Bogs dried, and drained to obedience and power of
lawful Sovereignty. This fire was more violent and raging in Ireland, when the
Popish Clergy, and confederated Romanists hoped by force, and power of
spiritual fulminations, and Martial terror of fire and sword, to remove all
English claims and interest in that Country, and in a moment to devour, and
swallow up all the English Colonies and Plantations. But the Roman Agents
walked in England and Scotland, in more obscure and secret paths, having
dark-lanthorns in their hands, screwing on their advantages, with pretended
arguments of piety, whispering their refined Counsels, with oily flattery, and
insinuation; pleading with plausible fallacious demonstrations, the certainty
of the Popes infallibility: as if (undoubtedly) S. Peter's Successor; and so his
sanctity, head of the Catholic and Universal Church, because he was Patriarch
of that of Rome. But these common topics are not arguments used to any, but
those who have wide swallows, and strong digestions: They apply other Pills
finely gilded, to weaker tempers, and steal into their opinions and fancies, by
gentle degrees and applications; and rather than not to prevail, they will get
u^, and walk on Presbyterian stilts, ride on the shoulders of the severest
Opiniators, Sectaries, and Humorists; and mimically preach and pray, whine and
sigh, whisper and rail, and baul, changing into any notes and tunes, to make
others skipp and dance after their Roman pipe; on this score, they look one
way, and row another, encountering contrary winds and waves, to get to the steps
and stairs of their expectation: And they conceive their business highly
advanced, their progress great, and their gain not a little, if they can but
seduce and delude credulous Novelists to a dislike of that Religion wherein
they were first baptized, and seasoned in: and if they come so far as to shake
the foundation, or to cause any to stagger, or totter from their first
Principles, they conclude their own work half done. With such fallacies as
these, have the Roman Foxes (clothed in Lambs-skins) devoured many harmless
flocks in England, Scotland, and Ireland; having found out the way, by
railings, and popular scandals, to smite and wound the vigilant Shepherds, and
then to disperse and scatter the poor Sheep; in which amazement, and strange
dispersion, many have run into Atheism, or desperate impieties; some have
fallen into a Indifferency, and a fit of cold Newtrality; and others (cunningly
ferch'd over) have staggered and tumbled into the gins and snares of besotting
Popery; who (now revolted) have the opinion and names of learned Clerks, or
hopeful Saints: But if the List, and Legend of the warping Revolters be well
examined, and their aims and ends impartially scanned, it is very apparent, the
Apostates of this kind are either strangely benumbed, in doting, and besotted
ignorance; or most unworthily transported with the hopes of gain, pleasure, or
power in another Church, which is full of error, danger, darkness, and
superstition. But that neither the ignorance of some, nor curiosity of others,
nor the peevishness and protervity of many, nor the avarice and ambition of
most, may prove prevalent examples, to seduce and invite any more to follow
their dangerous courses; it will not be time ill-spent, to read the new Legend
of these later times, set out by Mr. William Birchley, and to view, and
character the vertiginous Temporizers; whom, either the breath of Persecution
has driven and afrighted, or private interest of plenty, preferment, and
Pensions, or ease and safety (in a a strange Country, or at home) has tempted
to run to Rome, and to quit and forsake their Mother Truth, and sound Religion.

CHAP. XXXI.
A Discourse that cannot but be unpleasant, and very unwelwelcome to the
capritious Revolters; but when the aims are only to vindicate abused Truth, and
to preserve the grace of perseverance in the profession of it; the Apostates
must not judge the rules of Charity violated, if their lives and interests be
more narrowly ripped up, who have so maliciously and venemously fallen off from
Truth, and so irreparably scandalized and reproched their Persecuted brethren;
and for private ends, so desperately hazarded their own Salvation.

CHAP. XXXII.
LEt an old Chevalier (a Batchelor-Knight) lead the way. Sir Toby Matthews, who
was the disobedient Son of a most learned, S. Toby Matthews.
and most reverend Archbishop, his Father. This Metaphysical, Alchymistical
Traveller (long since) found out an easier way, by adulation, and
Court-flattery, to get and gain, than by plain dealing; and that the streets of
Rome were more smoothly paved for his purpose, than those of the City of York,
or the Kingdom of England, and that the Policy and Maxims of that Church of
Rome, afforded greater helps and advantages to thrive cunningly, than that of
England. According to the rules of greatest possibilities, this Rook builds his
nest, and frames his designs; and finding his hopes in a more thriving
expectation by his Inclinations and Resolutions to Rome, he quitted suddenly
his Mother-Truth, and was easily tempted to rail at his own worthy Father, as
an old Dotard, or ignorant Heretic, or a perverse Schismatic: And having
taken the boldness once to dishonor such a venerable, and near Relation, he
cares not how maliciously he spits at, and abuses all others, who would not
admire his pretenses to knowledge and experience, or not rashly submit and
comply with his new opinions, and temporizing profession. And, as he has no
language, but gall and vinegar, for those who sided not with him, so he has no
drops (flowing from his deceitful lips) but what were sweetened and sugarcandyed
in gross diffimulation and flattery, for his deluded benefactors, and patrons;
with these false Pendents, and counterfeit Jewels (Pedler-like) he addressed to
many Courts, and to some persons of greater quality, both in England, and other
Countries; where he met with Ignorance, he labored for admiration; where with
great parts, and knowledge, he presently became an adoring Parasite: His
Conversation was (for the most part) amongst Ladies (the weaker vessels) on
whose softness, and facility to nobleness, and bounty, he has gained much, and
made great use: perhaps, he would pretend to some petty secret in Physic, and
by this discourse, get a gold Watch, a Ring, or some such honorable toy, and
reward of Flattery. His Craft and Genius guided him always to adress to such
places, and company, as were rich and plentiful, (a very dream of Pharaohs lean
Kine being able to scare, and terrify him out of his Wits;) where by a
continual distillation of Flattery, he would work a hole (at length) in a
Stone. In this course of base insinuations, Sir Toby has got some store of
gold in the several Courts of Rome, Spain, and England, to keep his old cold
Age warm. In Rome he chiefly adores the Pope, and (in a cunning subordination)
then the crimson Cardinals. At Bruxels he highly applauds the Catholic King,
the Archduke Leopoldus, and some benevolent great Dons of Spain; Every Court of
every Kingdom and and Country, gives a new Relish to the Knights tongue;
which like an exact beam of an excellent pair of scales, is easily turned with
the least golden grain of profit, and advantage. Sometimes he acts the part of
a cunning Broker (but in the Dark) and motions (perhaps) a very rich Cabinet,
or a Suit of noble Hangings, a fair Bed, or some rare jewels to be pawned, or
sold, and if the motion succeed, he very carefully licks his fingers on both
sides: He puts (often) at the mystery of occult qualities, and would make the
World believe, that all his remedies are probata; he has gained something by
persuading to a lotion and bathings of the head in cold spring water. This
Leech sucks strongly, wherever he meets with a full and liberal vein; he loves
(like a Silkworm) to be finely clad, and daintily fed, and as long as he can
have the sweet air, and delicacies of warmer Countries, he cares not how freely
he rails at the plainest Truths, maintained and professed in the Northern
Climates, hating any thing that may disturb his ease, content, and plenty, as
much as a rich Merchant does a Storm at Sea, or a lasie, timorous Officer of
War, an Alarm in a good Quarter on shore. This Knight deserves to lead the way
in the Legend, and (a 100 years hence) may chance to creep (as a Saint) into
the Roman Calendar, for turning Papist, and for great miracles done by Flattery.

CHAP. XXXIII.
ANother strangely-Metamorphosed Gallant follows; who, for some eminency and
note, deserves to be ranked in the second place (if not in the prime, and
first) of the late Lapsarians to Rome; And he is called Mr. Walter Montacute,
or if you now please (according to the last Translation) Father Abbot. M.
Walter Montacute
Who had ever thought to s^e such a wild English Plant, become (as he esteems
himself) so tall and strong an oak and pillar of Rome? and such a glistering
Reveller, a subtle rich Abbot in France? This Gentleman (whom all his
Acquaintance knew to be double died in the vices of the times) surfeited daily
in the luxury and plenty of the English and French Courts; restraining bis Lust
and Appetite from nothing that might please his Fancy, or gratify his
Sensuality: This blazing Comet finding no influence so warm, hopeful, and
proptitious, as those beams which shined from the favors of Rome, easily
persuaded himself to embrace the motions of another Religion; and if by those
stairs he could climb to a glorious support, or plentiful condition at home,
or abroad, he resolves, as indifferently, to say adieu to the true Religion
wherein he was baptized; as to the last Mistress he courted, and for ever
disobliged, with unchaste and violent importunities. This Court-Rat finding the
Ship (wherein he sailed) very old, and leaky, and a Royal house ready to fall,
cunningly withdraws to save himself, and after some closer Retirements (in his
Cabal, with his Romish advisers and friends) he publishes himself in Print by
their help, and sent his Book of Miscellanies into the World, to make the
People believe, what a pattern of Piety, and Saint he was like to prove; by
this means (he conceives) he is more valuable, and becomes more capable of
Preferment in a warmer Climat; and because formerly known in the Court of
France, and not a stranger to Cardinal Mazarine (chief Minister of State in
that fair Kingdom) he designeth to mount to some preferment, by the Cardinals
power with the Queen Regent: and to make his possibilities less difficult, and
himself more notorious and famous, he conceives it a securer, and more easy
way to promotion, rather by service at the Altar, than in an Army, and by being
an Ecclesiastic, than an Officer in the Field: And in this consideration, he
changes his Courtly dress, of fluttering in Gold and Silver, into the robes and
habits of a grave Clergyman, his long Sword, into a long Cloak and Cassock; And
(the hopes of the English Court, her plenty and glory being so strangely
dispersed, and shattered, so suddenly vanishing) Mr. Walter conceives it high
time to run to Churh, and cringe at Mass, as a Secular Priest; to which Office
he encouraged himself, by the Rents and Revenues of a rich Abbey (which he now
possesses) worth seven or eight hundred pistols per Annum. And this petty
morsel (being as considerable as the Annuity of an ordinary younger Brother)
serves (at present) to stay the Gentleman's stomach, who (doubtless) feeds his
further Ambition with the hopes of the Bishops Miter M. Montacute now elected
Archbish. of Anch. in Guien.
, and then it were a shame for the Politician to despair of a Cardinals Cap.
And now, having looked on this Picture by a true light, and observing his
double Apparition, of a Revelling Courtier, and then exchanged into a Secular
Priest, what can we otherwise judge of these transmutations, more than that Mr.
Montacute was formerly a vainglorious, shining Ruffler, strutting in Silks and
Sattins; and that (at present) he walks in a more dark, grave weed; under the
umbrage whereof, he insinuates, flatters, and persuades (like Sir Toby) where
he cannot domineer and tyrannize.

This great Zelots devotion consists much in vomiting his malice against that
Church and Truth, he never well understood; he is a very Active seducer of young
Gentlemen (otherwise Carechised) to his desperate new Principles; and he hopes
to be better preferred by the Church of Rome; by becoming a Countenance and
Patron to those who have weakly or wilfully Revolted As Mr. Dean of Peterburghs
Son, and Mr. Doct. Lewis two Sons, and others bred at Paris.
from their duty to God, and their Parents. He could devise a malicious
exception, That no English strangers should finger a So^'s of the French
Clergies b^nevolence, but who were Roman Catholics; by which clause, some
were (and those of his own Country) almost famished, and forced to great
extremity, George Bows, who flung himself out of his chamber, and dyed with
his fall, into the Fosse at the Louvre at Paris.
others were plunged into desperate resolution, using violence on themselves;
and by this pragmatical extremity, some others were seduced (for a better
proportion sake) to renounce (at least complacently) their Religion, and
therein, the quiet of their own Conscience. These proceedings have no taste of
Piety in them, and neither relish of honor nor honesty; and if by such works
the Abbot get a Bishopric, and by such degrees, creep (at length) into the
Roman Legend, it is no wonder if the Saints of Rome so exceedingly multiply:
Such a president as this (well looked on) cannot stagger, or shake, but rather
fix, and confirm a poor Christian in the principles and maxims of true
Religion, whence avarice, security, and ambition, has (most probably) seduced
this changeable, and temporizing Humorist.

CHAP. XXXIV.
A Third eminent Apostat and false Brother, is an infamous Companion, Mr. Doct.
Goff.
one well known in many Countries, and notorious by the name and title of Mr.
Dr. Goff; a vaporer, who has been an impudent stickler, and infinitely
pragmatick ever since he was but pen-feather'd, and but a Schoolboy: At length
(having passed some time in the University of Oxfora) he rambled into the
Low Countries, where his Puritanical education made way for his preferment, to
be Chaplain to Colonel Veres, and afterward (if there be not a mistake) to
Colonel Gorings Regiment; in which relation Goff (being an apt Scholar) learnt
quickly all the ways, and sharking humors of the Camp, and understood nimbly
the Soldiers social debauchery, as well to drink and drab, as to preach or
pray. Out of these employments (having got acquaintance, and some experience of
Travel) he wound himself into the favor and knowledge of an eminent Court
Lord, and now (like an Essex hop) having got an high pole to climb up on, he
got the honor and degree to be a Doctor of Divinity, and the Kings Chaplain,
and being (according to his obligations) a sole creature of that Lord who so
much favored him, Goff was admitted to some Transactions of secrecy, employed
in travells, and sometimes transmitted (as a minor Agent, and Amvoy) from
England to France, from France to Flanders, from thence to Holland, and other
Countries; but if his person, his parts, his progress, his conversation be
looked upon by judicious and charitable eyes, this Mountebanck, and
State-Emperick, will be found out to be nothing but an empty juggling Impostor,
who has used all the ways of cheating and sharking, to cozen, and gain some
profit and advantage to himself. In the Army, and Winter quarters and Garrisons,
the Officers and Soldiers loathed the pride, lasiness, and inconstancy of their
rude, fantastic, and insolent Minister. In Roterdam, and other Burgher Towns
the coy young Dames, and Fray Freisters made outcryes (as they had at
Elversluce in Holland) and complained of the unruly Doctors rampant and
salacious humors. At the Hague (having kept a tempest of debauchery with some
more Noble, and less-offensive Gallants) he was kicked and thrasht, beaten black
and blew, thrown into the fire, and had been out of the window, and his neck
broke for his beastly sawciness in his drunken fits, (wherein be had provoked,
and abused so many honorable persons) if the goodness of some (in tenderness to
that coat and profession which he has now so shamefully scorned, and
renounced) had not preserved the brute, from being burnt, or killed, or knocked
in the head: Out of this nasty pickle (his brains a little settled) he crept
like a Water-Rat, in the dark, from the Hague to Antwerp, where (sculking with
the scarrs and marks of one of his Companions spurs in his face) he got a
Surgeon to plaster his countenance: And (after some time, having well paid
for his Cures) took his journey toward Paris, with as much confidence as ever;
but there meeting with much derision and scorn, Goff was much slighted, but
that which most deeply struck at the root of his preferments, (and more
troubled him (as appears) than any sin or shame) were the pious checks of a
most venerable and heavenly Divine; who zealously chid Goff, for his
unchristian-like conversation, and those notorious scandals which he had given
to Religion, and his profession; at which admonition, or rather in dignation,
Goff imitated the Crocodile in her tears, and made (deceitfully) some show of
sorrow and repentance. But this stream of hypocrisy flowed more easily from his
eyes, the more powerfully to deceive his wisdom and counsel, who had so
zealously and plainly told him of his lewd and wicked conversation: besides,
Goff hoped by this solemn dissimulation, and by the Letters and Commendations
of this good Man, to have all unworthiness utterly obliterated, and so himself
made more speedily capable of an English Bishopric, if the dignities of the
Church should ever be restored. The hopes of this preferment suddenly failing,
Goff quits the Episcopal, and imbraceth the Presbyterian Interest, and on that
score, under the wing of a great Nobleman crept into Scotland, not doubting,
but (fishing in all waters) he might at last catch something. As for the
Covenant, he bragged, he could as easily swallow that, as crack a Nut; such
toys were not to stick in Statesmens stomachs (in which number he accounted
himself,) and that Pill once swallowed, he doubted not but to creep into any
trust or favor. But the Northern noses quickly smelt the Foxes skin, and knew
how to measure (by their own infidelity) that such a false brother as Goff, was
not to be affianced, or employed in their Negotiations; hereupon he was quickly
dismissed out of Scotland; who in a sullen humor returned to Holland, then to
Flanders, and so to France; where lingering out some time, he received
Intelligence of Mr. Crofts return out of Polonie from his Embassy, to whom he
procured an address, with some Letters and warrants for Money; but in his
journey, projecting chiefly his own ignoble, base interest, he got seven
hundred and fifty Pistols into his own fingers: and having so treacherously
made a solemn cheat, (for a farewell of his service) of his Sovereigns and
Masters money, he speedily slunk into the Society of the Peers Oratoires, at
Paris, and turned Roman Catholic; having against honor, truth, conscience,
know^^dge, subscription, and oaths, renounced the Church of England; and it is
the persuasion of many who know this Mouster, that it he were now at
Constantinople, he might be easily tempted to be one of Mahomets Mufties, and
to turn Turk. In this guise, this Jugler and his Money have found sanctuary; and
this is a Third Stella cadens, wandering Star, who for private ends seems fixed
to another Orb, the Church of Rome: but his light is so dim, and influence so
dangerous, that none but fools or mad men will follow this Ignis fatuus, who is
now cried up for a good man, and a Saint on Earth; out of which Commendations
he may creep (in time) to be a Confessor to some Revolted Ladies, if they
please to be so simply deluded.

CHAP. XXXV.
THe next who follows in the Legend, is a bird of the same feather with Goff,
called, Master Doctor Vane; who (timorous Lapwing) was quickly afrighted out of
the Nest, and singed, not with the flames, but the fears of a Civil war in
England, took wings, and fled to France; where his Arivall was much more welcome
(to some) for the company of the fair Dame his Wife, than for any admiration of
worth or parts in himself, which (by those who best knew him in the Pulpit, or
the Schools) were never much admited. And as for his starting and alteration in
Religion, that work is rather looked on, as a fair compliance to maintenance and
subsistence, (in these sharper times) than any fundamental cause or ground.
Indeed the change of one, who had been the Kings Chaplain, (though but
extraordinarily) might cause some noise and notice in a strange Country; and
the work of Changing being then more rare, cause some pity; and the Romish
Priests, and pity, and interested friends, might solicit for the promise of a
Pension; but all this pretense was only as a bait to catch, and secure the
Gudgeon, not to feed him, the Priests and Jesuits, who scrued him into their
obedience, engaged him to put forth his scandalous Libell against the Church of
England, which Vane called his Ovis perdita, his Lost Sheep; but with how many
falsities that malicious Tract is stuffed, is easily discerned by a judicious
Reader: And an ingenuous Man cannot but blush, that so young, so raw, so
illiterate a proficient in Polemical Arguments, who (certainly) scarce ever
read one Greek or Latin Father entirely in all his life, should so boldly
(though with the help of other learned Clerks) use Quotations, and Cite so
many Authors (though impertinently, or falsely) in his late Tract: Yet the
Apostat (once Revolted) was so heightened with insolency and malice, that he
thought no venom strong enough to be spit at, and then to destroy that tender
good Nurse, who had received him into her arms, and given him so much innocent
milk, and fed an unthankful child with so much solid Truth; by the fruits of
this bitter Root, ( Vanes present) he prevailed to get some acquaintance
amongst Strangers, who (caught with Novelties, and his detestation of that
which they hated) became persons interested, to solicit, and petition the
Queen Regent of France, for a Pension for the new Convert, which the Court of
France easily promised, and importunity prevailed for the sum of one hundred
Pistols to be paid; but in the expense and strength of that, the Family was to
be considered, and the Doctor was engaged to a Journey and Pilgrimage to Rome,
for an unerring Benediction, after the kiss of his Holiness slipper: which made
the Doctor so infallible in his Conversation, that he drank freely and daily,
the pleasant Wines of the Country, to such proportions, that he and his
Comrades became the discourse of his own Countrymen, and of the sober Italians.
Their money at last growing low, and the Visit made to Rome over, the Doctor
returns (as wise as he went) to Paris, where being of no great esteem,
(notwithstanding his present of Ovis perdita, his Lost Sheep) the sneaking
Wormb is crawled into the practice of Physic, hoping by that Profession to
gain something out of Patients of all complexions. In this new guise (savoring
more of his Serpent, than his Dove) he is now returned into England, where
under the color of a Physician, he is to administer his Spiritual Pills, and
to try how they can work in the veins of his Countrymen. Thus the
Theological-Physical Doctor works as he wanders, abusing Hypocrates and Galen,
as well as the Fathers; but if his Pills prove no better for the body, than his
rules and doctrine for the soul, his Patients will have no more comfort of his
Remedies, than a company of starved Mice, of Mercury or Rats-bane to their
breakfast.

CHAP. XXXVI.
THe next who fitly follows in the wooden Legend, Mr. Hugh Cressie.
is Mr. Hugh Cressie, whom the storms of Ireland and England have blown over
into France, and into another Religion than what he seemed to preach and
profess to the world for many years. It is very probable, this discontented,
despairing creature, was bred a Puritan, and understood little of the doctrine
or practice of the Church of England. In his Apology for his Reconciliation to
Rome, he rails mightily against the persons of Luther and Calvin, and the
Protestants in General; and through their sides strikes fiercely at the Divines
of the Church of England, whom he charge falsely, That all of them (contrary
to their Oaths and Subscriptions) had submitted to the late Covenant, and so
abrenuntiated their former obligations and tenets; but how fall, and
notoriously untrue this scandal is, is visible to all men's eyes who live in
these sad days. In other places of his Book he makes Calvin and Luther, the
Fathers and Founders of the Religion of the Church of England, which is a
charge equally mistaken, as Mr. Hooker advises in his Eclesiastick Policy, and
as all men know, who understand any thing of the Reformation of the Church of
England, begun in King Edward the sixths days. This unsatisfied Seeker has
tasted of many waters in diverse Countries, as Ireland, England, Italy, France,
and Flanders, and (like a light Bowl) having not been well biased at first,
was apt to turn out of the way with the least Rub; his wings could not endure
the scorching heats of of a Civil war, either in Ireland, or England, and
therefore he composed himself for travel into other Countries; where he did
not only change the air and climat, but his mind, and resolulutions of his
soul, renouncing timorously, and most unworthily his Religion and Profession,
and became a Roman Catholic, ensnared to that new choice, by the hopes and
promise of being to be admitted an idle Drone or Monk in the Charterhouse at
Paris, where he might live as warmely, as lapt all over in Lambs skins, and
like a Be in a plentiful Hive, fed with the purest Amber honey. With this
golden delusion was Mr. Cressie caught, and so strangely wrought upon to alter
Truth for Falsehood, Religion for Superstition, and the Church of England, for
that of Rome; In this violent fit the deluders insulted on his bad humors,
(being predominant at that season) and gave him such Physic, or rather Poison,
as made him swell with venom and malice against primitive and ancient Truth;
and in this mode, he not only solemnly renounced the Religion which he had long
embraced, but vented much rancor and untruth against her; until this work was
finished and published, M. Cressie had hoverly encouragements, and hopes to be
admitted into the rich, plentiful, warm Orders of the Carthusians, but (his
Masterpiece of untruth and malice being Printed and published) the
Charterhouse Monks were too wise for the new Convert, they gave him leave to be
fed with the crumbs of hope, and comfortable expectation, until he was made
sure on their side by spewing up, and contradicting his old principles; but
that done, they barred the door of future possibilities to such a plentiful
secure condition, and his crafty Patrons gave Mr. Cressie then leave to search
out for some other Order and Condition, as not fit, nor worthy to taste of the
Plenty, or to be trusted with the Secrets of that rich Society; at which news
and apprehension, the man was much dejected: but (being so far entered into the
intricat labyrinth, as that he knew not how to return) he crept into the Order
of St. Benet, and in that weed (working on the good nature of some deluded
simple Ladies) he is with much ado kept from starving, being Priest and
Confessor to a petty young Nunnery (now erecting) at Paris. But it is
charitably believed, that if this Revolter might have quietly enjoyed his
Deanery in Ireland, or his Prebendary at Windfor, he would never have changed
his Religion, for a possibility of being a Charterhouse Monk, nor have fallen
into the condition of a needy, poor, Benedictine.

CHAP. XXXVII.
A Another black Swan of these fickle times, is, one Master Doctor Baily, Mr.
Dr. Baily.
Son to the late Lord Bishop of Bangor, who set forth that Tract, called the
Practice of Piety. This fiery Spirit seemed mightily enraged against the humors
of these later times: and he did not only talk, and preach, and pray, but took
up arms, and fought furiously against all parties, who as enemies, endeavored,
or designed to pull down the Miter, or the Crown. In this Quarrel, he, with
violent passion, engaged his person, his fortune, and his friends, and seemed
to adventure and hazard all, to protect the Church and the King; But he no
sooner entered into the walls of Ragland Castle (where was most certainly great
store of Gold and Silver) but the Doctor suffered himself to be new molded,
and the old Lord of Worcester had rich Arguments to inchant this wild Divine to
new Principles. The wealthy objects of such great Treasure, as he daily saw,
dazzled his eyes, and speedily wrought upon his impressive temper, so that on a
sudden, as an ignorant Traveller in a Cross-way, Baily knew not whether, rather
to embrace the title of Doctor, or Colonel, whether to walk in a Cassock, or
march in a Buff coat, and whether to use the Martial or Spiritual Sword; but
the dispute and Combat was quickly over, the great strength and wealth of
Ragland, together with the grace and favor of the old rich Marquess of
Worcester, did so astonish this bare Officer, that his Commission to be a
Colonel was very welcome; and to rise from a low needy Condition, to such
command and plenty as abounded in that Garrison, was an Argument irresistible
for his ambition. The Castle being forced at length to a surrender, the
Colonel-Doctor was a principal party in the transaction of the Articles of
Condition, and the parti-colored Colonel (ever taking particular care for
himself) so lined his Welsh hose, that he was able to see the world abroad, and
to travel into France, and so to Italy, in a profuse and plentiful expense and
garb; and having fed his appetite with the delicious varieties of those warmer
Countries, he returned for England again; where (finding no hopes of such a
second Garrison, and such silver Mines as were in Ragland Castle) he framed his
wit to compose some frothy Romances, and some other light stuff of
inconsiderable value: amongst the rest, that which he styles the Royal
Charter; where in the tenth Chapter he declares, That the Jesuit and the
Puritan about an hundred years since, taught, that it was lawful to murder
Kings, Page 65. and he reiterates the same words, Page 71. That Jesuits and
Puritans taught the world that it was lawful to murder Kings. In his fifteenth
Chapter, the Doctor pretends to prove Episcopacy Jure Divino; and yet Page 112.
he confounds the names, as well as the orders of Apostles, Bishops, Presbyters,
and Ministers, and concludes grossly, That the Jus Divinum consisted not in the
Episcopacy, but Government; and then says, (but very erringly) That Episcopal
Government, degenerated into Government of Priests, or Presbyters, is a
Government Jure Divino: In this, as in many other Points, the Author is
mistaken, as an unskilful fickle builder, diruit, aedificat, what he rears with
one hand, he pulls down with the other; and amongst many stories of his Travels,
having freely railed at all the Commonwealths of Europe, at last he fell
desperately on the new erection of that in England. Which angry and unpleasing
History, provoked strict examination, and the Colonel-Doctors imprisonment,
whence making an escape, he first went into Holland, and having rambled abroad
much more in in his mind, than he had in his body, at last he declared himself
a Roman Catholic; And from a hot-brained Rodomontado, he is become a
melancholy desperate Zelot in the Roman interest, wherein (if he meet with any
occasion) he breaks forth, like a flash of Lightning, into rage and sury
against the true Religion he preached and professed, and seems ready (like a
blacksoul'd Canoneer with Match and Lynstock in his hand) to give fire, and
batter the walls of that Church, whereof he was a Member and Prebend; and
having no duty, nor kindness for his Mother, he cares not how scornfully he
abuses the memory of his own Father, nor disgraces that Order and Miter that
yet honors his Fathers name and tomb. This new Roman Saint needs no Red
Letters for his Canonization, his high ranting humor being very legible in his
fiery complexion; his looks seem very desperate, as though he had a design to
stab some Great one (like Raviliack) with a Poniard, or (like another Guido) to
attempt some more solemn mischief with a dark Lanthorn, in in another hellish
Powder Plot.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Master Crawshaw
MAster Crawshaw (Son to the London Divine) and sometimes Fellow of St. Peter
house in Cambridge) is another slip of the times, that is, transplanted to
Rome. This peevish silly Seeker glided away from his Principles in a Poetical
vein of fancy, and impertinent curiosity; and sinding that Verses, and measured
flattery took, and much pleased some female wits, Crawshaw crept by degrees
into favor and acquaintance with some Court-Ladies, and with the gross
commendations of their parts and beauties (burnisht and varnisht with some
other agreeable adulations) he got first the estimation of an innocent,
harmless Convert; and, a purse being made by some deluded, vain glorious
Ladies, and their friends, the Poet was dispatched in a Pilgrimage to Rome,
where if he had found in the Sea Pope Urban the eighth, instead of Pope
Innocent, he might possibly have received a greater quantity, and a better
number of Benedictions; For Urban was as much a pretender to be Prince, and
Ecumenical patron of Poets, as head of the Church; but Innocent being more
harsh and dry, the poor small Poet Crawshaw, met with none of the generation
and kindred of Maecaenas, nor any great blessing from his Holiness, which
misfortune puts the pitiful wierdrawer to a humor of admiring of his own
raptures: and in this fancy (like Narcissus) he is fallen in love with his own
shadow, conversing with himself in verse, and admiring the birth of his own
brains; he is only laughed (...), or (at most) but pityed by his ^ew Patrons,
who conceiving ^im unworthy of any preferments in their Church, have given him
leave to live (like a lean Swine almost ready to starve) in (...) poor
Mendicant quality; and that favor is granted, only because Crawshaw can rail
as sa^y^ically and bitterly at true Religion in Verse, as others of his grain
and complexion can in Prose, and loose discourses: this fickle shurtlecock so
^ost with every changeable puff and blast, is rather to be laughed at, and
scorned for his ridiculous levity, than imitated in his sinful and notorious
Apostasy and Revolt.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
ANd now (in this Ring and Rabble of Turncoats) enters a Saint indeed, and
worthy a letter or mark in his for head; he is famous by the name of Rowlands:
Mr. Rowlands.
one, who probably was never of any degree in a University; yet (perhaps) had
the honor to creep up to be a poor Curat in England. This drunken sot had the
luck to reel out of England into France, and to stagger from London to Paris,
there to guzzle as deeply in the juice of the Grape, as he had swil'd himself
in that of Good Ale. This Fellows head is like an Irish Bogg, a spungy
Quagmire, his brains are in a perpetual Sowse-tub, the pickle is only now
changed from Ale to Wine: This parboyld Rat would be accounted a great Rabbin
beyond Sea, did not his besotted countenance betray, and discover his ignorant,
stupid, dull soul. This profound Soaker, knows nothing better, than how to
swallow and carouse, and (daily surfeiting) to vomit and spew his loathsomness,
which brings up with it falsehood and malice. This Buffoon is one of the
common scorns of all Civil people, as carrying about him all the signs and
tokens of a shameless Sot; his eyes are ready to tumble out of his head; his
Bacon complexion is greazy, dropical, and like the gelly of Veal; his breath,
and belchings, are strong enough to cause an infection; his clothes stink as
nastily as the lees and droppings of a moldy Hogshead, or a Brewers apron: And
as the beast has on him the Drunkards marks, so he has had their guerdons and
rewards: Some of his own companions (tired and ashamed with his foul disorders)
having first sowed him in a blanket, have tossed him as a fungus or maulkin
stuffed with straw; sometimes they have singed his hair, and otherwhiles set
the ends of candles burning on his feet, which have scorched his toes, before
the Buzzard could be made to wake, or become sensible. This Secular, studies
most in Cabarets and Taverns, is the companion of Water-Merchants,
Crochettiers, and Porters; his rest and repose is usually upon benches, and
chairs, and stools in petty Tap-houses; unless he chance to creep under some
Cart, and get a pile of Faggots to shelter him from the rain. This debauched
wretch is ambitious to be accounted an example of piety, presumes to climb up
into the Pulpits at Paris, and disputes before the Gates of the petty Burbon,
commonly in the streets with simple weak Hugonots, and does spit, and froath,
and draffle as much nonsense, malice and vanity, as can be imagined; and being
Chaplain to Father * Abbot, it is possible for his great worth, Mr. Mountacute.
this Monster may get into the Legend; but if such horrid ignorant Asses
stumble into the Calendar, it matters not much whom the Church of Rome curses
and excommunicates for Schismatics and Heretics.

These several, more notorious Ringleaders, are to be looked upon as persons
not of any eminent piety, but of self ends, and interest; and their company and
doctrines shunned, as most pernicious and dangerous; their conversation is very
contagious, and their infection has poisoned too many already, who are reduced
and become their miserable proselites; some simple men and women having become
seduced to stray with these Grand Impostors.

CHAP. XXXIX.
TO the number and tribe of these English Revolters, a famous Scot may be
seasonably added, Mr. Simonet.
Master Simonet, sometimes a great zealous Preacher, and Presbyter of the Kirk
and Assembly of Scotland. This bold, brazen-faced dissembler did, with much art
and cunning, pretend great zeal to piety, and used a form (too common, and too
much now in fashion) of Godliness: under the guises of these holy pretenses,
Simonet crept (a long time) into private houses, Conventicles, and secret
meetings (as well as the public Congregations) where he wrought much
mischief; and with long prayers (in Hypocrisy) devoured Widows houses, and
committed many vilanies: At length; the shameless confident Scot insinuated
into the company of Sir James Hamiltons Lady, whose Husband living abroad, the
dishonorable Dame was tempted to lewdness in his absence, and the lecherous
Presbyter ensnared the Lady to a base unworthy familiarity; at last, yielding
to his unchaste motions, the Lady was got with child by the Presbyter, and most
shamefully cast off the obligations and promise to her noble Husband, made in
the bonds of Wedlock and Marriage. This most sinful and most notorious Accident
was quickly and lowdly talked on through all Scotland; the Knight (so
abominably affron^ed by his Wife, and Simonet) at last received the Alarm, and
news of these particulars, and thought of nothing but Revenge upon the
Fornicator and the Adulteress. The Assemblies of the Presbyters were in a great
dispute, and could not well resolve, Whether to look on Simonet with
compassion, and tender his condition, as a weak Brother, who had been tempted,
and so fallen; or else, Whether to stand upon their Assembly Privileges, and to
acquit and defend their lapsed Partner; or, if that proceeding might
shamefully, and too much irritate the people, Whether Simonet should be punished
according to the severity of the Laws of the Kirk; whiles these agitations
were in debate, and some public determinations by the Presbyters, Simonet
contrives to withdraw himself out of Scotland; and getting beyond Seas, he
suddenly takes Sanctuary; and to cover his sins, and secure his person from
further danger, either of Sir James Hamilton, or his Brethren the Presbyters,
he turns Roman Catholic, and lurking in the habit of a Secular Priest, at
length he got to be Chaplain to the Archbishop of Corinth, Coadjutor of Paris,
and in that service he does continue his old impudence and villainy, seducing
and disturbing; the change is only this, from a cunning, sharking Scottish
Presbyter, he is transformed into the shape of a more impudent, saucy, Secular
Popish Priest; in which capacity, he rails as much at the Church of England,
(though with much ignorance, envy, and falseness,) as he did when he was acting
the part of a proud, piert, lascivious Presbyter; And this is another such like
Roman pillar who is likely to prove as great a Saint on that side the sea, as
he was to have been in the Kirk of Scotland.

CHAP. XL.
THese great Impostors, like cunning Juglers, have deluded many; Some, as
Children, are easily puffed up, and enticed with every trivial blast of new
doctrines, and much taken with Babies, toys and trifles; and sometimes, those
of elder Age grow doted and deluded. It has fallen out thus with many wanderers
of these times, who afrighted out of their Religion, and perhaps out of
England, wi^h the terror and effects of a Civil War, have found out new faces,
new fancies, and new resolutions, at home, and in other Countries; where, for
better assurance of gaining ease, or the hopes of plenty and safety, they have
parted with substances, for shadows, and truth, for errors; vaing loriously
concluding into the bargain, that they should get the names and reputations of
good Roman Catholics.

The greater numbers of these Converts and Revolters, might yet follow, Men,
and Women, subjects more soft and easy, and therefore more fit to be tampered
withal, as more thirsty after new fashions, and so more capable of
alterations, and the dress a la mode. But a decyphering of them, and their
interests, might seem a work too tart and bitter; therefore charity spares
their characters. And it is lesser wonder, to see smaller Shrubs scorched and
burnt up with weaker flames; when seeming Oaks and Cedars so suddenly fall and
tumble down; overturned with the gusts and winds of a Civil War.

CHAP. XLI.
THe strokes of Afflictions are very sharp, trying the very hearts and reins;
and as they engrave glorious marks and characters in religious Martyrs, and
patient Confessors; (who are well grounded in the faith) so their smart lashes,
afright, and drive away, to any desperate mutation, the light and giddy humors
of unsettled minds: This is a common experience in the History of the sacred
Book of God, where Judas was, as certainly affrighted with the news of our
Saviors passion, (and therefore feared his own troubles and Persecution) as
tempted with the price of blood, and the thirty pieces of silver, that reward
of iniquity. Fear, and Covetousness, are very ill Commanders, and lead on many
ugly followers; their company is infectious, the design sinful, and the end
very damnable. These two capital betrayers of worth and honesty, fear of
further loss, and hopes of future gain, inclined Iscariot, not only to
forsake, but to betray his Master; and not only to fall from, but to fall on
Innocence it self. There are some other Vipers which attend these horrid
Monsters; as, Envy, and Malice, at others, both parts, and fortunes: Ignorance,
and thereby a dull uncharitable measuring of others (though of great abilities)
by the narrow, scantless, and short cubit of their own imperfect, and ruder
judgments; Rashness and impatience, cruelty and detraction, keep the timorous
always company; and it is most true, oderunt quos metuunt, men ever hate
(though without cause) whom they fear. It is no wonder then, if timorous
afrighted spirits forsake, and fly from a Profession, and Religion, which may
(for the maintenance of its truth) render the Pofessors, either more miserable,
or less secure in their Plenty, and Content. It was even thus in the College of
Christ's own Apostles, which was dissolved, and they scattered, when the great
Shepherd of our souls was arraigned, condemned, and crucified: One betrayed
him, but all forsook him, and fled, Mark 14, 50. But, except one Traitor, who
desperately dispatched and hanged himself, Mat. 27.5. all the other holy
Apostles speedily recovered themselves from fear and cowardice: St: Peter,
though afar off, yet still followed his Master, and though he sat without,
Mat. 26.96. yet even there was he within the Palace, and when driven thence, he
went out into the Porch: though he denied shamefully his Lord with his mouth,
yet he manfully defended him with his hand, when he dared to smite off one of
the High Priests servants ears. The glorious company of the Apostles, whose
souls seemed to have been in deliquio, almost quite melted for sorrow of
Christ's Passion, quickly revived at the noise of his resurrection from the
Grave; and those, who showed themselves than men, when Christ was crucified, did
put on the courage of Angels, when they understood he was risen from the dead;
reco^pencing the failing of their flesh, with the great fortitude of their
minds, and the few minutes of fear, with their whole age of better resolutions,
boldly professing that Truth, which they followed to the Cross; and (at last)
sealing with their blood, what they preached with their tongues, and published
to all Nation.

CHAP. XLII.
THe many Demasses of this age (who like frosted leaves have fallen from that
Tree that nourished the^ with the juice of truth) surely, have not believed
this doctrine, or not followed these examples; but rather, in these times of
sharper trials (like those dissemblers, who pretended to be Christ's disciples)
as neither willing (though it were to save their souls in the ark of Gods
Church) to endure hard language, nor hard labor, much less to suffer the
loss of their plenty, ^ase, content, or safety: St. John records the infamous
Apostasy, John 6.66. From that time, many of his Disciples went back* and
walked no more with him. Thus have too many disobedient children forsaken their
Mother; and (as infected with the falling sickness of the times) have, in
their distempers, frothed out the v^nome of their disease. The constitution of
these lapsed Revolters, is not much unlike the ignoble temper of Aratus
Sicyonus, in Polibius, Lib. 6. Qui ad Civilia omnia mirifice vafer and
appositus; trepidabat in bellicis: nec exequi aut facere, cor aut corpus ei
firma. Aratus was of an excellent wit, very subtle and crafty, and very active
and prompt in Civil affairs; but if called to Martial counsels, or the
business of War, the Coward and Pultron trembled; having neither a heart, nor
a body for such heroic enterprises: but (as that Historian goes on) hic autem
ipse si quando in Aperto acie dimicare vellet segnis in Consiliis, timidus in
Aggressionibus, nec aspectu quidem aut vultu pugnam tolerans, If the great
Politico were concerned in a battle, or a fight, he proved flat and dull in his
advice, timorous and fearful at the Re'encounter, and durst neither see, nor
be seen in an Army ready to engage an Enemy.

CHAP. XLIII.
THus many verbal champions, who in calm and serene days, and more Civil times,
seemed to love truth (impartially, and for her own sake) are fallen flat; and
tumbled into those unclean labyrinths, whence their forefathers were delivered
by a great Providence, that they and their children might worship God with more
Truth and Devotion, and less error, vassalage, and superstition. It is almost
an act of Mercy, not to take notice, but to pass by rather, those many other
Roman Proselites, who have (in these later times) revolted from their Religion,
and that Church wherein they were incorporated, baptized, and confirmed. It is
S. Iudes counsel in his Epistle, ver. 22. And of some have compassion, making a
difference; and others save with fear, absterrentes illos, and sancta
severitate revocantes; terrifying them with their present danger, and so (if
possible) recovering them with holy severities. The Apostle proceeds with
tender bowels, ver. 23. Pulling them out of the fire; hating even the Garment
spotted with the flesh. It is even this divine consideration that persuades,
not to lay open the humors, opinions, lives, interests, and designs of the
other Revolters, lest (their ways and works discovered) the Parties concerned
may grow more desperate, as to themselves, or more odious and scandalous to
all, who are not flatterers to their Apostasy. The common wings, whereon too
many have fled away, (like the unkind Raven) from the Ark, are, Fear and
Covetousness; which shapelesse Monsters, under the shadows of security and
plenty, have bewi^ched some to a choice of new interests; which if ripped up,
and sifted to the bottom (it is to be feared) too much chaff and tares would be
found in the late Roman Professors conversations; but it is better to leave
the^ to the examination of themselves, that dealing impartially with their own
hearts, they may return to that truth, from which they have (after so many
Oaths, Vows, Protestations, Amens, and holy Communion in the Sacraments)
parted, so weakly, or so wilfully.

CHAP. XLIV.
BUt although many deluded Persons are spared out of pity, or the hopes of a
Recovery, (from whence they are lost;) yet no fins ought to be concealed or
smothered, that infatuate and deceive to wretched Apostasy: It is an old rule,
jubet peccare, qui non vetat, that he is (at least) an Abettor, that is not a
Rebuker of fin. And Philo taxed Flaccus, (sitting President at a Council in
Alexandria) when Agrippa was abused and scorned, and no notice taken, nor so
much as a check, (...), That he that did not at least rebuke, if not correct,
an offense or sin, did in some measure, permit and tolerate, if not command the
Sin. Cassiodore goes nearer, in the example of Theodahadus, a King; who aiming
at the Reformation of his Subjects errors, concluded, A Domesticis inchoare
Cassiodor: lib. 10. var. Epist. 5.
volumus disciplinam, ut reliquos pudeat errare, quando nostris Cognoscimur,
excedendi licentiam non Praebere, To begin his discipline with those first of
his own Family; that Strangers might be the more ashamed to commit those
offenses, which were so severely punished in his own Domestics, all liberty of
excess being utterly restrained.

CHAP. XLV.
THese Examples and Rules, direct, (as agreeing with Christian Religion) That
it is not only tolerable, but just and necessary, to rebuke their Sins, whose
Persons are to be honored, or pityed; otherwise, what is a politic silence,
or a smooth flattery, but a Postern-door; or a fair Bridge, to convey (sooner)
souls, in great danger, to Hell it self. Therefore, that the Patient may
recover, (if possible) before the disease grow incurable, it may be proper, to
lay open, and discover the malignity of that poison, which (if not prevented,
or mastered by Antidotes) may irreparably destroy those, who are infected
therewith: And whiles those nine S. Toby Matthews. Mr. Mountacute. Dr. Goff.
Dr. Vane. Dr. Baily. Mr. Cressie. Master Clawshaw. Mr. Rowlands. Mr. Simonet.
Active Ringleaders, are looked on by all men, as pernicious and dangerous
Examples; as having forfeited their Faith, and Oaths, to all things that might
speak them, either religious or moral, It may not be unseasonable, to have
compassion on some others: (whom the Moderator has presented to the world,
either at large, or in his, etc.) And, whiles a self guilt condemns them, for
their dangerous new choice, perhaps they may recover, (as some others Mr. Hen.
Carry, M. Patrick Carry.
have don) to that Ancient way, that according to primitive examples, may more
securely lead them out of their errors, and put them in a direct path toward
Paradise. Impartial glances on sin, are wholesome, though not pleasant; and a
wise man, or a good Christian, takes it well, when his disease is found out;
but much more when a remedy overtakes it, or strives to keep it company.

CHAP. XLVI.
IT is not long since, 12 years, De Negotiis Civilibus si quid statuitur nemo
putat esse violandum, and praeceptum de Kell^gione calcabitur? Amb. ad Valen.
a visible Uniformity was backed and supported with a great Authority; then the
Presbyter and the Jesuit were chained up into more obscure Conventicles, or
darker Circles; but when they once got loose, they suddenly grew fierce and
violent, and like Watermen, having got Oars to tug with, they plied at any
stairs to get a Passenger. The giddy multitudes perceiving a gap open to
change, thirsted and gaped Humanum Genus est avidum nimis auricularum. Lucret.
Est men's nostra vaga, and novitate rerum laetissima. Seen. Quis autem finis: si
semel carceres hos aperis, ad innovandum. Ibid.
wide for an Alteration; and the cunning Artists, observing the Crisis for best
adva^tage, made the raging waves to roar; they made the Peoples ears, and their
fingers itch for Reformation: The design was specious, and had a show of
godliness, the words, Religion, and Reformation, are excelent terms, and carry
with them a silver sound in the peoples ears; Thus a pre^ence of Justice, and a
Religious Vow to be paid at Hebron, 2 Samuel 15.11. drew away many hundreds, in
their simplicity, but they knew not any thing: -- Quod saepius olim
* Relligio peperit scelerosa, Lacret.
atque impia facta.


Thus often, in Ancient times, Religion patronized horrid crimes.

CHAP. XLVII.
BUt, though many innocent souls were drawn away in their simplicity, yet
others heightened the troubles and confusions, which promised to foster and
nourish their hopes and ends; and were not only Passive, but vigorous and
Active in their new designs, and aims. Sunt quibus ingenium and votum
inclarescendi perturbar^.
On this score, the Jesuits proceeded and wrought with double diligence;
resolved (according to that great Cardinal Richlieu.
Politicians Maxim) That Angliam turbare, to raise Tumults, and to thrust
England into commotions, was the readiest way to their business.

It is true indeed, many thousands, simple ones, were drawn aside; but other
Volunteers quickly shrunk on their own accord, from their love to impartial
truth, and their first Principles, and some gave themselves over to swallow a
Covenant, and so (though lost) ventured to travel in a dark Scottish mist;
others, liked no air, but what was breathed from Rome; and having abjured and
renounced what they had so long embraced and admired, they transplanted their
thoughts to another Religion, new interests and ways, to thrive in the World,
at least expecting dissentiones augente licentia, That dissentions much
increasing, they might the better Julianus primum securitatem suam slabilire ab
hoc christianorum dissidio conatus. Ammianus.
establish their own hopes and security, by the rended opinions and
distractions of the times, and either to live in the ruins of what was to be
destroyed, at home; or in the detestation of that which could not give them a
farther support and maintenance, and in that garb to travel abroad, and shark
in other Countries.

CHAP. XLVIII.
OR, if these relations of temporizing sins seem to General (leaving the
Discourse of the deluded hot Presbyters to the sense of their own violent
folly, which now seems somewhat qualifyed with better temper, and repentance for
former impetuosities) as not to touch the quick, nor search the wounds to the
bottom; It may be proper and reasonable, to discover particular instances, that
have inveagled, and caused several Revolts, and sudden alterations. Motives to
Revolt to Rome:
A design of getting great Favor, great Power, profitable places, mixed with
Curiosity, and other self-interest, Ambition.
has been a temptation too prevalent with many, to change their Religion; as
Seamen and Mariners stand over to several shores, if any Wind or Tide cross
them, the better to gain the fair Haven of their own desires. Some weak,
Rashness -- Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
Ovid.
rash judgments, measure Truth in Religion, by success in humane Affairs:
concluding, that Church is not well reformed, nor is it sound in faith and
doctrine, which is not attended with victories, and the Glory of Plenty and
Prosperity: and, (transported with the violent errors of self-opinion) resolves
not to be any longer of that Religion, whose Defender, and Professors have lost
so many battles. This Argument, is fit for none but short-sighted censurers,
who are more guided by sense, than reason: and rather conclude, as mere
Animals, then rational and understanding men. Such a demonstration as this, a
Scottish Merchant used (not long fince at Amsterdam) who because he had many
losses at Sea, (being a Christian) was persuaded to be Circumcised, to go to
the Synagogue and turn Jew; and so to get Mammon, denied his Savior: It any be
of this opinion, he may (if he please) become a loyal Turk, and plead for the
Grand Signiors cause, and rights; because he and his Predecessors have subdued
and captivated the poor Greek Christians, and so long prospered.

CHAP. XLIX.
A Golden delusion, and dream of a restitution of Abbeylands, and a re-edifying
of those fair Monuments of Piety and Chari^y, is a bait, that serves to catch
some greedy Fish; and in this fancy, some, not so religiously, as Covetousness.
covetously and ambitiously, promise great honors and commodious preferments
to themselves; believing, that the Jesuits and Roman wits looking (at present)
so cheerfully on the rubbish and ruins of antiquity, they may live to see a
restoration of Pontifical Structures, and themselves famous Grandees and
Trustees by their Commissions from his Holiness at Rome. This very design was
hot and high in Ireland, but proved as ridiculous, as monstrous; having
effected nothing but further ruins, and greater confusions.

CHAP. L.
Luxury.
luxury, fresh air, good clothes, delicat wines and fruits, and all enjoyed
without the noise of Drums and Trumpets, in peaceable Cantons and Countries,
whilst their own has been in hot combustions and wars, have enchanted and
besotted some, rather to turn their Religion, than to starve heir belly; and
although they would be reputed holy Converts, yet (let their own Conscience be
their Confessor) if, Phil. 3.19.
as those belly-Gods the Philippians, they love not their Meat above the Mass,
and follow a new Profession in Religion, as some did Christ, Joh. 6.26.
not so much out of love to him, as for the bread and loaves, and when that
failed, they forsook him.

CHAP. LI.
AN Atheistical, and Profane humor of some, Atheism.
has seized on some, who presume to be as blasphemous amongst Christians, as
Lucian was rude, bitter, and uncivil, amongst the grave Philosophers: and in
this mode, they can indifferently keep a Sabbath, with a Jew, a Christian, or a
Turk, and as usually go to Mass, as to Market; so they may but get the least
smile, or favor of advantage.

CHAP. LII.
Preferment.
in the City, or at Sea in a good Ship: A Mistress, or a Wife, these poor
Relations have startled some, who have so Idolized their own Interests, that
rather than not enjoy their expectations, they resolved to turn any way, and to
embrace any n^w commands, though never so dangerous to the soul.

CHAP. LIII.
THe hopes of an honorable Marriage, A fortune in Marriage.
accompanied with youth, plenty, a great jointure, a noble train, and a
complete equipage, are silver lines, which have drawn some to be married at
Mass, whose Religion has entered no further than their eyes and ears; which
have been too much dazzled, and tickled, with sweet sounds, and gorgeous and
gilded apparitions.

CHAP. LIVE.
POverty has a terrible face, Durum telum necessit as.
and pincheth shrewdly; the fear of the loss of Liberty has alarmed some out
of their quarters, Fear of want.
and driven them timrously to comply with the Roman interest, not so much out
of Conscience, as Compliance; to get Pensions and Portions from Strangers
hands. And in this changeable condition, how have many disgraced their Religon,
dishonored themselves, and made themselves not only sinful before God, but
scandalous and ridiculous to all the world? turning and returning, and turning
over and over L. K.
with any new blast or gale, that might better fill their wavering sails. These
Cords, made up of Gold and Silver twist, have strongly fetched over many, who
(undutifully scorning their own Mother, clad in a torn and ratter's habit, and
poor persecuted dress) have made choice of a rich cunning Stepdame, and have
strained their Consciences, to supply their Conveniences; but it is wisdom for
those who change, to look well to their choice, and where they lay their heads,
lest a Serpent lurk under the Pillow.

CHAP. LV.
REligion is not a mere Politic obligation, (as many use it) but a Sacred
bond, whereby men are engaged to serve the Everlasting, and All-seeing God;
from whose sight and intuition, nothing can be obscured or concealed: if
Hypocrisy or dissimulation could veil the eyes of the Almighty, the dissemblers
might have some color for their fraud; if gifts and bribes corrupt, the
offenders might hope for Advocates and Patrons; but in the High Court of Heaven
there is nothing to interrupt the course of Justice, but Mercy; the Supreme
Judge knows the very thoughts of the offenders hearts. Nihil a Deo clausum
est, interest animis nostris, et cogitationibus mediis intervenit. Seneca
Epist. 84. It is much that a Heathen should so divinely teach Christianity; as
if indeed the Philosopher had read S. Paul's Epistles and translated that part
into Latin, Heb. 4.12. For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper
than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow; and is a discerner of the thoughts of the
heart. Here is then, that light confessed, where neither dwells, nor
interchangeth any darkn^sse at all; small cabinets, and thin curtains cannot
conceal, what thick rocks and mighty Mountains cannot hide, and cover. It is in
vain then for foolish men to lose Paradise, and gain nothing but shame, and
Fig Leaves to cover it; to skin the wound, which must after fester, and rancor
more desperately.

CHAP. LVI.
THese conclusions rightly weighed, the Politicians of the world may be
abashed, to inthrall obedience into their power, by pious pretenses; and under
a face and name of Religion, to hatch so many horrid and foul designs; of which
sort of men no age has been more guilty than this last century, wherein it
would prove an argument very difficult to determine, whether the Puritan or the
Jesuit have don more mischief, as having been Communes Perturbatores Pacis
Christianae, the great disturbers of the Christians peace throughout all the
whole world. But while the worldly wise (guided by the rules of Machiavil,
Borgia, Knox, Bucanan, Loyola, and such desperate Authors) thus prevail with
great delusion, to Tyrannise and Lord it over all the earth, let not truth be
deserted, though never so plain and naked. Act. 27.17.
In a storm every * Mariner puts his hand to the tackle to save the ship,
unless he be a sluggard like Jonah, dead drunk, or in a dead sleep of sin, and
yet, though the Prophet was not awaked with the storm, he was roused by the
Mariners; So the Shipmaster came unto him, and said unto him, what meanest thou
O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think on us, that
we perish not, Jonah 1.6, 7, 8. Thus poor simple seamen, in their afflictions,
taught a great Clerk, a learned Prophet, to ^^ll on God; and Jonahs sin (as the
Prophet confessed) was Peccatum tergiversationis.
tergiversation, a running away from the presence of God, Jonah 1.10, 11. And
nothing can keep poor man from running from his maker, but faith, and
obedience, in the profession of true Religion; a foundation so necessary, that
without it there can be no hopes of Heaven, and when these sacred bounds and
walls are thrown down, how quickly do the beasts of the wilderness enter into
the Vineyard, and destroy and devour the Vine? The Heathens in their politic
reaches found out the experience of Religion, which (though false and
abominable, yet having an influence over the people) served their turns for
government.

CHAP. LVII.
THus Livy writes of Numa (projecting a security to his victory) that he
designed to the People a fear and veneration of the Gods, and multitudinem
dico, non hanc togatum tantum aut muliebrem, sed etiam illam accinctam, and
militarem. Concluding, that an opinion of some Numen, or the Gods, did not only
command the soft and female sex, but likewise the Senators, and the Soldiers,
who easily yielded to a worship, and veneration of a Deity. And another
Historian declares plainly, Curti. li. 6.
Multitudo alicqui impotenss, aeva, mutabilis, ubi vana religione capta est,
melius vatibus quam ducibus paret, that the confused, fierce, distracted
multitude, once overcome, or caught with a religion, loves as easily to obey
their Teachers as follow their Commanders; It was from this very ground that
Plutarch called, (...), Religion, the bend of all Society, and the life and
foundadation of Justice; without which, nec usquam, nec unquam Respub: stetit,
sine aliqua specie relligionis, neither in any age, nor any place, any Kingdom
or Commonwealth has been well established, or long continued; as Aristotle
concludes in his Polit. From this very light many Princes and Heroes (of their
times) have found the way to be more securely Sovereign, either in commanding
their Armies, or governing their Subjects, (once subdued to their power.) Thus
Pub: Scipio (that great General) pret^nded often, and when he had any design,
to consult with Jupiter in the Capitol; Quintus Sertorius, caused his tame
white Hind to march with his Army; Caius Marius had one Martha, whom he called
his Syrian Prophetess; Publius Scylla, in the heads of his Troops, elevated,
and openly showed the Picture and Image of Apollo; And it is a Story, (scarce
out of memory to the presentage) how Charles the 7th. of France, gained, and
recovered very much from the English in that Kingdom, by the delusions of Joan
of Orleans, who boldly addressed to the King, and mira constantia asseruit
divinitus se missam, pellendis e Gallia Anglis, and told him, That she was sent
from Heaven, to expel the English out of France. Res relata ad Consilium,
suasa, dissuasa, Regi admittere visum, and prudenter, ejus sane opera imo ductu
(nam arma Gerebat, et viris Praeibat) Aurelianum arsta obsidione liberatum and
pleraque alia fortiter and faeliciter gesta. Ad extremum tamen vacillavit
vaticinii fides, cum Johanna capta ab Anglis and Rotomagum ducta, igne exusta
est ut Praestigiatrix, as I. Lip: notis. 1. Lib. Pol. makes a full narration:
the raves of the juggling Prophetess was related to the Council; who, after
some debate, thought fit she should be brought to the King; and it was
resolved, she should march before the Armies, which having some success, as
well by her Dreams and Enthusiasms, as Conduct, and Martial Posture, the City
of Orleans was delivered from a straight Siege; but at Rone, the fantastic mad
Prophetess was rewarded for her pretense to Revelations, where (being taken
Prisoner) she was burnt for a Witch by her Enemies. Yet success, had almost
like to have prevailed to have canonized for a Saint, whom the English looked on
as a malicious Sorceresse, or common Strumpet. In France.
And the present age does so dote (yet) on the memory of this impudent Virago,
that her Sword is kept at St. Dennis, as a religious Monument, and is commonly
showed as a Sacred Relic.

CHAP. LVIII.
NOw if the Heathens and Poli^icians make such use, or (rather) abuse of
Idolatry, witchcraft, superstition and Nihil in specimen fallacius, quam p^^va
relligio est, ubi Deorum numen praetenditur se^l^ribus. Live. lib. 39
ralse Religions, how very necessary is the true worship and service of God, to
the preservation of a Kingdom or Commonwealth? which Civil, is very like the
Natural body; wherein, if the heart be once pierced or wounded, the vitals
quickly faint, and the nervs and ligaments are infeebled, the Body (though for
the present supported with some Politic crutches, and patcht and painted with
some Artificial obumbrations and delusions) cannot strongly march, or move any
way; nor stand, nor endure to any long continuation: For, although such a
Sovereignty and Government (like Nebuchadnezzars Image) seem bright and
excell^n^, and thereby deceive and delude vulgar eyes; yet the whole Frame
erected on so weak a foundation, must quickly totter and fall: For what though
the head be composed of Gold, (the most refined Machiavels, and Jesuitical
wi^s) the breast and arms of Silver, (the treasure and wealth of many Kingdoms
and Countries,) the belly and things of Brass (a vast Magazin of Arms,
together with heaps of Morter-pieces, Cannon, Powder, Ball and Bullet, and all
other exquisit torments, and Engines of war) the legs of Iron, (stout Atmies of
resolute officers and Soldiers, and they ready to charge with their muskets,
pikes, and swords) yet because the feet of the great Image were part of Iron,
and part of clay, it quickly fell; so the Prophet tells the story, Then was the
Iron, the Clay, the Brass, and the Gold broken in pieces together, and became
like the chaff of the summer threshing floors, and the wind carried them away,
that no place was found for them, Daniel 2.35. There was a stone made without
hands, the corner stone which the builders refused, the Rock of salvation, as
King David calls him, My Rock, my Fortress, and my Deliverance, 2 Samuel 22.2.
This stone smote the Image on the feet, which were part of Iron and part of
clay, (brake in pieces cruelty, and earthly affections) and became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth, Dan. 2.34, 35. The plots and stratagems
of men, (though the deepest politicians) are but like the Spiders lines and
webbs, which are rent in twain with the weakest straw; or the smallest sprig;
and it is evident, that crutches, though they help to support the body in its
motion, yet they are held up themselves, by the weak hands of the impotent
commanders of them, or else they fall: but true Religion is not only baculum
viatorium, the beggars Crutch, but Columna veritatis, the Rillar of truth,
which (without all staggering) supports the Christians Faith, and most surely
fixes and coroborateth Crowns and Scepters in their Sovereign power. Thus the
Prophet counseled a great King ready to be destroyed, They shall drive thee
from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the sield, and they
shall wet thee with the Dew of Heaven, until thou know, that the most high
rules in the Kingdom of men: Wherefore O King, let my counsel be acceptable
unto thee, and break off thy sias by righteousness, and thy iniquities by
showing mercy unto the Poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity,
Daniel 4.25, 26, 27. The some Prophet was as free with Belshazzar, King
Nebuchadnezzars Son, taxing him faithfully with the crying sins of Pride,
Cruelty, Cum diis pugnant sacrilegi. Curt. lib. 7.
and Sacrilege, But when his heart was lifted up, and his mend hardened in
Pride, he was deposed from his Kingly Throne; And thou his Son have not humbled
thine heart, though thou knew all this: but have lifted up thy self against
the Lord of heaven and they have brought the Vessels of his house before thee;
and thou, and thy Lords, thy Wives, and thy Concubines have drunk wine in them,
thy Kingdom, is numbered, divided, and finished, Dan. 5.23.

CHAP. LIX.
BUt most men as they are easiest taught by what they see before their eyes; so
they are sooner led by the lewdest examples, than the best rules; and if sins
in fashion grow commendable, and get Patrons, Romans 1.32. how many followers
shall success and prosperity (though in wickedness) quickly gather? hence it is
that numbers and multitudes prevail more with many judgments mistaken, than
truth it self; and if it be but vogue that the vulgar may have but a little
share of profit in that which is to be ruined, they are well pleased to hearken
to Catilines motions; and for a poor portion and pittance of expectation, and
of that which can neither make them rich, secure, or happy, (if obtained) the
captivated crowds are enraged, and deluded, to lift up some politic Tribunes
to more Popular height and power, though to no other use or end, (though not
discerned) but as the wanton swelling waves, mount up a well rigged Ship, more
securely to ride over them. And when the Storm begins to rise, and the Wind and
Tide turn toward an alteration, then some subtle and unquiet spirits, greedy
(if possible) that they and their interest should guide and govern the World,
strictly observe the nick of time, strike fire instantly, and if they find the
courteous tindar receive a spark, they blow the coal, non aliter quam scintilla
flatu levi adjuta ignem suam explicat Seneca Epist: 95.
gently at first, to light their sulphurous Match; and then, if the light serve
not for their own end, the desperate Agents (as though they would anticipate
the day of judgment) wilfully set all (that is not for their turn) on
combustion and fire. In working of such effects, the Puritan and the Papist
have been most severely active, resolving to submit and refer all Christian
Power to the Presbyterian Assembly, and Consistory, or to the Papal Conclave;
most parts of Europe have tasted too much of the bitterness of these two fiery
spirits, as Poland, Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands, and England,
Scotland, and Ireland; besides other famous Cantons and Corners of the
Christian world. And, as if the an^ient lesson of the Primitive Christians were
quite forgot, and praeces and lachrimae, prayers and tears, were laid aside,
The Pulpits and Conventicles have been loudly filled with the bloody noise, of
Arma viri, ferte arma; as though Gods service were rather to be done in a
tempestuous whirlwind, lightening, and a crack of thunder, than in a sweet,
peaceful, and gentle voice; or, as if those who pretended to be Ministers of
the Gospel, and had only Commission to shake off the dust of their shoo^s
(where the Gospel was refused) had authority to shake all in pieces, and (in
displeasure) might become as barbarous as the Cyclopes and Giants of old, (
quibus ludo and joco sanguis humanus) who never started at the effusion of
Christian blood.

CHAP. LX.
IT agrees with the Rules and Practice of some Statesmen, non solum tolerasse
sed induxisse sectas diversas; not only to tolerat, but to innovate new Sects,
new Opinions, new Religions, where they intend to found, or enlarge, or continue
their Authority, and so to ingraft various fruits on several arms and
branches of the same Tree, which might flourish, and have their feeding from the
same root. The similitude is sounder than the substance of this Parallel:
Fruits and leaves that have only a vegetative capacity to increase and grow,
may thrive from the common sap and moisture that springs from the root, yet
they seldom prosper, unless they be very connaturall; but rational men, having
souls of most sublime operations, are full of various thoughts and
imaginations; and the entertainment of fancies, and species of things, are
often not what they are in themselves, and really presented, but as they are
received; hence it is, that a very opinion that to one seems as bright as the
Sun, appears to another as obscure and dark as Hell; and that which is tasted
as sweet and pleasant as Milk, by some Palate; is disgusted by others, and
loathed as Poison.

It is not with men, as with Plants, Beasts, and Birds, and the Elements, which
in obedience to the Providence of the Creator, more easily suffer themselves to
be mixed together, according to their several natures, for a General
Preservation of the Universe: Man in the Creation was made in Imaginem Dei, to
have the Rule and Dominion over these Inferiors. A subordination then, and
order was appointed to Men's wills; as the Father was, in Nature and time, so he
was in Honor and Order, before and above the Son, the Father appointed to rule,
and the Children to obey.

This Authority, and this obedience, was to be guided, and regulated by sound
judgment, and Nihil potest esse diuturnum, cui non subest ratio. Q. Cur. l. 4
reason; which (being shrewdly shaken by the laps and fall of man) is more
clearly directed by the holy word of God, who in his great wisdom and mercy
first wrought laws of justice and Government in Man's heart, and then caused
moral laws written in tables of stone. And here came in the visible form of
Religion, which teaches some to rule, and others to obey; and if Religion be
so absolutely necessary, then certainly, unus Deus, una Fides, unum Baptisma,
una Ecclesia, one God, one Faith, one Baptism, one Church; the Apostles golden
chain of unisons Ephesians. 4.4. would be the first bond of peace, as equally
inclining the conscience to obey, as to command, where God sees it meet, as
Saint Paul concludes, (and it is no light argument) Wherefore we must needs be
subject not only for wrath but Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. The sentence being
very terrible that goes before, ver. 2. They that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation: And it is most true, that the best Christians have ever
been the best Subjects, Libenter enim Religiosi subditi parent, and miti
fractaque cervice humanum iugum ferunt, qui semel illud divinum; and they best
bear up the yoke of Authority, and without any repining and reluctance, who
have first conscientiously submitted to the Divine, and express Commands of
God: for true piety, and the fear of God, are the bit and bridle, that restrain
all the rebellious and insolent motions of an ambitious mind. But some
Politicians of later ages, first to creep into, and then to keep up their
domination and commands, like Julian the Apostate, propose a way that seems
plausible, and pleasant, ut quisque Religioni serviretinire pidus, That every
Sectarian might enjoy freely that opinion or humor which he calls his
Religion; thereby concluding, that where there were so many sects and petty
dissentions, there could not be an agreement or union for general opposition;
and hereby the Government became more secure in their hands, who stood at the
helm and ruled all. Secondly, by this Maxim, the Potentates aim to destroy that
which they most fear, and therefore most hate, as most obnoxious and
destructive to their Authority, as Julian designed, eo modo putans Christianum
nomen posse perire de terris, Opt. Melivitan: l: 2.
si unitati ecclefiae de qua lapsus fuerat, invideret. and sacrilegas
dissensiones liberas esse Permitteret, That the very name of Christian should
be forgotten; by the sacrilegious rapines and dissentions that the Emperor
permitted; thus Cato nourished petty discords in his family, that his servants
might not too well agree amongst themselves, to cozen their Master. This rule
has been a policy (long since) amongst the Egyptians, and Iapaneers, and (as
the Moderator plea, ding for a toleration of Popery presses) in France, the
Netherland, and some other Countries; but if the Annals and Chronicles of
several Kingdoms and States, be read over, several sects, like different
factions have only waited for opportunities to sub^u and inslave those who were
not of their judgment, and then the innocent name of Religion, truth, and
Reformation (presently) became the cloaks for rapine and much mischief; and
wherever the variety of several sects are introduced or tolerated, it is most
generlly true, una Religio Dominatur, reliquae, mussant and submittunt, nec ad
honores aut militiam cuiquam aditus, nisi per ill am unam, That one Religion is
most predominant; others are as asleep, or if awake, but in the dark or dim
obscurity; and it is too well known to all the parts of Christendom, what private
grudges, dissentings, and contrary Religions, and what massacers, civil wars,
and effusions of Christian blood, have produced, to the very shame of
Christendom it self.

CHAP. LXI.
AS the Puritan and the Jesuit agree in the way and work of insinuation to
make a proselite, So they still proceed, with indefatigable art and pains,
never ceasing (if fecible) until, like the serpent, having once got in the
head, they wind in after the whole body, they rest not satisfied in any house,
until they (with their divine pretenses) scrue into a condition to give rules
to all the family.

The temptation is usually made, and the design assaulted, on the zeal and
favor of the Mistress and Lady of the house, and if she be once engaged, there
are little hopes of any quiet, if a deaf car be rurn'd to the female
importunate motions; the Lord and Master of the house is sometimes taken, and
then (if violently transported) the Presbyter and the Roman Priest carry
clearly all before them. Then these great shaddows of holiness become
solicitors, contrivers, counselors, and have a finger in the guidance of the
estate; if a marriage be concluded without their consent, or a Will, which they
make not, they take it ill, and presendy fall to new inventions how to
captivate or humble the offender; and when they meet with a person resolved to
avoid and refuse all their violent importunities, (as fixed neither to part
with his faith nor his Religion,) (the better to serve their ends) The great
examples of Christianity (as they would be thought) run into deep and ridgid
censures, accounting all men either very simple or very obdurate, that yield
not to their arguments, and interested opinions; hence they proceed, with
(great rancor and malice) to scandalize their brethren with the name and stigms
of heretics, reprobates, carnal Gospellers, and damned persons (besides those
unchristian marks of greater uncharitableness) they cease not from their
scandals (whiles men live) but prosecure with malice after death; and because
some have lived in Roman Catholic air, and there conversed (perhaps out of
curiosity, content, or thrift) with the Jesuits Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir
Theophil. Gelby, etc. at Paris, and La Fle^che, in France, or in Italy.
they have concluded them of their party, as many of the Royal party have been
received as dear brethren in Scotland, and sons of the Kirk, because (for
some other ends) they seemed to hear devoutly the irksom Presbyters preaching
and praying zealous nonsense.

The venom of scandalous malice dies not suddenly; the Presbyter and the
Jesuit are very diligent (commonly) about the sick man's bed, where they frame
all necessary discourse to self advantage, and if they meet with a temper not
of their judgments, they flash out nothing but hell and damnation, wracking
the discontented patient with distraction to despair; and if the party dye in
the faith and profession of any other Church, yet (if it be for their purpose)
it is publicly vogued, that he departed a zealous Presbyterian, or a Roman
Catholic.

CHAP. LXII.
THe dangers being then so very terrible, and the instruments and contrivers so
cunning and malignant, it were to be wished, That the great bellows of Faction
and Sedition, (the Presbyter, and the Jesuit) might have their mouths stopped,
that they might not breath so freely, and further blow and kindle the coals of
Dissension, which have (already) so much scorcht and burnt the very bowels of
the Christian Faith; as having, by a very noise of Holiness, Religion, the
Church, and such seeming professions of Sanctity and Piety, robbed the Church of
Truth, Christendom of Peace, and most men (meekly disposed) of their Content
and Quiet on Earth, and their hopes of Heaven.

Gloriosum victoriae Genus est ab eo, cum quo decertem, armacapere. St. Aug.
Epist. Nil tam Probe et Provide dictum est, quod vellicare non potest
malignitas. FINIS.

