AN UNTAUGHT TEACHER Witnessed against.

OR, The old Bottles mouth opened, It Is Wine poured forth, drunk of Drunkards,
denied of them who have tasted of the new.

That is to say, the unsound, unseasoned, unsavory Doctrines, and opinions of
Matthew Caffyn, Baptist-Teacher laid open, who in the County of Sussex, is
cried up to be as their Battle Axe, and Weapon of War, who as Jannes and
Jambres rides aloft, and bestirs himself with the Magic Rod of his lies,
slanders, aspersions, and unsound Doctrines, labors to strengthen the hands of
carnal professors, and to keep the beloved of God in bondage: for whose
redemption the Lord is risen, and is going forth in majesty, and great glory,
and will triumph over all who have triumphed.

Which Doctrines, and unsavory speeches were received from his own mouth, part
of them at a meeting of the people called Quakers, at Crowley in Sussex, others
thereof at his own house near South-water, before me and John Slay, upon the
fifth day of the seventh month, 1655.

No Weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, every tongue that shall
rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn: this is the Heritage of the
Servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord, Isa.
54.17.

Tho: Lawson. John Slay. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the
Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1655.

AN Untaught toungless Teacher laid open.
The unsound Doctrines of M. C. B. T. witnessed against.
1. HE said several times to us, that he knew not what the tongue of the
learned was, being asked what it was.

I answer here out of thy own mouth, thy shame and nakedness is laid open, and
to every wise man whose eye is in his head: art thou made manifest to be the
lying mouth, which Jeremiah, who had the tongue of the learned witnessed
against, who bore witness from the mouth of the Lord against such as run; and
were not sent of the Lord, so did not profit the people at all, Jer. 23.32.
here thou art, thy own mouth has declared it, who is gone forth, calls the
self a teacher, yet confesses thou knows not what thy tongue of the learned
is. Isay had the tongue of the learned given him to minister a word in season
to the weary, Isay 50.4. he did not minister till he had received the tongue of
the learned; for thereby he knew what to minister as he says; but thou takes
upon thee to minister before thou receive the tongue of the learned or know
what it is: never did any of the holy men of God minister, till they received
the tongue of the learned; but thou in thy own will art run unsent, confessing
thou knows not what it is, stop thy mouth thou liar, thou evil Beast, who runs
up and down pushing at the Ministers of the everlasting Gospel with thy horns,
such Paul called evil Beasts, liars, and slow bellies, Titus 1.10, 11. who run
and were not sent, as thou do, who yet knows not what the tongue of the
learned is, who subverts whole houses, all that flock after thee, taking upon
thee to teach others, and art untaught thy self, only have treasured up the
letter in thy corrupt mind, and ministers it forth to others, as thou imagines
of it, so steals the word from others, as the false Prophets did, which
Jeremiah cried against, Jer. 23.30. and the Lord is against thee, as he was
against them, who stole words one from another, as thou have stolen the words
of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and treasures them up in thy corrupt
mind; but knows not the tongue of the learned, as thy forefathers did not,
who stole the word from their Neighbors: so be ashamed of thy Ministry.

2. He said, he ministted from the word of truth, otherwise called the
Scripture, through the assistance of the spirit of God.

I answer, to say that the word of truth is called the Sctipture, or that the
Scripture is called the word of truth, that is a lie: search the Scripture, and
therein show it me, where the Scripture is called the word of truth, thy
ignorance of the word of truth, here appears, as of the tongue of the learned,
2 Timothy 2.15. Tymothy rightly divided the word of truth, but he came not by the
will of man, and he was a Minister of the spirit, and not of the letter; and
James he said, Of his own will begat he us, by the word of truth, James 1.18.
is this the Scripture? is it the Scripture by which God works, reforms,
changes, sanctifies, and begets again? or is it not the incorruptible seed,
which is the word of God, the word of truth, which lives and endures for ever,
1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. does the Scripture live, does it endure for ever, is it
the incorruptible seed? does the Father work, and beget a new by it, or by his
Son, who is the way, the truth and the life; now thou may say, we deny the
Scripture, because we bow not to thy fancies and opinions; but the Scripture we
own to be a true declaration, Luke 1.1. testifying of him, who from the womb of
love is given, to bruise the Serpents head, in whom, and by whom God changes,
reforms, converts, sanctifies, justifies, and begets anew, John 5.39, 40. this
is the word of truth, of it the Scripture testifies.

3. And he said he ministered from the Scripture, through the assistance of the
spirit of God.

I answer, the blind may lead the blind, and deceive the blind; but the seeing
deny all blind guides, such as thou art, who says, thou ministers from the
letter: here thou art shut out from all the holy men of God, who were Ministers
of the spirit, and not of the letter, as Paul was, 2 Cor. 3.6. but thou art a
Minister of the letter, and not of the spirit, as thou makes it appear, who
confesses thou knows not what the tongue of the learned is, and holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.21.

4. And thou tells of the assistance of the spirit. I answer, for shame give
over, and lay aside thy covers and pretenses, what? tell of the spirit, and
could not tell me what the Cross of Christ is: what? art thou so impudent, and
shameless, as to tell of the assistance of the spirit, and yet acknowledges,
thou knows not what is the tongue of the learned? let the wise in heart judge,
and the least in the knowledge of God consider, if thou be not in confusion,
one of Babels builders, which God is coming to throw down, and thy pretense of
the spirit will not hide thee, who ministers the letter in the dead mind, and
keeps in death, such as follow thee and search the Scripture, and own thy
example: the false Prophets in the days of Jeremiah, who had not the tongue of
the learned, had nothing from the mouth of the Lord, but got the words of the
true Prophets, and did pretend the spirit, and did use their tongues, saying,
the Lord says, when as they had nothing but the letter, when as he had not
spoken to them, such the Lord was against, Jer. 23.30.31, 32. this is thy
example, own it; shuffle thy self from among these dreamers, if thou can, who
knows not the Cross of Christ, nor the tongue of the learned, and have got
the words of the holy men of God, into thy vain, wily, shifty, peevish, subtle,
crafty, and untoward mind, and there treasures them up, and ministers them
forth and uses thy tongue, and tells of the assistance of the spirit.

5. He said, the means that leads to salvation, is without man, that is not
dwelling in his mortal body.

I answer, for all thy profession thou art got no further then the Pope, who
talks of a Christ without, means of salvation without, as thou do; but thou,
whose Religion and Kingdom is in words, and in Lip-talk thou knows not, neither
what is the means that leads to salvation nor where the means is, and thou art
wallowing in filth, and in the pollutions of the world, so knows not the word
of salvation, nor where it is: have thou not read in the Scripture, that to
them that are saved the preaching of the Cross is the power of God, 1 Cor.
1.18. if thou knew this Cross, what it is, where it is, what its operation is,
what it takes hold on, what ground it strikes at, and what it works out, and
what it lets in: if this thou knew, thou would not dream, and imagine as thou
do. Christ is the light of the world, and lights every man that comes
into the world, and from him light shines in darkness; but darkness comprehends
it not, John 1.5.9. and this light is within, and shows thee thy evil deeds,
and the pollutions thou lives in, which if thou loved it, that would lead thee
to him that gave it, even to Christ, who has given to every man a measure
according to his ability, which measure is in man, and shows all wicked
thoughts, purposes and intentions, that arise out of the heart of man; and who
loves it, it leads to him, who gave it out of evil to him alone, who is the
head of the Church, the Savior of the body, in whom alone is salvation, and
not in any other name under Heaven: this is the cornerstone, who has given a
light, a measure to every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. Acts 4.10,
11, 12. t^ is stone thou sets at naught, who art a foolish builder, seeking a
way to salvation without thee, so art out of the Doctrine of Christ, who said,
go not forth, when men cry, lo here, lo there, Mat. 24. and grace in measure
has appeared unto all men, which brings salvation, Tit. 2.11, 12. this grace
in measure is in all men, showing evil, as evil is intended in thy mind; and
him who loves it, it teaches him to deny ungodliness, so brings to salvation;
but thou, and all who live in ungodliness, and worldly lusts, turns it into
(...), so are of old ordained to condemnation, Jude 4. (...) that which may be
known of God is manifest in man, Romans 1.19. it is in man, that shows him evil,
and who love and obey it, it leads out of evil, and guides such into the
knowledge of God, to witness the salvation of God; and from this thou art gone:
so in thy corrupt mind art pleading for means without, to lead to salvation:
The Serpents meat is dust, and for, his meat he wrangles and pleads; but the
way of God is a way of holiness, which no unclean person, no Lion, no ravenous
Beast walks in, Isay 35.8.9. but all unclean persons, and ravenous Beasts can
conform unto, and imitate the practices of them who gave out the Scripture, who
were the ransomed of the Lord, as thou do, and plead for that in which thou
may live at ease: so you deny Christ, who has given to every one a measure
to lead to him who gives it; and the Scripture in its place we own, which
testifies of Christ, Jo: 5.39.40. but to set it in the room of Christ, we must
not; but are witnesses against you, who deny him, and set the Scripture in his
place.

6. He said, God is one thing, and his glory another thing, as says he, my
hand is one thing, and this book in my hand, is another thing.

I answer, silence dreamer, who would divide God, and his glory; and from God,
and his glory thou art separated, and God, and his glory thy eye must not see,
but destruction, who art an enemy to the Cross of Christ, and thy mind is in
earthly things; tell of God, and his glory, and live in the pollutions of the
world, when as no unclean thing dwells with him; and it is Virgins that love
him, and all thy corrupt reasonings, comparisons, and arguings of God, and his
glory, and for condemnation, and that mind which calls God one thing, and his
glory another thing, is accursed, are from God, and his glory thou art
accursed, who would divide God, and his glory asunder.

7. He said the Scripture has in it, the mind of God revealed, so is a rule
to guide men to Christ.

I answer, holy men of God, to them, and in them, was the mind of God
revealed, by the Spirit, before the Scripture was written, and his mind not
any one comes unto, but in whom the Spirit of God arises, and rules: as thou
have the Scripture, which declares of the mind of God, but his mind thou have
not, but minds earthly things: says Paul, we have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor.
2.16. and Phil. 2.5. let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus:
none have the mind of Christ, but them in whom Christ dwells, though they may
have the Scripture, a declaration of his mind, but, conforming to the
practices of the holy men of God, in whom the mind of God was, in the will of
man, this lets not in the mind of God: but the cross, which shows the carnal
mind, which professes the Scripture, and crucifies the carnal mind, the same
lets in the nature, and the mind of Christ; the Jews had the Scripture, and
covered themselves therewith, but had not the mind of God, but persecuted him,
whom the Father sent, of whom the Father bears witness.

And thou say the Scripture is a rule to guide men to Christ, when as Christ
himself said, that none could come to him, but as the Father drew him, and
every man that heard, and learned of the Father, came to him, John 6.44.45.
Here thy mind is contrary to the mind of Christ, Christ said, it is his
Father that draws to him, and thou says it is the Scripture: herein thou art
Antichrist, opposing Christ, and his doctrine, and here thou sets the Scripture
in the seat of God, saying the Scripture is a rule to guide to Christ, when as
the Scripture says, none comes to Christ except the Father draw him: this, and
such like is the mist, that thou keeps people in darkness withal, but now thou
art seen.

8. Again Matthew Caffyn said, that the Scripture does so far reveal God, and
Christ to a Creature, as that he walking up to its revelation, to his lives
end, with a single heart, shall be eternally saved.

I answer, let all who know any thing of God judge, if thou do not herein shut
out thy self, both from the knowledge of the Father, and the Son, so art a
heathen, not knowing God, Math. 11.27. no man knows the Son, but the Father,
neither knows any man the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals
him: herethou art Antichrist, pulling the Crown from off his head, and giving
it to the Scripture, saying the Scripture reveals God, and Christ, etc: when as
the Scripture says, the Son reveals the Father: here thou wrests the
Scripture, out of its place, which does but testify of Christ, John 5.39.40.
and sets it in the room of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.10. God has revealed them unto us
by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God;
and thou say, the Scripture reveals: here thou sets the Scripture, in the
room of the Spirit, Gal. 1.15.16. Paul said, God revealed his Son in him, so he
preached him among the heathen: Paul said, God reveals his Son, and thou says
the Scripture reveals him, herein thou have set the Scripture in the room of
God, saying the Scripture reveals the Son, when as the Scripture says, God
reveals his Son, herein have thou set the Scripture in the room of God, Christ
and the Spirit: and that which may be known of God is manifest in man, for God
has showed it unto him, Romans 1.19. and the Lord reveals his secrets, to his
servants, Amos, 3.7. and 1 Jo. 5.12. he that has the Son has life, he that
has not the Son has not life, who only gives an understanding heart, to know
him that is true, 1 Jo. 5.20. here without life thou art, and without the
knowledge of him that is true, saying the Scripture reveals God, etc. When as
the Scripture says, it is the Son alone that gives an understanding heart, to
know him that is true: O lier, see thy folly, and unsound doctrines. The Angel
is sounding, and a Star from Heaven is fallen, unto the earth, who has the Key
of the bottomless pit, the same to open, and smoke arises apace, Rev. 9.1.2.
the wise see and consider.

9. Matthew Caffyn said, that there is so much of God, and Christ, revealed in
the Scriptures to men, as, through faith therein, is a sufficient means of
salvation.

I answer, what have thou to do, to tell of salvation, whose mouth is full of
lies, and under whose lips does the poison of asps appear, and for
condemnation thou art, who denies the Father, Son, and Spirit, and sets the
Scripture in the place thereof, powers forth heresies, corrupt doctrines, and
denies him, whom we witness to be able to save to the utmost, such as come to
him, Heb. 7.25. this is the stone, which such unskillfull builders as thou
denies, and sets the Scripture in his place, in whom alone is salvation, Acts
4.10.11.12: but him thou knows not, so lives in vain jangling, and the
sufficient means which thou speaks on, has not saved thee, and thou that
would set up any thing in the room of Christ, in whom alone is salvation, or
in thy devilish reason, would set up any thing with Christ, to add to his
sufficiency to save man, him thou knows not, but art for condemnation, with the
light, which shows the sin, and evil, which thou acts contrary to.

10. Matthew Caffyn said, no man has eternal life now in him as possessing
it, but a promise of it, 1 John 2.25.

I answer, thou art turned from the light, wherewith Christ has enlightened
thee, which guides all that love it, up to life, so the earth is seated in
thee, where the beast, and false Prophet lodges, and the promise, which to thee
is promised, is the lake of fire, burning with brimstone, Rev. 19.21. that is
the promise to the beast, and false Prophet, and he is the beast, who is out of
the truth, and whether thou be out of the truth, yea, or nay, let thy lying
fables witness, and he is the false Prophet, who runs, but is not sent of the
Lord, and whether thou be sent of the Lord, yea, or nay, let thy lies, thy own
words witness who have run so long, and yet confesses, thou knows not what the
tongue of the learned is, and thou that lives contrary to the light, knows not
what they come to enjoy, and possess, who obey the light, which comes from
Christ, and leads to him, who is eternal life, 1 Jo. 4.3. every Spirit that
confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this
is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard, that it should come, and
even now already is it in the world, but thou may say, thou knows, and
confesses he came in the flesh, 1655, years since: that we know, and the Pope
confesses Christ as near him as thou, but thou art Antichrist, who do not
know him ruling in thy mortal body, this they witnessed to whom these words
were spoken, they were Children and had overcome them, and were of God, 1 Jo.
4.4. this they knew not by talking of him without them, but by possessing him
in them, who is greater then he that is in the world, even Jesus, who is
eternal life, 1 Io. 4.4. Io. 5.24. some had everlasting life, some were passed
from death to life, 2 Cor. 4.10.11. Paul spoke of the life of Jesus being
manifest in the mortal body, and the life of Jesus is eternal, and 1 Io.
5.11, 12, 13, 20. says John this is the record, that God has given to us,
eternal life, etc. and these things have I written, etc. that ye may know you
have eternal life, and they were in the true God, and eternal life: how
ignorant art thou of the letter, and yet dare call thy self a Minister of
Christ, and 1 Io. 4. he that confesses, that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God, and he that dwells in God, dwells in eternal
life, God is eternal life, Io. 6.54.

11. Matthew Caffyn said, that no man while he is upon earth comes to the end of
faith.

I answer, thou art exercising thy self in things that be too high for thee,
why art thou speaking of the end of faith, who have not faith as a grain of
musterdseed, which removes mountains? The end of faith is the salvation of the
soul, 1 Pet. 1.9. which the Apostle spoke of What do thou press after? thou will say, after the salvation of the soul. What, and if any come to enjoy that,
which thou presses after, will thou envy them, or deny the goodness of God
toward them, Math. 1.21. Christ was given to save from sin, Paul and those he
speaks of, were already saved, 2 Timothy 1.9. Head. 7.25. he is able to save to the
uttermost: the ingrafted word is able to save the soul; James, 1.21. this is
denied of thee, who lives in pollutions, and in the nature of the world: the
light who ownes, which comes from Chfist, it lets man see a necessity of a
Savior to save him from sin, and by little, and little begets faith in him, as
that from sin, he shall be saved: now abiding the end of faith is witnessed,
that is possessed, which was believed to be enjoyed, so is Christ, the author,
and finisher of faith: does this beget carelessnesse, or bring forth iniquity,
no, who live in iniquity, salvation, witness not, but the same that saves from
sin, keeps out of sin, all who abide in it, 1 Ioh. 3.6. but what is this to
thee, who art one of the foolish women, that sewes pillows to all Arm holes,
and slaies the souls, that should not die; and saves the souls alive, that
should not live, by thy lies, Ezekiel. 13.18.19.

12. He said, that that Christ that was crucified at Jerusalem, and role flesh
and bones, etc. is not really in any man upon earth, but his spirit is.

I answer, no other Christ we own but him, who witnessed a good confession
before Pontius Pilate, and thou that knows not that he is in thee, art a
Reprobate, 2 Cor. 13.5: and the same Paul who said Christ is in you, except you
be Reprobates, the same said, Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. Now if thou had
been in the days of Paul, who said, Christ lived in him, would thou have told
him, that Christ did not, it was his spirit; or would thou have told him that
Christ did not really live in him, or will thou set Christ in one place, and
his spirit in another, who is Emanuel, God with us, Mat. 1.23. and says
Christ, I in them, and thou in me, Jo: 17.23.26. Now wi^t thou oppose Christ,
and say, he is not really in them: who is it here that denies Christ? who is it
that wrests the Scriptures? and now thou art a liar, who says, Christ is not
really in any man upon earth, Christ says otherwise, whether must Christ or
thou be believed? He says, At that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you, Jo: 14.20. and he that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, dwells in me, and I in him; but a wiser then thou may stumble at
this, John 6.56. and Christ in you the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. Now this, thou
that stumbles at, is that the Scripture may be fulfilled, Christ is a stumbling
stone.

13. He said the Scripture is the word

I answer, that is another lie, and the Scripture is a witness against thee, it
says, God is the word, and the word became flesh, and dwelt amongst the
Saints, John 1.1.14. and Rev. 19.13. his name is called the word of God Rev.
19.13. Now the Scripture is a true Declaration, John 5.39.40. Luke 1.1.

14. He said the Scripture was the word of Faith.

I answer, that is another lie, and here thou denies Christ, who was before the
World was, or the Scripture was, or Heresy, Schism, Antichrist, or false
Prophet was. Heb. 12.2. who is the Author and finisher of faith. Now thou
says the Scripture is the word of faith: now then, how came Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph: how came these to faith, and the rest who
were before the letter was? here thou makes it manifest, thou art faithless,
not knowing the word of faith, but puts the letter in its room, and Romans 10.8.
Paul, who was a Minister of the word of faith, he was not a Minister of the
letter, but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. but that ear that hears the word of
Faith, thou knows not opened; but the dead mind bears rule in thee: so thou
sets the Scripture in the room of him, who is the Author and finisher of
Faith, whose coming is as the morning, who opens the blind eye, and unstops
the deaf ear, Isa. 35.5.

15. He said the Scripture was the truth.

I answer, here thou wrests the Scripture out of its place, and sets it in the
room of Christ, who says he is the truth, John 14.6. Now Christ says, he is
the truth, and thou say, the Scripture is the truth: whether is the liar, a
liar thou art: the truth sets free, John 8.32. the Scripture does not: truth
sanctifies, John 17.17.19. the Scripture does not; but thou may be ready to
slander me, because I say not Amen to thy lies, and say I deny the Scripture,
which I do not; for it I own to be a true Declaration, testifying of Christ,
who is the truth. John 5.39.40. Luke 1.1.

16. He said the Scripture did lead into the truth.

I answer, that is another lie, and the Scripture witnesses against thee, which
says, the spirit of truth leads into all truth. John 16.13. and 1 John 2.20.
ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things, and that by the
virtue of the unction in them, and not the leading of the letter without them:
so the Scripture testifies of that which leads into all truth, but is not the
thing leading into all truth.

17. He said, the Scripture led into the knowledge of God, and did teach man
the knowledge of God.

I answer, that is another lie, and the key of knowledge thou here denies, so
thou art brutish in thy knowledge, Jer. 10.14. Thou says the Scripture leads
into the knowledge of God, and teaches the knowledge of God: here thou denies
the Son, and sets the Scripture in his place. Mat. 11.27. No man knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him; and thou say, the
Scripture teaches the knowledge of God. Romans 1.19. what may be known of God is
manifest in man: now thou says, it is the Scripture without that teaches the
knowledge of God; it is the spirit that discerns God, who is a spirit, and
makes known spiritual things. 1 Cor. 2.14. Isay 28.9. it is God that teaches
knowledge, John 14.26. The comforter shall teach you all things. Luke 1.76.77.
the Child Jesus, Emanuel God with us, he gives the knowledge of salvation. Now
here thou sets the Scripture in the room of Christ, who teaches the knowledge
of his Father, and says, the Scripture teaches man the knowledge of God: here
another lie is found in thy mouth, and the key of knowledge thou casts from
thee, who disobeys the light, which shows the sin and evil; and another lie is
put into thy hand even by the Angel of the bottomless-pit, whose name in the
Hebrew Tongue is Abaddon, in the Greek Tongue Apollyon, Rev. 9.11. so thou art
opening, and screwing; but I say by thy searching thou shall never find out
God; Job 11.7, 8.

18. He said no man's wisdom upon earth was perfect.

I answer, Thou art turned from the light, so thy wisdom is from below; and
thou and thy Generation, who know not the Cross of Christ but denies it,
knows not the wisdom which is from above which is perfect in the Saints, Jam:
3.27. 1 Cor. 1.30. who is of God. Christ is their wisdom, and he is perfect in
the least measure: so here thou have uttered blasphemy: if thou knew it, the
Beast that opens his mouth in blasphemy against God, his Tabernacle, and them
that dwell in Heaven, into the lake must go, Rev. 13.6.

19. Matthew Caffyn said, the Scripture was the Touchstone to try spirits
withal.

I answer, That is another lie, the Scripture is not the tryer of spirits, to
try the living by the dead, that I deny: the Saints have salt in themselves to
savor withal, and their own every where they relish and know; but the
contrary they deny: the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1
Cor. 4.32. and this spirit owns it self over all: this discerned and knew them,
who used their tongue, saying, the Lord says, when as they had nothing but
the letter. Jer. 23. discerning of spirits was, and is a gift of the spirit: 1
Cor. 12.10. Now thou says, the Scripture must try spirits. 1 Cor. 2.10. The
spirit searches all things, 1 John 2.20. ye have an unction from the holy one,
and know all things; and by this unction they discerned Antichrists,
Deceivers, false Prophets, Heretics, and deluders, and not by the letter
without; and by this spirit did Paul discern such as had the form, but not the
power. 2 Timothy 3.5. and I will come shortly says Paul, and will know not
the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power. 1 Cor. 4.19. The day
declares every man's work. 1 Cor. 3.11.12, 13. Mal. 3.16, 17, 18. In the day,
when the Jewels are making up, and in the day is the discerning betvveen the
wicked and the righteous, him that serves God, and him that serves him not;
but this is by virtue of the day, and not by the letter without. The sheep
know the voice of Christ, but deny to follovv a stranger. John 10.4, 5, and
this the sheep do, through the virtue of salt in them, and not the letter
without them; for a stranger may have the form, and all the Scripture, and
there with deceive: yet the sheep have salt to savor vvithall, and knovves
him that uses his tongue; and says, the Lord says, when he has nothing but
the letter. Jer. 23. and whereas John said, Try the spirits, whether they be of
God or no. 1 John 4.1. this he spoke to them that had salt in themselves, where
the tryer was born; they were of God and Children, and a greater was in them,
then he that was in the world, 1 John 4.4. Thou that says the Scripture is the
Touchstone to try spirits withal, tell me this, how may a Minister made by the
will of God, be known from a Minister made by the will of man; seeing a
Minister made by the will of man may have all the Scripture the form, as well
as he that is by the will of God; The Jews had Abraham's words, Moses and the
Prophets words, but they knew not Christ, could not thereby discern his spirit,
but said, he was a Samaritan, and had a Devil, John 8, 48. and they knew not
what spirit the Apostles were of, but stoned Paul till they thought he had been
dead, Acts 14.19. Well may thou stumble at that which tries spirits, who
confesses thou knows not what the tongue of the learned is, Ephesians. 5.13. All
things that are reproved, are made manifest by the light: what ever makes
manifest is light, which makes thee manifest, and thy spirit, which is to be
reproved, which light leads to the stone with seven eyes, Zac. 3.9. and nothing
but this discerns darkness, and that which leads into darkness.

20. He said the Law without man, is that which convinces man of sin.

I answer, that is another lie; for Christ is the true light, which lights
every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. which sight is in man, and he
that does evil hates it: yet it reproves him, and convinces him of sin, and
shows him his deeds are evil, who acts evil, John 3.19.20, 21. this is given
to the ends of the earth, and leaves them without excuse, who have not the Law
without, in that it shows them evil, and sin, which is darkness, Isay 49.6.
Romans 2.14.15, 16. Ephesians. 5.13. as many as sin without the Law, shall also
perish without Law, Romans 2.12. and in Romans 4.15. he says, where there is no
Law, there is no transgression and Romans 3.20. by the Law is the knowledge of
sin: now read these Scriptures, he tells of some that are without the Law: and
he says moreover, that where there is no Law, there is no transgression. So by
consequence, these are no sinners, who are without the Law. yet he says, As
many as sin without the Law: So that I say, though they have not a Law without,
yet have they so much within, as lets them see evil, and secretly moves to turn
from evil, and this leaves them without excuse, Romans 1.19. And Paul had the Law
without, and as touching it was blameless, and was alive in the flesh, and
says he was without the Law: so by the outward the letter, he did not see him
elf; but when his eye was opened, which had been blinded, the spiritual Law,
then sin appeared, and he died, Romans 7.9.14.12. verses. and John 16.8. it is
the spirit, which convinces the world of sin, which in measure has appeared to
all men, 1 Cor. 12.7. Tit. 2.11, 12. and Isay 42.6. He is given a Covenant to
Israel, but a light to the Gentile.

21. He said, God and Christ was two.

I answer, that is a lie, and thou gainsayes Christ, who said, I and my Father
are one, John 10.30. and John 17.11. that they may be one, as we are, and that
they may be one, even as we are one, John 17.22. This Doctrine thy forefathers
could not bear, even the Jews, who had the Letter, but stumbled at the
stumbling-stone, and stoned him, John 10.31. and the rage envy, and bitterness
that lodges in thy heart, and the swelling cruel words that from thee have
proceeded, sufficiently make known where thou art: let that in thy own
conscience witness, thou knows not him, who is one with the Father; but sets
the Father in one place, and the Son in another, and changes the glory of the
incorruptible God, into an Image made like unto corruptible man, Romans 1.23. the
Virgins birth thou knows not, which is Emmanuel, God with us. Mat. 1.23.

22. He said, he shall see God with his eyes, which be carnal, often pointing
at them with his fingers, alleging that of Job, Job 19.25, 26, 27.

I answ. let all who know God in the least measure judge if thou be one of
them, who art changing the glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made
like unto corruptible man, who is telling of seeing God, who is a spirit, and
invisible, with carnal natural eyes: thou Image-maker, what do thou imagine
God to be like, who art doting, and dreaming of seeing God who is a spirit,
with thy carnal eyes: true it is, the old man dreams Dreams, but Sons and
Daughters prophecy; and Job saw God, while he was in the flesh, but not with
fleshly eyes, Job 42.5.6. mine eye now sees thee, said Job; but thy right eye
must be plucked out, and cast from thee, else not know that eye which sees him,
who is invisible. Heb. 11.23.24, 25, 26, 27.

23. He said, by the person of Christ no man comes to the Father.

I answer: how long will the Nations be led by such blind guids as this, who
says, by the person of Christ no man comes to the Father, when as Christ said,
no man comes to the Father, but by me, John 14.6. herein he denies the true
way, so is Antichrist: let all who are simple judge, whether this fellow lead
toward God, or from God, who denies Christ to be the way, so is a Thief, and a
Robber, who denies the door, so is climbing another way, John 10.1. and Heb.
7.25. he is able to save to the uttermost, such as come to God by him: now thou
denies him, and says, he is not the way: will any be so bewitched, as to run
after thee, or such like. O shameless teacher, and without understanding, who
art so drunk with the Cup of abomination, as that thou staggers, reeles,
stumbles, and spews out thy own shame, and denies the Lord, who has put a
price into thy hand; but it, and him thou denies, and no other Way but him we
own, who lights every man that comes into the world, which thou denies and
walks not in, it is a way of holiness, the unclean, the Lion, the Beasts of the
Forest walk not in this way; and thou who bears the Image of the earthly,
denies him who is the express Image of his Fathers person, Heb. 1.3.

24. He said, Christ was ascended into Heaven, and is now sitting in Heaven,
with a body of flesh and blood, with the very same body of flesh and blood,
with the which he did eat broyled fish, among his Disciples.

I answer, thou art an Image-maker, and knows not his body which sets free
from the Law, and from the body of sin, Rom, 7.4. and thou who lives in lies,
in the Customs and fashions of the world, and in deceitful ways, contrary to
that in thy conscience, knows not the body of Christ, so art doting, dreaming,
framing, forming, and imagining, and setting up Images, and likenesses in thy
sensual wisdom of persons and places, which who know his body, from these
things are redeemed, Ephesians. 5.23. He is the Savior of the body, and his body
sets free from sin and the Law: if thou have an ear, thou may hear, Ephesians.
4.9.10. Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he also descended first into
the lower parts of the earth, and no man ascended into Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven, even the Son of man, which is in Heaven, John 3.13. And flesh
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. yet are we members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. Go learn what these
things mean; and thou that says, he is in Heaven with a body of flesh and
blood, opposes the Apostle, who was an eye witness of his Majesty, who said
flesh and blood must not inherit, etc. and said Christ, glorify thou me, O
Father, with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee, before the
world was, John 17.5. and Christ's glorious body we own, Phil. 3.21. so deny
thee, and thy Images, and thy vulturs eye, and the Eggs which thou Cocatrice
hatches, and the spiders webb, which thou weaves, which thy nakedness cannot
cover, Isay 59.5.6. call not this railing; for a name thou must have, according
to thy nature, whose lips speak lies, whose tongue mutters perverseness, who
trusts in vanity, and pleads not for the truth, but against it, saying, thou will root the Ministers of the truth, out of these parts, the marks of them
thou bears, that Isa, spoke of Isa. 59.1, 2.3, 4, 5, 6.

25. Matthew Caffyn said, God did not dwell in any creature, but his Spirit did.

I answer, here thou would make good a lier, who has said, I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.22. they were an habitation of
God, through the Spirit: this thou stumbles at, disputes, and cavills against
who art a stranger, and a forrainer, and an enemy to the household of God, 1
Cor. 3.16.17. ye are the temple of God, and the temple of God is holy, which
temple ye are, Rev. 21.3. the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them: and, who are of God, this witness, and witness against thee, and
know t^ee to be without God in the world, who imagines God to be one where, and
his Spirit, another where, when as God is a Spirit, and the Spirit, Ioh. 4.24.
2. Cor. 3.17. whosoever confesses in truth, that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God, 1 John, 4.15.

26. He said, no man while he is upon earth is in the Kingdom, and that the
chief of Saints, have but by promise.

I answer: thou art a bundle of lies, and what have thou to do to meddle with
the Saints, or talk of their inheritance, who art profane Esau, selling thy
birthright for the earth who contrary to the light acts, so a child of
disobedience art, thy fruits make thee manifest, and with Jacob; thou have no
inheritance who said, he was a Minister of the Spirit, he also said, that they
were translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13. and the Saints
were raised up, and set together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2.6. and if any come to know the life of the holy men of God, and bear witness
to their conditions, thou spreads thy arms abroad, crying out of blasphemy,
heresy, damnable doctrines; so might thou have said of them, who gave out the
Scripture, which was given to be fulfilled, not for a heard of swine to feed
on: what have thou to do, to talk of the Saints, who arms thy self with
arguments, against such as grow up in the life, which translated them into the
Kingdom, so be a witness against thy self, that thou art out of the Kingdom,
which is a Kingdom of light, and by the light art found out among the
Cocatrices, Night-birds, Cormorants, Bitterns, Owls, Ravens, Dragons,
Wildebeasts, Satyrs, Vulturs, Scritch-owls: ownthy mates, who art pleading
against possessing the Kingdom.

27. He said no man upon earth sees Christ, he said, he had not seen Christ,
and when I asked him, if he had seen God, he cried out of blasphemy.

I answer, here thou art a witness against thy self, that thou art one of
them, who have eyes, but sees not, Math. 13.15. Moses saw God, Exo. 33.11.23.
and death reigns till Moses, so in thee death reigns: so what have thou to
profess? Abraham saw the day of the Son of man, and was glad John 8, 56. and
God appeared unto him, and talked with him, Genesis 12.7. Genesis 17.1.2, 3, the Lord
appeared unto Isaac, and talks with him, Genesis 26.2. Jacob saw God face to face,
Genesis 32.30 Job saw God, Job. 42.5.6. now thou that stumbles at seeing of God,
and confesses thou have not seen Christ, in the steps of Abraham thou art not,
nor to his condition come, who saw the day of the Son of man, and was glad, and
death reigns in thee, and thou clothes thy self with the Letter, which they
spoke forth, who saw God in Christ, if any come to witness the life of them,
whose words thou professes, Isay saw God, Isa. 6.5. the Prodigal came to
himself, and said to his Father, I have sinned in thy sight, Luke 15. but in
the far Country yet thou art, amongst harlots, and riotous livers, and art gone
into the field to feed swine, and thy self eats the husks among the swine,
and that which would let thee see thy self, and thy Country, and thy
companions, and thy food, and the Father of the living, that thou denies, and
lives in disobedience to the light, which comes from Christ, so art for
condemnation, he that sees the Son sees the Father, Jo. 14.9. but thou art
without both, and in fellowship with neither, 1 Cor. 15.8.14.15. Paul was an
eye witness of his majesty, Heb. 11.27. John saw him on horseback, sitting on
a white horse, and a bow and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth
Conquering, and to Conquer, Rev. 6.2. and such as thee shall his arrows deeply
pierce, who says thou art a Minister of Christ, and yet have not seen him, nor
his Father, nor knows not what the tongue of the learned is, so art one that
Paul witnessed against, unlearned, and unstable, wresting the Scripture to thy
own destruction, and the destruction of other, 2 Pet. 3.16. he must needs be
unlearned, who runs to teach others, and himself nor knowing what the tongue
of the learned is, Rev. 19.11.12.13. all the Children of the Lord are taught of
the Lord, and they see their teacher, which is the Lord, so here thou have shut
out thy self from all the Children of the Lord, who confesses thou have not
seen God nor Christ: all his Children, the Lord teaches, and him they see, and
none of them thou art, who confesses thou have not seen Chirst, Isa. 54.13.

28. He said, Adam did not die the same day, he did eat the forbidden fruit,
but was in a dying condition, that is growing nearer the time in the which he
should be put into an hole in the earth.

I answer: thou art a liar, for the lake; and would make God a lier, who said,
Genesis 2.17. in the day, thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die: now thou
say he did not die, so would make God a lier, and Genesis 3.6.7.8. when they had
eaten thereof; the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they both
were naked, and they showed figleaves together, and made them them elves
aprons, as thou have been doing this many years, both for thy self, and for
others, and art found a witness against God, and thou thy self ignorant, not
knowing the death, which has passed over all men.

29. He said, I denied the resurrection.

I answer: thou art a slanderer, and must have the Portion of the slanderer,
for a resurrection I own, both of the just, and unjust, Acts 24.15. The
resurrection of the dead I own, both of the just, and unjust, Jo. 5.28.29. the
one to life, the other to damnation: but because I said, thou must not see God
with thy carnal eyes, and that flesh, and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 15.50. therefore thou concludes, I deny the resurrection: thou
might as well slander Paul, and say he denied the resurrection, as slander
such, who bear witness to his words: but thou says, with what manner of body
do the dead arise: thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
die, and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, etc.
but God gives it a body as it pleases him; it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. chapter, and Paul earnestly labored to
come to the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.11.

30. Matthew Caffyn, said he believed no man upon earth did live without the
transgression of the Law, yet man might come to have the righteousness of the
law fullfilled in him, as Paul said the righteousness of the law, was fulfilled
in himself, and others, Romans 8.4. and yet at the same time, he saw a law in
his members, warning against the law of sin, which was in his members, and
cried out O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death, Romans 7.23.24.

I answer, thou that says, the righteousness of the law may be fullfilled in
man, and yet man not freed from the transgression of the law, I say it, it is a
lie, and prove thy doctrine if thou can, let all whose eye is open judge
between thee and me, whether the righteousness of the law be fulfilled in man,
while he lives in the transgression of the law, yea, or nay: this makes it
manifest, thou art ignorant of the law, which is spiritual, Romans 7.14. and it
has power over a man so long as he lives, Romans 7.1. so that being alive in the
flesh, out of that which crucifies the flesh, the spiritual law is
transgressed, and here he is not witnessed, who is the end of the law, for
righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. And said Paul, who knew
the law, Gal. 3.19. wherefore then serves the law, it was added because of
trasgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made, so if
thou had an ear, thou might hear: the law was added because of transgression,
and is also added, while transgression stands: the law has its work, which
ministration is glorious in its time: and the end of the law is not come, who
was made under the law, to fulfill the law, so thorough the law, to redeem
from the law: he is not come, while sin and transgression is lived in, even he,
that comes by water, and blood, not by water only, but by water, and blood, 1 John 5.6. the law is added, because of transgressions, till the seed come, who
bruises the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. and takes upon him the seed of Abraham,
and not the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16. this is he, who in taking upon him the
seed of Abraham, finishers transgression, because of which the law was added,
and makes an end of sin, and makes reconciliation for iniquity, and brings in
everlasting righteousness, and seals up the vision, and prophecy, here the most
holy is anointed, Dan. 9. if thou knew the seed, to which the promise is, the
end of vision, or prophecy, this thou would receive, but thou that tells of the
righteousness of the law, being fulfilled in man, and yet man live in the
transgression of the law, thou know not what thou spaks, nor whereof thou
affirms: for he himself says, that he was made free, from the law of sin,
and death, before he tell of the righteousness of the law being fulfilled in
him, Romans 8.1.2.3.4, and says Paul, I thorough the law (which law has power
over a man so long as he lives) and dead to the Law, that I might live unto
God, Gal. 2.19. but neither Law nor Gospel thou knows, who stumbles at seeing
God, and cries out blasphemy, when as Moses, who received the perfect Law from
God, which is according to that of God, in every ones conscience, he saw God,
and till Moses, death reigns; there thou art.

And in as much as thou said, that Paul said, the righteousness of the Law was
fulfilled in him, and yet at the same time, he was carnal, sold under sin, and
found a Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his mind, leading him
captive into sin, and was a wretched man, crying out, who should deliver him
from the body of death, Romans 7.

I answer, here another lie is found in thy mouth, for he did not say, the
righteousness of the Law, was fulfilled in him till the Law of the spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, had made him free from the Law of sin and death, Romans
8.1.2, 3, 4, and he could not both be carnal, led captive, and have the body of
death standing in him, and yet be free from the body of sin and death, all at
one time: this can in no wise be, as thou would persuade people; but whereas he
speaks of himself, being carnal, sold under sin, and led captive, and the body
of death not destroyed, Romans 7. here he declares unto them, how it was with
him, in the time of his warfare, Romans 7.5. when we were in the flesh, says he,
then it was so and so, then carnal; but the Law spiritual, then sold under sin,
then led captive, then a wretched man, then not delivered from the body of sin,
in the time of the Law, it being weak, through the flesh: now here he declares
to them, what he had passed through, and how it had been with him; but at that
time, he says he was delivered from the Law, Romans 7.6. so likewise from sin,
the Law being added because of transgressions; and he at that time, when he
vvrote unto the Romans an Epistle, which afterward was turned into Chapter,
and verse, by Tubal-Cain, the cunning Artificer, and Craft-man, for the benefit
of the Clergy: when this Epistle he vvrote, he witnessed the power of God
unto salvation, Romans 1.6. and the inward Jew, and circumcision inwardly, Romans
2.28, 29. and that he was justified, and had peace with God, Romans 5.1. and
that the old man was crucified, Romans 6.6. and that they were not under the
Law, but under grace, which Law is because of transgressions, Romans 6.15. and
that they were dead to the Law, by the body of Christ, Romans 7.4. and none is
dead to the Law, but who is dead to sin, his body sets none free from the
Law, but whom it sets free from sin, and he says, he and they were
delivered from the Law, Romans 7.6. so from sin, because of which the Law is
added, and he says, he was set free from sin, and the righteousness of the
Law was fulfilled in him, Romans 8.1.2, 3, 4. now that he could vvitness these
glorious conditions, and growth in Christ Jesus, and yet be carnal, and fold
under sin, and led captive, and groan under the body of death, that I deny;
but it is the Doctrine of Matthew Caffyn, who is a Baptist-Teacher, so I leave
it with him, or any that own him, the same to prove, and in Romans 7.25. Paul
said, so then -- implying a condition, and disposition which he had passed
through, then it was so, and so; and in the next verse he says, But now --
Romans 8.1. therein he declares his present condition, which was that he was set
free from the Law of sin and death, and the righteousness of the Law was
fulfilled in him, Romans 8.1.2, 3, 4.

Romans 7.25. So then Who is not blind may see. Romans 8.1.2. But now Who has an
ear, may hear.
To the 7th Chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, do all unsavory Professors,
Priests, and people fly; and unto it run, as unto a Bulwark, for a cover to
continue in sin and corr^ption, while they remain upon earth which will stand
them in no stead: so two Propositions shall I lay down; and if the Devil in any
profession, or Matthew Caffyn, be offended at what I have spoken concerning
that Chapter, which all Professions take hold on, for a shelter for their
iniquity, let them appear in writing, that truth may come to light, and lies be
searched out, and not back-bite, grumble, and grudge, and run up and down
slandering and railing, and crying out that we hold forth damnable Doctrines,
and Heresies. But do not so, that is not honest, that is the nature of
Night-birds, and Screech-owls, who scratch in the dark: so Matthew Caffyn,
prove thy Doctrines, else throw down thy Crowns, and own that in thy
Conscience, which shows thee thy enmity against the truth: the Lord is taking
unto himself him great power, even the Almighty, who was, is, and is to come,
to reign over all, and the Nations are angry, and combine together against the
Lord, and against his anointed: yet upon the holy hill of Sion, will he his
Sonset: the hill of God, is as the hill of Bashan, an high hill: this is the
hill in which God delights to dwell; yea, in it, he will dwell for ever, and
all hills shall tremble before it, even before his hill, who is setting the
solitary in families, and bringing out those which are bound in Chains, he is
beating the wicked one, out of all his Bulwarks, and fenced walls, and high
Towers; and in Israel does God appoint, for Walls and Bulwarks, even salvation;
so make not lies your refuge, and plead not for sin, which is a wall of
separation between God and man.

1. That Paul was not carnal, and sold under sin, nor led captive into sin,
nor the body of death undelivered from, (which is made mention of Romans 7.) when
he said, the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, had made him free from
the Law of sin and death, Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4.

That at that time, when Paul wrote to the Romans, and spoke of being carnal,
and sold under sin, etc. Romans 7. that he spoke not of his present condition,
but how it had been with him formerly, in the time of his warfare, which was
then accomplished, and the body of death put off, and he set free from sin,
Romans 8.1.2, 3, 4.

31. Matthew Caffyn said, I spoke error, when I said, no man did further
witness the Scripture fulfilled in him, than he was grown up in that spirit,
which gave it forth: the same also I now say, and, prove it to be error, if
thou can; but the wise in heart, will not take thy words for a Gospel-proof,
who have uttered forth so many lies, and did give me these words under thy own
handwriting, That the Scripture does so far reveal God and Christ to a
Creature, as that he walking up to its Revelation, to his lives end, with a
single heart, shall be eternally saved. I say thy Ministry teaches not
singleness in the one spirit, but thou would have all shroud themselves in thy
Form, to their lives end, and in the deceit of the world, and then tells them
of being saved: now he to whom the true Ministry, was committed, said, 2 Timothy
1.9. they were saved, Tit. 3.5. Thou would have people wrapped up in thy Form,
all their lives, that thou among them may have pre-eminence, and tells them of
salvation afterward, when as no unclean thing, must enter into the Kingdom, as
the Tree falls, so it lies.

This have I written, as touching particulars received from M. Caffyn, part in
writing, and part from his mouth, and God who is the Judge of all, is my
witness herein, that I have not added to what was spoken by him: so be ashamed
thou blind guide, and prove thy Doctrines, else be silent, and give over
teaching others, who thy self art untaught: mind that in thy conscience, which
shows the sin and evil, and let it stop thy mouth: see thy own confusion, glory
not in Babylon, a building by thy own fingers, in thy own imaginations: the
Kingdom thou art departed from, the measure which shows the evil, thou
disobeys; and from men thou art driven, and thy dwelling is amongst the Beasts
of the field, and thou art pushing with thy horn and power against the Lambs;
and upon the grass thou art feeding: there is thy state, not only seven times,
but ever, except the light which shines in thy Conscience, thou own, that by it
thou may be led out of darkness, up to Christ, who for that end gave thee a
measure to profit withal: does not a man whose eyes are open, know a beast, by
one mark? how many marks does thou here bear, which God gives his Children
victory over: therefore cease thy prateing with malicious words, against that
which thou knows not, and come out of deceit, and the worlds vanities, which
thou sticks in, contrary to that in thy conscience: therefore be warned, thou
who spreads thy self, as the Bramblebush, and obey that in thy conscience which
shows the sin and evil; for fire is in the bush, though thou be not aware of
it: resist not that in thy Conscience, by which God calls thee, and secretly
checks thee, that out of the evil of the world, thou may come: God who is a
consusuming fire, will awake for his own glory; and his fire, he will kindle,
which all thorns, briars, and brambles shall consume: prize the day of thy
visitation. A Lover of thy soul.

Thomas Lawson.

THE END.

