A LAWFUL LEAGUE AND COVENANT* To be entered into, and taken, by all Men that
have either Religion, Loyalty, or Honesty: For the freeing themselves and their
Posterities, from Tyranny and Slaverie.

with an Exhortation for taking the same.

Servants have ruled over us, and none would deliver us out of their hands.

Lament. 5.8. The breath of our Nostrills, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken
in their netts: of whom we said, under his shadow, we shall be preserved
alive among the heathen.

Lament. 4.20. But the wicked men said, How shall he save us? so they despised
him, and brought him no presents: but he held his tongue.

1. Sam. 10.27. Printed for the People, and are to be sold in the Streets, to
such as will buy them. Anno 1648.

THE Lord has destroyed his Tabernacle as a garden, he has destroyed his
Congregation: the Lord has caused the Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in
Zion and has despised, in the indignation of his wrath, the King, and the
Priests: Lam. 2.6. The Lord has forsaken his Alter; he has abhorred his
Sanctuary verse 7. He has destroyed and broken her bars; her King and her
Princes are among the Gentiles; the Law is no more: verse 9. Let us search and
try our ways and turn again to the Lord, let us lift up our hearts with our
hands unto God in the Heavens. Lam. 3.40.41. Come let us join our selves unto
the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. Jer. 50.5.

The Praeamble.
WE Noble men, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland; having by the Faction and Rebellion of diverse wicked people under
the specious color of Reformation been deprived of our Religion, King, Laws,
and Liberties; having for seven years last past: now before our eyes the
glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, the honor, and happiness of the Kings Majesty, and His posterity;
and the true public liberty, safety, and peace of the Kingdoms; wherein
every ones private condition is included: And calling to mind, the Barbarous,
and cruel, inhumanity; of these enemies of God against the Kings Majesty;
with their bloody plots, conspiracies, and practices against the true reformed
Religion, and the professors thereof, in all places, (especially these three
Kingdoms) ever since this pretended reformation; and how much their rage,
power and presumption, is of late and at this time increased and exercised:
whereof the desperate, and deplorable estate, of this Church and Kingdom of
England; the inconstant, and unsettled estate, of the Kirk and Kingdom of
Scotland, and the bleeding condition of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, are
present and public testimonies: we have now at last, after other means of
expectation supplication, complying, pr^ying, paying; and suffering, for the
restoration of our Religion, and King, and the preservation of our Laws,
Estates, and, Persons, from utter ruin, and destruction, according to the
commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times (and especially that in
the year 1643.) and the example of Gods People in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn
League and Covenant: Wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself
with our hands and hearts lifted up to the most high God do swear.

The Covenant.
1. THat we shall sincerely, really, and Constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the Restoration of the reformed
Religion in the Church of England; in Doctrine, worship, Discipline, and
Government, as the same is by Law established: The reformation of Religion in
the Kingdoms of Scotland, and Ireland, in Doctrine, worship, Discipline and
Government (if we shall be thereto Lawfully called) according to the word of
God: And shall endeavor, to bring the Churches of God, in the three Kindomes to
the nearest conjunction and uniformity, in Religion, Confession of Faith, form
of Church Government, Liturgy, and Order, that may stand with the word of God,
and the Laws of the Nations; That we and our posterities after us, may as
Brethren live in Faith, and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the
midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Presbytery, (that is to say Church and Kingdoms
Government, by Presbyters, lay Elders, and unlawful Synods and Assemblies,
whether Congregationall, Classical, or National; or any of them)
Independency, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness; and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, least
we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms.

3. We shall, with the same sincerity, realty, and constancy, in our several
vocations, endeavor with our Estates, and lives, mutually to preserve, the
known rights and Privileges of Parliaments, according to the primitive
constitutions thereof; and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, And to restore,
preserve, and defend, the Kings Majesty's Person, and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom,
And in all other causes as well Eclesiasticall as Civil (according to our Oath
of Allegiance) he being therein, in these his Kingdoms next and immediately
under God Supreme head and Governor; That the world may bear witness with
our Consciences of our Loyalty, And that we have no thoughts of introducing
Popery by acknowledging any person, or power in these Kingdoms to be above the
King.

4. We shall with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be, Incendiaries, Malignants or evil instruments, by
hindering, or obstructing the exercise of Religion, and worship, according to
Law established; dividing the King from his People, or one Kingdom from
another, or making any faction or parties among the People, contrary to the Law
of the Land* that they may be brought to public trial, and receive condign
punishment as the degree of their offenses shall require, according to the
known Laws of the Land, and by no other power or Judicatory whatsoever.

5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, so
well settled formerly by his Majesty, is by the Faction of these Incendiaries,
broken and violated, and all the three Kingdoms, involved in Blood, and
confusion, we shall each of us according to our places, and intrest, endeavor
that Peace may be restored; and the Kingdoms conjoined in a firm and lasting
League, and Union, under his Majesty and his posterity for ever. And that
Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
these Articles, and not otherwise.

6. We shall also according to our Places, and Callings, in this common cause
of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms; assist, and defend, all those
that enter into this League, and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuance
thereof and shall not suffer our selves, directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion; or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union, and conjunction; whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or give our selves to a detestable indifferency or newtrality in this cause;
which so much concerns the Glory of God, the Good of the Kindomes, and Honor
of the King: But shall all the days of our lives, zealously, constantly,
continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same, according to
our power; against all letts and impediments whatsoever. And what we are not
able our selves to suppress, or overcome, we shall reveal, and make known,
that it may be timely prevented, or removed: All which we shall do as in the
sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and His Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses,
and dangers, the fruits thereof: we profess, and declare before God and the
world, our unfeined desire, to be humbled for our own Sins, and for the sins
of these Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued that
enestimable benefit of the Gospel; that we have not labored for the purity
and power thereof, and that we have not indeavored to receive Christ in our
hearts, nor to walk worthy of Him in our lives; which are the causes, of
others Sins and Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; and our true
and unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves, and all others
under our power and charge, both in public and in private; in all duties we
owe to God, and man; to amend our Lives, and each one to go before another, in
the example of a Real reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and
heavy indignation, and establish these Churches, and Kingdoms, in truth and
Peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher
of all hearts, with a true intention to Perform the same, as we shall answer
at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed most
humbly beseeching the Lord, to strengthen us by his holy spirit, for this end,
and to bless our desires, and proceedings, with such success as may be
deliverance and safeto the King, and People; and encouragement to other
Christian Churches, groaning under or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian
Presbytery and Tyranny; to join in the same, or the like association, or
Covenant; to the Glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

The Exhortation to the taking of this Solemn League and Covenant; for the
Restoration and Defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the King,
and the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdoms.
IF The Power of Religion, or solid reason, if Loyalty to the King, and piety
to their Native Country, or love to themselves, and natural affection to
their posterity, if the example of men touched with a deep sense of all these,
or extroardinary success from God thereupon, can awaken an imbroyled bleeding
remnant, to embrace the Sovereign and only means of their recovery, there
can be no doubt, but this Solemn League and Covenant will find, wheresoever
it shall be tendered, a People ready to entertain it with all chearefullnesse
and duty.

And were it not commended to the Kingdom, by the concurrent encouragement of
the renowned city of London, the County of Essex, the Principality of Wales,
and multitudes of persons of eminent rank and quality in this Nation. And the
whole Body of the Kingdom of Scotland except the Assembly of Presbyters, who
pretend Jure Divino to govern Kirk and Kingdom) with the Kingdom of
Ireland, who are all ready to join in it, with rejoicing at their
undertakings, so graciously seconded from Heaven already, by blasting the
Counsels, and breaking the power of the enemy: Yet it goes forth in it is own
strength, with such convincing evidence, of equity, truth, and righteousness,
as may raise in all (not wilfully ignorant or miserably seduced) inflamed
affections to join with their fellow Subjects, in this happy Bond; for putting
an end to the present miseries, and for saving both King and Kingdom from
utter ruin; now so strongly and openly Labored by the two factions of
Presbytery, and Independency, and such as have been bewitched, and besotted,
by those bloody and viperous Traitors.

For what is there almost in this Covenant, which was not for substance, either
expressed, or manifestly included, in that solemn Protestation, of May the
fifth 1641. wherein the whole Kingdom stands engaged, until this day: The
sinful neglect whereof, (as we may justly fear) opens one Flud-gate the
more, to let in all these Calamities, upon the Kingdom, and cast upon it, a
necessity of renewing Covenant, and entering into this.

And if it be said the extirpation of Presbytery (which has not so much as
the face of a Law to countenance it, nor any color to introduce it in this
Kingdom but certain scandalous petitions preferred to the Parliaments in
Queen Elizabeth and King James His time, by factious and seditious persons,
that neither feared God nor his Vicegerent, but were wholly adicted to change,
and who by the wisdoms of those Parliaments received their just rewards) is
unwarrantable, or not necessary: The assertors thereof will not only appear
to be defective in their own Judgments, but lay an aspersion upon the wisdom
and temper of the Parliaments of those times, by the moderation and Justice
whereof under God we reaped those blessings of Peace, and Plenty, which we
enjoyed, until we were deprived thereof, by the industrious malice of these
pretended Reformers.

And as for those Clegy-men and others, who may pretend that they cannot
Covenant, to extirpate that government which themselves have sworn to set up.
They can tell if they please, that they that have sworn obedience to the Laws
of the Land, are not by any voluntary, or enforced oath, or Covenant, to be
after taken, bound to extirpate those Laws, though they be inconvenient. And
if any Minister, or others, have entered into any such oath, or Covenant, not
warranted by the Laws of God, and the Land: In this case they must teach
themselves; and others, that such oaths call for repentance, not pertinacy
therein.

That scruple, that this is done without the Kings consent will soon be
removed, if it be remembered that the Protestation of the fifth of May before
mentioned, was voted and executed by both Houses, and after by order of one
house sent abroad, to all the Kingdom: His Majesty not excepting against it,
or giving any stop to the taking of it, all be it he was then resident in
person at White Hall: But now, his Majesty being imprisoned, and it being
voted, that no address shall be made unto him; the People are discharged
before God and Man, if of themselves, they enter into a Covenant to restore
this Religion, and to free their Sovereign, themselves, and their posterities,
from Tyranny and Slavery.

Therefore however some men, hoodwinckt; and blinded, by the Artifices, of
these Jesuiticall Engineeres; who have long conspired, to Sacrifice our
Religion, Laws, Liberties and persons to Arbitrary slavery; and our Estates to
their insatiable avarice; may possibly be deterred, and amused, with high
threats and Declarations, flying up and down upon the wings of the Privilege,
and power of Parliament (now captivated and prostituted to serve all their
lusts) to proclaim all Malignants, Incendiaries, and enemies to the State, who
take This Covenant. Yet let no faithful English heart be afraid to join with
their loyal fellow Subjects of the three Kingdoms, in this Solemn Lawful
League.

What though those tongues set on fire by hell do rail and threaten: That God
who but even as yesterday vouchsafed to disperse those dark Clouds, and Foggs,
which overshaddowed the Kingdom of Scotland, and made their Loyalty appear as
clear as the Sun at noone day, in the very eyes of their purblinde brethren.
And has so miraculously turned the hearts of those that fomented the disloalty
of our fellow Subjects of Ireland; will doubtlesly stand by all those, who with
singlenes of heart, and a due sense of their own sins, and a necessity of
restoration of Religion, shall now enter into everlasting Covenant with the
Lord, never to be forgotten, to put an end to all these unhappy and unnatural
breaches, between the King and his People, causing his righteousness and
praise to spring forth before all the Nations to the terror and confusion of
those men of Blood, the confederate enemies of God, and the King, who have long
combined, and have now raked together the dreggs and scum of many Kingdoms, to
bury all the Religion, Glory, Honor, and Liberty of this Nation, in the
eternal grave of dishonor and Destruction.

READER, I desire thee to compare this Covenant, and the exhortation for the
taking thereof, with that, which was with such violence imposed upon these
Nations, in the year 1643. (and is now again threatened) and thou shall find,
the reasons here given, to be really the same, that were then pretended, for
the obtruding that upon us, But the legallity and necessity of this, to be so
great and just: That it needed no reasons to persuade any man to enter into it
but if yet thou want reason: Read over a book lately printed entitled
Good English: and if that give thee not satisfaction, that there can be no
settled Peace but this way, I shall conclude that thou art wilfully blind or
deperately wicked to thine own destruction.

Luke 19.27. The King said: moreover those mine enemies which would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me.

Sam. 10.24. And Samull said, see you not him whom the Lod has chosen that
there is none like him? And all the people shouted and said.


GOD SAVE THE KING.

