A LETTER From one of the PERSONS Under censure of Parliament, Written upon the
publishing of his Majesty's late Speech in the Vpper-House, With an Answer
thereunto.

W S
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for William Shears, 1660.

DOCTRINA PARET VIRTVTEM a device consisting of an open book with a sword,
scepter, and surrounding motto
A Letter from one of the Persons under censure of Parliament, written upon the
publishing of his Majesty's late Speech in the Upper-House Oxford.
SIR,
HIs Majesty's Speech, which I send you here enclosed, as it is the only theme
of our discourse, in these parts, so it shall ever be the subject of my
grateful remembrance, and now the argument of my Letter.

As the goodness of God was manifested in the great Act of our redemption, so
was his wisdom in the seasonablenesse of the Act, which having first showed us
our heavy doom, then opened unto us a door of Mercy, by whose example his
Vicegerent (for such he ever was, and now appears,) has permitted us to be
acquainted with our Ruin, that by a due sense of our condition, under the Law,
we might be prepared to value his pardon, and our deliverance: I shall freely
in my own words, deliver the sense, I hope, of thousands, his Majesty knows
how to conquer; for in one peaceable action, he has won many battles, by
enlarging us, he multiplies our captivity, and makes us more his prisoners,
then we could have been in the Tower, and if hereafter we forget such a bounden
duty, may our names be at once recorded in the book of Infamy, and blotted out
of the book of Life; The Parliament, in their late Votes, procceeded with such
freedom, justice, and moderation, that not any, the most concerned, could or
durst appeal but the KING, has, alone, the glory of (...) great sincerity in
exceeding his own promises and our hopes, modesty in referring his own
Interest, to the Parliament, and above all, Clemency; in intercepting so
deserved a sentence; Certainly, his Majesty, has an invinceable evidence of
his virtue, whilst his actions are thus exalted by his enemies, and censured of
nothing but too much generosity, by a few intemperate royalists, whose eyes, it
seems, are evil, because his Majesty's is good, who, methinks should be
better satisfied, if they consider, how their Victory is thereby completed, his
Majesty's Throne established, and he, by Gods blessing, better enabled in due
time to reward their merits, then he could have been by exacting the utmost
forfeitures. This indeed was the right way for his Majesty's cause to prevail,
and extinguish, even the brands, and embers of faction, whilst those, who
sought for Parliaments, against him, now flee to him from the Parliament, the
most Fanatic of Commonwealths men being taught to reverence the name of a
KING, and confess, there might be more, and better use of his prerogative,
then they dreamt of: Thus, betwixt the loyalty and gratitude of his people, he
will I am confident, need neither guard for his Person, nor taster for his
Meat, (but for fashion sake) being protected by his Majesty, his innocence, and
his benefits, and may expect such security among us, as no earthly power could
afford him; which, that he may find answerable to our duties, and his deserts,
shall be the daily prayer of, Sir,

His Majesty's faithful Beads-man, and your humble servant, W. L.
London, July 28. 1660.
A Letter from Oxford in answer to the former Letter.
SIR,
I Read both his Majesty's Speech, and your Letter, with much satisfaction,
finding in the one, I hope, a solid foundation of our future settlement, in the
other an honorable sense of his Majesty's unparaleld Clemency; and though I
cannot choose, but fancy to my self, too vast an inequality; I reflect, how
even such as could afford others no justice, now, themselves find mercy, and
those who are full of our spoils, march off, as it were, with bag, and baggage,
the very thought whereof not only raises my spleen, but perplexes my mind, for
that, (besides the seeming scandal,) the consequence is really dangerous, both
in the discouragement of loyalty, and emboldning of future insolences; yet
since, I believe, the peace of the Nation, now requires it, I shall cheerfully
submit my interest and wishes to so great an end, above all, since his Majesty
who is most concerned, has declared himself so fully and accuratly, I think
it time for Subjects no longer to debate the Justice or Wisdom of his
Counsel, especially in an act of Grace, which though most proper, and
seasonable to his enemies, is yet, in some degree, necessary, even, to his
friends, whose future security (therein included,) ought to balance their
dis-satisfactions.

I shall not therefore examine the reasons of this truly Royal Action, but
conclude, that his Majesty, being more moderate in his Judgment, more
charitable in his Censure, more generous in his thoughts then we; resolves to
try an experiment; (viz.) how the amplest of indulgences will work with the
greatest of offenders; wherein I can only wish him that success which is due to
his virtue, or, at least, a better return, then his blessed Father found, upon
the like, (not to say, the same) account. And truly, if his Clemency make such
impressions in others, as it appears to have done in you, it is not cast away.
But I fear his Majesty, has now, too many Proselites, who follow him more for
his Loaves then his Doctrine, and will be taught no longer then they are fed:
Such, indeed, can promise vastly, in the tempest, but perform nothing, when
they are come on shore, like those Leapers, whom our Savior cleansed, not one
of ten, I doubt, will make so much as a bare acknowledgement; Give me leave,
Sir, therefore, to Catechize you, a little not in your own person, but in the
name of those thousands, whom you mention.

Do your Vows proceed from Christian remorse, or servile fear, are they not a
kind of deathbed repentance, when judgment is at your doors, and do you not
retain the will, when you have lost the power of offending?

Are you changed in your principles, and natures, or is the change only of your
condition?

Would you not have sat in the seats of violence till doomsday, if it had
depended only on your own choice, and would you not still wish for the
opportunity of new crimes, if you could hope for it?

Do you not lie in wait to disserve his Majesty in all things, where you can
with safety, since you cannot break his head, do you not plot and contrive, at
least, to bruise his heal?

Are you not better satisfied in his Majesty's present Declaration, then you
were in his late Restitution, and would not the prosperity of Lambert, or a
fortunate attempt upon his Majesty at his Landing, have been more welcome news
to you then either?

Can you with Mary Magdalene, wash his Majesty's feet with your tears, and
wipe them with the hairs of your head, or do you love in measure, as you are
forgiven?

Would you with Zacheus, if you had wherewithal, restore fourefold, for all
the goods you have gotten by Extortion, and will you, now make restitution, so
far forth as you are able?

Could you be content, to do a weekly penance, for what is past, or go a
yearly Pilgrimage to Tiburne, as long, as you live?

Will you not swallow, digest, and void your pardon, as you did thanksgiving
dinners, in eight hours that you may be ready for another meal, will you not
take it for a step to reward?

Will you think your selves more obliged to his Majesty, then your fellow
subjects, and vye services with the most zealous of the Royallists?

If you can clearly answer to these, and other the like interrogatories, I shall
rejoice with you, and for you, Otherwise, I must tell you plainly, I fear, his
Majesty has cast his Pearls to swine, who will turn again, and rent him.

Sir, I shall recommend this argument to your serious meditation, and entreat
your favorable construction of my freedom, as the truest testimony of my
friendship, who really am

Your affectionate and humble servant, R.E.
Oxon July 31. 1660.
FINIS.

