UPON THE BLESSED RETVRN OF OUR Gracious Sovereign KING CHARLES The Second.
Presented to his sacred Majesty by a Person of Honor the next day.
The Proeme.
WHat Pen is fitting to salute a King?
Lend me a Quill plucked from an Angels wing.
My Muse does tremble, and my hand does shake,
Whilst that my King I do my Subject make.
So tender am I to my Sovereign's Name,
I fear the Press, whilst that it stamps the same:
Hold, Printers, hold, pray stop your hands again,
Let Jove impress it in his Charles his Wain.
Heaven's milky path suits best for papyr here,
And golden Letters from the starry Sphere.
Yet since my knee, nor yet Poetic feet
Bowed e're to Baal, or Times-Idol greet:
Since mouth never swore, nor yet subscribed my hand,
A Poets feet in loyal verse may stand:
On Pegasus now mounted will I style
My Poem a Troop to lead in rank and file.
The Wish.
LET Canons speak it with their Brazen lungs,
Let Muskets shout it with their iron tongues;
Let Towr's and Steeples now instead of Knells,
Chime with their Canons, Volleys sound with Bells.
Let Squibs and Crackers ring their Peals of joys,
Let old decrepid men turn skipping boys.
Let frozen Stoics melt; our vowed Dads
Drop off their snowy beards, turn smooth-cheek Lads.
Let Poets toss their Laurels up, and try
To lodge them on the Blew slate-Eves of the Sky.
Let the Muses fill each head, their Conduits may
Through their Quil-pipe run Hippocrene to day.
Let the British Island frisk a Water Dance,
Like the Nymph Isles of Lydia let them prance.
Let now the Irish waves like the Attick Sea,
Sound like an Harp, and quaver Harmonye.
Let both the York and the Lancastrian Rose,
Which in War's Limbeck was distilled by foes:
Let it so spring, that all the world may say,
Alt'ring the Proverb, like a Rose in May.
Let the Scotch Thistle yield up all her down,
To ease the Travels of the tossed Crown.
Let the French Lily with its silver Bell,
And jealous Clapper ring our joy, their Knell.
Let Soldiers now no more from Cromwell's Nose
Be Blazoned Red Coats, but from Charles his Rose.
O let, that blazing Comet be accursed,
For its predicting death to Charles the First:
That Nebuchadnezzar's furnace and the Urn
Where Charl's three Children were condemned to burn.
Hadn'to our Moses God himself been seen:
For Elohim both God and Oak does mean.
'Twould be no Legend sure, if I should say
The withered Oaks grow fresh and plump to day.
Let trees who have their mossie rugs for age
Skip at this News upon the grassie stage.
In fine, the Church of England let us see,
To day not Militant, but Triumphant be.
Let old decrepid Paul's, whose palsy head,
Bare to the scull was even trapanned dead;
Let it revive with joy, to think it shall
Have a new Birthday, not a Funeral.
Let not Religion come to this, we must
Pull down the Altar to set up a Just.
Let Moses, Jesus, Gospel and the Law,
Never more be hid in Reeds, or laid in Straw;
Let never such contempt in Churches reign,
As in the Manger lay our Christ again.
CHARLES STVART Ana -- gramme

A Rachel's Trust.
ENgland thy Rachel is, thy Leah we
May Scotland call, first married unto thee.
Had Monk thy Laban been, we surely know,
The had married been to Rachel long ago.
England his love can never mistrust it is true,
Which twelve years waited for what first was due.
The Emblem of our English Times.
Vivat CAROLVS. II. Augustissimus Magnae Britanniae REX.



HAs not the world been round? our Times can say
This giddy age was turned every day.
Spare, spare such pains, of which no need at all;
The World is round enough for Fortunes ball.
Some that did see these precious shavings lie
Under the Lathe, strait covet with their eye.
The parings of this golden Apple they
With wide-mouthed bags gape after every day.
One on his Pike a golden Pippin sets;
Another hedg-hog a Queen Apple gets.
See how the Royal Rose was stole by such,
Who left their Sovereign but the Thorny bush.
It seems that fruit, which they a Crab did call,
So sweet it was, they would devoured it all.
But what is the Tool has turned our British sphere?
Not the smooth Chizel, but the Pike and Spear.
Hence drops the Scepter; there a royal Jem,
Here falls a George, and there a Diadem.
Sweet Angel leave thy turning, and but see,
What kind of men these shavings steal from thee.
Well then! if that my Muse this sacred time,
'Stead of Parnassus may Olympus climb,
A wheel within a wheel I shall descry,
Not Cupid turning, but the watchful eye.
For the hand of the Dyall stands now where't begun,
Twelve years are past, and we are come to One.
Kingdoms are Watches, and their Native King,
His Scepter is the Hand, himself the Spring.
The Crown-wheel keeps the other wheels in awe,
Justice the Balance, and its string the Law.
God grant now of our Watch it may be sain,
Once more wound up shall never go down again.
The concluding Emblem.
JOHANNES LAWSON



Heaven bad the Angels cry aloud to Fame
To blow the Trumpet in our Sovereigns Name.
Just Fame obeys and sounds it in the Ears
Of Englands Commons and the Noble Peers.
Both Houses meet, and Vote the Droven Bees
With their Great King, are welcome when they please.
White Hall and all the Palaces do strive
To be unto this honey-dew a Hive.
When Neptune heard the News, he swelled with pride,
To think our Sovereign on his back should ride:
Forthwith he Courtier turned, to make him fine,
Besnow'd his curled Locks against the Time;
But when he saw our Charles, no more he raves,
But's Trident Kembeth smooth his tangled Waves.
Now the wilderness is passed, now Canaan found,
Our Crown is landed, and our Land is Crowned.
With milk and honey does white Albion flow;
The silver and the golden Mint will go;
This day for Englands Vintage we will allow,
Since very Conduits turn wine-presses now.
Sure Charles his presence cannot but be Divine,
That turns our Water thus to purest Wine.
Charles the best Christian does Assurance gain;
The World will witness that he is born again.
Johan. Lawson. M. D. de Coll. Land.

In the first Year of Englands restored Liberty and Happiness.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, 1660.


