THE INDEPENDANTS MILITARY ENTERTAINMENT.

OR, Certain Reasons and Arguments why Independants ought not only to be
admitted into the Army raised for defense of Church and State, but also both by
Law of God, Nature, and Nations, are required to put their hands to the Plough
of the Kingdom.

TOGETHER With the answering of such grand Objections as tend to the contrary.

By W. L.

Licensed, Entered, and Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

THE INDEPENDANTS MILITARY ENTERTAJNMENT.
SInce it has pleased God to put into the heart of, and to enable our ever
honored Parliament to new form and constitute the armies raised for the
defense of themselves and Kindom, by which means consequently many Malignant
and disaffected instruments, formerly employed, are outed, whose spirits daily
speak out their former disaffection and profane insides, the Devil also
begins to be very busy to blow the coal of contention, and to sow the seed
of strife and division, amongst such who are yet Engaged in the work, and who
under God are like to be very Isntrumental to put a timely end to our unhappy
troubles: And therefore labor might and main to beget such a disaffection
between them, to wit, the Presbyterian and Independent party, as if the
entertainment of both in the Army were inconsistent with the well being, and
success of it. Now seeing that both of them have ever been engaged in the
work, since the beginning, and that party so much poynted at, no whit behind
any other, either in faithfulness or courage; I thought good to declare to the
public, that Independent party, so much stumbled at, are not only very
precious Instruments to promote the present military affairs: but are no ways
to be discountenanced, or their assistance and brotherly help declined for
these reasons ensuing.

FIrst, that our divisions are the enemies hopes and our own hurt, and they
daily endeavor to disunite us, that they may have the greater advantage upon us.

2. Those our friends whose absence we would so willingly wave, are neither
Heathens nor Turks, but men professing the same Religion with us, having the
same God, the same Christ, of the same faith, partakers of the same hope, borne
with us in Baptism in the same Covenant, only differing in and about
Circumstance, not the substance of Gods Worship, not any fundamental points of
religion.

3. If Papists, Malignants, and desperate Delinquents are the common
adversaries of the Kingdom, these men of all other are most likely to be real
in their undertakings against them, whose principles are so utter contrary to
them, they being formerly the objects of our Prelates persecution, for that they
knew them utter enemies to Prelacie, Popery, and profaneness.

4. They have through Gods assistance behaved themselves in the Field, and in
the face of the Enemy very gallantly, as the common adversary himself
confesses and certainly if it be a received tenent among Commanders to
entertain fighting men, although otherwise dissolute, and profane, certainly
these men that are conscientious, that abhor oaths, blasphemies, and
profaneness, should not only be admitted, but required and desired to assist
the State, if for nothing else, yet because they will fight.

5. It has been too too apparent that diverse professing themselves Protestants
at large, as our adversaries themselves do, have proved very perfidious, who
having taken up arms for their own ends have made use of their best
opportunities to attain them, by betraying their trust, and although we have
had too many experiments of this kind, yet I never heard of any, usually
called Independent, since the war began, that proved perfidious.

6. Consider our Enemis are accounted old Soldiers and Politicians, and they
tell us it is lawful for the King to call to his assistance papists out of all
Countries, yea and the most desperate wretches in the world, nay and our
Malignants will tell you he does well in receiving any that will stick to him
in his necessity, although by experience, they are such as endeavor both the
ruin of himself and kingdom, and whose tenants are so utterly inconsistent,
with the wel-being or the being of the Church or Kingdom, that a man may safer
live with a Turk, a Jewe, a Pagan, then with a Papist, and shall we be so
void of reason to decline the help of our faithful friends, of whose courage
and zeal, we have had sufficient testimony? Let us not suffer the children of
this world, to be always wiser then the children of light especially in this
Generation wherein such abundance of light is discovered.

7. It is displeasing to God when men of one and the same religion, whose
judgments differ in point of Ceremony, not substance, are disunited in
affection, and so either decline, or deny each other assistance, and indeed we
can expect little peace in the Kingdom, so long as we have wars and fightings
in our spirits, one against another, God who is our wise Father, will lash his
children if they fall out one with another, believe it he will make a third man
among them, till they agree better.

8. The cause of God and Kingdom lies at stake, and they as well as others are
bound in Conscience to help against the Common adversaries, and shall we tie
their hands behind them, in opposition to our own assistance, not suffering
them to help the Lord against the mighty? shall Herod and Pilate become
friends to Crucify Christ, and Christians suffer themselves to become a prey
to the Adversary rather then mutually to be helpefull?

9. They are not truly called Independent, otherwise then to distinguish them
from the Episcopal and Presbyterians, for no true Church is independent,
neither know we any such in New England, or elsewhere that wholly decline the
brotherly advice and assistance of the Neighboring Churches in Points of
difficulty either in Doctrine or discipline.

10. What occasion of slighting have they given? have they not bin active and
zealous to promote the affairs of the Kingdom, both with their persons and
purses? or do we emulate and envy them for that they are more zealous then our
selves, although in conscience they are bound to it, knowing a heavy curse
hangs over the heads of such as do the work of the Lord deceitfully, or
negligently.

11. Me thinks above all men our brethren the Scots, should be so far from
disaffecting them, that they should join heart and hand with them, for these
men were especially those that in the day of their trouble stuck closest to
them, although at that time not baptized into the Name of Independants;
Prelates were not acquainted with any such titles.

12. Herein we shall use the same method to ruin our selves that the enemy
does to destroy us: they fight against us under the notion of Brownists,
Anabaptists, Separatists, and Roundheads, under which terms they comprehend
all not so vilde as themselves: and we quarrel one with another under the
notion of Presbyterian, Independent, nay we use the same tone of Brownists,
Anabaptists, Sectaries, etc. condemning all not of their own opinion, as men
extremely prejudicial in their very assistance of the State, although the most
godly and learned in the Kingdom, viz. the Synod, dare not condemn them. Nay
further in some sense I may truly say, we are all Independants the Kingdom
over: for ever since Episcopacy was condemned and made shorter by the head, no
other discipline being settled in the Church, wherein the great difference lies,
every man does that that is right in his own eyes, and how long it may be thus
who knows?

13. If we would have them cashered the Army, why not also cast out of the
Kingdom? believe it, he that is not fit to be trusted in the Army, is in these
dangerous times as unfit to live in a Commonweal: he that is not with us is
against us, and he that is not thought fit to assist us, must consequently be
thought as unfit to live amongst us, especially such men as hate neutralizing:
Yet I believe neither Parliament or Synod have any thoughts to deny them the
liberty of freeborn subjects: nor do they, I believe, at all doubt of their
honesty: But as Independants account the Presbyterian godly, so the
Presbyterian accounts also of the Independent. And if they be found fit to live
in the Kingdom, and men approved godly by those best able to judge, why shall
we condemn them for unprofitable and unusefull members? And although
doubtless there are some, nay too too many, that think if Independancy be
tolerated in the Kingdom, it will be like Moses rod, etc. and therefore would
gladly have it cast out of the kingdom. Truly I say this should satisfy that
it was Moses rod that devoured the rest, and the rest were but the effects of
enchantments. And if we shall cast out Independants for their conscience, sake,
by the same ground we may banish all Religion.

14. They are men known to be lovers of Religion and Law all of them, and as
they have a birthright in both they are bound both by the Law of God and Man,
of Nature and Nations, to lend their assistance when these are endangered.
Besides, they have both lives and estates to save or lose as well as others.

15. Again, we have more need to encourage them to join with us, then decline
their help, many of them already having laid down Arms in reference to the
Covenant, and many never would take up Arms to fight for any cause, or upon
any terms at all, holding it unlawful: these then that are willing, resolved,
and men sufficiently known for their fidelity and courage, should rather be
encouraged, then any way discountenanced.

16. Consider who they are that are principal opposers of Independants, and
would so gladly have them outed the Army, certainly, none that are truly godly,
whatsoever they pretend: for it is not that they are Independent, but that they
are godly they are envied: it is the power of godliness aimed at: and he that
is now an enemy to Independants, were there not one of them left in the Army,
would be as arch an adversary to Presbyterians, so far as the power of
godliness is held forth in their conversation: this I am confident of, if men
will swear and swill, drink and drab, as those that would have sway in the
Armies have too long done, and would still, which can neither stand with the
power of godliness or common honesty; let them be Independent, Presbyteriall,
Prelaticall, or Popish, all is one, Birds of a feather would flock together.
Not that I condemn all now by course dismissed their commands and employments,
for I know many choice, worthy, gallant Gentlemen are outed by means of the
new Model; I only point at the profane Atheistical party, for whose sakes
the Army has been new formed: and who are the only enemies of Independants,
and the power of godliness, in whomsoever it is.

Q. But these Independants will not take the Covenant, what should they do
amongst us? why shall we trust them?

A. Many, nay most of them have or will take it, only some few decline it in
point of conscience, questioning the lawfulness of pressing it upon them with
all its circumstances; yet men resolved without any such tie, having a
principle within them leading them to be true to their trust, and no whit the
more backward in their assistance. And as a worthy Gentleman said once
concerning forcing men to our public Assemblies, by reason of a complaint
made against such as used private meetings on the Lords day, quoth he, let us
force them to Church that make no conscience at all, rather then force those
that withdraw out of tenderness. So I say concerning the Covenant, although
many thousands both godly and conscientious have taken it, and who doubtless
will to their utmost endeavor to keep it, yet there are many thousands in the
Kingdom that make no conscience at all what they swear, nor ever care to keep
any Oath or Covenant whatsoever: mists and milstones are alike: it is good to
impose it upon such with reasonable instruction concerning it; but let us take
heed of pressing it upon a tender conscience: say not, How shall we trust them?
for he that fears an Oath fears God, and let him alone with his conscience,
he will wrong no man, he will neither kill his King, nor poison his Prince, nor
blow up a Parliament: his tenants are no way distructive to Church or State;
nay though he swear not, yet he will assist the kingdom to the utmost of his
ability: these take heed of offending one of those little ones that desire to
walk according to their light.

Q. But they are principal causers of divisions in the Army, by preaching and
teaching they know not what: they must be all Preachers forsooth, although they
have neither call to the Ministry, nor parts to discharge that function; hereby
they poison abundance of ignorant people with their errors, and wrong
Scriptures by their mis-interpretations.

A. For that general charge of being causers of divisions, it is no more then
what formerly even from the beginning to this day has been laid upon the back
of Religion, therefore was Eliah counted the troubler of Israel, Paul a sower
of sedition: and indeed the profession of Christ has ever been cause of
division, therefore he says he came to set the father against the son, the
mother against the daughter, etc. and it is necessary such offenses should be,
that the approved may be known: flesh and spirit, light and darkness,
godliness and impiety must needs be divided; and thus it has been, and so
will be to the end of the world in all Christian Kingdoms, Churches, nay and
persons too, the flesh lusting and warring against the spirit: they are always
contrary.

Indeed for that men of weak or no abilities, without any warrant or call from
God or man, do preposterously thrust themselves into public dispensation of
ordinances, this is to be rather bewailed then pleaded for; and I doubt not but
that the Parliament and Assembly both will take care to prevent this enormity,
and to furnish our Armies with able conscencious Preachers, and so also prevent
the great mischief that often necessity brings with it: yet I presume not one
of forty do take upon them public administrations, and why should we
condemn all the rest for those? as well may we cry down all godly painful
Ministers, by reason some were ignorant, some profane, some superstitious,
many of them very sots, fitter to serve swine then seed the flock of Christ:
yet I hope we reverence the godly learned of them; and so though some few
forget themselves in this, making an Idol of Ignorance, as too many of us do
of Learning, yet take heed of condemning the rest that are both wise and godly.

Neither must I condemn any man for exercising his talent in the place where
God has set him, to his glory, but with Moses, heartily wish that all the
Lords people were Prophets, enabled for his work, knowing every Master of a
Family, every Commander in an army, according to his light received, and the
charge committed to him, ought to improve it to Gods glory, and the benefit of
those related to him: no man ought to hide his talent in his napkin, or put his
candle under a bushel, but to pray with and for those committed to his charge,
to exhort and instruct them in the ways of God, provided they deliver known
practical, and received truths, and meddle not in things too high for them,
questions and disputations engendring controversy, rather then tending to
edification, leaving things more dark and doubtful to the godly: learned and
called by God and man to public administrations, know that the Scriptures are
of that latitude that a Lamb may wade, and yet the Elephant swim in their
Ocean, so shall men do much good in their places, and may by their praiets,
tears, and Christian duty wrestle with God, as usefully and profitaby as fight
with an enemy, for the peace and welfare of Church and Commonweal: thus shall
we build with one hand, and fight with the other. Let us therefore bless God
for such Commanders and Soldiers, and not envy them for their zeal.

But above all let it be our shame, that swearing, blasphemy, drunkenness, and
all manner of profaneness, things out of question unlawful and sinful, are
suffered in our Armies, while such practices as tend to the power of godliness
are opposed and oppugned: and who ever thou art that art an enemy to the
Independants entertainment in the Army, be silent till all profane ones are
cashiered, and especially profaneness out of thy own heart and conversation
cast out: pluck out thy beam first, and then thou will see more clearly the
mote: if this course were taken, few or none would either spurn at the power
of godliness, or despise the day of small things. To conclude know this, he
that has the least spark of true grace in his heart, will not envy the power
of godliness in any man's conversation whatsoever.

FJNJS.

