AN ELEGIACALL EPITAPH UPON The deplored Death of that Religious and Valiant
Gentleman, Colonel John Hampden Esquire, A worthy Member of the Honorable
House of Commons in PARLIAMENT; who received his Deaths wound in a Battle
near Chinnar in Oxfordshire, and deceased At Them. JUNE, the 27. MDCXLIII.
SInce God himself did stoop so low, to lay
His Picture on a piece of that same Clay
Whereof we are composed, it is but just,
To wayle his loss, and to adorn his Dust:
In doing which, both head and hand may miss,
For who can pourtray Virtue as it is?
Or make a true description of that fire,
That so inflamed him with a brave desire?
But if a Jem, which God both made and bought,
Of manly shape, yet of more manly thought,
If Piety, and to the truth true Zeal,
If love and care of Church and common weal,
If Chastity (rare in a Soldiers breast)
And Temperance, (which Cavaliers detest,)
If wisdom, courage, and an humble mind,
^ust dealing unto which he was inclin'de;
If love of Peace, of Arms, and heavenly Arts,
And bounty unto men of good deserts,
May make a man unto his Country dear,
Brave Hampden justly may exact a tear
From present and succeding Ages; then
Come Albion Muses all, come Maids and Men,
Come silver Swannes leave singing on the banks,
Of Isis floods, and in you painted Ranks
Ye merry Birds go solitary sit,
Silence and sorrow, does us best befitt:
For though we live, yet are we deadly shot,
(Like stricken Dear at gaze) and feel it not.
Then let our Tears upon our selves descend,
For our Heav'n-daring Crimes, which do portend
More heavy Judgments coming on apace,
To Court and Country, retrograde to Grace.
In vain (dear Hampden) we solicit Thee,
Whose passive part has made thee now shot-free
From Sirens violence, Sin, Fear and Death,
Wherewith we Mortals struggle here beneath.
Then let us strew thy Hearse with bud and bloome,
As Thetis did her loved Achilles Tomb,
Or rather hang (with Athens) Laurel by,
In token of Thy happy VICTORY,
Triumphing over all forenamed Foes,
And whatsoever did Thee here oppose.
Farewell then honored Hampden (heavenly Jem)
Adoring now the new JERUSALEM.
Farewell beloved in Parliament and Field,
Farewell thy Soldiers faithful broken Shield:
Farewell thy friends and native Counties stay,
To them it is an over-clouded Day;
And dismal unto all it may be spoke,
Save such as love to bear the Romish Yoke.
JULY, 27. 1643. Per JO: LEICESTER.

LONDON, Printed by BERNARD ALSOP. 1641.


