OF BAPTISM. The heads and order of such things as are especially insisted on,
you will find in the table of chapters.

Printed in the Year 1646.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of these follovving thoughts professes, that he was
necessitated to them, partly in duty to himself, that he might discover what
was the good thing of that ordinance, which the Scripture magnifyes so
greatly, and himself understood so little; but particularly by reason of a
controversall scruple, which a providence of God put him to conflict with,
and all the present light he had, could not manadge to satisfaction; to which
also may be added as another just reason, that the desires of a fevv friends,
who have a real interest in him, engaged his endeavors also in their
respect, and contributed to the production of these meditations, which last
reason was necessary to be known, in regard that they, whose desires were
accessory to the dravving forth of this discourse, have been principal in the
publishing of it, and have offered a kind of violence, partly by importunityes,
and partly by venturing upon the community and liberty of friendship, to make
it public without any order obtained from the Author to that purpose, who
needs no fuller witness then God and his own conscience, and a fevv
friends, with whom he has more particularly conversed, how little he has
delighted to engage his thoughts in the controversall parts of truths, and how
in a constant tenor, his meditations have formed otherwise. But since it is
done, and certainly with no ill will to the public. The Author finds good
to accompany these papers with these good vvishes, That they may by no means
be the occasion to any of angry or quarrelsome disputes; that blood, which
was shed for us, and which this ordinance exhibites as a fountain to bath
in, should qualify our heates, and correct that Chagrin and distemper, which
often manifests it self in the agitating of things diversely apprehended;
Particularly, that they may escape the unhappiness of the censures of idle
men, who because they say nothing public enough for an answer, think they
may say any thing, and having found an easy way to religion, to wit, the
suffrage of learned men, and the practice of the most, judge them vain and
impertinent that take a greater boute.

To which he adds also this vvish, that they may be delivered from such who
triumph in discovering some lesser mistakes, and place a great part of their
abilityes in critisizing upon a word or phrase, not so well placed, or
pertinently expressed; such, not to mention their charity, as their talent is
commonly very little, so that which is, seems fitted not so much for argueing
as wrangling (with which he would have nothing to do) and is levissimus
fructus ingenij, which you may english, The froth or scumme of wit. And
lastly he desires that any who shall examine them more seriously and
particularly, and shall not in every thing be of the same mind (for light is
not administered to all by the same measure) would be content that men should
enjoy their judgment (since nothing is more our own) till cause be given to
alter them, and would in the mean time be so friendly to him, who professes
to be greatly a friend to truth, in order to the truth Jesus Christ, that in
the difference of opinions, there might be a just simphathy and unanimity of
the Opiners.

These escapes the Reader is desired to correct, before he read the ensueing
discourse.
Page Line Error Correct 11 4 us as 30 14 offense offense 31 3 terrify can
terrify 33 4 blot out; after the word death 17 discarge discharge 50 14
obliging obligeinge 56 14 or our 58 14 proceeding preceading 87 9 or as 88 17
which with 98 12 hnit hint 101 14 opposite apposite 113 19 Christ Christ's 128
13 put out That 133 8 chain claim 135 11 forner former 144 15 recte una 156
13 host have 171 16 anquietnes an acuteness 177 15 to two 181 18 rational
national 185 14 infaithfullnesse unfaithfullnesse 186 16 oath each 19
rationallity nationallity 187 9 blot out the; at sin 189 1 yooke yoke 195 11
a beginning our beginning 198 3 gave have 210 3 antientnes ancientnes 12 we
workers coeworkers 224 4 come came 226 6 John John 1. 240 5 typising typifieing
274 20 pole pale 293 17 woe woe 324 6 ^^ite ^int 328 10 differring deferring 329
10 differring deferring 348 16 provooke provoake 369 3 bewtifull beautiful

The table of chapters the Reader will find at the end of the book.

OF BAPTISM.
CHAP. I. Wherein, of the first and great end of that ordinance, the sealing up
of our union with Christ, and more particularly, of the most illustrious tipe
of Baptismeall sealing, in the Baptism of Christ.
THE Scripture holds forth no point with more glory and certainty, then the
onenes which we have with Jesus Christ, which union is the rise and ground of
all that is good and happy in us: this therefore is the first and great thing
that is made ours by Baptism, we are baptized into the name of Christ; for
we, though we be baptized into the name of the Father and Holy Ghost
likewise, and have an union with them, yet the Fathers love is made good to us
through Christ, and the Spirits efficacy is derived through and for Christ, who
is the Mediator, the middle person, the bond, between God and us, so Romans
6.3. Ye are baptized into Jesus Christ. And Gal. 3.27. For as many of us as
have been baptized into Christ. This therefore is the great ordinance,
assuring and sealing up; If God had kept his mind to himself touching our
eternal estate, there had been a surenesse in it, but there had not been a
sealing to us; but when he tells us his heart, and his mind, and bids us
believe it, doubting nothing, and when he shall yet speak more sensible to
us, to our sight and to our touch, and engage almost all our senses, when he
shall mark us with sensible signs and seals, and speak visible words also,
this must needs assure; and of all assurances there is none so great as this
first piece of our union, to have this sealed and signed, to be baptized into
Christ, to be ingrafted into, and made one with him, how great a matter is it:
Now God is not wanting to our faith, in the truth of the representation,
between the sign and the thing signed, between the seal and the thing
sealed, and therefore Abraham in his believing, received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of his faith, Romans 4.11. that is, the
righteousness which he had by faith, the acceptance he had, was sealed up to
him by the sign of Circumcision, by that mark; now what Abraham had by
circumcision, that the Saints have by Baptism; for so the Apostle intimates in
Coloss. 2.11.12. (which place we shall have occasion to open hereafter) where
he shows the use of Circumcision, which was a figure of things to come; so
when Cornelius and his company were baptized, the holy Ghost fell upon them,
as that to which the seal immediately was to be set, Act. 10.47.48. But the
most illustrious sealing of all others was, as it became it to be, in our head
Jesus Christ, when he was baptized, Matthew. 3.16.17. And Jesus when he was
baptized, went up straightvvay out of the water: and lo, the heavens were
opened unto him, and he savv the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and
lighting upon him; and lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased. There the whole Trinity appeared, to make the
Triumph and ratify that affair; never any ordinance was graced, with such a
presence. And as Baptism is a visible seal to our faith, so here the Trinity,
in whose name we are baptized, made themselves visible together; the Father by
a voice, the Son in his body, the Holy Ghost like a bird. First there was the
Heavens opened, but to him, so are the words Mark 10. its said, he savv the
heavens opened or cloven or rent; that is, he saw a cleaving or rending, some
great Hiatus; now this was for Christ himself, for it was as Luke says, as he
was praying, Luke 3.21. which was, that so the voice and the spirit might be
known to come from heaven, it being a great evidence of the presence of God
there. Then he saw the spirit like a dove, lighting upon him; as the multitude
in the Acts, saw the spirit as it were in cloven tongues like sire, the spirit
took upon him the shape of a dove, and rested and abode on him; that sealing
spirit, that seals us all, sealed Christ and abode with him, for so says
John, Upon whom thou see the spirit descending and abiding, that is he. And
then there came a voice, and that admirable and considerable; this represented
God the Father to his ear, as the dove represented the spirit to his eye, so
while the spirit sat upon his head, the Father spoke from heaven, the great
sealing word, This is my vvellbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: This,
that is, this man Jesus whom I show and point out, by my spirits abiding upon
him, Is, this is he whom I have promised, now ye have him, or, thou art,
(speaking to Christ) my Son, we cannot be sealed to such a Sonneship in all
respects; we are adopted children, he was the natural and proper Son, the
only begotten (...), that beloved, many are beloved, but he was only beloved,
as only begotten; we are sons, because we are beloved, but he was loved,
because he was a Son, In whom, not in any other who ever he be unles by
this One; I am well pleased; In whom I am contented, in whom my mind rests,
that is, who only and singularly pleases me, and in whom there is nothing
that displeases me; therefore I delight wholly in him, and rest in him so as
every thing will be acceptable to me that he does, by whom I shall be pleased
with others, and by whom others may please me; for the Father here intimates,
that his love so rests in Christ, as it deffuseth it self to others, so as
beholding him, he puts of all offense, and anger toward others, whom he
beholds in him, opposing him to every thing.

All these things were to his person, but respected also his office, which was
unseparable from his person. Therefore first, to him the heavens opened, whose
office it was to open heaven, and to make an entry for us thither, again to
open heaven, and to draw down the great mysteries of it to us, the doctrine of
the Trinity was here declared, and truth came by him also, what he had seen
of the Father, that he revealed.

Secondly the spirit came in the shape of a dove, as to seal us before, so to
show that he should converse here up and down in a dovelike manner; should
have neither weapons without nor gaul within, to offend withal, although his
condition was not greatly to please, therefore such passages as these, fell
sometimes from him, Learn of me that I am meek and lowly; Ye know not of
what spirit you are. This abiding and this use of the spirit, is that
prophesied of him Esaias. 61.1, 2. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because
the Lord has anointed me, to preach good tidings unto the meek; he has sent
me to bind up the broaken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound: To proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, and to comfort all that mourn; and he was to be filled
with the spirit, that it might descend upon us his members, and that we might
be baptized with the holy Ghost.

Thirdly for the voice, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased;
it was then the office of Christ to execute and manifest the wellpleasing of
God in himself, to the redeeming, reconciling and renewing of the world that
should believe in him, and the restoring of all things. This is that expression
that is to be opposed to that other Genesis 6.7. It repents me that I have made
man; God can never repent him more that he has made man, when he is so well
pleased in the man Christ Jesus, so abundantly satisfied and contented, and in
him with all his. This Baptism of our Savior was the Epoche or term, whence
they reckoned Acts 1.22. etc. Beginning from the Baptism of John, unto that
same day that he was taken up from us.

I have been the larger in opening this illustrious tipe of Baptismall
sealing, that the nature and way of it may be seen in the highest pattern.

We shall be sealed also, with our difference of younger brothers; the heavens
in Baptism opens upon us; and the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost, who are
visibly present here, are present also to our sealing, and ready to give us the
same witness, but with its distinction as before, this is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased; and as we are then visibly united to Christ, who
sanctifies this ordinance for us; so the spirit is ready to seal us up; and
God by the spirit, to witness every good thing to us, let us therefore put a
value and a price upon this ordinance, more then we have done; and after being
once baptized into Christ, let us know and be assured, that we have a right to
what he has, and to what he had, and to what he is; for what ever he was or
is, as Mediator, he is for us: with the great difference of elder brother, and
having that in his own right, which we have in his; and therefore the sealing
of his Baptism, belongs also to our baptism, as his dying and rising
again, does to us, who dye and rise again with him in Baptism.

To add a word or two of the seal, Paul has two words (...) and (...). Signum
and Sigillum; a statue, a representation may be a sign, but it cannot be a
seal; we seal those things which we would keep with the greatest security,
and have remain untoucht, therefore letters and evidences are sealed, that no
man might doubt of the truth and authentiquenes of them.

Again, two considerations more there is in a seal; first things sealed, and
marked, are kept for their masters use, My beloved is a fountain sealed up,
Cant. 4.12. kept only for the use of the spouse; so their wells and springs
were shut up in Israel, they were not for every body: Amongst the Persians they
had fountains of which only the King and his eldest son drunk, under
capital punishment to all others; in Spain they have also one of the same
sort; so as we are marked and sealed for Christ's use our husband, we must not
make our selves common therefore to the world, and lie exposed to every lust,
to every love, since God has impropriated us.

Secondly, we seal or mark things precious, as coin, gold or such things, as
we set a price and vallew upon; God by his sealing lets us know, what a vallew
he puts upon us, how he separates us from refuse and base things, therefore we
should not defile our selves.

CHAP. II. Wherein of the second great use and end of Baptism, assuring us of
our Justification in the remission of all our sins, together with certain
corollaries and inforcements.
HAving told you that Baptism is the great ordinance of Christ, to confirm
and seal up to us our union with himself, whom having, we have all things,
that we may further see how considerable an ordinance this is, we will beat
it out, as far as the Scripture gives light, in the point of Communion, and so
we shall find, that as it seals and confirms our union with him; so it also
seals and confirms to us, the most desirable thing in the world, which is
the pardon of all our sins. It is safe giving ordinances that notion the
Scripture gives them, which while you do, you will get the true juice they
afford, and you shallbe sure not to err from the true nature of them: This you
have Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you for the remission of
sins. As if he should say, you are now pricked at the heart, and you see your
selves in a lost condition, and therefore cry out what to do, as men amazed
and at astand, says he there is hope for you, God has made an ordinance to
relieve you in this straight, Repent and be baptized for the remission of
sins; This Jesus whom I preach, and whom God has made Lord and Christ, can
remit sins (for that is it which gauls you when light comes in) now for this
God has formed an ordinance on purpose to confirm and ratify unto us the
remission of sins, and that is Baptism, therefore be not amazed, but repent
and be baptized: So Acts 22.16. when Paul was in an ill condition, being
humbled with a witness (it is the greatest representation of the humiliation
of a sinner that we have,) and Ananias was sent to raise him; says he, Why
tarriest thou, arise and be baptized, and vvash away thy sins; what can be
said more comfortably to a distressed soul, then this, that God has set and
instituted an ordinance on purpose, that thou may be acquitted of every
sin, to witness and seal up what is done by faith: Therefore do not
languish in this condition, why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash
away thy sins; so 1. Pet. 3.21. The like figure vvhereto Baptism does now
save us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscence; We know that salvation lies, especially in justification and
discharging all our sins; Baptism does this, it does now save us, that is,
this signs and seals your salvation to you, which lies in justification and
discharge of smne; but you must not think that it is only the washing away
of the filth of the flesh, not a carnal ceremony only, but the answer of a
good conscience; that is, it is that confidence and assurance which we have
before God of his reconciliation to us; which this ordinance outwardly does
seal and exhibit: it is the stipulation of a good conscience, when a
conscience appeased and pacified with the discharge of sin, can cry Abba
Father, with a holy security, can speak to God himself; now, says he, this
stipulation of a good conscience, this is that which is the effect of Baptism,
and which Baptism seals up to you; for what Baptism finds it seals,
although it does also exhibit more of the same kind; Baptism and so all the
ordinances of Christ, those we call Sacraments, seal up what is already, else
how could it be a seal, but does also conveigh more of the same.

This stipulation of a good conscience Beza says; clearly refers to the answer
of the Catechists of which there is a pattron 8. Acts 37. when Philip told the
Eunuch the condition of Baptism, which was to believe with all his heart, and
he gave the answer of a good conscience, that he did believe; that which he
desired baptism should seal up to him, here was a plain stipulation, for so
the word signifies; now that supposes one asking or demanding, and another
answering and making the bargain, or contract; as when one asks do you do
this? ca^ you believe with all your heart; and a conscience void of fraud,
speaks clearly and evidently what it can do and does, then comes Baptism.

This they were used to do in the primitive Churches, and in the same manner
we find, some do in this age, to infants, who understand them not, which is
not very wisely done, for surely what ever they can do, they cannot give the
stipulation of a good conscience: If they intend the infants which they say
speak by others, they may well retain the old form, but not with any good
understanding. It is the same Baptism that saves us, that did then, that
acquits and discharges us, as the ordinance of God appointed for that end,
though it supposes especially the inward works, He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved; belief must go before, this is that which on Gods
part seals us, and ingrafts us into Christ, and conveyes Christ to us; and on
our part it is the stipulatio^ of a good conscience answering clearly and
boldly to the intent of the ordinance: Thus you have another great use of this
ordinance, it seals the remission of sins, and it seals to us the remission
of the sins of our whole life, for it ingrafts us into Christ, and seals him
up to us for the remission of sins; and therefore it must ever be considered
for that purpose, and when it is so considered, we must look upon it, as the
discharging and acquitting ordinance, which seals up, not only sins past,
but all sins, past, and to come; which some not understanding, and finding
that those places for remission of sins were great and comfortable, have
refused to be baptized till death, as is affirmed of Constantine and others,
mis-taking the true use of it, which is to seal up the pardon of sins, and
respects all sins, in all times.

You see what the nature of Baptism, the wages of sin is death, would you
not be glad of something to discharge you and ease you; would you not be glad
of all means that should assure you, that iniquity should not be your ruin?
would you not be glad, to be baptized for the remission of sins, to have your
sins vvasht away by baptism; to be saved by baptism in the stipulation of
a good conscience, answering the sign and seal. This I think is no question
to them that are stung with sin, and pricked in their hearts; then bless God
for this ordinance, value it much, let it not be an empty ordinance to you,
since there is fullnes in it, let it not sleep and be a dead thing to you,
since there is life in it, it being the ground of all our life and good; but
improve it to its advantage, get the marrow and sweet of it, for there is much
in it.

Secondly, a man, and when a man's conscience condemns him, he needs no word
to carry him to hell, he has that within him, will do that fast enough,
guilt makes us run from God, as Adam did, and when we run from God, we
run to death; God therefore in goodness and mercy, has made the way to pardon
so open and exposed, as nothing more. The very name of pardon and remission of
sins, ordinarily implies offense against some lawgiver, some state, some great
person, and implies guilt which needs that pardon: Now guilt abaseth and
greatness terrifieth; what can there be more therefore to set us at a mighty
distance from God, then guilt, which lays so low, and what greatness terrify us
more then his; But God has provided that we may come boldly, and he has done
it by two things; first by setting up a throne of grace, instead of a throne of
majesty and justice. Secondly he helps us, by giving us a tender and sensible
high Priest, who shall usher us in, and plead our cause at this bar and
dispatch the business with his Father, that we may obtain mercy, 4. Heb.
15.16. And to show his heart the more in this work, he has not only a
throne of grace, and a high Priest to manadge this affair; but he has
invented this ordinance of Baptism, that we might have an abundant entrance;
In this you may see Gods heart for the pardon of sin, for as Baptism does
it, so it is by Gods appointment; Therefore know the mind of God, and labor
not anxiously about sins, and the pardon of them, which is a great impediment
to the comfort and holiness of our life. Now, that Baptism does this, you have
heard from several places, so as it is a great end of that ordinance, to remit
and pardon sins, and assure that to us.

But if you ask how it does it? Answer, by your being baptized into Jesus
Christ; by being baptized into his death, by being visibly ingrafted into his
death; and condition, that as he did conflict with the wrath of God, it
brought him to the cross, carried him to the grave, kept him there, and laid
him low, but at last he get out, we being interested in what he did, as in a
common person, who did all for us, and in our names might by the help of this
ordinance (which visibly and sensibly represents our communion with him, in
that which gains the discarge of our sins, which is his death, into which
we are baptized) have full assurance that nothing remaynes us of the guilt of
sin; nothing remayns us, undischarged, since Christ, who was as we were,
that is, made guilty of sin, that we might be as he is, that is, discharged
from sin, has broken the cords of death, having made a full satisfaction,
death having no more dominion over him, because there is no more guilt upon
him; so that baptism does it this way, and as many as are baptized into Jesus
Christ, into his death, are put into that condition, that he was after his
death, and rising again; and this must of necessity be, because he was as a
common person, wholly in his death and resurrection; therefore they that makes
themselves of that community, for whom he acts and trades, and by this visible
sign and institution of his, submit themselves to that way of salvation, they
put themselves into that state and condition that he is in after his death and
rising again. If any ask, why did Christ dye? he dyed for our sins, says
the Apostle; and why did he rise? for our justification, we being baptized
into his death, partake of the end of it, which is the discharge of our sins,
and our justification; it is certain therefore, our sins made him dye, and it
is as certain, that his righteousness made us just and righteous. Therefore what
should keep any man under the power of death and subject to bondage, since if
Christ be any thing to him, the great thing, and which the first Christian
institution, Baptism, holds out, is, that he is pardon to him, and that he
has dyed and risen with Christ, and therefore may go boldly with Christ unto
the throne of grace; and it is well called a throne of grace, because it is not
we, that have done this for our selves, but it is Christ that has wrought all
this good for us, so as it is grace to us, even the grace of Christ, who
personally suffered what we do mistically, and by way of communion.

Secondly it is a throne of grace, because it was not we that did or could
make the terms but God, for he might have required from us, the personal
payment of our own debt: Now that God would make this the terms, to take that
at Christ's hand, which lay upon us, as a personal debt, it makes it a throne
of grace to which we may go with all boldness and liberty of speech, and with
the same assurance, that Christ himself did, because by virtue of his own
contract sealed to us by his own ordinance; we are what he is, and have done
what he did.

CHAP. III. Wherein of a third great use and end of Baptism, whereby is sealed
our communion with Christ in his holiness, to wit, a death unto sin, and a
rising to newness of life.
We come now to another great use and end of Baptism, which is holiness of
life, consisting of two parts, dying to sin, and rising to holiness, and this
is especially held out Romans 6. I shall therefore breefly open and analise these
words, not intending a large discourse, but so much as suites with the nature of
this ordinance.

First therefore in answer to that unsavory objection verse. 1. Shall we
sin that grace may abound? The Apostle reasons verse. 2. How shall we
that are dead to sin, live any longer therein; as if he had said, those that
are dead to sin, should not live in sin, but you are dead to sin,
therefore you should not live in sin; contraries destroy their co^traries,
death destroys life, as the privation does the habit; a man cannot live and
dye together.

But now it rests to be prooved that we are dead to sin, v. 3. Know ye not
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death? This he prooves from our Baptism, which is the seal and expression of
our faith: If Christ be dead to sin, then those that are baptized, are dead
to sin; But Christ is dead to sin, therefore those that are baptized, are
dead to sin.

That Christ is dead to sin, and how, you shall hear v. 10. For in that he
dyed, he dyed unto sin once. But the proposition that those that are
baptized, are dead to sin, because Christ is dead to sin, he shows you from
the end of baptism, which is to witness and confirm to you your union and
communion with Christ: And first of all with his death, which both discharges
you from the guilt of sin, and destroys and kills sin in you.

Now that this is the particular end, he shows you from the general, verse. 3.
Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death; ye are baptized into Christ, therefore into his
death; hence verse. 4. We are buried with him by baptism into death; ye are
so surely dead with Christ, that ye are buried also, to be sure he is dead that
is buried. In this verse he prooves further this communion in holiness, by the
contrary to death, namely our rising again, that like as Christ was raised
up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
nevvnes of life. For as Baptism witnesses to you that you are dead with
Christ, so the same Baptism witnesses that ye are risen with him, so that as
we are dead to sin by virtue of the death of Christ, so we are alive to
holiness by virtue of the rising of Christ, that as Christ was raised from the
dead to a new glorious and heavenly life, so we are raised to a life, new and
holy: Now the reason of this witness arises from the analogy and proportion
that the sign has, with the thing signified, that Baptism has with the
thing witnessed: Those that are baptized, they are drowned and buried, and
brought again alive out of the water; so by our union with Christ, we have
the communion of being crucified and buried with him, and of rising again to a
new life. Verse. 5. If we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. This word
planting shows the reality of these signs and seals, this ordinance
witnesses our planting and grafting into Christ, who is the stock with whom we
live and dye; as we feel death with him, so life also, this is the great
stay, the great comfort, we are planted into Christ the true vine, by God the
Father, and now we shall run his fortune in life or death, as the plant and
stock dye and live together. ver. 6. Knovving this that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth
we should not serve sin: Here he insists in the former argument, namely our
communion in the death of Christ, which death he declares by the kind of it,
namely crucifixion, and shows that as Christ for our sins dyed, so the body
of sin in us by the death of Christ is crucified, the power and force is
abated, that we should not serve sin, and live to sin.

Verse. 7. For he that is dead, is freed from sin. He that is free from
sin, is no longer obliged to sin, but believers baptized, are freed from
sin, because they are dead to sin; dead with Christ therefore we are free
from sin.

Verse. 8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also
live with him. This is to show the communion still, and to usher in the next
verse of our communion with the life of Christ.

Verse. 9. Knovving that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death
has no more dominion over him. Here he illustrates the life of Christ, from
the perpetuity of it, that from thence he might gather, the condition of the
Saints, in their persuance of holiness, which should be evermore.

Verse. 10. For in that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once; that is, to blot out
sin, but in that he lives, he lives to God; a glorious life and to the
glory of God the Father.

Verse. 11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin,
but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

There is the conclusion of all that went before, reason your sealnes,
therefore to be dead to sin once, when Christ died to destroy the power of it,
therefore sin has nothing to do with you. On the contrary, you are as
Christ, alive to God, to that glorious and new life, and all this through
Christ, whose union and communion is notified to you in Baptism.

This is for holiness, which consists in mortification and newnes of life, which
Baptism both signifies and seals to us. It signifies it, by the analogy and
proportion, which is between the sign and the thing signified, and in that it
signifies a thing past, it seals it to us, for when God will give you a sign
and resemblance of a thing, it is but to confirm it to you, and assure you of
it.

CHAP. IV. Wherein is showed the report which the ceremony of Baptism has, to
the forementioned ends and uses of that ordinance; also some Corollaries.
HAving spoken of the use and ends of Baptism, it will not be unmeete in the
next place to discourse something of the Ceremony, that we may show the report
which the sign and ceremony has to the thing signified and represented.

Now the signification is most apt; for the external form or Ceremony of
Baptism lies properly in three things, Immersion, or Drowning, or Burying, by
putting under the water; some stay under it, and emersion, or rising out of it.

First the element which is used, is water, extremely fit and proper to
represent our cleansing, both from the guilt and stayne of sin. Arise and be
baptized, and vvash away thy sins, says Ananias to Paul Acts 22.16. So
Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water by the word, Ephesians. 5.26. So Tit. 3.5. According to
his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration. So as this washing of
water represents our cleansing, that is our justification and sanctification.
The Jews had many sprinklings with blood, fit for their gross capacities, but
which indeed rather serve to make spots, then to cleanse them.

First therefore the dipping or drowning in the water, signifies the great
depth of divine justice, with which Christ for our sakes was swallowed up; and
so we are dead and buried with him, reaping in a ceremony the fruit of that
which he suffered indeed, pertaking of his death for sin, and thereby
obliging our selves to death to sin.

Secondly the stay under the water, though never so little, represents unto us,
Christ's descending to hell, that is, the lowest degree of his abasement, when
he was sealed up and watched in the grave, and was as it were cut of from
amongst men; of this abasement we reap the fruit by Baptism, and are hereby
secured against that abasement, and everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord; to which sin would have brought us; and therefore sin as it is
destroyed in us in respect of the guilt, and cut of by this abasement of
Christ, so it should be apprehended by us for our justification, and it should
be utterly dead and mortified to us, in respect of its power and vigor; dead
and buried to sin.

Thirdly the Emersion, or rising out of the water, is a representation to us of
that victory, which Christ being dead and buried, got over death, and in his
rising, triumphed over it, with whom also we rise triumphing over sin and
death, and all evil whatsoever, clearly above the guilt of all sin, and
secure against the evil of sin, rising up to holiness and newnes of life. And
thus there is a sweet and excellent proportion, between the ceremony and the
substance, the sign, and the thing signified, and we are confirmed to be of
the union and communion with Christ in every thing that is for our good and
comfort.

Now having showed the several ends of Baptism, and how the ceremony makes
them all good to us, I shall gather some Corollaries from the main notio^ of
this ordinance, which is our being dead with Christ, and rising again,
according to the forementioned place of Romans 6.11. Reckon your selves to be
dead to sin, but alive to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Reckon, that is,
build upon this; this is a thing exceeding sure.

First if we be dead to sin, Coroll. 1.
and sealed up to this death by Baptism into the death of Christ, then let us
be in the world as dead men in that respect; let us not understand the
reasonings of sin, nor hearken to the persuasions of sin, nor look upon
the baits of sin; the Apostle made this an argument in a better thing, If
you be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as though
living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle
not, Col. 2.20. These things had once a good being, but were become old, but
sin was never of any worth or account. Barzillai 2. Samuel 19. thought it
reason to refuse the Kings table, because his appetite and senses were decayed,
he was eighty years old; but our senses are not decaying, but dead, and sin
is not old, but dead; it is dead in a mystery, it is dead in Christ, and we
have the Sacrament upon it; therefore if lusts tempt, turn not only a deaf,
but a dead ear to them; persuasio^s should not work on a dead man, objects
should not take or affect a dead man.

breath in the air of another life, hasten after the full and real possession
of another life; let God and Christ and heavenly things be great unto you,
though they be little to the world, and what ever is great to the world, let it
be little to you, proportionating your object to your life; love those
ordinances, those times that feed your life.

was an Emperor, if he had not been remembered of it by others. Think
therefore much on these things, what you have done in this ordinance, what are
the consequences and results of it, which will be a mighty not only help, but
engagement to faith and holiness, it is a seal on both sides, we seal to God
as well as he to us, it is in our own choice no more, we are engaged by our
own act; we have subscribed and can recall no more, and certainly this as it
ingages much, so it helps much: to act an act of faith in thought is much, but
to speak it is more, but to sign and seal it in an ordinance, by professing
subjection, by going down into the water, by suffering your selves there to be
drowned, or buried, by rising or coming out again, all as a ceremony or
ordinance for such an end, is both a great engagement and a great help to us in
believing.

CHAP. V. In which the proper ceremony of Baptism is vindicated by the force
of the word, Scripture practice, the suffrage of learned men, and the use of
ancient times.
IN the proceeding discourse we have taken it for granted, that the ancient
and usual form of Baptism, has been by dipping or plonging the whole body
under the water, according to which notion we have found what great proportion
the ceremony has to the substance, and the sign to the thing signified: But
because the possession which the Churches have had of a long time of
sprinkling, is become a strong argument in the thoughts of many for that
ceremony, it will be necessary to speak something more particularly to this
point, and to show that as the ceremony of dipping, suits with the ends and use
of Baptism, so it agrees perfectly with the force of the word, the Scripture
practice, and the use of ancient times.

First therefore the word (...) signifies properly mergo, seu immergo, that is,
to drown, or sink in the water, to dip, to overwhelme, to plunge, so mergere
aliquem sub aequore, or in undis, to drown them; so Chamier says that
immersion expresses the force (...): it signifies also tingo, to dye, or
color, quod fit immergendo: which is done by dipping into the color,
overwhelming and drowning in it. So Walleus, a learned Professor of these
parts, says that the ancient Latins expressed the word (...) per tinctionem
and inundationem; inundatio is an overflowing. This therefore is the proper and
natural force of the word, we will see in the next place what aspect the
Scripture bears in several passages to the acceptance of the word in this
sense.

First in the story of Christ's baptism, the greatest and fairest example of
the kind, as ye read it Mat. 3.13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan
unto John to be baptized of him; ye see he went to John, who baptized in the
river Jordan, a place proper for immersion and dipping, where at last he was
baptized, that is, dipped or plundged in the water, for so ye have it verse. 16.
He went up straightvvay out of the water: that is, as the word is translated
generally, he ascended out of the water. Now if any one, says Maldonat,
ask why the Evangelists use the word rather of ascending, then goeing out,
they seem to be ignorant that the earth is higher then the rivers; so as
Christ ascended or went up out of the water, in the which he had been dipped or
drowned. Lucas Brugensis, upon the place, says this, Christ ascended upon the
land, for he had descended into the river (after the manner of others that
were baptized) as deep as his thighs, or his navell, for the rest of his
body (says he) was dipped by John, not sprinkled only with water. Others
have thought that it was the custom of John to hold the people up to the neck
in water, till they confessed their sins.

The learned Cajetan upon the place, says, Christ ascended out of the water,
therefore Christ was baptized by John, not by sprinkling, nor by povvring
water upon him, but by immersion, that is, by dipping or plunging in the
water. Besides the evidence of the thing, many more testimonies might be
brought to this purpose, of men that for the present content themselves with
sprinkling for their infant baptism, but these shall suffice.

The next place we shall consider, shall be that of John 3.23. And John was
baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there was much water there. The
reason why he pitched upon this place is given, because there was much water
there, which was not ever found in that country, and much water was needful to
his Baptism. Piscator upon the place says, (...), signifies many rivers, as
(...) in the singular number signified the river Jordan, this, says he, is
mentioned to signify the Ceremony of Baptism which John used; immergens
scil. totum corpus hominis in fluvio stantis; dipping, or plundging the whole
body of the man standing in the river, whence, says he, Christ baptized of
John in Jordan, is said to ascend out of the water, Mat. 3. the same manner
Philip observed Acts 8.38. And in his observations upon the place, says, that
the ancient manner of Baptism was, that the whole body was plundged into
the water, and thence drawn out again; the one signifying the mortification
of the old man, and the other the vivification of the new, as Romans 6.3.4. thus
Piscator. Cornelius a Lapide, upon the place, From hence (says he) you may
gather that John so baptized, as he vvasht not only the head in water, for a
little water would have served for that, but the whole body. Many Authors
might be quoted for this purpose, but the place speaks so clearly for it self,
that I shall add to what I have said already only the judgment of Calvin
upon these words: From this place, says he, you may gather that John and
Christ administered baptism by plundging the whole body into the water,
although he adds also his opinion; Ye need not be much careful, says he, of
the outvvard Ceremony, so it agree with the spiritual truth, and the
ordinance and rule of our Lord; and so say I also.

You see what light this place affoords to the clearing of the primitive
practice for dipping or plundging in baptism.

The third place we will examine shall be that of Acts 8.36.37. etc. where you
have the story of the baptizing of the Eunuch by Philip; As they went on their
way, they came unto a certain water, and the Eunuch said, See here is water,
(...), that is, as Piscator interprets it, fluvium, vel amnem, vel stagnum some
river, or a poole, or ponde; after this discovery of a fit place for Baptism,
the Eunuch desires it, and Philip having taken an account of his faith, which
was to give him his qualificatio^ for that ordinance, it is said in the 38.
verse, that they went both down into the water. So Beza translates it,
Descenderunt ambo in aquam, they descended both into the water: So the French,
Descendirent enl'eau, as Deodat. and the baptism being done, verse. 39. they
came up out of the water, in the which they had been before. So Beza, Quum
autem ascendissent ex aqua, when they had ascended out of the water; the
French, Quand ils furent remontez horse de l'eau; when they were remounted or
ascended out of the water; all which express not a going to the water only,
as some would have it, but a going down into the water for Baptism, and a
coming out of it again. Lorinus upon the words, quotes Carthusianus, saying,
Eunuchus magnam familiam habuit, nec tamencoram illis se nudare ac lavari
erubuit, dum coram Deo de proprijs verecundabatur peccatis: The Eunuch had a
great family, and yet he blushed not before them to make himself naked, and to
be vvasht, whilst he was ashamed of his sins before God. By which, says
Lorinus, they are confounded, that reverence and fear the presence of men more
then God: And adds also, That this descent, going down, signified by all
means immersion, that is, plundging, or dipping, and it is probable, that by
what means it most conveniently could, and was most expressly washing, the
Eunuch was baptized.

There will not need to be said more to this place, I shall only conclude it
with the words of Calvin, as I did the other, which I am enforced to give you
in his french, because his latin edition is not by me. Nous voyons icy qu'elle
faconles anciens avoyent d'administrer le Baptesme; car ils plongeoyent tout le
corpse dedans l'eau: L'usage est maintenant que le Ministre jette quelques
gouttes d'eau seulement sur le corpse, ou sur le test: We see here, says
Calvin upon the place, what fashion the ancients had to administer Baptism,
for they plundged the whole body in the water; the use is now, says he,
that the Minister casts a fevv dropps of water only upon the body, or upon
the head. Whereby you see both what his opinion was for the practice of the
most ancient and primitive times in general, and how clear he was that the
Baptism administered here to the Eunuch, was by dipping, or plundging.

The fourth and last place I shall consider to this purpose shall be that of
the 6. Romans and the beginning, where the Apostle elegantly alludes to the
ceremony of Baptism in our death, and resurrection with Christ, but having
handled this before largely, and by it self, I shall only give you the sense
of expositers about it for our present end.

The learned Cajetan upon the 4. verse (we are buried with him by baptism
into death) says; By our burying he declares our death, from the Ceremony of
Baptism, quia, scil. qui baptizatur sub aqua ponitur; because he who is
baptized is put under the water, and by this carries a similitude of him that
is buried, who is put under the earth: Now because none are buried, but dead
men, from this very thing that we are buried in Baptism, we are assimulated
to Christ buried, or when he was buried. Thus Cajetan.

Estius upon the place, having said out of Austen, that what ever was done in
the cross of Christ in his burying and resurrection, etc. was so done, that
to those words and actions, the life of a Christian should be conformed; Ads,
the like mystery the Apostle puts in the Ceremony of Baptism, for the
immersion (that is dipping) of Christ, represents to us burying, and so also
death; for the sepulcher is the Symbol of death, and the emersion (or rising
out again) which follows that dipping, has the similitude of the
resurrection; therefore in Baptism we are conformed, not only to the death
of Christ, but also to his sepulcher and resurrection. Where you see he
clearly places the ceremony of Baptism, both of Christ's, and ours, in
immersion, or putting under the water, and emersion or rising up again,
exactly conformable to what is to be signified to us by it, namely our dying
and rising again with Christ. So Cornelius Alapid. upon the place 4. (...), in
mortem, id est, in similitudinem mortis Christi baptizati sumus; qui enim
baptizantur and aquis immerguntur Christum mortuum, and sepultum representant
allegorice, etc. Into his death, that is, we are baptized into the similitude
of the death of Christ; for they who are put under the water, represent
Christ dead and buried allegorically.

I shall add but one or two quotations more in a thing so evident, Deodati in
his annotations upon the place verse. 4. has these words, Ce qu'au Baptesme
nous sommes plongez dedans l'eau (selon l'ancienne ceremony) nous est un sign
sacre qu'il faut que le peche soit estouffe en nous par l'Esprit de Dieu, comme
c'est un seau du lavement de nos ames devant Dieu. That in Baptism we are
plundged into the water (according to the ancient ceremony) it is a holy sign
to us, that sin should be stiffled in us by the Spirit of God, as it is a
seal of the washing of our souls before God.

I shall conclud with the judgment of Piscator upon the place verse. 4. Sepulti
igitur sumus, videtur (inquit) respicere ad veterem ritum, quum toto corpore in
aquam mergebantur, atque it a quasi sepeliebantur, ac mox rursus extrahebantur,
tanquam e sepulchro. The Apostle (says he) seems here to have respect to the
ancient ceremony, when as the whole body was dipped into the water, and was
by and by again drawn out, as out of a grave. So Piscator.

Having thus far carried on this notion for dipping, or plundging in the
ceremony of Baptism, which we have found to have its rise from the natural
and proper force of the word, and to have accorded fully with Scripture
practice and example, which is the copy to which we must conform, I shall
consider a little to discharge my self more abundantly to this point, what has
been the practice of the times we commonly call primitive, that is, those
after the times of Christ and his Apostles, and what the judgment of the
Fathers and ancient writers have been to this purpose.

And first the Apostolical constitutions, which are of great antiquity, being
attributed to Clement the 4. from Peter in the order of Bishops, according to
the Roman account, they injoyne the office of Diaconnisses, or shee-Deacons, to
be to assist for the unclothing of women at Baptism; the words are (...). To
minister to the Presbyters whilst the women were baptized, for comelines
sake. Constable. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 32. this I find quoted by Chamier lib. de
Baptist. cap. 2. p. 240. who brings it to prove, that from the beginning, as
he says, it was the custom to dip the whole body, which expresses (says
he) the force of the word (...), whence it was (says he) that John baptized
in a river, and he affirms that it is uncertain, when or why the change
began, to baptize by sprinkling, saving that he adds that it would seem that
3000 could hardly be baptized in one day, by so fevv Apostles, if they were
all dipped, or that the Iaylor had not perhaps a vessel at hand, big enough for
dipping the whole body. But first you see that his opinion is clear, that
Baptism in the beginning was by dipping or plundging the whole body, to prove
which he brings the force of the word, the example of John, and after the
Apostolical constitutions: only he knows not how so well to accommodate
these two instances, but that sprinkling also might be used: I shall take
therefore this occasion, to answer once for all to these considerations. First
that when we have a clearnes of Scripture practice, agreeable as is confessed to
the force of the word of institution, and expressing it, which also accords, as
we have already shown abundantly, with the use and end of the ordinance,
which is the scope and intent of it, and apparently conformable to the most
evident ancient practice, it were a boldness (to say no more) to leave or
desert that practice, which upon the former grounds, we know to be safe and
warrantable, for another, which we have little reason to believe was used, but
because we see not how in some instanced particular circumstances it could be
well otherwise; And as it is ever dangerous, to depart from known and
approoved Scripture practice in the matter of ordinances, upon our own
surmises, so it can be no where of worse consequence then in such ordinances
(of which Baptism and the Lords Supper are) the being, and good of which lies
much in the right administration of a ceremony.

It would be safe to follow the clear and assured way, and for the other,
unless they employed a simple impossibility, (which the practices instanced in
will by no means be found to do) not to be much troubled about them.

But truly I am jealous that those who find sprinkling most commodious for
infants, and are not willing to depart from the notions of infant Baptism,
trouble themselves more with the objectio^s mentioned, then they would find
cause to do, if they did not find it needful to raise objections from these
places for the patronising of baptizing by sprinkling, which as was said before
is so proper for their infant Baptism: For the thing it self, to instance,
first in that of the Iaylor, how easily may it be conceaved, that in those
eastern and hotter countries (this being at Philippy in Macedonia, Acts 16.12.
where bathing was of great and continual use) this keeper of the prison might
be provided with some vessel fit for bathing and washing the whole body, which
might serve for the use of Baptism, as the Christians afterward, when they
came to enjoy fixed places of meetings for worship, had their vessels affixt to
their temples, which vessel they called (...), Bucan. p. 666. being of a great
continent filled with water for the use of Baptism, which the Latin calls
piscina, or lavacrum, a vessel proper to bath in, or font, from whence the
custom of our little diminitive fonts in Churches has come, since sprinkling
(more proper for children as Chamier affirms) has been the ceremony used in
Baptism, with exclusion to dipping or plundging the whole body: I say it is
easy to suppose that the Iaylor might be thus provided for his Baptism, and
safe to suppose this or any other way that does not imply a contradiction, then
to think that the Apostles altered the usual ceremony for Baptizing used to
Christ and by Christ and his Apostles, as (appears evidently and clearly) and
which so much accordes with the intent and scope of the ordinance in that which
the Ceremony signifyes and exhibits to us, namely our being buried with Christ,
and rising again, as we showed already.

As for the other objection, that it would seem difficult for three thousands
to be baptized in one day by so few Apostles, if dipping the whole body, not
sprinkling were the ceremony used; I answer it will not appear much less
difficult if sprinkling were the ceremony, and it is the objection that
Bellarmine and the Papists bring against our Divines, to prove that in certain
cases the Laycks may baptize; This Chamier answers by Salmeron the Jesuit, one
of their own, tract. 15. in Acta, who says it is no way impossible, and
brings for proof one Franciscus Xavier, who baptized in one day amongst the
Indians 15000, now if one man could baptize fifteen thousand, twelve Apostles
could baptize three thousand, besides if they want Ministers, and will not
admit of the assistance of Brethren out of office (whose ministry to some will
not seem so improper for assistance in certain cases of public affairs by
public authority) we can furnish them with more help, namely the seaventy
Disciples, whom our Divines will by no means admit at that time to be Laycks,
since Christ had called them before to the ministry of the Gospel, and had
constituted them as public workmen in his harvest, and had sent them with a
public and particular commission, saying, Those that hear you, hear me, Luke
10. so that according to this account, the number of regular and lawful
Baptizers, will be 82, namely 12 Apostles and 70 Disciples. Thus far we are
helped by our Protestant Divines in their oppositio^ against Lay-Baptisme. Now
if you distribute the baptizing of 3000 to the work of 82 persons, there will
fall under 40 to the share of every one, as might be easily reckoned, so as the
baptizing of that number either way, by dipping or sprinkling, might be
accomplished in one day, though the Baptizers were not endued with the
dexterity of Franciscus Xavier, and why not as well by dipping or sprinkling
(for all that can be said to the contrary, by the number of those, who were
baptized) since we suppose those that were baptized, to offer themselves
willingly to come into the water, and present themselves ready, and the
ceremony of dipping requiring very little time more by him that administers it,
then that of sprinkling, and which by so many hands might easily be dispatched.

It was necessary to speak something to this, since it is all which I have met
with (and that all you see how little it is) which might give the show of a
reason from Scripture practice, for baptizing by sprinkling, and that only too
by way of objection, which you see accommodated.

Thus you have a clear proof brought by Chamier, for the ancient manner of
Baptizing, by dipping, from the Apostolical constitutions, which that also
considered as an objection, why at any time it might seem to be varyed, and
you see, that as the objection to the general rule was but conjecturall, so
the solution is very easy, and the other practice, to wit, by dipping, most
clear and evident.

In the second place, VValleus de Baptiz. p. 84. (a reverent Author, whom we
have formerly mentioned) showing that the ancients Baptized by an immersion of
the whole body, says, That anciently the days of Baptism (for they used some
solemn days, as we show in another piece of this tract) had their name,
from the ceremony, therefore it was called Dominica in albis, the Dominicall
or the Lords day in vvhites, because being unclothed for their Baptism, which
was as before by dipping or plundging, they put on white or linen garments,
with which they went into the Baptisterion, a vessel as we have formerly
said, fitted for that ceremony of immersion: and therefore the Papists at this
day, who retain every thing of ancient ceremony, though they corrupt the use
of it, give a white garment to the baptized child in one part of their
ceremony, which Bellarmine says they are to wear a Sabbato sancto usque ad
Dominicam in albis, from the holy Sabbath, to the Dominicall in vvhites, Tom.
3. p. 83. That is that Dominicall, which VValleus mentions, when those who were
baptized for comelines sake, clothed themselves with white linen garments,
whence the same Author says, That those who were to be baptized, were
called Candidati Christianismi, Candidates of Christianity, with allusio^ to
the clothing in white, with which they were accommodated for Baptism by
immersion.

In the third place I find the opinion of Bonaventure, quoted by a late and
learned writer, who though he allovves sprinkling, yet more commends
immersion, or dipping, either of the whole body, when there is water enough,
or if there be but a little water, of the head and breast, or of the head
alone, or of the face only, because there are all the senses, and there does
especially flourish the operation of the soul, and we take the image or
picture of a man especially from his face; which several reasons he gives to
that purpose, so as if you will sprinkle, ye must fall upon a new question,
which may for ought I know be much disputed, and that is, what part is to be
sprinkled; or if you will sprinkle the whole man, which cannot be done exactly,
to be sure not easily, it were better to follow the ceremony of immersion; but
by what reason, aspersion, or sprinkling, came into use in the world, instead
of immersion, or dipping, ye shall find fastened upon two considerations; of
charity to sick and weak persons, and charity to tender children, although as
the same Author affirms, mersion was more usual even for children, to the
days of Gregory (who was Bishop of Rome Anno 590) and Isiodor. For Gregory
giving an account of the threefold dipping, has these words, Vt dum tertio
infans ab aquis educitur, resurrectio triduani temporis exprimatur; whilst the
child is drawn out of the water three times, the resurrection after three
days burial may be signified. Epist. Greg. lib. 1. Epist. 41. An account of
this charity for sick persons, ye have expressed in an epistle of Cyprian to
Magnus lib. 1. Epist. 6. In the times of Cyprian there was a question moved
concerning Baptism, by aspersion or perfusion, that is, powering water, to
wit, how they were baptized, who in respect of infirmity, or sickness could
not be dipped, whether such sprinkling were to be accounted for true baptism;
by which demand you may perceave, that in Cyprians time, immersion or dipping
was so much the usual and received form for Baptism, as it was made a great
question, whether they were rightly baptized, who desired Baptism, and yet by
reason of infirmity, could not receive it, but by sprinkling or aspersion:
Cyprian answers modestly and says, He would not have his opinion be a
prejudice to any other man's either opinion or practice, but his charity extends
rather to think, that in such cases, Baptism may be received by sprinkling;
it were to long to quote his expressions wherein he is large.

But to conclude all, you see by a current of authority from Scripture
especially, and after by Authors ancient and modern, that dipping, or
immersion has been the old way of Baptizing, even for children in the days of
Gregory, a reason of the alteration I have in part showed you, from the
quotation out of Cyprian. A more particular account Iacobus Pamelius shall give
you, as you may read in his annotations upon the 76 Epist. of Cyprian, his
words are these pa. 215. Quum propter aegritudinem immergi sive intingi (quod
proprie Baptizari est) aegri non possent, aqua salutari perfundebantur, sive
aspergebantur; eademratione ab Ecclesia occidentali primum observari caepisse
consuetudinem adspertionis, qua nunc utimur, existimo, ob teneritudinem nempe
infantium, quum jam rarissimus esset adultorum baptismus: When in respect of
weakness those who were sick, could not be dipped, or plundged (which is
properly to be baptized) they had water povvred upon them, or were sprinkled
with it; from the same reason I suppose the custom of sprinkling, which we
now use, to have been first observed by the western church, to wit, for the
tenderness of infants, when as now the baptism of those of age was very
rare; then he goes one, Olim certe tum in occidentali, tum in orientali
Ecclesia immergi solere veteres suis scriptis manifestum faciunt, and Romae id
adhuc usitatum aetate Gregorij manifestum sit ex ipsius Sacramentorum libro:
idque apud Anglos etiamnum observari ad marginem adnotavit Erasmus. Certainly,
that of old time, in the eastern and western church, they were used to
dipp, the ancient make manifest by their vvritings; and that it was used at
Rome, in the time of Gregory, is manifest, from his book of the Sacraments,
and that it was yet used amongst the English, Erasmus has noted in the
margent. So Pamel.

I have been large in this subject, but I hope it will be of use to us, both
for the assuring of our practice in this particular, and the answering of such,
whose peremptory persuasion the other way (for some there are so persuaded)
give themselves, and their friends trouble.

I shall take a knit from this, to observe (with which I shall conclude) what a
tyrant custom is, that dares stand up and contradict a thing so evident in it
self, so agreeable to the reason of the ordinance, to the clear phrase and
expression of Scripture, to the practice of ancient times, in so much that in
Cyprians time, it was a question moved in the Church, whether those that in
respect of infirmity, could not receive baptism, the ancient and usual way,
and yet earnestly desired it, might be rightly baptized, by sprinkling;
whether such (as Cyprians words are to Magnus) might be accounted lavvfull
Christians, that is, whether their Baptism so administered, were right, or a
nullity; I say, you see here the tyranny and boldness of custom, that having
shaped (as it is apt to do) our minds to one way, dares now pretend for that
alone, with the exclusion of others, and would persuade us, that nothing should
be, but what we have seen to be, and counts every thing error, that has not
fallen under our sense or experience: In things civil and indifferent, I can
be content that custom shall be my guide, and shall take that for good coin,
that the world stampes, but in matter of ordinances, and things sacred, the
rule of which lies in institution, and not in our liberty, or choice, and the
blessing of which lies in conforming to the rule, and institution: I beseech
you let us be wairy to judge with righteous judgment, and not by that
appearance, which the customs of this world, upon their worldly and carnal,
though seeming wise considerations, hold forth to us.

CHAP. VI. Wherein is showed the agreements and differences that the word
preached has with the Sacraments, together with certain Corollaries giving
light to the present controversy.
HAving out of the Scripture considered the use and ends of Baptism, to which
the ceremony appears to be extremely proper and opposite, we will now to
bring further light to this ordinance, and in order to a discourse of the proper
subject of Baptism, and of the controversy thereabout consider the agreements
that are common to it, with the administration of the word, and that wherein
these two ordinances seem to differ.

They agree first in the efficient cause: Baptism and the other Sacrament,
have the same author and institutor that the word has; scil. the King, Priest,
and Prophet of his church; and as the same efficient, so the same administering
causes, those that were to teach had order to baptize, Mat. 28.19. Go
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc.
And 1. Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
stevvards of the mysteries of God.

Secondly they are both instruments in the hands of the Holy Spirit for
edification and salvation, the word is a dead letter without the Spirit, and so
also is Baptism, it speaks no more then it is bid; the blessed Angels that
are so far above sin and corruption, have no quickening virtue in
themselves, the flesh of Christ has no virtue but from his Godhead: Now if
there be no virtue in the flesh of Christ, but by the personal union, how
shall bodily actions about bodily elements confer grace, but by the mediation
of the Spirit.

Thirdly they agree in the principal matter, for the same Christ with all his
benefits is offered and confirmed to us in the word and Sacraments, the same
union, the same communion in the death and the resurrection of Christ, and they
which look for more in the Sacraments, then the word promises and holds out,
makes an Idol of them.

Fourthly they agree in the end, for God by them builds up and edifies his
Church till it come to be perfect.

Fifthly they agree in the instrument, which renders both profitable to us,
both word and Sacrament are ineffectuall without faith, 3. John 36. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life.

Sixthly they agree in the effects, They are the savor of life unto life, or
the savor of death unto death, etc. So, He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved.

From the first you learn, works to faith, in the point of justification,
perverts the word and preaches another Gospel, and therefore is accursed, Gal.
1.1. So he that shall alter in the administration of the Sacraments, but in a
ceremony, since the ordinance lies in a ceremony, and shall be bold to enlarge
the subject of this ordinance, or contract it, will be found a breaker of Gods
bounds, and be found guilty of the curse that is the portion of such as add or
detract, so as what we do herein is of great moment and consideration.

it: Secondly the Sacraments work not Phisically.

From the third,



mingled with faith, it profits not, without faith it is impossible to please
God.



We come now to the difference of these ordinances, which will contribute more
of light to what we have proposed.

They differ first in the manner of the administration of the same Gospel. The
one is an audible word, the other is a visible word, the word signifies
according to such expressions as men have given a vallue unto, to signify
things by, but the Sacraments represents by such similitudes and proportions
as the signs have with the things signified; therefore we read the word and
hear the word, but we see and feel the Sacraments: In a word they are
Hierogliphicks; it was the custom of the Egyptians to teach by visible
representations, which signify such and such things, these are of that nature,
that whereas the word strikes the ear only, which is the usual and ordinary
sense of discipline, those signs and visible elements affect the senses
outward and inward, the senses conveigh the object to the understanding, there
the Holy Ghost takes them, and brings us into the present enjoyment of things,
as if we saw Christ with our eyes, touched him with our hands, felt him by our
taste, and enjoyed him with our whole man: all this in a rational and
discoursive way, raising an analogy and proportion between the sign and the
thing signified.

Secondly they differ in the measure of their signification, the word
especially teaches, the Sacraments especially seal and confirm: the word
indeed signifies and applies spiritual things, but the Sacraments more
efficatiously represent and apply.

Thirdly the word is simply necessary to actual believers, and so to the
salvation of believers, and sufficient, as in Cornelius; for faith is by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God; but the Sacraments are not absolutely
necessary to all, nor without the word are they sufficient to salvation, for to
what purpose are seals without the writing.

Fourthly (for I will not trouble you with many) the word belongs to all
mankind, the Sacraments belong only to believers; therefore for preaching, ye
have, preach the Gospel to every creature under heaven; But for the
Sacraments, teach them, says Christ, that is, disciple them, and he that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; so for the other Sacrament, let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat and drink; and the people were baptized
in Jordan, confessing their sins, of which they repented; and after the
Eunuch was taught, there was faith required before he was baptized; if thou
beleevest with all thy heart, thou may; and no Baptism or Sacrament find
we administered otherwise in the new Testament, the reason is evident, because
the word begets faith, the Sacraments confirms it, the word is the writing,
the Sacraments is the seal, for it carries this with it, and speaks this
language; as certainly as thou usest this ceremony, and eats this bread, so
assuredly Christ dwells in thee, and as thou entrest this water, and art
therein buried, so assuredly thou art made one with Christ, planted into his
death, and thou art buried with Christ, and thou risest with Christ, as thou
risest out of the water; every thing speaks this, thou art Christ, and Christ
is thine, and therefore supposes faith, which is the tie and the union on our
part, and you see how curious Paul is Romans 4. to prove, that Abraham was
justified by faith, before he received the sign of circumcision, which was to
him a seal of his faith, and his righteousness thereby,. 10.11. How was it
reckoned when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision, and he received the sign of circumcision
a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised, etc.

We come now to deduct Corollaries from these differences.

From the first, necessary; our reason must be most busy and active whilst our
senses are engaged, the hearing of the tone or sound of the word spoken does no
good, therefore we preach it not to children or fools, so the seeing of the
coullors of things, to feel the water cold or hot, the touch or taste is not
the thing, but what the elements and ceremonies about it teach us, which must
be discerned by the use of reason, in comparing the thing signified according
to the Scripture application, and the proportion it holds, so as here is a
knowledge of things already laid in, and reason in the act required. So the
teaching by similitudes or resemblances, does not require less reason, or
less the use of reason, but the adva^tage it brings, is, that by the mediation
of several senses, it strykes our reason differently and more strongly; and
God descends to that way of teaching, that he might more forcibly work upon
our reason, and speak to it all manner of ways.

From the second, him exceedingly, that spoke a clearer language; it was fit
the message should go before the chariots, so the word before the Sacraments.

From the third,

From the fourth, so the Sacraments cannot be but where the word has been; for
the word supposes nothing, but comes at aventure to every creature under
heaven, but the Sacraments supposes faith wrought already by the word; to make
this playner, we must know that men are by nature children of wrath, by the
disobedience of Adam all were made sinners, Romans 5.19. And the Lord looked
down from heaven, and savv that all were gone out of the way, we neither
perceive nor know the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14. And though the light shine
in darkness, the darkness comprehends it not, and our carnal mind is emnity
against God; our whole soul is filled with all unrighteousnes, Romans 8.7. and
1.29. Now while men are in their infancy, they lie only exposed to Gods inward
and secret works, if they belong to the election of grace, he knows how to
deal with them, and work wonderfully in ways we know not, nor can conceive
of; so long we cannot communicate our selves to their souls at all, nor can
reatch them any otherwise then by our prayers, for all things are here secret,
if there be a change wrought, it is more then we know, or can conceive the
manner of it. But when they come to years of understanding, and to be capable
of ordinances, the first thing we do to them, is to bring them under the
ordinance of the word, and to lead them into a right knowledge of themselves,
to convince them of their natural estate, to preach to them conversion,
repentance and faith in Jesus Christ, that they may have life; when we find
this operate, and that by their profession and by their works, which is the
only way of evidencing their faith to others, they make it appear they
believe, then we gladly go one, and lead them into further ordinances, give
them the Sacraments to confirm them: and thus we make things run parralel
as they must do: There is an outward preaching of the word, there is a
conversion and change of heart, made visible by works, and so a faith
evidenced, and the visible and outward seals and marks are given them, to
seal them up to themselves and to others. Thus you see a naturalnes, a
coherency, and a comelines in things thus laid and stated, by which also as by
a right rule, you may be helped in discerning errors.

CHAP. VII. In which is laid down the relative and personal qualifications by
which infants are usually entitled to Baptism, by our most considerable
Protestant Divines.
BY what has been said, we have fully showed the nature of Baptism, what is
the proper and adequate subject of this ordinance, namely a believer, one
qualified by the use of faith and reason, for the confirmation and sealing up
to him by this great ordinance, his ingrafting into Christ and union with him
by faith; secondly as an immediate fruit thereof, his justificatio^, of which
we largely spoke, and also his adoption, by being consecrated to the Father,
Son and holy Ghost, and baptized in their names. Thirdly his sanctification,
consisting in the death of sin, and the life of holiness, and as a fruit of
that, and which cannot be separated from it, his glorification, Romans 6.8. Now
if we be dead with Christ, we believe we shall also live with him: To
which on the other side, the party baptized puts his seal, and makes his
sponsion, to be to God and Christ in all those relations.

But now because it has for a long time, and almost generally obtained, that
children should be baptized, we must consider how they can pretend to these
qualifications, what right they have, or by what title they hold it.

The right which the world gives them to it, is a right imputative, a right
derivative from Father to Son, a right of succession, a birthright, this is
that which they call a foederall holiness. Nor do children only claim by this
derivative imputative title, but also those who are adopted by Christian
parents, for as by adoption in Christ we are rendered the children of God; so
by the adoption of Christian parents, such are to be accounted for their
children, as some argue. Ger. p. 582. Also those who by lawful means, as just
war, bargain, gift, fall into the hands and government of believers, and
whom Christians will answer for, that they shall for the future be instructed
in the Christian faith, and this appears by divine institution, they say from
the parallel of circumcision, since not only Abraham's children, but his
servants, and those bought with his money, were circumcised, Genesis 17.12. And
he that is eight days old, shall be circumcised among you, every man-child in
your generations, he that is borne in the house, or bought with money of any
stranger which is not of thy seed. This also some illustrate, and apply more
particularly from that place Acts 2.39. For the promise is unto you and to your
children, and to all that are afar of, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call; where they say Peter witnesses that the divine promise belongs to those,
which by reason of their birth are far of; but by the wonderful providence
of God, are called to that ordinance by lawful means, such as these before
named, and Chamier, the great protector of our religion against Bellarmine
(not to trouble you with what the Papists say) affirms, that if our servants
were truly servants, such as Abraham's were, they then drevv a right from
their masters for Baptism; for we read, says he, that Abraham circumcised
all his servants, but such servants as for the most part we have now a days;
because indeed they are free men, he thinks should not be so handled; in the
same capacity he thinks to be also such as by the right of war are
subjected to Princes, for such kind of subjects also remain free; which if it
be true, and that that exception only lies against their Baptism, with all
the great things it seals and conveighes to us, I should much bewail the loss
of slavery to the Christian world, since one good man by that tenure might have
made a hundred and a hundred infidels, by being subjected to one man, might
have been Christians in a moment. Thus you see how far they make the covenant
extend, and indeed the parallel of circumcision, carries it strongly, and for
one as well as another; you see therefore that which qualifies for infant
Baptism, is some good and pertinent relation to a believer; but if you ask me
now what denominates this believer, and qualifies him for communicating this
Christian qualification. Chamier says, we allow not all infants to be
baptized, but those only of believers, that is of baptized persons; So that as
the Baptism in the parent qualifyes for baptism in the infant, Tom. 4. p.
270. Not to enlarge in this, the charity of the world is very great, and if Mr.
Davenport mistook not in his complaint in his writing to the Classis of
Amsterdam, he says that there was required of him an unlimited baptizing of
all infants, which were presented in the church, of what nation or sect soever,
although that either of the parents were Christians, were not otherwise
manifest, then by answering, Yea, at the reading of the liturgy of Baptism
publicly, or by nodding their head, or some other gesture, they seemed to be
willing; Book of complaints 1.2.

And that you may see this further clear in the authority of a learned man,
who speaks not only his own judgment, but the judgment of other orthodoxe
with him; VValleus a reverend Professor of Leyden, in his treatise De Baptis.
infant. p. 494. says thus: Quaeritur ergo de infantibus eorum quorum parents
sunt impij, etsi nomine Christiani, etc. It is demanded concerning the
children of them, whose parents are wicked, although Christians in name, or
whose parents are excommunicated, or whose parents are heretics, or Idolaters,
as the infants of Papists, Anabaptists, etc. By way of answer he allows all
such children to be baptized; We think (says he) that Baptism is not to be
denied to those, qui ex stirpe sunt Christiana, which are of a Christian stock,
and which without an interruption of a public Apostasy from the faith, may
refer their kindred to the faithful, such as in Christian commonwealthes are
those procreated of Christian and baptized parents; only he would not have
them baptized against their parents consent, because they be their goods and
possession, and he would have their parents, or those which offer them to
baptism, answer that they will bring them up in the Christian profession;
which if they do, we judge, says he, that all infants, which come from a
Christian stock, should be baptized, if they be offered to baptism, according
to the order of the Church, although their next parents should labor with
unholines of life, or heresy, or the crime of idolatry. And this he goes on to
prove strenuously (as well he may) from the manifest and perpetual practice
of the whole Church of Israel, in the administration of circumcision, which as
in a maine proportion it helps to the baptizing of infants, so it will help
also to several such consequences as those are; from this opinion so stated of
the learned, and orthodoxe, you may see that it is no such great honor to be
able to entitle infants to baptism, which is common to you with unholy
persons, with excommunicate, and with Idolaters: And secondly that it is an
effect of great charity, to entitle the children of such a parentage to
regeneration, and the Holy Ghost: For to proceed;

Though now in the derivative title for the chain of Baptism, they all agree,
that what ever title the child has, comes by virtue of the fathers covenant,
yet the immediate qualification is inherent in the infant; for they affirm
that Christian infants have repentance, faith and regeneration: The Lutherans
are so much of this opinion, if you will believe Bellarmine Tom. 2. p. 294. f.
that they believe that infants, whilst they are baptized, use reason, hear
the word of God, believe, love, which as he affirms, was publicly
determined in the Synod of VVittenbergh An. 1536. Which as he says does so
openly repugne to the truth, as it does injury to humane sense; for how is it
credible (says he) that an infant, which cries, and resists what he can when
he is washed, or sprinkled, should understand what he does.

The Calvinists and more orthodoxe Divines receive it generally and assuredly,
that infants bring to baptism, as their immediate qualification, regeneration,
faith, repentance, etc. though not actual, or by way of declaration to others;
they argue thus, If infants naturally are some way capable of Adams sin, and
so of unbeleefe, disobedience, and transgression, then Christian infants
supernaturally and by grace, are someway capable of Christ's righteousness, and
so of faith, obedience, and sanctification; but the forner is true, therefore
the latter: The consequence they prove hence, that else they would not see the
kingdom of God, John 3.5.6. Jesus ansvvered and said unto him, Verily, verily
I say unto thee, except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God; that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is borne of the spirit is spirit; but Christian infants dying in
infancy, shall see the kingdom of God, and not be damned; therefore they are
borne again of the spirit, and so must needs in some measure have repentance,
faith and holiness.

Again they say, that if we cannot object Gods work in nature, but do
believe that our infants are reasonable creatures, and are borne not bruit
beasts, but men, though actually they can manifest no reason nor understanding
more then beasts; then neither can we justly object Gods work in grace, but
are to believe that our infants are sanctified creatures, and are borne
believers, not infidels, though outwardly they can manifest no faith or
sanctification to us; Ainsworth page 49.50. whom I quote, as being by all
acknowledged a learned man, and in this opinion wherein he concurres as we
shall see with the stream of our Divines, not to be suspected.

The like to this says Walleus de Bapt. Infant. p. 493. Infants are to be
reckoned amongst believers, because the seed or spirit of faith is in them,
which some call a habit, others an inclination; from whence by degrees,
through the hearing of the word, actual faith is formed, sometimes sooner,
sometimes later. This in the next page 494. he prooves, Because else they
would not be saved, Romans 8.9. If any have not the spirit of God, he is none of
his. And John 3.5. No unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of heaven;
but infants by nature are unclean, and are purged by the blood of Christ, the
kingdom of heaven belongs to them, and they please God, etc.

This is laid for a ground amongst the Calvinists concerning Baptism: That
Baptism is only a sign and seal of regeneration already wrought; Oecolamp.
de verb. Dom. cap. 3. Aqua mystica in Baptismo non regenerat, nec efficit
filios Dei, sed declarat; the mystical water in Baptism does not regenerate,
nor make men sons of God, but declares.

So Zwinglius, Baptismus non aliter Ecclesiae Christi signum est quam exercitus
aliquis signatur, non quod signum hoc conjungit Ecclesiae, sed qui jam
conjunctus est, publicam tesseram accipit. Baptism is the sign of the Church,
as the ensign of an army, it does not join you to the Church, but it declares
you joined.

So Beza, Nihil obsignatur, nisi quod jam habetur; nothing is sealed, but what
is there already; of this opinion is Calvin fully, as it were easy to quote
him, saving that in answering the Anabaptists, he says; This objection is
ansvvered in a word, by saying that children are baptized into faith and
repentance to come; actual he means (for he adds according to the first
opinion quoted) of which though we see not the appearance, nevertheless the
seed is planted there by the secret operation of the holy Spirit; so as he
would have faith and repentance there in the habit, that God may not seal to a
blanck, nor give a lying sign: The like says Pemble, a late and able Divine,
That which is signified in our baptism, is our justification by the blood of
Christ, and our sanctification by the Spirit of Christ; Baptism is the seal
of both unto us, and infants may be partakers of both, being vvasht from the
guilt of sin by the blood of Christ, in whom they are reconciled to God, and
actually justified before him, and also purified in part from the uncleanness
of sin, by the infusion of grace from the Holy Ghost; what then should
hinder, why those infants should not be vvashed with the water of the
Sacrament. So also Davenant in his comment upon the 2. chapt. of the Colossians
to quote no more, where conflicting with the Anabaptists, he says, As for
infants because they are not sinners by their own act, but by an hereditary
habit, they have the mortification of sin, and faith, not putting forth it
self, but included in an habitual principle of grace: Now that the Spirit of
Christ can and does ordinarily work in them an habitual principle of grace,
no wise man will deny. From all those testimonies we may observe, that the
clear reason of the thing inforces men to allow as necessary to Baptism in
general, the qualification of regeneration, faith, etc. how this now will fit
infants Baptism, we shall consider hereafter; for the present we join issue
with them in these three things.

First that a personal holiness, not derivative, or imputed only, must be the
ground of Sacraments.

2 That this holiness must be regeneration.

3 That the habits of faith and repentance, are to be esteemed such, I prove
not these things, because they are clear in themselves, and taken for granted
by those already quoted, only in these things we join with them, and so
far agree together.

CHAP. VIII. In which are contained several queries and considerations, raised
from the premises, declaring what little ground there will appear from their
own principles and concessions to conclude for Infant Baptism.
THese things thus supposed, I make these doubts about the baptizing of the
infants of believers.

First I would ask whether all infants of believers have necessarily and
assuredly those habits, which must of necessity be concluded, since it is their
personal qualificatio^ for Baptism, and therefore you must have good grounds
to judge that they have it, one as well as another. First of all Peter Martyr
says, that, I will be the God of thee, and of thy seed, is not an universal
promise, but has place only in the predestinate; and therefore upon 1. Cor.
7.14. else were your children unclean, but now are they holy, he says,
Promissio non est generalis de omni semine, sed tantum de illo in quo recte
consentit electio, alioquin posteritas Israelis, and Esau fuerunt ex Abraham.
And therefore affirms, that the children of the saints are borne holy, when
they are predestinate; and this agrees with reason, for if you make that
holiness, as before, the infusion of gracious habits, ye must suppose election
without which such gracious habits are never infused, unless to make good this
opinion, you will allow falling from grace, which I am sure our selves, and
those we desire to satisfy, will not do.

This being said, I would ask upon what ground the Saints can suppose all
their children to be elected, or why they should deny any infants baptism,
since experience tells us, that the children of many unbeleevers (if we will
judge by the fruits and effects, which is the surest judgment) are elected,
and many children of believers reprobated; especially now since the sluice is
taken up, and the Gospel preached to every creature under heaven.

Again consider how cold a ground this is for infants baptism, your children
are holy by being borne of you, that is, regenerated, and so qualified for
ordinances, if at least they be elected, and I seal to them their holiness and
the kingdom of heaven, if they be elected; as if a King should say, I confirm
this town to you and yours, if at least it has pleased me, or shall please
me, to give it you.

But if you say, we have reason to hope well of them, according to that, else
were your children unholy, but now are they holy, for so says Peter Martyr
upon that place, Been sperantes quod ut sunt secundum carnem semen sanctorum,
ita etiam sunt electionis divinae participes, and Spiritum Sanctum, and gratiam
Christi habeant; Hoping well, that as they are according to the flesh, the
seed of the Saints, so they are also partakers of Divine election, and have the
Holy Spirit, and the grace of Christ.

I answer, that if you will hope of them, you need despair of none,
especially where the sound of the Gospel is, and it is but stretching the line
of your hope and charity a little farther, and you may baptize all.

Secondly it is not a hope you must go upon for the giving of ordinances, holy
seals, but a judgment. Paul called the saints positvely faithful and elect,
and said it was meet for him to judge and think so of them all; and when we
come to admit members, if they give but only ground of hopes, we let them
stay for their own profit, and the discharge of our duty, till they can give
us ground of a judgment.

Thirdly the Apostle says positively they are holy, and therefore what ever
holiness it is, it is no longer the subject of your hopes, but your judgment;
ye ought to judge them so, and to assure your selves they are so.

If therefore by a general consent the infusion of holy habits depends upon
election, we must consider upon what election depends, before we can make up a
judgment; for the infusion of habits, if that depends upon the holiness of the
parents, you say some thing, but surely every honest heart will grant, that as
holy parents themselves, are both loved and elected for Christ's sake, so God
loves and elects their infant children, not for their sakes, but both them and
their children for Christ alone: and to make God consider (as the object of
childrens election) the faith of their parents, is worse then the opinion of
the Arminians, who make faith and works foreseen the object of every
particular man's election; so as if election must precede the infusion of holy
habites, which must qualify for infant baptism; and experience shows
ordinarily (by the rules which Christ has left us to judge by, the fruits and
effects) that the children of godly parents prove not ever holy, and that the
election of God for the child, depends not upon the holiness or faith of the
parent, but upon his own free grace in Christ: Then the judgment will seem
to rise up very coldly and lamely for the Baptism of infants of holy parents,
which must, as themselves confess, be first qualified with the infusion of
holy habits.

But secondly, I would know of these men, why for the making good of their
infant Baptism, they should determine God, ordinarily to an extraordinary way
of working and converting (which is the infusion of gracious habits in that
age) for faith in the ordinary way comes by hearing; but this way of being
borne Christians, that is, charged and qualified with holy habits, is not by
hearing, but by an immediate revelation, and in a way so extraordinary and
strange to us, that though we find cause to assent that it is sometimes done,
yet how it is done is a mighty mystery, and altogether unknown to us.

And if you object that though this may be extraordinary to men of age, yet it
is a way of converting, ordinary to children, who are not capable of the other
way.

Answ. I am sure that all men of age were children once, and we find by the
effect it is not ordinary to such, for we find them so far from being borne
again, though borne of Christian parents and baptized, that a great part of
their life is often spent in an unregenerate estate, and their conversion
prooves very visible and evident to themselves and others, so as it appears
not to be the ordinary way of conversion, but at the best the extraordinary and
particular way to such infants, as fall under election, and come not to that
use of reason and understanding by which they might receive faith, by hearing:
now certainly an extraordinary way of working, must never prove to be the
ground or qualification of an ordinary administration. But then thirdly, I
would ask why this holiness, that is, this faith and conversion in infants,
being wrought (if it be at all) in a hidden secret and invisible way, we should
seal it and confirm it to them, and conveigh also more of the same, by a
sensible and intelligible ordinance; That it is so, we are forced to reason
our selves into it, because no unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and therefore how it can be cleansed, and sanctified, though we know
it not, yet we suppose it is, if it be saved: Now it seems strange that that
faith which we know not how to go about to work, or to begin, yet we know
how to seal, and how to confirm; we use to say things are preserved and
nourisht as they are made, the way supposed to convert, is immediately from
God, the way used to seal and confirm, this is mediate by an ordinance; the
way of conversion is invisible, mystical, secret; the way to seal it is
evident, visible and teaching; for the Sacraments conveigh to us, more
concionis, after the manner of a sermon. Now the understanding cannot be moved,
but by understanding, nor the eye but by seeing, nor the ear but by hearing;
to say therefore that faith is sealed, or faith is increased, by an outward
teaching ordinance, which shall neither stryke our sense nor our understanding,
is very hard to receive; a man must have his understanding and his ears paved
to hear such a saying, and must of necessity have accustomed himself to
digest many incongruites and contradictions, before he can bear so notable
and visible an one.

Fourthly I would ask what needs this leaping over hedges, what needs all
this host; why cannot this child supposed to be elected, and converted in a
secret invisible way (for without that you will not pretend to baptize him)
rest quietly in that state, in the arms of God, who only can, and only has
administered unto him, till he shall come in a due season, and to his best
advantage, to have that sealed to him, which shall be discovered to be in him;
how long do those who are of age and are qualified for them, stay often
without Sacraments, because they would miss nothing of the order, either for
want of a church state, or a lawful minister? We all know assuredly our
children have reason, because the rational soul is the form of a man, (I
would we could be as assured of their grace) and we all pretend so much love
to them, as to improove this principle, and instruct them timely in things for
their good, for the use of this life and a better, and yet we should account
him a fond father that would lie lowing in his childrens ears, and loose his
sweet words before the time of the use of reason come; I beseech you consider
whether it be not the same thing: If therefore we could be assured, that all
children had that grace so timously infused, which we can scarce hope for, yet
how much better were it for the ordinance sake, which seems otherwise to be
profaned (as much as if you should preach a sermon to a child) and for my
child's sake, to stay till he understand what he does, and what he receives,
that that ordinance which ought to be administered but once, and is of so great
an use and influence, may be received to his best advantage, whilst in the
interim, he is in the hands of God fit, and exposed to receive the
preservation of his spiritual being in the same way, in which it was wrought,
and by those unalterable bonds of election, and conversion, safe enough till he
shall be capable of setting his seal and receiving Gods visibly, to that, which
in a secret and unknown way was wrought in him.

CHAP. IX. In which entrance is made into the consideration of the great
argument for Infant Baptism, drawn from the circumcision of Infants, by way
of answer whereunto five particulars are handled, the first whereof is treated
on in this Chapter, namely what circumcision was to the Jews, and whether the
qualification requisite to it was regeneration, or the infusion of gracious
habits.
HAving thus laid down the state of Baptism, and considered several things
about it, sufficient for my own satisfaction, and clearly also designed the
right subject of that ordinance, I come now (in order to a more full discharge
of my self to this controversy, and for a more general satisfaction) to
consider the particular reasons, by which the patrons of Infant Baptism would
enforce it: The first whereof (and which seems to be a great one) is that the
seed of Abraham, with whom and whose seed God was in covenant, received
ordinances, and particularly circumcision, by virtue of their birth, and that
we being ingrafted into that stock, have power to derive a capacity of
ordinances to our children, else the privileges of Christians, and the New
Testament would be less then those of the Jews and of the old Testament;
which is not to be imagined; I take this to be the sum of that argument,
which seems to carry the greatest weight, and to speak lowdest for Infant
Baptism of any other.

Here diverse things by way of answer are to be considered, first what
circumcision was to the Jews, and whether the qualification required to it was
regeneration, or the infusion of gracious habits; for if not, then there will
be found to be this great and essential difference, namely the qualification
of the subject.

Secondly, what ever that should prove; how far the ordinances of the old
Testament should regulate and determine, by way of rule and institution those
of the New; if not, then the parallel of circumcision is not fit to bear the
weight of an institution.

Thirdly how we are ingrafted into Abraham's covenant, and by what tittle we
are called Abraham's children; for we are not to claim the same things by
different tenures.

Fourthly how far the Jews, by virtue of their being Abraham's seed, could
pretend to New Testament ordinances, and if they by their birthright could not,
then neither can we by any such birthright, or carnal generation.

Fifthly whether though Infant Baptism, should not be; the privileges of
Christians and their churches might justly be said to be as great or greater,
then the privileges of the Jews and their Churches and state.

For the first, I must profess I am not Jew enough to understand the full
drift of that ordinance, and although men are bold in commenting and
interpreting all types and ceremonies of the old covenant, after their own
apprehensions, yet it is safe to be sober, and to advance no further then the
Scripture guides. This I am persuaded of, that as they were formed particularly
to that state of the Jewish church, so they had means to understand them, for
their comfort and edification, to better advantage then we have, but it would
not be hard to tell you, what some have thought, and perhaps to as much purpose
as those who are of a different opinion, for this notion received that the
parallel of circumcision must be the pillar of infant Baptism, has (I am
afraid) to much determined and straightened the interpretation of that
ordinance, and the places which speak concerning it; Ambrose upon the 4. of
the Romans says, Circumcisio aliquid habet dignitatis, sed signum est tantum,
quod signum ideo accipiebant filij Abraham, ut scirentur ejus filij esse, qui
credens Deo, hoc signum acciperet, ut aemuli essent paternae fidei.
Circumcision has something of dignity, but it is a sign only, which sign
the children of Abraham did therefore receive, that they might be known to be
his seed, who believing in God, received this sign, that they might be
emulators of their fathers faith.

Jerome upon the 3. of the Gal. says, Because Christ was to spring from the
seed of Abraham, and many ages were to pass from Abraham to Christ; the
wise God, least the seed of beloved Abraham should be mingled with other
nations, and should by degrees be joined more familiarly, distinguished the
flock of Israel by a certain mark, or circumcision; then for 40. years
together in the wilderness none were circumcised, because they were out of
the danger of such mixtures, being alone; but as soon as they were past the
banks of Jordan, circumcision prevented the error of mingling with others,
whereas it is written that they were circumcised that second time by Joshua,
it signifies that circumcision ceased in the wilderness, which was
rationally used in Egypt.

The Apostle Romans 4. does not call circumcision a seal of the covenant or
promise, but of the righteousness of faith, which says Origin upon this place,
was to seal shut up, the righteousness of faith, which in its time was to be
revealed; that is, under the figure and types of that carnal circumcision was
secretly signified and vayled, the circumcision of the heart, which is the true
justification that Christ was to bring, or as Chrysostom, Theophilact and
others, it was called a seal of the righteousness of faith, because it was
given to Abraham as a seal and testimony of that righteousness, which he had
acquired by faith; Now this seems to be the privilege of Abraham alone, and
not to be transferd to others, as if circumcision, in whom ever it was, were
a testimony of divine righteousness: for as it was the privilege of Abraham,
that he should be the father of all the faithful, as well circumcised as
uncircumcised, and being already the father of all uncircumcised, having faith
in uncircumcision, he received first the sign of circumcision, that he might
be the father of the circumcised; now because he had this privilege in
respect of the righteousness which he had acquired by faith, therefore the
sign of circumcision was to him a seal of the righteousness of faith, but to
the rest of the Jews, it was a sign they were Abraham's seed, but not a
seal of the righteousness of faith, as all the Jews also were not the
fathers of many nations. This appears first, because Paul joins these two
together, he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
faith, that he might be the father of all that believe, whether circumcised or
uncircumcised, ver. 11.12. Therefore all circumcised have not the seal of the
righteousness of faith, as they are not the father of all that believe.

Secondly, this the Apostle may seem to intimate, by distinguishing between a
sign, and a seal, to show that circumcision was to all a sign, but to
Abraham alone a seal of the righteousness of faith.

Thirdly though the Scripture speak often of circumcision, yet it never calls
it a seal, but here where it speaks of Abraham, which intimates that it was
only a seal to him, else when Paul asks, what advantage has the Jew, and
what proffit is there of circumcision, and says, much every way, Romans 3.1.2.
He should (one would think) have mentioned this great advantage, that it
should be the seal of the divine promise, but this he mentions not at all; nor
will it answer this (though that be the best I know given) that Aquinas seems
here to find a double question, one, what advantage has the Jew, which is
handled in this Chapter; the other, what proffit is there of circumcision,
which is handled in the 4. chapter; this has to great an quietness, rather as
Musculus says upon that place, It is no danger to which member ye apply the
answer, for the same thing is asked in both, for by circumcision he comprehends
in general all Iudaisme, for as much as the inauguration into Iudaisme lay in
circumcision; So as what ever force there is in this probable reason (for it is
no more) may stand good notwithstanding this exception.

Fourthly, if circumcision had been the seal of the righteousness of faith to
Infants, then an account of the righteousness of faith should have been required
in those of years; to whom it was administered, but that such faith was
required or found in all, we read not; Abraham the same day circumcised all,
whether borne in his house, or bought with his money without any such
declaration, or demand that we read of; and Ishmael, who was thirteen years
old, and judged not within the covenant of grace, was also circumcised; Of the
Sechemites also there was required no profession of faith to their
circumcision, which as a form at least would have been required, if it has
been judged necessary to that seal, and used by converted Proselites, though
Symeon and Levi, brethren in iniquity, were the ministers of it.

To illustrate this consideration, let us see the great difference in the
institution of Baptism and Circumcision, when Christ instituted Baptism, Go
teach, says he, and baptize, make Disciples and baptize; and in the
administration of the ordinance, they confessed and were baptized, they
believed and were baptized; but not a word of infants, who were not capable of
this believing and confession: But when the precept of Circumcision was given,
not a word of teaching, or faith, nor in the example find you any such thing;
but of infants you find the command most expressly, for the time, for the age,
for the sex.

To conclude, whereas holiness is required to Sacraments, the household of
Abraham, whether natural, or adopted, were holy, but not so as to include
regeneration, or cleanes of heart, which is our holiness; but there was of use
among them an Ecclesiastical, Leviticall, and typical holiness, which amongst
us obtains nothing; of creatures for food some were clean and some unclean,
and the land was holy and so was the fruit, the trees therefore were holy and
to be circumcised, Levit. 19.23. in such a time and state of the church, when
things and actions took their denomination of sinful or holy, from such
outward and typical considerations, when circumcision was predicated of trees,
as well as men; no wonder though infants were circumcised.

The sum of all is this, that it is not easy for us to determine distinctly
of the nature and scope of the ordinances of the other covenant, that some have
judged circumcision only a sign of the Jews, did inguishing and admonishing
to good, but a seal to Abraham only, who had righteousness of faith (as the
Scripture calls it) to be sealed, and who was of capacity to receive it. Though
there be them, who have doubted, whether it sealed any thing to Abraham, but
his fatherhood of the faithful.

And then again, it is wondered, that the profession of this faith should never
have been required of those of years, if it had qualified for this ordinance,
and lastly it is showed, that there was another kind of holiness then of use and
esteem in the church of God, namely, typical, ecclesiastical and Leviticall,
which gave right and tittle to ordinances, which amongst us has no place, and
therefore there will be found to be this great difference between these to
ordinances the qualification of the subjects, which will farther appear, in
handling the third particular in this answer; to all which I shall add only
this one thing more, that if that be true which I have formerly discoursed
about Infant Baptism, that it cannot be necessarily concluded that they have
Baptismall qualifications, namely regeneration, and that if they had, yet there
were no just have for the ordinance of Baptism, but the contrary, then much
less can any such qualifying regeneration and conversion be predicated of the
infants of the Jews in the old covenant; and therefore if that be the only
way, as it is, to pretend to Baptism, and our infants cannot pretend that way,
then the Jews infants must needs have some other qualification for
circumcision, then regeneration, and therefore the subject of these ordinances
differ greatly, namely in that which respectively qualifies them to be capable
of those administrations.

CHAP. X. In which is handled the second particular, proposed in answer to the
argument drawn from Circumcision, to wit, how far the ordinances of the old
Testament should reg^late and determine by way of rule and institution those of
the New.
QVest. the second, what ever should become of the first question, the next is,
how far the ordinances of the old Testament should regulate and determine by
way of rule and institution those of the New.

I answer nothing at all, especially in the essentialls of it, amongst which
the subject of ordinances in the main qualification of it, must needs be
accounted: Because things become ordinances to us by virtue of a word of
institution, forasmuch as the efficacy and energy of ordinances, hangs upon the
will of God, not the reason of them.

There are certain necessary circumstances about ordinances that common reason
will suggest, though the institution should not, as time and place, but by the
same common reason, to add other circumstances, which in themselves are not
simply necessary, or by consequences drawn from the ordinances of another
covenant, is to set our posts by Gods posts, and to be wise above what is
written, and to be guilty of adding to the will of God, in that which is most
purely his will, the ordinances of institution; And I beseech you consider
whither this way of working has not brought in, if not all, yet as great and
considerable errors into Popery as any: That a church is a foundation ordinance
of the new covenant, we all grant, but says the Pope as that of the old
Testament was rational, and but one in all the world, the truths of God being
then confined to a narrower compass, so now since the Gospel is preached to
every creature under heaven, by just consequence the Church of God should be
universal and Catholic; and as then though there were many subordinate
Priests and Levites, yet there was one high Priest, who sat in power and place
above all the rest; so by just consequence there should be now a Summus
Pontifex, a high Priest, a Bishop of bishops, who should be the last object of
appeals upon earth, and the great moderator under Christ, who both then was,
and still is, the invisible head of the church. And if you shall object now
that the New Testament gives no such extension to the Church, nor power to an
universal Bishop, that those things were typical and proper to that Testament
or covenant (which is the same that is said by those who oppose the Baptism of
Infants) they will not fail as well as the patrons of Infant Baptism, to tell
you, that besides some little footesteps they find in the new Testament, this
is par ratio, a like reason, a due consequence, and good reason may be showed
that it is for the honor and safety of the Church, that things should be so
administered; Hence comes the ornaments and vestures of Priests, the holiness of
Temples, and for ought I know the baptizing of bells from the circumcision of
trees, or what ever else a bold and presumptuous heart may, under the title of
just consequence, intrude into the worship of God; I confess there are some
things of common equity, the rule of life was the same then that now, and the
same Christ that now is, was the salvation of the elect, such things therefore
as are of such a common nature, may be illustrated and inferred from one
Testament to another, especially amongst those that doubt of the new Testament,
and the light of it, as the Jews did, with whom our Savior and the Apostles
had to do.

But in instituted ordinances, the reason of which lies in nothing else, but a
particular will of the institutor, it is bold and unsafe to institute above
what is written in the new covenant, at least in any essential thing,
concerning either the parts of the ordinance, the manner of administration, and
the subject of them, and it is further to imply an infaithfullnes, and an
unclearenes in the new Testament, in things essential and necessary to the
worship of it.

The sum is, that it is unsafe arguing from one institution to another,
because the inferrences and consequences cannot be drawn from our reason, as
not falling under the judicature of common light, or spiritual reason in the
general, but of a particular distinct and independent will in Christ, from
whence, not from the reason of the thing they draw all their virtue and
efficacy, the reason that makes it good to us, being only the impression of
his will upon it; but especially this will take place in ordinances of
differing covena^ts, for the ordinances of oath covenant are fitted to the
meridian of that covenant.

The rationallity of that church, the typicallnes of that which was called
holiness and uncleanes amongst them, the generality of the subjects, which were
not only men, women and children, but beasts, birds and trees, their very
garments, their very land, to what alone is called holiness and sin; now with
the subject of it, shows a great boldness and presumption to force institutions
in the subject or any of the parts of them by a par ratio, or consequence from
this old, worst, first, vanishing covenant, as the Apostle styles it Hebr. 8.
to this new, better, second covenant, as he styles that under which we live,
in the same place.

Now that circumcision (though of use before the law, as Baptism was also
before Christ) was the great ordinance of the Mosaicall law, as I could bring
many places, if any doubt of it, so I will content my self with one or two,
Acts 21.21. They are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews which
are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, that they ought not to
circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs; where the
prime instance of forsaking Moses, was not to be circumcised; that place more
shall suffice Gal. 5.3. For I testify again to every man that is circumcised,
that he is a debtour to do the whole law: The yooke of circumcision they
could bear, not the debt to which it obliged them, therefore that was the
leading ordinance of another covenant, namely the law; Now to make this main
ordinance of the law, institutive to us, as touching a great essential in our
Christian Baptism, namely, the subject of it, is to make not only one
ordinance institutive to another, of which no good account can be given, but
infinite and visible inconveniencyes follow, as we have seen; but to send us
to school to the old covenant, in that which was the leading, maine and
distinguishing ordinance of it, which no good Christian, I hope, will
consideringly admit of, especially since we are so assured of the sufficiency
and saithfullnes of our Lawgiver Christ Jesus, by whom we have grace and truth
and who is the way* the truth and the life to us, as well in the matter of
his ordinances, as in any other thing that concerns our duty, as that we need
not turn aside to other guides and teachers.

CHAP. XI. Wherein is discussed the third particular in answer to the argument
drawn from circumcision; s^^. H^w we are ingrafted into Abraham's covenant, and
by what title we are called Abraham's children.
A Third consideration is, how we are ingrafted into Abraham's covenant, and by
what title we are called Abraham's children.

In the 4. Romans 16. you have this affirmed, that Abraham is the father of us
all; That place seems to be understood of all believers, and therefore when
he says in the same verse, the promise is of faith, to the end that it might
be sure to all the seed; he makes a distribution, Not to that only which is
of law but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; as if he should
say, this whole seed, to whom the promise is sure, is either the believing
Jews, or the believing Gentiles, which have no other pretense or claim to the
promise, but by a like faith, even as the Jews also pretend to this
fatherhood, no other way but by their faith; for so verse 12. And the father of
circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but also walk in
the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had yet being
uncircumcised. It is not enough to be of the Circumcision, but they must walk
in the steps of the faith of Abraham, that is, believe as he did, if they
would pretend to the sonneship we speak of, so as in this 16. verse, the
opposition is only between the faithful under the Law, and the faithful
under the Gospel, so as the law and faith are not opposed here simply, but as
circumcision was an adjunct, or no adjunct to faith, that is, as true believers
were either of the Jews or Gentiles, and so these words are not to be taken as
the 14. verse. If they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void,
and the promise made of none effect. Here you see one fatherhood, Abraham is
the father of all believers, whether Jews or Gentiles; So in another
consideration you have Sarah said to be the mother of all good and obedient
women, who are called her children, 1. Pet. 3.6.

But besides this, Abraham may be considered under the notion of another
fatherhood, of which the Jews were apt enough to brag, namely a carnal
generation, that they had Abraham to their father, as appears by the reproof
that John gave them, Mat. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves we have
Abraham to our father. Now in opposition to this fatherhood, considered alone,
is that added verse 17. of 4. Romans where the Apostle quoting the promise Genesis
17.5. I will make thee a father of many nations, adds this, before him whom
he believed, even God, who quickens the dead, etc. As if he should say,
Abraham is the father of us all, not in respect of his carnal paternity, but
of his spiritual, which is before God, whom he believed; it is said to be
before God, because founded in faith, by which we are commended to God.

He adds also, Who quickneth the dead, and calls those things which are
not, as though they were; by which we have all a pattern or glass of our
vocation, by which is proposed a beginning or entry, not into our first birth,
but into our hope of life to come, to wit, that when we are called by God, we
go out of nothing, as not having the least spark or seed of good in us,
which may render us capable of the kingdom of God; but on the contrary must
dye to our selves, that we may be proper for Gods call, whose call is so
effectual, as a simple will of his or sign thereof, produces the greatest
and highest existencies.

The like distinction of a double paternity and sonneship, to wit, after the
flesh, and after the spirit, that is, by carnal generation and by faith, ye
have Romans 9.6.7.8. Not as though the word of God has taken none effect, for
they are not all Israel, which are of Israel, neither because they are the
seed of Abraham, are they all children; but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called, that is they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.
Where the Apostles intention is to make it appear, that notwithstanding the
great defectio^ of the Jews, yet the truth of the divine promise is not
diminished, For they are not all Israel, says he, which are of Israel,
because they are not the children of the promise, but of the flesh, and can
pretend title only to Israel their father by a carnal generation, verse. 7.
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they children, that is, the
like may be said also of Abraham; It is not their carnal generation (of which
they are apt to boast) that gives them a true notion of sonneship, in respect
of the spiritual promises made to Abraham (for so only by faith they gave the
title of Abraham's seed as before;) But in Isaac shall thy seed be called;
this he explaines verse. 8. that is they which are the children of the flesh,
those are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted
for the seed.

The sense is, That promise of God made to Abraham, by which he made so great
a difference amongst his children, that, Ishmael laid aside and rejected, only
the posterity of Isaac should be called his seed; saying in Isaac shall thy
seed be called; teaches us thus much, that neither they all, nor only, are
to be reputed for the true seed of Abraham, which according to the flesh are
issued from Abraham, but those which are the sons of the promise, that is,
which are regenerated according to the spirit by faith, according to that
promise, In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

Here you have a distinction as it were of two Abraham's, a begetting Abraham,
and a believing Abraham, and also of two seeds, the children of the flesh,
that is by carnal generation only, and the children of the promise.

This allegory has its foundation in that which the Apostle says Gal.
4.22.23. For it is written, Abraham had two sons, the one by a bond maid,
the other by a free woman; but he who was of the bond-vvoman, was borne
after the flesh; but he of the free woman was by promise; where he affirms
that Ishmael was borne according to the flesh, but Isaac according to the
spirit; that is, he only by a natural power of generation, but Isaac not so
much according to the flesh, but miraculously as it were, by the restoring of a
generative virtue to Abraham, for the making good of the promise.

Now, says he, those only, which according to that of which Isaac was a
type, are borne by promise, those and those only are counted for the seed,
Romans 9.8. They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children
of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. According to
which is that which is affirmed Gal. 3.7.9. Know ye therefore that they
which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham; and verse. 9. So then
they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

In the first of those verses, out of the former reasonings, he bids them
conclude and take it for granted, that not those which are of works, which
hold by that tenure, but those which are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham.

Again he perstringeth the Jews, who gloried in their carnal generation,
that they were Abraham's sons according to the flesh; the 9. verse is a reason
of the 8. where he says, that the Scripture (that is, the spirit that writ
the Scripture) foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith,
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be
blessed; that is, either in thy seed which is Christ, who only is apprehended
and made ours by faith, or (as many of the ancients expound this place, and
Calvine is of the same judgment) In thee, that is, according to the imitation
and after the similitude of thee: he being, as Calvin says, in this the
pattern and rule of us all, and therefore is called our father, as being the
primitive pattern made by God; and this interpretation the words of the 9.
verse seem to imply, So then they which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham; which is an illation or inference of the foregoing reason:
in this verse the principal Emphasis lies in the word faithful, where the
former mentioned distinction is again intimated, there is a begetting Abraham,
and a believing Abraham, it is with the believing Abraham, the faithful
Abraham, that all nations are blessed by being as he was of faith; the word
blessing however diversely taken in the Scripture, yet here it is taken as
Calvin expounds it for our adoption into the inheritance of life eternal.

Having therefore at large opened those places, which give light to this
consideration, and made good out of the Scripture, that double fatherhood of
Abraham, the one carnal by his begetting, the other spiritual by his
believing, there remains nothing to add, but this in a word, that we can
pretend nothing of sonneship to Abraham, by the first tenure, scil. of
begetting, by which tenure the Jews partooke of circumcision, but by the other
of believing, that is, after the example and imitation of Abraham, who, for
that he so anciently and so eminently believed in God, carries the title of the
father of all believers, who do the like, as Sarah his wife does of the mother
of good women; and this faith, not carnal generation, is that that intitles us
to Christian ordinances.

And to make this last which is the sum of all, a little plainer, I shall add
this, that by virtue of the parallel of circumcision, that only qualifies for
ordinances that is derivable from parents to their children by generation; for
neither was Isaac circumcised, because he was borne after the spirit, nor
Ishmael debard from it, because as a type he was borne after the flesh, but
both the one and the other had it by virtue of their natural and carnal
generation, by which they were made of the household and family of Abraham: Now
we pretending to be Abraham's children by faith, not by carnal generation,
cannot pretend to ordinances by carnal generation as the others did.

And secondly, forasmuch as by carnal generation, we our selves cannot derive
faith, which is that which qualifies for our ordinances, therefore no
fatherhood of ours can derive a right for ordinances, unles we understand such
a fatherhood as Paul pretended to, when he calls Onesimus his son, saying, He
had begotten him in his bonds, Phile. 10. Or when he tells the Corinthians 1. Corinthians. 4.15. Though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye
not many fathers, for in Jesus Christ I have begotten you through the Gospel;
and so we may be the father as well of other men's children as of our own: Now
then if we cannot pretend to be Abraham's children, and so consequently to
partake of ordinances, by the way which the Jews did, which was carnal
generation, but by a way quite of another kind, namely a way of personal
believing.

And secondly, if we cannot pretend to a fatherhood to others in deriving by
carnal generation, the qualification of ordinances, which is faith, it must
then of necessity remain, that the Jews partaking of circumcision by virtue
of having Abraham to their father, and deriving that title to their posterity,
by the same way of carnal generation, is no president or pattern to us, of
either being Abraham's children, and so qualified for baptism, in such a way,
or of our deriving to our posterity any such qualification, either for that or
any other ordinance by the like way of carnal generation.

And indeed in the Gospel notion we all are children, and there is no father
but Abraham; for to gain the title of father, there must be either a
generative power, which remaynes only in the spirit, of whom as Christians we
are borne, Not of flesh, nor of blood, nor the will of man. Or there must be
the eminency of an example or copy, and so we use to say the first in every
kind is the rule of the rest. Now it has pleased God to give this honor to
Abraham, who for the eminency and antientnes of his faith, is styled by God,
and will carry that title to the worlds end, of the father of us all.

Let us be content therefore to be children, and glory in that, and let Abraham
enjoy his privilege; or if we will needs be fathers also, let us imitate
Paul, and be we workers with God, and labor in Jesus Christ to beget men
through the Gospel.

CHAP. XII. Wherein is handled the fourth Question, proposed to answer the
argument drawn from Circumcision, to wit, How far the Jews by virtue of
their being the sons of Abraham, could pretend to new Testament Ordinances,
wherein also, besides several others, that much agitated place is opened and
considered of, Acts 2.38.39.
FOurth Question: How far the Jews, by virtue of their being the sons of
Abraham, could pretend to new Testament ordinances; and if they by any such
birthright could not, then nor we, by any such birthright or carnal
generation.

First we will show how far they might pretend.

Secondly where the stop lay, and where they went equal with others. They had
this great honor and advantage, that the Gospel was first offered to them; the
Jews were brought nearer God then others, and therefore the advantage of the
Jew and circumcision was much every way, because to them were committed the
oracles of God, Romans 3.1.2. And this kind of dispensation God pleased to
continue in the promulgation of the Gospel, and therefore Christin his first
mission charged the Apostles, Not to go into the way of the gentiles, nor
into any city of the Samaritanes (which were as gentiles to them) but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, and preach the Gospel to them, Matthew.
10.5.6.7. This priority and advantage Paul mentions Romans 2.10. Glory, honor
and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to the
Gentile; and after the ascension of Christ in Peter's effectual sermon, which
was crowned with the conversion of 3000 souls, he keeps this method Acts
2.38.39. Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the holy Ghost, for the promise is to you and to your children, and to
all that are afar of, even as many as the Lord our God shall call: In the way
he took to raise those which were cast down, he bids them, Repent and be
baptized, that was the thing to be done on their parts, for their restoring and
raising, of which he tells them the effects; first the great and main one,
that they should receive remission of sins, and as a consequence and earnest
as it were of this, proper for those first times, they should also receive the
gift of the holy Ghost, that is, whereas they were amazed and wondered to see
this befall the Apostles, why, says he, it is not to us alone, but to you
also, that the prophecy and promise of Joel foreme^tioned. 16.17.18. is to be
accommodated, yea to all who ever God shall call; but with this difference and
by these degrees, that it is first to you which are Jews, which are night, and
then though you may wonder at it, to the gentiles also which are afar of; and
that you see in the event prooved a wonder, for it is said Acts 10.45. that
they of the circumcision which believed were astonished as many as came with
Peter, because that on the Gentiles also were povvred out the gifts of the
holy Ghost. Now these gentiles are called afar of, suitable to the expression
of Ephesians. 2.13. Ye, that is, the gentiles, who sometimes were far of, are
made night by the blood of Christ; where the same expressions of nigh and far
of, are used that are here; now he makes mention particularly of their
children, (under which also he intends the children of the gentiles, when by
calling they should be made nigh) to accommodate to them more fully the
mentioned place of Joel; as if he should say, those are the last days, when
this promise verse. 16.17.18. is to be fullfilled, both to Jew and gentile, as a
consequence of their faith in the Messiah, that they shall receive that eminent
gift of the holy Ghost, as a badge of their profession, and the glory of God,
by which they shall be able to do such things as we have done, but with this
difference, that according to what is foretold, the spirit will accommodate and
vent it self proportionable to their states and capacity; some things are
proper to old me^, they shall dream dreams, others to young men, they shall
see visions, and according to the manner of their revelatio^, shall their gift
be, and the venting of it by prophecy. But all, you and your children shall
receive gifts of the holy Ghost, and so be made partakers of that illustrious
promise: here therefore ye have that which might first and especially comfort
them, the remission of their sins, so as no man can object against Peter, for
comforting them only with gifts.

Secondly as a consequence of this, and as Christ elsewhere says, a sign of
them that believe, they shall have the same gift of the holy Ghost, both Jews
and Gentiles (in their order) that the Apostles had, and this should be just
accommodated according to the prophecy of Joel to fathers and children, to
young men and old, according to their proportions and capacities for prophecy.

Now that by the gift of the holy Ghost, and so consequently the promise of
Joel, is meant abillity of speaking tongues and prophecies, as it is clear by
the context in it self, so according to the judgment of Calvin, who says
clearly, that this ought not to be understood of the grace of sanctification,
but of those primitive gifts, which though we now receive not, yet we have
something analogicall and proportionable to them.

Now as the gift was not the grace of sanctification, so neither the promise by
which it is made ours, for all gifts are ours by promise, this is the general
judgment of expositers, Protestant and others, and is most clear by Acts
10.45.46. where says he, they of the circumcision which believed, were
astonished, because that on the gentiles also was povvred out the gift of the
holy Ghost, for they heard them speak with tongues etc. where the gift of the
holy Ghost (the same words used that is here) is discribed by speaking with
tongues. Peter therefore calls them that were pricked at their hearts, and
were weary and heavy laden to repentance, and Baptism in the name of the Lord
Jesus, that they might receive and have sealed up to them the remission of
sins, which was the great thing they desired, as a symbol and sign of which
they should partake also of the effect of that illustrious promise made in
Joel, and mentioned formerly, that they should receive the gifts of the Holy
Ghost; so as nothing could be spoken more to the hearts of distressed men then
this, nor nothing could more encourage them to repentance and Baptism, then
the remission of sins sealed to them in that ordinance, and yet more and
further signified and sealed by that famous promise of extraordinary gifts of
the holy Ghost, which for that time, Christ himself made a sign and effect of
believing to them that were nigh and far of, that is, both to Jews and
Gentiles, and so you see the Jews encouraged to repentance and Baptism, upon
great, and noble, and most considerable grounds, with this distinction and
difference, that the offer of all those great things according to the way of
God and the Gospel, comes first to them, and after to them which are afar of,
that is, to the gentiles, who indeed were afar of, being aliens and in the
estimation of Peter, so far, that God was forced to give him a particular
vision, as you shall hear Acts 10. to persuade him to look upon them as those
nigh.

And thus we have what the Jew as a natural son of Abraham may pretend to
Baptism, and new Testament ordinances, to wit, a priority in respect of the
offer, whereby the way we have taken occasion to clear that place that some
have indeavored to bring to prove infant Baptism by, then which truly nothing
seems to be less properly raised out of it.

The next considerable thing is, where the stop lies, and where the Jews go
equal with others. Now for that we will consider that place of Matt. 3. chap.
s. 7.8.9. When he savv many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his
baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to
flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance. And think not to say within your selves we have Abraham to our
father, for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. The Pharisees and Sadduces, men (especially the
Pharisees) strict in their religion, come many of them to John's Baptism, upon
this pretense and claim, that they were descended from Abraham and were his
children; that they come in this confidence and pretense, was manifest by what
John said unto them: Luke has it Luke 3.8. Begin not to say within your
selves, that is, do not take this subterfuge, to oppose to repentance, and
change of heart, which only qualifies for Baptism, that you have Abraham to
your father, Matthew says, think not to say within your selves, which notes
a persuasion of a prerogative of carnal generation, that you have Abraham to
your father; such carnal and birth prerogatives stand you in no steed in this
covenant, for of these stones God can raise up children to Abraham; that as
when Isaac was borne, who was the son of promise, Abraham's body and Saraas
womb were dead as a stone; so those which are now to be accounted the sons
of Abraham, God can raise from nothing, eve^ from stones, from the gentiles,
which you despise, and for their hardness, and distance, not in place, but in
the knowledge of God, are as stones; of such can God raise children to Abraham;
for the ordinances I pretend to are not bottomed upon carnal generation, or
privileges, but things of another nature, namely true holiness, which is seen
and manifested by the fruit it brings forth; Bring forth therefore fruit meet
for repentance.

The next place considerable to this purpose is that John, where he shows
that this excellent person the son of God, that came to bring life and light,
was rejected by the world, and after by his own, not only the world which
he had made, and in which he had showed great and sufficient evidences of
himself, knevv him not, (by which the miserable blindness of corrupt nature
appears, they can do nothing spiritual, but by a light of another kind then
theirs is, to wit, spiritual and divine) But when he came to his own they
received him not. The people of the Jews were his peculiar; he was in the
world, but he came to them, that is, first he presented himself to them,
they received him not, that is, though he were offered and showed, they took
him not to them, which shows a great deal of malice joined to blindness, by
which they resisted the holy Spirit, offering to inlighten them by words and
miracles; But least Christ should suffer as a person generally neglected and
slighted, he tells you Christ came not in vain, there were those that received
him, and made much of him, As many as received him; for now the hedge was
pulled up, the partition wall broken down; those he magnifies wonderfully, they
had this power, that is, this dignity, this privilege, as in the margent,
given them to become the sons of God; that is, though they were strangers,
and afar of naturally, yet the honor of adoption was given them, to be made,
and be the sons of God. If you ask now, but what was this receiving, or how
came this about? He tells you this was effected by faith, by believing in his
name.

But now whereas the fashion of this world in adopting children, is to respect
either the greatness of their birth, or the excellency of their parts, or some
glory of their actions, he tells you, nothing of all this moved God, but his
mere grace and will; which provoked him to do this great good to the vyldest
and unworthiest, for says he, those were borne not of bloods.

The Jews pretended the dignity of their race, that they were the seed of
Abraham, and because they drew their original from Abraham, by a series of
many successions, and so they were more noble by their antiquity, therefore he
says, bloods; this blood (says he) did them no good, and by consequence the
carnal generation from godly and just parents, will do no good (simply
considered) to entitle us to become the sons of God, or consequently to the
ordinances, which seal up that sonneship; therefore they were borne not of
bloods, nor of the will of flesh, nor of man, that is, no freewill, no
resolutions, no moral endeavors, though they should engage never so much, can
effect this birth; Nor the will of man, no heroical works, no excellency or
dignity can effect this adoption, this title, but only God; this proceeds
only from the will of God, James 1.18. Of his own will begat he us, by the
word of truth, which (by the way) should cause us to love God, who finding
nothing in us, has so freely loved us.

Here you see in the second place, that in respect of adoption and sonneship to
God, of which baptism is especially and in the first place a seal, the birth
of bloods, the descending of such parents, whether Jews or gentiles (saving
for the order of the offer as before) does no good, but we all in that matter
lie open and exposed to the free will and grace of God, so as when a Jew comes
to baptism, he must come even as we, and bring other characters with them,
then of having Abraham to his father, if he will pretend to this, or any new
Testament ordinance.

The equality in this respect will appear by that place also of Acts 10.34.35.
Then Peter opened his mouth and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons: But in every nation he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. God seemed formerly to have been a
respecter of persons; some men, as some meats, were borne clean, insomuch as
circumcision and other ordinances were their due as a birthright, those which
were Jews by nature were holy, and those that were gentiles, that is by birth,
were accounted sinners; now this acception of persons, was not a vice in God,
contrary to distributive justice, because God was not obliged to dispense his
ordinances as in any certain manner, so nor to any certain men, or to all in
general, because no man had right to them, or could merit them at his hands;
but he is free, as a rich man at a doale to give to whom he will, or a King to
his subjects, so as the acceptance of persons in this sense was once just and
according to the will and pleasure of God; But now Peter was taught by God, by
the means of the vision he had seen, to admit men to ordinances upon other
considerations, then legal denominations of clean, or unclean, namely, upon
fearing of God, and vvorking righteousness, and no other, which is a thing not
generated and conveyed by birth, but by the new birth, and the spirit of the
living God: Now this Peter expresses, I perceive of a truth, the word
signifies, to gather or collect by reasons, signs and conjectures, as Calvin
expounds it, to wit, the signs he saw before, viz. that of the vessel verse.
11. Now then you see new qualifications to denominate a man accepted of God,
and qualified for ordinances, and this in this covenant and way of worship was
common to both, without any difference, for so you have it Acts 15.9. And put
no difference betvveene us and them, purifying their hearts by faith; the purity
is not by birth as formerly. Thus you see the Jews come to Baptism, and be
called the sons of God, not by their pretention to Abraham for their father,
nor for the honor and advantage of their descent and blood; And the Gentiles
they were admitted without any consideration of persons, or personal
prerogatives in respect of their birth, but upon their fearing God, and working
righteousness, and having their hearts purified by faith; therefore the old way
and advantage of birthright, and in that respect of accepting of persons, is
ceased long ago on both sides alike.

To conclude in a word, all birth privilege is by the title of Abraham's
covenant, if therefore the natural seed of Abraham could not at all pretend
to new Testament ordinances a right by that title, much less the adopted seed
by any such way of natural generation; but if you speak of the spiritual
seed and heirs according to promise, then they and we pretend both alike in
new Testament ordinances, with this difference only, to the Jew first and then
to the Gentiles.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein is handled the fifth and last question in answer to the argument drawn
from circumcision, scil. whether Infants not prooving the subject of Baptism,
the privileges of Christians and their state, may not justly be said to be as
great as the privileges of the Jews and their state.

QVestion 5. Though infants should not prove to be the subject of Baptism,
yet whether the privileges of Christians and their state, may not justly be
said to be as great and greater then the privileges of the Jews and their
state.

No man is willing to loose by change, and our children are so great a piece of
us, as that what they loose, we feel.

It must first be affirmed that the Jews had this peculiar honor proper both
to their persons, and the land of their habitation and dwelling, their Temple
also and other ordinances, that they were types of things to come, and in that
respect were many things performed by them, and many things predicated of
them, which else would not have been, as the land was holy but typically, and
the Temple holy but typically, and all the inhabitants of all ages and degrees,
unless under a particular defilement and uncleanness, were denominated holy,
but typically also.

Now what ever was a type in that wherein it was a type, whether persons or
ordinances, etc. of all such things as types, it may be affirmed.

First that they are inferior to their antitypes, that is, to the thing
figured, or showed by them.

Secondly that they are not true in themselves, being a shadow of things to
come, but in the body or truth, which they figure or type out.

Thirdly that when the antitype, or truth is fullfilled, or performed, the type
cease; now it seems to be agreed by all hands, that not only places and
persons, ceremonies and events, were types, but the Sacraments of the Jews and
former times, were types and shadows of our Sacraments, not to instance in any
but in circumcision, as relating to and typising out Baptism, which is agreed
on all sides to be a type of our baptism, yea, so far some urge it as a type,
that they would therefore have infants baptized, because infants were
circumcised, the antitype being to answer the type; but upon how great a
mis-take they so urge it, we shall show hereafter, when we shall make that
manifest, that a great reason of the difference and not baptizing infants of
believers, arises from the consideration of the typicalnes of circumcision:
for the present though it be generally granted, yet we further make it
manifest to be a type of Baptism by examining that place Coll. 2.11.12. In
whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in
putting of the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ,
buried with him in baptism, wherein also you are risen with him through the
faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead. In this
second chapt. Paul seems to contend with diverse impugners of Christian
religion, us. 1. For I would that you know what great conflict I have for
you; and first verse. 4. he contends against oratory and enticing words, by
which their hearts might be led away and seduced; And this I say, least any man
should beguile you with enticing words, etc. then verse. 8. he argues against
Philosophers, as a vain deceit; who would judge of the things of Christ by
the elements or rudiments of the world, for none of those things extend
themselves to the mysteries of Christ, which we hold by faith, and therefore
Philosophical demonstrations any farther then they are proportionable to the
analogy of faith, are extremely deceitful, and to be bewar'de of.

In the third place he contends against those who labored to retain Jewish
ceremonies and types, verse. 10.11.12. And ye are complete in him which is the
head of all principalities and power, in whom also ye are circumcised with
the circumcision made without hands, in putting of the body of the sins of
the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism, wherein
also you are risen with him, etc. For here he shows that circumcision, which
was the profession of the whole Law, was fullfilled as a type or figure to
Christians by Christ in Baptism, and therefore that was to vanish away, as
types ought to do, when they were fullfilled; therefore he shows how we are
circumcised in Christ, which is sealed and effected by Baptism; first it is
without hands, which the legal circumcision was not, as Baptism in some sense
may be said also to be, God being the great Baptizer.

Secondly this circumcision does not deprive you only of a little skin of the
flesh, which was typical, but of the whole body of sin.

Thirdly this is not the circumcision of Moses, or of the fathers, but of
Christ, for only Christ can effect this.

Lastly all this is sealed to us and made ours by Baptism, by Baptism is
effected this circumcision, in which we are assimulated to Christ, buried and
risen again, and are sealed one with him in our death to sin and life to
holiness, so as Baptism is Christian circumcision, and then we are said to be
circumcised with the circumcision of Christ, when we are rightly baptized.

Now therefore if circumcision be a type of Baptism, as it is acknowledged and
prooved, then examine it by the former properties of a type.

And first if circumcision be a type of Baptism, then it is inferior to
Baptism, as types are to their antitypes, of which they are shadows and
figures; But if Baptism be to be administered for a seal and sign in infancy,
as circumcision was to teach and instruct hereafter, then on the other hand
their privilege was far above ours, who carried a mark in the flesh, visible
and sensible, by which they knew assuredly they were circumcised, whereas that
any of us have been sprinkled or dipped in infancy, we must receive by a humane
faith, having never our selves seen it, nor no marks to show it us, or
convince us of it; and it may well fall out, that no body may be able to assure
us of it neither; so as that ceremony may well not work upon us with any
power, of which we have so little assurance, whether it have been administered
to us or no.

Besides that a man had a Jew to his father, was the assured qualification for
circumcision, which a man might know as well as his own father; but for
Baptism I must believe my parents was godly, if I will be assured of my
qualification, which arises from the faith (as they say) of one parent, (for
it will not now go down so easily as it has done, that a profession of
Christianity only at large will qualify for deriving right to Baptism) now
this is a thing which possibly may be very hard for me to ascertain from my
own knowledge, or the knowledge of any others, but perhaps I must be put to
dispute as well my right to baptism, as the matter of fact that I had it,
which yet according to the right notion of that ordinance, is to be the rise of
much comfort and instruction to me.

After all this consider how weakly will the operation of such a ceremony or
sign fall upon me, where in there will be need of faith to believe that I had
right to it, or that I had it at all. Now then if the type be inferior to the
antitype, we must never allow it great and essential superiorities, as it
would certainly have, if infants were to be baptized, as formerly they were
circumcised; this therefore according to what has been said, not being
possibly to be avoided, that if infants be to be baptized, they will fall below
in such Baptism the privileges and advantages of circumcision, which is
contrary to the nature of a type, it must then follow that therefore they are
not to be baptized, and therefore baptism was never intended them; this being
most assured, that it far excells that of the Jews, as the antitype does
that which typifies it, and figures it out.

Secondly it is affirmed of types that they were not true in themselves, being
a shadow of things to come, but in the body or truth which they figure or type
out, so the escape goat, the Pascall lamb, etc. apply this from circumcision
of infants the type to the antitype baptism, with its subject; the infants
generally of the Jews no more then the land were not truly and properly holy
and saints, but types of such, the administering it to males of such an age,
and to males only, shows as much, when as it might have been administered to
women, as Peter Martyr affirms out of Ambrose, the Egyptians do, and the
Iacobites, a certain sect of Christians inhabiting Cyprus, Syria, etc. in great
numbers, and others do to this day; Now had it not been for the types sake,
what probable reason can be given, why women, who must be acknowledged within
the covenant as well as men, should not be circumcised, which they were capable
of, as appears by what is recorded of fact, for what is done by whole nations
and people, might have been done by Gods command, or the Lord could have pitched
upon another ceremony, which would have fitted women in the administration of
it, if that would not; But as it is acknowledged that circumcision typified
Baptism, so the subject of the one the subject of the other, to wit, a male a
believer, or one who is in Christ the son of God: Therefore baptism is
better the^ circumcision, and our state better then theirs, though infants have
it not; nay the betternesse lies in this, that by baptizing believers, so
known and received, we have the substance of what they had but in the shadow
and type, to wit, a male infant, the subject of that ordinance, we a believer
the subject of ours.

The third thing predicated of types is, that when the antitype or truth is
fullfilled and performed, the type cease: Apply this to the case of
circumcision and baptism: The Lord now making up his churches of saints really
so and no other (as far as we can judge by the rules he gives us to judge by)
those who by virtue of their typeship were accounted holy, and the subject of
ordinances, to wit, a certain generation of men and their infants are now no
more to be esteemed so, nor is any thing to succeed, or come in place of such
an administration, but that which is the truth and substance of it, to wit,
believers, and such as in whom Christ is formed, which the other seemed to
typify and shadow; and to do otherwise, were to bring your selves to the
beggarly administrations of types and shadows, when you have the substance and
antitype, out of a desire to go equal with the Jews in privileges, whereas
in this way propounded, ye are infinitely above them.

To conclude out of what has been said, their state had the honor of the
type, ours of the antitype, they of the shadow or figure, but we of the body;
our children no more then our land or temples, hold out shadows of things to
come: In the mean time we have Christ amongst us, and are his temple; we
have the body, Coloss. 2.17. others were a shadovv of things to come, but the
body is of Christ. And Heb. 10.1. The law had a shadovv of good things to
come, and not so much as the image of them. And our condition being not to hold
out types and figures, our infants have no such administration used to them, as
formerly the Jews had in an age when it can proffit them noe otherwise, but in
making them types. And if this be an unhappynes, ye may as well count it an
unhappynes that our land is not typical, or our temples or days of worship:
But we have Christ amongst us for our seed, as well as for our selves. And
consider this that by all that is said, we reject no promises made to the
children in consideration of Gods love, or affection to their parents; but we
embrace them, and expect, and pray for the fullfilling of them, only we do
not by precipitating the administration of an ordinance to our children, beyond
the institution and before the time of it, render that which is intended for so
much comfort and use, both unproffitable and uncomfortable to them, and
assimulate them to the pedagogy and similitude of types.

And lastly that we may look upon this in the glass of other things, no man
holds the condition and state of our Ministers less blessed, then that of the
Jewish church, yet the Priests and Levits then had this peculiar, that their
state was successive, and derived from father to son, which ours we know is
not. And not only so, but their church state also was successive, a man was
borne a member of the Jewish church, and by his birthright had a title to all
church ordinances, as his age made him capable of them, but the children of
Christians however they are baptized at aventure, yet not only many churches
we take notice of now a days, as pretending to a more strict reformation,
require also a personal and particular admission, for the instating them into
the Church as members, but others also (and those particularly of the united
Provinces) do the like, not only in relation to the children of Christians,
strangers to them, but to those borne of their own members; Since therefore
neither our ministry, nor our church state suffers, in wanting the power of
deriving ministers or members, by way of succession, it should less stick with
any that they cannot derive a right to Baptism to their children that way; on
the other side, we should glory in our privileges, and think our selves more
then recompensed, that in steed of the honor of types, which is a thing common
to men, with beasts and countries, we have the body and substance of that, of
which in old time they had but the shadow, and not so much as the image, Heb.
10.1.

CHAP. XIV. In which is considered that famous and much urged place of 1. Cor.
7.14. Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy.
HAving thus largely vindicated this great Gospel ordinance, from those
objections that the parallel of Circumcision seem to make against it, in the
administration of it to an actual believer only, and by the way cleared
diverse places that use to be debated in this argument, and particularly that of
2. of the Acts 38.39. Reason and good manners require, that that famous and
much urged place of 1. Corint. 7.14. should have its turn for consideration,
to it therefore we now address our discourse, the words are these, For the
unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is
sanctified by the husband, else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy.

The great drift of this place seems to be to exhort believers to abide in
that calling or condition, wherein religion finds them, and to inform them,
that that laid no law or necessity upon them, of a change, verse. 20. Let every
man abide in the same calling wherein he was called; art thou called being a
servant, care not for it, etc. In which verses he gives an account and
satisfaction to servants, which he had done before to married persons,
concerning the communion of man and woman for the use of the bed; there were
two things which seemed especially to render it unclean and unholy, both in
respect of the parties themselves, and of the issue of their bodies, one was
the polluting of the marriage bed by adultery; therefore God made one man and
woman, that there might be a holy seed, when he had abundance of the spirit,
and could have made more, that the converse might be holy, that is, within
those bounds and limits, and their seed holy, that is, not spurious and
bastardly, Mal. 2.15.

The other was the being unequally yoaked with unbeleevers and Idolaters, which
amongst the Jews rendered the marriage and the fruit of the womb so unclean
and unholy, that there was to be a separation and devorce between the husband
and the wife, and the children also of such births were to be put away as
unholy, as appears Ezra 10.2.3.

And that the course of the Apostles doctrine was against this unequal yoaking
with unbeleevers, appears by what he says 2. Cor. 6.14. Be ye not unequally
yoaked with unbeleevers, which intends particularly though perhaps not
principally marriage, as some would have it; it was but therefore needful to
inlighten and clear this great objection, which would lie as a bar in their
way, to the comfortable enjoyment of that relation, in regard of their
yoakefellowes and children; to those people therefore that seem to fall under
such a capacity and condition, the Apostle speaks verse. 12. to the rest speak
I, etc. that is, to these which are of a different religion and worship (having
considered others before) and what says he to them? he relieves them against
a great evil, that they might fear would fall upon them, which is that they
must part with their wives, or husbands, that are unbeleevers, and by
consequence also with the births of such a bed: He tells them there is no
necessity of such a parting, but that they may abide in the condition wherein
they were called, s. 20.21. Religion breaks no bonds, no civil contracts, ties
or subordinations, which in themselves are not simply, and by the law of nature
unlawful. Adultery were a state out of which religion would call you, as being
simply unlawful, and against the law of nature; but the state of marriage,
which is honorable amongst all men, and holy in it self, is not dissolved, or
rendered unholy, by the conversion of any party, but on the other side, it still
remaynes a holy and sanctified state, to the believer (for to the pure all
things are pure, that are not naturally and by themselves sinful or impure) as
on the contrary, even lawful marriages, and the most justifiable things, are
impure to the unbeleevers, to whom nothing is pure, their minds and consciences
being defiled, therefore says he, the unbeleeving husband is sanctified in the
wife, or to the wife: Sanctification being here opposed to that which is
impure and unclean, that is, contrary to the law of God; so that the whole
marriage converse, is by the faith of the believer rendered pure and clean, as
also are their children, though borne of an unbeleever on one side, which if
the marriage converse were unclean, would be unholy or unsanctified, they also
are holy, for so it follows, Else were your children unclean, but now are
they holy.

Here seems to be two arguments, though very much alike and near of kin,
why there should not be a putting away of the man's side, or a leaving on the
woman's, if either of them be a believer, the one is from the holiness of the
unbeleeving yoake-fellow, the other from the holiness of the births of such a
bed, which are both rendered so, that is sanctified or holy to their use, by the
faith of one party: where mark that the question is not here of infants only,
but of children in general, though of age, which are as capable of being
sanctified by the believers faith, and to the believer, though themselves were
unbeleevers, as the unbeleeving wife, or the unbeleeving husband is; And as the
word children, extends it self beyond infants to all children, so the word holy
(which is of the same kind with that which in this verse is attributed to the
husband or wife) is as applyable to a child of years, and not believing as to
an unbeleeving husband or wife; And of such a holy child there will be no great
cause to boast, as of a fit subject for Baptism.

This I take to be the genuine interpretation of this place, which seems to
exhort as much as may be, to an abiding in the condition, wherein religion
finds them, as appears by the 17.18.19.20. verses, and answers the great
objection, which might arise from unequal matches in respect of their
yoake-fellowes and their children.

Another interpretation there is, which you may consider also, which seems to
take its rise from the words before, And she be pleased to dvvell with him,
s. 12. And he be pleased to dvvell with her, s. 13. So as the reason why the
believer sanctifies the unbeleever not simply, but in respect of marriage, is
from the pleasure and willingness of the unbeleever to co-habite with the
believing husband or wife; for the Apostle would seem to intimate, that such a
kind of consent to co-habite, by which the unbeleever seems not to abhor
the faith of Christ, and a spiritual life in the believing wife or husband,
will cause or effect, that he shall not abominate also the Christian education
of their children, so as in this respect the unbeleevinge husband or wife, and
the children also though themselves for the present unbeleevers, by reason of
the willingness of the one to cohabite, and the subjection of the other to
Christian education, may in that sense be said to be sanctified, or made holy,
being as it were deputed to it, and in the way of preparation for it, so as the
unbeleeving parent and the children of that mixed birth, may be called as
Tertullian says, Candidati timoris; and as afterward by others, Candidati
fidei, Probationers or compettitors, for fear and faith; the words following
verse. 16. seems to favor such an interpretation, For what know thou O
wife, whether thou shall save thy husband, or how know thou O man,
whether thou shall save thy wife; there being already wrought a good
pleasure, or willingness to abide and cohabite on the unbeleevers part, husband
or wife, and the children in that respect being subjected to Christian
education, and to the beholding of holy examples, true co^version and faith,
which brings them into estate of salvation, may be in time accomplished in them,
to which they seem in some sort destined by the providence of God, in such a
yoake-fellow, or such parents. So sanctification is predicated of those who are
destined, or prepared to such an end; so God says of the Medes and Persians
Esaias. 13.3. I have commanded my sanctified ones, that is, such as I have
prepared, for so Calvin upon that place says, that sometimes sanctification is
referred to regeneration, which is peculiar to the elect of God; sometimes it
signifies to prepare or destine to a certain end; so those unbeleeving parents
by their willingness to abide with believers, and their children in regard of
the opportunity of a holy education, seem to be as it were destined or
prepared for regeneration, and for that state which accompanies salvation; and
in that respect as in a large sense, may be called sanctified or holy. Which
consideration, if it may give them a greater access to ordinances proper for
them, or stir up others to lay out themselves in a more peculiar and
particular manner for their conversion, I shall not hinder it; but on the
contrary think that such providence speak much, and that as they give
grounds of hope, and so of endeavor, so there may be much of duty toward
them, in regard of the opportunity that families and churches, that parents,
masters and ministers have to do good to such, who though strictly they may
not be called church members, no more then strictly sanctified, that is,
regenerated by the holy Spirit, yet so far as in the respects before
mentioned, they may be termed sanctified, that is, by a providence destined as
it were and prepared for God, so far the church within whose pole they seem
by a providence to live, and to be cast, ought to have a more especial eye
after them, and care of them, by virtue at least of that general injunction,
As you have opportunity do good to all men, especially to the household of
faith; under the shadow of which these are come.

But whether you take either of these senses, or both, for they may both stand
in several respects, and regarding the text with a different aspect, you will
surely find nothing to ingraft Baptism upon.

For whether the children are sanctified to the believing parents use, as all
other things are (not unholy in themselves) which to the unbeleever are not, or
whether in the second sense they are sanctified, that is, as it were destined
for holiness, of which by virtue of a great providence, in respect of their
education, they are made Candidati, that is, probationers or competitors, as
when men stand for a place or office, and as the Catechumini of old were
called, yet can they by no means in either of these respects be qualified for,
or made the subject of Baptism, which presupposes, as has formerly been
showed, another kind of holiness proper to, and inherent in the party, namely
regeneration and nevvnes of life; not such an one as is competible to an
unbeleever, either parents, or children.

It was but necessary to speak something to this place, which bears amongst
many the weight of so great a building as infant Baptism, though if I could
find here such a holiness for infants, as we all wish to ours, namely
justifying faith and regeneration, yet I should no more judge it meet to
baptize them, then to preach to them, or to administer the Lords supper to
them, they being as capable of the word as baptism, and of one mysterious
ceremony as well as another; which has been a reason, I doubt not, why many
formerly, and many at this day do administer the Lords supper to infants, by
virtue of a parallel ordinance to Baptism: Nor do I know the reason why the
one should be refused, where the other is deemed a due. But enough I hope for
this, which truly the contests of others, rather then any scruple, which has
fallen upon my spirit from these words, has made me say so much of.

CHAP. XV. In which the authority of the Fathers, and the practice of
antiquity, touching the subject of Baptism, is considered.
THe authority of the Fathers, and the practice of ancient times, is to many a
great argument for the Baptizing of infants; to me that look upon such
argumentations, as not of the first magnitude, collateral, and such as may
truly and as often be brought, for the patronising of errors as truth, they
are of no great consideration, yet to satisfy others more then my self, there
must be something spoken to this head.

In which I shall consider especially these two things, first whether by the
witness of story, Infant Baptism have enjoyed a quiet and peaceable
possession in the church, from the Apostles times downward, till of late it
was interrupted by some few evil spirits in the times of Luther, as some men
would give us to believe.

Secondly upon what grounds those Fathers, which are alleged for the chief
patrons of Infants Baptism went; for if they have erred in the reason of the
foundation, it will be easilyer believed, that they did also in the building.

We will consider first of this latter.

I will give you their grounds, either as I have read them my self, or as I
find them quoted by Bellarmine Tom. 3. lib. cap. 8. whose quotatio^s I shall
take for truth, till I find the contrary, for here he has to do with the
Anabaptists, enemies in this point alike common to him, with most of those that
are termed Protestants.

First he quotes the testimony Dionisij Areop. qui lib. Eccles. Hier. c. ult.
part ult. ab Apostolis traditum affirmat, ut infantes baptizentur. Iusti. five
quicunque est auctor earum quaest. qu. 56. parvulos baptizatos salvari alios
non item; That infants baptized are saved, others not.

Orig. lib. 5. in cap. 6. ad Romans Ecclesia inquit ab Apostolis traditionem
accepit, etiam parvulis dare Baptismum. The Church says he received a
tradition from the Apostles, to give Baptism to infants. Cypr. lib. 3. Ep. 8.
ad Fidum scribit, Non solum sibi, sed etiam integro consilio visum esse
parvulos baptizariposse: That it seemed good, not only to himself, but to a
whole council that infants might be baptized, even before the 8. day. In
other places the same author affirms, Baptism simply necessary to salvation,
and that it vvashes away original sin, so as it is never more to be
imputed. page 470. a.

Hierom. lib. contr. Pelag. Infantes baptizari dicit, and tum ommpeccato
carere: That infants are to be baptized, and then they are without all sin.

Aust. lib. 10. de Genesis cap. 23. Consuetudo inquit matris Ecclesiae Baptizandis
parvulis, nequaquam sparnenda est, nec illo modo superflua deputanda, nec
omnino credenda, nisi Apostolica esset traditio. The custom of our mother the
church in Baptizing little children, is not to be despised, nor to be judged
superfluous, nor to be believed at all, unles it were an Apostolical
tradition.

The same Austin, As for the authority of infant Baptism, he flies to
tradition, so for the reason of it he bottomes it upon this, that they neither
have faith to save them, nor a Sacrament instead of faith without Baptism,
and therefore judges them to eternal death, unles they be taken out of the
world by martyrdom, as the learned Forbes has observed in his 10. book
Instruct. Histor. in Theol. cap. 5. lib. 7. only Austin says, they shall be
in damnatione omnium mitissima multum autem fallere and falli, qui eos in
damnatione praedicat non futuros; They shall be in the easiest damnation of all
others, but he much deceaves himself and others that teaches they shall not be
condemned, lib. 1. de peccat. meritis and remissione cap. 16. and lib. 5.
contra Julian cap. 8. but as gentle or as easy as damnation is, it is such as
the wrath of God remains upon them, lib. 3. de peccatorum meritis and
remissione cap. 20. They go into the second death, lib. de bono perseverantiae
cap. 12. And they are children of wrath, lib. 6. contra Julian cap. 3.

Bernard also was of this same mind Epist. 77. Sane, inquit, omnes infantes
qui hanc prohibente aetate non possunt habere fidem, hoc est, cordis ad Deum
conversionem, consequente nec salutem, si absque baptismis perceptione
moriuntur. Certainly, says he, all infants, who their age hindering them,
cannot have this faith, that is, the conversion of their hearts to God, neither
consequently can they have salvation, if they dye without the partaking of
Baptism.

More of this and of the same kind might be alleged, but these shall suffice.

Before we go any farther, we must consider here, what is meant by
traditions, which in the former quotatio^s you hear so often mentioned.

The name of Tradition in it self is general, and signifies all doctrines,
either written, or not written, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Hold the traditions which
you have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle.

But the name Tradition is accommodated by Divines, to signify only a doctrine
not written, so Irenaeus is quoted lib. 3. cap. 2. Evenit, inquit, neque
Scripturis, neque traditioni consentire eos. They would neither consent to
Scripture, nor tradition.

So Tertull. lib. de corona militis, Si legem postules Scripturam nullam
invenies, traditio tibi praetenditur auctrix: If you look for a law, ye
shall find no Scripture, but tradition is pretended, as that which authoriseth.

Now that is called a doctrine not written (says Bellarmine) not which is
no where written, but which is not written by the first author, and he
gives the instance of infant Baptism: It is called an Apostolical tradition
not written, because it is not found written in any Apostolical book,
although it be written (as he affirms) in the books of almost all the
ancient Fathers. Tom. 1. lib. 4. cap. 2. b.

And by the way, why Bellarmine could not find Baptism written in the Apostles
writings, if there it were, as well as other men, I know not; for he wants no
accutenes in his sight, but when he is corrupted by his ends, and it suites
with his end abundantly to prove infant Baptism as strongly as he can,
because none judge it so necessary to the world as he, and those of his
religion do.

You see therefore by traditions here, meant things not found written in the
Scripture, yet for their antiquity supposed to be Apostolical, which if they
were allowed and received, what a miserable confusion should we be brought
into in matters of religion, and how under the notion of ancient traditions
should we worship God in vain, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men, Matt. 15.9. Matthew. 16.6. Christ bids us take heed of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which was their unwritten traditions, and we are commanded to obey
God not men, Acts 5.29. And if any man bring us any other doctrine, he is to be
accursed, Gal. 1.9. This has been the opinion of holy men in all ages. Luther
on the first of the Galat. There ought no other doctrine to be delivered, or
heard in the church, besides the pure word of God, that is, the holy
Scriptures; let other teachers and hearers with their doctrine be accursed. So
Calv. lib. 4. Inst. cap. 8. s. 8. Let this be a firm axiom, nothing is to be
accounted for the word of God, to which place should be given in the church,
but that which is first contained in the Law and the Prophets, and after in
Apostolical vvritings.

But because we are in a way of quotatio^, it will not be amiss to give you
the judgment of some more ancient concerning this matter; and we will give
them as they are given by Chemnit. in his exam. of the counscell of Trent, and
quoted also by Bellarmine in order to his confutation of them, I shall give but
a few. One is of Origin in cap. 3. ad Romans etc. Necesse nobis est, inquit,
Scripturas sanctas in testimonium vocare, sensus quippe nostri and
enarrationes, sine his testibus non habent fidem. It is necessary for us to
call the holy Scriptures to witness, because our senses and narrations without
those vvitnesses, have no credit.

So Constantin the Emperor, who in the Counscell of Nice, as Theodoret
witnesses lib. 1. cap. 17. says thus, Euangelici and Apostolici libri and
antiquorum Prophetarum oracula plane instruunt nos, quid de rebus divinis
sentiendum sit; Proinde hostili posita discordia in verbis divinitus inspiratis
sumamus quaestionum explicationes. The Evangelical and Apostolical books,
and the oracles of the ancient Prophets, plainly instruct us what we should
think of divine things; Therefore all hostile discord laid aside, let us
take the explication of questions from words divinely inspired.

Then Athanasius lib. contragent. Sufficient divinae, and divinitus inspiratae
Scripturae ad omnem instructionem veritatis; The holy and divinely inspired
Scriptures, suffice to all instructions of truth.

Then Basil. in sermon. de fidei confess. Infidelitatis argumentum fuerit, and
signum superbiae certissimum, si quis eorum quae scripta sunt, aliquid velit
rejicere aut eorum quae non scripta introducere. It would be an argument of
infidelity, and a most certain sign of pride, if any man should reject things
written, or should introduce things not written.

Also Cyril. lib. de recta fide. Necessarium nobis est divinas sequi literas,
and in nullo ab eorum praescripto discedere. It is necessary for us to follovv
the divine letters, and in nothing to depart from their prescript.

So Theoph. lib. 2. Paschali. Diabolici spiritus est, aliquid extra
Scripturarum sacrarum auctoritatem putare divinum. It is the part of a
diabolical spirit, to think any thing divine without the authority of holy
Scriptures.

So Tertull. lib. contra Hermogenum, Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, scriptum
esse doceat Hermogenis officina, si non scriptum est, timeat vae illud
adjicientibus, vel detrahentibus destinatum. I adore the fullnes of the
Scripture, let Hermogenes show that it is written; if it be not written, let
him fear the vvo destined to those which add or detract.

The end of all that has been said amounts to this, that those Fathers, or
Churches, that took up and practiced Baptism as an Apostolical tradition,
that is, a thing not written, nor found in the word, but for the antiquity sake
called Apostolical (as those forequoted did, and most will be found to have
done, that being their best plea) are justly to be reputed ours, and of our
side, for they judge it not from Scripture, and therefore are forced to fetch
the rise of it from tradition; which tradition, because it will not bear the
weight of an institution, as you have heard, therefore the whole building is to
fall, which is falsely bottomed, and their authority upon that ground is
nothing, saving that by flying for a bottom, and refuge to tradition, they do
with us affirm, that there is no better ground for infant Baptism then humane
tradition, which is indeed none at all. So as you find how all these
testimonies and authorities, and many of the same kind become ours. And here by
the way I am not ignorant, that some of ours, whofeele themselves pressed by the
Papists, as if they admitted of a tradition in this ordinance of Baptism,
which they refuse in others, and being loath to loose the authority of the
Fathers in this point, who put it upon tradition, as upon its proper basis,
would feign wrest their neck out of this noose, and therefore show you also
how the Fathers fastened it upon some Scripture ground, so Chemnit. in his
answer of Lindan. Exam. Council. Tridentin. de Trad. p. 69. To which I answer
according to truth, that the forequoted Fathers fastened Baptism upon
tradition, as upon its own ground and basis, being no more able then other men
to find a word of institution for that which had none, and for the credit of
the tradition, calling that Apostolical, which they found ancient, which as
the same Chemnitius acknowledges was an ordinary practice in other things, but
withal some of them give some ground of Scripture of their own framing for
the color of such a tradition; so Origin, Iraeneus, Cyprian and those others,
quoted by Chemnitius to this purpose, which reatch not to any word of
institution, but to the reason of it, as Origin says, That the Apostles knevv
that there were in all the stayne of sin, which ought to be vvasht by
water and by the spirit. So Cyprian, When the Lord says in the Gospel, he
came not to destroy the souls of men, but to save, we also should prevent as
much as may be, that no soul be lost. For God as he accepts not the person, so
nor the age. I shall give you no more, this only for a taste. Now those I said
are no words of institution, but some general reason as they conceave, and
does not at all hinder, but that Apostolical tradition, as they call it,
bears the weight of the institution; I deny not but that there has been such
a thing as the tradition of Christ, and Apostolical tradition, which are of
the highest and greatest authority, but they were such things as afterward
were committed to writing by the Evangelists and Apostles, as Chemnitius well
observes p. 61. and other traditions of Christ and his Apostles, we avow none,
but esteem them all Apocryphal.

Again for those Fathers and ancient writers, together with the Papists and
Lutherans, that judged Baptism simply necessary to salvation, and some of them
condemning infants to eternal damnation without it, as Austin, Bernard etc.
(unless they were happily rescued by martyrdom) you see what necessity lay
upon them to deffend infant Baptism, but upon a most false ground, namely the
necessity of it to salvation, which failing as we know it does, we may see
both how they might be tempted and necessitated to such an opinion, and what
good reason there is, why their foundation and building should fall together.
And if any man shall here object as before in the case of traditions, that this
peremptory necessity to salvation, was indeed a false hypothesis, or
supposition, not fit to bear the weight of infant Baptism; but that the
Fathers also might possibly have other mediums, by which to prove this, as
those before instanced in. I answer, that the weakness of those mediums or any
other I have met withal in this particular, as alleged by them, declare
plainly that there was some other great thing, which enforced them to it,
namely the necessity of it to salvation, as when we see wise men contend
earnestly for that, for which they give no good visible or apparent reason; it
may well be conceived, that there is something of interest, which supplies to
them the want of reason, and this interest of the salvation of our children
sitts so near us, as it may bear the weight of many reasons, and cause us to
admit conclusions, though of great moment and concernement upon very easy
considerations. So as we have fully examined this head, namely upon what
grounds the Fathers, which are alleged for the chief patrons of infant
baptism, went and have found that so many as build it upon tradition, as
generally all do, are of our side, for, avouching that, for their best
authority they acknowledge there is no better, to wit, the Scripture; and so
conclude with us, that Baptism of infants is not an institution of God, which
has the Scripture for its foundation.

And those which give it to infants, because it is simply necessary to
salvation, will be of no authority against us, nor of no credit to their cause,
because the building must be levelled according to the foundation, and that
being false, they are necessitated to the mistake of their building.

To conclude, if there were any force left in these authorities for infant
Baptism, as I conceave there is not, why should it not regulate our practife
in the other Sacrament, to give that to infants, which was ancient, and of use
in many churches, as well as the other, as it remaynes also in some to this
day, and it is like would in more, had not Popish superstition given the supper
the start of Baptism, to such a degree as to make it not so much the sign and
representation of Christ, as Christ himself, and the very Protestants
themselves, are so respective to this Sacrament of the Supper above the other,
as to give it as a reason, why it should not be administered to infants, least
it should fall in contempt. Hosp. Hist. Sacram. p. 60.

We shall produce some testimonies that the Supper was administered to infants
as well as Baptism, as necessary to salvation, and if antiquity be to be
esteemed a great argument for the administering of one Sacrament, why not of the
other.

For this Hospinian in his second book Histo. Sacram. pa. 59. quotes Cyprian
Se. 5. de lapsis, and affirms also that Jerome, Aust. and other Fathers
witness, that those which were baptized not only of age, but also infants
without any delay received the holy mysteries under both signs.

So Jerome against the Luciferians, Non potest, inquit, Baptima tradere sine
Eucharistia. Baptism must not be given without the Eucharist.

And Aust. lib. de Dogm. Eccles. cap. 52. Siparvuli sunt (ait) vel hebetes qui
doctrinam non capiant, respondeant pro illis qui eos offerunt, juxta morem
baptizandi, and sic manus impositione at Chrismate communiti, Eucharistiae
mysteriis admittantur. If they be little (says he) or dull, which are not
capable of doctrine, let those answer for them, which offer them according to
the custom of baptizing, and so being fortified by Chrisme, and imposition of
hands, let them be admitted to the mystery of the Euchariste.

Also Epist. 107. he speaks thus, Infantes si in illa parva aetate moriuntur,
utique secundum ea quae per corpus gesserunt, id est, tempore quo in corpore
fuerunt, quando per corda, and ora gestantium crediderunt, vel non quando
baptizati, vel non baptizati sunt, quando carnem Christi manducaverunt, vel non
manducaverunt, quando and sanguinem biberunt, vel non biberunt, secundum haec
ergo quae per corpus gesserunt, non secundum ea quae si diu hic viverent
gesturi fuerant judicantur. Infants if they dye in that young age, are judged
according to that which they have done by the body, that is, in the time in
the which they were in the body, when by the hearts and mouths of those
that carried them, they believed or not believed, when they were baptized, or
not baptized, when they did eat the flesh of Christ, or not eat it, when they
drunk his blood, or not drunk it; according therefore to those things which
they did by the body, they are to be judged not according to those, which if
they had lived long, they would have done. So lib. 5. Hypognosticon cont.
Pelag. Quomodo, inquit, vita regni caelorum parvulis promittitur, non renatis
ex aqua and Spiritusancto, non cibatis carne, atque non potatis sanguine
Christi, qui in remissionem peccatorum fusus est? How (says he) is the
kingdom of heaven promised to children, not renewed by water and the holy
Ghost, not fed with the flesh, and made to drink of the blood of Christ,
which is shed for the remission of sins.

This custom received of old, so far prevayled afterward, especially in the
time of Charles the Great, that not only the Eucharist was communicated to
infants, in the public assembly of the church after Baptism, or at other
times, when they were wont to come together for the Lords Supper, but also the
bread of the Supper was kept to be communicated and given to sick children, as
well as to those of years: for this Hospinnian quotes Canonem Carolinum lib.
1. de legib. Francorum in these words, Presbyter Eucharistiam semper habeat
paratam, ut quando quis infirmatus fuerit, aut parvulus infirmus fuerit, statim
eum communicet, ne sine communione moriatur: Let the Presbyter have the
Eucharist ever ready, that when any is vveake, or when a little child shall
be vveake or sick, he may presently communicate him, least he should dye
without communion.

Amongst the Aethiopians as Osorius witnesses in his 9. book de gestis
Emmanuelis, Infants in the same day that they are initiated to holy things,
take the Eucharist in a bitt of bread: Hospinian also affirms, that not many
years ago, there were relics of this custom in Lorrayne, and the places
adjoining; for when an infant was to be baptized, the Priest, who baptized
him, brought a little box in which was the Sacrament to the Alter, and
shevved one Host, as they call it, to the people; then he put it in the box
again, and reatches forth his two fingers, with which he had tucht it, to
be vvasht with wine by the Clarke or Church-vvarden, and distills of that
wine into the mouth of the baptized Infant, saying, The blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ proffit thee unto eternal life.

Also at this day, as Brerewood in his learned inquiries, touching the
diversity of Religion, affirms, The Supper is admninistred to Infants
immediately after their Baptism in both kinds by the Iacobits, a people
called by that name, which are in great numbers in Syria, Cyprus, Mesopotamia,
Babylon and Palestine; for the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who keeps his
residence still in Jerusalem, in which City there still remain ten or more
churches of Christians, is also a Iacobite. Also the Cophty (which are the
Christians in Egypt, for it is a name of their nation, rather then of their
religion) do the same, namely give the Sacrament of the Eucharist to infants
presently after Baptism.

The like do the Christians termed Habassines, which are the midland
Aethiopians.

As also the Armenians, Christians dispersed for trade through the Turkish
Empire, but inhabiting especially Armenia the greater, and the lesser, and
Cylicia.

More might be quoted and are by Brerewood in those his collections.

Now the reason why the Papists have quitted this practice (out of whose
rubbish we drew our reformation, as being once involved in that lump and
confusion) seems to me to appear out of their Tridentine constitutions, Trid.
Council. sec. 5. where it is affirmed; Parvulos usu rationis carentes nulla
obligari necessitate ad Sacramentalem Eucharistiae communionem, si quidem per
Baptismi lavacrum regenerati, and Christo incorporati, adeptam suam Filiorum
Dei gratiam, in illa aetate amittere non possunt. That children, which want
the use of reason, are by no necessity obliged to the Sacramental communion of
the Eucharist; for as much as being regenerate by the laver of Baptism, and
incorporated into Christ, in that age, they cannot loose that state of
sonneship already obtained; so that grace being necessarily conferred to them,
according to their opinion by baptism, which they cannot loose if they would
in that age, they think they need not the other till they come to be capable
of sinning and falling away. Besides the high and transcendent notion they have
put upon the Lords Supper, by making it to be the very body and blood of
Christ, may justly apologize for them that they make it not childrens play.

And even that differencing of those two Sacraments by way of preferrence,
sticks close still to our fingers, of which there are undoubted characters in
the greatest part of reformed Churches.

All this has been to show, that if you will take primitive practice, and
antiquity for your guide, that will lead you as well into the administering of
the Supper to infants as Baptism, and if it fail by your own judgment in
the one, you may very well suspect it in the other; for my part, I see not why
the Sacrament of the Supper should be of a greater mystery then the other, or
the ceremony more significant, or that the duty of examining should need more
the use of reason, then believing, repenting and confessing our sins. And
since it is as natural and proper to infancy to be nourisht, as to be borne, I
see not but why they should be as capable of the ceremony of their nourishment,
as of their birth, and so of one Sacrament as well as the other. You see how
needful it is to examine the reasons, as well as the opinions of men, an
immoderate veneration of antiquity has well nigh undone the world, the Fathers
with some far fetched Scripture allusion or gloss, has been enabled to
establish ordinances of institution, and enforce practice apparently very
diverse from reason, and Apostolical president, and which since by consequences
have stuffed books with so many ridiculous disputes in this point, as
forsooth, whether the child being wholly in the womb, and no part appearing
it may be baptized, or whether if any part appear without, it may be baptized,
especially if it be the head, or the hand, or the foot, whether if it be borne
with the after birth, or whether if it be a monster, it may be baptized, with
several of the like nature, which have miserably tormented the Schoolmen, and
are the births of such a premises, it being the nature of error to be
fertile, and if you grant one fundamental absurdity, a thousand will follow.

And so much for the first head I propounded in this argument of authority,
namely upon what grounds the fathers that are alleged, for the chief patro^s
of infant Baptism, went.

The second wherein I shall be brief (for we build not much upon this
bottom) was, whether infant Baptism have enjoyed a quiet and peaceable
possession in the Church from the Apostles time downward, till of late it was
interrupted (as is affirmed) by certain unquiet spirits in the days of Luther.

Though no prescription will lie good against God, yet I am of opinion, that if
the possession of infant Baptism has been very ancient (which I doubt of) yet
the enjoyment has not been anciently so peaceable, as some would make us
believe.

Let them who list or can confute Ludovicus Vives, who affirms in cap. 27.
lib. 1. de civitate Dei; Neminem olim consuevisse baptizari nisi adulta aetate,
and qui per se peteret baptismum, and intelligeret quid sit baptizari. None of
old (by which it seems he meant very old) were wont to be baptized but in a
full or grown age, and who desired Baptism for themselves, and understood
what it was to be baptized. I find also Rupertus Tuitiensis in his 4. book
of divine offices cap. 14. quoted to have said, In former times the custom of
the primitive Churches was, that they administered not the Sacrament of
regeneration, but only at the feast of Easter and Pentecost, and all the
children of the church, which throughout the whole year, through the word
were moved, when Easter came gave up their names, and were the follovving
days till Pentecost instructed in the rules of faith, rehearsed the same, and
by their Baptism, and dying thus with Christ, rose again with him.

So the famous Erasmus, as I find him quoted in his annotations upon the 5. of
the Romans, affirms, that baptizing of children was not in use in Paul's
time. And our Doctor Field in his learned Treatise of the Church p. 729.
affirms, that many very anciently, who were borne of Christian parents,
besides those who were converted from Paganism, put of their Baptism a long
time, insomuch as some were elected Bishops, before they were baptized, as
we read (says he) of Ambrose; to prove which he quotes Ruffinus lib. 2.
cap. 11. But to come more particularly to a few ancient and authentic
proofs, with which I shall content my self.

He that shall read Justin Martyr, who lived about Anno 150. and is believed
to have been converted to Christ within 30. years after the Apostle John, when
it is credible also very many were living, who had been frequent auditors of
the Apostles, he, I say, who should consider in secunda pro Christianis
Apologia, the description he makes of the manner of Christian Baptism, would
surely not pick out of it the Baptizing of Infants, as the most usual and
ordinary practice of those times; its worth the relating at large, being of so
great Antiquity; I will now tell you, says he, how we dedicate our selves
to God, being renewed by Christ, least if we should have past by this, we
should seem to deal malignantly, and dissemblingly in this discourse; who
ever have been persuaded, and have believed that those things are true, which
are delivered and spoken by us, and have engaged themselves to live
accordingly, they are taught to pray with fasting, and to beg of God the
remission of all their past sins, we also praying and fasting with them,
then they are brought to us, where there is water, and in the same manner of
regeneration, with which we are regenerated, they are regenerated; for in
the name of our Lord God the parent of all things, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ and of the holy Spirit, they are then vvasht with water. Nor is it any
prejudice to this testimony (by which as by way of Apology, the regular and
ordinary way of Baptism is declared) that I find him quoted by some as owning
infants Baptism, for as much as they say in a treatise which goes under his
name (which whether it be his or no is doubted by all men, and particularly by
Bellarmine himself, who yet is willing enough to make use of it, and therefore
not of that authority as the quotation I bring) he gives a knite of infant
Baptism by considering in a word or two the condition of those children, who
dye baptized, and of them who dye unbaptized, since it is not my part here to
prove that infant Baptism, as well as many other unwarrantable practices,
crept not in betimes, but to show by story, what was the most usual and
authenticke practice of the administration of this ordinance, or what was the
opinion and judgment of the most ancient and learned men about it.

The next authority I shall bring is of Nazianzen, another Greek Father, a man
of great esteem and authority, he plainly counsels, that Baptism should be
differred, Donec pueri de fide sua aliquid possint respondere; till children
should be able to answer something of their faith, and therefore counsels to
defer Baptism at least till the third year of their age. Wherein although
he made have, not being altogether perhaps free from the superstition of the
danger of dying without Baptism, which crept in betimes, yet overcome by the
truth and the reason of the ordinance, he judged it fit to defer it till
such time as they were capable of having and manifesting actual faith. This
famous authority of a man so great and learned, Bellarmine answers only thus,
That other Fathers were of another mind, and that the commodity is very
little, but the danger (to wit, according to his opinion of the necessity of
Baptism to salvation) is very great.

The next and last authority I shall bring, shall be that of Tertullia^, who
flourished about 203. years after Christ, the most famous of the Latin
Fathers, of him Hierom in an epistle of the Christian writers, affirms, that
nothing was more learned, or acute, a man of that authority, with the famous
and ancient Cyprian, that he called him his master, and as Hierome affirms of
him, he never past a day without the reading of Tertullian.

This Tertullian in a treatise that he has of Baptism toward the end, has
these expressions; first in the general, Baptismum non temere credendum esse,
sciant quorum officium est. That Baptism is not slightly or rashly to be
committed to any, let them know whose duty it concerns. To give to every one
that asks belongs to alms; rather consider this, Give not that which is
holy to dogs, nor cast your pearls to svvyne. And lay hands suddenly on no
man, least you partake of their sins; then he apologizeth why the Eunuch and
Paul were so soon baptized, and then goes on; Itaque pro cujusque personae
condition, ac dispositione, etiam aetate cunctatio baptismi utilior est,
praecipue tamen circaparvulos. Therefore in regard of the condition and
disposition of each person, the differring of Baptism is more proffitable,
especially for young children; for what necessity is it, says he, for the
vvitnesses to expose themselves to danger, etc. It is true the Lord says, do
not forbid them to come to me, let them come therefore when they grovvolder,
when they learn, when they are taught why they come; Fiant Christiani quum
Christum nosse potuerint; Let them be made Christians when they can know
Christ. Then he tells them, They deal more warily in secular things, that
divine things are given, where they would not betrust earthly. And lastly
concludes, that they who understand the weight of Baptism, will rather
fear the attaining then the differring of it: adding that, Fides integra
secura est de salute; An intier faith is secure of salvation. Thus the
excellent and ancient Tertullian.

Nor can that stand to any purpose, which some (who are loath to have so great
and ancient an authority against them in the point of infa^t Baptism) allege,
that parhaps Tertullian speaks here of the Baptism only of those infants,
whose parents were unbeleevers, because he speaks of the danger of the
witnesses, or suerties, for where the parents are Christians, there the
witnesses seem not to be exposed to that danger? To which I answer, that the
witnesses were not freed from danger, though the parents were Christians, for
though the parents may help with the witnesses, to the education of the child,
yet they cannot secure themselves nor others, that they shall stand to that
covenant which is made for them.

Besides the reason of his assertion against infant Baptism, runs upon
principles common to all infants, of what ever parents they be borne, for he
would have none come, till they be capable of learning, and being taught why
they come; he would have none declared Christians by that ceremony, till they
can know Christ, and concludes that he would not have divine mysteries be
trusted with infants, whom we would judge it improper and uncomely to be trust
with earthly and secular affairs.

I shall content my self with what has been said already to this head, having
neither the desire, nor the commodity to make a large and general search;
besides that a few of the most authentic, and most ancient writers after the
Scriptures, ought to be of more authority then many hundreds (if there could so
many be found) of latter times, it being my undertaking to prove that most
anciently, beginning with Christ and the Apostles times the subjects of
Baptism, were persons professing faith and repentance, not infants, and that
the most authentic and primitive Fathers were of this mind and judgment.

We have done therefore with this head, wherein if the most authentic and
ancient authority be ours, and the rest necessitated to their opinions by false
premises and principles by no means to be received, or allowed, and which also
as rationally produce other co^sequences, which in these times men are loath to
admit of; no men I hope will blame us for our present belief, concerning the
subject of Baptism, nor object hereafter as an argument against us, the
authority of the fathers.

CHAP. XVI. In which is handled, whether Baptism be to be repeated; but more
especially, whether such as were baptized in infancy, should be accounted
baptized, or are to have that ordinance administered to them.
HAving give^ the due bounds to the ordinance of Baptism, in respect of the
subject of it, and said what I judged co^venient to that purpose, there is a
very considerable question yet remaining, and which cannot be left out in this
discourse, and that is, If infants ought not to be baptized, whether such as
were baptized in infa^cy should be baptized again?

Wherein first will come to be considered, whether Baptism be to be repeated
or no?

I answer, there have been some of that opinion, as Mercion and his followers,
who had their first, second and third baptism: Also a religion called the
Hemerobaptistae, that is, the every day baptizers, that avowed, because we
sinned every day, therefore we should be every day baptized, and practiced
accordingly.

Secondly according to the received opinion, that I conceave it is not to be
repeated.

First because the covenant of grace is but once made, and struck with every
man, and this is the seal of the Covenant, it is the Sacrament of
regeneration, initiation and incorporation; but these things are not capable of
being reiterated, therefore the seal and sign thereof should not be, to this
agrees that place Heb. 6.4.5.6. For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to repentance,
etc.

The Apostle speaks not here of theft, perjury, adultery, or any sin in
particular, but of an entire revolting and falling away; when a sinner offends
not God in any particular, but renounces wholly to his grace, bids him adieu
for ever; Now he falls thus, who revolts from the word of God, who
extinguisheth the light of it, and who deprives himself of the taste of the
heavenly gift, and quits the communion of the spirit, in the participatio^ of
its grace, which cannot be without the sin against the holy Ghost, and a
total falling from God: Now it is impossible, says he, those should be
renewed by repentance, having sinned against the holy Ghost, they have a heart
that cannot repent; now they having broken covenant with God in the highest
manner, and being incapable of repentance, which is to precede Baptism, they
are incapable of Baptism; for others though they sin, the same covenant,
repentance, and Baptism stands good for ever.

Secondly because the signification, the fruit and use of Baptism, is not for
a moment, or respecting the time past only, but respects the future also, and
the whole life of the baptized person, as appears Romans 6.2. So as the Baptism
of repentance once received for remission of sins, remaynes as a pledge by us
of the covenant of God, and that perpetual washing which we have by the blood
of Christ, Mark 14. John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; which is to be often
thought of, for the full assurance of our pardon, for that promise is of
perpetual use and influence, He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved; and Gal. 3.27. As many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.

But thirdly the greatest reason why Baptism is not to be repeated, is because
neither in precept or example we find it repeated, which is the word of our
institution. But on the other side, There is one Lord, one faith, one Baptism,
which is one, Vnitate usus legitimi, in the unity of the lawful use, as well
as in other respects; so as there is no thought of leaving Christ, as if there
were to be exspected a new regeneration, and a new Baptism: The Fathers also
were of this opinion, Tertull. lib. de Baptis. Semel lavacrum inimus, semel
dilicta diluuntur. So Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3. Baptisma semel sumitur, nec
rursus iteratur. Baptism is once received, nor is it repeated again.

The question then will be, what shall become of those that have been baptized
into a false name by heritickes that err about the Trinity, as the Arrians,
Marcionites, etc.?

The received answer is that they are to be baptized aright, with the baptism
of Christ, and in such cases, Baptism is not to be said to be repeated, the
former being no baptism or a nullity, and this according to the decree of the
Counsel of Nice cap. 19. as Bucan quotes it p. 635. The like decree also has
a Counsel of Carthage, Ii sunt baptizandi, de quibus incertum est, an fuerint
baptizati necne, Council. Carth. 50. cap. 6. They are to be baptized, of whom it
is uncertain whether they were baptized or no. The like also says Cyprian in
his epistle 71. ad Quintum fratrem. Here was some difference in opinions,
Cyprian and his Bishops were of opinion that Baptism in an heretic church was
null, and therefore those who came to them were baptized, as supposing that
vain and nothing: others have thought that those only were to be baptized
again, who had been formerly baptized by such a church and in such a manner as
the essentialls of Baptism were wanting, so the Arrians baptized, which
rendered that ordinance vain and null.

The same may be affirmed more fully of infant Baptism, that it is null and
nothing, and therefore that the party so supposed to be baptized, is indeed
still unbaptized, and therefore ought to be baptized according to the
institution of Christ, which Baptism, when he has once received, he ca^ in no
way (as is before showed) be said to be rebaptiz'd; for those things which
cannot be shown done, no reason allows that they should seem to be
reiterated.

To proceed therefore, The Sacraments in general, and particularly Baptism,
is that by which we pledge our selves to God, or in which a formal covenant
is made, in which we promise obedience, and God protection and defense to be
our God, and therefore 1. Pet. 3.21. it is styled a stipulation, or
covenanting; also the word Sacrament, is from sacring, making holy, dedicating,
or initiating, as juramentum, an oath, is a jurando, from swearing.

In the civil law it signified an oath, Sacramenti praestatio, and recusatio,
the taking or refusing an oath: The word Sacrament also is taken for a mystery,
for the visible sign of an invisible grace. In a word Baptism seems to be
nothing else, but the ceremony of a mystical and spiritual marriage, for it
is a dedication, a covenant, and a mystery; and as in marriage besides the
words, there has been usually some ceremonious sign, as the giving of a ring,
or money, or a kiss, or the taking by the hand, so here, etc.

To examine this therefore by that similitude and resemblance, that which is
the first and principal ingredient into marriage, is consent, Nam nuptias non
concubitus, sed consensus facit; Not the bed, but consent makes marriage; for
otherwise that joining, which is fornication, or adultery, would be marriage:
This stands by virtue of the first institution, A man shall leave his father
and his mother, and cleave to his wife, Ge. 2.24. How? By covenant and consent.

This is so essential an ingredient, as Beza calls it the formal cause of
marriage, others the efficient cause; therefore the lawyers say, Solus
consensus matrimonium facit; Only consent makes the marriage. But then this
consent must be expressed outwardly, Nisi quatenus consentiunt, and consensum
suum exterius exprimunt; because the covenant and contract is external.

But then lastly and especially, it must be the proper consent of the parties
married, for the consent of the parents, who have some and the greatest power
besides, cannot do it; hence an error of the person, makes the marriage also
null and invalid, as if I marry one, and another be put in the place, by the
same reason, if one of the parties be mad constantly, because they cannot
consent, because that supposes not the consent of the marryers, so as here is a
formal or efficient fail in respect of the consent, and a material fail in
respect of the persons married, which is as it were the subject matter of
marriage.

Let us see what help this similitude will give us to the notion of infant
Baptism.

First the great business of marriage is consent of the parties married, this is
the efficient or formal cause of it, so in our mystical marriage, Baptism,
the covenant struck between God and us, implies especially the consent of
parties; But by infant Baptism the infant is not bound, for he consented not;
again consent must be expressed, but the child wantes the just ripeness and
formation of organs inward and outward for such expressions, that cannot be,
neither he cannot will it, because he cannot understand it, nor can he
express that which within he has not.

But may not my friends do it for me?

Personal consent is required to carnal marriage, when much depends upon the
parents, much more to this mystical; therefore as a mad man cannot consent nor
express it, for the trouble and distemper of his understanding, so nor an
infant for the want of the use of it; and for parents, and Godfathers and
Godmothers, as they call them, they provooke to duty, incite, and encourage,
and teach; but as the covenant is made with us, so it must be made by us: A
child may lawfully marry himself to Christ, without the consent of his parents,
which in the other marriage he cannot do; here is therefore no covenant, no
bond, because no consent on one party, founded on a present impossibility, for
a covenant is betvveene two consenting parties.

It is not therefore the dipping of the child in water, gives baptism, no more
then the bed gives marriage, where consent is wanting.

Here you see then a fail of the great matter in the business of the covenant,
namely the formal, or as some will have it the efficient cause; you will find
a great fail also in the subject matter, for here is an error of the person;
Christ looks for a believer, he makes his covenant in Baptism only with such,
the institution is terminated upon them; but here is a poor infant as
incapable for the present of believing and repenting, as a mad man is of
reasoning, which yet he may have in the habit, and therefore of covenanting
and consenting, which is a fruit of that faith; and therefore as a marriage
made with a man mad, were null, so were it much more a madness to bring to
Baptism such an one; and see whether it may not be thought to hold of the same
distemper, to offer a child to that sacred fountain, that in the matter of
reasoning and covenanting can do no more then a mad man: Ye see therefore the
great and essential fail of such a Baptism, so essential as it makes it a
nullity, as the like in marriage renders it null and void.

Now then to go on, if there be no bond, no covenant in this infant Baptism,
no obligation, which is the main of it, then there is no sealing, for a seal
serves but to ratify and confirm a bond and covenant. Again, as there is no
bond, nor sealing, so there is no exhibition, or conveyance of any thing from
Christ, for there are no pipes to receive it, that is, as an ordinance, there
is no reason in the use of it, no faith, no sense; you may speak aloude, and
say, this signifies the death of Christ, and this his resurrection, by this you
are buried and mortified, and by this quickened; but the child is asleep, or
dead, or as good; here is no receptive faculty, proportionable to the
ordinance, in the manner of conveighing it.

When Christ will speak in an invisible, secret, unknown and unconceavable
way, he does it without the help of an outward and visible ordinance; when
John was sanctified in the womb, he needed no word or sign to conveigh it to
him; but here, if Christ conveighes not himself Sacrame^tally by words and
signs, and representations, he conveyes not himself at all by virtue of the
Sacrament. So that as there was a fail in the form of contract, or covenant,
and in the subject matter of this ordinance, there is an error of the person,
so also in the ends of this Sacrament on Christ's part, of which you have heard,
namely, sealing up to us our union with Christ, and every good thing, and
exhibiting and conveighing himself to us, in the use of this ordinance; and for
us who by this means should form a formal contract with God, and should give
a testimony of our piety and obedience to God, John 4.1. And secondly should
distinguish our selves by this badge, or charracter of our profession, from the
prophanes of the world, with some more of that kind, we are capable of doing
nothing, in a business so active, no more then of receiving, so as upon the
whole matter, and as the sum of this discourse Infant Baptism is a nullity,
as much as the marrying of infants, or the ordination of infants, which latter
in some parts of the world is also in use, which all men will judge a nullity;
the ordinance has been profaned to such, out of a well meaning ignorance, and
he that will partake of that great ordinance, as it is our duty and
privileges, must knowingly and beleevingly be baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus; which ordinance, when we have once received aright, it is, as I said in
the beginning, not to be repeated.

If any man shall say, that consent afterward may make up the defect, and that
there be many things which were ill done, which yet stand good when they are
done? I answer, There may be many great fayles in an action, which may not make
it null or nothing; as for one to marry one of another religion, or without
some due consents, makes it an ill or an unlawful marriage, but it does not
make it no marriage; but those essential fayles, which may be said to nullify
it, can never be repaired by any act afterward; now such are the fayles of
infant Baptism, as I have prooved, such as enter into the very essence of it,
namely the formal and material causes, so as if you ask what I lay to the
charge of infant Baptism, I say that it is nothing, as the Scripture says
that an Idol is nothing, not but that there is a great deal of business made
of it, as if it were something, which all can contribute or confer nothing to
the essence or being of it, so as he that will affirm that after consent may
make that pretended Baptism real and true, must prove first that it has not
failed in its essentialls, which I have already prooved Baptism to have done.
To conclude, a man may receive many wounds, and be miserably disfigured, loose
many members or parts, and yet remain a man, but let out the rational soul,
which is his form, but by the prick of a pin, and that which remaynes is no
more a man, but a carcass, because the co^stitutive essential, which is his
form, is gone, and it must be an Almighty power that must give him his being,
and denomination of a man again; of what act soever ye may justly say this is
a nullity, that no after act can repair to give it a being, it may now take
upon it such a being as that pretended to, but to that it can give no being.

But secondly, to urge the former objection a little farther, you will say
parhaps, That that which is given, cannot be ungiven, but to Infants Baptism
is given already. I answer, It is true that which is given cannot be said to be
ungiven, but to Infants the Sacrament of Baptism is not given, but only a
certain external washing, with certain external rites and ceremonies: And the
patrons of infant Baptism, I hope, will pardon me, if what Chamier affirm of
Baptism, not given by a right Minister; I with much more equity and reason
affirm here, that it is not a Sacrament, but a rash mockery or deceaving, by
no means to be endured in the Church, Temerariam ludificationem nullo modo
tolerandam in Ecclesia. Tom. 4. Panstratiae lib. 5. cap. 14. s. 8. The
Imperial Constitutions carry, Vt ea quae contra leges fiunt non solum
inutilia, sed etiam pro infectis habenda sunt; That those things which are done
against law, are not only unprofitable, but are to be accounted for not done,
which rule they say is to be understood of those things where the cause of the
prohibition is perpetual, as for example, Ne filius contrahat cummatre, the
son should not contract with his mother; now the perpetual cause of
prohibition is the standing law of God, not changed by God himself, and in
which God himself has not dispensed, as is urged by a late and learned Author.
So as that which contradicts the standing rules of God, in the determination
and regulating of his ordinances (as Baptism given to infants has largely
been prooved to do) must by no means be accounted an administration or giving
of that ordinance, but as before, a rash and unadvised mockery of it, or
playing with it.

In the third place you may possibly object, That Baptism requires for the
subject a true believer, suppose an hypocrite profess faith, and submit
himself to the ordinance, will not here be by the same reason cause of
Baptism, the former being also a nullity in respect of the true intent of
Baptism. Answ. How far such a case may require another Baptism, I shall not
need to determine, if it should, that makes nothing against the other, but that
that does also and more. But here I shall put a clear distinction, and help my
self by the former similitude of marriage. There be some essential fayles, as
I told you, that make marriage a nullity, no subsequent act can releeve that,
as to give it the denomination of a being then, when it was a nullity; as for
example, consent afterward cannot make the no consent of infants to be a
marriage, but it gives form or being to a marriage, when the consent is given,
the like is true of Baptism.

But in marriage between persons of years, there may be a formal marriage
with an hypocritical consent, a man may profess faith in marriage to such a
woman, but may intend only to gain her estate by that pretense and leave her;
now the great ingredient unto consent, should be truth and reallity, but the
fail of that shall by no means nullify the marriage, he shall be ever bound
to the duty of a husband, though he should profess to have dissembled his
consent, nor shall there be any need of a new marriage, or expressing of
consent to tie him to it, which the former does sufficiently, what ever his
intents were. Because that to the reason and being of marriage, there is
nothing requisite, but that there be a due external performing of the
essentialls of it. The like may be avowed of Baptism, if a man repenting and
confessing his sins, believing and professing subjection, be baptized
according to the right form and ceremony of Baptism, I see not the ground of
repetition, what ever the internal fayles may seem to be either of true
righteousness on man's part, or of present influence on Gods part, which are
desirable to the happy being of Baptism, else so often as men find not that
present influence on Gods part, which to him is free, or doubt of their former
state and condition, so often there must be a repetition of Baptism, which I
see no ground for; the ordinance which is an external ceremony, having all its
external essentialls to the true being of that ordinance; and as the remaining
form produces its effect, when the impediment is taken away, as for example,
heavines in a stoane carries it down, when the impediment is taken away the
hand that held it up, so Baptism externally rightly administered, may attain
his end, when God takes away the impediment.

The like may be said of ordination, or admission into church fellowship, which
cannot be called a nullity, though the persons should prove hypocrites or
unholy, as appears by this, that such persons are capable of excommunication,
which implies them members, and the ordinance duly administered, notwithstanding
that there may be great internal fayles, but would be certainly a nullity, if
such admission or ordination were in infancy, in sleep, or in the time of
madness, as I said before; But what ever the case of the Baptism of
hypocrites may prove (of which notwithstanding I have told you my opinion) it
makes not much to this question, for if it prove not a nullity, it is because
they fail not in the essentialls, if they should require Baptism a new, then
Baptism in infa^cy much more, in whom it is most clear the fayles of Baptism
were essential.

And it is not my part so much to prove, that there are no other causes of
repeating of Baptism, as that in this there is cause full and sufficient, to
give them a true real Baptism, whose pretended Baptism, in respect of its
essential fayles, prooves void and nothing.

CHAP. XVII. In which is considered the time and rank that Baptism is to hold
in the order of Ordinances.
THere are but two things, which I shall farther consider, upon this subject,
the one is the time and order of Baptism, the other is the Minister of
Baptism.

That there is an order in all the worship of the New Testament, no man will
deny that has learned with Paul, to joy in beholding the order and faith of
the Saints, Col. 2.5. and none will acknowledge this more then they, who deny
themselves of some very considerable ordinances, for want of comeing to them in
the right order, as the Lords supper for want of church fellowship: Every thing
is seasonable and bewtifull in its time, out of which it is disorderly and
evil, to find the order and time of Baptism, will I conceive be the easiest
thing in all this inquiry, whether you consider Scripture rule, Scripture
example, or example of the primitive Church, and indeed of all that ever was,
or the reason of the thing.

For Scripture rule ye have, Teach all nations, and baptize them, Mat. 28.19.
make disciples and baptize. Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved: You see here the rank of Baptism immediately after teaching,
after believing, it holds the first place of ordinances properly Christian; ye
may see it again in the rule in Peter's preaching, Repent and be baptized, Acts
2.38. which was instantly put in practice, which is our second head of proof,
namely Scripture example, for they that gladly received his word, were
presently baptized, to the number of three thousand, ver. 41. after which they
continued constantly in the liturgicall works of the Apostles doctrine, and
breaking bread, and in prayer, ver. 42. In the example of the Eunuch you have
the same, as soon as ever Jesus was preached, and he discovered water, what
hinders me, says he, to he baptized? nothing, says Philip, if thou have
faith, so he was instantly baptized, Acts 8.38. The like ye have of Cornelius,
who upon the first preaching of Christ, before the assembly was dissolved, was
baptized he and his, Acts 10.48. The like you have of the Iaylor Act. 16. to
whom at midnight (being astonished by a miraculous action) the word was
preached, and to all in his house, and he and all his believing, were
forthwith all of them baptized. Here was no loss of time, and for the order,
it was after faith, and before any other administration; more examples might be
brought of this kind, out of which that which I conclude is, the order and time
of Baptism, namely the next ordinance to believing, not but that I would have
fit time allowed for the trial of faith, wherein to be sure the Apostles were
not negligent of their duty.

For the primitive times we can have no better instances then what we hear of
the Catechuminy, who were excluded not only from the Eucharist, but from the
very sight thereof; and therefore after the word, Sancta Sanctis, they went
out, not because they were without faith, for there were two sorts, audientes,
and competentes, or electi, the first were beginners, which heard sermons, and
had a desire to Christ, the other were such as desired Baptism, and had given
up their names for it, as Austin mentions in libro de cura pro mortui cap. 12.
and others also.

Now these were supposed to have faith, and waited only a fit time for the
administration of Baptism, during which time they were far enough from being
admitted to the Lords Supper, though believers judged, but on the other side,
as soon as ever they were baptized, they had Baptism, confirmation, or laying
on of hands, and the Lords Supper on the same day.

And of this the Fathers give a reason. In all respects the order of the
mystery is kept, that first by remission of sins a medicine be prepared for
their vvounds, and then the nourishment of the heavenly table be added. Ambrose
etc. And as this was observed strickly to the catechuminy, so every body will
grant me that to infant Baptism, this order is surely maintained.

If you pass from precept and example of all times to reason, there you will
find that what ever makes for the not repeating of Baptism in the ordinary use
of it, makes also for this as fully or more that it should be the first.

For first, if it be not to be repeated, because this is the seal of
initiation, regeneration, and incorporatio^, then by the same reason this must
be first, as initiation, admission, incorporation, and regeneration, are the
first internal acts in us, and upon us, by which we are made Christians.

Secondly if the signification and use of Baptism be for ever, and of constant
and perpetual use, then this ordinance is to lie as the bottom stone in the
building of ordinances, which is to have a durable and constant influence into
the whole edifice.

Or thirdly if this be not to be repeated, because neither in precept nor
example you find it so, then must this be the first, because in precept and
example you find it so, and never otherwise, or if the ends of Baptism on our
parts (not to mention further those on Christ's) be, that there should be a
formal external contract past with God, by which we are visibly handfasted
in this mystical marriage, or secondly to distinguish our selves by this badge
and charracter of our profession from the evil world, which we renounce with
all its works, then certainly this piece is to be first administered before we
go further, and the Sacrament of our spiritual life and birth, is to be given
before that of our nourishment and growth: In a word Baptism has been called
of old, and not without reason, Sacramentorum janua; and is for all these
considerations, which are as many as can concur to any one thing, to keep
that name and nature still, which is to be the first and primitive Sacrament,
in which a converted person, man or woman, is to communicate. Now the^ if the
timeing and order of instituted worship be any thing, as it is of great moment,
a great part of it lying in nothing else, but the right and orderly
administration of ceremonies, and if the Scripture rule and example be any
thing, which is all we have to show for any practice, then Baptism is to be
the first Sacrament after believing.

Besides the reason of the thing, that which makes it unlawful to baptize
before teaching is, because the Scripture has rankt it otherwise, that says,
teach and baptize, not baptize and teach, as the Papists and others do; the
same reason will hold for the giving it its preference in time to any other
ordinance, because it is rankt immediately after teaching, and before any other
thing, again you have the fullest concurrence of all example and reason also,
for the timeing and ranking of this ordinance, as for any thing can be thought.

To what has been said in this last point, I shall only ad by way of
caution, with which I conclude it, that when I give Baptism the first place in
the rank of ordinances, after believing, I intend not such expressions to the
prejudice of church fellowship, which I conceave is properly the state for
instituted ordinances, and the subject of them, as will more fully appear by
what will be said in the following chapter.

CHAP. XVIII. Wherein by way of conclusion, is treated of the Minister of
Baptism, and showed where that power rests, which is to conveigh to us that
blessed Ordinance, which has been all this while the subject of our discourse.
WE have found out the subject of Baptism to be a believer only, (that is)
one professing faith in Christ, and subjection to his ordinances; upon which
consideration we have found cause to reject the Baptism of infants as a
vanity of men's invention, and our own received then, as void and null; we
have also found in the order of Sacraments Baptism to be the first; the next
thing we are to speak of is the Minister of this Sacrament, that we may know
whence, and how to receive it. And here to omit many things which might be
considered under this head more generally, and also not to trouble our selves
with the handling of this controversy, as it is stated between us and the
Papists, who putting a more simple and absolute necessity upon this ordinance
then is its due, expose it in case of such necessity, to the administration of
all sorts of people, of what condition or sex soever they be, we shall only
take those two things for granted, or at least deny them not; first, That the
error of the Minister does not enter the essence of Baptism, nor is of those
things that can destroy it, and make it null: And secondly that by the opinion
of antiquity, and learned men, there were certain necessitous and extraordinary
cases, wherein others might be used for Baptism, then such as were the
ordinary Ministers of it.

But now because it is one thing to be, and another thing to be rightly, or
well, in relation to our selves, and the ordinary and orderly administration of
Baptism, we shall consider whether Baptism be a thing of public or private
cognizance, and to what predicament it belongs, and whether it pretends, which
will be the bounds of this discourse, and show us whence it is to be fetched and
derived.

That it is a thing of public cognizance, appears to me both by the
primitive commission, and primitive practice, the commission lies Matt. 28.19.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

In the 18. verse Christ tells his Disciples, that all power is given to him
in heaven and earth, these were his letters patents, by which he showed he
did nothing without power and good warrant; now he goes into heaven as into one
part of his kingdom, which was quiet and at peace, and sitting there at the
right hand of his Father, gives an Apostolical commission for all the earth,
so Mark 16.15. Go into the whole world, preach the Gospel to every
creature; here he opposes the whole earth to the bounds and limits of Judea
(by which the Prophets of old were bounded in their administrations) That, he
had by an hereditary right, he sent therefore to them, first with this caveat,
that they should not go into the way of the Gentiles, nor enter into any city
of the Samaritans, Matthew. 10.5. But now by his death and resurrection, having
acquired a right of reigning over all men, he gives a commission for all the
world, this is Apostolical, for he bids them go forth into all the world,
which is properly the word of Apostolical commission, whose diocese had no
bounds, and if not here, where can any Apostolical commission be found? And he
tells them their great works, which was to preach and baptize, for although
Paul says 1. Cor. 1.17. that he was sent by Christ not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel, that must be understood with a limitation, that he was not
sent especially to baptize, because the administration of the Sacraments, which
are the appendixes and seals, though it need as much power, yet a less gift
then the preaching of the word.

And behold I am with you to the end of the world. Here is a word of great
incourageme^t and comfort, Christ had told them before, he was Lord of heaven
and earth; he sends them to manage a great work, but says he I will be with
you, that is, who ever is publicly deputed for such a service, as they need
more especially assistance, so they shall have it, and here he makes a plain
difference between the makers of Disciples, and Disciples to be made; He
will be with them especially as they need it most, to whom the charge of
teaching and baptizing is deputed; for the Apostles were not to continue
always, as the world was to be gone through but once, and institutions to be
set up but once, but a public power was still left, which succeeded this
Apostolical, which in the next place we come to consider of, that so finding
where the commission rests, we may address our selves thither for ordinances,
and expect the blessing of Christ's being with it unto the end of the world, for
this is a state continuing to the end of the world, to the change of all things.

Now this clearly is the Church, which is the subject of Ecclesiastical policy
and power, as the commonwealth is of civil power, so as Ecclesiastical and
Church power, is essentially and primarily in the Church as in the subject,
Mat. 16. ver. 18.19. And I say unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it: And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. So as
though the use of the keys be diverse, according to the variety of callings,
and conditions in the Church, yet the power of the keys originally and
primarily is given to the Church, for Peter here bears but the person of the
Church, as in other places in which he answers for others, and Christ also
speaks to him as adressing himself to the Church by him. This is a thing so
commonly avowed and defended by Protestants against Papists, as I shall not
need here to prove it. Also that other known place of Matthew. 18.17. Tell the
Church, where both Church state, and Church power are clearly spoken of: Now
where the power of admitting, receaving and casting out is, there is the power
of administering and communicating all ordinances to the edification of the same
body; and they which have power of administering the kingly office of Christ,
consisting in casting out and receaving in, have also power of administering his
Prophetical office, of which the Sacraments are a part, and therefore to the
Christian churches, as to the Jews of old, pertains the public
dispensations and services of God. Romans 9.4.

And hence it follows, that such as were deputed by the church for their
Ministers and officers, were called overseers, made by the holy Ghost, and were
to be imitators of the Apostles, to whom ordinarily in the executive part they
succeeded, Acts 20.17.18.19.28.

Hence Peter calls himself a fellow Elder, with the ordinary Elders, 1. Pet.
5.1. The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, etc.

To conclude this head, a man becomes a Prophet and able to teach, by virtue of
a gift, namely of knowledge and utterance, 1. Cor. 1.5. But no gift renders a
Baptizer, but a call, as being a thing of public cognizance and commission.
Teaching out of a gift has its foundation in nature, which arises from a
personal gift and grace of the spirit. But Baptism, censures, ordination and
the like, depend not upon a special gift, but are acts of power, conferred
authoritatively upon a special person. And thus much for the primitive
commission for Baptism, which falls under a public cognizance, upon persons
qualified by public authority for the administration of it.

Next we consider in this discourse, primitive practice and example, for
according to this power and commission, you will find it run in the example.

The first Baptizer who introduced that ordinance, and from thence drew his
name, John the Baptist, to be sure had commission for that and all other parts
of his ministry, according to the prophecies went on him in Esaias and Malachy,
He came in the spirit and power of Elias, was the great restorer of Israel,
this no man will deny. Then Christ in the 4. of John is said to baptize (but by
his Disciples) who received commission for that administration from his person
and presence, himself either intending to the greater works of miracles, or
teaching, or else might abstain purposely that those baptized by him, might
not vaunt of a greater privilege then others. In like manner it is probable
Peter the Apostle communicated of his authority to those who were with him, for
the baptizing of Cornelius and his family, for it is said verse. 48. of Acts 10.
He commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord; unles it were either
that of those brethren there were inferior officers, or that by commanding is
meant, the warrant he gave to Cornelius, and his company for Baptism, of which
notwithstanding he himself might be the Minister.

Of the Apostles commission you have heard already, you may find it in the
execution in diverse passages.

For others who baptized (saving those who drew their commission from Church
power, of whom we shall speak afterward) we read of Philip and Ananias, the
one, to wit Philip, was an Evangelist, an order as it is taken of a public
authority and commission, as the Apostles were. Besides he had an especial
authority and provocation from the spirit at that time, for the ministry he
had to perform about the Eunuch, by which spirit also he was miraculously
taken away after the work done, as you may read Acts the 8. And for Ananias of
whom we read in the 9. of the Acts, that he baptized Paul, he was also deputed
in an extraordinary manner to that ministry by the Lord, who spoke to him in a
vision; And such extraordinary and peculiar manner of workings, where the
ministry of conversion lay in a miracle, and the Ministers were men acted to
it, as appears by divine revelation, must not be drawn into ordinary examples,
and here we find also particular commission: but thus far in the example it
makes clear for what we say, that the administration of Baptism is a thing
of public cognizance and commission.

That it has been since the Apostolical times so, is as clear out of all
story, of which the notion of the Catechuminists will give an assured witness;
Christians in the Church were anciently distinguished by three degrees,
Catechumini, Fideles and Poenitentes; the Catechumeni, or such as were
principled in the Christian religion, the faithful and the penitents; the
faithful were such as being past the form of Catechists, were admitted to all
ordinances, and the penitents were such as had fallen into some scandal, and
were under censure.

The Catechumeni were such (as Origin cont. Cells. lib. 3. says) who were
newly admitted into some degree of communion, but not yet baptized; of these
mention is made in the most ancient writers Ireneus, Clemens Alexand.
Tertullian. Of these Clemens says, Sine catechismo nulli datur credere;
without catechizing no body can believe.

Of this number some (as I have formerly had occasion to speak) were called
Audientes, some Competentes. The Audientes were such as submitted themselves to
teaching by the hearing of the word, and being instructed in the principles of
religion, which by their submission and pretense to farther ordinances, got the
name of Catechists, for otherwise neither Jew nor Gentile, nor any were
excluded from hearing the word. Conc. 4. Carth. Can. 84.

The competentes, or competitors, were such as being well instructed in the
Christian religion, desired Baptism, and gave up their names, of these Austin
says, Post sermonem fit missa Catechumenis, manebant fideles. Ser. de Temp.
137. After the sermon the Catechumini were dismissed, the faithful remained, to
partake of the Supper and other ordinances, which partained to full membership.

Out of all this, besides the purpose for which I especially bring it, two
things may be observed by the way.

First that of old men were not lightly admitted to the communion and
fellowship of the Church, but after due instruction and examination.

Secondly that it was usual of old to stand as competitor for Baptism, as a
Candidate, as we call them, to seek and desire it before they had it.

But the end for which I especially bring this here, is to show that in all
times of the Church Baptism has been a thing of public cognizance, and the
commission for the administration of it has rested, since the times of the
Apostles, no where but in Church power, nor has been no where else sought, nor
never by any otherwise pretended to it I know, saving of late years by those
upon whom the name of Anabaptists was primitively and properly fixed, who erring
greatly in many other things of as great consequence, might easily be mistaken
in this.

These two things in a word I suppose out of this discourse is evinced, which
will directly point out the Minister of Baptism.

First that Baptism is a thing of public cognizance and commission.

Secondly that as of old since the Apostles times, so now and always till
Christ come, the Church is the dispenser of such commissions and
administrations.

That which remaynes now therefore is to find out what a Church is, wherein I
hope we are not to seek.

A Church in a word may be said to be an assembly of saints, knit together to a
fellowship with Christ their head.

I intend not here a discourse of this subject, it is enough to my purpose that
this be considered and allowed, that believing and saintship, gives a
qualification for Church fellowship, and Church fellowship for acts of power,
and that Baptism does no more enter the definition of a church, as if a church
state could not be without Baptism, then the communion of the Lords Supper
does, or officers, Pastors, Elders and Deacons. All these are but certain acts,
by which they make good their fellowship with Christ, and one another, and are
church ordinances, and church dues, things they have power for, and may justly
pretend to. Though it will ordinarily be, that a church will consist of
baptized persons, for what should hinder them who have assembled for the
enjoying of ordinances, and who have power for all ordinances, from
administering to themselves in a way of order that ordinance, which is as it
were the gate of the rest, and as we may call it (for ought I know according
to the old name) the ordinance of initiation, since it is the first of church
ordinances, the Church covenant and assembling being more properly called the
state for enjoying of ordinances, and the subject of all ordinances; so as
ordinarily a church will be an assembly of baptized Saints, though the word
Baptism be no part of the definition, nor does Baptism contribute more to the
being of a church, then other ordinances, which for a time they may want. So as
ye see clearly where to fetch Baptism, namely where a company of Saints are
gathered together in Christ's name, that is, in his power, there is authority
amongst them for all commissions, for acts of church fellowship, for the
deputing and ordaining of officers, and for the administration of all
ordinances.

But here it may be parhaps objected, to which I will speak a word, that
Baptism not being the ordinance of admission into the Church, nor parhaps
necessarily to follow after, but may be before it, how appartaynes it to the
Church? Answ. The rule will hold universally true, that all instituted
ordinances (of which Baptism is one) will fall under the cognizance and power
of an instituted body, whether therefore Baptism be administered after
admitta^ce, which in an ordinary way seems better, or whether it may precede
it, it will be all one in the issue, since it is in order to church fellowship,
and a full church communion; Now what ever is in order to it, as well as that
which follows it, falls under church cognizance and power, and therefore
catechizing, taking account of faith, yea and preaching the word by way of
power in order to the conversion of others, especially if they offer and submit
themselves, falls under Church power; now no man is baptized with a privilege
to go about the world at large, but to live in all the ordinances of Christ,
and to receive nourishment as well as birth, and the seals of both from the
church: And therefore as before, I like well for Baptism the title of the
ordinance of initiation, as which in the order of ordinances is the first, and
pretends to further.

Lastly this rightly stated and considered, it cannot reasonably be objected,
that he that baptizeth should necessarily be himself a baptized person, for
though ordinarily it will be so, yet it is not necessary to the ordinance, no
more then it is simply necessary to a church state, that the members be
baptized, for not the personal Baptism of him that administers, but the due
commission he has for baptizing, is alone considerable to make him a true
Minister of Baptism; And here that expression holds not, one cannot give what
he has not, as a man cannot teach me that wants knowledge himself, because no
man gives his own Baptism, but conveyes as a public person, that which is
give^ us by Christ: A poor man that has nothing of his own, may give me
gold, that is the money of another man, by virtue of being sent for that
purpose; so if any man can show his commission, the writing and seal of him
that sent him, it is enough here, else what would become of the great Baptizer
John the Baptist, who had a fayer commission to baptize, but was not himself
baptized that we read of, or if he should be, which cannot be affirmed, yet
the first Baptizer, who ever he was, must at the time of his first
administration of that ordinance be unbaptized.

To conclude, in this discourse of the Minister of Baptism, we have showed
especially these particulars.

1 That the due administration of Baptism has been always, and is an act of
power and commission.

2 That the Churches of Christ are now the only subject of this power, and are
betrusted with dispe^sing all commissions for the administrations of
ordinances, of which Baptism is one, whether it be administered after admission
into Church fellowship, (which parhaps will be the usual way) or before, (but
as other things) in order to it.

3 That Baptism does not enter the definition of a church, as Saintship
professed and manifested does, nor is it simply necessary to the Minister of
Baptism that he be himself baptized, since his qualification for that work,
arises from his commission, not from his Baptism.

FINIS.
The heads of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. Page 1. Wherein, of the first and great end of that ordinance, the
sealing up of our union with Christ, and more particularly, of the most
illustrious type of Baptismeall sealing, in the Baptism of Christ. CHAP. II.
Page 18. Wherein of the second great use and end of Baptism, assuring us of
our Justification in the remission of all our sins, together with certain
corollaries and inforcements. CHAP. III. Page 38. Wherein of a third great use
and end of Baptism, whereby is sealed our communion with Christ in his
holiness, to wit, a death unto sin, and a rising to newness of life. CHAP.
IV. Page 48. Wherein is showed the report which the ceremony of Baptism has,
to the forementioned ends and uses of that ordinance; also some Corollaries.
CHAP. V. Page 58. In which the proper ceremony of Baptism is vindicated by the
force of the word, Scripture practice, the suffrage of learned men, and the use
of ancient times. CHAP. VI. Page 101. Wherein is showed the agreements and
differences that the word preached has with the Sacraments, together with
certain Corollaries giving light to the present controversy. CHAP. VII. Page
121. In which is laid down the relative and personal qualifications by which
infants are usually entitled to Baptism, by our most considerable Protestant
Divines. CHAP. VIII. Page 143. In which are contained several queries and
considerations, raised from the premises, declaring what little ground there
will appear from their own principles and concessions to conclude for Infant
Baptism. CHAP. IX. Page 160. In which entrance is made into the consideration
of the great argument for Infant Baptism, drawn from the circumcision of
Infants, by way of answer whereunto five particulars are handled, the first
whereof is treated on in this Chapter, namely what circumcision was to the
Jews, and whether the qualification requisite to it was regeneration, or the
infusion of gracious habits. CHAP. X. Page 179. In which is handled the second
particular, proposed in answer to the argument drawn from Circumcision, to
wit, how far the ordinances of the old Testament should regulate and
determine by way of rule and institution those of the New. CHAP. XI. Page 190.
Wherein is discussed the third particular in answer to the argument drawn from
circumcision; scil. How we are ingrafted into Abraham's covenant, and by what
title we are called Abraham's children. CHAP. XII. Page 210. Wherein is handled
the fourth Question, proposed to answer the argument drawn from Circumcision,
to wit, How far the Jews by virtue of their being the sons of Abraham,
could pretend to new Testament Ordinances, wherein also, besides several
others, that much agitated place is opened and considered of, Acts 2.38.39.
CHAP. XIII. Page 237. Wherein is handled the fifth and last question in answer
to the argument drawn from circumcision, scil. whether Infants not prooving the
subject of Baptism, the privileges of Christians and their state, may not
justly be said to be as great as the privileges of the Jews and their state.
CHAP. XIV. Page 259. In which is considered that famous and much urged place of
1. Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. CHAP.
XV. Page 278. In which the authority of the Fathers, and the practice of
antiquity, touching the subject of Baptism, is considered. CHAP. XVI. Page
333. In which is handled, whether Baptism be to be repeated; but more
especially, whether such as were baptized in infancy, should be accounted
baptized, or are to have that ordinance administered to them. CHAP. XVII. Page
368. In which is considered the time and rank that Baptism is to hold in the
order of Ordinances. CHAP. XVIII. Page 380. Wherein by way of conclusion, is
treated of the Minister of Baptism, and showed where that power rests, which
is to conveigh to us that blessed Ordinance, which has been all this while the
subject of our discourse.

