A Compendious Body OF CHEMISTRY, Which will serve As a Guide and Introduction
both for understanding the AUTHORS which have treated of The Theory of this
SCIENCE in general; And for making the way Plain and Easy to perform,
according to Art and Method, all Operations, which teach the Practice of this
ART, upon Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, without losing any of The
ESSENTIAL VIRTUES contained in them.

By N. le FEBVRE Apothecary in Ordinary, and Chemical Distiller to the King of
France, and at present to his Majesty of Great Britain.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Davies and Theo. Sadler, and is to be sold at the
sign of the Bible over against the little North-door of St. Pauls-Church, 1662.

A COMPENDIOUS BODY OF Chemistry: Wherein is contained whatsoever is necessary
for the attaining to the curious knowledge of this Art; Comprehending in
general the whole practice thereof: and teaching the most exact preparation of
Animals, Vegetables and Minerals, so as to preserve their essential Virtues.

Laid open in two Books, and dedicated to the use of all Apothecaries, etc.

By Nicasius le Febure, Royal Distiller to his Majesty of England, and
Apothecary in Ordinary to His Honorable Household.

Translated into English by P. D. C. Esquire. one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's
Privy Chamber.

Part. I.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe for Octavian Pulleyn Junior, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard near the little
North-door. 1664.

To his most Excellent MAJESTY CHARLES the second, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, etc.
ROYAL SIR,
THE more I reflect upon the gracious favor your Majesty has done me, by
calling me to be one of your Majesty's servants: The more my mind is raised
and excited to apply wholly her self to the study and disquisition of the
Contexture and Compound, and of the resolution of Natural bodies: whereby those
wonderful Virtues, and specifical proprieties which Nature has hidden in their
Center, may be discovered and laid open. And as your Majesty is eminently
versed in the nature of good, and knows, that good can only be properly called
so and reputed such, insomuch as it is more obvious to the understanding, and
more communicable in the practice; so likewise have I begun to follow this
heroical Idea, from the time I did live in France, and there teach Chemical
Philosophy, I did then by vocal expression declare as much as I was capable to
do; and since GREAT SIR, I have compiled in French this Book; which now being
made English by one of your Majesty's Servants (a lover and great admirer of
this noble Art) I presume to dedicate unto your Majesty; that having the stamp
of this Language upon it self, it may go more current amongst, and be better
understood by your own subjects, by whom your Majesty's Royal inclinations to
the public good being generally so well known through the vast extent of your
Majesty's Dominions, this Gentleman has concurred with me in the laudable
intention of seconding this tenderness, and paternal care of your Sacred
Majesty, for preserving and restoring the health of those three Nations which
Providence has subjected to your sacred Empire, and for instructing those
which dedicate themselves to the practice of the Noblest and best kind of
Pharmacy. To this end, I say, has been translated this which I had written,
that it might become more familiar and useful to the one for their health, to
the other for their information and improvement of their knowledge. I hope,
SIR, I shall have the good fortune from henceforth to produce some other
things, which may best contribute to the satisfaction of that sublime,
Heroical, and most worthy curiosity of your Majesty's discerning Genius, and
which according to your own Royal desire and intention shall find a success
toward the good and advantage, both of sick and healthy, it is the earnest
wish of him, who to his last breath shall ever be,

Royal Sir, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful
servant N. le Febure.

To the Apothecaries of England.
SIRS,
I Am very glad I have applied my self during the time I was in France to some
work useful to the English Nation, even before his Majesty of Great Britain had
done me the honor and been graciously pleased to call me unto his Royal
service. For in this Treatise of Chemistry you shall find a Chapter of
Vegetables and their preparation, which contains several specifical Remedies,
to oppose and root out Scorbutical Diseases, which are but too frequent and
connatural to the Clime of this your Country; so that with a very earnest and
sincere heart and affection I do impart unto you, not only that which I have
declared of most abstruse and secret particulars in the matter of Vegetables,
but all the Contents of this whole Work also, both touching Animals and
Minerals, where you likewise will meet with a considerable Harvest of
Antiscorbutical Remedies. I wish all may succeed to the common good and
advantage of your Nation, and to your own in particular; since it is the chief
aim, and sole intention of our Great Sovereign. You shall know by the sequel of
this Discourse, that I have now, and shall always have for you and the
improvement ^f your knowledge, the same tenderness I have had for the French
Apothecaries; I shall then advertise you, that it is near five and thirty years
since I was first addicted to Pharmacy, and that by a Father that was in his
profession most exact, who employed himself particularly in the curious
searches into things necessary for the Election, Preparation, and Composition
of Medicines, which he kept in his Shop, to dispose of according to the precept
and orders of the Physicians. I may say, as he was my Father, so he was my
Master, from whom I received the first Elements of Pharmacy and Chemistry; who
likewise in the first place enjoined me to observe that excellent principle,
viz. to exercise my Profession with Fidelity, suffering nothing to discredit
the dignity of this Art: But above all, to follow punctually the directions of
the Physicians, which ought to be the Fountain from whence all first receive
the Noble knowledge of true Natural things, and the manner of preparing them
well.

But this excellent Patron, by whom I ought to square all the Actions of my
best life and Profession, soon forsook me, leaving me full of nothing but grief
for his loss, and a true Prognostication of the decay of Pharmacy. For he
foresaw that the body of the Physicians was divided in such a manner, that the
branches were separated from the Roots, and that the nourishment necessary for
their subsistence must fail them, without question, if he did not effect a good
reunion, that might oblige the Physicians to continue their studies and
searches into Naturals, and so communicate them to the Apothecaries. And these
ought to receive them with due respect and gratitude, to the end that they
might jointly dedicate themselves to the Public good, without farther rending
themselves by partiality and particular interest, which has ever been the
ruin of those that are willing to indulge themselves from their due endeavor.
Now when I saw my self deprived of the instructions of a Father and a Master, I
applied my self wholly to follow his last precepts. Whereupon I searched among
the dead for those Physicians that had written best of Pharmacy, and among
these living, those that did practice best, and did labor daily to imbellish
it by their new doctrines, and supplies of good and wholesome Remedics. 'Twas my
good fortune to find at Sedan (which was then the place where I was settled)
one Dr. Duhan deceased, Dr. of Physic, and professor of Philosophy, who did me
the favor to instruct and show me much; 'Twas of this great Man that I
confess I received whatever did by degrees promote in me that good design of
diligent searching into Physical verities, because those notions are absolutely
necessary for our Apothecary, that would acquit himself well in his profession
with requisite fidelity; and I can say in commendation of his admirable Genius,
that France has suffered much by his untimely death; for he was designing then
to publish some Writings, which would have much illustrated the knowledge of
things Natural, Medicine and Pharmacy. He had Anatomised Nature in General and
particular sufficiently to acquit himself honorably of what he had undertaken,
had he not been ravished hence so soon to the infinite loss of the
Commonwealth of Learning. Afterward at Paris, I had the happiness of liberty
to converse with M. du Clos Dr. of Physic, who did me the favor to correct my
defaults, and lead me as by the hand of his judgment and experience, through
all that which I have undertaken in my endeavors to advance the dignity of
Pharmacy, which now lies bending toward its ruin, if it be not upheld by its
true Arches and Pillars, those faithful, learned, experienced and curious
Physicians. This Excellent and rare Physician denied me none of those lights,
or illustrations, that are necessary for the well-doing of those that addict
themselves to the legitimate preparation of Pharmacy; so that I am indebted to
Him for the well-being I have acquired in my Profession. Thus I have continued,
till at length I was called some years since by the favor of Mons. Vallot, the
most worthy and Chief Physician to our most invincible Monarch, as Apothecary
and Distiller in ordinary to the King, to perform by his precepts and order
lessons and operations in a course of the true Pharmacy; which is Chemistry,
and that in the Garden which his Majesty prepared in the Suburbs of St. Victor.
'Twas there truly that I found wherewithal to satisfy the appetite of my
curiosity, not only by the profuse expense with which this True Father and
Restorer of Medicine and Chemistry furnished us vessels and materials withal,
for the demonstration of those operations which I was commanded to make yearly,
as well after the Ancient as new ways; But likewise by those unfathomed
depth's of Learning and Experience which he possessed, and which he communicated
to me for the application of it to my self in particular, and the imparting of
it in pulick Lessons so in general, (I find I come in my expressions beneath
my desires) that I thought I could not do less then to let Posterity know, how
much I stand indebted to the bounty, learning, and sole generosity of their
great and illustrious Mecenas.

I have given you this account of the progress I made in Pharmacy, to the end
that you may see the method of making your own advantage, and to discover to
you the reasonable submission that you and we do, and always shall owe to our
illustrious Masters. You must know then by this that I am about to say, that I
give you nothing here but what has been received from the Physicians, so that
it is to them only to whom you owe the obligagation. And as for my publishing
this Tract of Chemistry in French, it is because I would imitate the most
eminent Authors of Germany, who thought themselves obliged to write of Chemical
Pharmacy in the vulgar Tongue, that it might likewise be useful not only to the
Apothecaries, but, that it might likewise be serviceable to men of other
professions. For as much as is impossible to write with order and method of
that which is necessary to Art, when we declare not, nor illustrate at the same
time the principles of things Natural; and moreover, because we discover not
the order of the generation, and corruption Physical, from which all the
effects of Nature do result which are the subject of the operation as well of
the one as the other Pharmacy.

I have likewise published it, to contribute to the public good in general, and
yours in particular; For as I have never had a greater ambition then to see
Pharmacy practiced in its true luster, which I now see vilified and neglected,
and as I am fixed in this profession under the protection of one of the
chiefest of all Physicians, one that entertains the highest and most generous
design for its establishment; so likewise will I guide and conduct you by the
Theory and practice of this Treatise of Chemistry to a fair, exact, faithful
and veritable profession of our Art.

You will learn hence Readers, as in other Tracts of Pharmacy abundance of
things, their true and legitimate preparation, from whence must follow
necessarily a good and agreeable Composition. I have undertaken this labor for
your use, because I have never yet found one that has taken the pains or care
to show and discover punctually the manner of operating upon things to preserve
their virtue, and correct their defaults.

Moreover, You may observe the difference there is of the correction of those
Medicaments which are made according to the opinions and directions of the
Ancient Pharmacy, with that which is showed and commanded by the Modern.

You may observe likewise the envy and malice of those that carp at and rail
against Chemistry, and how ignorantly they aver, that this admirable Art is
not occupied by its followers, but on poisons, when you will find the Treatise
of the Chemical preparation of Animals as well as Vegetables. Lastly, You will
find the difference that there is in the modus faciendi of the Ancient
Pharmacy with the judicial, intelligent and reasonable government of Chemical
Artists, for the separation of the pure from the impure, and for the
preservation of that which causes the efficacy and the virtue in things.

You may and ought to believe, Readers, That though I have not made all the
preparations that are described in this Tract, yet nevertheless I have tried
the greater part, and may therefore judge of the possibility of their operation
and the liberality and virtue of things by the practice and experience in other
works which daily pass my hands. If you do but examine those Authors that have
given you the description of some things, I will leave it to your discretion to
judge the pains I have undertaken to denote to you those little observations
which are necessary for operating, and without which it is impossible to avoid
failing. I have followed the Method and Order of that knowing and expert
Physician Schrederus who is yet living and a Stipendiary to the City of
Francfort, to whom all Apothecaries are greatly obliged for the excellent
Chemical Dispensatory he has published. I Recommend to you likewise the
Auspurge Dispensatory, illustrated by the Remargues of that Great, brave and
Artist Mr. Zwelfer, Physician to his Imperial Majesty, as likewise to the
Appendix joined to it, to the end that you may have greater knowlede of those
Noble Lights which these two excellent persons have communicated in public,
and from whence I have drawn many things that will serve for your instruction
if you please to give your self the trouble to read and practice them.

Lastly, Readers, I desire with the greatest passion that this may redound to
the glory of Medicine, to the advancement of the one and other Pharmacy, but
above all to your good and particular satisfaction.

THE PREFACE.
THey that reckon Chemistry amongst the modern Arts, and of but late invention,
betray their knowledge both in the history of Nature, and the reading of
ancient Authors: Since, in the first place, Chemistry is nothing else but the
Art and Knowledge of Nature it self; that it is by her means we examine the
Principles, out of which natural bodies do consist and are compounded; and by
her are discovered unto us the causes and sources of their generations and
corruptions, and of all the changes and alterations to which they are liable:
And secondly, it is known, that the ancient Sages have taken from Chemistry,
the occasions and true motives of reasoning upon natural things, and that their
monuments and writings do testify this Art to be of no fresher date then
Nature it self. To this do agree the testimony of the holy Scriptures, by whom
we are taught, that even in the Worlds Infancy, Tubal-Cain the eighth of
Mankind from Adam, descended of Cain's line, was an expert Artist in all Brass
and Iron works, which he could not have been without a previous knowledge of
Minerals, and without being well acquainted, that the Mineral nature contains
in it self and comprehends the Metallic, as the purest part of its essence.
But this knowledge cannot be attained unto, but by the help and skill of
Chemistry; since it is by this Art we are informed, how a metallic, malleable
and ductile body, may be extracted out of brickle and inform Minerals. Whence
we do safely conclude, that he did receive this noble Art from his
Predecessors, or being himself the inventor of it, left it to Posterity, as the
richest Jewel they could inherit from him. This Assertion may be proved by the
most ancient of Authors, and most worthy of credit; and so we have upon record,
that Moses took the Golden Calf, an Idol of the Israelites, did calcine it, and
being by him reduced to powder, caused those Idolaters to drink it, in a
reproach and punishment of their sin. But no body, how little soever initiated
in the mysteries of this Art, can be ignorant, that Gold is not to be reduced
to Powder by Calcination, unless it be performed either by immersion in Regal
Waters, Amamulgation with Mercury, or Projection; all which three Operations
are only obvious to those which are fully acquainted both with the Theorical
and Practical part of Chimistry. This truth is confirmed by Hyppocrates, when
in his Book de Diaeta, he says, Artifices aurum molli igne liquant: and all
experimented Artists know, that Gold is not to be melted without some violence
of fire, and that the action of fire does rather purify it, then destroy it,
unless it be made tractable and volatile by the help of certain salts and
powders, only known to few persons; and those specially who have had their
hands in the work, and by practice attained the secrets of the Art. We could
join to this, the authority of Aristotle, made use of by his Sectators of this
Age, to oppose Chemistry, who says, That the Inhabitants of Umbria, were wont
to calcine Reeds, thereby to extract a salt out of them for their ordinary use;
which they would not have undertook without being first taught by the
principles of this Art, that Salt is a body of an uncorruptible nature, which
by this vulgar calcination could not be destroyed: And if we run over all Ages
since the Worlds Creation, we shall scarce find any wherein some great man
has not raised himself a name to live in the remembrance of Posterity, by the
help of Chemical learning. Witness the Egyptian Mercury, or famous
Trismegist, whose works do at this day exercise the understanding of the
greatest wits: Witness the first inventor of Glass; and that other more
skillful Artist, which had attained to that admirable secret of making it
malleable, and dyed with it, by the strange and tyrannical policy of the
Emperor Tiberius. And do not Geber, Raymundus Lullius, Peter of Apona,
Basilius Valentinus, Isaac the Hollander, and Paracelsus, sufficiently prove by
their incomparable works, that Chemistry is the true Key of Nature; that by her
means the expert Artist discovers her hidden beauty, aad that without her aid,
no man shall ever attain to the true preparation of those remedies, which are
only capable to encounter with that Hydra of various diseases wherewith humane
nature is daily afflicted and assaulted? But we should prove ungrateful to our
Age, and the memory of a most worthy and charitable Physician, and to the
industry of one of the most ingenious and exact Artists that ever was, if we
should pass by unmentioned the subtle Van Helmont lately deceased, and the
laborious Glauber, yet living, since they are as the two Beacons and Lights
which we are to follow in the Theory of Chemistry, and the best practice of it:
From their works then, and Paracelsus, we acknowledge to have compiled this
Abridgement of Theorical and Practical Chemistry, which we shall divide in two
parts: The first containing the Theory, the second the Practice of the Art: The
first part divided in two Books, shall treat in the first, of the Principles
and Elements of Natural things; and in the second, discover the springs and
effects of purity and impurity in them: The second part shall also be divided
into two Books; the first whereof is to contain all the necessary terms, both
to reduce in practice, and understand the operations of the whole Art; and the
second and last of all, shall open the means, and give a plain description,
whereby to anatomize all mixed bodies, whether Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals,
and thence to extract such remedies as are necessary for the cure of our
diseases. But before the principal matter be entered upon, I have not thought it
unnecessary, for the Readers satisfaction, to clear some few Queries, which use
to be moved, touching the nature of this Noble Art.

A Preliminary Discourse, containing some few Quaeries about the Nature of
Chemistry.
IT is one thing to treat of a Science and Art, in order to teach it, and it is
another to discourse upon the same: The first belongs properly to the Artist;
the second is a matter of deeper speculation, and belongs to the enquiry of the
Philosopher, whose part it is, to treat of the method, object, end, and action
of every Art or Science. According to these rules, we will succinctly examine
the most difficulties occurring in this Art, propounded in the following
Quaeries, and first, Concerning the Names usually given to Chemistry, whence
they are derived?

1 Quaery. This art, as many others, has according to its several effects,
received several names; the most ordinary is that of Chymia, or Chemistry,
which seems to have its original from the Greek word (...), signifying Gum,
or Liquor, because it teaches to reduce the most solid and compact bodies into
Juice or Liquor. Sometimes it is called Alchymia, Alchimy, with an addition of
the Arabic Particle (...) al, Answerable to the Greek Article (...).
which is the indication of some remarkable thing; often times prefixed as a
Particle: Others have called it Alchamia, supposing Cham one of the Sons of
Noah, to have been after the Flood inventer and restorer of Chemical Arts, but
chiefly Metallic. Sometimes it is called Spagiry, which name includes the
Noblest of her operations, namely to separate and join again substances, from
the Greek (...) and (...), to divide, and reunite again.
(...); And because none of her operations can proceed without external fire,
which does excite the internal heat of bodies: It has the name also
Pyrotechny, as the Art of fire, from the Greek (...), and (...), as to say,
(...) If it be called the Art of Hermes, or Hermetical, it gives a note of her
Antiquity; as Distillatory Art, or Art of Distillation, designs the most
familiar of her operations. Of all these names we rather choose that of
Chemistry, as being the most vulgarly known and received.

2. Quaery. If Chemistry ought to be called Art or Science? and of its
definition.

Before we enter into the definition of Chemistry, it is necessary to examine
her genus and difference, the knowledge of both which is necessary, before a
true definition of things can be given. We must then examine, whether it be an
Art or a Science, before we can define it is true genus, and seek its difference
in the object; since there is no part more essential in its definition. But to
avoid difficulties and intricacy, let us in few words explain the differency
between Art and Science, and the several acceptions incident to the name of
Chemistry.

The differency assigned between Art and Science, is only to be taken from the
diversity of their intentional ends or purposes: For as it is the only scope of
a Science to contemplate, and its end to attain knowledge by that
contemplation, wherein it does rest satisfied without putting the mind to a
further inquity: So Art is only bent to operation, and never cease until it
has brought the purposes of the Artist to a desired accomplishment. Whence we
may infer, that Science is only of such things as are not in our power, and
that Art does busy it self upon such things as are in our power. This being
granted, we must know, that as Chemistry is of a great extent, so it has also
several ends, and that as it has all the sphere of Nature for its object, some
things are under the power and reach of its disciples, others not; and besides
these two kinds of subjects, which are wholly of a different nature, there is
a third sort, partly under their power, and partly not: Whence we may in some
manner conclude, that there are three species of Chemistry; the one wholly
Scientifical and given to Contemplation, and may be very well termed
Philosophical, having only its end in the knowledge of Nature, and of its
effects; because it takes for object those on^y things which are constituted
out of our power: So that this kind of Chemical Philosophy, does rest
satisfied in the knowledge of the nature of the Heavens and Stars, the source
and original of the Elements, the cause of Meteors, original of Minerals, and
the way by which Plants and Animals are propagated; having not in her power to
frame or make any one of all these things, but being sufficiently pleased with
entertaining her discourse and reason upon the causes of so many various
effects. The second species of Chemistry may be called Iatrochymy of Medicinal
Chemistry, whose only end is operation; but not to be attained, unless by the
means and helping hand of Contemplative and Scientifical Chemistry: for as the
art of Physic, consists in two parts, Theory and Practice; the former being
but a Clue and help to lead unto the other: so shall also Iatrochymy
participate of both; the end of its contemplating being only Operation, and
that operation again purposing only the satisfaction of her disciples minds,
about the Contemplation both of things that are, and are not in our power. The
third species is Pharmaceutical Chemistry, which has for its end only
operation, belonging to the Apothecary's profession, who is to direct his work
by the Precepts and Orders of Iatrochymists: such as amongst the French
Physicians is eminent at this day, Monsieur Vallot, first Physician to his most
Christian Majesty, who does eminently possess the Theory and Practice of those
three species of Chemistry which we have spoken of. This third species or
kind, has for its object those things which come under our power to operate
on them, and extract those different parts which constitute the compound
thereof. Whence, from all that is above said, we may conclude, That Chemistry
may be called both Science and Art in several respects, and so consequently a
practical or operative Science.

Thus having found the genus, it remains we should find the Difference, to
complete the definition. Some do define Chemistry, The art of Transmutations;
others, The art of Separations; others, of both Transmutations and Separations:
But as Transmutation and Separation are the effects of Chemistry, they cannot
constitute its true and specifical Difference. There are several other ways of
definition used by others, but which do all come to what we have already said;
therefore we must of necessity take the Difference from its Object, as it is
above deduced. Some Authors make the object of Chemistry to be, Mixed bodies:
but they are deceived; for the Elements which are unmixt bodies, are also under
the verge of this Science: Others would have it the Natural body; but they also
are deceived; since Chemistry has under its consideration the universal
spirit, which is divested of all corporeity. We say then, that Chemistry makes
all natural things, extracted by the omnipotent had of God, in the Creation,
out of the Abyss of the Chaos, her proper and adaequate object. But it is to
be noted, that by natural things we do not understand bodies only, as they are
said to be composed of matter and form, but that we mean all created things,
though deprived of bodies; and by opposing things natural to supernatural,
there will be a sufficient distinction set between the Creator and Creatures,
to take away that reproach wherewith the Professors of this Noble Science, are
ordinarily spotted and traduced. Chemistry is then thus defined, A practical
and operative Science (or knowledge) or things natural. It is a Science, as is
already said, because it contemplates natural things; but because it does not
end or rest in Contemplation always, but alters sometimes natural things by
the means and help of others, it may be called an operative or practical
Science. To make short, It Is nothing else but Physic, or knowledge of Nature
it self, reduced to operation, and examining all it is Propositions by reasons
grounded upon the evidence and testimony of the senses, and not relying upon
bare and naked contemplation. This is then the difference between the
Chymical-Physician, or Naturalist, and he that follows the Schools, or
Dogmatical way; that, if you ask from the former, What parts do constitute a
body, he will not give you a naked Answer, and satisfy by words and mere
discourse your curiosity, but he will endeavor to bring his demonstrations
under your sight, and satisfy also your other senses, by making you to touch,
smell and taste the very parts which entered in the composition of the body in
question, knowing very well that what remains after the resolution of the mixed,
according to the rules of Art, was that very substance that constituted it. But
if you ask from the School-Philosopher, What does make the compound of a body?
He will answer you, that it is not yet well determined in the Schools: That, to
be a body, it ought to have quantity, and consequently to be divisible; that a
body ought to be composed of things divisible and indivisible, that is to say,
of points and parts: but it cannot be composed of points, for a point is
indivisible, and without quantity, and consequently cannot communicate any
quantity to the body, since it has none in it self; so that the answer should
have concluded the body to be composed of divisible parts. But against this
also will be objected, If it be so, let us know, whether the minutest part of
the body is divisible or no; if it be answered, Divisible, then it is instanced
again, that it is not the minutest, since there is yet a place left for
division: but if this minutest part be affirmed to be indivisible, then the
answer falls again into the former difficulty, since it returns to affirm it
a point, and consequently without quantity; of which being deprived, it is
impossible it should communicate the same to the body, since divisibility is an
essential property to quantity. You see then, that Chemistry does reject such
airy and notional Arguments, to stick close to visible and palpable things, as
it will appear by the practice of this Art: For if we affirm, that such a body
is compounded of an acid spirit, a bitter or pontick salt, and a sweet earth;
we can make manifest by the touch, smell, taste, those parts which we extract,
with all those conditions we do attribute unto them.

Now follows the third and last Query: What is the end of Chemistry? It is
not to be wondered, that ordinary Naturalists have attained to so little light,
in their search and knowledge of natural bodies, since they did propose to
themselves no other end but contemplation; thinking that it became not them to
set their hands to the work, thereby to attain a true knowledge of mixed bodies
by Chemical Anatomy: They and their Sectators also, imagining they should wrong
their Gravity and Doctoral State, to defile and sully their hands with the
blackness of Coals. Much contrary has been at all times the practice of
Chemical Philosophers, though they made, as well as they, Contemplation their
end: For they were persuaded, Practice and Operation were to be joined, to
receive a full delight and satisfaction, and lay firm and sure foundations to
their Reasonings; unwilling to build upon the quicksands of vain, frivolous,
and fantastical opinions; which made them willingly undergo the charges, toil
and labor of Practical Chemistry; and not be discouraged by Watchings, and ill
Savours, that they might attain the sooner to a solid an delightful knowledge
of the things of Nature, finding by the several experiments of their Works and
Processes, the abstruse causes of its wonderful effects, wherein they differ
very much from the Empyricks; which do, without much reasoning, confound,
obscure and intricate all things.

We do then conclude and affirm, that Operation is truly the general end of
Chemistry: For the Philosopher operates, only the better to be able to
contemplate; the Iatrochymist also to discover the better by his operation that
which Nature performs in the body of a sound man, that he may be capable to
restore health, when by sickness it becomes vitiated and disordered. Lastly,
the Pharmaco-Chymist operates, only to furnish wholesome and salutary remedies to
the sick Patients, according to the judicious Prescriptions and Orders of the
skillful and learned Physician. Is it then to be wondered at, if Chemists do
bestow so much labor and industry in purchasing this noble knowledge, the
perfection of which can never be attained without having first anatomized the
greatest part of Nature? For as it is necessary to dissect the human body, if
we will know its organical parts; so it is requisite, before we can discover
the fairest and best part of natural substances, which are as it were hidden
and involved within a secret rind, that we should open their composites.
Whence it may be concluded a very difficult matter for any to attain to the
exact knowledge of natural things, without the previous guidance of Chemistry,
and being acquainted with all its parts; neither can any be reckoned a perfect
Physician without the help of Hermetical Philosophy, since it is the truest
ground of Physic, and without which no Practitioner can deserve any other
title then that of Empyrick: For it is not a Gown, or degrees taken in
Universities, which constitute the Physician, but a solid knowledge of Nature,
grounded upon sound Reason and mature judgment, improved by practice and
experience. Whence it follows, first, That Chemistry does not merely consist
in the skill of preparing well a Remedy, as many do erroneously imagine; but in
the using of it with due circumstances, and respect to the Theorems of Art,
which is properly the true Physic: Secondly, that whosoever meddles with
Chemical remedies, without the previous grounds of Theory, can deserve no other
name then of an Empyrick, since he is altogether ignorant of the internal
efficient causes of their effects, and cannot give the Physical reasons, why he
does administer such a remedy, for such and such disease; being not
sufficiently grounded to know that these rare prescriptions of Chemistry, have
their remedies grounded, not upon the actions of first and second qualities,
but upon the specifical and internal virtues of their Chemical Principles, as
will more evidently appear in the sequel of this Treatise.

A Compendious Body of CHEMISTRY.
Book I. Of the Body of Chemistry abbreviated.
PART I. Of the Principles and Elements of Natural things.
CHAP. I. Of the Universal Spirit.
THE title of this Chapter does sufficiently evidence the error of those who
maintain, that the Natural Body is the only object of Chemistry, since it
treats also of the Universal Spirit, which is a substance void and divested of
all Corporeity: hence it is, that with more reason, we did assign all natural
things her adequate object, viz. all created things, both corporeal and
spiritual, visible and invisible; and that because Chemistry does not only
teach, how a body may be spiritualized, but how a spirit also may be fixed to
become a body. For after having made the general and particular Anatomy of
Nature, and searched and penetrated to its very center, this noble Science has
found, that the spring and root of all things was a spiritual substance,
homogeneous and like unto it self, to which ancient and modern Philosophers
have attributed several names, calling it a Vital substance, a Spirit of life,
Light, Balsom of life, Vital Mummy, Natural heat, Universal Spirit, Mercury of
life; and many more names, which to sum up all here, would be needless, since
these are the principal appellations.

But as our Scope, in this first. Book, is, to treat of the Principles and
Elements of natural things, it seems to stand with reason, that we should in
the first place speak of the first Principle, by which the others are
principiated; which Principle is nothing else but Nature it self, or that
universal Spirit, which makes the subject matter of this Chapter.

Paracelsus, in his book of Vexations, says, that Domus est semper mortua, sed
eam inhabitans vivit: By which mysterious and figurative speech, he endeavors
to teach us, that the strength of Nature is not included in the mortal and
corruptible body; but that it is to be sought in that wonderful seed which
hides it self under the shade of the body, who of it self has no strength or
virtue, but fetches it all from that seminal spirit which it contains; a thing
manifestly demonstrable in the corruption of that body, during which the
internal spirit does fabricate it self a new one, yea many new ones, by the
destruction of the first: Which occasioneth again our German Trismegistus to
say, that the power and virtue of death is efficacious; for then the spirit
does disingage it self from the bonds of the body, wherein he seemed to be
fettered, and without efficacy, which he begins then to declare, when it
should seem more improbable. This truth is illustrated by the grain of Corn
rotting in the earth: for the body being opened by that corruption, the
internal seminal spirit therein enclosed, buds out, produces a blade and
stalk, and at the end of it an Ear, containing several grains of Corn, the very
same in likeness to that which perished and was rotten in the ground.

This spiritual substance, which is the primary and sole substance of all
things, contains in it self three distinct, but not differing substances: For
they are homogeneous, as we have already said. But because there is found in
it, a heat, a moisture, and a drought; and all three are distinct, but not
differing; we say, that these three are but one essence, and the same radical
substance; otherwise, as Nature is one, simple, and homogeneous, if the seminal
Principles of these substances were heterogeneous, nothing would be found in
nature one, simple, and homogeneous; which cannot be, in regard of the great
inconveniences that would follow: For if heat did differ from moisture, it
could not be nourisht and fed by it (which is notwithstanding necessary to be
granted true) because nourishment is performed by things not differing, but of
a like nature* and if the aliment should prove in the beginning, different from
the alimentated, it would be necessary before it could pass into the substance
of the last aliment, that it should be divested of all difference and
dissimilar nature. Now it is granted on all hands, that radical moisture is the
last aliment of natural heat; whence it follows, that it cannot be of a
different nature: Moreover, if they did differ, each one would endeavor to
produce its like, and the intestine war, raised by this occasion, hinder the
generation of the Compound. Let us then conclude, that this radical and
fundamental substance of all things, is truly and really one in its essence,
but has a threefold denomination; for in respect of its natural heat and fire,
it is called Sulphur; in respect of its moisture, which is the food and aliment
of this fire, Mercury; and finally, in respect of the radical drought, which
is, as it were, the knot and cement of the fire and moisture, it is called
Salt; which we shall clear more particularly, when we treat hereafter of these
three Principles by themselves, and examine, whether or no the one may be
transmutated or converted into the other.

Having thus much spoken of the nature and essence of this universal spirit, we
must now examine it is original, and the effects which it does produce: And for
the first point, it is not to be doubted, but that this spirit has been
created by the omnipotency of the first Cause, when it extracted this goodly
fabric of the world out of its nothing, and did harbor it in all the parts of
this vast Machine, as the Poet does acknowledge, when he says, Spiritus intus
agit, totamque infusa per orbem
Men's agitat molem. --
For all the parts of the Universe are in continual need of its supply and
presence, as we discover by the effects; and if any by accident has been
deprived thereof, he immediately returns to possess it, and taking its place,
restores life by his arrival. So we see, that having extracted from the salt of
Vitriol several substances therein contained, if the dead earth, or Caput
mortuum, be exposed to the air, in some sheltered place free from the washing
of Rain, this spirit will not fail to return to it, being potently attracted by
this Matrix, whose earnest longing it is to fill it self with this spirit,
which makes the principal part of all things existent; for as things are only
destinated to their operation, so can they not act, but by their efficient
internal Principles. Therefore God, who ever works by the most compendious way,
and will not every day busy his Omnipotency in the creation of new substances,
has once for all created this Universal Spirit, and placed it every where,
that he might operate all in all things.

And as this Spirit is universal, so can he not be specificated but by the
means of particular Ferments, which do print in it the Character and Idea of
mixed bodies, to be made such or such determinate substances, according to the
diversity of Matrixes, which receive this Spirit in themselves to make it a
body. Thus in a Vitriolick Matrix, it becomes Vitriol; in an Arsenical,
Arsenick; a Vegetable Matrix makes it a Plant; and so of all the rest. But two
things are here to be noted, the first, That when we say, that this Spirit is
specificated in such or such a Matrix, that we understand nothing else, but
that this Spirit is imbodyed in such or such a Compound, according to the
different Idea it has received, by the means of particular ferment; and that,
notwithstanding, it may be extracted again out of this compound, by divesting
it by the help of Art, of this gross body, to give it a more subtle one, and
so bring it nearer its universal nature, and thus prepared, it does manifest
its own virtues much more eminently. The second thing observable is, that this
spirit cannot return to its indifferency or universal nature, without having
lost first of all the Idea received from the Matrix, in which it was embodyed:
I say, it must have lost all this Idea, because although these spirits have
been divested of their bodies by Art, they do notwithstanding preserve yet, for
a while, the character and print of their first body; as it evidently appears
in an air poisoned with Realgarick and Arsenical spirits, which invisibly fill
it, and do fly up and down; but when it has quite lost this Idea, it reunites
it self with the universal spirit, and if it meets with any fruitful Matrix,
being yet impregnated of its Idea, then it embodyes it self in several
different compounds: as it is evident in Plants and Animals, which we see
produced without seed, as Mushroms, Nettles, Mice, Frogs, Insects, and several
other things; which to relate here, would be too tedious.

Thus much had we to say of the Universal Spirit, reserving to speak of the
Matrixes which do specify and corporifie it, and communicate him the Idea and
Character of such a determinate existence or body, where we shall treat of
Elements hereafter.

CHAP. II. Of the several substances which are found after the Resolution and
Anatomy of the Compound.
WE may consider three several ways, the Principles and Elements which do
constitute the Compound: Viz. Or before its composition, or after its
resolution, or whilst they do yet compose and constitute the Mixed. In the
foregoing Chapter we have demonstrated the nature of Principles, before they
enter in the composition of the body; now our task is, in this Chapter, to
show, what they are after the resolution, and during the composition of the
Mixed; which we will do the more succinctly and in general terms at present, in
regard we shall fall again more particularly upon the same matter in the
following Chapters.

We have said heretofore, that the Universal Spirit, which radically contains
in it self the three first Substances, was indifferent and in order to be made
all things; and that he was specificated or embodyed, according to the Idea
which it took from the Matrix wherein he was received; with the Minerals
becoming Mineral, with Vegetables becoming a Plant, and with Animals Animal. Of
this Idea we will speak more hereafter, as also of the Matrixes which do
communicate it to the same.

During the composition of the Mixed, this spirit retains the nature and Idea
which it took in the Matrix. Thus if it has taken the nature of Sulphur, and
been impregnated with its Idea, it communicates to the Compound, all the
virtues and qualities of Sulphur. The same is to be said of Salt, and Mercury;
for whenever it is specificated, or (if it may be said without barbarism)
Ideificated in any of these Principles, it shows it immediately by its
actions: Thus things are in their Composition either fine or volatile, liquid or
solid, pure or impure, dissolved or co-agulalated, and so of the rest,
according as this spirit contained more or less Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, or
more or less mixture of the grossness and terrestreity of the Matrixes. But
after these Principles are separated one from the other, and from the
terrestreity and corporeity which they draw from their Matrixes, they make it
plain enough by their powerful effects, that it is in this state they ought to
be reduced, before they can work with efficacy, though they retain yet still
their character and internal Idea. Thus some few drops of the true spirit of
Wine will be more powerful, then a whole glass of this corporeal liquor
wherein it was enclosed: A drop of spirit of Vitriol shall be of more effect
then many ounces of the body. But you are to note also, that these powerful
effects and great virtues do last no longer in the spirits, than the Idea of
the Mixed, whence they were extracted, remains with them: For as all things by a
natural circulation in Nature, which corporifies to spiritualize, and
spiritualizeth again to corporifie, have a strong tendency to their first
Principle: so these spirits are still busy and working, in endeavoring to
divest and free themselves of the Ideas wherein they are fettered, that they
may return to their first Principle, which is the Universal Spirit.

These things being so cleared, it remains to see how many substances Chemistry
finds in the resolution of the Compounds, and what they are. Aristotle says,
that the resolution of things shows their constitutive Principles: Upon this
Axiom, has its ground and basis our Philosophy, both by reason of the truth of
it, and that Chemistry receives no Principles of sensible things but such as
are obvious to, and fall under the Judicatory of the senses. And as the
Anatomist has found a certain number of similar parts, which constitute the
humane body, whereof he makes the subject of his Art; so does the Chemist
endeavor to find out the number of primary and similary substances of all
Compounds, to exhibit them to the senses, that they may better judge what was
their Office whilst yet joined in their Mixed, having considered their virtue
and efficacy, in this purity and abstracted nature; thence the name of Sensal
Philosophy has been by some given to the Chemist: For as the Anatomist does
make use of Rasors and other sharp Tools in his Dissections, to separate the
better the several parts of the human body, which is his chief object: The same
does the Chemical Artist, fetching his instruction from Nature it self, to
attain his end, which is nothing else but to join homogeneal and separate
heterogeneal things by the means of Heat; for he does nothing else but
contribute his care and labor, to regulate the first according to the exigency
of natural Agents and Patients, thereby to resolve the mixed bodies in their
several substances, which he separates and purifies afterward; for the fire
never relents or slackens its action, but rather drives it on and increases
it, until he finds no Or Dissimilar parts.
heterogeneity left in the Compound.

After that the Artist has performed the Chemical resolution of bodies, he
does find last of all five kind of substances, which Chemistry admits for the
Principles and Elements of natural bodies, whereupon are laid the grounds of
its Doctrine, because in these five substances is found no Heterogeneity; these
are, the Phlegmatic or waterish part, the Spirit or Mercury, the Sulphur or
Oil, the Salt, and the Earth. Some give them other names; for it is free for
every body to use their invention in such a case, being a thing of no great
importance to neglect Names, and leave a latitude of freedom to every one
therein, provided you may agree in the substance.

Now, as the Mixts cannot subsist in their integrity and perfect state, if you
deprive them of any or these parts, so would also the knowledge of these
substances prove defectuous, if they were separated one from another: wherefore
we are to consider them, both absolutely and respectively. Three of these
substances offer themselves to our sight, by the help of Chemical Operation,
under the form of a Liquor, which are the Phlegm or Water, the Spirit, and the
Oil; the two other in a solid body, viz. Salt and Earth. The Water and Earth
are commonly called passive Principles, material and of less efficacy then the
other three; as contrary wise the Spirit or Mercury, Sulphur and Salt, are
reckoned active and formal Principles, by reason of their penetrative and
subtle virtue: Some do call the Earth and Water or Phlegm, Elements; and give
the name of Principles to the three others. But if that definition which
Aristotle has given to Principles, is essential, viz. That Principia neque ex
aliis, neque ex se invicem fiunt; Experience does teach us, that these
Substances cannot properly bear the name of Principles; because we have said
above, that Mercury did change it self into Sulphur, moisture is the aliment or
food of heat, and food transforms it self into the thing which is fed.
Therefore the definition of Elements should rather suit with these substances,
since they are the last thing to be found, after the resolution of the
Compound, and that Elements are, Ea quae primo componunt Mixtum, and in quae
ultimo resolvitur.

But because the Elements are considered two ways, either as they are parts
which do constitute the Universe, or as they only compound Mixed Bodies; to
accommodate our selves to the ordinary way of expression, we shall attribute
unto them the name of Principles, in regard they are constitutive parts of the
Compound; and shall reserve the appellation of Elements, for those great and
vast Bodies, which are the general Matrixes of natural things.

CHAP. III. Of each Principle in particular.
SECT. I. Wherein is treated, Whether those Five Principles, which remain after
the dissolution of the Mixed, are Natural or Artificial.
Chemical Philosophy does admit for Principles of the Compound, those five
substances whereof we have treated above, because as it is a Science wholly
sensal, it grounds its reasons only upon what senses do demonstrate unto her:
And because having exactly anatomized a body natural, nothing is found beyond
what may answer one of these five substances. But here may be a Question moved
of no small difficulty, viz. Whether these five Substances, are Natural or
Artificial Principles, and not rather Principles of Disunion and destructive,
than of Composition and Mixture? To this may be answered, that it is not a
matter of small difficulty, to know whether these Principles are natural,
because we do not see them severed from the Compound, by a natural corruption
or putrefaction; and that Chemical separation can only be performed by an
artificial corruption caused by the help of the heat of fire: but if the
business be judiciously and narrowly examined, it will appear, that although
these substances can only be extracted by the help of Chemical Art, they are
notwithstanding, merely and purely Natural, since Art does contribute nothing
else but the Vessels to contain and receive them. Whence Nature being destitute
of these Vessels, and we cannot without their help render those substances
palpable and visible objects of the eye; it cannot seem strange, that we should
not perceive these substances, in the natural corruption and solution of their
Compounds: for Nature which is still in action and busy about productions,
makes use of the said substances, and applies them to the generation of several
other existencies, as Aristotle has very well observed, when he says that,
Corruption unius est generatio alterius. Thence it is, that in the natural
putrefaction of bodies, a certain smell for the most part offends our Nostrils;
a true token of the Air being impregnated with volatile spirits, which are
Saline and Sulphurous; by which it appears, that the Mixed is radically
dissolved, and thus it is performed: The Salt is dissolved by the help of the
internal Phlegm or Water; and as the Salt is the bond of the two other
Principles, so can they no longer subsist in their Mixed or Body, because heat
which accompanyes all putrefactions, does subtilize and carry them away, so
that there remains nothing but what is of earthlinesse in the Compound.
Therefore we do conclude, that although these Principles may not be made
sensible and manifest, but by the Operations of Chemistry, it does not debar
them notwithstanding from being natural, because if nature had not immixed them
in all things, they could not indifferently be drawn from all bodies, as we
daily see that they may; whence we infer, that these substances are not
extracted from the Mixed by transmutation, but by a mere natural separation,
assisted by the heat of the Vessels and the hand of the Artist: for all things
cannot indifferently and immediately be transformed in the like and same
things. Therefore it cannot be thought strange, that other substances then the
forementioned five, should be extracted from Mixed Bodies by Chemical
Operations, when the way of operating is altered, and proceeds by another way,
then by the separation of Principles, such as are the Quintessences, Arcana,
Magisteries, Specificks, Tinctures, Extracts, Faeculae, Balsoms, Flowers,
Panacaea's and Elixirs, whereof Paracelsus treats at large, in his Books of
Archidoxa; since all these several preparations take their virtues from the
various mixture of the Principles, whereof we are to speak in the following
Sections, according to the order wherein they fall first under our senses.
Where we shall consider them both as they yet compound the Mixed or Body, and as
they are separated from it.

SECT. II. Of Phlegm or Water.
THat insipid liquor which commonly is called Water, has by the Chemists the
name of Phlegm given unto it, when it is separated from all other Mixture; it
is the first substance obvious to the eye, when the fire does act upon any Mixed
body; it appears first in the shape of a vapor, and by condensation turns into
liquor: Her presence is as necessary as any other Principle in the composition
of the Mixed: And we do not agree with the opinion of those who hold it to be
needless, provided the proportion and harmony required in Natural bodies be
preserved: for Phlegm is as the curb and rains of spirits, which dulls and
allayes their sharpness, dissolves the salt, and weakens its corrosive
acrimony, hinders the inflammation of Sulphur, and binds the Earth, and mixes
it with the Salts; for as these two last Substances are brickle, crumbling and
dry, so could they give but little firmness and consistency to the body
without the help of this liquor: Thence it comes, that corruption and
dissolution are introduced by its absence, which has occasioned some to call
it the Principle of Destruction; for it easily vapors away, which is the cause
that the Mixed cannot long subsist in the same state and harmony, because this
Principle being part in the body, easily and at every hour exhaleth it self and
vapors away, which makes it obnoxious to the least outward injuries, procured
as much by internal as external causes. Therefore those that do work about the
preservation of Mixts, make it their study to preserve this Principle in the
Compound; because it is he that keeps all the other linked together, as it
evidently appears by the operations of our Art: It can endure several
alterations, without changing its nature; for if sometimes it turns it self
into vapors, they are notwithstanding essentially nothing else but the very
Phlegm it self. And here you shall note, that vapors are of a different
nature; some are merely aqueous and Phlegmatic; others spirituous and
Mercurial, others Sulphurous and Oily; and lastly, some participate of these
three qualities together. It is moreover to be noted, that even the Salts, and
Mineral and Metallic Earths, may be subtilized yet and turned into vapors
differing from the aforesaid four qualities, yielding fix and ponderous
spirits, and flowers. Briefly, the Doctrine of fiery, aqueous, and aerial
Meteors, may very well be related to the nature of these vapors and
exhalations: For we see that aqueous vapors are easily condensed in water in
the Limbecks, which the Spirituous or Oily are not, as requiring much more time
and cooling; whence many consequences may be drawn, tending to the use of
Physic, and particularly in the cure of those pains, which are thought to
proceed from vapors and exhalations, and vulgarly are called Mereorisms, or
griping vapors of the Ventricle and Spleen: For aqueous vapors cannot cause
so much distention, because they are sooner compressed and condensed, then
those which proceed from the Spirits, Oils, and mixed Salts. Now as too much
Phlegm does extinguish the natural heat, and slackens the body, and dulls all
his functions: so the too small proportion thereof, causes as it were a
burning and corrosion of it, whilst the Sulphur and fixed Spirit or Salt
becomes predominant; an evident proof that the frame of mixed bodies does only
subsist by the harmony and just proportion of all its substances. To conclude
what we have said of this Principle, you are to observe, that the Phlegm or
waterish part of any Mixed, is ordinarily the fittest Menstruum to extract the
tincture and Extract thereof, because it is endowed still with some character
of its Compound, and some Idea of its virtue and faculty: but chiefly because
it is for the most part accompanied with the volatile Spirit of the Mixed,
whereby it is rendered more capable easily to penetrate the same, and to extract
its virtue, being partaker of a mixed nature of most subtle Sulphur and
Mercury, which comes very near to the Universal.

SECT. III. Of the Spirit.
SOme do call Mercury that second substance which falls under our sight in the
Anatomy of the body; Others name it radical Moisture, but we shall keep the
appellation of Spirit, as the most in use. Notwithstanding, to avoid error and
mistake in these vulgar names of Principles, and that the Reader should not
confound them with the appellations of Compounds; it is necessary to inform
him, that they have received such names, only for the likeness and
correspondency they have with those substances from which they are denominated:
See therefore you do not mistake Phlegm for Pituite, Mercury for Quick silver,
and Sulphur for ordinary Brimstone, which is an ingredient in the composition
of Gunpowder, mixed with Saltpeter, nor Salt for that common Salt familiar to
our Tables, and much less Earth for such a substance as is Bol-Armeny or Terra
sigillata, since all these are Bodies, composed of the same Principles, every
one as we design by those names. Spirit then is nothing else but that aerial,
subtle, penetrating, active substance, which we draw out of the Mixed Body, by
the help of fire; whence it is to be concluded, that this Principle in it self
is one, unmixt, and homogeneous, having taken its Idea from the character of
its specific and particular Matrix, as we shall deduce hereafter more at
large, when we speak of the Elements, and their virtues, in the following
Chapter. This substance of the Spirit is considered, either as it composeth yet
the Mixed, or as it is separated from it: Separated, it is very penetrating; i^
cuts, opens, and attenuates the most solid and fixed Bodies, it excites heat in
Fermentation, untieth the bonds of Salt and Sulphur, and makes them separable,
resists corruption and rottenness; yet by accident may be the cause of it;
devours the Salt, and seises so greedily upon it, that it can scarce be
separated but by an extreme violence of the fire: It is possessed of its own
heat, and cold, for it does not act by Elementary, but by his own proper and
specific qualities: To be brief, we fall short of proper terms to express
duly his nature; since it is a true Proteus, which turns himself in all
shapes, and as the Sun dryes and moystens, whiteneth and blackens, according to
the diversity of subjects upon which it works. This same Spirit communicates
several Noble qualities to the Phlegm; for it preserves him from corruption,
makes it penetrative, and endoweth him almost with a^l his own activity: And in
requital, the Phegm does soften and bri^^e the fury of the Spirit, and makes it
so tractable, that it may become useful in a thousand ways.

Now whilst this Spirit remains in a due harmony, and does not exceed the
terms of his Office in mixed Bodies, it becomes to them very serviceable,
hindering the increase of excrementitious matters, and of all other substances
which may prove contrary or hurtful to the nature of the Compound, multiplying
his substance, and strengthening all his faculties, and that in Animals,
Vegetables and Minerals. But if by the power of some other Agent, this
Principle is forced to exceed the condition and constitution of the Mixed
wherein it is, it alters the whole frame and economy of its Compound, as we
shall show more at large, when we come to treat of the Principles of
Destructives.

SECT. IV. Of Sulphur.
THis Principle, as well as the others, has received several names; for it is
called Oil, Natural Fire, Light, Vital Fire, Balsom of Life and of Sulphur, and
besides, many other appellations have been given by the Sons of Art, with which
we will not fill up this Section: According to our usual custom, we will
content our selves, with examining the nature of the thing, leaving the nicetie
of Names to the overcurious.

That substance then, which sometimes we will call Oil, sometimes Sulphur, is
the third in order of those we extract by the artificial resolution of the
Compound; we give it this name because it is an Oleagineous substance; which
easily take fire, being of a combustible nature, by whose means also the Mixts
are rendered such. It is called Principle as well as the others, because being
separated from the Compound, it is homogeneous in all his parts, as the other
Principles are. This Substance is also considered two several ways: For being
loosened from the others, it swims above the Phlegm and Spirits, because it is
lighter and more aetherial; but if it be not absolutely separated from the Salt
and the Earth, it will sometimes precipitate it self to the bottom, or swim in
the middle, because the Sulphur supports and holds up the Earth and Salt,
until it be overcome by their weight; it receives not easily nor willingly the
Salt, without being first joined with the Spirit, or before the Salt be
circulated with the Spirit, wherewith it has a great sympathy* and then they
easily receive the Sulphur together; a thing very well worth noting, since
without this observation, no Panacaea's, Magisteries, Essences, Arcana's, nor
other most secret Remedies, which are unknown to vulgar Physicians, and
Galenical Apothecaries, can be made: no more then these can give a reason of
the noblest natural effects; because for the most part they assign them to the
four first or primary Qualities.

This Sulphur is of the matter of those fiery Meteors, which are kindled in the
several Regions of the Air, and are sometimes found in the Cavities of the
earth, and chiefly in those places, where Minerals and Metals are generated; it
resists to Cold, and never congeals, being the Principle of Heat; it never
suffers corruption, preserves from it those things which are immersed in it,
preventing the penetration of Air, it sweetens the acrimony of Salt, by whose
help it is fixed and coagulated; does so powerfully blunt the sharpness of
Spirits, that the most strong Waters have no power over it, nor those Bodies
where it abounds. His Office is, to bind and allay the Earth which is but
dust, with the Salt in the frame of Mixed Bodies: It causes also the strict
union of the other Principles, moderating the too great dryness of Salt, and
fluidity of Spirit, and finally by his means, these three Principles grow into
a viscuous compact substance, which often times hardens afterward, by the
mixture of the Earth and Phlegm.

SECT. V. Of Salt.
THe Phlegm, Spirit, and Sulphur, are volatile Principles flying from the Fire,
which makes them ascend, and sublimate into vapors; whence it follows, that
they were unable to endure the Mixed with a requisite solidity for its duration,
unless there were some other fixed and permanent substances joined unto it; of
which we find two wholly differing from the others in the last dissolution of
Bodies. The first is a plain and unmixt Earth, without any remarkable quality,
except it be dryness and heaviness: The second is a Substance; which resists
fire, and dissolves in water, known to Chemists by the name of Salt.

These two substances, which are as it were the basis and foundation of the
Mixed, though confounded by the action of fire, are notwithstanding two several
Principles in which are to be found such essential differences, that there is
between them no Analogy. The salt does manifest it self by his qualities, which
are as numberless as efficatious and powerful, much more without compare then
the Earth, which is almost without action or virtue.

The Salt being exactly severed from the other Principles, offers it self to
our senses in a dry, crumbling, and brickle body, easily reduced to powder, a
certain sign of his external drought; but it is endowed also of an internal
moisture, witness its fusibility; it is fixed, and incombustible, resisting to
fire, wherein it grows purer, suffers no putrefaction, and is (as it were)
eternal, being capable to preserve it self without alteration. This substance
is thought by some, to be the first subject and cause of all savours, as the
Sulphur of odours, and Mercury of colors; but we shall refute this Assertion,
when we come to handle this Subject hereafter.

Salt is easily dissolved in moisture, and being dissolved bears up the
Sulphur, and joins it to it self by the means of the Spirit. The usefulness of
it is very great; for it hinders fire from consuming hastily the Oil; which is
the cause that floated Wood does not yield a long flame, being deprived of the
greatest part of its Salt: It is salt which makes the earth fruitful, being
with the Oil, instead of a vital Balsom to Vegetables; and thence it comes,
that Grounds too much washed with rain, lose their fertility: It conduces also
to the generation of Animals, and hardens Minerals also, and gives them their
consistency: But you are to note, that all these effects do only follow, when
it is dispensed in Bodies, with a just proportion; for if it exceeds,
generation and increase are thereby hindered, because it corrodes and destroys
with his acrimony, whatsoever the other substances can produce.

But that you may not be deceived by the ambiguity of the word Salt, you are to
know, that there is a certain Central Salt, radical Principle of all things,
which is the first body wherewith the Universal Spirit closes it self, and
contains the other Principles; some have called it Hermetical Salt, because,
say they, Hermes was the first that spoke of it: but it may be more properly
and lawfully called the Hermaphroditical Salt, because it participates of all
natures, and is indifferently inclined to all. This Salt is the fundamental
ground of all Nature, being the Center where all her virtues do meet, and the
true seeds of all things, being nothing else, but a congealed, well digested
and concocted Salt: The truth of which evidently appears in this, that if you
boil in water any Seed whatsoever, it becomes immediately barren; because this
seminal virtue consists in a very subtle Salt, which dissolves and vanishes in
the water; whence we learn, that Nature begins the production of all things
by a central and radical Salt, which she extracts out of the Universal Spirit.
The difference between these two Salts is, that the first breeds the other in
the Mixed, and that the Hermaphroditical Salt is ever a Principle of Life, and
the other proves sometimes a Principle of Death. But because we are to treat
hereunder, of the Principles of death and destruction, we shall not insist in
these Sections upon the effects of either, because the knowledge of Contraries
being the same, they shall be more illustrated when opposed one to another.

SECT. VI. Of the Earth.
THe Earth is the last of Principles, both of fixed and volatile; it is a naked
substance, divested of all manifest qualities, except dryness and astringency;
for as concerning Weight, we shall speak of it hereafter: I say, manifest
quality, because this Earth retains always in it self, the indelible character
of that virtue she was once possessed with, viz. of embodying or corporizing,
and Ideifying the Universal Spirit. The first Idea she imparts to it, is that
of Hermaphroditical Salt, which restores to this Earth, her first Principles,
so that the mixed is as it were by it resuscitated, since from the same body,
the same specifical Principles, which by Chemical separation were before
separated, may be extracted again; as we shall explain hereafter more at large,
when we come to treat of this matter. Let us consider at present, the
usefulness of this substance, very necessary in the Compound of the body, since
it is by her means that it receives firmness and consistency: For being united
to the Salt, it causes presently the corporeity, and consequently, the
continuity of the parts: Mixed with the Oil or Sulphur, it causes tenacity,
viscosity, and lent or, i. e. slowness in motion; it yields then with Salt,
hardness and firmness; for as Salt is of a brickle and crumbling nature, and
easily reduced to dust, it could not intimately be united to the earth, to give
it a solidity, but by the help of moist and liquid substances. The
inconveniences of this Principle are manifested in this, that the Mixed
requires abundance of the other substances: For when Earth does predominate,
it makes the body heavy, slow, cold and stupid, according to the nature of
Composites, wherein it does abound.

But you shall notwithstanding take notice, by the By, that it is not the sole
Earth which causes the heaviness of the body, as those Philosophers do assert,
who are little acquainted with our handiwork: For we find more Earth in a
pound of Cork after its resolution, though it be a very light body, then in
three or four of Box and Guaiacum, which are so heavy, that (against the nature
of other Woods) they can scarce hold above water: Whence we must of necessity
conclude, that the greatest heaviness and weight of Bodies, proceeds of Salt
and Spirits abounding in these Woods, whereof Cork is deprived. It is also
experimentally seen, that a Glass filled with Spirit of Vitriol, or some other
sharp Spirit well rectified, shall outweigh two or three Glasses of the same
bigness, filled with water, or any other like Liquor. I know it will be
objected against this Experiment, that the heaviness of Guaiacum proceeds from
the compactedness of its substance, almost impenetrable to Air, and that the
lightness of Cork does proceed from the great quantity of big and large pores
it has, which are filled with that light Element, and cause it to swim above
water, contrarily to Box and Guaiacum. But this Answer is not fully
satisfactory; for if levity and heaviness are caused by rarefaction and
condensation, it will follow thence, that those many pores in Cork, must
proceed from the abundance of earth in it, and the defect of the other
Principles; and hence it will be concluded necessarily, that Earth is porous of
it self; and secondly, that it causes porosity in Bodies: For the Axiom is
true, Nihil dat quod non habet; and, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud
est magis tale, say the Peripatetick or Ambulatory Philosophers; and so shall
they be forced to assert by their own reason, though contradictory to their
Maxims, that Earth causes not only the levity of Mixts, but that it is also
light of its own nature, which in their Philosophy should be a Monster: and
contradicts also to experience; for of all the Principles, when they are duly
and according to Art separated one from the other, none is heavyer then the
Earth, which ever subsideth in the bottom of the Glass, when they are mixed
together.

To come out of this Labyrinth, a higher Philosophy is required, and fair
Ariadne, which is Nature it self, must be courted, to obtain this Clue, and
find the issue of its winding paths; which if we can happily attain to, we
shall be taught by the operations of Chemistry, that there is two sorts of
levity and heaviness, the one internal, the other external; the one found in
the Principles, whilst they yet compound the Mixed, the other when they are
separated asunder.

CHAP. IV. Of Elements in General and Special.
SECT. I. Of Elements in General.
THE difference which Peripateticks make between Principle and Element, is, as
they say, that Principles cannot take one another nature, neither be
metamorphosed or transmuted the one into the other; but that Elements are
Substances which of themselves are compounded of Principles, and do compound
the Mixts afterward at their turns, and so these substances can easily pass
one into another nature; the truth whereof we shall examine hereafter. But in
Hermetical Philosophy, Elements are taken for those four great Bodies, which
are as it were the Matrixes, containing in themselves, the virtues, seeds,
characters and Idea's imparted to them by the Universal Spirit. But before we
enter into this kind of Philosophy, after we have spoken in the foregoing
Chapter of the nature of Principles, we must now treat in this of Elements;
where we will first examine, what reason the Galenists have to say, that Mixed
Bodies are compounded of those Elements, and whether there are not more
substances found in their Dissolutions, then those which their Books make
mention of.

They say, that when Wood is burned in the Fire, four substances do manifestly
occur to the senses, and do assure us, that these are the four Elements, which
did constitute the Mixed before it was destroyed by the fire. Let us examine,
whether they have discovered all, and left no occasion unto us of farther
inquiry.

Their reasons are grounded upon the following experience: The four Elements,
say they, are made manifest to our senses, when the Wood comes to be examined
and consumed by Fire; for the Flame represents the Fire, the Smoke Air, the
Moisture issuing from the ends of the Wood Water, and the Ashes Earth; whence
they draw this consequence, That since we see but those four substances, there
was none other that could constitute the Compound. But, though we grant those
four to be all what can appear in so gross an operation, yet, if we will
proceed with more Art and exactness, we shall not want to find something more
in it: For if you take the pains to enclose shreds or filings of Wood in a well
luted Retort, and fit a capacious Recipient to it, and give a graduate and
regular fire, you shall discover two substances, which without this Art cannot
fall under our senses, and this is the Apple of Discord between Peripatetical
and Hermetical Philosophers: Which before I proceed further, I will endeavor
to reconcile. To this end, we grant to both Parties, that Principles and
Elements, are found in all Mixts; but let us see how. When the first say, that
the Smoke in burning Wood represents the Air, we say they are in the right, for
it is only by way of Analogy and similitude, that this Smoke can obtain the
denomination of Air; For it is not really Air, since experience shows us,
that this smoke imprisoned in a Recipient, has qualities very much differing
from that of Air; whence we infer, it can be called Air, only by Analogy. And
this is the point in which both do differ, concerning this substance, that the
Peripateticks call it Air, and Chemists Mercury: Let them dispute of the words,
provided we do agree in the thing it self.

We come now to the other Element of Peripateticks, viz. Fire, and the other
Principle of Chymisters, Sulphury, which we are to examine, and see in what
they agree, and wherein they differ. The first say, that in the action of Fire
preying upon Wood, its action is manifest to the senses. But our answer to this
sensible experiment is, that whatsoever destroys the Mixed, cannot be a
constitutive Principle of it, but rather a Principle of destruction: If they
return, That no fire is actually in the Mixed, but only potentially: therein we
will close with them, and reconcile them with the Chemists, who name their
Sulphur that potential fire of Peripateticks. To end then their Controversy, I
say, that the fire which we see to issue out of burning Wood, is nothing else
but the Sulphur of Wood actuated; for the actuating of Sulphur does consist in
its inflammation. As for the Ashes which they will have to be the Element of
Earth; that Salt which by washings and Elixivation is extracted out of them,
should sufficiently persuade these Philosophers, that the Chemists are as well,
if not better, grounded in establishing the number of their Principles.

The number then of Principles and Elements which compound Mixed Bodies, being
thus cleared, it remains for us to say something of the Elements, both as to
their number and propriety, before we speak of them severally, as also of their
Matrixes and Fruits.

It is a thing to be wondered at, that the Sectators of Aristotle, should not
yet since so long a time that his Writings and Philosophy are in credit, have
determined the number of Elements: For some amongst them with great reason do
affirm, that there is no Elementary Fire; I say, with reason, if it be
understood in their own sense: for, to what purpose is it to admit an Element
of Fire under the sphere of the Moon, since we assign to it no other use then
to enter in the Compound of Mixed Bodies; and that, besides that Element so
placed, is at too great a distance from the place where Mixts are generated, we
have found that the fire in them is nothing else but their Sulphur: therefore I
do conclude here, with Paracelsus, that there is no other Elementary fire, but
the Heaven it self, and its light.

As touching the general proprieties of Elements, two Quaeries use to be made
on them: The first, If they are pure; the second, If they are transmutable one
into the other. Concerning their purity, I answer, that if they were such, they
should prove of no use; for a pure Earth were barren, since it should have in
it self no seeds of procreation and fruitfulness; and the brine of the Sea, and
several qualities of the Air, sufficiently confirm this Assertion. But as
concerning their mutual transmutation of one into the other, it is not so
easily performed as vulgar Philosophers do imagine, though we cannot say it to
be absolutely impossible: For they teach, that Earth is changed into Water,
Water into Air, Air into Fire, and finally that Fire by another transmutation
returns into Earth: Because, although Earth and Water do sometimes assume and
take the shape and form of Exhalations, yet these vapors are always
essentially Water or Earth, as it is made plain by their re-assuming their
first nature. This change then cannot happen, unless such or such Element being
totally spiritualized, comes to lose its Elementary Idea, and to be reunited
afterward to the Universal Spirit, who might then give him the Idea of another
Element, whose body he might have, by the character imprinted by the Matrix.

For this reason do Chemists assign two natures to Elements, in their
description of them; viz. the one Spiritual, the other Corporal; the virtue of
the one being hidden in the bosom of the other. Hence it comes, that when they
will have any thing to act efficaciously, they endeavor as much as in them
lies, to divest it from its Body, and spiritualize it: For as Nature cannot
communicate its. Treasures unto us, but under the shade of Bodies, so can we do
no more then to divest them by the help of Art from the grossest and most
material part of that Body, to apply to our uses: for if we urge them, and
spiritualize too much, so as that they should fly from our sight and contact,
then do they lose their bodily Idea and character, and return again to the
Universal Spirit, to reassume after some space of time their first Idea, or
some other differing from it, by the character and Idea of such or such a
Matrix, enclosed in such or such part of such or such Element.

These are the true effects of Elements, which are, as we have said, to
corporifie or identifie the Universal Spirit, by the several ferments contained
in their particular Matrixes, and to give it those characters which they had
imprinted in themselves; for, as we have said, this Spirit is undetermined to
all things, and may be made all in all. This happens, because Nature is never
idle, but perpetually in action; and as it is a finited essence, so can it
neither create or annihilate any other, because such an act belongs only to an
infinite power. But this matter being of too large an extent to be treated of
here, w^ shall refer it to the following Sections, where we shall
particularly treat of Elements, which are the Universal Matrixes of all things,
where also we will speak of particular Matrixes, that imprint the Idea's and
characters to the Spirit, whereby so many fruits are produced, which daily fall
under our use, by the help and means of natural fermentations.

SECT. II. Of the Element of Fire.
SInce all things tend to their Center, and place of their natural rest, it is
a manifest sign that they are thereunto inclined and drawn, by a natural
virtue, hidden under the shade of their bodies; this virtue can be nothing
else, but that Magnetic faculty wherewith each Element is endowed, to draw its
like to it self, and repel its contrary: For as the Lodestone attracts the
Iron of one side, and rejects it of the other, the Elements do likewise by a
like power attract those things which correspond with their nature, and repel
and drive away from them, those that be of a different: since then fire
ascends, it is not to be doubted but that this effect does proceed from a
tendency it has to its natural place, which is Elementary Fire, where it is
carried by its own proper spirit, when it forsakes the commerce of the other
Elements.

To understand well this Doctrine, it is first to be known, that the Element of
Fire is not enclosed under the sphere of the Moon, as we have already hinted
above, and that consequently no other Fire can be admitted, then the Ether or
Heaven it self, which has its Matrixes and fruits, as the other Elements. For
that great number of Stars which we see moving in that vast Element, are
nothing else but particular Wombs or Matrixes, where the Universal Spirit takes
a very perfect Idea, before it descends to incorporate it self in the Matrixes
of the other Elements; and thence may be illustrated the sense and meaning of
that Axiom of the Great-Hermes, which many look upon as a Chimaera; that, Nihil
est inferius, quod non sit superius and vice versa; and that opinion of
Paracelsus, who does affirm, That every thing has its peculiar Heaven and
Astrum: For to speak true, the virtue of all sublunar things comes from
Heaven, by the means of that Spirit whereof we have already so much spoken.
Paracelsus names the knowledge of this Doctrine, Pyromancy, especially when he
treats of the Theory of Diseases; for we see that Elements are as it were the
Receptacles and Domicils of all those things that are endowed with an
intellectual, sensitive, or vegetative knowledge, or also Mineral, which some
do call the fruits of Elements: And according to that Doctrine, it is not to be
doubted, that as the Heavens are most perfect and spiritual, so they are the
Mansion and Receptacle of those spiritual and perfect substances which are
called Intelligences.

But you must note, that when I have said, that Fire in its ascent does forsake
the commerce of others Elements, that I have so spoken, only because the
visible Fire which we use on our Hearths, is nothing else but a Meteor or Body
imperfectly mixed of some Elements or Principles, wherein Fire or Sulphur are
predominant, and its flame an oleagineous and sulphurous smoke kindled; and
when fire is spiritualized by that forsaking, it never cease till it has
returned to its natural place, which of necessity must be above, and beyond the
Air, since we see it in the Air it self in a perpetual action, as willing to
forsake it. It is also by the means of this fire, which is still aspiring to
its Center, that the Clouds, which are hot and moist Vapors, or Meteors,
compounded of Fire and Water, ascend to the second or middle Region of the Air,
where the fire forsaking the water to ascend still higher, and so this Water
finding it self destituted of the Fire, which did bear it up in the Form of a
Vapor, is forced to fall back in the form and substance of rain.

And here you are to note that Circulation, which Nature makes by the means of
that Universal Spirit, already described; for as its power is limited, and that
she can, neither create nor produce any new thing, so can she neither create
nor annihilate any substance already created; as for Example, The continual
Influxes of Heaven and its Stars, do incessantly produce the Fire or
Spiritual Light, which begins first to embody it self in the Air, where it
takes the Idea of Hermaphroditical Salt, which thence falls in the waters and
upon the earth, where it takes a body, either Mineral, Vegetable, or Animal, by
the character and efficacy of some particular Matrix, imprinted in it by the
action of its ferment; And when this body comes to be dissolved by the means of
some potent Agent, its Sulphur, Fire or Light corporified is so depurated, that
the Stars attract it for their food; for the Stars, (as we suppose) are
nothing else but a Fire, a Sulphur, or some most pure Light actuated: Not
unlike the link of a Lamp, which once being lighted, does continually attract
the Oil to feed its flame: so that the Stars in the same manner attract this
fire, which is depurated by that action, and spiritualize it anew, to
precipitate again by their kind influency, and restore it to the Air, the
Water, and the Earth, to corporifie it, or give it a body again: Thus you see
nothing is lost in Nature, which maintains its great work, and wheel, by these
two principal actions, viz. By spiritualizing to corporifie, and corporifying
to spiritualize, as we have already said; and these are as two Ladders, whereby
the heavenly influences descend down, and re-ascend again from the lower parts:
for the Heavenly virtues should not be so durable, and would daily decay, by
reason of the perpetual Conflux of so many productive substances, without this
constant Circulation; unless that without any necessity we would admit a
perpetual creation and destruction of sublunary substances, which could not be
without a Miracle, and being a thing of daily course, might be called a miracle
without miracle, and so imply a manifest contradiction: What Spring do you
think could supply the matter which feeds those vast Aetnean flames, which have
lasted already so many Ages, were it not for this Circulation of Nature? And
what could since so many years entertain the streaming sources of those
mineral, hot, and acid Fountains which the World does afford in so many places,
unless it were by the help of this wonderful Ladder, and concatenation of
Earth and Heaven: Therefore it must not be held totally impossible to make a
Body turn wholly into Spirit, and reduce that Spirit again to Body; for you
know, that Art applying Actives to Passives, may in a very short time perform
that, which Nature must be long busied about: And because that artificial
Circulation which was performed in an ancient Sepulcher sound out at Padua,
does not ill represent that Natural Circulation, or Circulation of Nature,
whereof we have spoken, it will not be amiss to insert here in sew words the
history of it; Appianus in his Books of Antiquities, relates it thus: That in
the Town of Padua was discovered a very ancient Monument, wherein, being
opened, a burning Lamp was found, which had been there kindled many Ages
before, as by the Inscriptions of it did appear. This fire could not possibly
be maintained, but by Circulation, and so it is easy to conjecture how it was
done; viz. The Oil spiritualized by the heat of the burning and kindled Taper,
did condense it self at the top, and so fall again into the same place whe^nce
it had been elevated. The Taper likely was made of Gold, Talcum, or Alumen
Plumeum, which are incombustible; and the Urn was so exactly closed, that the
least particle of Oleaginous vapors could not breathe out.

SECT. III. Of the Element of Air.
PHilosophers have been long in doubt, whether there was an Element of Air, and
whether that space wherein Animals do move and live, was not void of all
substance; but the invention and use of Bellows, and the necessity of
respiration, have at last abolisht this error. Therefore, there is no debate or
difference between Chemist and Peripateticks at present, concerning the
existency and place of this Element; but they agree not amongst themselves
concerning its use in Nature: for these last do make the Air to bear a part in
the composition of Mixed Bodies, which the former utterly reject and deny,
because it never falls under their senses, in the last resolution of the
Compound. The chief use which Chemists do assign to this Element, is, that it
serves as Matrix to the Universal Spirit, which does begin in it to take some
bodily Idea, before it be wholly corporified in the Elements of Water and
Earth, who produce Mixed Bodies, that are as fruits of the said Elements. And
because we see no Element which does not bear and produce its fruits, some have
been forward to affirm, that Birds were the fruits of the Air. But this opinion
is wrong and erroneous; for although these Birds be volatile, and for the most
part abide in the Air, yet can they not be deprived of Commerce with the Earth
either for the necessity of generation or food: they that maintain Meteors to
be the right fruits of the Air, are much more in the right, since they take in
it their true Meteoric^ Idea.

Some do call that part of Philosophy, which concerns the knowledge of Nature,
the fruits and effects of this Element, Chormancy, but it is corruptly, and by
a mistake instead of Aeromancy; for Chormancy is something more general, and
more universal: since it is the Doctrine and knowledge of the Chaos, which is
to say, this great Matrix, whence all the Elements have been drawn: it is the
Tohu and Bohu, or the hyle of Cabalists, which in Holy Scripture is called
Water, where it is said, that the Spirit of God did move upon the Waters, or
rather lay hovering over the Waters, So much does import (...) in the Original.
as a Hen does over her Brood, Spiritus Dei incubabat aquis.

But a question may here be moved, that whereas we have said above, that
Elements cannot but difficulty quit their own nature to put on that of another
Element, how it comes to pass, that Air is said to be the food and aliment of
Fire, and that in reality it seems so necessary for its subsistence, that it
perishes as soon as the passage or communication of Air becomes intercepted.
The answer is at hand; for as we have already showed, the fire of our Hearths,
or material fire, is not pure, the combustible matter set on fire, does send
forth abundance of vapors and fuliginous excrements, which do very much
prejudice the durableness and action of it; therefore it requires still a
stream of continual Air, to remove the fuliginous matter, because without it
the flame should immediately be choked; so that by this appears, how this
conversion or imaginary food, is to be taken, and how much d^fference there is
between true and false Philosophy.

Another question may be yet started, touching the use of respiration or
breathing in Animals: Whether that Air which they draw in their breathing, has
any other end but merely to refresh them, as the ordinary Philosophers do give
out, only relying upon their Teachers words, without any industrious enquiry
touching the truth of it, and contenting themselves to quote their Authority,
as the sum and ground of all reasons: But those that look more narrowly into
the nature of things, say, that there is another much more excellent and
necessary use thereof, viz. to attract the Universal Spirit, which by the
influx of the Heavens, is conveyed into the Air, where it is endowed with an
Idea altogether Celestial, Spiritual, and full of virtue and efficacy; it is
converted in the heart into Animal spirit, where it receives a perfect and
vivifying Idea, which renders the Animal capable by its help to exercise all
the functions of life: For it is this spirit contained in the Air we breath in,
which subtilizeth, and makes volatile, all the superfluities that are found
both in the venal and arterial blood, the shop and matter of vital and animal
spirits; and it is by the force and efficacy of this Spirit, that Nature is
enabled to expel the impurities of nutriment insinuated in the last
digestions, by entertaining a continual transpiration through the pores. This
appears even in the Plants, though very obscurely: for although they be
deprived of Lungs, or any other material Instrument, for the performance of
respiration; yet have they something Analogous to it, which is their
Magnetisme, by which they draw that Spirit residing in the Air, without which
they could not perform their natural Operations, as to nourish themselves,
increase, produce their like, etc. Which manifestly does appear when they are
buried too deep in the ground, and by this means deprived from that vivifying
Spirit, by which they are animated, for they immediately die as if they were
suffocated.

SECT. IV. Of the Element of Water.
THE most learned and perspicacious Philosophers amongst the Ancients, have
been of opinion, that Water was the first Principle of all things; because it
could in their apprehension, by its rarefaction or condensation, produce the
other Elements. But as we have heretofore declared this mutual change to be
impossible, so must we have our recourse to another way of Philophy. We shall
not here consider Water, as being a constitutive Principle in the Composition
of the Mixed; for in this sense we have already spoken of it, where we have
treated of Phlegm: But we shall speak of it as of a vast Element, concurring to
the frame of this Universe, and containing in it self many particular Matrixes,
which produce a fair and pleasing variety of fruits: First of Animals, viz.
Fishes, and all sorts of Water-Insects: Secondly, Vegetables, as the herb
called Ducks-meat, which has her root implanted in the Water it self: And
finally, Minerals, as Shells, Pearls, and Salt, which is abundantly through
Creeks and secret pores conveyed into the Earth, to advance the production of
her own fruits. The Water then is the second general Matrix, where the
Universal Spirit takes the Idea of Salt, communicated by the Air, which did
receive it from the Light, and the Heavens, for the production of all sublunary
things. Paracelsus calls the knowledge of this Philosophy of Water, Hydromancy.

SECT. V. Of the Element of Earth.
IN the last Section of the foregoing Chapter, we have spoken of the Earth, as
a Principle partly constituting the mixture of the body, and found after its
last resolution; but in this Section we treat of it, as of the fourth and last
Elem^nt of this Universe.

The Earth in this respect is, as it were, the Center of the World, in which
all its virtues, proprieties and faculties are united; it seems even that all
the other Elements were created for the use and benefit of the Earth, for all
what is in them more precious, seems to be intended for its service. Thus the
Orbs of Heaven are incessantly whirled about, to supply all the parts of it
with vital spirit, and for the maintaining as it were, and recruiting the daily
expenses of its Family: The Air is in a perpetual motion, to penetrate her
deepest bowels, an^ that to the same end, viz. to furnish her with the same
vital spirit; and the Water is never at rest, running continually to
communicate to her that which the Air has bestowed upon him: So that all the
World seems to be concerned for the Earth, and the Earth only for her Fruits,
which are her Children, she being the Mother of all things. It seems even
that the Universal Spirit, loves the Earth above any other of the Elements,
since it descends from the highest part of Heaven, where it is in its
exaltation, to corporifie it self, or take a bodily shape here on Earth. Now
the first Body which the Universal Spirit does take, is that of
Hermaphroditical Salt, whereof we have spoken above, which contains generally
in it self all the Principles of life: it is not deprived of Sulphur nor
Mercury, for it is the seed of all things, which takes afterward a body, and
the Idea or taliety of Mixts, by help of the characters of particular Matrixes
or Wombs, enclosed in the body of this great Element: If it meets with a
Vitriolick Matrix, it turns it self to Vitriol; if with Sulphur, it becomes
Sulphur, and so of the rest, and that by the virtue and efficacy of several
natural sermentations: In a Vegetable Matrix, it becomes Plant; in a Mineral,
Stone, Mineral, Metal; in an Animal, whether living or not living, it produces
an Animal, as it is daily seen in the generation of such creatures as are
produced by the corruption of some Animal, or other Mixed; as for Example, Bees
generated out of young Bulls flesh, and Worms out of the corruption of several
Fruits: Now as there are a great many differences of Mixts, so is there a great
variety of particular Matrixes, which often causes a transplantation in all
things; but this matter belongs rather to Chemical Philosophy then to this
place, where having no time to particularize, we do treat of things only in a
general way. The knowledge of that part of Philosophy which concerns this
Element and its fruits, is called Geomancy. By it we are made capable of
knowing the operations of Nature, both in its very bowels and the surface: Her
fruits are the Animals, Vegetables and Minerals; and if these Mixts are
composed of the purest vital Principles, then according to their proper nature
and condition, will they be lasting, and will attain the end of their natural
predestination (or destiny) if some external and occasional cause does not
interrupt that progress, and stop them in their Career: But when Chance (or
Fortune) mixes in their first Composition or Nourishment, any of the Principles
of Death or Destruction, they cannot long subsist, neither end their intended
course by Nature; because these Domestical ^oes do incessantly devour and
consume them, as we shall make appear, when we come hereafter to speak of
Purity and Impurity. But before we enter into that matter, something must be
said of the Principles of Death or Destruction.

CHAP. V. Of the Principles of Destruction.
SECT. I. Of the Order of Matters treated in this Chapter.
HAving to treat of Purity and Impurity, in the second Book, which shall
immediately follow this Chapter, and the Principles of Death being in a manner
contained under this matter; I found it not out of purpose, to close this first
Book by a short Discourse upon these Principles, although to speak properly,
they should not be called by this name; for it is proper to the nature of
Principles ever to compound or generate, but never to destroy.

We have showed heretofore, that Principles may be considered three several
ways, viz. Either before the composition of the Mixed, or in the state of its
composition, or finally after dissolution and destruction: We may say the same
here touching the Principles of Death, which we have already said in another
place concerning the Principles of Life. But because Contraries opposed one to
the other, are better apprehended and illustrated, we shall say something again
concerning the Principles of Life before the composition of the Mixed, that we
may the better come to the knowledge of the Principles of Death, when we shall
speak of it in the third Section; for we shall refer our selves so speak of
their effects, being already corporified or embodyed in Mixts, when we come to
treat of Purity and Impurity.

SECT. II. Of the Principles of Life before Composition.
WE have often said above, that the Universal Spirit being indifferent to be
made all things, is undetermined to any particular subject, unless by the
character of particular Matrixes; and because each Element is filled with these
particular Matrixes or Wombs, as we have already proved, each Element does
contribute something of his own for the perfection of its Composite. The Heaven
does by the assistance of his Stars, communicate unto it her heavenly,
spiritual, and invisible virtue, which descends first into the Air, where it
begins to assume a kind of body; the Air sends it into the Water or the
Earth, where this celestial virtue and influence begins to operate more
materially, and associate it self to matter, thereby to frame a body to it
self, by means of those various natural fermentations which are the cause of
alteration in sublunary things: because this Spirit is the true Agent, and the
true efficient internal cause of these fermentations performed in the Matter,
which of it self is merely passive, and the Archeus or director general of it:
For when it is Mixed and united to the body, which clotheth it as it were, or
involves it under its rind, it can neither produce nor manifest those
wonderful effects which it hides and conceals, being then as it were fettered
and imprisoned; and shall never be able to exercise or show his vittues, unless
it be first disintangled of its corporeity, and grosseness of the matter; and
this is the main point upon which Chemistry bestows so much labor, care and
study, to bring unto light those lovely Truths, which this p^^t of natural
knowledge does contain.

Now as this Universal Spirit is the first Principle of all things, and that
all things are produced by it, and return into the same, it is evident, that it
must by necessity prove also the first Principle or Original of death in all
things, which does imply no contradiction, since it is done and understood in
several respects; for as the variety of Compounds in Nature, does require for
its maintenance a variety of substances: There is also a variety of Matrixes or
Wombs in the Elements, to attend the fabric of those various substances, and
thence it is that what does oftentimes advance the life of one, is the
destruction and death of the other; as for Example: A corrosive Principle will
be the death of a sweet Mixed; and contrary wise, a sweet Principle the death of
a corrosive, by taking away its acrimony and sharpness, which did constitute
its estence and differency.

But to speak strictly and properly, it appears, that this first Principle,
thus and thus Ideified, cannot be said to be a Principle of Life or Death: This
expression can hold but in a respective consideration, and as it relates to
this or that Compound; but as the most part of sweet things do contribute to
the service and preservation of Mankind, because they have some correspondency
with his taste, and participate more of substances analogous to his Nature and
Constitution: Hence it comes to pass, that when the Universal Spirit has
received this stamp or character, it takes the denomination of Principle of
Life; as to the contrary that of Death, if it be stamped with a corrosive Idea,
which not only prejudiceth to the actions of man, but corrupts also those of
such Mixts and Substances as serve for his daily food and subsistence.

So when the Air is filled with Arsenical vapors, and Realgarick and Corrosive
Influences, which by reason of the necessary use of respiration, are often the
cause of great mortality amongst Mankind; yet considering that those
destructive spirits are not influenced to that end, and that their ill effects,
as to Man, are only accidental; so can they not properly be called Principles
of Death, since they are dispensed here below by the Care of Nature, for the
generation and propagation of Arsenical Substances, Realgars, and other
corrosive mixed Compounds, which are no ess a part of the World then Man it
self, and are destinated to a better end, by the hand of the all-wise Master
and Creator of this Universe, then is known unto most of us; for we see that
Nature and Art can so order and prepare these Mixts, as to make them fit and
serviceable for the use of Man: We must not therefore presently call Nature a
Stepmother to us, since God has endowed us with the skill and means, to avoid
these evil and malignant influencies. To accommodate our selves then, to the
vulgar way of expression, we shall say, that the Principles of Life, before the
Composition of the Mixed, are nothing else but the Universal Spirit, impregnated
with the Idea of favorable and amicable Principles to our Nature, and
possessing in the Center of its Hermaphroditical Salt, a moderate Sulphur, a
temperate Mercury, and a sweet Salt: as to the contrary, the Principles of
Death are nothing else but this same Spirit, having in it the same
Hermaphroditical Salt mixed with a sharp Sulphur, a biting Mercury, and a
corrosive Salt, as we shall more fully declare in the following Section.

SECT. III. Of the Principles of Death.
I Must, before I do proceed further, repeat once more here, that when we call
these, Principles against Nature, we understand not Nature in a general term;
but only humane Nature: because it happens often, that what is Poison to one
species, shall be nourishment to the other: so does Hen-bane please to Sterns,
which feed upon it; and kills Man.

This ground being laid, I say, that all heat, or rather all hot, corrosive,
biting, sharp substance, which destroys and consumes, is such, because it
contains in it self a Sulphur against Nature; and that from this Sulphur it is,
that as from their Spring, do flow all the virtues and proprietyes of the Mixed,
where that impure Sulphur is predominant: for if Life does flow from a sweet,
natural and vital Sulphur, and that it receives a long preservation by the
essential proprietyes of this Sulphur, it must necessarily be concluded, that
death and destruction must follow that Sulphur which is of an opposite nature
unto it; and all Arsenicks, Realgar, Auripigment, or Lead-oar, Sandarack, and
all other venoms of a hot, fiery nature, whether celestial, aerial, watery,
terrestrial, all these Poisons, I say, are such by their very actions, and sole
propriety of this Sulphur against Nature.

It is not our design to speak here of those Principles which are enemies and
contrary to humane nature when they are already incorporated, and do compose
some of the venomous Mixts, because we refer our selves to treat of it in the
Book following; we shall only speak of these Principles here, as they are yet
spiritual, and flowing from the Stars; by the mediation of the Universal
Spirit, and as this Principle is single in this respect, so has it received
these several and different denominations: for as we have already said, that
the Sulphur, which is heat, cannot be without Mercury, that is to say,
moisture; neither without Salt, by reason of their mutual union, it follows
from thence, that a biting Mercury, and corrosive and caustic Salt is required
to the subsistence of a sharp Sulphur; as likewise a temperate Mercury and
sweet Salt is required for the preservation of a moderate Sulphur. For these
three Principles are ever united and joined very strictly together, whether
considered as P^inciples of life, or P^inciples of death; and if sometimes we
treat of them separately, it is to the end only that their operations and
nature may be better understood; because there is still one of these Principles
predominant above the others in the Compound, and whose actions are made
manifest, concealing and blunting the efficacy and virtues of the two other,
though notwithstanding they act by way of Concomitancy, with that which
predominates; as for Example: When the Mercury of Death operates the Sulphur
against Nature, and corrosive Salt does not cease from their action, though it
appears but little, by reason of the predominant Principle, for a potiori
sumitur denominatio.

Now as the Sulphur of Death, or Mortal Sulphur, does manifest it self in the
Arsenical substances, Realgar, Auripigment, etc. the Mercury of Death does also
the same in all Narcoticks, and we have not without reason affirmed these
poisons to be, not only terrestrial, but aerial also; for in all the Elements
there is much of this malignant Mercury, not yet specified in any individual
Body, but flying up and down, and remaining of a volatile nature; and
whenever it exceeds proportion, does cause an infinite number of Epidemical,
Pestilential, and Contagious Diseases; and if the individual venoms already
immersed in Bodies did not attract it for their nourishment, it would
infallibly, cause a great spoil and disorder in the World.

And as Salt is the Principle which causes the coalescency of substances in
Bodies, or corporification (if we may use the word) and that by it Sulphur and
Mercury are made visible and palpable, by reason of the coalition of the same
which it causes; so the corroding Salt, does also corporifie the two other
Principles of Death, and renders them visible by giving them a Body; for these
substances otherwise should remain invisible in the Universal Spirit, were they
not brought to light, and made corporeal by the operation and help of the Salt,
and by this means it is, we find true, that so important Axiom of the great
Trismegist, when he says, that Quod est occultum fit manifestum, et vice
versa. The violence and hurtful nature of this Salt of Death, appears very
little in natural things; but when Art has bestowed its skill, upon one or
several Mixts, then appears its activity, and not before, as is obvious in all
sublimated Corrosives, Aqua Fortis, Butter of Antimony, and several other
Preparations, of this nature, known to the Sons of Art, it is from such a kind
of Salt, that Cancers, Gangrenes, King's Evil, and all other corroding Ulcers
are generated in man's body; which is against the sense of those, who do impute
to sharp and biting humors, the cause of these Diseases, having but Chemical
notions of knowledge in natural things, as we shall show in the next Book,
where we shall declare which way the Principles of Death do incorporate
themselves in Man.

The Second Book OF The First Part. Of Purity and Impurity.
CHAP. I. What is Purity and Impurity.
THE words pure and impure, may be taken several ways; for some by Purity
understand what is useful and profitable to Man's Nature, and by Impurity what
is hurtful and damageable to it: Others will have that to be purity which is
homogeneous, and all heterogeneous substances to be impurity; but it may so
happen sometimes, that Heterogeneous substances shall be profitable, and the
Homogeneous hurtful. Thence it may be gathered, that nothing can be said
either pure or impure, absolutely speaking, but only comparatively, and in
respect of one thing to another: For as we have already said above, it may
happen, that what shall offend the one, shall help the other; as for Example:
Should it not be thought a very great absurdity to believe, that the bones of
Animals should be impure, because men do not eat them, and that their Flesh
only should deserve the appellation of pure, because men feed upon it with
pleasure, though the same bones be so absolutely necessary to the perfection of
Animals, that without them they should not be what they are, since Bones are
the solidest part of their substance.

We shall not take here purity and impurity in this sense: but by purity we
will understand, all what in the Mixed or Compound can be found to serve our end
and purpose; as to the contrary, by impurity all what opposes it self and
contradicts to our intention in the work: For though in Mixts Bodies there be
many parts hurtful to man's nature, yet if we speak absolutely or respectively,
in reference to the same Mixed, the parts of its Compound cannot be said impure,
since they are of the estence of it, and do constitute his integrality:
Moreover these parts cannot be damageable to man, but conditionally, since
nothing compells him, but his own will to make use of it.

Purity and Impurity are in this sense considered, either in man, or out of
him. The impurity found in man does hinder and disturb his and Natures
intention, which is, that without interruption, he might enjoy a full and
entire health: The same does it also out of him, since we suppose that it must
necessarily enter and penetrate in him: But this is the difference between
these two kind of Impurities; that inward impurity does all immediately by its
presence, and the other is only considered as remote and absent, though it is
to be nearer at hand, at some time or other. Because, as there is a necessity
for man to breathe, and receive daily food, so can he not avoid the action of
that impurity wherewith the Air and Elements are sometimes impregnated, as
hereafter we will make it appear, and demonstrate also that in those substances
which by some are accounted pure, there does yet remain intermixed abundance of
impurity.

CHAP. II. How Purity and Impurity are mixed in all the Compounds of Nature.
THere is in every Mixed a Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, proper to its nature, as
we have already said above: Now all Mixed perfectly framed, is either Animal,
Vegetable or Mineral. Whence we gather, that as the one is the food of the
other, as it appears by the mutation of Minerals into Vegetables, and of
Vegetables into Animals, and again from Animals into Vegetables and Minerals;
so is there in every Mixed, a Salt Sulphur and Mercury, Animal, Vegetable, and
Mineral, imparted to them by the Universal Spirit; for all what receives
nutriment receives it by its like, and what is dissimilary, is expelled as an
Excrement: and if the expelling faculty is not vigorous and strong enough for
this purpose, there remains many Excrements in the Compounds, which occasions
many Mineral Diseases in man's body, altogether unknown to vulgar Physic, and
consequently out of the reach of her Methodical Remedies and Prescriptions.

This which I say here, comes to pass in this manner: When the food is
received into man's body, and digestion has separated the several parts of
Mixts, which contribute to its nourishment; each part does attract out of this
food, and the Animal Principles therein, that which is most proper and
Analogous to its nature. But as for those other Principles, which cannot be
assimilated to our substance, and are no staff of our lives, Nature does
expel them by the ministry of that faculty which is dedicated to such an
Office: But if this faculty be oppressed or debilitated, by some accidental and
external cause, or by some internal disorder of our Archeus, which is the guide
and director of our life and health; then do these Excrements coagulate
themselves, or turn volatile, according to the Idea which the natural
fermentation vitiated by this accidental disorder, imprints on them; and by
this defect are all the Mines of Diseases bred and generated in us. Whence it
comes to pass, that such Diseases cannot be mastered nor expelled, but only by
such as are first very well acquainted with the nature and vice of the Ferment;
and secondly, with the proper and specifical remedy, which can restore our
Nature, and appease those irritations of Spirits, which are caused for the most
part by a preposterous or corrupt fermentation. For if the ferment be of a
coagulative nature, it is necessary we be acquainted with some specific
dissolvement, which should not prejudice the Ventricle: but if it be such a
dissolvement, as will make an evil colliquation of the nutriment and parts; he
that will undertake the Cure with success, must know what remedy is capable to
repair that fault in Nature, and reform its disorder. Thence proceed the
reiterated fits in F^avours, and their continuance often, notwithstanding the
administration of many remedies, which cannot stop their raging fury, because
we are for the most part ignorant in the effects of good or bad fermentation.

If our leisure would give us leave to enlarge here upon several noble and
curious inquiries, we should be taught by this Philosophy the causes of several
effects, altogether unknown to most men. I will give a touch only by the by,
for a proof of it, upon this Question ordinarily moved: Wherefore Men before
the Flood were much stronger and long-lived without comparison, then after that
general inundation of the World? Two reasons of this effect and wonderful
change we can give, according to the Doctrine laid already before: The first,
that as the world stood then in the beginning, there was yet no change of
alteration in the nature of things; which happened since, only by the several
mixtures and changes introduced in the Compounds of Nature, after the deserved
Curse inflicted upon sin. The second, that the Waters, which are the general
Matrixes or Wombs of several Minerals, and particularly of Salts, had not yet
covered all the Earth, neither by consequence communicated the Mineral seeds,
to feed the Family of Vegetables, whose virtue is thereby become vitiated, and
their first nature in a manner altered: Whence the Animals Family has been
made partaker of this defect, because it draws its food and sustenance almost
from Vegetables; as this chiefly appears in the Vine, which abounds in Tartar,
which is its proper Salt: Now, that Tartar is a kind of Mineral, appears by
its action, working potently upon Minerals, and with great efficacy upon
Metals; for, all natural action is performed by its like, and there is a
proportion required between the Agent and Patient. But to avoid here
multiplying objections, I understand here by this Proportion only a genetical
similitude. These things thus premised, 'twill not be very difficult to
conceive what is here properly understood by impurity, viz. That they are
Principles of an Heterogeneous and different nature, mixed with other
Principles, not of the same Family nor Category: As when Minerals become by
some way or other, united to Vegetables or Animals: It is also very easy to
observe, how Purity insinuates it self in all things, by taking the opposite or
contre-part of what we have said of Impurity. But now will it be necessary to
show, how impurity may be severed or banished, since it is a Principle of Death
and Destruction, as purity a Principle of Life, as we have said here above.

CHAP. III. How the Impurity of all things is to be separated.
WE have said impurity to be that which could interrupt the perfection of
those actions, which do conduct the Mixed to the end of its natural
predestination: It is then very requisite to know, how it may be freed from
this domestic enemy, which insensibly does creep into the Compounds. Now as
all Mixts are under several genders, and differing species, and that there is
several sorts of impurities, men have invented several Arts to correct and take
them away: and as the Art of Chemistry has all the things of Nature in general
for her object, so does it endeavor to show how they may be freed and
extricated from their impurities: But because, to particularize all the parts
of this doctrine, would extend beyond the limits of a Compendious Treatise, as
this we do intend; we shall content our selves to speak only of those
Impurities, which use to happen in Chemical Operations: For, to handle any part
of Physical Chemistry or Iatrochimy, is not here our design, since it could
alone fill many Volumes. You are to note only by the by, that there is two
several ways of removing the impurity of things; the first universal, the
other particular: The first is an universal medicine, which is or may be
extracted from several subjects, after they have been, as much as Art can
perform it, reduced to their Universality, and divested of their specification
and natural fermentation, which caused them to be this or that determinate
Mixed: For this Medicine being by a fit digestion, and requisite coction and
maturation, reduced to the highest degree of its exaltation; it is sufficient
to expel impurity out of all Bodies indifferently, because it insensibly
consumes it, both by the help of Fixation and Volatilization. The second is a
particular Medicine, which by its specifical virtue and faculty, may expel
particular impurities: A thing of no small importance, and whose secret is not
to be attained unto but by the true Sons of Art; and those which do join
together manual Operation and diligent Practice to an indefatigable study,
which do use and bring to the Examen of Tracts the weight of their reason, and
never venture their Remedies upon sick Patients, unless grounded upon the
infallible Theorems of the noblest Philosophy, and the truest Physic.

To return then to our Operations, we have said above, that by the ministry of
fire, the Artist did separate from each Compound, five Substances or differing
Principles, which though very pure in themselves, yet in several respects may
have their impurities, either in respect to themselves, or in respect to our
intention: For if we have occasion to use only the Spirit extracted out of a
Mixed, and that this Spirit be joined with some portion of the Phlegm of it, we
shall say this Spirit to be impure in such a respect, and so of the other
Principles. Now concerning the particular way of separating these kind of
impurities, we shall treat of it in the following Book, but particularly in the
first Chapter of the last Book, to which we refer the Reader.

CHAP. IV. Of the Pure Substances extracted out of Mixts.
BEsides the five Substances or Principles, which we have formerly said may be
extracted out of natural Compounds, by the ministry of fire; there may be yet
some Essences drawn, by diversifying the Operations of Art, which exalts, and
do ennoble the Principles of these Mixts, and raise it to their purity. These
Essences do not only differ in body, from that of the Compound whence they were
extracted, but are advanced also to nobler and more efficacious qualities and
virtues, than those which during it is intireness did adorn their bodies, and
after its dissolution and artificial separation, will possess more then any of
the Principles of the Compound. But though these wonderful Essences obtain
several names in the Books of Philosophers, who call them Arcana's,
Magisteries, Elixirs, Tinctures, Panacea's, Specifical Extracts, etc. they are
comprehended nevertheless, under the general notion of pure and purity; and it
proceeds from hence, that after those Essences are drawn out of their Mixts,
the remainder is commonly rejected as impure. Paracelsus in his first Book of
Archidoxa's, says, that the six following Preparations, viz. Essences,
Arcana's, Elixirs, Specificks, Tinctures, Extracts, are contained in the
mystery of Nature, which he calls Purity, and that with a learned allusion to
the Greek word (...), which signifies fire; thereby insinuating, that these
Essences are brought near and assimilated to their first Principle, which is of
the nature of Fire, since Light it self, which is but Fire, is the first
Principle of all things: In the same place, he calls also the Body Impurity,
which keeps in Prison this mystery: and therefore says, that he that will
enjoy this mystery, must divest it of all Corporeity, as it shall appear in the
second part of this Treatise. But it is here to be noted, that when Paracelsus
says, that this mystery must be divested of its body, he means only that it
must be freed of that gross body wherein it is imprisoned, to impart him a more
subtle one, which he may shake off with ease, and spiritualize himself, to be
the more capable thereby to penetrate into our last digestions, and there
correct all those defects which impurity might have caused. This mystery
sometimes is extracted out of one sole Mixed, as Magisteries are done; sometimes
of several Compounds, as Elixirs, which will appear more plainly hereunder.

But it will not be from our purpose, to treat succinctly of Compounds, either
perfect or imperfect, and their variety, because we have already much spoken of
it in this Treatise, and are to speak yet more; considering likewise that these
Mixts are the subject and matter of Chemical Operations, and further, that it
may serve as a common and peculiar place of Physic, where he that will rightly
be informed, to what Category each Body does belong, may have his recourse: We
shall then handle in this last Chapter of this Book, the natural generation and
corruption of Bodies, and their variety.

CHAP. V. Of the Natural Generation and Corruption of Mixts, and their variety.
SECT. I. Of the Order of this Chapter.
BEfore we can well understand the nature of Mixts and Mixtion, and apprehend
clearly how purity or impurity bear a part in their generation, we must know
well beforehand, what Alteration is; and thence consequently inform our selves
touching the nature of Generation and Corruption. Therefore it will be
apposite, to say succinctly something of Alteration, Generation, Corruption,
and Mixtion, before we enumerate more particularly the Mixts, either perfect or
imperfect, which are the fruits of Nature, and by consequence the subject of
its Operations.

SECT. II. Of the Alteration, Generation and Corruption of Natural things.
IF you will insist upon the Etymology of the word Alteration, you shall find
it to be nothing else but, A motion by which any subject is made different from
what it was before: Or thus, It is a motion by which a subject is accidentarily
altered according to its qualities. In this, Alteration differs from
Generation; for Generation is an essential and substantial change, and
Alteration is only an accidental motion of the qualities of a Body: And
further, Alteration is only a disposition and preparatory way toward
Generation and Corruption: and thence it comes to pass, that there are two
kinds of Alteration; the one perfecting the Body or Substance, the other
destructive of it. In perfective Alteration, all the qualities observe a just
temper of proportion, and an equal harmony, according to the nature of their
subject, and in order either to preserve the same nature, or assume a more
perfect one. But in the destructive or putrefactive Alteration, all qualities
fall into that disorder, that they plainly remove their subject from its
natural constitution, as it often happens in fluid bodies, abounding with great
store of Phlegm; and is seen by Example in Wine, when it begins to corrupt, and
grow flat.

This is then the difference between Alteration and Generation, that Alteration
introduces no substantial form into its subject; but that which is substance
in the subject, receives only some adventitious quality which it had not
before; as for Example, when heat or cold are generated in any Plant or Animal.
But Generation is a change of substance, which presupposes not only the
production of new qualities in the Subject, but of new substantial forms also:
as when out of Bread Blood is engendered, the subject or matter of this Bread is
not only deprived of the quality of Bread, but also of its substantial and
essential form, to take the form and quality of Blood: Yet are you to note,
that a question upon this may be raised, though not wanting its Answer, viz.
That when some Physical Herb is prescribed to a Nurse to feed upon, that the
virtue of this Herb may pass into her Milk, whether it be the same numerical
quality which was in the Herb, that is now found in the Milk? The Answer is
negative; though it be the same specifical, or rather generical: For as the
Milk and the Plant do generically differ, the difference of their quality
should also be altogether generical. But to speak of these things more
intelligibly, we say with Van Helmont, that the virtue of the Plant was
enclosed in its Median or Intrinsecal Life, which is neither altered nor
corrupted by the Nurses digestions, and so is conveyed into her milk, setting
aside the ordinary Quiblets and Niceties of Schools, which usually raise more
doubts, then they can establish truths in Physic and Philosophy. Hence you may
learn, how the Generation of one thing is the Corruption of the other: and
contrary-wise, the Corruption makes the Generation. Therefore we will say no
more of Corruption, because whosoever shall understand the one, cannot be
ignorant in the other: We will only succinctly show, wherein Generation and
Corruption, do differ from Creation, Destruction or Annihilation. The
difference then lies in this, that Generation and Corruption do presuppose a
matter, which must be the subject of the several forms introduced into it. But
Creation and Destruction require no matter; for as the one is the production of
something out of nothing, so is reciprocally Annihilating performed but upon
created things. Generation and Corruption are natural motions, proceeding from
a second and finite cause: but Creation and Destruction or Annihilation, can
only be the work of an Omnipotent hand, and infinite Cause; the distance
between being and not being, something and nothing, being infinite.

These things thus cleared, we come to Mixtion, which is twofold, viz. the one
so called improperly, which is artificial; the other proper and natural. That
improperly called, is but a local approximation of Bodies differing in Nature,
confusedly joined together, so an heap of Corn is improperly called Mixed; this
Artificial mixture, in which the parts are really mixed together, but without
change or alteration of the whole substance, is yet double, viz. that which is
made by apposition, and that which is by confusion of the parts: Apposition is
made, when the things mixed together, are divided in parcels scarce perceptible
to the eye, as when the particles of Wheat and Barley mixed in a heap, are
mingled in the same mass of Flower: Confusion is, when the mixed parcels are not
only imperceptibly divided, but also so confounded together, that they cannot
easily be separated again, as when Water and Wine are mixed together, and
Apothecaryes mix their Druggs, which remain so confounded, that none can be
longer discerned.

Natural mixture properly so said, is a strict union of the substances, whence
some things substantial does result, and yet different from the other
Substances which constitute it, by the help of Alteration: For by the
conjunction of the Principles, a Mixed is generated, whose principal form
differs from that of its own Principles, as it is made more manifest in the
dissolution of the Mixed, according to the Peripatetical Axiom, which says
that, Quod est ultimum in resolutione, id fuit primum in compositione. This
Alteration, which causes Unition to lead Nature to Union, and thence to
Mixtion, has been already illustrated, where we have spoken of the conjunction
of Salt and Spirit, and the action of Phlegm and Sulphur, which overcome the
sharpness and sowerness of Salt and Mercury; and when we have said, that the
Earth imparts solidity and body to these several Substances; it is by the means
of this Alteration, this union and conjunction, that the natural Compound is
framed and produced. And if it be objected, that these Principles are rather a
work of Art then Nature, your recourse shall be for answer, to what we have
already said in the first Section of the first Chapter of the first Book.

SECT. III. Of the differency of Mixts in general.
HAving sufficiently discoursed at large of those single, pure and homogeneous
Substances, which we have called Principles; and having illustrated their
various alterations before their union and mixtion, which makes up the
perfecting of the Compound: it follows we should speak of such Mixts as are
resulting from this action. All Mixts are perfectly or imperfectly compounded,
according to the strength or weakness of their Principles union. The Body,
which is imperfectly compounded, has only a light coagulation of some of the
Principles, and not very lasting, neither differenced by some principal,
substantial form, which should make it essentially to differ from its
Principles; as for Example, Ice or Snow, which only differ from Water by
adjunction of some foraign and adventitious qualities: But the Perfect Mixed is
that, which is endowed with a substantial principal form, distinguished from
the Principles whereof it is compounded, after their perfect union, and for
this reason also is more lasting; such are all Minerals, Vegetables, and
Animals.

Those Bodies which are imperfectly compounded, are called Meteors, and their
difference is great, according to the difference and variety of the Principles
which abound in them; for some are Sulphurous, others Nitrous, others Aqueous,
and so of the rest; of these we must say something, before we speak further of
perfectly compounded Mixts: and herein will we imitate the process of Nature in
her workmanship, which never produces any perfect Mixed, before her Principles
have passed through Meteorick Nature, as we shall explain hereafter: her method
being, never to pass from one extremity to the other without a mean. Meteors
are called (sometimes) perfectly mixed Bodies, not because the nature and form
of Mixts is in them, but because, although they preserve in a manner the nature
of Principles, yet they differ in some kind from the natural state of those
Principles; which is the reason they are assigned a middle condition and
nature, between that of pure and unmixt Principles, and Bodies perfectly
compounded of them: they are also imperfect Mixts, by reason of their sudden
generation, and dissolution: For as the mixture and coagulation of the
Principles in those Bodies is imperfect, so can they neither be of duration;
but are easily converted into the nature of the Principle most predominant in
them. The material, remote cause of these imperfect Mixts or Meteors, are the
Principles; and the proxime or immediate, those fumes and Spirits, into which
by the virtue of some efficient cause, the same Principles are turned by
volatilization and spiritualization. But you are to note here, that there is
two different kinds of Fumes and Spirits, viz. Vapors and Exhalations: Vapor
is a hot and moist Fume, and consequently proceeding from Phlegm, if it prove
Aqueous; from Oil or Sulphur, if inflamable; or Mercury, if windy and
spirituous. Exhalation is a hot and dry Fume, and by consequence generated from
a terrestrious and earthly Body, and a Principle of Salt: It must also be
noted, that the Vapor is said to be hot and moist, because Water converted
into Vapor, is elevated by the action of Fire which is insinuated in it, and
for this cause (by a Greek expression (...)) is called Meteor, or a body
imperfectly composed of some Principles. And concerning the Doctrine of Meteors
in particular, they that will be exactly informed, must repair to such Authors
as have professedly handled this Doctrine: For it would engage us beyond the
bounds which we have limited to this our short Chemical Abbreviate in our
Preface, if we should undertake that matter here at large.

SECT. IV. Of the Diversity of Perfect Mixts.
HAving showed, that Nature ever aims at the corporifying and spiritualizing
Mixts and their Principles, by the assistance of the Universal Spirit, and the
virtue and character of particular Matrixes or Wombs, and that wrought by the
operation of the Ferment, and impression of the Idea once received: We must
also now turn our discourse to those Mixts, which are as we have already often
said, generated by the Universal Spirit only, clothed under some Meteorical
Idea; as that appears in the resolution of Metals and other Minerals, which are
converted into Fumes and Exhalations, before they escape our sight, to reunite
themselves to the Universal Spirit; whence we gather, that they must have
observed the same degrees of production in their generation, corporification
and coagulation.

The perfectly compounded Body, is animated or inanimated; the animated Mixed,
is that which is adorned with a soul, or vivifying form, as Plants, Beasts, and
Men; as contrariwise, the inanimate Mixed is that which is deprived of all
appearance of life, which does consist in sense and motion.

But a Question is here raised, Whether Minerals are animated or no? To which,
without mentioning here the vulgar School-Arguments, to avoid tediousness, we
answer, That though in these Bodies, which are fruits of the Earths Center, we
cannot so easily perceive those manifest vital Operations, which are obvious in
Plants and Animals, yet nevertheless are they not altogether deprived thereof;
since they are multiplied by a constant perpetuity; which moves us to say, that
as they have a multiplicative form of their own species, so must they be
endowed with life. Some of the ancient Philosophers have acknowledged this
Life, as when Pliny says, lib. 3. c. 10. Spumam Nitri fieri, cum ros
cecidisset, praegnantibus intrariis, sed n^n parientibus. Let us then conclude,
that Minerals do live, as long as they are joined to their Matrix and Root,
since they grow there sensibly; but when they are separated from it, they are
justly called Inanimate Mixts; as we may rightly call dead, the stock or body
of a Tree separated from its root. In this sense we shall from henceforth term
them, as also many other substances, though taken from Animate Bodies: In this
manner, we say, there are two kinds of Inanimate Bodies, the one extracted
from the Earth, the other from the Mixts themselves, either animate or
inanimate: those which are extracted from the bowels of the Earth, are called
Minerals, whereof there are three species, viz. Metals, Stones, and middle
Minerals, which are also called Marcassites.

Metal is a Mixed, extending it self under the Hammer, and melting in the fire.
Marcassites are fusible, but extend not under the Hammer: and Stones are
neither fusible nor extensible.

As for those Mixts which are not dug out of the Earth, human Art has found
a way to draw them ordinarily out of animated bodies, such are Fruits, Seeds,
Roots, Gums, Rosins, Wool, Cotton, Oil, Wine, and several other substances
extracted and separated as parts of Animals and Vegetables, no more considered
as Organical; whose Animals are also made use of (in Chemical Operations) when
they are deprived of their life and soul. Of all these mixed substances, as much
animated as inanimated, shall we treat in the following Sections.

SECT. V. Of middle Minerals or Marcassites.
MIddle Minerals are Fossiles of a middle nature, between Metals and Stones;
and partaking in something of the essence of both: For by their fusion they
agree with Metals; and with Stones, in their brickle and crumbling nature.
Middle Minerals are for the most part Metallic Juices, dissolved or condensed,
or else Metallic and Mineral Earths.

The principal Metallic Juices are, First, Salt, which is a body easily
crumbled, dissolving it self in moisture and coagulating in drought: whence it
is evident, that the predominant and abounding Principle in this Mixed is Salt,
whence it borrowes its denomination, and because it is a Mixed, thence it
follows, that it is not destituted of other Principles, as it appears by the
action of fire upon it, and its Spagitical Anatomy.

Salts are either natural or artificial: Nature produces the first kind,
which are called Fossile Salts; Art does make the other, of which therefore
several species are found; as for Example, Salgem. Armoniack, Saltpeter or
Nitre, Well or Pit-salt, Sea Salt, Fountain-salt, Aloms, Vitriol or Copporas,
which all are endowed with specifical qualities differing the one from the
other, according to the nature of their predominant Principles, which are
either fixed or volatile, dissolving or coagulating, as may be seen by the
diversity of Operations which may be performed upon each kind of these Salts.

Bituminous Substances follow Salts, and comprehend several various kinds, as
Asphalium, Amber yellow or gris, Camphire, Naptha, Petroly, and Brimstone,
which we difference from the Sulphur as it is a Principle in all things: For
this is but a fat and stinking Mineral Juice, having in it self a subtle,
inflamable part, and another terrestrious and Vitriolick, by which he soon
destroys Metals, and will soon be extinguished if Vitriol does abound in it.
This Brimstone is either quick ( Sulphur vivum in the Shops) that is, such as
when it is drawn out of the Earth, and never felt the fire; or prepared by Art,
and refined by Fire, as we have it in Cakes from the Druggist. Several various
Remedies useful in Physic, are by the help of Art extracted out of these
Bituminous bodies; as we will more particulary declare in the last Book of the
Second part of this Chemical Treatise.

Arsenick is either Natural or Artificial; the natural is of three kinds,
Auripigment or Litharge of Gold, so called for its golden color; Sandarak,
which is red; and Realgar, which is yellow: the artificial is prepared by a
sublimation of the natural, with Salt.

Antimony is also natural, otherwise called Mineral; and artificial, which is
most frequent in our use, having been melted from the Mineral in Cakes: Of the
qualities and choice of it, its constituting parts, and various kinds, we
shall speak more fully hereafter, where we handle the practice upon this
Mineral.

Cinnabar is a Mineral body, composed of Sulphur and Mercury, or Brimstone and
Quicksilver, coagulated together to a stony hardness. The natural is extracted
from Mines, where it is found more or less mixed with Sand; the artificial is
made by sublimation of those two substances mixed together.

Cadmy is natural or artificial; the natural is a Metallic Stone, containing
in it self the volatile and impute Salt of some Metal; there are very many
kinds differing one from the other, in color, virtue, and consistency: The
artificial is found in Furnaces where Metals use to be melted, being nothing
else but the Flores or volatile Salt of Metals, sublimated and cleaving to the
walls of the Furnace; raising, as the subtilest part of flower does in Mills,
to the roofs of melting houses. There are also of this several sorts, as,
Pompholyx, Spodium, Tuty.

The other kind of Marcassites are Mineral Earths, as B^lus's, Terra Sigillata
of Lemnos, Silesian Clay or Blois in France, Chalk, red Clay, and all other
Mineral Earths. To this we might also add, all Artificial Earths, as the
several kinds of Lime, made out of feveral sorts of Stones, and containing in
them a corroding Salt, and a secret fire.

But before we begin with the Section of Metals, we must remove a difficulty
which offers it self in this place; and that is, That since Salts are reckoned
amongst Metallic Juices, how can Armoniack Salt, and some kind of the
Metallic Earths, of which we have spoken above, be placed amongst Mareassites,
since Marcassites or middle Minerals, do not indeed yield or extend themselves
under the Hammer, but are fusible; for it is granted that Armoniack does never
melt in the fire, but rather ascends and sublimates it self; and so likewise
those Metallic Earths do not melt, but easily calcine and sublimate themselves
in Metallic Flowers. To this we answer, that if indeed Armoniack Salt be put
alone in a Crucible, it will not melt, but sublimate; But if this Salt
nevertheless be mixed with other Salt in fusion, it will melt together; as
likewise if Metallic Earths be mixed together alone, they shall rather be
calcined then melt; but if they be allayed with some fusible body, then are
they capable of fusion: as by Example, When to equal weight of red Copper, is
added as much Lapis Calaminaris, it will melt with the Metal, turn it into a
yellow Brass, and make an augmentation of fifty in the hundred. It is then to
be noted, that when Fossiles are divided into Metals, Stones, Marcassites; by
Marcassites or middle Minerals must only be understood those bodies which
participate, or bear some relation with the nature of Stones or Metals, either
in respect of their fusibility, or extensiveness, or hardness, or softness. So
that noble Mixed which seems to be the Masterpiece of Art, that is Glass,
must in this sense be reckoned amongst Marcassites, since it easily melts, but
cannot for all that yield and extend it self under the Hammer, if you except
that which was made Malleable at Rome (in the time of Tiberius) whereof the
Secret is perished with its Author.

SECT. VI. Of Metals.
MEtals are hard bodies, generated in particular Matrixes or Wombs in the
bowels of the Earth, which may be extended under the Hammer, and melt in the
Fire. They are commonly reckoned seven in number, which number is referred to
the seven Planets, whose names (in the writings of Chemical Philosophers) they
sometimes do borrow. They are divided into perfect and imperfect: Perfect, say
they, are those which nature has advanced and brought to their ultimate and
perfect end. The tokens of which perfection are, perfect fixation, a most exact
mixtion and union of the constitutive parts of those Bodies, accompanied with
(requisite) weight, sound, and color; capable of bearing a long fusion, and a
strong ignition, without altering their qualities, and losing of their
substance: There are two of this nature, viz. the Sun and Moon, or Gold and
Silver. Imperfect Metals are of two sorts, viz. hard and soft; those that are
hard, are rather susceptible of ignition then fusion, as Mars and Venus, or
Iron and Brass; soft, are those which are sooner susceptible of fusion then
ignition, as Jupiter and Saturn, or Tin and Lead. The Mercury or Quicksilver
is accounted the seventh Metal, and is a liquid Metal, for this cause called
fluid, as the other are named solid: Yet by reason of this fluidity, some do
expel it from the Classis and number of Metals, and place it amongst the
substances that are nearly related to Metals, as being a kind of Meteor of a
middle nature between; and even many Philosophers, will have it the first
matter of Metals.

Metals and Minerals are differenced in sex, and accordingly several kind of
Menstrues are used for their dissolution: so nothing but Regal water can
dissolve Gold, Lead and Antimony, which are accounted of the masculine sex; but
ordinary Aqua fortis is sufficient to dissolve the others, which are accounted
of the female sex.

Before we put an end to this Section, some few Questions, which are usually
raised, about the nature of Metals, must be illustrated: The first Question
raised, is: If when several Metals are melted together, any Metallic Species,
differing from the Metals, which do make the whole Compound, is thereby raised?
To which, the Answer is negative, because it is not a true mixture, much less a
strict and exact Union, but rather a Confusion, since they may be again
separated asunder. There is another Doubt also made upon this matter, Whether
or no Metals do specifically differ amongst themselves, or only according to
the more or less perfection: But Scaliger answers to this, that Nature has no
more made Metals in order to the production of Gold, then framed other
Creatures to the generation of Man; it may be added to this, that God created
this variety of Metals for the perfection and beautifying of this Universe, and
the several uses wherein men do employ them: We must nevertheless acknowledge
as a truth, that both Minerals and imperfect Metals participate of the nature
of either of the two perfect Metals; and most commonly of both together, as it
is evident by the extraction which those can make, that are Masters of the
secret of this separation, performed either after a preceding digestion, or by
examining by the true instrument of Separation, external Fire, which excites
and actuates the internal, potential Fire of things, and is the only Instrument
of Philosophers to verify by deed what I have said: Whence we conclude, that
these imperfect Metals and Minerals do continually endeavor the perfection of
their natural predestination, whilst they are yet in their Mothers Womb; which
they are able to do no more, when torn off from their Matrixes. This Question
is commonly followed by another, which demands, Whether the power of Art does
extend to the changing of an imperfect Metal, and may advance it by this
Metamorphosis to the perfection of either of the great Luminaries? To which out
Answer is affirmative; since it is certain, that both Art and Nature applying
Actives to Passives, are capable of great and noble transmutations. But the
difficulty of success is almost insuperable: and this i^ that Great Work, which
since so many Ages has vexed the minds of so many obstinate searchers,
wearied and weakened their bodies, and emptied their Purses.

The last Question to be touched here, and ordinarily made, is, Whether Gold
may be made potable? To which the Answer is, that it cannot be doubted of,
since Experience does show that it may be converted into Liquor; but the chief
point is to know, whether this Liquor can afford nourishment, as many do
endeavor to persuade: which we do deny, since there is neither correspondency
nor analogy between Gold and our Body, which is necessarily required between
nourishment and the body nourished; but there is no proportion between the
Metallic and Animal Nature. Yet no doubt is to be made, but that this Liquor
is a very Sovereign Medecin, if it be performed with a Menstruum or dissolvent
friendly and amicable to our Nature, and capable to render Gold so volatile,
that it may not be afterward in the power of Art, to reduce it again to body.
For being thus once prepared, it passes easily to the very last digestion,
where it corrects whatsoever it meets with that is defective; and so it alters
and changes our body for the better, provided the right Dosis and way of using
it be known, otherwise it would rather prove a devouring Enemy, then a familiar
and pleasing Guest.

SECT. VII. Of Stones.
STones are hard Bodies, which neither are extensible under the hammer, nor
meltable in the fire. They are generated in their particular Matrixes out of a
Juice, which has the Idea and Lapidifick ferment imprinted in it self: they
receive their various colors, from the various Mines through which their
Lapidifick juice, and their Mercurial fumes, or coagulating Spirit does pass.
They are either opacons, or transparent: The transparent are either with or
without color; so in all likelihood we may say, that the Coagulative Spirit of
Emerald passes through a Mine of Vitriol or Copper; that of Opal through a
Sulphurous Mine; of Ruby and Carbuncle through a golden one; Granats and some
other like Stones of this nature, draw their color from Iron, a proof whereof
is, that they are attracted by the Loadstone; and so we may conclude of others.
But the Coagulative Spirit of Diamond and Rock Crystal, is only a pure and
unmixt petrifying Spirit, deprived of all tingent Sulphureity; which by
consequence leaves in it nothing but that lovely and admirable transparency,
for which they are admired.

It is noted, that opacous Stones, are not only generated in the bowels of the
Earth or Waters, but also in the bowels and entrails of all kind of Animals,
as the searchers of Nature have made it manifest.

Thus briefly we have run over the Nature of Minerals: For in what concerns the
Doctrine of their particular hystory, we must have recourse to such natural
Philosophers as have exactly and professedly written thereof, as Georgius
Agricola, and Lazarus Ercker; for our intention is, only to make an Abridgement
of the chief heads, to which you may refer all the natural-Mixts which depend
upon, and flow from them.

SECT. VIII. Of other Mixts, both Animate and Inanimate.
WE have said above, that there were two kinds of Inanimate Mixts, viz. Those
that are extracted from the bowels of the Earth, and those that are not; it
remains we should speak of these last, since we have, as much as the Laws of
our Abridgement can suffer it, discoursed of the former. Those which belong to
this last Classis, are Juices and Liquors, extracted out of Plants by
expression; as also mediately or immediately from Animals: As for Example,
Wine, Oil, Vinegar, Gums, Rosins, Fruits, Fats, Milk, Cadavers and their
several parts, and many other things, which as remedies are used for the
restoration of men's decayed health.

Animate Mixts, are either Vegetables or Animals; Vegetable or Plants are
either perfect or imperfect: Perfect Plants are those which have both root and
stalk or surface: Imperfect, which want either of the two, Tuberes terrae,
Puffes.
Trussoli are of this kind: for their root makes all their substance, and
contrariwise Mushroms, in which there appears little or no root at all. Perfect
Plants are divided into Herb, Shrub, and Tree; and each of these again
subdivided into an infinite number of differing kinds, the names whereof are
to be found in Herbals. The parts of perfect Plants, are principal, or less
principal; Principal are those which the Vegetative soul makes use of in her
functions, and they are similary or dissimilary: Similary again are, liquid or
solid; Liquid are Juices and Drops, which if they be aqueous are coagulated
into Gums, if sulphurous in Rosins; and for this reason Gums dissolve in
Liquors of an aqueous nature; and Rosins cannot be dissolved, but by Oils, and
analogical Liquors. The solid parts are the substance or carneous part, and the
fibers of the Plant. The dissimilar parts, that is to say, those which contain
in themselves a diversity of substance, are perpetual or annual. Perpetual or
lasting long, are the root, the stock, the rind, the marrow and the branches:
Annual are those which renew every year, as the buds, flowers, leaves, fruits,
seeds, etc.

As the plants then have a great variety of parts, and they divided into
several kinds; so likewise Animals, which are composed of similar and
dissimilar parts, are divided into several species: for they are either,
rational or unrational; the irrational, or beasts, are perfect or unperfect:
Perfect are those which are without caesure, and for the nourishment of their
parts do generate blood: Unperfect, such as are Insects, breed no blood and are
divided by cesures. All beasts, whether perfect or unperfect, are either
gressile and marching, or reptile and creeping, or natatile, i. e. swimming, or
volatile, i. e. flying. But if you desire to be further instructed in the
History of Animals, read Aldrovandus, who has treated of this subject with
great exactness; and for the knowledge of Man and his parts, consult
Anatomists.

CHAP. VI. In what manner Chemistry works upon all these Mixts, to extract
what is pure in them; and rejects their impurity.
YOu see by the enumeration of these Mixts, of what vast extent is the Empire
of Chemistry, since her operation is busied upon these so different Compounds:
for she may choose any of these bodies, either to divide and resolve it into
its Principles, by making a separation of the Substances which do compound it;
or she uses them, to extract the mystery of Nature out of them, which contains
the Arcanum, Magistery, Quintessence, Extract and Specific, in a much more
eminent degree, than the body from whence it is extracted; because this body,
by Chemical Preparation which separates impurities, for the perfection of this
mystery, is changed and exalted; as we shall make it plain in the Book of
Operations. For it is not enough to study and read the Works of Paracelsus, and
chiefly his Books of Archidoxa, which I have already recommended: but you must
also use your hands, and come to the Practical part, if you will unriddle his
Obscurities, not heeding the time which therein must be spent, nor thinking
much of the labor and charges; As most do, who by the reading of some few
Authors, only grounded upon the authority and opinions of their Predecessors,
neglecting experience and the painful search of Natures secrets, think and
imagine to attain unto great perfection, though Experience be one of the
Columns of the best Natural Philosophy, and consequently of the truest Physic.
That we may then the better attain to it, we shall here conclude the Theorical
part, to come to the Practice; and by the help of one, illustrate the other the
better.

The End of the Theory.
Part II. Of the Abridgement of CHEMISTRY.
Book I. Of the proper and necessary terms to understand and perform all
Chemical Operations.
The PREFACE.
IN the First Part of this Treatise, we have showed unto you the Grounds upon
which does lean all the Theory of Chemistry: But because we said in the
Preface, that Chemistry was a Sensal Philosophy, which admits only what the
Senses manifest and demonstrate unto us; it is time for us to come to the
Practical part, and Operations depending of it, and to examine, Whether all
what we have said above, is grounded upon Sense. No body must admire, that a
Science should become Operative; since Operation is only to the end of
perfecting Contemplation, and Contemplation seems to be only to help
Operation; so that these two seem to be inseparable. And if it be true, that
all Doctrine and Knowledge must begin by the Senses, according to the Maxim
which says, Nihil esse in Intellectu, quod non prius fuerit in Sensu; I think
it very necessary that the Senses be well informed and instructed by several
Experiences, before you give your self to the Theory, or begin to contemplate
upon Natural things, lest you fall into the error of those superficial
Philosophers, who please themselves in arguing upon the Principles of some
Doctrine, whereof experience discovers the untruth; as for Example: Is it not a
very manifest and palpable error, to imagine that the Smoke or Fume, which any
Mixed does yield by violent dissolution, should be a Fire or Elementary Air, or
some unmixt Substance; since, if they are examined in a Limbeck, or any other
Vessel or Receiver, experience will demonstrate to the sense, that that Flame
or Smoke, are neither pure Elements nor imperfect Mixts; but that it is
sometimes the Body of a most perfect Mixed, as evidently appears by subliming of
Brimstone and Armoniack Salt, and the Fumes of Mercury, which is the same
Quicksilver, who like unto that Proteus of the ancient Poets, takes all sorts
of shapes and colors; but returns again to its first nature, being revived.

By this it appears, that it is not good to judge of things lightly; as to say
that all Smoke is Air, because it has some resemblance with Air: For though
all Vapors and Exhalations are alike unto the sight, yet nevertheless are they
of a very different nature; as those that examine them thoroughly, and search
them narrowly, by the help of Chemical Vessels will discover; and this shall we
demonstrate by the several Operations, whereof we are to treat in this last
Part.

But because in the practical part of these Operations, we meet with several
terms that are proper and essential to the Art of Chemistry, and seem to be of
difficult understanding, it is necessary, before we enter into the discourse of
Operations, to explain their meaning. We shall then in this First Book, treat
of the several kinds of Solutions and Coagulations; because one of the chief
ends of Chemistry is to spiritualize and corporifie again, thereby to separate
Purity from Impurity: after this, we will show the several degrees of Fire; by
the means of which, and the help of several Furnaces, and diverse Vessels, that
true exaltation is attained unto, which from the mystery of each Mixt's nature,
does extract the Arcanum, Elixit, Tincture, or some sublime Essence graduated
to such a height, as one drop or grain of these miraculous Remedies may without
comparison be more efficacious then many pounds of the gross and bodily Mixed,
out of which these Medicaments have been extracted.

CHAP. I Of the several kinds of Solutions and Coagulations.
THough Chemistry takes for its object all natural Bodies, yet properly and
particularly she confines her Operations upon Mixed Bodies, which she reaches
how to exalt by the help of Solution and Coagulation, who do contain under them
several kinds of Operations, tending all either to spiritualize or corporifie,
Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals: so that the exaltation of any Mixed or
Compound, is nothing else but the purest part of the same, by the help of
several Solutions and Coagulations often reiterated, brought to its highest
perfection. To attain this point, Purity first must be separated from Impurity,
which is performed materially or formally: Materially, by cribration or
sifting, ablution or washing, edulcoration or sweetening, detersion or
cleansing, effusion or pouring, colation and philtration, or running through a
bag, and despumation: Formally, by distillation, sublimation, digestion, and
several other reiterated Operations, whereof hereafter.

The separation of Purity and Impurity being performed, to obtain a perfect
exaltation of the Mixed, the impurity of it must be rejected, and that which is
pure be first put in Solution, then Coagulation; which is done either by
reducing it to very small Particles, or to Liquor, or else in a solid Body, by
help of the following Operations, viz. Limation or filing, rasion or scraping,
pulverisation or reducing to powder, alkoholisation or reducing to atomical
parts, incision or cutting, granulation or reducing into small grains by
melting, lamination or converting into thin Plates, putrefaction, fermentation,
maceration, fumigation, which is either dry or moist, cohobation,
precipitation, amalgamation, distillation, rectification, sublimation,
calcination either actual or potential, vitrification, projection,
lapidification, extinction, fusion, liquation, cementation, stratification,
reverberation, fulmination or detonation, extraction, expression, inceration,
digestion, evaporation, desiccation, exhalation, circulation, congelation,
crystallization, fixation, volatilisation, spiritualization, corporification,
mortification and revivification; all which terms, to remove obscurities in the
understanding of the Artist, we will further illustrate in this Chapter.

Cribration, is when the matter, after it has been pounded in a Mortar, is
sifted through a thin Cloth or a Sieve, the one is for the exact contusion, the
other for the grosser.

Ablution or lotion is, when the matter to be cleansed from its grosser
impurities, is washed in water; but when the matter by its weight is fallen in
the bottom of the Vessel, and the water powered out by inclination, it is called
Effusion.

Edulcoration is, when the spirituous, saline, and corrosive parts of Chemical
Preparations, performed by actual or potential calcination, are separated.

That matter which cannot endure water without alteration, or loss of its
substance, is purged by Detersion; and if it be put in any convenient Liquor,
and then afterward grossly expressed, either through a Linen, or some other
Strainer of Cloth or Tamy, it is called Colation or Percolation: but if this
Operation be performed through some more compact substance, it will be called
Philtration, which is performed either by the Cloth, Paper, or Ragge; that
which is performed through the Paper, is cleanlier and exacter.

Despumation is nothing else, but separating of the skum, or other impurities
which swim above the matter, with some proper Instruments to that purpose.

Limation is the solution of continuity of some mixed Body, performed with a
File of Steel: it is used in all the three Families of Bodies; for, the Bones
of Animals, the Wood of Vegetables, and the Bodies of the most compact, hard
and solid Metals yield to the File.

Rasion comes very near Limation, but is performed with a sharper Instrument,
as a knife, or some of the like nature; it may also be referred in a manner to
In^ision.

Pulverization or Contusion, are nothing else but the reduction of some Mixed
into Powder, by means of Trituration or grinding upon a Marble or Porphyry, or
pounding in a Mortar; and if the matter be reduced to an impalpable and
imperceptible Powder, it is called Alkoholisation, which is also sometimes said
of liquid things, as the Alkohol of Wine, or other volatile and inflamable
spirits, when these spirits are so deprived of their phlegm and waterish part,
that they consume and flame away with the matter wherein they were dipped, be it
Linen, Paper, or Cotton.

By Granulation, Mineral and Metallic Bodies are reduced to small grains, and
by Lamination extended in small and thin Plates, as are Gold, Silver, Leaf
Copper, etc.

Putrefaction is, when the Mixed by a moist heat without any mixture tends to
its corruption: and if it be performed by the mixture or addition of any
Ferment, as Tartar, common Salt, Yeast of Beer, Leaven of Bread, or Lees of
Wine, it is then called Fermentation.

Maceration is, when any matter is put in a Menstruum or proper liquor to
infuse, that liquor being chosen according to the design or intention of the
Artist, to extract the virtue of the Body upon which it works. This Operation
requires a fit and competent time for completing the Extraction, which retards
or advances, according to the more or less solidity and compactedness of the
body wrought upon.

Fumigation is a Corrosion of the external parts of a body by a vapor, or
sharp and corroding Exhalation: If it be by a vapor, as is that of Vinegar, it
is a moist fumigation: if by Exhalation, as the fumes of Lead or Quicksilver,
it is a dry fumigation, calcining laminated Metals, or reduced in Plates, and
making them so crumbling and brickle, that they may afterward be easily
reduced to powder.

Cohobation is done, by often pouring again the Menstruum, extracted out of one
or several Mixts upon its own feces, or the remainder of those Mixts in the
Receiver, either to draw the Central Virtues enclosed in those Compounds, or to
cause the same feces, to resume and take back, what in the distillation they
had suffered to fly up and volatilize by the action of heat, and in this only
Operation does Cohobation consist.

Precipitation causes the dissolving Menstruum to quit the body which it had
dissolved, which is performed by the analogy that Salts have with Spirits; for,
Whatsoever is dissolved by Spirits, is precipitated by Salts; and contrariwise.
This Operation requires the particular consideration of the Artist, because it
gives great light, and is a great key to comprehend the generation and
corruption of natural things.

Amalgamation is a particular calcination of Metals, which some Authors do call
Philosophical Calcination: It is performed by the union of Mercury or
Quicksilver with the least particles of Metals, which does so separate and
open them, that they become unctuous and extensible upon the hand; so that
evaporating the Quicksilver with a convenient heat, the Metals are reduced to
a very subtle Calx, which cannot be performed so well by any other means.

Distillation is, when the matter enclosed in a Vessel, drives and sends up
vapors in another Vessel, by the help and activity of Fire: There are three
species of it. The first, when the vapor of distilled Substances do ascend.
The second, when the same vapors are driven by the side of the Vessel: And the
third, when downwards: all these according to the distillable matters, and the
fitness of the Vessels for Operation.

Rectification is nothing else but a reiterated Distillation, and that to
subtilize the more the distilled vapors, or separate some Spirit from its
Phlegm, and the more-terrestrial and gross parts, according as the Spirits are,
either sharp and fixed, or volatile and inflamable.

Sublimation is an Operation, by which the action and heat of Fire, elevates a
whole body, in dry Exhalations, or at least some part of it which cleaves and
condenses it self in thin and subtle Flores, or sometimes thick, compacted and
pressed in the top of the Vessel: this manner of Operation is opposed to
Precipitation.

Calcination is a violent action, which reduces the Mixed to Calx and Ashes. It
is double, actual and potential: the actual is performed by flaming Wood or
kindled Coals, which are the material fire: Potential Calcination is that which
is made by the secret and potential fire of strong and dissolutive Waters, or
Aqua Fortis, single or compounded, and by the vapors and corrosive fumes, as
it is observed in Precipitation and Fumigation.

Vitrification is the change of Metals, Minerals, Vegetables or Stones in
Glass, and that by projection after their fusion, or by addition of Salts,
Alkali or fixed, or extracted from Lees, which do penetrate and purify these
several substances, and vitrifie them by giving them fusibility and
transparency: There are many nevertheless Opacous also, which are used for
enamelling, and called Amels.

Lapidification is when Metals are changed into Stones or Pasts, which in a
kind are of a middle nature, between Metallic and Transparent Glasses; and
Amels, because they are susceptible of a fair polishing.

Extinction is the suffocation and cooling of a hot kindled substance in some
Liquor, either to the end of extracting its virtue and communicating it to the
Liquor, or to impart some adventitious quality to the substance immersed; as
when, for Example, Tuty or Lapis Calaminaris is extinguished in Fennel water or
Vinegar, to make them more efficacious for the cure of the Eyes; as also all
Iron and Steel Tools are dipped, to become thereby more apt for polishing, and
receive a hardness, and consequently an edge.

Fusion is properly said of Metals and Minerals, and is performed by a great
and violent Ignition. And Liquation is only said of the fat of Animals, Wax,
and unctuous fat and resinous substances of Vegetables, performed by a
temperate heat.

The Impurities of Metals are removed by Cementation; it serves also to examine
them, whether they are true or false, as also to lessen their bulk by the
compressing of their parts, which is performed by stratification, making a bed
or lay of Cement, another of Metallic Plates, and so continuing stratum super
stratum, or lay upon lay, till the Vessel be top full; but you are to note,
that the first and the last lay must be of Cement, after which the Pot or
Crucible must be exactly luted, to give a Circular fire by degrees until
fusion.

Reverberation is an Ignition, by which Bodies are calcined with a flaming fire
in a Reverberatory Furnace: Whether it be done to the end corrosive Spirits may
be separated from it, or to subtilize and soften the body with that Operation.

Fulmination or Fulguration is an Operation, by which all Metals, excepting
Gold and Silver, are meteorized, and driven or reduced into vapors,
exhalations, and fumes; by the help of Lead in a Copell, with violence of fire
kindled and animated with good and ample Bellows.

The end of Detonation is to drive away and separate all the Sulphurous and
Mercurial parts of a Body which are not pure, that there may remain the earthly
part only, which is accompanied by the internal and fixed Sulphur, in which is
properly inherent the virtue of Minerals. This Operation is performed by the
help of Saltpeter or Nitre, as it appears in the Precipitation of
Diaphoretical Antimony, made by Detonation and Fusion.

Extraction is, when the essence or tincture of a Mixed is extracted, by help of
a Menstruum or convenient Liquor, which the Artist does evaporate away, if it
be unusefull and of small value; but if of any price, he draws it again by
Distillation, to use it in other Operations; that which remains in the bottom
of the Vessel is called Extract.

Expression tends to separate the subtilest from the grosser parts of the body,
according to the intention of the Artist, to preserve the one or the other, it
is performed by a Press which screwes, or otherwise, and Tables.

Digestion is one of the principal and most necessary Operations of Chemistry;
because Mixts are made tractable by it, and capable to yield us what we desire
out of them; it is performed by the means of a convenient Menstruum, and a slow
and long heat: most commonly joynted Vessels meeting at the mouth, called
properly Circulatory, are employed for this purpose, that nothing of the
volatile spirits of the digested Substance may be lost; to this Operation are
commonly made use of, the heat of a watery Bath (Balneum maris) or vaporous, or
aerial, or the heat of Horse-^ung, Ashes, or Sand. Digestion has a great
affinity with Maceration, they do notwithstanding differ among themselves; in
regard that there is a kind of coction performed in the act of Digestion,
which is not done in Maceration.

The Menstruum, which has been used in Dissolution or Extraction, is by
evaporation reduced to vapor, and this way is Desiccation performed: but by
Exhalation the dry spirits are carried away from the substance by the virtue
of the fire, and reduced to Exhalations.

Circulation is an Operation, by which the substances, contained in the bottom
of a Pelican, or Circulatory Vessel, are driven upwards by the action of heat,
and thence fall again upon them-themselves, either to volatilize them by the
help of spirits, or to fix the spirit by the frequent and reiterated contract
of the body; which is a thing very well worthy the contemplation of him that
will attain the true knowledge of Nature.

Congelation is, when the solid parts of Animals are, with some convenient
Menstruum, reduced to a Jelly by Elixation: Such are the Jellies of Horns,
Bones, Muscles, Sinews, and Cartilages; but you are to note, that this
Congelation proceeds only from the volatile Salt, which abounds in Animals: As
Crystallization is properly said of Salts purified by several Solutions,
Filtrations, and Crystallizations, after the Liquor in which they are
contained, has been evaporated to a skin.

Things volatile are fixed by Fixation, as contrariwise Fixed are volatilized by
Volatilization. That substance is called fixed, which abides and is permanent in
the fire; as volatile is called that which flies and exhaleth it self with the
least heat. But note here, that as there are several degrees of heat, so there
is several things fixed, and several volatile.

Spiritualization does change the whole body into Spirit, so that it becomes no
more palpable nor sensible to us: And by Corporification, the Spirit re-assumes
its Body, and manifests it self again to our senses; but the body so qualified
is an exalted body, very different in virtue from that from which it has been
extracted, since this body so glorified contains in it self the mystery of its
own Mixed.

By Mortification, Mixts are as it were destroyed, and lose all the qualities
and virtues of their first nature; to acquire others much sublimer and more
efficacious, by the help of revivification. Paracelsus meant it of this
Operation, when he said, That the power of death was efficacious, since no
resurrection can be without her: And as the Apostle S. Paul says, It is
necessary, that the grain of Corn should first dye in the Earth, before it can
live again, and multiply it self in the Ear which it produces.

CHAP. II. Of the several degrees of Heat and Fire.
THE most potent Agent that Nature has furnished us withal under Heaven, to
perform the Anatomy of Mixed Bodies, is Fire; which to feed and maintain it
self, does need first a combustible oily and ^^phureous matter, either Mineral
as Sea-coal, or Vegetable as Chark-coal, and the Oils of Vegetables; or
finally, Animals Fats, Suets and Oils of Animals. Secondly, Fire needs a
continual Air, that may by its action drive away the excrements and fuliginous
emanations of the substances which are burned, and that may animate the Fire,
to make it more or less act upon its subject; and from this necessity it is
that some, though improperly, have affirmed, that the Air was the true food and
nourishment of Fire. If we will exactly speak, it cannot be said, that Fire
receives more or less by it self or in it self, or as Philosophers speak,
admits of intention or remission; Though the matter upon which it does act, may
receive great variety of degrees of heat, according to its neerness or
distance, or interposition of things which may receive the impression of heat;
whence it necessarily follows, that the ordering of the heat of Fire, does
consist in a just and convenient quantity, administered by the Artist, according
to the nature and condition of the matter upon which he works, and according
to the means or instruments which he uses, to whom it is required he should
give a proportionate distance.

To increase the Fire, it is required, either to add a greater quantity of
Coals in the Fire, or if there be enough, and that the Artist does find it not
to burn according to his expectation, there must be more Air let in, either by
the door or mouth of the Furnace which receives the Fire, or by the Ash-hole,
which is better: as also by opening the Registers, which are usually made
either at the upper part, or in the sides of the Furnaces, to let out
exhalations and fuliginous vapors, which commonly suffocate the Fire; or
lastly, by blowing large bellows, and of a capacious body for room of wind.
From this that is said may be conceived, that Fire may be decreased and
weakened by the contrary ways, as shutting the Doors and Registers, to hinder
the entering of Air, and issue of fuliginous substances; or the combustible
matter must be diminished, or the Fire covered with cold Ashes, or a plate of
Iron, or a Brick, to hinder such disorders and accidents as usually happen in
the midst of the work.

As for the distance of the Vessels containing the matter, it can only be
judged according to the nature of (...) matter of their composition, or the
Mediums interposed between, it may nevertheless stand as a general rule, that
there ought to be a distance of about eight inches, between the Grate which
contains the fire* and the Dish or part upon which the bottom of the Vessel
which is to receive the heat does rest: For the action of Fi^e upon bodies, is
mediate or immediate; Immediate, when without opposition Fire acts upon the
matter, or Vessel that contains it, whether it be a Crucible, Retort, or any
other thing; and this is commonly called Open Fire; Fire of Calcination and
suppression: Mediate is, when any thing is interposed between the Fire and the
matter, which does hinder its destructive action; whereby the Artist is enabled
to govern it, not otherwise then a skillful rider manages a Horses, and keeps
him in awe, by the help of the Bridle which he holds in his hand.

We shall comprise under nine chief Classes, the several differing degrees of
Heat, and these the ingenuous Artist may yet vary in an infinite number of
manners, according to his intention, and that the quality of the Mixed upon
which he works, does require it: Those differences are as follows.

We will take the first degree of Heat from the greatest extremity of its
height, which is the fire of Flame, which calcines and reverberates all things;
and this is that properly, which is capable to turn the most solid and fixed
Bodies into Vapors and Exhalations.

The second is that of Coals, which properly and principally serves for
Cementation, for coloring and purging, as well as for contracting Metals, as
also those Minerals which participate most of Metallic nature. It is sometimes
called Circulatory Fire, (Ignis rotae;) sometimes Fire of suppression,
according as the fire is placed above, under, or at the sides.

The third degree of Intense Fire, is that of the Iron Plate, when it is red
hot at the highest; which is a kind of heat proper to try Metallic
Tinctures, as well as the degree of Fixation of Mineral remedies.

The fourth is that which is maintained by the filings of Iron put in a Capsula
or Kettle of the same Metal; and this, because this substance being once
heated, preserves its heat much longer then the other, and communicates it to
the Vessel put into it, which contains the matter that is either to be
distilled, digested or concocted, with a greater activity.

The fifth is the Fire of Furnace, with Sand interposed to the Vessel; it
preserves, and yields a less heat then that of the filings of Iron, because it
takes heat more slowly, and sooner cools, and is more easily kept in order,
by the help of the Registers of the Furnace.

The sixth is the heat of Ashes, which in respect of the foregoing degrees,
begins to be temperate: This Fire commonly is used in the Extractions of such
Mixts as are of a middle substance, either Animals or Vegetables, as also in
their digestions and evaporations.

The Balneum Mariae, or (to speak more properly) Balneum Maris, makes the
seventh of our Classes or degrees; and it is the most considerable of all, as
that which constitutes the most excellent and useful part of the work of
Chemistry; because an understanding Artist may manage it with that judgment
and proportion, that he may with its help perform a numberless variety of
Operations, which by any other imaginable way, are not to be attained unto: For
this Bath may be boiling hot, half boiling, simpring, lukewarm, half
lukewarm, and be yet so ordered as to keep the middle proportions of all these
degrees too.

The eighth degree of well graduated Fite, is the Vaporous Bath, for the
Vessels may be only put to the vapor of the water contained in the Bath: And
for the ninth, there may be put about the Vessel sawings of Wood to receive the
vapor, as also Oaten Chafe, or any other, shred very small, because they are
bodies which easily attract this vapor and heat, and keep it long in slow, and
almost perfectly equal temper.

Besides all these degrees and kinds of Heat spoken of, there remains yet the
Lamp-fire, which may be graduated according to the distance or neerness of the
Lamp, which shall have one or more Weeks; these weeks shall have two, three,
four, or more threads, according as you intend to give a less or greater temper
of heat to your matter; this Heat is chiefly used for Coction and Fixation.

The invention of ingenuous Chemists has found out, besides this, several
kinds of cheap Heats, as that of the Sun, either exposing your matter to the
reflection of the rays of his light, received by some Body, more or less
capable to reflect them; or concerning the rays of the same Light, by the help
of a Burning Glass, an Instrument whose invention may strike with amazement the
best Philosophers, that are not well acquainted with the sphere of its
activity, since the most obvious effects of it are, to melt Metals, according
to the section and bigness of the diameter of these admirable Instruments. But
that which of all is more worth enquiry, and surprises more, is, that this Fire
is a Magical Fire, differing from all other; since the vulgar is destructive,
and this to the contrary preserves and multiplyes, as experience does verify
in the Solar Calcination of Antimony, which loses its impure Mercury and
Sulphur, vapouring away in this Operation, whereby it would be thought the body
should diminish; whereas it acquires a cordial and diaphoretick virtue, with a
considerable addition of weight: which is thus proved. If you calcine in vulgar
fire ten grains of this Mineral, it diminishes to four, and consequently there
remains but six, which have yet a Cathartick and Emetick faculty: but if you
calcine the same quantity with the Solar Fire, besides that it loses its ill
qualities, by the Exhalation made of its Impurities, which no question have
some weight, and seem in the Operation to have diminisht the ten grains; you
shall, instead of that, the Preparation being ended, find twelve grains of
matter endowed with an admirable virtue; and this with just reason strikes into
amazement the subtilest and most searching Wits; for, compare this to the other
Operation, and you cannot but confess, that the augmentation is of a just full
half. But it will allay something your astonishment, if you are acquainted a
little more with the nature of this miraculous Fire, and can comprehend, that
Light is that Promethean Fire, which gives life to all natural bodies, is their
Principle, and indivisibly joins it self to its like, wheresoever it meers with
it in any subject.

Chemical Artists do likewise make use of Horse-dung, which yields a puttefying
heat, specially recommended by Paracelsus, in the opening of the most solid and
fixed Bodies, as are those of Metals and Minerals: To extract the eassier those
noble remedies which he does teach us, we may substitute to the Horse-dung,
that of hot Bathes and Mineral Springs heared by Nature it self, as also that
of Balneum Maris, which is Artificial, provided the requisite proportions be
understood.

CHAP. III. Of the variety of Vessels.
THE matters which the Artist works upon, are not often put on the open bear
fire: But that it is necessarily required they should be enclosed in fit and
convenient Vessels, according to the intention of the work; which Vessels are
to be set artificially and with great judgment upon the fire, whose action is
mediate or immediate; to the end that the extracted substances vanish not, and
be lost without proof, but rather carefully and curiously preserved: We shall
treat in this Chapter of the variety of those Vessels, and the several uses
unto which they are serviceable.

Now these Vessels are to be considered either according to their matter, or
their form; because they are the two essential parts, which make them to be
used in the Operations of Chemistry, and their differences is as great, as the
fancies and inventions are various in the minds of Artists. And as they are
since many Ages in quest of the perfection of the Operations of this Art, so
shall we only trace, in more general terms, the greatest part of the more
necessary Instruments, to leave a latitude of liberty to the invention of those
which will addict themselves to this Noble Art, after they are once introduced
to attain to the most secret and abstruse knowledges of it, by the rare
Preparations which are made by the means and assistance of the same.

There must ever be a care had to choose the cleanliest matter for the fabric
of Vessels, which must also be pressed and compacted, that the subtilest
portions of matter may not transpire, and that the substance of the Vessels may
not communicate any forain quality to the matter, whether single or compounded,
upon which the Chemist does operate. Glass is the body, which excluding all
others, would be the fittest to be employed, both by reason of its
compactedness, and cleanly nature, were it capable to endure all the actions of
Fire; but its fusibility, and the several accidents which may cause it to
break, notwithstanding all the care and foresight of Artists, make it necessary
to have a recourse to some other matters which may be capable of resisting
Fire, and may not break so easily: As, for one, to Potters Clay, which
furnishes several Vessels to the service and use of Chemistry, according to the
several kinds of Clay, and their porosity; for if it be said, that it may be
glased within with some Mineral or Metallic substances (as Leaden oar. etc.)
which will hinder transpiration, it is as soon answered, that this Preparation
makes them not differing from the nature of Glass, and so consequently subject
to the same inconveniences, as Glass is: For, besides their ordinary
brickleness, there must also a great regard be had, not to expose them too soon
from heat to cold, nor from cold to heat, because compression or rarefaction of
the parts, and the air in them, would soon cause them to fly in pieces.

There is also some use of Metallic Vessels for many Operations in this Art,
which without their help would prove very difficult, yea almost impossible; as
much by reason of the activity of Fire, destroying and consuming whatsoever
comes near it, as for the several m^tters upon which the Artist does use to
work: for, to contain sharp, acid, saline, nitrous, vitriolick and aluminous
substances, Glass, or leaded or glased Pots, are necessary; as contrariwise
when you intend to distill spirit of Wine in abundance, Metallic Vessels that
may long abide an open Fire, and contain much matter, are requisite. Distilled
Oils of Vegetables cannot also be drawn without these Vessel^, because these
Operations require a violent and long fire to disunite the Balsamic and
Ethereal parts from the other, which are terrestial and saline, which cannot
be separated without much ebullition, and store of water. But you are to note,
that when you intend to work upon Mercury (which you are to understand
henceforth to be Quicksilver) you must never make use of any Metallic Vessel,
because this Metallic Body will easily amalgam and mix it self with the
greatest part of Metals, though with greater ease with some then others. Thus
much in short concerning the matter of Chemical Vessels.

As for the diversity of their form, it is distinguished according to the
requisite or intended Operations. For when the distillation is intended, we use
Cucurbites with their head -- or Limbeck, as also the brass Body, or Vesica,
covered with the Moors head, made of the same Metal or Tin, lest the Spirits or
distilled Oils should draw any vitriolick substance from the Copper; And to
prevent the same inconveniency, it will be very requisite, that all the Copper
Vessels which are to be used by the Artist, be tinned within: For the
distillation of new Fruits, juicy Plants, or Flowers, are to be used great and
large Basins, on the top whereof a Tin Bell or distilling head is to be
applied: And these three kinds of Vessels, are sufficient for the distillation
of all vapors extracted by ascension. But for performing the distillation of
such vapors as are droven by the sides, Re^orts and great Receivers are
necessary, as Artists have found by experience, because such vapors cannot
ascend by reason of their heaviness; it is also sometimes requisite to have
earthen Retorts, or of Metal opened above, as also Receivers with three necks
or channels, to change and fit others to the first, with more ease and dispatch
when occasion requires, and to condense more easily and speedily the
Exhalations and vapors which the matter urged by the Fire's action does yield;
for were it not for that, either of necessity the Vessel containing the matter
must break, or the Recipient fly into pieces, if not changed, because it would
not be capacious enough to contain the vapor or spirits droven in by the Fire.

For digestion long neck'd Matrasses and narrow mouthed, are necessary: double
Vessels may also be used to this purpose, which are two Vessels whose mouths
are placed one in the other, that nothing of what is fitting to be kept in, may
evaporate.

Pelicans are used for Circulation, as also twins, which are two Cucurbites
with their heads, whose noses are reciprocally inserted in the body of the
opposite Cucurbite. The double Vessels may also be made use of for this
Operation, but they are not so commodious. For sublimation Aludels are
employed, or some analogous Vessels, as several earthen Pots put one in
another; as also distillatory heads, or blind Limbecks without nose: strong
and well glued blew Paper shaped in a Conick Figure is also used, to receive
the Exhalations of the sublimed matters, as we shall teach more particularly in
the sublimation of Benjimin hereafter.

For Fusion or melting, as also Cementation and Calcination, it is requisite to
be provided with Crucibles made with a good Earth, and well abiding the Fire,
and capable to keep the Salts in fusion, and hinder the vaporation of their
spirits, as also to keep Metals in fusion: There must also be coverings for the
Crucibles, that may easily be put on or removed with the Pincers, that no Coals
or any other Mixture, may fall into the matter whilst it is upon the fire, or
that they may exactly be luted to the Crucibles, as it is practiced in
Cementations.

Finally, the Artist must be provided with Pans, Dishes, Spoons, and Spatula's
of Glass, white Earth, Jugg-metal, or some other good Earth glased, or not
glased or leaded, to use in Dissolutions, diagram A Vessel to alkolize the
Spirit of Wyn in the very first distillation.
1. Vessel receaving the Aqua Vitce 2. pipe to put it in. 3. the head receaving
the ascending vapor. 4. the first piece of the crooked pipe or worm. 5. the
second piece. 6. funnel receaving and supporting the still head. 7. the still
head. 8. the receaver or Recipient. 9. a stander supporting the same Recipient.
10. an Instrument to empty the spirit of Wyn without interrupting the
distillation called Siphon.


diagram A Common Furnace for all operations, provided the vessels be fitted
and appropriated thereunto as we have said in the Chapter of Furnaces
a. the ash hole. b. the focus, or fire room with its grate. c. iron bars
supporting the Retort. d. the Retort. e. the cover of the Furnace. f. the holes
or Registers to suppress the fire. g. the receavor or Recipiem. h. the stool
or threefoot table to support the receivor.


diagram Lamp Furnace
n We atherglass, Thermometer, or Engine to judge of the equality or degrees of
heat.

a. the Basis of the Furnace. b. a Lamp which may be raised and depressed with
a screw. c. Trefoot, to set upon the Vessel. d. the Vessel, with the
Philosophical egg. e. first, second and third piece of the Furnace. f. glass
Window, to look upon the matter. g. another Oval window opposite and answering
f. h. Registers.


diagram Sublimating Furnace.
a. the Furnace. b. the ash hole. c. the door of the focus. d. Registers. e.
the next to the fire wherein the matter is put. f. another pot turned vpside
down wards and placed upon:e. g. the door through which the matter is thrown
in. h. the third pot. i. the fourth pot. k. the fifth pot. l. button closing the
pot. m. spoon to throw the matter in.


Exhalations, Evaporations, Crystalizations, and particularly for Dissolutions
in the cold Cellar or open Air.

Those that will employ themselves about true Fixations, shall need the
Philosophers Egg, or another Instrument of my own invention, which I cannot
call otherwise, then the Egg in the Egg, or Ovum in Ovo: It does something
participate of the nature of a Pelican for the Circulation, and of that
Instrument which is called a Hell, because whatsoever is put in it can never go
out again: This Vessel is proper for the fixing of Mercury, and has the figure
of an Egg enclosed in another; so that it is as the Abridgement and Compendium
of these three Vessels, usually employed by Artists in their work of fixation.

But as the exact description of all these Vessels cannot be so well performed
by writing; and that ocular demonstration does much more advantage the
understanding, than reading can do: we have thought fitting in this regard to
satisfy the Readers curiosity, by exhibiting in a draught, in the beginning of
this Chapter, the delineation and models of the several Vessels spoken of.

CHAP. IV. Of the Diversity of all sorts of Furnaces.
IT does not suffice, that the Artist be provided with Fire and Vessels, he
must have also his Furnaces to regulate and govern his heat, and put his
Vessels in that degree of Fire, which he shall judge most fitting and
convenient for the matter in them contained. Furnaces are Instruments
destinated to those Operations, that are performed by the help of Fire, that
heat may be as it were kept in awe and bridled, to submit it self to the
judgment, skill, and intention of the Artist. They have several names given
them, according to the several Operations to which they are appropriated: For,
they are either fixed and immovable, or moveable and to be transported. We will
only speak here of the Unmovable, since they are the most useful kind for
Chemical Operations; leaving the other to the invention and fancy of those whom
their curiosity leads to this noble Art. The matter of Furnaces is threefold;
Bricks, Clay, and Iron-work; their form is according to their use.

Every Furnace must consist of four necessary parts, of whatsoever form they
be, which are; First, the Hearth or Ash-room, with its hole or mouth, to take
away the Ashes falling from the Coals. Secondly, the Grate which receives and
keeps up the Coals. Thirdly, the Chafing Dish or Focus with its door to throw
the Coals upon the Grate; wherein are the Registers, whereby the degrees of
heat of the kindled Coals are ruled and moderated. Finally, the Shop or
Laboratory, which must contain the Vessels and matter upon which the work is
intended. These are the general heads upon which the matter and construction of
Furnaces is grounded; it follows now, we should say something of their use,
and the description of their parts.

We begin by the Furnace commonly called an ATHANOR, which signifies a Furnace
in Arabic, and has this name given it by excellency, (the figure called by
Orators Antonomasia) because this Furnace is not only the most useful of all
others, to perform at the same time several Operations; but also because it
saves Coals, eases the care and assiduity of the Artist, and yields a heat
easy to be regulated. The Athanor is consisting of four parts: The first is
the Turret, containing the Coals: The second, a Balneum Maris: The third, an
Ash: The fourth, a Sand-furnace. The Turret is to have four or five foot in
height, 1 foot square in the outside, and ten inches of empty space or diameter
in the inside. It requires an Ash room, with its door for communicating the
Air, and taking away the Ashes, and a door above the Grate, to cleanse it, and
take away the earth and little stones which are sometimes mingled with the
Coals, and would stop the Grate, and hinder the passage of Air, and
consequently extinguish the Fire. This Turret also must have three open places,
each half a foot high, and three inches broad in the three other sides of the
Furnace above the Grate, that the heat may by that passage be communicated to
the Balneum Maris, Ash and Sand-Furnaces, which must be Contiguous to this
Turret, and each of these must also have their Ash-hole, Grate, and Door, to be
(if occasion requires) employed severally by themselves without the Turret:
These holes must be shut up, with Iron Plates, that are to rise and fall,
according to the degrees of fire to be given, to either of these Furnaces. To
stop the top of the Turret, there may be fitted a round or square brass Kettle,
which may be useful for several Operations, but specially digestions: This
Kettle or Cauldron shall be fitted, and join between two Iron bands, the one of
which shall be even with the inside of the Turret-top, and the other with the
outside, the space between these two being filled with Ashes to hinder the
expiration of heat by the said top; and thus the fire shall be forced to drive
its heat to the sides, drawn in by the Registers fitted to each of the three
Furnaces. And so much shall suffice to give a short explanation of the
structure and use of the Athanor: for as concerning the form and figure of it,
the ingenuous Artist is left to his own liberty.

There is also a Distillatory Furnace requisite in Chemical Operations, to
which the Copper body, or Vesica, is fastened for the distilling of Aqua Vitae
or Spirits of Wine, and for other hot Spirits, which are extracted by the help
of fermentation; also for the extraction of distilled Oils, improperly called
Essences, and after you have covered the said body with its head, you must join
to it a Fat or Barrel, with a strait or crooked Pipe (called commonly a Worm)
passing through the same, and receiving the vapors droven by the Fire, which
are condensed into Liquor in the Pipe, by the cold of Water wherewith the Fat
is to be filled.

For those that will operate upon Minerals and Metals, a Furnace of Cementation
or trying-Furnace is required, which is nothing else but a Round of bricks of
one foot diameter in the inside, and eight or nine inches high; wherein, after
the first row of bricks is set, which by a good Lute and fire-proof, must
exactly be joined and fastened together, a hole must be left for the bellows:
This Furnace may also serve for Copell and Calcination.

A Laboratory cannot be accounted complete, without a Reverberatory Furnace,
which is either close or open; the close is that in which, Aqua Fortis, and
spirits of Salts, as Nitre, Vitriol, common Salt, and other things of like
nature, may be distilled; the Open, is that which is used for Reverberation and
Calcination, by the help of the flame refracted from the backside to the mouth
of the Furnace, drawn in by a gap of half an Inch broad, and of the length of
the whole Furnace, left behind the Iron Plate, which contains the matter to be
reverberated; and the same flame so reflected, goes out by another gap of the
same dimension, left in the forefront of the Furnace at the top, immediately
under its Cover, which ought to be made flat without any Register, except the
same gap left open before.

Finally, to complete all, the Artist must have his Winde-Furnace, for Mineral
and Metallic fusions, Vitrifications, and preparing of Regula's; the Grate
thereof must be placed upon a Square born by four Pi^lars only, that the wind
and air may have a free admission, and so may be instead of bellows; the
opening between each Pillar of about a foot; and upon this basis, a round
Turret of about fifteen inches high, and eight inches diameter in the inside,
shall be built; the door for passage of the Crucibles that are to be put in,
must be seven or eight inches broad, and ten inches high: upon this Turret must
be applied a Cover of an Elliptical figure, or Arch-wise, with a Channel above
bored with a hole of about three inches diameter, upon which another shall be
adapted, three or four foot high, that the action of fire may better
concentrate about the Crucible, or other Vessels containing the matter to be
melted; the mouth of the door, by which Crucibles are put in, Crucibles must
also be stopped, with a door of good Clay, made of three pieces.

But because Chemical Artists are not still sedentary, and so cannot be
furnished, where they have occasion to work, with all sort of Furnaces, I will
he^e impart a w^y how to erect one, which may successively be employed in all
Operations requisite to this Art; provided the Artist may be furnished with
necessary Vessels, and of suitable dimensions to the Furnace, which I will now
describe.

Build a Furnace of 1 foot square, make the bottom of the Ash-room with a brick
laid flat, and continue to raise the wall with two bricks, and leave the empty
place in the middle, with the door before of four inches height, which are two
bricks; then cover the door with a brick, and complete the square with the same
height: after this set a Grate consisting of seven Iron bars, of the
thickness of the thumb, squarely wrought: these bars must be laid upon their
edge, that the ashes may the easlier fall thorough, and not suffocate the fire;
the distance between each must be of the fore-fingers breadth: and having thus
placed them, and fitted their equal distance with Tyles broken, or stones of
the same dimension and thickness, and luted all very well together; you must
begin to build in a falling wall, leaving only six inches of your Grate open,
and lessening every lay of bricks of about three lines, which work is to be
continued till you have brought it to be about ten inches high, which space is
necessary, as much to contain the Coals, as to leave a play sufficient for the
fire; you must leave here a door also of the same dimension as the Ash-room;
this ended, place two Ironbarres of an inch thick, distant half a foot one from
the other, and then eeven the wall either with stone, or some other matter of a
fit thickness, and then build round three bricks edge wise, that you may have
the more room, to put the necessary Vessels for the following Operations.

If you will work with the Balneum Maris, take a Kettle or round Cauldron of an
equal diameter with the inside of your Furnace, and of one foot height only,
that it may the better be adapted to the Furnace, and the space remaining at
the corns of the square, will be instead of Registers to draw, and enliven or
remit the heat, according as there shall be occasion. You must also have
another Cauldron, with a good strong bottom of Iron plate, but thinner in the
sides, made fit to be adapted to the same Furnace; and this will serve for
distillations, and for works that require a heat either of Ashes, Sand, or
filings of Iron; and if this Iron Vessel was made of Mettle of a Brest-armour
Plate, and forged all of one piece, it would also serve for a Balneum Maris.

And if you will work with a Retort, you may put an Earthen Pot Cover, turned
upsidewards, upon the Grate; and fill the hollow of it with sand, to be instead
of a Lute, and hinder the breaking of the Vessel, and the too quick action of
the fire, upon it and the contained matter; after which you have no more to do,
then to cover the top of the Furnace with an Earthen Pan not leaded, and bored
with a hole in the middle, that this hole with the other four angles may be
instead of a Register to direct the fire.

If the Artist desires to make use of this Furnace; toward Fusion,
Calcination, Cementation, or Reverberation, he may do it also, having taken
away the bricks, builded edge-wise on the side-top of the Furnace, as the
bars also, to put in his matter more easily and readily.

Thus much we had to say of Furnaces built with Lute and Bricks: there remains
only now, to speak something of the Lamp-Furnace, used by the most curious
Artists for many Chemical Operations. This Furnace must be made of a good Bolus
and well compacted Clay, kneaded and well allayed together, and then well
baked, that the heat of the Lamp may not transpire; and to hinder it the
better, the Furnace may after baking be rubbed and anointed within and without,
with white of Eggs reduced to Liquor by a continual agitation.

This Furnace is to consist of three pieces, making in all 21 inches in height,
of an inch thickness, and eight inches diameter in the inside. The first piece,
which is the basis of the Furnace, must be eight inches high, with a hole of 4
diameter below, that by this opening the Lamp may be put in, whose diameter is
to consist of three inches, and the depth or concavity of two: it must be
round, and covered with an Iron plate, bored in the middle with a sufficient
hole to contain a link of 12 threads or more, and with six other holes round
about, proportioned in an equal distance from that of the middle. The second
piece is to be of seven inches height, and fitted and adapted to the first,
having four earthen jets or handles of about an inch long, springing out of the
Wall-work, to hold up an Earthen or Brass Vessel of six inches diameter, and
four high, to make a Balneum Maris, or a Capsula for ashes or sand, as occasion
requires. There must also be in this second piece or part of the Furnace two
holes opposite the one to the other, of 1 inch diameter, fitted with two
Glasses of Venice Crystal: these two holes must be made between the height of
the fourth and last inch of the height, to be instead of windows, to discover
thereby the better the various colors, in the Operations and Dissolutions made
by the Artist, opposing a lighted Candle to the side you are to look in the
Vessel in which the matter is contained, lying interposed. The third piece or
part of the Furnace must be six inches high to complete the total height of 21.
made archwise, or hemispherical, and bored on the top with a hole of an inch
diameter, receiving several pieces of three lines apiece, growing still
narrower till they end in a pyramidal knob which shall close up the last: There
must also be four other like holes made between the height of three or four
inches, equally distant one from the other: these holes are instead of
Registers to the Lamp-Furnace, whose heat is also partly governed by the
increasing or relenting, which the approach or removal of the flame in the Lamp
does cause, (whose support must be made with a round piece of Wood, fastened or
applied to a skrew, whereby it shall be raised or depressed at the will of the
Artist,) as also by putting more or less wieks to burn in the Lamps; and
augmenting or lessening the number of threads in the wieks, the heat is
multiplied or lessened, according to the nature of the Operations. But he that
will proceed with more nicety in observing the exact degrees of heat, must have
recourse to the Thermometer (commonly called A Weather-glasse) wherein the
water enclosed, does by its raising and depressing, exactly show the degrees of
heat. The Oil which is to be employed for the feeding of this Lamp, may be
rectified upon fixed Salts made by Calcination, that they may yield less Soot,
and display their action more vigorously, since that rectification takes away
their excrementitious humor and superfluity. The wieks must be made of Gold,
Alumen plumae, or Amiantho's, which is a Mineral found in the Island of Elba:
to which in case of necessity may be substituted the Marrow or soft Cotton
found in the middle of Elder, or Reed, very well dried; and this must be
changed fresh every 24 hours: for which cause it is necessary to be provided
with two Lamps, to succeed one the other, that no intermission may interrupt
the action of heat. If you make use of the marrow or heart of Elder, there must
be a little sharp piece of Iron, or a Wire sharpened, fixed and fodded in the
bottom of the Lamp, that may answer the middle hole of the Cover which is to
contain the wiek.

The figures of all these several Furnaces are exhibited in the Cut, following
this Chapter. We add only two words concerning the Instruments necessary to the
managing of the Furnaces, as Pincers and Tongs to take away the Crucibles, a
crooked Scraper to cleanse the Grates, an Iron Shovel to take the ashes away:
There must also be an Iron Conical and hollow Vessel, well sodded and staunch,
for projecting the Regula's, the Model whereof may be taken in the figures of
Glass Vessels.

CHAP. V. Of Lutations.
HAving described the variety of Vessels, and their use, as also the diversity
of Furnaces, it follows we should speak of all the kinds of Lutations, both
of Lutes belonging to the fabrication of Furnaces, as of that which is used for
the preservation of Vessels, and to repair their cracks and fractures, as also
to join them again together.

That Lute which is fittest for the construction of Furnaces, is to be made
with red Clay: not too fat, lest it be subject to chinks; nor too lean or
sandy, lest it bind not enough. This Clay must be wrought in Water, wherein
store of Horse-dung and Chimney-soot has been steept and well mingled, by
which a Salt is communicated to the water, binding the Clay, and making it fit
to abide the Fire. But if you will make use of this kind of Lute or Clay, to
arm, or spread about the Glass or Earthen Vessels, which are exposed to the
open Fire, you must add common Salt, or the Caput mortuum of Aqua Fortis,
beaten or grinded Glass, and scales of Iron falling from the Anvil in Smiths
Forges; and you shall have a Lute so resisting to the action of Fire, that it
will be impenetrable to vapors, insomuch as it will serve instead of the
Retorts when the length and violence of flaming Fire, which is usually given at
the end of Mineral Operations, has melted the Glasten ones.

When we have spoken of Vessels, we have mentioned some that ought to be joined
together for one Operation, and said that it is necessary, when the substances
wrought upon are subtle, penetrating and ethereal, that their meeting may be
very exactly luted. There are then three kinds of Lute observable, for the
joining of Vessels together, when they are not exposed to open fire. The first
is, that Lute which is made with white of Eggs, beaten and reduced to water by
a long agitation: therein dip Fillets of Linen, and spread the powder of
unslackt Lime subtily beaten, then add another fillet of dipped Linen, and
spread powder again, and so continue and re-iterate this three times; but note,
that the Lime powder must never be mingled with the water of Eggs, because the
secret fire of the Lime would burn and harden it, though many Artists do fall
into this error; you may also dip in the same Whites of Eggs, Swine or Ox
Bladder, without making use of the Lime, principally in the rectification and
alkoholisation of fiery Spirits, extracted out of fermented substances. The
second kind of Lute is made with white Starch or baked Flower, and made into
Pappe with common water: this kind of Lute suffices for luting Vessels which
contain less subtle and penetrating substances. The third, is nothing else but
Paper cut in Fillets, folded and dipped in water, applied to the top of
Cucurbites, both to hinder that the head may not offend it, and prevent the
exhaling of vapors. This manner of Lute is only used in evaporating and
drawing of some inconsiderable Menstruum or of small worth, and which may not
serve again for another Operation.

There must also be another kind of strong Lute, made to remedy the cracking
of Vessels, and join them together, when they are to suffer a violent heat; of
this there is two sorts. The first made with Glass reduced to very subtle
powder, Karabe or yellow Amber and Borax, allayed with the Mucilage or water
wherein Gum Arabic has been steept, and so applied to the joints or meeting
of the Vessels or their Cracks: and after it is well dried, you must run with a
red hot Iron gently over it, and it will give it a fast so dering and almost
perfect union of the chinks or cracks of the Vessels together: But if you will
spare so much trouble, make your Lute only with soft Cheese, Lime and Rye
flower; and you shall find it no less successful for this purpose by
experience. But if you will close the neck of a Retort, and fit it to its
Recipient, for the distilling of Aqua Fortis and Spirits of Salts, use only
common Clay, and the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol or Aqua Fortis, and common Salt,
dissolving the Salt in water, and mixing well your Lute, then applying to the
place, give it time to dry with a slow heat, to avoid chinks; which if any
happen, your care must be to stop them leasurely as they are made, and hinder
thereby the exhaling of volatile Spirits.

To all these kind of Lutations may very well be added the Hermetical Seal,
which is nothing else but the melting of the Glass in the neck of the Vessel,
to which end the Artist is to give by degrees the heat of Fusion; and when you
see the neck begin to yield and incline by the force of fire melting the Glass,
with strong Cizzers ready for the purpose, you must cut the neck of the Vessel
where it is most melted; and thus the parts compressed, do as it were unite the
edges of the Glass inseparably: But if you would rather close or seal the
Vessel in a sharp end, twisting by degrees the neck of the Vessel, you must
after expose the small end to the flame of a Candle or Lamp, to frame thereby a
little knob, wherewith that small hole may be stopped, which most commonly
remains at the end of the twisting, and is almost imperceptible.

Now as the Vessels are not still framed according to our desire, and that some
parts are often to be taken away, which may hinder the Operations; we must also
declare, how this, without endangering the Vessel may be done, viz. by breaking
or slitting the Glass equally by a thwart line: This is performed three several
ways; as either by applying a red hot Iron to begin the slit, or twisting
about the neck of the Vessel three rows of thread dipped in Brimstone, if it be
strong and thick; or else turning the Vessels part you would slit to the flame
of a Lamp or Candle, if it be a thin and small Glass; and when it is well
heated by any of these three ways, wipe it off, and throw upon it some drops of
cold water, which will cause a Crack; the which begun, money, or any other: Aqua
Fortis, the Ostridge's stomach: Armoniack Salt sublimated, the spread Eagle:
The Tincture of Gold, the red Lion: That of Vitriol, the Green Lion: The
Mercury sublimated, corrosive, and Antimony, are their two Dragons; the Butter
of Antimony, the poisonous Foam of the two Dragons: The Tincture of Antimony,
the Dragons Blood; and when this Tincture is coagulated, they have called it,
the Wolfs Jelley. They also name that redness, which in the distillation of
Nitre appears in the Receiver, the Blood of Salamander. The Vine is called by
them, the Great Vegetable; Tartar, the Excrement of the Juice of Janus's Plant:
And so have they several other names, more or less Enigmatical, which we will
not gather up here; partly because it might prove both tedious and needless; as
also that by assiduous reading and practice, (which are the two best Clues to
lead us out of this labyrinth) they may easily be conceived and understood.
Thus shall we with this Chapter put a conclusion to this Book, to enter into
the second of our Second Part, wherein we shall give a free and ingenuous
description of the manner of working, and preparing remedies, as also of the
excellent uses, to which they may be applied.

The Second Book OF The Second Part. Treating of Chemical Operations.
CHAP. I. Of such Observations as are necessary for Separating and Purifying
the first Five Substances, after they are drawn from the Mixts.
FIRE is a potent agent, and an equivocal cause, which easily drives upwards,
evaporable, sublimeable, and volatile Substances, such as are Phlegm, Spirit
and Oil. Phlegm, or the waterish part, because it sticks not very much to the
other Principles, does ascend the first; and for this reason, there is but need
of a slow fire to extract it, whereas for the Oil a stronger is required, by
reason of its clamminess and viscosity, and its union with the Salt; and for
the Spirit, it requires yet a more violent fire, by reason of its weight,
Spirits being nothing else but open Salts, as Salts exchangeably nothing but
closed and compacted Spirits. Sometimes the Phlegm, Oil, and Spirit, do
confusedly ascend with much Salt, by the great violence and vehemence of Fire,
and some time much of the Earth is also sublimated with these Substances; as it
may evidently appear in the Soot of Chimneys, from which the separation of the
five Substances may easily be made.

The Phlegm then, which is the first ascending, may be separated with the heat
of a lukewarm Bath, or some other analogal heat; it may be severed from the
Oil, by the Funnel, because it swims above: but from the Spirit it must be
separated by the heat of Balneum maris, or some such like: for, that heat is
capable to elevate the Phlegm, but cannot drive upwards the Spirit by reason of
its weight; to that sublimation a stronger fire is required, as that of ashes,
sand, or filings, or some quicker heat, according to the nature of the Spirit.

The Salt and Earth are not very strictly united, wherefore they may easily be
separated by the help of some aqueous liquor, which is the fittest Menstruum to
dissolve Salts, and separate them from the Earth: and as the Earth by its
nature is indissoluble, it precipitates it self into the bottom by its own
weight: The Salt being thus separated, the Lie must be filtrated, and the
Menstruum evaporated in Glassen Vessels, White-Earth, or Juggemetal till it
skins, then expose them to the cold to make it shute into Crystals, and so
enclose it in Glassen Vessels well stopped, to hinder their melting, by the
attraction of the moisture of the Air.

But you are to note, that the fiery, or hot Spirits, drawn from fermented
Substances, are lighter yet then the Phlegm, and so ascend the first in their
distillation or rectification. A very familiar and remarkable example is
obvious in the making of Wine: for, if you take it to distill in the Must before
it has fermented, nothing but Phlegm will ascend, and the Spirit shall remain,
joined and incorporated with the essential salt of liquor, which shall thicken
into an extract very sweet and pleasant: But, if you stay your Distillation
after the Fermentation is perfected in the Cellar, you shall draw first the hot
burning Spirit, which the Phlegm shall follow, and in the bottom nothing shall
remain, but an ungrateful and unsavory extract, because the essential Salt of
the Must, has been volatilized into Spirit by the action of the fermentation.

The difference of Vessels and several degrees of Fire, are also very useful to
separate and join again these several substances, after they have separated
assunder: for the bond of their union being once broken, each takes its place
by it self; but the fire intervening, reduces all into vapors and exhalations,
which according to the diversity of Substances are received by the Artist in
several Vessels. Thus is the Spirit easily separated from the the Oil by the
funnel, whether it swims on the top, as the Oils of Flowers and Seeds are used
to do; or whether it sinks in the bottom, as does the Oil extracted from
aromatic Substances and Woods, But nothing but a great and violent heat can
separate the Salt from the Spirit, by reason of the great sympathy they have
together; when it is noted, that Salts must be made use of in the fixing of
Spirits, and Spirits reciprocally to volatilize Salts.

From what we have already said above, every one may of himself make several
fine reflections and considerations, touching the distillation of Mixts
abounding in Salt, Spirit, or Oil, or any other mediane Substance between these
three. But it must be noted, in general, that Animals and their parts require
in the operations made upon them, only a very slow heat, because they are
compounded of a very Volatile Oil and Spirit; and that Vegetables and their
parts need a heat of a more exalted degree, according to their more or less
affixation; but Minerals, and chiefly all the family of Salts, require the
greatest and intensest hear.

When the Oils and Spirits ascend with the other Substances confusedly
together, they must be rectified, that is to say, purified by a re-iterated
distillation. But a slow and gentle fire draws easily away, and separates
asunder the Phlegm and the Salt: the Salt hides himself in the bosom of the
Earth, and forsakes it not till the Spirit and Oil be separated by augmentation
of fire, which by the violence of its action disunites finally the compound,
and that done, there must be water poured upon the Earth (commonly and
improperly enough called the Caput mortuum) to dissolve and separate the Salt:
which done, you are to evaporate the Menstruum, and in the bottom of the
Vessel, you shall find are transparent and Crystalline Salt, if the Salt be an
Essential Salt which follows still the nature of niter, provided you leave a
portion of Phlegm, that the Crystals may shoot therein: but, if the Salt be an
Alkali made by Calcination, you must evaporate Phlegm dry, and you shall find
the Salt in the bottom in the form of an opacous and friable stone.

All these Observations are very necessary to be noted in the practical part,
because oftentimes the Artist has need but of one of these Substances
separated from the others: therefore he must be skilful in separating the one
from the other according to his present occasion, because the desired and looked
for operation is often missed, and impedited by a connection of the associated
principles, when they are yet joined one to another: for one part of the Mixed
may be astringent and coagulating, when the other shall be incisive and
astringent, according to the variety of principles that compound the same: and
these parts so joined together, are hurtful, and contrary one to the other, so
that when you intend to dissolve, you must know, and be capable to separate the
dissolving principle by it self, as you must reciprocally take the coagulating
principle to coagulate.

The first Distillations are ever tainted with some impurities, and for the
most part have a touch and savor of Empyreuma, chiefly those that without
addition of any Menstruum, are made with the heat of a violent fire: as the
Oils drawn by a retort, which are thick and filled with some portion of the
Volatile Salt of the Mixed, and sometimes of the fixed Salt driven up by the
extreme action of fire. Therefore an Artist must be skilled in separating these
different parts; so, if the extracted Oil be filled with these impurities, or
has acquired an Empyreumatical odor, it must be rectified upon Alkalis, such
as are Tartar, or Vine-ashes, or ashes of any Wood; for, the sympathy which is
between Salts, will cause them to join together; or to speak more
Philosophically, the fixed Salts will kill the volatile by their action, they
being commonly sharp and acid, and so shall the Oil ascend clear, subtle,
defecated, and without that smoaky Odor, which the Volatile Salt carries along
with it, as a kind of smoke: And if the first Rectification be not sufficient,
it shall be reiterated upon other Salts, or upon that which has already been
used, provided it be before hand made red hot in a Crucible, to take away from
it, that ill odor and impurity which it had contracted in the first
Rectification.

The impurities of Spirits must be separated by rectifying them upon Earths
deprived of all Salt, or upon Ashes, whose Salt shall be washed away by Lies:
because, if you did rectify them, upon bodies that were impregnated with any
Salt, the Salt should fix and keep to it self some part of the Spirit; or, if
the Spirit was stronger, it would Volatilize the Salt, and carry it along with
it by Sublimation, because of their mutual sympathy which binds and unites them
very strictly together.

Those that have been ignorant of this doctrine of Action, Reaction, and the
several Fermentations incident to Chemistry, by the means and mixture of Salts
and Spirits, have grossly erred and committed irreparable faults, as it may be
observed in the reading of Chemical Practitioners.

Volatile Salts may be purified by dissolving them in their own Spirits, after
which they must be filtrated to separate their heterogeneous Substances, and
then drive them through low Cucurbits or Retorts with a wide neck: and thus
shall two operations be performed at once, by rectifying the Spirit, and
subliming the Volatile Salt, which is nothing else but a coagulated Spirit, or
a mean substance between Salts and Spirits, by the mixture of a small portion
of internal Sulphur of the Mixed whence it is extracted.

Concerning Essential Salts, such as those which are extracted out of green and
juycy Plants, where Nitre or Tartar are predominant, which contain in
themselves the principles in which resides the Essence and chief virtue of the
Mixed, they must be purified either with distilled Rainwater, or the water
distilled from the juyces of the same Plants; then percolate those dissolutions
through common Ashes, or such as will be made, by calcining the Cakes of the
Plants remaining after the juice is drawn: that it may be instead as it were of
a filtration, to remove the terrestriety and clamminess, which might hinder the
Crystallizing of the Salts; then evaporate what is percolated to a fourth part
of the whole, and expose it in a Vessel in the cold, that the Saline substance
contained in the liquor may shoot in Crystals.

As for the Salts, Alkali or Fixed; made by Calcination, they must be purified
by reverberating the Ashes, until they become gray or whitish, then make a Lie
thereof, filtrate it, and evaporate, till it be dry; and if it be the Salt of
any Plant distilled, reiterate the dissolution of that first Salt in the proper
water of that Plant, that the Spiritual and Essential Salt of that Plant which
is in the water, may join with the fixed Salt, which shall be as a Magns to it,
and increase its virtue; as also it will hinder the said Salt from melting so
easily when exposed to the open Air, as it would otherwise; the Salt having
been thus prepared, must be exposed in the cold to Crystallize, after
evaporation has been made, till a skin covers the liquor: but if it be a Lie
only, it must be evaporated, till it be dry, having first been filtrated.

From all that is said above, it may easily be conceived, that no labor nor
care is to be spared, to separate and purify all these diverse Substances,
since it is absolutely necessary; lest the one should prove opposite and
contrary to the other, and so hinder the use and operations of our most noble
Remedies, according to the true Indications of Physic: for these Substances
being joined yet together, do often more hurt and prejudice then they do
service: and this mixture does hinder, that the Preparation does not operate
(as we do intend) according to the extent of the Salts virtue, or of the Oil
and Spirit, because the faculty and virtue of one of these things, is blunted
and depressed, by the Viscosity or the drought of the other. And all these
general hints and directions may be applied to all Chemical Preparations, which
are not only made upon Animals and Vegetables, but also upon Minerals; and as
much for those that work upon Metals, as for those which only seek Remedies for
the ennobling of Physic; or such as only work for satisfaction of their
Curiosity, and the trial and examination of Physical Truths.

CHAP. II. An Apology in the behalf of Chemical Remedies.
I Thought it necessary to vindicate the Professors of this noble Art, from the
calumnies and aspersions which ignorant persons do cast upon it, before I come
to describe the Preparations of those Remedies which are used by true
Physicians; to arm with Reasons and defensive Arguments the Lovers of this
Science, against the weakness of their Adversaries. I say, that these despisers
of Chemists, and haters of Chemistry, are ignorant: because not only
unacquainted with the true Preparation and Effects of these Remedies; but
moreover ignorant in the knowledge of Nature and its Operations, which only can
be discovered by those that work upon natural Products, and do exactly and
curiously Anatomize all the parts which they contain in particular.

But before we come to quote the reasons of both parties, Chemists and
Galenists, in the controversy between them; we must before all things, find a
competent and capable Judge to decide the Question: that is to say, a Judge
that may be thoroughly acquainted with their Opinions. For it would not be
possible for a Galenist, to blame and lawfully refute the Theory and Practice
of Chemistry, unless he be fully acquainted with their doctrine.

But, that no body may be scandalized at our Discourse, you must know, that
there is a great difference between the Galenists and the Doctrine of Galen;
and that Chemistry does not undervalue this Author, knowing very well, with
what desire he was possessed to attain to the knowledge of this Art, having with
great avidity and longing sought for that Art, which should teach him how to
separate the several Substances, of which Mixts are composed. But many at this
day do profess, and take upon themselves the name of Galenists, which never
were acquainted with his works; and boastingly pretend to follow the Doctrine
of Hippocrates, which never did examine his practice. We must then call
Galenists those which are only Physicians by name, and who after they have
perused some University Writings, which do persuade them, that, Physic is
nothing else but an art of discerning heat and cold, immediately take upon
themselves the practice, and fill their discourses with nothing else but
notions of Heat and Cold; and all their skill tends to speak upon the more or
less of these qualities. But the learned Fernelius, who was the Ornament of his
Age, does confess and evidence, after having acknowledged this Error, that
besides these first qualities, there are many other virtues hidden in the
Mixts, as it evidently does appear toward the end of his second Book, De
abditis Rerum Causis, where he teaches how the Seminal Virtue contained in
Compounds, and which really is the seat of all their activity, must be
extracted.

We must then take for judge of this Controversy Peripatetick Philosophy,
provided it be seasoned with the noble knowledge both of Galenical and Chemical
Physic, that none may be judge and party in the same case; to this end, all
prejudices which might be entertained concerning either of these Arts, must be
laid aside, and submitted to the trial of Reason, which is the Touchstone by
which the truth or falsity of all Learning is discovered.

The Galenists, such as we have spoken of above, do first blame the Remedies
prepared by Chemical Art, for three reasons: The first, because these Remedies
cannot be wrought but by Fire. The second, because they are extracted from
Minerals. And the third, because their Action is too violent. To these heads,
we answer in order, and say first, That if whatsoever passes through fire, and
cannot be prepared but by it, was to be blamed, it would go ill against the
Cooks, who without it can dress no meats; and those very Apothecaries, which
according to their Prescriptions, prepare their Medicaments, would stand in
opposition to their exceptions. Secondly, that all Chemical Remedies are not
extracted from Minerals; though it may objected to them, that they use them in
their own Dispensatories; but that the greatest and best part of the choyselt
Chemical Remedies are taken from the family of Vegetables and Animals. And for
the third point, we say, That if any Chemical Remedies have a violent action,
and the Chemical Physician does make use of them in desperate and refractory
diseases, he does nothing in this case, that Hippocrates has not done, who
made frequent use of Hellebore, the violentest of all Vegetables: If they
object, that this great Physician made use of this Remedy only for want of a
better; it may be as rationally answered again, that Chemical Physicians
neither do use these violent Remedies, but in desperate Diseases, and that
because Extremis morbis extrema remedia convenient. To say, that all Chemical
Remedies are violent, is an assertion of ignorance; for Chemical Artists do
prepare them with so neat and in so necessary a manner, that they become by it
pleasanter to the taste, more salutiferous to the body, and less hurtful in
their operations. And it is in this properly, That Chemical Pharmacy does
differ from the Galenick, which prepares also in a manner Medicaments, and does
pretend to correct the vices and violence thereof; but not with that requisite
nicety and perfection, as to separate Purity from Impurity, and Homogeneous
from Heterogeneous Substances. For, who will not confess, that a Patient will
rather take some few grains of Magistery of Jalap, or a Pill of some
Panchymagogical Extract; or finally, a very small dosis of well prepared
Mercury, which may be wrapped in some Conserves pleasing to the taste, or delicate
Jelleys, or finally, be dissolved in some pleasant Liquor, then to swallow a
Bolus of five or six of Cassia, or double Catholicon: that he will more
resolutely take three or four grains of some Sudorifical Specific, as Bezoard
Mineral, then to swallow a full glass of some Therical Dissolution, or Opiatum
Salomonis: That he will look with a better Eye upon a Broth wherein 1 of
Vitriolated Tartar shall be dissolved, then a great Glass of Apozem, or some
Magisterial Syrup after the old way, the Receipts or Prescriptions whereof are
commonly of the length of one foot and a half.

But it will be moreover objected, That although Chemists do cry up the
sweetness and pleasantness of their Remedies; they must nevertheless confess,
that there is in them more danger then in others, because they are extracted
from Minerals. It is confessed, that many Remedies in Chemistry are taken from
the Family of Minerals: But for all this, it must not, nor cannot be granted,
that they are venomous, or contrary to the nature of Mans-Body, and to affirm
it, is the height of ignorance. For if ancient Physicians, have used them raw,
as they were, and without out any Preparation, as may be seen in Galen,
Dioscorid, Pliny, and several other Authors; If modern Galenists have also
employed them, as Rondeletius, which in his Pills against the Pox uses crude
Mercury; Mathiolus who has put in practice Antimony, which by excellency he
calls Manus Dei; Gesnerus has done the same with Vitriol; Fallopius with the
filings of Steel; and Riolanus, and many others, with Brimstone, for Diseases
of the Lungs: Why shall Chemists be debarred from the same Remedies, after they
have prepared, corrected, and divested them from the malignity and venom which
they did contain, by the separating of Purity from Impurity? which is much a
better way then the pretended correction of Galenists, who endeavor to
mitigate the vices and malignity of Mixts, used by the Ancients and Moderns
also, by the addition of some other Substance, which may have, and really has,
in it self its particular Vice and Impurity: as it is obvious in Hellebore,
Spurge, Scamony, Coloquint or bitter Gourd, Agarick, and some others, which
they pretend to correct by a simple addition of Mastick, Cynamon, Cloves, Gum
Dragant, and Ginger. But to show the manifest difference between this
Correction and that of Chemists; we may use the vulgar comparison of an
unskilful Cook, which to dress a savoury and delicate dish of Tripes, should
think it enough to boil them with odoriferous Herbs and good sents, without
washing and clensing them from their inward filth.

Again, the Galenists will instance, and say, that Chemical Remedies, by reason
of their sharpness and acrimony, are not to be trusted. But to that we answer,
That if the use of sharp things must be banished from Physic, it must with
more reason be forbidden in Food, and so consequently all dishes and ragouts
wherein Salt, Vinegar, Verjuyce, Leek, Onion, Mustard, Pepper, and all other
kind of Spices are Ingredients, must be excluded from the Kitching use, as well
as many Medicines blotted out of Antidotaries. Neither do they perceive, that
by this argument, they thwart Galen himself, who has placed Cantharides among
mortal Medicaments, by reason of their corrosion, particularly upon the
Bladder; he does notwithstanding ordain them, and so do his Sectators prescribe
them, though in some small quantity, in some convenient liquor, to provoke
Urine; to which end and purpose he does highly commend them.

The same do Chemists use to do, who give their sharp Remedies in some proper
and specifical Liquor, to produce such Effects as they hope from their
Medicaments. But to stop fully the Galenists mouth, we must prove that they use
in their common practice, though Empirically, Chemical Remedies, whether they
be natural, or artificial, as for Example: Do they not make use of crude Steel
and Mercury, and many more natural Mixts without preparation? Do they not use
Spirit of Vitriol, Spirit of Sulphur, Mineral Crystal, Cremor and Crystals of
Tartar, Crocus Martis aperitive and astringent, Salt of Vitriol, Saccharum
Saturni, or Sugar of Saturn? And though most of them be unacquainted with
Antimony, and the true time and method of exhibiting this admirable Remedy; yet
nevertheless do they give it in stealth to their Patients, disguising it
oftentimes with some infusion of Senne, or some portion of their ordinary
Pills; for they mix Emetick Wine in their Infusions, and Emetick Powder in
their Pills. But, that which is yet more to be noted, and considered, is, That
when Galenists by the obstinacy of the Disease, are at a stand, and can no
longer find in their method a Remedy to cure, and eradicate the evil of it,
because they never attained to the perfect knowledge of it, they use to send
their Patients for a last refuge, to Baths and Mineral Springs: which practice
of theirs, makes them tacitly to confess, that there is in Minerals a more
potent, penetrative and active Virtue, then in any other of those Remedies,
which they did put in practice before.

This Truth is further confirmed by those Remedies which Chyrurgions do daily
use with very good success, being for the most part compounded of Metals and
Minerals; but those principally which do work with more efficacy. It is true,
that Chemists do likewise send their Patients to Mineral waters, and enjoin
them the use of them: But there is this difference, between them and Galenists;
that the first are distinctly acquainted with the Sulphur, Salt or Spirit,
which predominates in the Waters by them prescribed; which the others do not,
having but a confused and superficial knowledge of the Virtue residing and
hidden in these waters; and prescribing them only, because others have used
them before, not being capable to ratiocinate upon the Effects by them
produced, much less to prove the Efficient Internal causes of the same; since
it belongs properly to the search of Chemists, whose peculiar work it is, to
anatomize Mineral Waters, and demonstrate what Fire, or Volatile Substances,
are contained in them: And if the ingenious Artist finds not himself fully
satisfied with examining the Waters, he must further extend his inquisition in
working upon the Earths adjacent to those Mineral Spirits, and endeavor to
discover what Metal most abounds in the Marcassites growing about that place:
that done, it will be easy for him to find what Salt, or what Spirit is the
most fitting to dissolve that Metal, and to unite and mix it so indivisibly as
it is, with the water: and being thus instructed, he can never fail to assign
pertinent and demonstrative reasons both of the effects and cause of the virtue
and efficacy of those Mineral Waters. If it be answered, that Galenists do also
give the reasons of such effects, and assign them to the Salt, Sulphur, or
Spirit predominant in these Waters; I reply, that they shall never fully
satisfy a curious inquisitor and searcher of truth in Nature, by their reasons
taken from the Doctrine of the Schools: But, that they must have borrowed this
light from Chemical Authors, and so far they are no more a Galenical Doctrine;
since they reason only upon the grounds, and by the Organs of Hermetical
Philosophy. Let us then conclude in the behalf of Chemical Remedies, and say,
that they are the true weapons, wherewith a Physician must arm himself to
conquer and extirpate the most stubborn and rebellious Diseases; and even such
as are held incurable by the ordinary Remedies of Galenical Physic; and so we
conclude this short Apology in the behalf of Chemical Remedies, whose wonderful
nature it is, ever to act Citius, Tutius, and Jucundius.

CHAP. III. Of the Faculties of Mixts, and the several degrees of their
Qualities.
AFter all we have said above, we are to consider what benefit we can reap, by
separating the five Principles which may be extracted out of Compounds, to
exalt the Virtues and Faculties of Remedies, and qualify them with convenient
and various degrees according to their nature. Having then distinguished the
various Substances, which an Artist may extract out of Natural Bodies, and
having taken notice, that some of them do more or less abound with Sulphur,
Salt, Spirit, Earth, or Phlegm and that these five Substances are found in all
the Mixts of the three Families of Nature, which are Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals: It seems that something may be lawfully determinated in Physic for
the use of it, and discovery of such virtues and specifical qualities, as are
proper to each of the Substances, extracted out of the Mixed Bodies. For, as
Vulgar or Dogmatical Physic has attributed all, to the several degrees of
first and second Qualities: we must in this Chapter open the true knowledge of
the specifical virtues of each principle of the compound, that what we shall
here deliver, may serve for an Introduction to the better understanding of
those Authors, who hitherto have written thereof; for it may be securely
affirmed, that whatsoever abounds in Oil, participates of the qualities of Oil,
and so of the Spirit and other constitutive parts. We might also insert here a
Catalogue of all the Mixts, wherein Sulphur is predominant; as also of the
Compounds, where the other Principles do abound. We could likewise Anatomize
all Natural Bodies, to know precisely in what dosis or proportion they possess
either of the five Principles, and how Nature has distributed them to every
one in particular, and having perfected such a work, we might very well
brag, of a distinct and absolute knowledge of the Faculties of all natural
things. But, as it is not only a work above the extent of any one single man's
life; and even that many Artists put together were not sufficient for it; and
that besides this consideration, many Volumes would be of too narrow a compass
to contain the Notes of such Experiments: we will content our selves, to speak
only something of it by the by, when we come to the description of the work
which may be done upon each Mixed, not exceeding the limits first propounded to
our selves in the delineation of this Abridgement.

To return then to our several Degrees of Qualities of Mixts, or the five
Substances which may be extracted out of them: We say first, that Oil does
heat, or perform its operation by the means of heat, which is a more excellent
Quality then that which is styled Elementary. As for Example, We see by a
common and familiar Experiment to all, that if the Oil, or Ethereal Spirit of
the Wine, which is its sulphurous part, be separated from its Volatile Salt,
exalted by Fermentation, which we vulgarly call Aqua vitae; that which remains
has no heating faculty left, and is quite unapt to communicate any part more
of that Quality, which we do attribute to Oils and Spirits; but, if you join
again this portion of Aetherial Oil, or Spirit to its Phlegm or watery part,
you shall restore it immediately to its capacity of heating which it had
before; which makes us to conclude, that the more a Mixed does abound in
Aetherial Oil, and Volatile Spirit, the more is it fit to impart heat,
strengthen and increase our spirits, as being more analogous and correspondent
to the nature of our vital Spirits, as also of the Animals, because this only
portion of the Mixed is able to be conveyed and pass to the last digestions.

The same judgment may be made also of all the family of Vegetables; for we
may say confidently, that the different parts of Plants have diverse Degrees of
Qualities, according as they have been more or less fermented, digested and
concocted by the external heat of the Sun, concurring with their internal and
essential, which is contained in their Salt, which is as the rind and cover of
their fermenting and digestive Spirit; and according as this Salt is exalted,
by the actions of these two efficient causes, the parts of the Plants do
participate of more or less efficacy. So is the first place assigned to the
Seed of the Plant, because it is exalted to its perfection, and contains in it
self, that germinative and spermatick Spirit, which is capable to produce and
multiply it self into its like; and that in the body of the Seed Nature has
likewise gathered, concocted, digested and concentrated all the Salt, Sulphur
and Spirit of the Body of the Plant; as it appears by the Distillation of Seeds
from which a great quantity of Volatile Salt is extracted, which is nothing
else but the three Principles volatilized and united together, by the Internal
heat of the Plant, and the External of the Sun: and in this Volatile Salt it
is, that the virtues of all things lie hidden, which has given occasion to Van
Helmont, to call them the General Lieutenant of the Arcana. Thence must we by
degrees descend to know by diverse steps the qualities of the other parts of
Plants, following the same Ratiocination we have already made upon the Seed,
for in the Flower there is less virtue then in the Seed, in the Leaf less then
in the Flower, and in the Wood less then the Rind; and the Fruit is better then
the Leaf, and so of the other parts of the Vegetable, which all are to be
esteemed according as they do abound in Oil, Spirit, Essential or Volatile
Salt. But we must digress a little here, to note a difference which is between
the annual and lasting Plants: for some have the seat of their virtue placed in
the root, the others in the leaf, and most in the Seed; therefore all these
circumstances are to be weighed, to make a right and solid judgment thereof,
and to examine them by the external senses and ratiocination, and make the
choice thereof accordingly.

All what we have said above, may also be applied to the other Principles, for
distinguishing the Degrees of their Faculties; for if, by Example, a Mixed be
deprived of its Salt, it shall lose its desiccative, detersive, coagulative
faculty, and all other proprieties proceeding from, or depending upon Salt. Now
it is possible, that one Mixed compared to the other, may have two, three, four
or five times more or less of Salt, Spirit, Sulphur, Phlegm or Earth, according
to which the rise and rule must be taken, for subdividing the Degrees of its
Faculties; when the Artist shall have discovered by his work, the excess or
defect of what produces the virtues of Natural Bodies, that being yet hidden
from our knowledge either by the neglect of Writers, or the ignorance of those
Mongrel Physicians, which neither knew their Mother, nor the Children of her
Womb: for we see that the juice of Barberies, Oranges, Limons, common and
distilled Vinegar, the Spirit of Vitriol, common Salt, Nitre, Tartar, and many
more like, do deserve to have several Degrees of Qualities attributed to them,
considering their eminent actions, which proceed from the excess or defect of
some Principle more or less depurated; by which it does appear, that Mixts have
more or less of efficacy, action, and virtue, according as the Efficient
Principles are more or less in them; wherefore we may with very good ground and
reason seek in Chemistry a solid foundation, for increasing the Ornament and
Variety of Physic; correct the vulgar Pharmacy, ready to fall to decay; and
examine thoroughly the practice of common Physicians.

CHAP. IV. Of the Order which we will follow in the Description of Chemical
Operations.
THE order to be observed in the description of the five Principles extracted
from Mixed Bodies by Chemical Operations, may be given two several ways: for
there may be first compiled in a Treatise all the Waters, either simple or
compounded, according to their several kinds, as also the Oils in another, and
so of the Salt, and likewise each other of the Principles. Secondly, These
Substances may be described in the same Order, as their Extraction out of the
Individual Bodies of Nature is performed. This last method we intend to follow,
as that which satisfies better the mind of the Inquisitor, and breeds less
confusion. We shall then accordingly give to each Mixed in particular a chapter
by it self, wherein we shall give an exact description of the nature of the
Mixed; and of all the Chemical Operations useful and necessary to Physic:
forgetting nothing of what may conduce to the exact information of the Artist,
in exactly and curiously anaromizing the Mixed upon which he does intend his
Operation, until he has separated all the several parts wherewith Nature has
endowed it.

And to proceed more methodically, we shall begin by Meteors, wherein we are to
speak of Rain, Dew, Honey, Wax, and B^ine or Seawater; next to which, we will
teach those Preparations which belong to Animals and their parts. Then we
follow speaking of Vegetables; where we will teach, how the parts of that rich
and numerous Family are to be anatomized; and finally, end by Minerals,
examining the contents of Stones Salts, Marcassites, and Metals, whereof we
shall separate the hardest, and fixest parts, to draw from thence those
wonderful Remedies, which are locked up in the Center of those true fruits of
the Earth.

CHAP. V. Of Dew, and Rain.
AS Chemists can neither extract nor dissolve, without some fitting and
convenient Liquor, adapted to the nature of those Substances whereof the virtue
is desired (this Liquor Artists do commonly call their Menstruum, and this word
being the most proper and best known, we will only make use of in all the
Operations we are to describe) as (I say) Chemists can perform no Operation
without their Menstruum; so has their care and invention, much labored to
find out one, which should be divested of all particular qualities, and
agreeable to all sorts of Mixts, besides the particular Menstrues which they
possess, and which are destinated for the extraction and dissolution of some
particular Substances and Compounds. The Sons of A^t, upon this account, have
thought no Substance to be more conducible to their end, then that which is the
purest and most simple in Nature, viz. Dew and Rain water; both containing in
themselves the Universal Spirit, and capable to yield their universal
Menstruum, fit for extracting the virtues of things, and to be separated again
from them, without robbing or depriving them of any part of their virtue and
excellency; provided these two Liquors be well and duly prepared.

It is needless to repeat that Dew and Rain are two Meteors, since we have
already spoken of it, in the first part of this Treatise: It will suffice to
say, that Rainwater must be gathered from the beginning to the twentieth of
March, (or eight days before the Equinoxe, and eight days after) because then
the Air is all filled and impregnated with those true heavenly seeds that are
destinated to the renewing of all natural productions; and when the water has
been elevated from the earth, and deprived of the several ferments wherewith
the diverse generations made within and without her Womb, had filled her, she
does fall again through the Air, where she is furnished anew with a pure
Spirit, undetermined to all things, and fit to assume any shape. And so much
shall suffice, to show the necessity of choosing the Aequinoctial time, for
gathering of the Rainwater.

Gather then about this time great store of Rainwater, and leave it in a great
wooden Tub or Vessel very clean, in an open place, and free to the Air, and
there let it ferment, to make a Sediment of the most gross Impurities, which it
might have contracted from the roofs and gutters of houses, or other
conveyances through which it passes, and is conveyed unto us; it shall yield
moreover a kind of skin or froth above, which perfects its depuration; after
this fill, therewith great stone-Bottles, Glass-Vessels, or Casks, if you will
keep any as it is then, being then even so, fit for many Operations, and more
useful then any other kind of water whatsoever, as we shall make appear in the
sequel of our practice; for it is of a more subtle nature then other waters,
and abounds with a spiritual Salt, the only capable Agent to penetrate well
into the Mixts.

But if you will subtilize more this water, and render it more capable to
extract the tincture and virtues of things, you must distill it through the
Worm, as you do Spirit of Wine, and draw only the two third parts of what your
Vessel contains, reiterating this Distillation, by diminishing still
proportionably, till from a hundred pints you have but ten, which will
afterward serve to the extraction of purgative Substances.

The same may be done with Dew, which is to be preferred to Rainwater; the
time to gather it is May, because then it is much more impregnated with the
Universal Spirit, and filled with that spiritual Salt, which administers
nourishment to all things, causes their generation, and gives them maintenance.

CHAP. VI. Of Honey and Wax.
YOU must not think strange, if we reckon Honey among Meteors, since Dew
contributes much to its generation; for it thickens after its falling upon
Plants, detains and condenses in it self those vapors, which Plants do
continually exhale, assisted by the cool of the Night; and the Suns heat does
digest and concoct all into Honey and Wax, which Bees do afterward gather, and
carry into their Hives, for their own sustenance and nourishment. From this
that we have said, the consequence may easily be drawn, why one season of the
year does abound more with Honey then the other. The best Honey is that which
is of a whitish yellow, pleasant to the taste and smell, neither too thin nor
too thick, compacted in its parts, and easily melting upon the tongue. That
which young Bees do yield, is better then old Bees Honey. From it is extracted
a Water, an Oil, a Spirit, Salt, and Tincture. From Wax also, which is an
Emplastick cleaving substance, is extracted the Phlegm, Spirit, Butter, Oil,
and a very small proportion of Flowers, which are nothing else but the volatile
Salt of this Compound.

The manner of Extracting the Principles of Honey.
TAke a quantity of Honey, and put it in a Glass Vessel, white Earth, or Stone
Bottle Earth, and put above it about ii of Hemp, or Flax-Tow, to hinder the
Honey from raising into the head by its ebullition; cover the Glass or Vessel
with its head or Limbeck, and lute or stop well the joints with two bands or
fillets of Paper, spread over with Pap made with flower and water boiled
together; put your Cucurbite or Vessel in sand, and give a slow fire at first,
to extract only the Water by this first degree of heat; then change your
Receiver and increase the fire, which shall drive up a second water, of a
yellowish color, containing the Spirit; and increasing yet one degree more,
you shall have a red Spirit with its Oil, which must be separated by the
Funnel, and the Spirit rectified. That which remains in the bottom, calcine in
a Reverberatory Furnace, to extract the Salt thereof with its own Phlegm, and
then evaporate either to a total drought, or to a skin only, to get Crystals in
a cool place.

Both these Waters of Honey, viz. the Clear and the Yellow, are very useful to
cleanse and clear the Eyes, take away films, spots, or blemishes; to cause Hair
to grow: the Spirit is a great remover of Obstructions; for, being taken from
fifteen to twenty drops, in Aperitive Waters, or decoction of Nettle-roots and
Burdock, it opens all Obstructions, provokes Urine, and drives away Gravel,
clammy and viscous humors in the Reins and Bladder. The Oil being circulated
in Spirit of Wine twenty or thirty days, becomes very sweet and pleasant; it
conduces wonderfully to the cure of Gun-shots, and to cleanse corroding and
cancerous Ulcers: It is a singular remedy to appease the pain of the Gout; as
also to take away the spots of the face, being mixed with a little Oil of
Camphire.

To make Hydromel or Mead, and the Vinegar of Honey.
TAke a q. of very good Honey, and viii p. of depurated Rainwater, or
River-water, left some days in a Vessel, to defecate and cleanse it self from
Impurities; then let it boil softly to the consumption of one half part, being
first exactly skimmed. This remaining Liquor put in a Cask, and upon every 30
pints of Liquor put i. of Salt of Tartar, and ii. of the Tincture of the same
Salt to help Fermentation, which within the Philsophical Month, which is 40
days, will be completed: But you are to note, that every day the Cask must be
filled anew, to repair what the fermenting Spirit drives away: that done, put
the Cask in a Cellar and stop it well: and this may be used for a very good
drink, both by healthful and crasie bodies.

But when you will make Vinegar, put, in the Vessel wherein you have boiled
your Honey and Water to a half consumption, as you are directed above, a knot
containing the pounded seeds of (...) grossly beaten, and leave the Cask in a
warm room if it be Winter, or expose it to the Suns heat if Summer, until the
Liquor has done boiling and fermenting; and it will by degrees and slowly turn
into very good Vinegar; which may be distilled as the other uses to be. It is
an excellent Menstruum for the dissolving of Peble stones, and all others,
though not calcined before; and this is that Vinegar which Quercetanus does
call in his writings, the Philosophical Vinegar. You are to note also, that the
same Author does often make mention of Honey, in his Works, under the notion of
Dew, or Heavenly Manna.

To make the Tincture of Honey.
THis Tincture is not one of the meanest remedies, extracted out of this
Meteor; either by reason of the peculiar virtues of the Mixed, or that of the
Menstruum, used to extract the faculties of this Heavenly Manna, much more full
of efficacy, then those have imagined which fancy that it is easily converted
into Choler; led thereto by that false Axiom of their School, which they take
for a granted truth, that Omnia dulcia facile bilescunt, not apprehending, that
these alterations of temper, are not wrought in us by the mixture of humors,
but that all is performed by the several fermentations, which have their rise
and original in the Ventricle, and that the Leaven or Ferment is either
healthful or sickly, according to the good or evil Idea's, which the spirit of
Life hidden in Man, has conceived. To return then to our matter, we say, that
Honey is one of the sublunary substances that has more in it self of Universal
Spirit, and that none is fitter to be reduced to the nature of that general
Agent of the World, to perform thereby wonderful remedies in Physic; sick;
provided we preserve in it something of its specification, whereby it may
become useful and sensible.

Choose then the best and purest Honey you can find, according to the notes we
have already given, and mix one part of it with 3 p. of the cleanliest and
purest Sand you can meet with, beating all together in a Mo^tar, and reducing
it to a mass, whereof make pellets of a convenient bigness, to pass through the
neck of a Mattress: thus being put in, power upon spirit of Wine well rectified,
and let it rise over the matter three or four fingers; then let another Mattress
be inserted in the neck or Orifice of the first, about two fingers deep, and
lute the joints of the two Vessels, with two fillets of Neat or Swines Bladder,
dipped in white of Eggs, reduced to water by frequent agitation; (note this
manner of luting the joints or commissures of Vessels, for all the Operations
which from henceforth shall be described.) Then tie your Mattress to the Cover
of your B. M. and suspend to the vapor, and so digest the Honey with its
Monstruum, until the spirit of Wine be well impregnated, tincted, and loaded,
with the internal Sulphur of this Mixed, which the Sp. V. will attract, by
reason of the analogy which is between it and this Principle. This being done,
leave the Vessels to cool, then open them, and filter the tincture through gray
Paper, and having powered it in a small glass Body or Cucurbit covered with its
head, luted the joints very exactly, and adapted a fitting Receiver, draw by
distillation half of the Alkohol of Wine, with a very soft heat of the B. M.
and the Bath being cooled, open your Vessels, and keep choysely the remaining
Tincture, in a glass Viol, with a narrow mouth, and well stopped with Cork first
seasoned in melted Wax, to stop the porosities of it, and cover it with a
doubled wet Bladder and a Paper, that nothing of the virtue of this Remedy may
exhale or vapor away, by reason of the great subtilty of its parts, to use
when you have occasion.

The use of this tincture is almost heavenly, in all affections of the Breast
or Thorax, wherein slimy and viscous serosities, gathered in the hollow or
capacity or cavity of it, are the cause: For it has a subtilizing and
dissolving virtue, sufficiently strengthening the Patient to expel by spotting,
what he finds obstructive and cumbersome, or to drive away by urine, sweating,
or insensible transpiration, which are the noblest and most ordinary effects of
such remedies as come nearest to the Universal Medicine. Such rare Medicaments
do prove the truth of this celebrated Maxim, that Natura corroborata, est
omnium morborum Medicatrix. The The Dosis of this Tincture is from one fourth
part of a spoonful, to a whole, for the more advanced in age; and from five to
twenty drops for Children: It may be given alone, or mixed in decoctions, or
specifical waters appropriated to the disease; as are the waters of Coltsfoot
flower, the roots of butter-Burre, the white and odoriferous Hore-hound,
Juniper berries, and roots of Enula; because all these simples do abound with a
penetrating and volatile spirit: it may also be exhibited in broths, or the
ordinary drink of the Patient.

To extract the Oil of Wax.
FRom Wax, as also from many other mixed Bodies, may be extracted, a Phlegm, an
acid or sharp Spirit, an Oil, and the Flowers which we have said to be its
volatile Salt. But as these substances (the Oil excepted) have no great use in
Physic, we shall not insist here upon their descriptions; contenting our
selves to impart here an useful, easy and compendious way of making the Oil
of Wax.

Take lb i. of yellow, well-smelling, and depurated Wax; melt it with a gentle
heat in a Copper skillet, shutting with a close Cover; and if you have a Fire
already kindled for some other purpose, take red burning Coals, and extinguish
them the one after the other in the melted Wax, until they are sufficiently
imbibed, and well filled with it: and thus continue until all the Wax be thus
consumed, having a special care in the mean while to cover close the Skillet
every time you throw the Coals in it, least the Wax should take fire; then
pound the Coals to an indifferently gross powder, and mix with equal weight of
decrepitated Salt; and having put this mixture in a glass Retort, leaving the
third part empty, place it upon a Sand-furnace, with a sufficiently ample
Receiver fitted to the neck of it, and lute exactly the joints with Bladder and
whites of Eggs, then having dried it leasurely, give fire to it by degrees,
until the vapors begin to cease of their own accord, which ever happens
within the space of fifteen or twenty hours, and ^^ll being settled and cooled,
separate the Oil which is yet gross and thick from the aqueous Liquor, and keep
some part of it in that consistency, to use outwardly, but rectify the rest in
a low Cucurbite, and mingle with 3 or 4 lb of White Wind, and iv. of Salt of
Tartar, distilling it with all the care and exactness which is requisite to a
very subtle and penetrating Oil, upon Ashes: Thus shall you have the Oil of
Wax, as clear, fluent and penetrating as the Sp. V. endowed with many peculiar
virtues, both for internal and external griefs. It is exhibited inwardly in
some Diuretic Liquor, from 6 to 12 drops, in retentions of Urine; and for the
same purpose may also be given in Parsly-water, and Sassafraswood-water, or
decoction, as also of Lignum Nephriticum. Outwardly applied, it is very
resolutive, which makes it of great efficacy to dissolve all schirrhous tumors
and swellings; good also to restore motion to Paralytical and contracted
Members, and cure all cold aches in the nervous and sinewous parts of the body;
it is also used with very good success against Sciatica, and cold Gout in hand
or feet. The Butter or gross Oil, which you kept unrectified, cures the chaps
of the lips caused by cold, and cicatrizes and heals again the soreness or
chaps in the Nipple. The aqueous Liquor or Phlegm being rectified, you shall
find a fourth part to be a spirit of Salt, not of less virtue then that which
is distilled alone.

CHAP. VII. Of Manna.
PLiny does, not without reason, call Manna the Honey of the Air, containing in
it self a heavenly nature: I have said, that he called it so, not without
reason; because Manna is nothing else but a Dew, or a sweet pleasant Liquor,
which about the time of the Aequinox, falls upon the branches and leaves of
Trees, thence upon Herbs, Stones, and sometimes upon the Earth it self, and in
a short time is condensed, and takes a form of drops of Gum.

That which commonly is chosen for the best, is the Oriental, as the Persian or
Syriack; but that which ordinarily comes from Calabria, a part of the Kingdom
of Naples, may very well serve turn; it must be white and new, for when it
grows reddish, it is a sign of age, and that it has lost that celestial and
spirituous part, wherein did consist its virtue.

To make Spirit of Manna.
TAke of Manna well chosen q. s. put it in a glass Cucurbit, covered with its
head; lute them both exactly together, and having fitted a Recipient to the
Limbeck, give it a slow fire, thence shall come forth a tastless spirit, of
very great virtue; for it is a great sudorifick, which with very good success
is given, both in pestilential and spotted Fevers, as in all sorts of common
Aguish distempers; this Spirit does provoke sweat copiously, and expells the
excrements of last digestions, as may be evidenced by the unpleasant smell of
the sweat which it provokes. The Dosis is from one half spoonful to a whole
one.

Moreover, this Spirit has a peculiar virtue to dissolve Brimstone, and
extract the yellow Tincture of it, which is not one of the least remedies for
easing the breast, and the principal parts about it, when oppressed: For this
Tincture is as a restoring Balsome, to correct the defects of the Lungs, and
strengthen and preserve their action. It may be given in Juice of (...)
prepared and depurated, as we shall direct in the Chapter of Vegetables, from
one drop to twelve.

There may be also a water of Manna made, which shall be both laxative and
sudorifick: For this end, a parcel of well-chosen Manna, two parts of very pure
Nitre, and put them both in a Near or Hogs Bladder, and having exactly tied it,
suspend the same by a string in boiling water, till all the two substances be
well dissolved: This Liquor or Dissolution must you distill, as we have said of
the Spirit; and you shall have an insipid, laxative water, provoking sweat
copiously: The Dosis is from i to vi, in a broth of some pectoral Decoction.
This water may prove a very good remedy to attract forth the superfluous
serosities, which ordinarily do breed Rheumatical Defluxions.

CHAP. VIII. Of Animals.
TO treat of Animals, is a part of Chemical Pharmacy, containing the remedies
extracted out of Animals, and the way how to prepare them: And as the object of
Chemical Philosophy are all natural substances, so does she extend her
Operations upon all Animals, and Man it self, the most perfect and accomplished
of all. But as the extent of a Compendium, or Abbreviate Treatise, cannot reach
to an exact enumeration of perfect Terrestrial Animals, neither of Fouls,
Fishes or Insects, which are the four Classes or Divisions of this vast,
beautiful, and noble family of Animals; it shall suffice for our design and
purpose, to make first some observations upon the nature of Animals in general,
and the choice which an Artist is to make of them, when he intends to draw from
them those wonderful remedies which they contain, to ease the griefs and
misery of mankind; thence shall we pass upon some of the Operations made on
them, to be as a Guide and an Example, whereby to work upon all others of the
like nature.

We say then by the way, that as all Animals are made of a more volatile,
subtle, and aerial substance, than the Vegetables on which they feed; so in
their ultimate resolution, which Art does perform, have they less of Earth, and
of diversity of Substances: whence it is, that there are only three efficatious
Medicines may be extracted from them, viz. Spirit, Volatile Salt, and Oil: We
will not lose time in debating here, whether the forms of these Animals are
spiritual or material; being a dispute more of curiosity then use. We will only
say, that the Artist must choose the soundest and healthiest Animals to extract
his remedies from; that they be of a middle age, that the parts may have
attained to a requisite firmness, solidity and perfection; for it is well
known, that Animals do daily ^ie, as they advance in age, after they have past
a certain state and period of perfection, which according to the nature of each
is the limit of their duration, and their Ne plus ultra. It is also requisite
the Animal should dye a violent death, chiefly by strangling and suffocating;
because suffocation does concentrate the spirits in their parts, and hinders
their dissipation; and that it is in the preservation of this flame and vital
light, that properly inhabits, and makes its residence, the virtue of Animals
and their parts, as is manifested by the following history of what happened at
Montpellier, as Bartholinus relates it in his Centuries: Which is, that a woman
having bought in the Shambles Meat newly killed, and steeming yet with the heat
internal, hung it in the Chamber wherein she did use to sleep; having some
occasion to wake at night, she was surprised, to see a great light in her
Chamber, though the Moon did not shine; she at first was astraid, not imagining
the cause whence it did proceed; but at last she perceived, that this light did
proceed from the meat she had hung up; and the next morning related it to her
neighbors, which de^rous to see this thing, which by relation seemed to them
incredible, were confirmed in the truth and belief of it by their own eyes: A
piece of this Luminous Flesh was carried to the Prince of Conde, then Governor
for his Majesty in Languedock, in the year 1641. and this Flesh at last did
lose its light, as it came nearer its corruption. This truth cannot be
contradicted in the historical part; and curious searchers of Nature, may see
whenever they list, that sparks of light do issue forth out of living
Creatures, if they take the pains to rub a Cat-skin in the dark, against the
hair, a sufficient proof to verify more and more that light is not only the
Principle of Composition in all things, but is also the Principle of their
preservation, and the chief cherisher of life. The foregoing relation makes me
remember a complaint which some Butchers Prentices did make at Sedan, that
coming by night time into their Slaughterhouse, they did perceive some
extraordinary light, which superstitiously they did attribute to apparitions of
Evil Spirits, not without horror and aftrightment, whereof I was an ocular
witness: but when there was any Candle lighted in the place, the light did
vanish away; by which it was easy to be seen, that this light proceeded from
the flesh of Animals newly killed.

Of Man.
THe Chemical Artist does extract from Man, both male and female, several
Substances, which are the subject of this work, and that either during his
life, or after his death; from male and female during their life, are taken
Hairs, Milk, After-burthen, Urin, Blood, and the Stone in the Bladder: After
death, use is made, either of the dead body, or its parts, which are muscles or
flesh, fat, bones, or skull. From these several, parts, is the Artist to take
his Remedies, as we shall hereunder teach in order; and that will be a
sufficient example to direct him in the like operation upon other Animals and
their parts. There are yet besides these above related, several other parts in
Animals, very useful for Physic: But, as they are not commonly made use of in
Chemical operations, we think it needless to mention them in this Chapter, lest
we break the Law of our Abridgement.

Of Hair.
TO draw from Hair any serviceable Remedy, and lose none of the Virtue, they
must be distilled; for by this Operation is the Spirit and Oil extracted, and
the Ashes are preserved: which is performed in this manner.

Take Hair either of male or female, as they are found in Barbers shops, or
Periwick-makers, and fill therewith a Glass Retort, rather then an Earthen one,
by reason of the subtilty of their Spirits, and put it in a Sand Furnace,
(which for abbreviation we will call only Sand hereafter): To this, fit exactly
a convenient and large Receiver, and lute the Joints; the Lute being dry, begin
first to give it a moderate fire; which increase by degrees, till the vapors
begin to fill and abundantly the Recipient; and keep the Fire in this state,
until, the vapors being spent, the Retort begins to grow clear of it self;
then increase the Fire more violently, that nothing of what may be driven out
of the Retort do remain, and the Calcination of the remainder, may perfectly be
performed; then ceasing the fire, let the Vessels cool, and you shall find in
the Recipient two different substances, which are the Ammoniac Spirit of the
Hair, and the Oil, which is nothing else but the sulphurous portion of this
Mixed, mingled with the grosser part of the Volatile Salt. These two Substances
after separation, may be applied to Physical uses: But it is nevertheless
necessary, to rectify them before hand, viz. the Spirit in B. M. upon other
Hair, cut in very small pieces, in a small Glass-Body covered with its head,
and using all requisite precautions; and the Oil upon its own Ashes, in an Ash
Furnace, giving at first but a moderate heat.

The Spirit of Hair is not inwardly given, partly by reason of its ill taste
and odor, partly because Art does extract from other parts of Man, other
Spirits more pleasing, and less nauseous in their use. This Spirit then is
never used, but with a mixture of Honey, to anoint the parts where Hair are
thin, and grow in small quantity, or altogether fallen away: The Oil is
soverain to eradicate Tetters in what part soever of the Body they grow, making
a Liniment of it with Salt of Saturn, and applying to the place, after a due
Purgation given to the Patient fit for expelling serosities. The Ashes mixed
with Mutton-suet in the manner of a Sear-cloth, produce wonderful effects in
the cure of strains, and the strengthening of dis-joynted and dislocated parts.
Add to this, that Hair unwrought, are a very present remedy to stanch running
of blood, either in wounds, bleeding of the nose, or immoderate courses of
women.

Of Milk.
Woman's Milk of it self is an excellent remedy for Eyes, to appease the grief
and remove inflammation, whether proceeding of some hurt in the substance it
self, or from small Ulcers which happen to breed in Eyelids and corners of the
Eye: and if Woman's Milk cannot be recovered, then some other kind is to be
substituted in the place. But there is a Vitriolick Water distilled with Woman's
Milk, or some other, either Cows Milk, Ass, or Goat, which may be still ready
at hand, and is no less efficacious to remove any grief from the Eye; It is
thus made.

of Milk and white Vitriol pulverised a like quantity, put them together in a
Cucurbite or Glass Body, fitted with all the care requisite to Distillation,
then extract upon the Ash Furnace, a water S. A. with a graduate heat, until
the white vapors or clouds do ascend, at which time cease the fire, lest the
Water should become corrosive: This Water does correct the redness of the Eyes,
and removes wonderfully inflammations.

Of the After-burthen.
TO prepare any Remedy from the After-burthen, you must choose (if possible) one
of the first birth, and a male: the Woman being of a middle age, as from 18 to
35 years, sound, Black or Ches-nut hair; the Red-hair Women (as participating
something of Arsenical Spirits) are to be absolutely excepted. And if the
Artist cannot recover one of the first child, let him at least have it of a
male child: and, unless in absolute necessity, make no use of a female, which
only in such case he is allowed to do: for being both male and female are
nourished in the same womb with the same menstruous blood, there is but the
difference of the strength and vigor, considerable in the choice.

Take then such an After-burthen (as is said) with all the conditions
requisite, put in a Glass Cucurbit, and distill in B. M. until the bottom be
dry, and keep the Water in a Bottle well stopped with Cork, seasoned in melted
Wax; and if what is left in the bottom of the Cucurbit, be not dry enough to be
reduced to Powder, dry it in a Paper doubly or trebly folded, at a moderate
heat. But you are to note, that neither in distilling nor drying of it, it must
not be turned upside downwards, that the Spirit and Volatile Salt may the
better concentrate themselves, because it is this Salt which properly gives
virtue, to the Powder that is to be made thereof.

The Water thus extracted, is an excellent Cosmetick, smoothing wonderfully the
skin, both of hands and face, takes away the wrinckles, and spots; chiefly, if
you add a little Salt of Pearls and Borax. But it is moreover very useful in
expelling the After-burthen, when the delivery of the Woman has been long and
difficult, and accompanied with weakness, provided you mix with this Water the
weight of ss. of the Powder of the Body whence it has been extracted, or the
same weight of an Eels Liver dried with its Gall, which is an approved and
infallible Remedy.

The Powder given from. 1. to ij. or iij. is a Soverain Remedy against
Epilepsie, either in its own water, or that of Pyony, or Lillium Convallium, or
Lime-tree, seven continual days fasting, during the decrease of the Moon. But
if you Calcine the After-burthen in an Earthen unleaded Pot well covered and
luted; the Ashes will be a specifical Remedy against the King's Evil, and Wens,
exhibited in Water of male Sour^hern-wort, the weight of ss. during the last
quarter of the Moon, every morning fasting.

Of Urine.
THough Urine be an excrement voyded, and cast away daily, it contains
nevertheless a mysterious Salt, full of Virtues, known but to very few. The
ingenious Artist which is acquainted with its proprieties, shall not easily be
scared or distasted by the name or noysomeness of it: it belongs only to such
as boast of an eminent knowledge in Pharmacy and its Preparations, and dare not
nevertheless fowl and sully their hands in the disquisition and separating of
the different parts wherewith bodies are compounded. And to prove in general,
the diverse Medicinal Virtues of Urine, we shall only hint, that the washing
with it, when newly voided, does dry and heal itches and scab, dissolve tumors
being applied warm, mundifies and cleanses wounds and venomous ulcers, prevents
gangreen; opens gently the body without gripings, being administed in Glysters
lukewarm; for, it it be suffered to cool, it loses that Volatile Spirit wherein
the chief Virtue of it does consist; hinders, or at least, lesseneth the fits
of certain Agues, if it be applied warm to the wrist, and in frontals: heals
the ulcerous Ears, being poured in; takes away the redness and the itching of
the Eyes, if be distilled in the corners of them: Being mixed with Spirit of
Wine, cures the shaking of Limbs; and taken in the way of a Gargal, dissipates
the swelling and tumor of the Uvula: and to be short, appeaseth all the pains
caused by vapors rising from the Spleen, applied in a Plaister-wise made with
Ashes. And if thus, Urin seems to be a treasure against outward Diseases: it
is of no less efficacy against inward ones, being soverain in removing all
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Bladder and Gall, preserving against the
Plague, and curing Dropsy in its beginning, and removing Yellow-Jaundies: And
it has been observed, by some curious searchers of Nature, that the Husband's
Urin in difficulty of birth is a specific remedy, to cause speedy delivery:
and experience has taught it to be no less wonderful and effectual in the cure
of Tertians; a good glass full of recently voyded Urin being given in the very
beginning of the Fit.

All what we have said hitherto, is only to make it plain, how much more
excellent and capable of producing its Effects, well prepared Urin, and
separated from its gross impurity shall be, than when it is yet corporeal; and
to prove more and more, that the chief, nay almost all the Virtues of mixed
Bodies, do proceed from their Spirits, and Salts.

They that will make use of Urin in Pharmacy, or Chemical operations, must
choose (if they can) that of wholesome Bodies of young men, or children, from the
age of 10. until 15. years, drinking Wine, if it may be had so, if not, such as
they can meet with; for all Urin is never without its Spirit and Salt: But in
Urin of this latter sort, they will be fewer and grosser. Though experience
has made it manifest, that the same Remedies are sound in it either to be
outwardly or inwardly applied, or to prepare the following operations.

To make the Igneous Spirit of Vrin, and prepare its Volatile Salt.
TAke of Urin, conditionated as we have said above, thirty or forty pints, and
evaporate it with gentle heat, to a consistency of Syrup; put the remainder in
a Glass-Body of about a cubit high, cover it with its Head or Limbeck well
luted; and in a B. M. or Ashes, extract the Spirit and Volatile Salt by
Distillation: if you work in Balneo, let it be boiling; if in Ashes, give your
degrees of fire with precaution. Your Spirit will be found coagulated in the
Limbeck in a Volatile Salt.

But you are to observe, not to Evaporate your Urin, but when it is recent and
new; for, if you did, after Fermentation or Digestion the best Substance would
Evaporate away and be lost.

The Spirit of Urin may also be distilled with a Limbeck in B* M. hot boiling,
withont Evaporation; but then it must be rectified.

The same Spirit may likewise be distilled without apparent fire, which is a
wonderful operation, and thus performed; Evaporate the Urin with a gentle fire
about a third part away, then having filled the bottom of a Glass Body with
three fingers high of good unslackt Lime, pour your Urin thereupon being thus
evaporated, then cover it quickly with its head, and fit a Receiver; and thus
without the help of any fire, shall you obtain in a short time, the Spirit of
Urin so Subtle and Volatile, as not to be any way inferior to any drawn by
another method: They that will make use of the open Retort of Glauber, shall
more easily distill it, and in greater quantity; it is very difficult to
preserve the Volatile Salt of Urin, by reason of its subtle nature, and the
penetrability of its parts, therefore is it necessary to digest it with its own
Spirit, and unite them both together, preserving them in a Glass Viol of a
narrow neck, and fenced with a double bladder wetted above all.

This Vol^til soline Spirit, or spiritual Salt is endowed with almost
innumerable Virtues: for it is first, of a soverain efficacy in allaying the
pain of all the parts of the body, and chiesly of joints, when mixed with some
convenient liquor. It opens more then any other remedy, all tartarous
obstructions of the Mizentery and Bowels; whence it is used with wonderful
success in Scorbutic and Hypochondryacal Diseases, to correct evil
Fermentations of the Stomach, and cure the two kinds of Jaundies: it is of no
less virtue to dissolve and attenuate the gravel and slimy substance generated
in the Reins or Bladder. It may also be made a very excellent remedy against
Epileptical, Apoplectical, Maniacal-Diseases, and all other of the like nature,
which are said to have their root and first original in the Brain: but it must
be prepared as follows.

Take Vitriol purified by several Solutions, Filtrations, and Crystallizations
made with distilled Rain, or which were yet better, Dew-water: Imbibe it with
Spirit of Urine, until it only covers the matter; stop your Vessel very close,
and put in digestion for eight or ten days, after which, put your matter thus
digested in a high Glass Body, and distill it in Ashes till dry: you shall have
an excellent Cephalic Remedy, to cure the Megrum and all other pains in the
head, even by the only smell; and to provoke sleep, if it be only held a little
space of time under the nose. That which remains in the bottom of your Glass
Body or Cucurbit, must afterward be put in a Retort in Sand, with its
Recipient well luted, to draw the Volatile Salt thereof, and a kind of brown
Oil, not to be despised both in Medicinal and Metallic Operations; you may
also make a Dissolution of the remainder, and by Filtration, Evaporation, and
Crystallization bring it to a Salt, which is one of the truest Stomachal
Remedies to expel those viscosities and hurtful superfluities which most
commonly stick to the sides of crude and ill-disposed Stomachs: it must be
given in Broth or warm Beer. The dosis must be from viij grains to xx. and even
to ss. The dosis of the Spirit of Urine, is from xi. drops to xij. or xv. in
Emulsions, Broths or other appropriated Liquors; that of Volatile Salt from ii.
grains to x. in the same manner as the Spirit.

To make the Water, Oil, Spirit, volatile and fixed Salt, of Humane Blood.
TAke in the month of May, a good quantity of some young men's blood, which they
ordinarily cause in that season to be let out for prevention of diseases, and
distill it in Ashes in a large Glass Body; but to prevent the raising of it in
the Head or Limbeck, put upon it two or three handful of Hemp, luting all
exactly, and fitting a convenient Receiver; rule your fire accurately by
proportionate degrees, and take care above all things, that the remaining Mass
after distillation in the bottom may not burn, but be only dried sufficiently.
So shall you have Water and Spirit, which rectify in Balneo: with the Water
you may extract the Salt remaining in the Caput mortuum, after due calcination;
the Spirit may be preserved as it is, to be used against the Falling Sickness,
and Convulsion fits of children. The dosis from ss. to i. It is also a
specific Remedy for the same diseases, if you mix with it the Flower of
Lilly-convally and Lavender, to extract the Tincture thereof. It will
nevertheless be better, if you cohobate it in a Retort upon what did remain in
the bottom of your Cucurbit, or Glass Body nine several times, or so long till
it has got a ruby color, and that the Oil comes at last with its volatile
Salt, sticking to the Neck of the Glass or the sides of your Recipient; then
mix it with the Spirit, and join them together by distillation in Balneo. This
is that Spirit impregnated with its volatile Salt, so much cried up for the
cure of Palsy, being inwardly taken from six drops to ten, in Broths, or
decoction of Squina-root, or in white generous Wine.

What did remain in the bottom of the Glass Body, must be calcinated with a
circular fire to extract the Salt thereof, with the water that came first in
the distillation, filtring, evaporating, and crystallizing, to preserve for the
following use.

Take the distilled Oil, and rectify it upon Colcothar in Sand in a Retort,
until you find it subtle and penetrative; mix the fixed Salt with your Oil,
and digest it together, until they be perfectly united; and thus shall you have
a wonderful Balsom, to allay the grief of Gout in hands, and feet, and remove
the swelling and redness thereof: But, that which is more considerable, is,
that this remedy softens, dissipates, and dissolves the Chalk gathered by the
Gouty humor in the Joints, as also coagulations in the Joints of Pocky Bodies,
being purged before with the ordinary preparations of Mercury and Antimony.

But you must not stick still at the Spring season of the year, whereby to get
your blood; for if necessity does require it, you may take it also in the other
seasons of the year; you may also make use of Goat, Swine, Near, or Sheeps
blood, and distill it with the same Art, and in the same manner as humane blood;
for in perfect Animals, the natural digestions are performed in the same
manner, and their blood is endowed with the same virtues; only that of Man is
of a subtiler nature, by reason of the delicacy of his food.

To make the Salt and Elixir of the Stone and Bladder.
IT is a wonder of Nature, that the very same thing which causes in Man such
extremities of torture, should become to the same disease so good and certain a
remedy: this is experimented in the Stone of the Bladder, which without any
other preparation than being reduced to small Powder, may be administered from
i. to i. in white Wine, or decoction of Burredock Roots and red Nettles, to
dissolve the Stone in the Bladder, and expel gravel and slime from it and from
the Kidneys: but those Remedies being heightened by Chemical preparation, are
much more efficacious, and do act with a much greater quickness.

Take then a parcel of these Stones, reduce them to powder, and join with 2.
pintes of Beach Goal pulverised, and thus being put in a well luted Crucible,
calcine it with a circular or reverberatory fire, the space of five or six
hours; and being cooled, grind your matter upon a Marble, and, with some
diuretical Water make a Lie thereof; o^, with Phlegm of Saltpeter, or Allom,
filtrate and evaporate till it skins; then in a cold place draw your Crystals,
and so continue to do, till you have extracted all the Salt; which if you find
not yet sufficiently cleansed, put it again in a Crucible, and let it grow
red-hot in the fire without fusion, then purify by reiterated solutions,
filtrations, evaporations and crystallizations, until you like it. You must
keep this Salt well dried, in a Glass Viol well stopped, lest by the attraction
of Air, it should contract moisture. The dosis is from iv. grains to viij. in
appropriated Liquors, to facilitate the excretion of Urin, dissolve and expel
the gravel and slimy matter in the Reins and Bladder, which most commonly are
the occasional cause of generating the Stone.

But if you will have an Essence or Elixir out of it much more efficatious then
this Salt, calcine the Stone with equal weight of well purified Saltpeter in a
Crucible with a circular fire, the space of six hours; then extract the Salt
from the matter calcinated, with Spirit of Wine, filtrate, evaporate, and draw
your Crystals, and when they are well desiccated, put them to digest in a
double Vessel in Baelnei vapore, with rectified Spirit of Wine: then cover it
with a head, and draw the Spirit of Wine in a gentle Balneo, and cohobate so
often, till the Salt be reduced to a very subtle and clear Liquor, which you
are choysely to preserve; it must be given from five drops to ten, for the same
Diseases, and in the same Liquors before mentioned.

The Artist must not scruple to make use of Nitre in the Calcination of the
Stone of the Bladder, lest its Salt should join with the other^: for, besides
that all, what is volatile, sharp and corrosive in the Nitre, flies away in the
calcination, that substance of it which remains after the Stone is calcined,
can but augment the efficacy of the Remedy, then lessen or obstruct it, being
reduced by the action of the fire to the universal nature.

Having thus ended to treat of those things, which are extracted from Man's
body during its life; we will end this Chapter by examining those Sustances
which his Body may afford after death; beginning with the Flesh, which does
furnish us with several considerable preparations, as in the sequel will appear.

Of Humane Flesh and its Preparations.
THe Mummy which is prepared out of the Flesh of Man, is one of the noblest
Remedies which all the parts of his Body can afford: But, because it is
abhorred by some natures, and is neither known, nor well apprehended by others,
it will not be unfit to say something of its differences, before we come to the
description of its true Preparation.

Those that have more learnedly writ of Mummy among the Ancients, make only
four kinds of it: the first is the Arabiack, which is nothing else but a Liquor
flowing from Bodies embalmed with Myrrha, Aloes, and natural Balsom mixed and
acorporated, with the fleshy substance of embalmed bodies, contaming the Spirit
and volatile Salt, from which does result the Mummial part, which composes with
Myrrha, Aloes, and Balsom this first kind of Mummy of the Ancients, which were
not to be despised, if recoverable; but none such is to be found at this day.

The second kind, is the Egyptian Mummy, which is a Liquor thickened and dried,
proceeding from the Bodies which have been sea^oned and filled with a Balsom,
ordinarily called Asphaltum, or Pissasphaltum (a kind of Bitumen). Now as
Sulphur in natural bodies is incorruptible, so is it by his means and Balsamic
faculty also, that dead bodies are preserved against corruption: This second
kind is much inferior to the first, and is only fit for outward uses, being
not capable to draw from the dead body, the virtues of the median life, which
was hidden and concealed in the parts, by reason of the compactedness and
closeness of parts of these Bituminous Sulphurous Substances, which are dry,
crumbling, brikle.

The third kind is altogether to be laughed at and rejected, being nothing else
but an Artificial Pissasphaltum, viz. black Pitch mixed with Bitumen, and
boiled with a Liquor issuing from the dead Bodies of Slaves, to give it the
cadaverous smell; and this third sort is usually found in Druggers shops, which
furnish Apothecaries; deceived by the odor of this D^ugg sophisticated and
falsified. This that I say, have I learned from a Jew of Alexandria in Egypt,
laughing himself at the credulity and ignorance of Christians.

The fourth, and best, and less so phisticated kind, is that of Humane Bodies,
dried up in the hot Sands of Lybia; for it happens often, that whole Caravans
are swallowed up in the Sands, when any contrary wind does in an instant arise,
and whirling the Sand, does in an instant cover and overwhelm them unawares. I
have said, that this fourth kind is the best, because it is uncompounded, and
that this sudden suffocation does concentrate the Spirits in all the parts, by
reason of the fear and sudden surprisal, which seizes on Travelers, according
to that saying of Virgil,

Membra quatit, gelidusque coit formidine sanguis. And because moreover the
sudden exsiccation caused by the heat of the Sand, or the irradiation of the
Sun, communicates unto it some astral virtue, which by any other way whatsoever
cannot be performed.

They that can recover this last kind of Mummy, shall make use of it toward
the following preparations: But, because these dead bodies so dried, are not
still to be recovered, and that the Remedies thereof extracted are very useful
and necessary; the ingenious Artist may substitute a fifth kind of Mummy, viz.
that which Paracelsus calls Mumiam Patibuli; and which may lawfully be also
called the Modern Mummy, which you may prepare in the following manner.

Preparation of the Modern Mummy.
TAke some young lusty man's body, of about 25 or 30 years of age, dead by
suffocation or hanging, and dissect the Muscles without loss of their common
Membrane, and being thus separated, dip in Sp. of Wine, and suspend in a place
where the air may be dry and pass freely to and fro, that they may be soon
desiccated, and the volatile Salt and Spirit contained therein, may be
concentrated in the fibers, the serous and unserviceable part only vapouring
away; and if so be the weather proves moist and rainy, these Muscles must be
hung in a Chimney, and every day aired with a small fire of Juniper wood,
having all its leass and berries, until they become as dry and well seasoned
as the powdered Beef, which Mariners use for long Sea-voyages. Thus will you
have a Mummy not inferior to that of the fourth kind before described; yea in
some regard to be more valued, because we are assured of her preparation, and
we can upon any occasion more easily come by it, and that it seems that the
Spirits, Volatile Salt, and the Mumial and Balsamic Substance, must by this
Preparation be better preserved, the flesh thereof not being dried with so
intense and great a heat.

To make the modern Mumial Balsom.
TAke lb 1. of the fifth kind of Mummy, and bray it with a wooden Pestle in a
Mortar, until it be reduced to very thin fibers; which cut afterward very
small with Cizzers, and put in a long-neckt Mattress, pouring thereon Oil of
Olives impregnated with spirit of Turpentine, which is properly her Ethereal
Oil, until it swims above the matter three or four fingers high, seal your
Glass Hermetically, and digest it in Fimo, or at the vapor of a hot Bath or B.
M. in dust of Wood, during the space of a Philosophical Month, which is a
space of forty days, without interruption of the heat: Then opening the
Vessel, pour your matter into a Cucurbite, and without covering put it in
Balneo M. and so let all the nauseous smell which it had contracted, exhale
away, and all the Mummy be dissolved; then strain it through a Cotton, and let
this dissolution digest in Balneo in a couble Glass, with equal portion of
rectified Spirit of Wine, wherein you shall have dissolved ii. of old Triacle,
and mixed i. of Vipers flesh in powder, during the space of three weeks, at the
end whereof, you shall take away the blind head of the double Glass, and cover
the remaining body with a Limbeck-head, drawing away the Sp. V. with a very
gentle heat of Balneo; and thus shall you have a most efficacious Balsom,
useful both inwardly and out wardly applied.

It is an excellent internal remedy against all venomous Diseases, but
particularly against Pestilential, and all those that come near their nature.
It is also singular for inward bruises, and congealed blood by a fall, for
Palsy, contracted Limbs, and weakened by Atrophy, Plurisie, and all other
Diseases which are helped by sweating: Therefore great heed must be had to
cover well the Patients to whom it shall be exhibited. The Dosis is from i. to
iii. in Broths, or Tincture of Sassafras, or Juniper Berries.

But the virtues of it outwardly applied, cannot enough be commended, for it is
a Balsom to be preferred even to the Natural, which appeases all external
griefs or aches proceeding from cold, or any wind or vapor shut up in the
spaces that are between the Muscles, as also caused by bruises and crushings;
you may also anoint therewith Limbs struck with Palsy, shrunk and contracted
parts of the body, or weakened for want of nourishment; you may also rub
therewith all places of the body where a pain is felt, and no swelling or
redness seen: but you must observe, that it will be good at the same time, to
give some inwardly to the patient, that the internal heat may cooperate with
the external; to this end he must be well covered, and left to his rest for
some hours, to provoke sweating, or to cause that which occasioneth the grief
and vice of the parts, insensibly to transpire.

How the Fat of Man's Body is to be prepared and distilled.
THe Fat of Man's Body, without other preparation, is of it self an outward
remedy very considerable; for it strengthens the feeble parts, and dissipates
the external dryness, appeases griefs, dissolves contractions, and restores to
sinewous parts their action and motion lost, softens the hardness of Cicatrices
or Skars, fills up holes and cavities, and smooths the hollow places which the
Smallpox leaves usually in the skin.

The first preparation is common and simple: for it prescribes only to cut it
and boil it in White Wind, until the pieces are well crisped, and the moisture
of the Wine evaporated; then crush it between two Tin-plates warmed before: and
so keep it for use.

The second preparation is, when you intend an Anodine Ointment, cooling, and
resolving, which may very successefully be applied in swellings, inflammations,
hardnesses, and other accidents usually happening to Wounds and Ulcers, either
by the Patients own distemper and ill diet, or the Surgeons neglect and
unskilfulness: You must thus prepare it. Take Phlegm of Vitriol, or Alum,
impregnated with their sharp, sour spirit, about lb ss. put therein to digest
in Sand ii. of washed and dried Litharge or white Lead, stirring it often; and
when your Liquor is well impregnated, filtrate it, and thereof make a Liniment
in the form of a Nutritum: and if you desire to make it more specific, add to
it in the stirring some proportion of the Tincture of Myrrh and Aloes, drawn
with good Spirit of Wine.

The third and last preparation is the exactest and best, and is performed by
distillation in this manner. Take 1 p. of Fat, and 2 or 3 p. of decrepitated
Salt, and being well mixed and incorporated together, put it in a glass Retort,
joined to its Recipient, both well luted S. A. in a Sand-furnace, then give it
a graduate fire, until the bottom of the Retort grows red, which may be
performed in the space of eight hours; and thus shall you have an Oil of a
subtle and penetrative nature, a sovereign remedy to re-animate, and take away
the benumming of Paralytick Limbs, which for the most part are cooled and
deprived of nourishment: better by much then the substance from whence it was
extracted, to all the uses and purposes which we have assigned it hereabove.
And if you will make this Oil yet more subtle and penetrating, circulate it in
Balneo with equal p. of Sp. of Wine, for the space of some days; then rectify
and distill in Ashes, in a low Glass body; by this means it shall become so
penetrating, that scarce it can be preserved in Glass, and becomes
imperceptible as soon as applied, by reason of its quick penetration.

These Preparations already described, may be a pattern for all other kinds of
Oils, Butters, Fats, and such like, which by this method may be made more
efficacious and penetrating.

To make the Spirit, Oil, and Volatile Salt of Man's Bones and Skull.
THe preparation of the Skull, shall not differ from that of the Bones;
wherefore we will not lose time in making two several descriptions, the one and
the other being thus wrought.

Take the Bones of a Man extingnished by violent death, which neither have been
buried under ground, nor boiled, nor put in Quicklime, and saw them in pieces
of a convenient size to be put in a Retort well luted, and being filled not
above the two third part: put it in a close Reverberatory Furnace with open
fire; and having exactly luted and fitted a Recipient to it, cover the
Reverberatory, leaving only a hole of about the bigness of an inch and a half
diameter, to be as a Register for ruling the fire, which ought to be moderately
graduated, until all the white steams be over; then change your Recipient, or
empty the matter contained in the first, and lute it again exactly, continuing
and increasing the fire, until you drive out the Oil with a Volatile Salt and
the remainder of the Spirit, which work must be thus pursued, until the
Recipient begins to clear of it self, which will happen in the space of twelve
hours, from the beginning of your Operation. But you must note, that the dust
coming out of the sawing of the Bones, must be preserved, or some other
provided by scraping or filing, to be used in rectifying of the Spirit, Oil, or
Volatile Salt. You must also calcine and reverberate with open fire to
whiteness, between bricks, the pieces or lump remaining in your Retort, that
they may serve in a manner to stay and fix the Volatile Salt, which otherwise,
by reason of its subtle nature, cannot be preserved: as we shall declare, when
we come to speak of the distillation and rectification of the Extract of
Hartshorn.

I cannot here bury under silence an experiment wherein I was an Eyewitness,
in the person of a Cornet, who had received a Musket Shot in the thigh, near
unto the knee, and who after the wound healed, had both his leg and knee so
strangely put out of their natural posture and situation, that his heel did
almost stick unto the buttock, which made him incapable of the function of his
employment. But their Surgeon major, who was a High German, did undertake the
restoring of his knee to its natural motion; which to effect, he administered
unto him every day, for the space of six weeks, i. of the powder of a thigh or
leg-bone of a man, who some years before had been dissected, in his ordinary
Broths; by which he did recover not only the bending of his knee, but made him
capable, before the six weeks ended, to Fence, play at Tennis, ride on Horse
back, and perform all other exercises. Whence you may note, that so rare a Cure
could not proceed but from the volatile, spiritual and penetrating Salt, which
this remedy did contain, since the material part of the bone could never pass
so far as the last digestions. I have quoted this history, to no other purpose
then to persuade the better, and lay more open to the understanding, the
effects of those remedies which are extracted from the skull and bones of Man,
by distillation, separating artificially the pure parts from impurity. The
Spirit and Volatile Salt of Man's skull is given against Epilepsie, in water of
Lime-tree flowers, Lilly-Convally, or Piony: that of bones is also
successefully administered, to restore contracted and dried Limbs; provided you
rub them also with Balsom of Modern Mummy: The Oil of skull and bones is only
applyable outwardly, to cleanse and heal filthy and corroding Ulcers, provided
you mix a little powder of Colchotar, and every other day plye the patient with
vulnerary and purgative potions. The Dosis of the Spirit is from three drops to
ten, and of the Volatile Salt fixed from four grains to eight.

The manner of preparing Remedies out of Hartshorn.
ALthough we have given a method whereby to perform all Chemical Operations, in
extracting remedies from the parts of Animals; yet because there may be many
that will be shie ^o work upon the parts or substance of Man, and that some
Animals parts do differ from that of Man, and contain in themselves a greater
share of the useful substance, to encounter and cure diseases: I thought it
necessary, exactly to describe such good remedies, as may be extracted out of
Hartshorn, and lawfully substitured to those which are extracted from the body
of Man. For we must confess, that there is something very noble, and worthy of
our consideration, in the annual production of the Stags head, which every
Spring he does renew by a kind of Vegetation: And to prove and clear this
truth, it is to be noted, that the head of this noble Creature, becomes then
only useless and troublesome to him when he is grown decayed and lean; which
the French Huntsman expresses by a very significan: Physical notion, Tomber
enpauvrete, Grown poor; for their meaning is, that the Deer has want of good
and sufficient food during the Winter season, when the earth being long covered
with snow, these poor Creatures are exhausted of natural spirits, and want
sufficiency of radical moystu^e, to fill up and shoot into their heads, having
scarce enough to prop up and maintain their life, which makes them in that
season prove lean and languishing. But when the Spring, repairer of Nature,
restores again the fresh Grass to Valleys, and tender buds to the Copses, they
are so plentifully re-animated with a new fire, that the sublimated Spirits
shooting into the head, do provoke them by a violent itching to cast their old
head, which at that time is become spongious and hollow, and spoiled of its
best and principal part, which is a volatile spiritual Salt, in which does
consist all its Medicinal virtue; after which they recover a new Velvet head,
soft in the beginning, and filled with a very subtle Salt; which hardens by
degrees, till it has attained to its full perfection: From whence we may
gather, that it is very necessary to have a regard in the choice of the heads
of this noble Creature; for, you must not take for Operations, any of the cast
heads, neither before they have attained their full and requisite firmness; or
when they are too near the Winter-season: but the fittest time to have it in
its true perfection, is between the two Feasts of our Lady in September; for at
this time it is sufficiently furnished with Spirit, Volatile Salt, and Oil, to
prepare those Medicines with it, which we shall hereunder describe: The Stag or
Deer must be killed by the Dogs. But before we go further, it will not be from
our purpose, to show, How the Water of Stags head is to be distilled, whilst
it is yet tender, and covered with its hair, being a Water of very great
virtue, and much less heating then the other remedies which we shall describe;
her Spirits being but yet in their Embryo, not sufficiently concocted and
digested, to attain their last perfection.

How the Velvet head of a Stag is to be distilled, to have thereby the Water of
the Stags-head.
TAke the said Velvet-head from the 15 of May to the end of June; cut it in
pieces of the thickness of a half-fingers breadth, and place them checker-wise
one upon another, in the bottom of a Class Retort, which put in Balneo, and
when all is ready, give fire till the Water begins to drop down, continuing
that degree of heat until no more water comes out: you may afterward put your
Cucurbite in Ashes, to extract the remaining moisture, that the pieces being
more dry, may the more easily be preserved. Some do add Wine, Cinament, Mace, a
little Saffron in the distilling, to make the Water more efficacious, chiefly
to ease women in hard Labors, help to expel the afterburthen when they are
grown weak, as also to cleanse the womb from such serosities, as during the
Childe-bearing have crept in between the Membranes, causing with the remaining
blood, those gripings wherewith women newly brought to bed are for the most
part tormented. The industrious and curious Apothecary, may make it simple and
compounded, the better to answer those Physicians intentions which will be
willing to employ him. The Dosis of the simple-water is from half a spoonful
to two, and even to more, considering it is a water that strengthens without
altering and heating; and besides its singular use in Childebeds, it is of no
less efficacy in all diseases where there is a touch of venom. They that will
preserve it long, must add to each pound weight of this water i. ss. of Borax
in powder, by which it will increase the more its virtues for Childe-births,
since Borax it self is a specific remedy to help and facilitate Delivery. The
Dosis of Compounded Water must be less, for it must not be administered above
ii. in quantity, in all malignant, and spotted or purpureous Fevers, but
chiefly in Measles and Smallpox it is a most sovereign Antidote.

The pieces which did remain in the bottom of the Glass, are not to be cast
away, but rather to be preserved, and being beaten into very small powder, used
from ss. to ss. for killing Worms in Children, and to hinder their breeding,
giving it in decoction of Scraping of Hartshorn and Ivory; this powder has
not lost its virtue, because the heat of B. M. is not strong enough to elevate
the Volatile Salt, which was enclosed in the most solid parts of these pieces.

A Philosophical Preparation of Hartshorn.
MAny are of opinion that Hartshorn cannot be made tender and crumbling enough
to be easily afterward reduced to powder, without previous Calcination; but as
this way of Calcination deprives it from its Spirits and Salt, the Sons of Art
have found a way of a Philosophical Calcination, which preserves its virtue:
whereby may easily appear how much ancient Pharmacy does come short from that
which in our days has received the light of Chemistry.

Take then well-chosen Hartshorn, and gathered in its true season; saw it in
pieces of the length of a Pan about the ends, then putting two sticks
crosse-wayes toward the top of such a Glass Body as usually serves for
distillation of Spirits and Waters, there suspend with a pack-thred pieces of
the branches of the Deers head cut as before, when you are to distill any
Cordial Waters, such as of Carduus Benedictus, Vlmaria, or small Centaury; or,
which would yet be better, when you go about to distill any fermented matters,
which send forth more penetrative and subtle vapors, you must cover the glass
body with a Limbeck, and give the same degree of fire as for the distilling of
Aqua Vitae; so shall these vapors penetrate into the very center of your
Hartshorn, and make it as easy to crumble and be reduced to powder, as if
calcined with open fire, and grinded upon the Porphyry: but you must prosecute
the work of your distillation, four or five days, without intermission or
opening the Vessel; for which reason, the Glass Body must have a hole toward
the upper part, placed side-wise, whereby to recruit it with warm Water
proportionably as it diminishes by distillation, taking care also that the
Liquor should not come near the suspended matter by half a foot. And if it be
objected, that the vapors may carry along with them the most subtle Spirits
of the Hartshorn: We answer, that it may be so, and that these cordial and
sudorifick Waters, whether distilled Spirits of fermented Juniper, or
Elder-berries, do thereby contract a greater virtue: but that this vaporous
heat is not sufficient to carry along with it the Volatile Salt, enclosed up in
the matter by the strict bond and union it has with the Oil or Sulphur, which
cannot be disunited but by a much more violent heat. Hartshorn thus prepared,
is much better then that which did remain in the foregoing distillation, as
much to strengthen and provoke sweat, as to give to Children against Worms, and
hinders all those corruptions which breed for the most part in their tender
stomachs. The Dosis is from ss. to ss;. and ii. in cordial and sudorifick
Waters, or in some specific Conserve, against all Pestilential and Venomous
Diseases.

How to prepare the Spirit, Oil, and Volatile Salt of Hartshorn.
TAke of Hartshorn with its requisite conditions, as much as you think fit,
saw it by round pieces of the thickness of two Crowns, fill with it a Glass
Cucurbit or Retort well Luted, and put it in a close Reverberatory to open
fire, which graduate until the drops begin to follow one another in the
Recipient well Luted with a wet Bladder, and fall no faster then you may reckon
Four between the interval of each drop falling; then continue and direct the
fire upon the same equality and rule, until the drops begin to cease; then
remove your Receiver, and empty it, then put it again, and lute it with good
salted Lute S. A. and increase the fire by a degree, until the Oil does begin
to distill, with some little remainder of the Spirit, and the Volatile Salt
will gather it self by degrees, and stick to the neck of the Retort, and thence
pass in the form of a Vapor in the body of the Recipient, where it shall stick
to the side in the figure and form of Stags-horns, and branches of Trees, when
they are laden with hoar-frost or snow; which is an Operation very pleasing to
the sight; for, of this Volatile Salt some part also under the shape of snow,
does fall into the bottom of the Recipient, and joins it self to the Spirit
which is under the Oil. Then continue the last degree of fire, until nothing
more comes out, and the Recipient begins to appear without vapors.

But it is not enough to have extracted out of Hartshorn these several
Substances, but the Artist must be taught besides how to rectify them, both to
take away as much as is possible the Empyreuma thereof, as to separate its
grosseness; And to begin with the first extracted Substance, which is the
Spirit, it must be rectified in Ashes, with gentle and soft fire, in a Glass
Retort, wherein you have put sawings or scrapings of Hartshorn three or four
fingers high, and so shall the Spirit come forth fair, clear, depurated and
deprived of the greatest part of its ill odor: The first drawn is to be
preferred to the last; because it is a Volatile Spirit, whose nature it is to
ascend first still; the remainder must be cast away, as unusefull and
unserviceable, but the rectified Spirit is to be choysely kept in a Glass Viol
of a narrow neck, very well stopped.

It is an excellent remedy either inwardly or outwardly applied: for it
purifies and cleanses the whole mass of the Blood, of its serous superfluities
by Urines and by Sweat, as also by insensible Transpiration; therefore it is a
true Specific against Scurvey, the Pox, and all other Diseases proceeding from
alteration of blood. Finally, this Volatile Spirit may worthily be substituted
to that which is or may be extracted from all the parts of other Animals, and
to be an excellent remedy to all the same purposes as the others formerly
mentioned. But outwardly applied, it is also of a marvailous use; for it
cleanses wonderfully all malignant, corrosive, cancerous, or fistulous Ulcers,
if they be washed with it, or if it be injected with a Spring. It serves also
for fresh wounds, caused either by fire, sword, or otherwise, preventing all
dangerous accidents; it is friendly to Nature, and helps her to the reunion of
separated parts, whose intention being not to cause suppuration, or a
colliquation of the flesh and adjacent parts, so does this Spirit hinder the
same: But note also, that you must give it inwardly at the same time, from six
drops to twelve, in vulnerary potions, or the Patients ordinary drink. To be
short, this Spirit is nothing else but a Volatile Salt turned to Liquor, as the
Volatile Salt reciprocally a Spirit compacted and condensated; whence it comes
to pass, that they may indifferently be administered to the same purpose, except
that the Dosis of the Volatile Salt, must be something less then that of the
Spirit; so that the virtues attributed to the one, may be said also to be
proper to the other.

We have no other observation to impart, for the rectifying of the Volatile
Salt and Oil, but that the Operation must be performed in a Retort, upon
scrapings of Hartshorn, and with the fame circumstances for regulating the
fire. So shall you have a fair, clear, and Ruby-red Oil, swimming over the
Volatile Salt passed into the Recipient, or sublimated to the neck of the
Glass, the Salt must be dissolved with its proper rectified Spirit, by a
dissolution made in the vaporous heat of lukewarm water, to separate it from
the Oil: This dissolution is to be filtrated through Paper, which must be
moystened by the Spirit before you pour any thing into it, and you shall have
the Oil by it self, and the Salt in its proper Spirit, which thereby is so much
bettered, and keeps thus better then alone, unless it be stayed and fixed, as
we shall direct to do hereafter. To this end put the dissolution of the Salt
and Spirit in a Cucurbit in Balneo to distill again the Spirit, and sublimate
the Salt in the head, or if you please in a Retort: It is almost impossible to
preserve this Salt, so penetrative and subtle it is, therefore it must be
stayed in the following manner. Take the round pieces which were left in the
bottom, after the distillation performed, being very black, calcine them in
open fire to whiteness, reduce one part to powder, which mix with equal weight
of its Volatile Salt, and sublime together, and so begin afresh with new
Hartshorn calcined to whiteness re-iterating four or five times, and thus
shall you have a volatile Salt fixed, which you may keep, transport or send
with less danger then the Spirit: nevertheless, it is my counsel to use rather
Spirit, filled, and as it were saturated with volatile Salt, to all the ends
and purposes to be declared hereafter.

This Remedy might truly be called a Panacea, or Universal Medicine,
considering the wonderful effects it is apt to produce; for it is soverain
against Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and generally against all Diseases,
whose spring and original is ascribed unto the Brain: It takes away all
obstructions of Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and Pancreas; resists all Venoms,
Pestilence, and all kinds of Fevers, or aguish distempers, none excepted. It
clenses the Kidneys and Bladder from all slimy substances, which are the cause
and original of Stones; corrects all defects of the Ventricle, and peculiarly
indigestions, which occasions an ill breath: it is a specifical remedy for the
Lungs, if it be digested with the Milk of Sulphur. It allayes the immoderate
looseness of the Belly, and the woman's purgations, because it evacuates
superfluous serosities, which are the cause thereof: but, that which seems
more inconceivable and wonderful, is, that it opens also the Belly when bound,
and provokes Monthly Purgations, restoring all the functions of Nature in their
former estate, and removes all gross and terrestrious matters, which did hinder
their effect. I make no doubt, but I shall appear ridiculous to all them which
do not understand the sphere of activity of Volatile Salts: but I know
likewise, that those who know with me, that this Salt is the last cover, and
cloak as it were, of Spirit and Light, shall not find it strange, that I should
attribute so many noble effects, to this admirable Remedy. But I will yet
unfold and open more this Mystery, as much as lies in me, by a description of
what daily is done in our Kitchings, in the preparation of meats, both for
healthy and sick people. Is it not unknown to all, that no Cook can make either
a Bisk or good Bagon, without making use of the Broth, gravy, and juyces of the
best kinds of meat; now it is only by their Volatile Salt, variously disposed
and mixed, that the pleasure and tickling which affects our taste, is
communicated to the Palate. Are there not also Jelleys, strong Broths, and
Juyces of boiled Meats prepared for the sick, whereof the material and earthly
dregs and superfluities are thrown away, being deprived of that Salt, which
remains in the Jelleys; and is the only principle of congelation: they are
exhibited to weak and crasie bodies, that their Stomach might sooner turn these
aliments to the substance of the parts by the easiness of digestion. The same
does our Artist in the preparation of the Volatile Salts, which are capable to
show suddenly their Virtues, in that they soon penetrate all the parts of our
bodies, and carry along with them that wonderful efficacy which we have
attributed them. And do we not see, that both the ancient and modern Physic,
has ever prescribed Hartshorn as a necessary ingredient amongst her Cordials,
has in very great esteem the bone of a Stags-heart, and that the shops daily
prepare Hartshorn Jelley, rather to strengthen the Patient, then to nourish
him. But we leave all this to the Touchstone of Experience, which is the true
ground of all our foregoing Ratiocinations.

To make the Tincture of the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn.
TAke the Volatile Salt rectified, and put it in a double Glass, or Blind-head,
which would yet be better in a Pelican; pour on twice the weight of it of
Alkool of Wine, and so let it stand twelve or fifteen days, in extraction and
digestion together, in the gentle heat of a vaporous Bath; and if all the Salt
was not dissolved, draw off what is already tincted by inclination, and pour on
new Alkool to perfect the extraction and dissolution. So shall you have a
Tincture much more exalted then the preceding Remedies, fit for all the uses we
have already mentioned; and moreover, a most rare Remedy, and of very present
help and efficacy in Apoplexies; by reason of its subtilty which is so great,
that it can scarce be preserved in the best stopped and closest Vials.

The same may be done with the Volatile Salt stayed, and as it were fixed, but
it will not all dissolve, neither shall its tincture be of that penetration and
efficacy; but it will be much more pleasing, and deprived of the nauseous
smell: The dosis of the first is from iij. drops to viij. or ix; and of the
second from vi. drops to xij.

Of the Preparations made out of Vipers.
WE shall close this Chapter of the Chemical Preparations of Animals, by
examining the several Remedies which Vipers do afford by the help of Chemistry:
for this Reptile is endowed with a very subtle and efficacious Volatile Salt
for the cure of several obstinate diseases. Galen does make several relations
of leprous bodies cured by the only drinking of Wine wherein Vipers had been
suffocated. Cardan does also prove the same truth, in a consultation which he
sent to John Archbishop of S. Andrews in Scotland containing this sense. I will
declare you a very great secret for the cure of consumptive bodies, leprous,
and corroded with Pox, etc. which fattens and restores them against all hope.
Take a well chosen Viper, cut off the head and tail, pull off the skin, throw
away the entrails, and preserve the Fat by it self: cut it in bits as you would
do an Eel, and sod it in a sufficient quantity of Water, with Benjeethin and
Salt, adding toward the end some few Parsley leafs: being well sodden, strain
the Broth, and in that Broth boil a Pullet, and give every morning to the
Patient Bread that has been dipped in that Broth, and let him eat the Pullet:
Continue thus seven days together; but keep the Patient either in a Stove, or
a very warm Room during the time, and anoint him with the Vipers fat all along
the backbone and other joints of the body, as also the arteries of the feet,
hands, and breast. This way are the Ulcers of the Lungs cured, for they are
driven to the surface of the skin in the form of Pustula's and other eruptions.
Quercetan does also speak very advantagiously of Vipers in his Dogmatical
Pharmacy. Several other Authors have followed these two: but we must
acknowledge here, that they have all stumbled against the same rock, holding
the Viper to be venomous either wholly in it self, or at least in some parts.

But the Experiment related by Galen, must confound this opinion of the Ancient
and Modern Authors, since that Viper was whole and alive, when suffocated in
the Wine which did cure his Leprousy. The English Ladies herein shame the
vulgar of Physicians themselves, making no scruple to drink of that Wine,
wherein living and entire Vipers have been suffocated, to keep themselves in
their plumpness. Sound disposition of Body, and quickness of Spirits, hinder
the injury of wrinckles, and preserve their flying beauty. But that which is
yet more remarkable in this particular, is, that the Italian Curtesana's
preseve themselves against the Venerian disease, and its sad accidents, taking
every Spring and fall, Broths, made of Pullets, Vipers flesh, and China root.
None amongst our Modern Physicians, but the famous Poterius, and the most
learned and subtle Philosopher Van Helmont, have well explained wherein the
poison of Vipers does consist; which is only placed in the sting of choler,
which prints in the imagination of that Animal an envenomed Idea.

Fabritius Hildanus, and many other grave and renowned Authors, do by their
observations authorize the truth of the effects; but the two quoted only have
taught us the true seat of poison, which cannot be but in the Spirit of the
Animals life; as the Italian Proverb hints very well; which faith, that Morta
la Bestia, morto il veleno, since Man it self, Dogs, Horses, Wolfs, Cats,
Pole-cats, etc. leave no venomous impression by their bitings, but when they
are angered, and their Imagination poisoned with a desire of rage and vengeance.

And let this hint suffice by the by, to prove more and more, that all the
Virtue of things is placed in the Spirits and Life, which are nothing else but
a portion of the Universal Spirit, and corporified light. We come now to the
Preparations made of Vipers, and of their parts.

The manner of desiccating Vipers, to make the Powder and Trochisks thereof.
THe election of Vipers does only consist in taking them after they have
forsaken their holes, and are more full and fed; the regard of their sex is
indifferent, provided the female is not big with young ones: they are to be
chosen in high elevated and dry places, leaving them that breed about Ponds, or
Morish and watery places.

Take of these Vipers as much as you please, pull off the skin and the
entrails, keeping the Heart and Liver; then put them in a large Glass Body or
Cucurbit, where you may have sufficient room to place and order them upon small
sticks, that they may not touch one the other: place your Glass with a Head in
Balneo, and so desiccate your Vipers; having first strewed over a little Nitre
very pure, or Flowers of Salt Armoniack; preserve the Water which shall issue
forth from it, for such uses as we shall hint hereafter. Nota, that every 12.
hours your Vipers must be turned in the Glass, that they may dry equally.

Thus shall you have a matter to make the true Powder of Vipers, not full of
thrids or filaments, which may be administered in its own Water, or in Wine, or
Cinnamon, or Sassafras Water from i. to i. in all Fevers, but particularly in
pestilential and contagious ones, and in the Plague it self, as also against
Epilepsie and Apoplexy: but the other following Preparations are preferrable to
this Powder.

But if you will prepare Trochisks, take other Vipers, and pulling off their
skins and entrails, cut them in pieces, and boil them in the water, which you
did preserve in the preceding distillation, in a hot boiling Balneo, in a Glass
Body covered with its Head, until this Broth comes to be of the consistency of
a Jelley: with this Jelley beat in a Marble Mortar the Vipers Powder, and
reduce it to Paste, which you shall frame in Trochisks or small rolls, having
anointed your hands with Peruvian Balsom, Oil of Cloves and Nutmegs made by
expression: Those that will rightly prepare Triacle, may make use of these
Trochisks instead of them which the ancient Dispensatories do prescribe, which
are only crumbs of Bread, and Vipers Flesh destituted of all the faculties,
which reside in their Volatile Salt. The Powder of these Trochisks is
preferrable to the single Powder, because they are impregnated with the proper
substance and virtue of the Animal, besides that they are less apt to corrupt
then the Powder. The dosis is from ss to ij. in the Waters abovementioned.

How the Spirit, Oil, volatile Salt, volatile fixed Salt, sublimation of that
Salt, and the fixed Salt of Vipers, is to be prepared.
I Should be unjust to attribute unto my self the manner and invention of all
these Operations, since the glory is lawfully due to the learned Zwelpherus,
Physician to his Imperial Majesty, yet living, who by his accurate learned and
judicious Notes, upon the Auspurgian Pharmacy, has purchased to himself an
Immortal name; having corrected the defects of the ancient and modern Pharmacy,
with so clear a judgment and so uncontrollable and confirmed an experience,
that all those which will follow the operations of the noblest Pharmacy, must
ever acknowledge themselves his debtors.

I will only hint, in the way, that the invention of Volatilising again the
volatile Salt of Vipers is mine, after it has been as it were fixed by an acid
substance. And as this gallant man has been pleased to make his Experiments
become public, thereby to oblige Posterity; so would I not conceal the secret
of this operation, since thereby a great benefit may accrue to poor diseased
bodies, although the invention of it be not vulgar, and does particularly
belong to my discovery.

Take well fed Vipers without distinction of sex, pull out the Entrails, and
separate the Heart and Liver, dry them in a Stove or Oven, moderately heated,
and being thus very well dried, beat into gross Powder, and fill therewith a
Glass Retort, which put in a close Reverberatory, upon the cover of an Earthen
Pot turned up-side down, upon which put two handful of Ashes or Sand, to fence
the Retort instead of lute, and hinder the first brunt and violence of fire;
then cover your Reverberatory, and fit a capacious Receiver to the Neck of the
Retort, and give a graduate fire, until the Retort grows red, and the Recipient
clears during the violence of the fire, which is an evident token that all
the vapors are dispersed, that is done in less then 12 hours. When all is
cooled again, you shall find three different Substances in your Receiver, which
are the Phlegm and Spirit mixed together; the Oil black and stinking, and the
volatile Salt sticking to the sides of it. The volatile Salt which is about the
sides, must be dissolved with the spirituous Liquor in the bottom, then must
this Liquor be separated from its Oil by filtration, put afterward the Liquor
impregnated with Volatile Salt, in a high Cucurbit or Glass Body covered with
its Head, and exactly luted in the Joints, and adapt to it a small matrasse for
Recipient, then put your Glass in a Sand or Ash Furnace, and regulate well the
fire, lest the bitter and stinking Water, which has dissolved the volatile
Salt ascend within: the sublimation being ended, separate the Salt curiously,
and preserve it in a Viol stopped with Cork dipped in melted Wax, upon which pour a
little of melted Brimstone, if you will preserve this Salt, otherwise it will
vanish in a short time, by reason of the subtle and penetrating nature of its
volatile and ^erial substance. It is this volatile Salt that possesses so many
rare virtues and wonderful effects; for it hinders all corruptions which use to
breed in us, opens all obstructions of the humane body, dissolves and carries
away all aguish distempers, and particularly the Quartane, being exhibited from
6. to 10 grains in Sassafras, Juniper, or Elder Water, one or two hours before
the Fit: it is moreover given in the Plague, and all other contagious Diseases,
in Emulsions made of Columbine, Radish, Carduus Benedictus seed, to which are
joined Amands, Kernels of Pine-Aples, Sugar, and a little Rose or Cinnamon
Water. It is also singular against Epilepsie and Apoplexy: for it searches into
the deepest parts of the bones and marrows; it is to be exhibited in Emulsions
made of Water of Lilly Convally, Piony Flowers, Lime-tree, Piony-seeds,
Almonds, Kernels of Cherries, Peaches or Ab^icots. The dosis is ever from vi.
to xij. grains.

But because this Salt is of a very unpleasant smell, and unsavory taste,
Artists have been long about seeking the means how to despoil it of these two
qualities, as also the Salt of Urine. yellow Amber, Hartshorn, and of the
parts of man: but hitherto, none has attained to this skill and perfection,
without depriving these volatile Salts of their subtility, and by consequence,
their penetrating and diaphoretick virtue. The learned and experienced
Zwelferus alone, has well attained the Art of this useful and curious
operation, after he had tried first without success several other different
ways. But the dosis of this Salt given in a larger proportion, shows enough,
that this purification does fix it in a manner; and that although it be fixed,
and more pleasant to the taste, it is notwithstanding of less efficacy. And as
this great and charitable Physician provokes the sons of Art, to impart their
Inventions, to render it again more volatile, and take away that acidity that
fixes it: I shall add to that Preparation, which we owe to his free
communication, that which my own Industry and the study of natural things have
taught me.

How Volatile Salts are to be stayed, fixed, and purified.
TAke such volatile Salt as you think fitting, put iiij. thereof in a high
Cucurbit, which cover with its Head, on the top whereof let there be a hole of
the bigness of a Goose-quill, lute exactly the Joints, and put in the said hole
a fitting Quill, stopped with Spanish Wax, or Gum-lack; then fit a small
Recipient to the Limbeck, and softly pour by drops of very well rectified
Spirit of Salt, upon your volatile Salt which is to be wrought upon, and
continue thus, until the noise and strife between the sharp Spirit and volatile
sulphurous Salt be over, then shall you perceive an union made of these two
several Substances converted into Liquor; which if it appears to be impure,
must be filtrated, if not, stop only the hole in the Limbecks Head with a Glass
stopple, covered with a Bladder dipped in white of Eggs: then fit your Vessel
again in Balneo, and draw off the moisture, till but two parts remain, if so be
you would have your Salt crystallized; if not, draw all the moisture from it,
and you shall find iiij. of Salt, fixed in a manner in the bottom of the
Cucurbit or Glass Body, and if you have noted the weight of your Spirit of
Salt, you shall find as much of tastless Liquor, and full of Empyreuma in the
Recipient. The Salt has a fragrancy and very good smell, a sharp savor, and a
Saline taste: The dosis of which is to be from ss. to i. It has a virtue that
penetrates to the remotest parts from the first digestion, without any
alteration, purifies the blond, and dissolves all excrementitious matters,
which seem already to have incorporated themselves ^^^h our parts, but chiefly
in gouty Bodies: it expels' Urine, Sand, Gravel and viscous humors from the
Kidneys and Bladder, evacuates all matters by which melancholic affections are
generated, resists better then any other Remedy to Putrefaction, opens all
manner of Obstructions, cures all kinds of Agues, is the true preservative and
curer of the Plague; and, to end in a word, the remainder of its virtues, blots
out and takes away all the ill Ideas and Impressions, which have imparted their
character to the Spirit of Life, the true seat of Health and Sickness: The
dosis may also be augmented or diminished, according to the age, strength, and
nature of the diseased and disease. But as Zwelpherus has been acquainted with
the way of fixing the volatile Salt, by the help of an acid to take away its
evil taste and smell, we will now declare the manner to draw off again this
acid, and sublime the volatile Salt, restoring it to its first subtle nature,
and increasing by consequence its penetrating virtue, without contracting any
evil savor or smell.

The manner of subliming again the Volatile fixed Salt.
TAke iv. of volatile fixed, and mix it with i. of Salt of Tartar, made by
calcination, and well purified; put them in a small Glass-body in Ashes; cover
the same with a fitting Head, and fit to it a Recipient, if the Head has a
Limbeck, (for if it be a blind Head, there is no need of it): lute exactly the
Joints, and give a graduate fire, until the sublimation be ended: so shall you
have the most subtle volatile Salt that may be found in Nature, and which has
a perfect analogy and peculiar sympathy with our spirits, which are the subject
of our natural heat, and radical moisture. But note by the by, that all
Alkalies have this propriety to kill acids, and never to prejudice volatile
substances. The dosis of this Salt can be but from ij. grains to viij. by
reason of its great subtility, which is so penetrating, as it cannot be
preserved, unless mixed with it own Liquor, or being reduced into Essence,
which preparation shall be taught hereafter. It is good for all the diseases
above related, but principally, that of Hartshorn and Vipers, which ought to
be considered as one of the Keys of Physic.

How the Essence of Vipers, with their true volatile Salt is to be prepared.
TAke about 50. or 60. Hearts and Livers of Vipers, dried in the manner above
related; beat them to Powder, and put in a double Glass, pouring upon Alkool of
Wine, until it swims six inches above the matter; then having covered your
Glass, and luted it exactly, put it in a moist vaporous Bath, to digest with a
fitting heat three or four days, to extract all the virtue thereof: that done,
put all in a Glass-body in Balneo M. and with a slow heat distill the Spirit,
cohobating three times, and at the fourth distill all off to the dry bottom; put
in every pound of this Spirit i ss. of the true volatile Salt of Vipers, i.
Amber-grice essensified, as we shall describe it hereafter, ss. of Oil of
Cinament, and as much of the true Essence of the external and fresh rind of
Limon; put all these substances together in a Pelican, to circulate the space
of 8. days; after which, put it up carefully in Glass Vials, as it becomes so
precious a Remedy, and stop it with all requisite care. All the virtues which
we have attributed to the volatile Salt alone, may lawfully be attributed to
this noble Remedy; it has even this advantage over and above, that it may
easier be preserved then the volatile Salt; and moreover, it is one of the best
and securest Antidotes in the world, worthy of the closets of greatest Princes.
The dosis is from ss. to i. in Wine, Broth, or other convenient Liquors.

The manner how to make the simple Theriacal Salt, impregnated with the
Alexiterial and Confortative Virtue of Vipers.
THe Ancients, and Quercetanus after them, have spoken of these Salts, and made
a particular account thereof: but the ancient way of preparation, and the
correction of it made by this famous Physician, are rather to be pitied then
imitated, though he ought not to pass without praise and commendation, for
having excelled in his age, and endeavored to find the truth with all his
power; but as we have got upon his shoulders, and the discoveries of modern
Physicians, industrious about the search of the secrets of Nature, and our own
experience having now better informed us, it is but justice and reason we
should impart it to others.

Take then lb ij. of Bay Salt, white and depurated, or as much Salgemme;
dissolve it in lb x. of River-water well settled, then add 2 dozens of Vipers,
with the Hearts and Livers, their skins and entrails pulled away: boil all
together in Sand, until the Vipers do easily get off from the bones, squeese
all, clarify and filtrate, then evaporate in a hot Balneo's vapor to the dry
bottom, and keep it for use in a well stopped Bottle. Of this Salt, you may give
to eat to healthful and sick bodies; to the one, as a Preservative; to the
other, as Restorative. It is chiefly of great use in Chronical Diseases, where
the mass of the blood is to be purified, and the vice of digestion rectified.
Those that will have it yet more specifical and stomachal, must add the
distilled Oils of Cinament, Cloves, and Nutmeg-flower or Mace, with a little
Sugar in Powder, which will be as an uniting mean to mix it perfectly with the
Salt. i. of a^a^ of these Oils, with i. of essensified Ambergrice is required
to each lb of Salt, for in this manner the Salt will be much more efficacious.
Its dosis shall be from x. grains to ss. in Broths, fasting in the morning, to
cleanse the stomach from all preceding superfluities, which are for the most
part the occasional causes of diseases.

Another Preparation of a Theriacal Salt much more specifical then the
foregoing.
TAke Scordium and small Centaury fresh plucked, a^a. lb. i. Roots of Angelica,
Zedoary, Contrayerva, Asclepias a^a^. ij. shred the Herbs, and pound grossly the
Roots, then boil them in Balneo in a double Glass, in lb x. of distilled Water
of Carduus Benedictus, and juice of Borage and Bugloss: being cooled, strain
the decoction, and put it again in the Vessel; then add a dozen and a half of
fresh prepared and cleansed Vipers, with their Hearts and Livers, as also the
Salts alkalized of Wormwood. Carduus B. small Centaury, and Scordium. a^a^
viij. shut up the Vessel and lute it, and let it boil the space of half a day,
and all being cooled, clarify it, filtrate, and evaporate in the vapor of a
Bath in a Glass-body with its head to a dry bottom; so shall you have a most
rare and precious Salt, and a water endowed with many singular virtues; for it
is a sufficient Remedy to eradicate all manner of Agues and Fevers; it is a
specific in all epidemical Contagions, and malignant Diseases. The dosis is
from i. and ss. to i. you may also add to this Salt the same distilled Oils and
essencified Amber-grice, as we have declared in the precedent Preparation of
Theriacal Silt, and here with this Opeation shall we conclude this Chapter of
the Chemical Prepatation of Animals.

CHAP. IX. Of Vegetables and their Chemical Preparations.
IN this Chapter we intend to make it manifest, that the haters and persecutors
of this noble Art, are very much to be blamed, when they discovered it; and
that their upbraidings done to the Artists and Practitioners of it, are false
and scandalous, since the Preparations which we are to describe, are capable to
bring the most envious to a sober mind, and convince the most obstinate, that
the Pharmacy of the Ancients had never any preparation coming nere its
excellency. It is upon the several parts of this noble, pleasant, and ample
Family of Vegetables, that the true Pharmaceutick shall ever find matter of
employment, and admiration of the Creators works. But, as the design of our
abridgement, does not permit us to make the examination and resolution of all
Vegetables and their parts; we shall content our selves to give one or two
examples, of the manner of working either upon the whole Vegetable, or the
parts thereof, which are Roots, Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Rinds, Woods,
Grains, or Berryes, Juyces, Oils, Drops, Rosins, Gums. We shall give a Section
to each of these parts, the better to explain the manner of working, and to
avoid confusion.

But before we come to the matter, I have thought necessary to say something of
the abuses daily committed by Apothecaries not fully enlightened with the
knowledge of Chemistry, and which are only guided by blind men, admiring and
suffering all the defects of their ill preparation, want of a true information
of the nature of things, and a right apprehension of Physical knowledge, the
true gate to Medical skill. Whence it is less to be admired, that blind men
guided by other blind, fall themselves, and daily cause so many other to fall
with them in the pit. And as Germany has Swelferus Physician to his Imperial
Majesty, who has reformed Pharmacy, in those learned and accurate Observations
he has made upon the Auspurgian Dispensatory; so have we in France, Monsieur
Vallot first Physician to our Monarch, who has labored, and labors yet
daily, to cultivate the field of Physic, and vulgar Pharmacy, and to purge it
from those thorns and thistles, which the ignorance of Chemistry has caused to
grow, and too much overspread the same.

This truth will I illustrate by the example of distilled Waters, and that of
Syrups, because I know, that in these two Preparations, vulgar Apothecaries
commit the greatest faults for the most part, either through ignorance, malice,
or covetuousness, to the great dishonor of Physic and Physicians, the
discredit of their Profession, and that which is yet worse, the great damage of
the common good.

First Discourse of distilled Waters.
IF Substances are not thoroughly known, it is impossible to have any good
success in their Preparation, since from this knowledge does absolutely depend,
the exact and most commendable way of Operation: and, if that be necessary in
all Chemical operations, much more is it in those which concern Vegetables, and
chiefly the manner of their distillation without wasting any of their virtue,
which has induced me to believe it necessary, to give a general Idea of the
nature of Plants, before I come to speak of their particular preparation.

We shall not speak here of Plants according to the sense of many; following
the trace and steps of Botannick Authors, which for the most part have left us
nothing but the external Picture of the Plant, and the diverse degrees of their
qualities, without taking any pains to teach us the differences of the
intrinsecal nature of the same Plants, and much less the true manner of
Anatomizing them, to separate and extract from them all what is good and
serviceable, and also what is unprofitable.

To begin methodically; we must explain the nature of Plants, as they are in
themselves, by the division we make of them, according to the degrees of their
increase and perpetuation: for, they are either long-lived, or annual: The
Long-lived (or vivacious) are those whose roots in the two Aequinoxes do
attract the universal nutriment to themselves; in the Vernal Aequinox they
attract what is necessary to bud out and vegetate, to the full perfection of
the Plant, which ends by her flower and seed; and in the Autumnal Aequinox,
they attract wherewithal to repair the exhausting of their strength, caused by
the Suns heat, and of the other Stars and Planets. This Note is not made by us
without necessity, being absolutely useful, to acquaint the Artist with the
most proper and fitting time to gather the Plant with its root, or to leave the
same as unnecessary; for, if he has need of the Plant a little after it is
sprung out of the Earth, he must meditate with himself, and make a judicious
reflection, that this Plant is not yet furnished with that saline and spirituous
nutriment, the Principle whereof is contained in the root, and that so his
Operation will be lost upon this Plant; since what he may extract of it, is
destituted of that strength and virtue which is desired by the Physician, and
much more of that which is requisite to show its efficacy against the disease;
his recourse then shall be to the root, which contains the Volatile Salt, the
very soul of the Plant, and possessing in it self the virtue and efficacy of
the whole. But if he desires to work upon the same Plant, when it has almost
attained to the period of her perfection, and that it has but yet a small
portion of its virtue left, which does administer yet a kind of languishing
life, until it has recovered its virtue, strength and new life, in the time
of the Autumnal Aequinox, to the end that in Winter it may evade destruction,
and be renewed or born again in the Spring. By which it appears, that when the
Plant is in her full state, as they speak commonly, the Artist must choose it
between flower and seed, if he is desirous to enjoy the full virtue thereof;
for when it has attained to that perfection, the stalk, leaf, flowers, and the
first seeds, are yet full of vigor and virtue, which they communicate to the
Liquor extracted by distillation, which being a Volatile and Mercurial Salt,
and an Embryonated Sulphur, contains all the virtue of the Plant; for, that
which is extracted from it, is a spirituous Water, which preserves it self very
long, with the proper taste and odor of its subject, upon the surface of which
swims an ethereal and subtle Oil, which is that Embryonated Sulphur, mixed
with part of its own Mercury. But if the Artist does expect that the Plant
should shoot and concentrate all its life in the seed, and that this Sulphur
which was but embryonated, should become actuated and fully ripe, he must then
in such a case reject the root, stalk, and leaf, because they have no more in
themselves, that virtue which they had before. Here the Artist must meditate
anew, and consult with the method of Natures action; for, the seed being once
perfected, has no more that Mercurial and saline moisture, which caused her
virtue more easily to be extracted, but all is to the contrary reunited, as it
were, and locked up under the skin of the kernel and the seed; and moreover,
these seeds are of three differing kinds; for some are muscilagineous, and
slimy, or like unto a Jelly; in the first of these, the Mercurial Salt and
Sulphur are more fixed then Volatile, and so these seeds will not yield their
virtue, but by the means of decoction; for, as they are clammy and sticking,
the virtue thereof does not ascend in the distillation: The other are milky, of
a white and tender substance, whence Oil may be extracted by expression, if so
be they are well ripened and dried; but their best virtue is only to be
extracted, when you draw the Lacteous substance, or emulsion, out of it: For,
this second kind of seed is equally mixed with Volatile Salt and Sulphur, which
easily communicates it self to Water; the Artist must not hope, by distillation
to extract the virtue of this kind of Seeds, no more then of the former. But
there is a third kind of seed, altogether oleaginous and sulphurous, which
communicates to the Water neither any Mucilage, viscosity or clamminess, no
more then whiteness; but to the contrary, their substance is compacted, dry,
and astringent by a Sulphur predominant over the Salt. The Artist must distill
this kind of seeds, either alone, or with addition; alone, if externally to be
used; with addition, if it be to administer the remedy, which he pretends to
extract internally to the Patient. These three differences or distinctions of
seeds, do sufficiently show, that it is required for a Chemical Apothecary to
be very well versed in the knowledge of Nature, thereby to make the necessary
observations upon the fixed and volatile parts of substances, whereupon he
operates, that his work may orderly proceed, and not be unnecessarily
confounded.

The same Notes and Theorems are to be applied to annual Plants, which are not
preserved by their root, but are every year to be renewed by their seed. Now of
these two sorts of Plants, either vivacious or annual, as well as of Seeds,
there are three different kinds, viz. Those that yield no smell, of which some
are almost insipid or tastless, or acid, or bitter, or severally intermixed of
these two last qualities, and others which have a taste by themselves sharp and
subtle; all these kind of Plants are green and tender, whose virtue begins to
appear in the prime of their vegetation, because they do abound in Juice, which
contains in it self an essential tartarous Salt, which with time and heat
thickens into a Mucilage, from whence, but with great difficulty, they cannot
be separated; therefore must they be taken whilst they are yet juicy and
tender, so as to break easily upon the least bending of their stalk. The second
kind of Plants is altogether opposite to the first; for, the Plant newly
growing out of the ground is endued yet with little of virtue, even a good
while after; for, when they are yet green and tender, they are tastless and
inodorous, have no taste properly but of grass, because the superfluous humor
is yet predominant, and that their virtue does not consist in an essential
tartarous Salt; but this kind of Plant carries with its natural nutriment, a
spirituous and volatile Salt, mixed with an Embryonated Sulphur very subtle,
which never is reduced from power into act, nor ever discovered by the taste or
smell; but after this superfluous humidity is by heat concocted and digested;
then begins to appear the virtue of these Plants, discovered by the smell and
taste, but particularly by the smell. The proper time to work upon this second
sort of Vegetables, is when their stalk begins to grow dry at the foot, when
they are yet covered with flowers, and begin already to show some little part
of their seed. The third kind of Vegetables is mixed and composed of the two
first, for they have a taste from the first moment of their vegetation: But
they are without smell, and acquire very little when they are in their
perfection; or, if they have any, it appears only when they are pressed,
grounded or rubbed with, because their Sulphur is overcome by a slow and gross
viscosity, which contains much Salt, and appears by a bitter and biting taste,
or a sweetish sugared savor like unto Honey, the Virtue of this last kind,
without previous digestion or fermentation cannot be well extracted. These
Plants are to be gathered, when their flower is yet upon them, if so be they
are bitter and without smell, but if they bear fruit, berries or grains, their
maturity is to be expected, because it is in these parts that the principal
virtue of the whole is maintained, and it is in the center of the sugared
Muscilage, and of a Honey nature, which is in these fruits, that an Artist must
seek the virtue of these wonderful Mixts.

Now it is not enough for us to have given these general notions, unless we
make some particular applications, which may serve us for a pattern and guide
upon each of these kinds; of integral Plants or their parts. We shall then in
the first place treat of Juicy, Nitrous Plants, that is to say, those which
participate of a Salt, much of the nature of Saltpeter, or of that Salt in the
Earth which is the Principle of Vegetation, and seems to have received yet very
little of alteration in the body of these Plants, only that it begins already
to partake a little of Tartar and its feculency. Plants of this nature are,
Pa^ietary, Fumitory, Purslane, Borage, Bugloss, Mercury, Nightshade, and
generally all succulent Plants, which are neither acid nor bitter to the taste;
but whose savor is only mixed with a tartness, compounded of acidity and
bitterness; qualities near to the taste of Saltpeter.

Of the preparation of Nitrous, Juicy Plants, how to extract the Juice thereof,
the Liquor, Water, Extract, Essential Nitro-tantareous Salt, and the Fixed Salt.
TAke a good quantity of any of the Plants above mentioned, which you must by
parcels beat in a stone, wooden or Marble Mortar, until they be reduced to a
kind of Pap, that is to say, until the parts of the Plants be sufficiently
disunited and confounded together, so that expressing the same in a Hair-bag,
Tammy, or Linen Cloth thinly woven, you may extract all the Juice, which being
thus extracted, you may run again through a closer strainer, and then let it
settle, until in a manner it be depurated by it self; after which you must
softly pour by inclination, this Juice so depurated in Cucurbites, or Bodies of
glass, fitted for Limbecks, and place in B. M. in case you desire a good
Extract and but a weak Water, because the heat of the said B. M. is not strong
enough to elevate the essential Nitrous Salt of the Plant, which causes it to
remain with the thick Juice, properly called Extract, when reduced to a thicker
consistency, in the bottom of the Glass. But if you desire a long lasting
Water, and animated with its spiritualized Salt, you must then place your
Cucurbites in Sand, because this degree of heat is capable to elevate and
volatilize the, purest and most subtle portion of the Salt, and raise it
toward the latter end of the distillation, with the last aqueous vapors:
nevertheless, great heed must be taken, that the heat toward the end be not
too violent, and that the residence in the bottom of the Cucurbit become not
totally dry, of cleave to the Glass in danger of burning. But before you come
to the end of your Operation, have a special care that your Juice may be
exactly defecated, for there are two Separations performed, when by the heat of
B. M. or sand the separation of the radical substance of the Juice of the Plant
is made, from the feces or sediment which falls in the bottom of the Glass, and
the skimm which rises above; wherefore this Juice so depurated must run through
a strainer of Cloth, commonly called a Bag, or Manica Hippocratis in the Shops:
after which, the Juice being so separated of all its Heterogeneities, and of
the forain mixture of terrestreity, the distillation in B. M. or Sand must be
continued, according to the intention of the Artist, until this Juice be
reduced to a consistency of Syrup, which is to be put in a fresh Cellar, or
some other cool place, until the Nitro-tartareous Essential Salt be reduced to
Crystal, and separated from the viscosity of the inspissated Juice, which must
be drawn again by a soft effusion by inclination, then put a second time in B.
M. or Sand, to evaporate it to the consistency of an Extract, which shall yet
contain great store of Salt, in case the first Operation was in B. M. and will
be useful to the making of Opiats, according to the indication which the
learned and skillful Physician or the Artist himself will take, when they
intend to make use of it in any disease, according to the nature o^ virtue of
the Plant whereupon the work is performed. And thus much for necessary
Observations, concerning the purification of the Liquor of Juicy Plants,
distillation of their Water, and the manner of making their essential Salt and
Extract.

We come now to the preparation of the fixed Salt; to this end you must dry the
Cake, or remaining part of the Plant after the expression of the Juice, then
calcine and burn it well, until all be reduced to whitish gray ashes, whereof
you must with river or rainwater make a Lie, which must be filtrated through
gray Paper not much stiffened, that the stiffening or glue may not hinder your
Liquor to run swiftly and easily thorough. After the first Lie, impregnated
with the Salt of the Ashes of the Plant, has been filtrated, you must pour new
water upon the Ashes, to extract the remainder of the Salt, until the water
comes off as insipid and void of taste as it was powered first; which is a
manifest and evident sign, that no portion of Salt remains in the Ashes, which
seem to be no more then an useless Earth, or as some do call it, the Caput
Mortuum of the Plant upon which you have wrought: but I will prove the contrary
nevertheless, by the following relation of what happened to me at Sedan, after
I had wrought upon a parcel of Fennel: For, being possessed of an opinion, as
others are, that these Ashes divested of their Salt were totally unusefull, I
caused them to be thrown away in a back-yard, where for the most part, Dung and
other Immundicities were cast; but the next year by what happened unto me, I
knew I was deceived; for great store of Fennel grew in that yard, whereof,
after it had attained to its perfection, I drew great store of distilled Oil;
by which experiment I was taught with that excellent Philosopher and Physician
Van Helmont, that the Median Life of things is not so easily destroyed as it is
imagined, and that according to this Axiom of Philosophy, Formae rerum non
pereunt; because both the Art and Artist do but follow from far our Mother
Nature; and this is sufficient to convince us, that we apprehend not the least
of her ways or contrivances, much less any of those which she uses toward the
attaining her own ends. But let us return to our purpose after this digression;
which, because it is in its proper place, I thought more fitting to make here:
After then you have gathered together all the Lies well filtrated, you must
evaporate them in Juggmettle dishes upon sand, until they thicken to a skin,
or incrustate by reason of the Salt, which then abounds; then must you begin
with a Spatula to stir and agitate softly the Liquor, until the Salt be
wholly dried, which then being put in a Crucible, reverberate in a Wind-furnace
between kindled hot burning Coals, until it grows glowing red on all sides,
taking nevertheless exact heed that it melt not; this done, take off the
Crucible from the fire, let it cool, and then dissolve the Salt in the
Extracted Water of the Plant which has yielded the said Salt, that you may
once more filtrate it, purify it, and restore that portion of Volatile Salt
which ascended in the distillation; after which, you must put this dissolution
in a Glass Cucurbit covered with its head or Limbeck, and draw off again the
Water from that Salt upon Sand, until it begins to contract a skin, then
cease the fire, and put the Vessel in some cool place, to cause the Salt to
Crystallize, and thus continue drawing off the Water upon Sand, and causing the
Salt to shoot in Crystals, until it be all drawn away, and so shall you have a
pure and cleanly Salt, fit for use when you have occasion: but the chief use of
it, is to put part thereof in the Water extracted from the Plant, to render it
thereby not only more active and efficacious, but also to make it more durable,
fitting for keeping several years, without any loss of its virtue. The
proportion may be of ii. upon every pint of distilled Water. The general use
and faculty of the fixed Salts of Plants made by calcination, evaporation,
reverberation, depuration and crystallization, is moderately to loose the
Belly, draw away Urines, and take off all obstructions from the lower parts of
the body: the other particular virtues may be taken or assigned, according to
the nature of the Plant from whence they were extracted.

And as we have declared the manner of purifying fixed Salts, so must we do also
in showing the way, of drawing off and separating a certain viscous and
colored sliminess, which is found even amongst the Estential Nitro-tartareous
Salts, in their first Crystallization. It is thus performed; You must dissolve
them in clean, common Water, and percolate three or four times upon a portion
of the Ashes of the Plant whence they were extracted; which is done upon two
intentional ends: For, the the Artist must not work blindly, or without being
capable to give an account, wherefore he does, or does not such a thing: The
first intention is, that the Essential Salt which is not yet purified, and for
the most part is found mingled with the Extract, without having been capable to
take the Idea or Character of Salt, by reason of the hinderance caused by the
clamminess of Inspissated Juyces, takes in his way as it passes through the
Ashes the fixed Salt of its own Body, which imprints upon it its own saline
Idea, and so causes it easily to crystallize, after the superfluous Liquor is
vapoured away: The second intention is, that the Ashes may preserve the thick
and clammy body of the Extract in themselves, and so the Water, impregnated
with the essential and fixed Salt of the Ashes, may pass cleanlier and purer by
the re-iterated Percolation. This being ended, you must slowly and gently
vapor away your Water in a Dish of Juggmettle in Sand; not till the skin
begins to cover it, as we have spoken when we treated of the Fixed Salts, but
evaporating away the two thirds, or the three parts of the Liquor, which must
be softly and without shaking the bottom gently powered in a clean Earthen Dish,
so as if by the action of heat any small Atoms or Corpuscles should happen to
settle and make a sediment in the bottom, they should not mix with the clear
Liquor, to hinder the purity of Crystallization in the Salt. The water which
shall swim above the Crystals, must be drawn off, and the Evaporation
re-iterated, until half of the Liquor be consumed away: and so continue till
you have got all your Salt turned to Crystals. And if so be this way of
Purification does not satisfy the Artist, and that the Crystals want the
cleanliness and transparency desired; he shall put them in a Crucible made of
the least porous Earth which is to be found, and let him melt his Salt in a
Wind-furnace, that the fire of Fusion may consume all what may hinder the
Crystallization to be done with the requisite cleanliness and transparency:
this Salt being so melted, must be poured in a very clean brass Mortar, warmed
a little before, that the too violent heat of the melted Salt should not cleave
or split it; when it is cooled, dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of the
Water distilled from the Herb whereof the Salt is extracted; but the quantity
of Water must not exceed that of the Salt; otherwise the third part or half
must be drawn again by Distillation, or Evaporation; which being done, the
Vessel must be placed in a cold Room, and the Crystals will become fair and
transparent, with sharp ends and sides much like unto the figure of Saltpeter,
and about the same taste: Thus you must continue to evaporate and crystallize,
until the Water yields no more Salt. This Essential Salt must be dried between
two Papers, then be put in a well stopped Glass-bottle to preserve for use: It
has the virtue to preserve as well the Water of the distilled Plant as the
fixed Salt; and moreover, makes it diuretical, aperitive, and cooling, much
better then the Mineral common Crystal made with Saltpeter. It may be given in
Broths, or the ordinary drink of the Patient, according to the judgment and
discretion of the Prudent and Learned Physician. The dosis is from ten grains
to a Scruple.

The Preparation of Juicy Plants, possessed with an Essential Volatile Salt,
and how to extract the Water thereof, their Spirit, Juice, Liquor, Essential
Volatile Salt, Extract and Fixed Salt.
AFter we have shown the way of operating upon those Plants which are
impregnated with a Nitro-tartareous Salt, and in what manner the Artist is to
prepare them, we must proceed in showing what change of Operation there is in
those which are also juycy, but with an acrimonious, biting, and Aromatical
taste, possessing in themselves great store of Essential Volatile Salt: such as
are all kind of Cresses, Water-parsley, Water-Mint, Alisander, Rapistrum,
Spoonwort, and, to be short, all the kinds of Mustard, and generally all other
Plants of this nature, which commonly are called Antiscorbuticks.

But as we have sufficiently and amply enlarged our selves upon the preparation
of Juycie Plants, which have in themselves a Nitro-tartarous Juice, and the
Operations already described are to lead the way, and serve as for a rule and
example in the case of all other Juycie Plants; we have nevertheless thought it
necessary to add here some notes, concerning the nature of these Plants, the
proper time of gathering them to enjoy their virtues, and furthermore to add
the manner of extracting the Spirits of these Plants, by the help of
Fermentation, because we have said nothing of it heretofore.

It is then to be noted first of all, that the^e either waterish or cultivated
Plants, do from their first orignal participate of great store of Essential
Salt, which is of a very subtle, penetrating and volatile nature: and that
therefore the Artist must work upon going. The reason is, because the other had
not in themselves that saline, subtle and Vol tile Salt, which easily vapors
and flies away, if the Artist does not use great industry, and take the nick of
time to preserve it; for, if too much time be spent, from the gathering of
these Plants to the making use of them, their Spirit does easily contract a
heat, and being volatilized by the same, does fly away, and the body of the
Plant remains rotten and useless. This kind of Vegetable then is to be taken
when he is newly sprouted, and begins to frame the tuffs or umbella's of its
flowers; for, it is in this very time that the Essential the virtue which is
hoped for; for, with a longer stay, all this efficacy would concentrate it self
in a short time in the Seed, by reason of the Plants own heat, and that of the
time of the year, as it is specially observed in the bringing up of
Watercresses or Nose-smart. And so much shall suffice to admonish the Artist,
what heed he is to take in his Operation upon Plants of this nature; for the
remainder, let him follow the Prescriptions we have already given above; and
specially not to use the Crucible for the Essential Volatile Salt of these
Plants, otherwise all this Salt would vanish away, by reason of its most
subtle and most volatile Principle, which participates more of Light and
Heaven, then of Water or Earth, which in Nitro-tartarous Salts abounds most.

How the Spirit of Juicy Plants, possessed with an Essential Volatile Salt, is
to be Extracted.
AFter we have given all the necessary observations to work upon Plants of this
nature, we must end our discourse or treaty thereof, by the manner of well
extracting their Volatile Spirit by the help of Fermentation; which is thus
performed.

B^; as much as you shall think fitting of one of these Plants, and cleanse it
from all its earthliness and impurities, bruise it in a Marble, Stone, or
Wooden Mortar, and immediately put it in a great Glass Receiver, commonly
called a great Ballon by the French Artists, and pour water upon it, between
lukewarm and boiling, which by the Cooks is called Scalding-water, the height
of foot, then stop the neck of your Receiver with a blind-head (or Vaisse au de
Rencontre;) and thus let it rest about two hours: after which, new water less
then lukewarm, and only simpering must be added, to temperate the heat of the
first, until the finger being put in can, scarce perceive the heat, and that
is the degree which the most expert in the Practice and Theory of Chemistry,
use to call Natural or Human Heat, and the true point or instant of
Fermentation. Herein the Chemical Artist needs properly his nicest judgment,
to take the true nick of time of this soft and amicable heat, because if this
degree of heat does exceed, it volatilizes too suddenly, the Spirit and subtle
parts of the Plants upon which he does work; which, notwithstanding all care
and precaution, easily vapors and vanishes away, for all is converted
afterward into an unpleasant acidity, which contains no more of the Volatile
Spirit: And if this heat, on the other side, is less than it ought to be, it
does not sufficiently help the Leaven or Ferment, to dissolve and divide the
most solid parts of the Plant, which contain yet in themselves a Centrical
Salt, contributing very much to the perfection of the Spirit which is to be
extracted out of the Plant; and moreover helps not a little to disunite the
viscosity of the Juice of the Plant, which contains in it self the principal
portion of the Essential Volatile Salt, which affords the Spirit; nevertheless,
it is safer to fail in the defect then in the excess. Things being put in this
temper, Take Barm, or Beer-yest, if you are in a convenient place to recover
it; if not, raise Flower dissolved in Water something less then lukewarm, with
about lb ss. of Leaven or Ferment commonly used every where for Dow in the
making of Bread: and when the Liquor is sufficiently raised and puffed, and the
flower has got on the top of the Liquor, heed must be had when the top of the
Flower begins to crack, for it is a token that the Fermenting Spirit is
sufficiently excited, to be reduced from power into act, and to be introduced
in the matter, ready to be fermented: but you must note, that your Vessel is
not to be more then half filled, otherwise all will run out and fly away, by
reason of the action of the Ferment, which by an internal motion agitates and
elevates the matters, and in which motion does consist the power both of Nature
and Art. This first Heat of Ebullition being past, the Artist must suffer the
Ferment to act softly and by degrees, until he perceives that all that Crust
which the Fermenting Spirit had raised up, and framed out of the most corporeal
and material substance, to be as a Wall or Defense against the evasion or
evaporation of the acting Spirits, begins of it self to subside, and
precipitate it self, because it is no longer supported by the activity of the
Spirits; this most commonly does happen at the end of two or three days in
Summer, and four or five in Winter. Here again must the Artist be very careful
to take his time, for as soon as this sign begins to appear, he must distill
his fermented matter, unless by his own sloth and neglect, he will lose what
Art and Nature had prepared to his hand; for, at that time this Fermented
Spirit easily vanishes, and what remains is no more then an acid, useless and
unprofitable Liquor. But when the Artist taking opportunely his time, shall
have put his fermented matter in the brass Vessel or Body, covered with its
Moor's-head, or Still, exactly luted the Joints, as much of the Head as the
Pipe, taken care that the Water of the Refrigeratory, to condense the raising
Vapors, be kept cool and fresh, given the fire by competent degrees, until
the drops begin to fall and follow one the other pretty thick, and having
attained this degree, closed the Registers of the Furnace, and stopped exactly
the door of the Furnace, to keep the Fire in that temper; he shall obtain by
these means a Volatile Spirit, very subtle and efficacious; and must not cease
the fire, until he has found out by the taste, that the Liquor stilling down
be insipid, which is the true sign upon which he must cease his Operation. If
he will rectify this Spirit, he must distill it again in B. M. But in case he
has proceeded by the method we have described, there shall be no need of
rectification, because he can separate immediately in the Operation, the first
Spirit from the second, and the second from the third, which shall differ
accordingly in degrees of virtue and subtility, because they have more or less
of mixture of phlegm.

The virtues of this Spirit are wonderful in all Diseases which have their
seat, and are rooted in fixed, crude, and tartarous matters, which he dissolves
and volatilizes powerfully: But above all, the Spirit of Spoonwort, as also its
Volatile Salt extracted of its Juice, as also the Juice of all Nitro-tartareous
Plants: for, these are the two most powerful remedies which learned men have
found against scorbutical Diseases reigning in Maritime Countries, and whereof
very few can preserve themselves in long Sea-voyages. And though these diseases
be almost unknown in the Climes of France, yet for the most part such are evil
Rheumatisms proceeding from the alteration of the mass of the blood, whose
whole Substance is vitiated, and degenerated in a gross and malignant serosity,
whose venomous quality imprinted in the membranous and nervous parts, causes
weariness, running pains, swellings, and spots in the skin, which are all
symptoms and tokens of the Scurvey,; and therefore, as these diseases can only
be terminated by Diaphoreticks and Diuretics, recourse must be had to the
Spirits and volatile Salts of Antiscorbutical Plants, whereof we have spoken
but a little before. The Dosis of the Spirit is from vi. drops to xx. in broth,
or ordinary drink of the Patient; that of the volatile Salt, is also from v. to
xv. or xx. grains in the same liquors, or is yet better, in the water of the
same Plant.

There will be no need of making any great discourse by it self, whereby to
give to understand how the little Centaury, Wormwood, Rhue, Pennyroyal, Balm,
Mint, Flowers of lime-tree, and other Plants of this nature; which in
themselves have no moisture when they are possessed with their virtue, and fit
to be used, are to be gathered. They are only to be grossly bruised in a Mortar
after they are cut, and you have added to each lb of the Plant (which you
purpose to ferment and distill thereby, to extract the Spirit) x lb of water, as
we have already related above, observing all the notes and hints also given,
which are essentially necessary to the true ordering of fermentation. But in
case you purpose only in your distillation to extract hereby the aetherial Oil,
and spirituous Water of the Plant, you must only distill the same Plant without
any previous infusion, maceration, and much less fermentation, being shred very
small, putting to each lb of plant x lb of Water.

There is yet notwithstanding a way to preserve Plants of this nature, and even
the Flowers themselves, and cause them to ferment without any other addition of
mixture: And herein also is the Artist to take great heed, and to be very
circumspect: for, unless you will lose time and labor, not one of the
circumstances which we shall now relate, is to be omitted. Proceed then as it
follows; Gather the Plant or Flower when they are in their perfection; to
this purpose must the Plant be in a state between Flower and Seed; and if it
bears no Seed, or be only a Flower, it must be in the height of its smell, and
the leaves must firmly hold to their stalks: But the principal Note besides,
is, the time of gathering, which is, to gather these things a little after the
rising of the Sun, that the dew may not be upon them, which would cause
corruption; they must not also be gathered after a rainy-day, or the day
before, whereby they might have contracted superfluous moisture, which would
cause the same accident. Having these Plants thus conditionated, you must fill
great Pots or Vessels of Jugge-metal therewith, well cleansed and dried, and
thrust them in very hard; leaving no empty space, but only so much as will
serve to put astopple of Cork very well fitted to the place, and steept in
melted Wax; this done, pour upon the stopple, black melted Pitch, and besmear
all round about the mouth of the Vessel, then put it in a Cellar upon Boards,
that the Earth may not impart it to much coolness, and the Plant or Flower may
not thereby be altered; and so shall you for whole years preserve Plants and
Flowers, which shall be fermented by themselves, and will be ready for
distillation at all times that there will be any need of it; adding only lb x.
of Water to every lb of Flowers or Plants so fermented by themselves, and you
shall extract a Water and a Spirit which shall really be endowed and
impregnated with the odor, and all the virtues of the Plant, as we have our
selves exemplified upon Plants so digested and fermented in themselves and by
themselves, by order of Mr. Vallot, first Physician to the King of France; who
has ever ordained those ocular demonstrations to be made in the eyes of the
public; that the virtue of things, and the noblest way of distilling them may
be made known, and that it may be truly confessed from henceforth, that this
noble and learned way of operation owes its invention to him.

We have nothing else at present, to say, touching the general rules and common
observations which the Artist is to make upon the Vegetable in general, and its
parts in particular, but that we must impart the way of extracting the Liquors
from the whole Plants, or their parts, and exalt them more and more, until they
are arrived to the nature of their first being, which will eminently possess
all the central virtues of their Mixed, because Art and Nature have preserved in
this operation all the seminal powers with which it was endowed, as our great
and illustrious Paracelsus does most learnedly explain in a Treatise, which he
intitles, De Renovatione and Restauratione.

The manner of Extracting Liquors from the Plants and their Quintessences.
ALl Plants are not fit for this operation, because they have not equally a
sufficient proportion of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury in themselves, to
communicate to their Liquors and Quintessences, the virtue of renewing and
repairing themselves: and Paracelsus himself does only recommend us two, among
all the rest, which may serve for a rule and pattern, in all other Plants
coming near the nature of these two, viz. Balm gentle, (or Melissa) and the
great Celandine; among those that come n^ar, we may lawfully comprehend the
great Scrophularia, the little Centaury, and the vulnerary Plants, as is the
Pyrroha, Consolida, Sarracenica, Virga aurea, St. John's Wort, Wormwood, and
generally all Alexite^ical Plants, as Scordium, Asclepias, Gentian, and the
kinds of Genti^nel, Rhue, Parsley, Small^ge, and many more, which we leave to
the choice and judgment of the Artist, who shall prepare them all in the
manner we will relate hereafter, and when he shall have extracted the Liquor or
Quintessence, he may use it as occasion shall serve, and according to the
virtue of the Plant.

Of these Plants when you intend to prepare any, being in its state and
strength, that is, when the Flower is fully blown, but not yet grown to Seed,
at that time which Paracelsus calls Balsamiticum tempus, the Balsamic time. i.
e. a little before the rising of the Sun, because in this operation is needful,
that sweet and pleasant humor which Plants do in the night time attract from
the dew, by the magnetical and natural virtue wherewith they are endowed to
recruit themselves with the necessary moisture as much for their subsistence
and self-preservation, as to resist the Suns heat, which by day time sucks and
dries them: when you have a sufficient quantity of the Plant you intend to
prepare, beat it in a Marble Mortar, and reduce it to an in palpable Pap, as
near as you can; then put this Pap in a long-neckt-matrass thermetically sealed
to digest in Horse dung, the space of a Philosophical month, which is forty
natural days; or else put the Vessel in a vaporous Bath, wrapped up in sawings
of Wood, or minced straw during the same time, and in a heat analogous to that
of Horse-dung. The time being expired, open your Vessel to take out the matter
which you shall find reduced into a Liquor, which being wrung, separate the
pure part from the impurity in B. M. in a slow heat, that there may be a
residence of the grosser parts, which you shall separate by inclination, or,
which is better, by filtrating this Liquor through Cotton by the Glass Funnel:
This Liquor so depurated, put in a Viol Glass, to join therewith the fixed
Salt, which you shall draw off by expression from the Plant, or from the same
dried: which will serve to increase the virtue thereof, and make it more
lasting, and even as it were incorruptible.

But when the Artist will go further, and purify this Liquor to the highest
degree, and reduce it to a Quintessence, he must proceed thus.

equal parts of this Liquor, and Water or Liquor made out of dissolved Salt,
(the manner of which Preparation we shall teach in the chapter of Salts) and
put them in a Mattress, which being hermetically sealed and exposed to the Sun
during six weeks; thus without any other operation, this saline Liquor will
separate all heterogeneous and slimy substances, which did hinder the purity
and exaltation of this noble Medicament: but, this time being over, you shall
see three several separations, which are the feces of the Liquor of the Plants,
the Quintessence of the Plant, which is green and transparent as Emerald, or
red and clear as an oriental Granate, according to the quality and quantity of
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, which shall predominate in the prepared Plant.

I know many will say, that the practice of this operation is easy, and most
will hardly believe, that the Liquor of Plants or their Quintessences should
possess those virtues, which after Paracelsus, we will attribute unto them. I
wish nevertheless every one might be, by legitimate and true experiments, as
well assured of this truth as I am my self; that Artists might be more
industrious, in furthering these rare Preparations, with a confidence, they
shall not miss the benefit they may hope from it in their particular, and
procure to the general society of mankind, in preserving and repairing health
in the individual members thereof.

Of the Use and Virtue of the Liquor of Plants.
THis word Liquor is not here singly to be accepted for juice, or moisture of
the Plant: but it is by excellency here given to this kind of Remedy, because
it contains in it self, all the efficacy and virtue which may be in the Plant
whence it proceeds; whence it is not difficult, to make the understanding
conceive, to what use these Liquors so prepared, may and ought to be employed;
for, if the Liquor be prepared out of a vulnerary Plant, it may be more safely
exhibited then the decoction of any of the Plants of this nature in vulnerary
potions; it may also be-mingled in injections, used in plasters, unguents and
digestives, which are applied to wounds or ulcers: but with this condition,
that the body of these remedies be composed of Honey, yolk of Eggs, Turpentine,
Myrrh, or any other Balsamic body, which may rather prevent accidents in the
wounded parts, then to cause a purging and painful colliquation, ever contrary
to the good intention of Nature, and much more of the true precepts of the
commendable and learned Surgery. In this excellent part of Physic,
Paracelsus has chiefly excelled, as, without any gainsaying, it may be proved
by those his two excellent Treatises, which he does entitle The great and small
Surgery. Moreover, if the Liquor be extracted from a Thoracical Plant, it
may be mingled in the Julips and Potions, which are to be exhibited to the
Patients, affected with any infirmity of the Breast. If it be prepared from a
Diuretic or Antiscorbutick Plant, it may be given for obstructions in the
Spleen, Mesentery, Pancreas, Liver, and other neighboring parts: or, it may be
employed against gravel, retention of Urine, and other diseases of the Reins
and Bladder: to conclude, if this Liquor draws its virtue from any Alexiterial,
Cordial, Cephalic, Hysteric, Stomachal or Hepatick Plant; it may with very
good success be given against Venoms, and all Agues, which may draw their
original from venom; if the Plant be alexiterial, it may be given against all
Lypothymies, or Swoundings, if the Plant be cordial: and if Cephalic, against
Epilepsie, threatenings of Apoplexy, Palsy, and all other diseases and
affections of the Brain. If hysterical, it will wonderfully conduce against all
Suffocations or Fits of the Mother, raisings, Convulsions, and all other
irritations of this dangerous creature, living, as it were, and moving within
another. If it be stomachical, it will extremely conduce to hinder all
corruptions which are generated in the bottom of the Ventricle, whether
proceeding from the defect of digestion, by reason of the superfluity, or from
the vice and evil quality of nutriment; or occasioned by evil fermentation.
Finally, if the Liquor be impregnated with the virtue of an hepaticall Plant;
if it be true, that the Liver is the receptacle and source of the blood; it
shall be administered in all the diseases which are attributed to the vice and
defect of this entrail: but chiefly in g^owing D^opsies, and their very birth,
as even in those which are thought to be confirmed and grown. The Dosis of
these Liquors, and Tinctures truly Balsamical and friendly to our nature, is
from ss to i. and ij. according to the age and strength of those to whom they
are prescribed by the skilful Physician. Let us add nevertheless one advice
more, that those which shall p^epare these Liquors, may also preserve them long
without any alteration or diminution of their strength, virtue or efficacy:
which is done by mixing only iv. of Sugar in Powder, to lb i. of Liquor, if it
be to be used inwardly, iv. of Honey boiled with white and despumated Wine, if
to be used outwardly in Chirurgical Operations.

Of the Use and Virtue of the Q. E. of Plants.
THE Q. E. of Plants may be used in every thing, wherein we have said, that
their Liquors were useful. But there is that remarkable difference, that as
these noble Remedies are much purer and exalted, then the Liquors which are
more corporeal, so must also their dosis be very much lessened: so that what
was given by dragms, before this high degree of preparation, must be now only
given by drops: The dosis then is from iij. drops to xx. raising by degrees.
This Remedy may be taken in white Wine, Broth, decoction or some kind of Water,
which may serve as a vehicle to the Medicine, to render it more active and
penetrating by the subtility of its parts, even into the last digestions, to
expel the evil, obnoxious, and useless part thereof, restore decayed strength,
and finally bring Nature back again into his true path, to direct the health
and preservation of every individual subject.

But we will demonstrate, that it is not without reason Paracelsus speaks of
the Preparation of Quintessences in the Treatise by us above quoted, De
Renovatione and Restauratione. This great Philosopher concludes his Treatise by
the method of preparing Quintessences of four several sorts, viz. Quintessences
of Minerals; precious Stones; Plants and Liquors, which are Sulphurs and
Bitumens: he has not been contented with a Theorical Discourse of the
possibility of renewing and repairing our internal and external defects; but
has also added the practice and way of operation, upon several matters, to
extract the Quintessences thereof, and finally does conclude, by the manner of
using the same to attain renovation of nature. He says then, that it will
suffice, to put as much of this precious liquor in white Wine, as there will be
need to color it with a color near that of the remedy; and thereof give a
Glass every morning fasting to him, or her which shall feel a deficiency by
age, or infirmity of sickness. Moreover, he gives the signs of the beginning
and progress of this renewing, and the time when the use of this admirable
Medicine must be put by: for, he thought it unnecessary, to mention the signs
and observations which are to be heeded, when it is taken for some sensible and
apparent disease; since it necessarily follows, that the use thereof must be
continued, until the Patient finds alleviatior, or the disease falls away, and
then must cease consequently the use of the Remedy. But as for the signs of
renewing, he delivers them in a judicious order, as if he would prevent the
incredulity of those which know not the power nor sphere of activity of the
virtue and efficacy which God has placed in natural Beeings, when by the help
of Art they are reduced to their universal Principle without loss of their
seminal goodness: or to prevent also the astonishment of those which shall make
use of it, since what ordinarily happens, in the taking of this Remedy, causes
no little surprisal, when the person that uses these Remedies, sees in the
first place all his nails fall off from feet and hands, and next all the hair
of the body, and then the teeth; and last of all, the skin to shrink and
wrinckle, and drying insensibly to fall as all the rest, which are all the
signs he gives of internal renovation, by that which is performed outwardly:
For, it is as if he would insinuate, and give us to understand, that of all
necessity, the medicine must have penetrated through all the body, and
replenished it with new vigor, since the external parts which are insensible,
and as the excrements of our digestions fall of themselves without any pain:
But you must note, that he causes the use of the Remedy to be intermitted, when
the last sign, viz. the drying of the skin does appear, the wrinckles and the
falling thereof, because it is an universal sign, that the action of renewing
has sufficiently extended it self through the whole habit of the body, which
the skin generally covers over, and that so it was necessary, that this old
rind should fall, and another grow in the place, because the first was not
sufficiently porous, or permeable, to cause the natural heat which is renewed,
to drive outwardly all the supe^fluities of digestions, which are the
occasional internal and external causes of most sicknesses in the humane body.

I know this Remedy, and the renewing and restoring ve^tues which are
attributed to it, will pass for ridiculous amongst the vulgar sort of the
learned, and even amongst those that pretend to the mysteries of Physic;
partly, because Closet Philosophy is not capable to apprehend this great
Arcanum Naturae; partly, because they will not, for the most part, be convinced
by any proof or experimental demonstration. But I will, to convince them, bring
here two remarkable examples; the one drawn from what naturally happens every
year, by the renewing of some kind of creatures in one season of the year only;
the other from a true History of what happened to one of my best friends, which
took Quintessence of Balm Mint to a woman past the age of sixty, which took
some also; and finally, to a Hen which did eat Corn steeped in some drops of
the same Quintessence.

As for the first example, there is none but knows the renewing of the
Stags-head, as also the skin of Serpents and Vipers; without mentioning that of
the Bird, called by the Latins, Halcyo, or the Kings-Fisher, the History of
whom Paracelsus makes in the Tract beforementioned. But of all those which
agree in the fact, very few do know, or care to know how, and by what means, or
for what reason it is done. For first, as for the Serpents in general, it is to
be considered, they remain hid under ground, or in the holes of Trees and
Rocks, or lodged among rubbish and stones, from the end of Autumn, until very
far in the Spring, and so during that time, they are as benumbed and dead;
their skins become thick and hard, and loses even its porosity to preserve the
better the Animal whom it incompasses; for, if there happened a continual
transpiration, there would be also a deperdition of substance: now after the
Serpents are in the Spring of the year got out of their holes, and have begun
to feed, and live upon the tender ends of Herbs, in which is a renewing virtue:
this creature being immediately excited by a pricking and shooting which she
feels about the compass of the head, by reason of the Spirits heated and
actuated by this natural remedy, she rubs and bestirs herself, until she has
got off her old skin from about her head, which she continues to do all the
rest of the day, till she has cast away all her old garment; which was not
only needless, but want of porosity and transpirability might have suffocated
her. Then does she appear all glorious, and as it were renewed; which is
perceived not only by the difference between the slow and lazy motion of those
which are not renewed, from those which have cast their skins; whose motion is
so quick and nimble, that easily they escape our sight. And moreover, the skin
of the old ones is deformed, and of an earthly color; whereas the other, to
the contrary, is polisht, fair, shining and well colored. As for the Stags,
the casting of their head is done in another way, and for another reason then
that of the Serpents: for, that Creature does not hide it self in the ground;
nor renews not all its external parts, since he casts nothing off but his head
in the Spring: but the reason is his being, during Winter, deprived of
sufficient nourishment, and made unable to maintain this wonderful production
he bears upon the head since even he wants a due supply for his own subsistence
and life; then say the Huntsmen, that the Stag (by a Gallicism) is fallen into
poverty, which is perceived not only by his leanness and weakness, but chiefly
also by the head which becomes dry, spongious and destituted of sap, because
this Animal has not a sufficient vigor, to impart a spirituous and saline
nourishment to the head, by reason of its want of food, as we have said even
now; now, it is this nourishment, which gives strength, vigor, and sustenance
to the Stags head; for which reason, when in the Spring, a good and juicie
nourishment animates, and heats its body, it causes now vegetation in all its
parts, and consequently, and chiefly, in the head, which makes him to cast it
off. We shall say no more of this renovation, and of the virtue contained in
the new Stags-head, and that which is already grown to consistency and
perfection, because we have sufficiently made mention thereof in the Chemical
preparation of Animals and their parts.

But let us come now to the Experimental proof of Renovation begun by the use
of a Quintessence, by the relation of the History we have promised above, and
which happened thus. After one of my best friends had prepared a Quintessence
of Balm mixed, and that all the tokens and alterations which Paracelsus
requires, had succeeded according to his hopes, and the truth of the remedy, he
could not have a full and true satisfaction in his mind, unless he made the
proof of this great Arcanum; to be more fully and better persuaded of the
verity of the thing, and the delivery of the Author he had followed: and as he
knew that commonly experiments made upon other bodies will be defective, he
made it upon himself, and an old woman-servant he had by him, of about 70.
years of age, in the same house where he lived; and a Hen bred in the same
place. He then for about 15 days, took every day fasting, a glass of white
Wine colored with this Remedy; and the very first day, the nails of hands and
feet begun to separate themselves from the skin, without any grief or pain, and
so continued still casting, until they fell off themselves without help. I
confess unto you, that his constancy was not great enought, to go through all
his Experiment, and that he thought himself sufficiently convinced by this that
happened, without being obliged to try any further conclusions upon his own
person. Therefore he gave every morning some of this Wine to this old Woman;
who did drink not above 10. or 12. days, and before this time was expired, her
monthly courses came back with a laudable color, and broke out in a
considerable quantity, enough to fright her, and make her believe it would be
her death; not knowing she had took a remedy capable to renew her to youth;
upon which account also, my friend durst not proceed further, as much by reason
of the fear which had possessed the old Woman, as by reason of what had
happened unto him. Having then thus experimented the Effects of his Medicine,
both upon man and woman, he would know also, what operation it might have upon
other Creatures; and so steeping some few grains of Corn in the Wine
impregnated with the virtue of the Quintessence he gave them, for the space of
eight days to an old Hen by her self; and about the sixth day, she began to cast
her feathers by degrees, till at last she remained quite naked; but before the
fifteenth came about, she beg^n to recover new feathers, and having got them
again, they appeared fairer and better colored then before; her crest did rise
again, and she began to lay Eggs as before. Thus much I had to relate upon
this subject, whereof I draw the following consequences.

I believe, there is none of so perverted a reason and depraved intellectuals,
which does not easily conceive, that since Nature teaches us by all her
operations, that to maintain life in living bodies, with all the necessary
functions of the parts which constitute them, their porosity must be preserved;
so must of necessity Art, which is but imitator of Nature, do the same to
maintain and restore the health of Individuals, committed to her care and
custody. Whence I do infer consequently, that the Physician and Chemical
Artist, ought perpetually to endeavor, by the Anatomy which they make of
natural Mixts, to discover that subtle, volatile, penetrating and active part,
which is not corrosive, but to the contrary, friendly to our Nature, and may
only advance her birth or delivery without constraint: And, as I know that
there is nothing but the volatile sulphurous Salts, which may have the power
of acting in the manner we have said; so must they apply all their
understanding, to separate this amiable and friendly agent, and nevertheless
very efficacious, and untye it as it were from the commerce of the gross and
material body; if they will be the true imitators of Nature, which ever makes
use of this same agent, to conduct all animated bodies to the perfection of
their natural predestination, unless she be hindered by some occasional
external or internal cause, which ordinarily does interrupt the order,
oenonomy, and guidance of her secret motions, which preserves the lovely
harmony of all animated compounds. This Paracelsus has done, teaching us the
manner how to prepare Liquors and Quintessences: because, this operations
separates the subtle part from the gross; preserves and exalts the seminal
faculties of the compound, until it has rendered it capable to correct and
amend the defects of natural functions; that imitating the example of this
great searcher of Nature, and according to the Ideas by us given in this
Discourse, before we come to the particulars of the parts of Vegetables, and
all the operations to which they are liable by the processes of Chemistry; all
those that shall really addict themselves to these noble operations, may be
prevented with a general knowledge of their parts, whether gross or subtle,
and conducted also and regulated in their judgment and actions, according to
the notions and theorems we have imparted, which they may by the direction of
their intentions appropriate to each Vegetable in particular, that so the
Artist may satisfy the expectation others have of her, and himself also, to
the illustrating and innobling his Profession; and, that which must be his
principal end, to the preservation and restoration of his neighbors health.

Second Discourse of Syrups.
WE have sufficiently, in my opinion, insinuated the various nature of Plants,
and the difference of their parts, in the foregoing Discourse, to prepare the
mind of our Artist, to an acknowledgement of that truth we are now to declare,
in that which we now begin, to correct and reform; and, if it be possible, take
away the abuse and evil preparation, which the greatest part of Apothecaries do
practice, when they work upon Syrups, which are either plain or single, or
compounded: and are nothing else, but Sugar or Honey boiled to a certain liquid
consistency, either with distilled Waters or Juyces, or with decoctions also of
whole Plants, or of their own parts, as leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds and
roots. But, as we have taught above, the diverse nature of these parts, to be
taken notice of by the Artist when he intends to distill them; so do we refer
there also the Apothecary, which pretends to Chemistry to be instructed in the
way of his operation, when he intends to make his Syrups either single or
compounded. Nevertheless, as I know, that all Dispensatories are defective, and
commit the same faults in the preparation of their Syrups, and that but one
Hermetical Physician has attempted to correct them; I think my self obliged to
follow the example of Mr. Swelfer Physician to the Emperor, which has made
very learned Notes, upon all the defects of the ancient Pharmacy: but as he
writes in Latin, and does reason as an Hermetical Philosopher, I have thought
my self obliged to direct into the right way, those which either through want
of that language, or of skill in Chemistry, to apprehend the sense of so
learned an Author, do stride, and go out of it: Moreover to exhort those,
which are endowed with the Latin tongue, and have some persuasion of being
skilled in the Mysteries of Chemistry, not to bury their talent, but rather
improve it to the advancement and benefit of sick people, the discharge of
their conscience, and particular benefit.

We must notwithstanding set down here, some few examples of faults committed
heretofore in this part of practice, prove the Error, want of a true
apprehension of the things; and finally teach the way how to do better,
adjoining positive reasons, which may have their foundation in the thing it
self and the manner of working, and why that operation proves better, and is
more successful.

Before we come to the proof to which we have engaged our selves, it is
necessary we should show the scope both of ancient and modern Apothecaries in
the composition of their Syrups, either single or compounded, whereof they have
left us the descriptions in their Antidotaries and Dispensatories. All the true
sons of Art, have from all time held this Maxim; that in all Remedies three
conditions were required, viz. that they should be capable to operate quickly,
safely, and pleasantly, cito, tuto, jucunde: Moreover, another of their
endeavors was, that, what they did prepare, might preserve for some time its
own virtue within it self, to be used when opportunity should offer. Upon this
ground have they brought in Sugar and Honey, separated, or both together, in
the composition of their Syrups, and other Remedies of the like nature. So then
have they made use of these two Substances as of two Balsamic Salts, which
might be fit to receive and preserve the virtue of distilled waters: as that of
Rose Water in their Syrup, or Alexandrine Julip: that of the Juyces of Plants
or Fruits, as that of Wine, Vinegar, Juice of Quinces, Limons, Oranges,
Pomgranats, and many other, in those Syrups which they prescribed the
Apothecaries shops to be still furnished with: that of the infusions of Woods,
Roots, Seeds and Flowers, whereof they have made several prescriptions of
Syrups: And finally, that of Decoctions of great store of all these things mixed
together, as aromatic Substances, Flowers, mucilagenio^s Fruits, lacteous
Seeds, slimy and jellyed Roots, and those that abound with volarile S^lts,
whereof they have givenus the method to prepare compounded Syrups. But, as the
greatest part of those, who have pretended to will, and to be capable to teach
Apothecaries, their Art and modus faciendi, have been ignorant themselves in
the differences or distinguishing of their matter, and want of being vers't in
Chemical operations, have not known the several ways of extracting their
virtue without loss; so is it not to be admired, if Apothecaries who have
followed them, and every day yet follow them, are fallen into grosser Errors
then themselves, since for the most part they perform but very imperfectly what
they find in their Books.

Our refuge then must be to Chemical Physic, which shall prescribe us the
rules that from henceforth may hinder Physicians and Apothecaries, if they will
be guided by them to commit the like faults, and if they benefit themselves by
the examples and doctrine which we are about now to prescribe them, whereby
methodically to prepare the single and compounded Syrups, without losing any
pottion of that virtue which resides in volatile sulphurous Salt, and the mixed
Salt of Mixts prescribed by their Dispensatories.

We shall begin by plain Syrups, and that by degrees: and first, by those which
are compounded of juyces already depurated of themselves, or which may be
separated without fear, that fermentation should be obnoxious to them, such as
are acid juyces. Then will we treat of such Syrups, as are made with the juyces
extracted from Plants, and those of two natures; viz. Some destituted of odor,
and participating of a vitriolick tartarous taste; the other are odoriferous,
and participating of a volatile sulphurous Salt: these two sorts of Juyces
need a quick and nimble Eye, and much industry of the Artist in the separation
of their impurities, without any loss of their faculties and virtues, before
Syrups are made of it; which without the Precepts of Chemistry, an Apothecary
will never be able to perform, then will we end this matter, by demonstrating
the faults hitherto committed, in the preparation of Compounded Syrups, whereof
we will give some Examples, that all may be made more sensible and manifest, to
him that has a desire to improve his knowledge and skill in his Operation.

The manner of preparing the Syrup called Acetosus Simplex, or Syrup of
Vinegar, after the ancient and vulgar way.
lb v. of clarified Sugar, lb iiij. of spring water, and lb iij. good
White Wind Vinegar, boil all according to Art, into a Consistency of Syrup.

It seems at first sight that this Prescription is all full of ingenuity,
clear, and agreeable to the rules of Arr and Nature; but our Chemical examining
thereof, will make it appear, that there are more faults therein then words,
and that it is all full of absurdities, even unworthy of a Chemical Novice, and
so by consequent much more of so famous and renowned an Arabic Physician as
Mesue was, to whom the invention of this Syrup is attributed.

But before we come to note the imperfections of this process, we must declare
what virtues Mesue and his Sectators have attributed to this Syrup, and the
Oxymel Simplex, and for which Diseases he destinated it, because it will not
give a small light, to discover, how false and ill grounded are the indications
which they have taken, want of knowing well the nature of things, and being
versed in the Operations of Chemistry.

They attribute, and not without some ground and reason, to this Syrup, the
faculty and virtue of incising, attenuating, opening and mundifying; that of
refrigerating and tempering the heats proceeding from choler, that of resisting
to putrefaction and corruptions, and finally of expelling the Urine, and
provoking sweat. I confess all these virtues may possibly be in this Syrup,
when rightly prepared: but unless it be after our prescriptions declared
hereafter, it will possess those eminent and signal virtues.

I have taken the description of this Syrup from the Aupsburg Dispensatory, as
the most correct and exact we have at this day; for had I taken it out of
Banderon, or some other yet more ancient Author, I could show in it much
greater and less tolerable absurdity, than those I am now to demonstrate.
What, I beseech you, is there worse digested, than to prescribe to boil lb v.
Sugar, with lb iii. water, upon a fire of kindled and flaming Coals, and
skimming perpetually to the consumption of half the substance, without a
previous Clarification, and then to add iij. or iiij lb Vinegar, to reduce the
whole into a Syrup, since Vinegar does also participate of its impurities and
froth, and so puts the Artist to a new skimming. This is, notwithstanding, the
prescription of Baudero.

Others have not sped better with their clarified Sugar, and deserve no less
reprehension; for Experience it self does contradict what they pretend to: For,
this Axiom which says, Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora,
aeque been vel melius; shows evidently, that it is very ill done, to put lb
iiij. of Water, with the Sugar and Vinegar, to reduce them to Syrup; since,
besides that water is here altogether needless, I say even that for two reasons
it is absolutely prejudicial: The first, because the ebullition of this Water
causes a great loss of time, which a good Artist ought to value; the second,
and which is yet much more considerable, is, because the Water does in the
action of boiling too long, carry away in its steem, the most subtle, volatile,
and saline parts of the Vinegar, from which proceeds the incisive and aperitive
virtue, which is proper and specifical to this Syrup. For, I would fain know,
what lb iiij. of Water can avail to this Syrup, or what virtue communicate unto
the same: For, if it be answered, To advance the depuration of the Sugar, and
that it was the intention of Baudero: I will ask the reason also, why the
Dispensatory of Augsburg, does also prescribe the same lb iiij. of Water, since
it prescribes to take clarified Sugar; which makes me to conclude, that neither
the one nor the other had any reason for what they did. Therefore, those that
will prepare this Syrup as it should be, with all the virtues and faculties
necessary unto the same, to follow and answer the intention of Physicians, must
proceed after the following rule.

an earthen white Dish, or Jugg-mettle glased, which place upon a Kettle or
Cauldron of boiling water, which we will call a boiling B. M. put in this Dish
lb ij. fine Sugar in powder, upon which pour xviij. distilled Vinegar in a
glass Cucurbit rectified in B. M. to draw thereof all the waterishness or
phlegm, as we shall teach when we come to treat of Vinegar; stir the Sugar and
distilled Vinegar together with a Spatula or Glass-spoon, until all be
dissolved and reduced to a Syrup, which shall be of a just consistency, and
long-lasting, and possess all the virtues required in the acetous plain Syrup.
I leave now the Reader to his free choice and judgment, of making this Syrup
after the ancient or modern way, and I know that the knowing Artist, will ever
follow that reason and experience which guides him to operate citius, tutius,
et jucundius; that is to say, in the quickest, safest and pleasantest manner:
to show that Chemistry is, and ever shall be the fairest and best School of
Pharmacy. To conclude this examination, note in the way, that ix. of clear
Liquor by it self, or according to the prescriptions of Art, are sufficient to
reduce lb i. to a consistency of Syrup, by a simple dissolution in the heat of
the Vaporous Bath; that this may be as a general note, when we come to speak of
the other Syrups, either plain or compounded, hereafter.

The general method of making Syrups of Acid things, Fruits, as are those of
Juice of Lemmons, Oranges, Cherries, Pomgranates, Barberries, Quinces,
Gooseberries, Strawberries, Apples, etc.

WE have not much to note, upon the preparation of these Syrups, because the
vulgar Pharmacy does commit less faults in them; yet as there is some small
observations we account necessary to the instructing of our Chemical
Apothecary, we would not pass them by.

Take then of all these Fruits which you please, and thereof express the Juice
according to Art, and the nature of each in particular; with this precaution,
to make use of no Metallic Vessel to receive them; taking also great care to
separate the grains and seeds of these fruits, because some of them are better,
and other mucilagineous and slimy; and so would impart an ill taste to the
Juyces, or a sliminess and viscosity, which would be prejudicial to the
perfecting of the Syrup: And as for those Fruits which must be scraped, to
express the Juice thereof, you must have Scrapers of Silver, or Letton well
blanched and prepared; for, Iron does easily communicate its taste and color,
to the substance of any acid Fruit, as also Copper or Letton. All this being
exactly observed, let those Juyces, which of themselves are liquid, to
depurate, until they have deposited a sliminess, or a ground of certain
Corpuscles, which are to be separated by filtration. But as touching the Juyces
of such Fruits, which are of a soft, slow, and viscous substance, they must be
put in a cold place to settle, and, as it were, ferment a little, and then the
purest Liquor so clarified of it self, and swimming above the rest, let be
separated; because if you proceed otherwise, there will rather come a Jelly
then a Syrup.

After all these Juyces have duly been prepared in this manner, as we have now
deducted, they must be put in a Glass Cucurbit in B. M. and evaporated to the
consumption of p. or neither ought you to fear, that by this process any
portion of the sharpness of the Juice should be lost, since to the contrary it
will increase it; the acid or sharp quality remaining ever the last, and
nothing vapors away but the phlegm, or unnecessary waterishness, and moreover
this Operation will serve to separate the remainder of the feculencies abiding
in the Juice: For it is a thing worthy to be noted, that two hours of digestion
in B. M. will sooner depurate a Juice, then three days of insolation of the
same; and, that which is yet more remarkable, the Juyces so depurated will
seldom viny, and may be much longer preserved then others, without any
alteration: As for the preparation of the Syrup, you must follow the modus
faciendi, which we have heretofore prescribed to the Acetous Syrup, viz. ix. of
well prepared Juice, against lb j. of powedered Sugar, or the same quantity of
Sugar boiled into a solid Electuary or Rosat Sugar, dissolve them in the heat
of a Vaporous Bath, in Earthen glazed, or Glass Vessels, noting still, when you
work upon Acids, never to use Metal.

The manner of preparing Syrups of the Juyces of Plants, as well of those that
are deprived of smell, as Odoriferous; with the necessary Notes for their
Depuration.
THere are three kinds of Plants which offer themselves here to our
consideration, and by consequence three Examples to be propounded, to prepare
well the Syrups thereof, with the preservation of their proper and essential
virtue, which we will distribute into three Classes. The first shall be of
inodorous Juycy Plants, such as are the kinds of Sorrel, Chicory, or Endive,
Fumitory, Mercury, Purslane, Borage, Bugloss, Carduus B. and other of the like
nature. The second, shall be of those that are inodoriferous, and sometimes
also odoriferous, and whereof the Juice is filled with a Spirit and Volatile
Salt, very subtle, such as are Antiscorbutical Plants, as Cochlearia, Cresses,
the kinds of Water-parsley, Mustard, Alisander, or Bell-rags, and
Water-purstane, which is called also Beccabunga, or rather Beccapunga. The
third, shall be of such Plants as are odoriferous and juycy, such as are
Betony, Hyssop, Scordium, Smallage, Parsley, Eupatory, and others of the same
Category.

How the Juyces and Syrups of Plants of the First Classis shall be prepared.
TAke the Plant whereof you intend to extract the Juice, cut it small, and beat
it in a Marble or Stone-mortar, w^ing and express the Juice, with all the care
and necessary observations, which we have hinted in our discourse above, where
we treated of the distilled Waters of the same Plants, and after the Juice has
been well depurated in B. M. and a sufficient quantity of Phlegm or Water has
been extracted, as two parts from three by distillation; then to lib. 1. of
this Juice so depurated, mix lib. 1. ss. of Sugar, and boil it together to a
Consistency of Sugar. Rosat. Which decoct and reduce to a Syrup, with vi^or
vii.. of that water you have drawn out of the Juice by distillation in B. M. so
shall you have a Syrup endowed with all the virtues of the Plant; and when you
will prepare either Apozems or Juleps, you shall mix i. or ij. of either of
these Syrups, with iij. or iv. of its proper Water, which according to the
virtue and quality of the Plant, you shall fit to the purpose of the disease.
Nota, that these Juyces so depurated by distillation may be kept one or two
years without any corruption, because they are sufficiently filled with the
Nitrotartarous Salt of these Plants: but they must nevertheless be covered, or
filled up with Oil, to hinder the penetration of Air, which is the great
Alterator of all things; and that they must also be kept in a place, neither
too moist, nor too dry.

How the Juyces and Syrups of Plants of the second Classis shall be prepared.
THE Juyces of these Plants must be extracted with the same precautions we have
taught, when we spoke of the spirits of Plants, their distilled Waters and
their extracts, whereto we refer the Artist, to avoid needless and tedious
repetitions. But as I have already often said, that Antiscorbutical Plants were
composed of subtle parts, and had in themselves a saline Spirit, which is
volatile, mercurial, and sulphurous, which easily vanishes and flies away: so
must the Chemical Apothecary carefully and diligently work in their Preparation
after he has once begun, that by his carelessness he may not lose, what he
ought with diligence and study to preserve, and can no more be recovered when
once fled away. Here is then the only difference, between the preparation of
these Juyces and Syrups, and the foregoing. That when you distill them in B. M.
you must have a judicious regard, to set a part v. of the first Water which
will ascend out of every pound of Juice, because these v. shall have carried
away with themselves the portion of the Spirit and volatile Salt of i. Juice:
then continue your distillation, until you have drawn away the half of the
liquor or moisture of your Juice; then cease, and to lb i. of this Juice, put
lb i. ss. of Sugar boiled to a consistency of Sugar Rosat, and reduce it unto
Syrup, by a simple dissolution in cold, with vi. or vij. of the spirituous and
subtle Water which first ascended, and has been kept for this purpose; so
shall you have a Syrup filled with all the virtues of its Mixed, as easily it
will appear, and manifestly, by the odor and the taste: but principally, by all
the noble Effects it will produce in all Scorbutical diseases, whether you give
it single or mixed, with the second Water you have preserved. You may also
preserve these Juyces for service, when there shall be need in the time that
Plants are out of season and vigor, using such precaution and forecast as is
in such a case required.

How the Juyces and Syrups of Plants of the third Classis, shall be prepared.
WE will not here lose time with vain and empty repetitions, since it suffices
us to say, that the Artist must duly prepare his Juice, to ground his operation
upon, as we are now going to declare. When you have the Juice of any of these
odoriferous Plants, you must depurate it by a single and slow digestion in B.
M. to separate the feces and skum which swims on the top. This Juice being
percolated cold through a Flannel, lb iiij. thereof, and place it in a
Cucurbit, with a blind head over it, or in a double vessel exactly joined: put
in this juice lb i. ss. of the tops and flowers of the same Plant, not beaten
in the Mortar, but only cut very small with Cizzars; then close the Vessels,
and lute them with a bladder steept in beaten whites of Eggs, and place it 24
hours in a slow heat of B. M. After which take away the covering of the Vessel,
and apply to it a Head. Limbeck to extract out of this Juice impregnated with
the new virtue and efficacy of it Plants xx. of spirituous and very odoriferous
water, this ended, cease the fire, and express what remains in the bottom of
the Cucurbit, and preserve it for this following purpose: Put the xx of
odoriferous Water in a double Glass, or blind Head, to which you shall add x.
more, of the new tops of the Plant upon which you work; which lute and cause to
digest in the slow heat of B. M. during a natural day; then being let cool,
express it softly, that it may not grow thick or muddy, and keep it till you
have caused that which did remain with the grounds of your expression to boil,
and clarified it with white of Eggs, and boiled with lb iij. of Sugar, into
consistency of Lozenges, which you must melt in the cold, or only in lukewarm
water, with the twenty ounces of your odoriferous Water, containing the Mumial
and Balsamical virtue of the Plant; and thus shall you have a Syrup, in which
nothing of what should be in shall be wanting, to follow clearly the intention
of Art and Nature. But me thinks, I hear the most part of Apothecaries
alleging, that this is a way to lengthen the method of making Syrups, and
that no body will care for rewarding the trouble which they will be at, in this
exact way of operation: Moreover, that they must be obliged to be at the charge
of a Balneum Maris and Glass Vessels, which are necessary to digestion and
distillation, that these Vessels are brickle; and that, all things thus
considered and cast up together, the price of their remedies must then be set
at higher rates: and besides this, that others which are not so circumspect,
will give their Syrups at the common rates, and that people run most commonly
where they find things cheaper, without examining the worth or goodness of
them; and that this is the way to ruin their shops quickly, and lose
customers. To all these objections, which are not without some ground, we
answer, First, as concerning the Balneum Maris, it has no such matter to be
started at in it self, but the name, to such as know the nature thereof: for a
Kettle only may be made use of to all the purposes and necessary uses of their
shops. Secondly, Concerning the Vessels, What Artist is not obliged to be
provided with them for other distillations, if they will duly discharge their
Calling, or at least make a show thereof? And if they fear breaking, they may
have Cucurbits of Jugge-mettle, or white Earth for acid substances, and of
Copper tinned for other matters; but this will not be without some
inconveniency, in respect that they shall not be able to judge of the
depuration of the substances, nor the remaining quantity or consistency, where
these things are to be observed, by reason of the opacity of their Vessels. But
the last consideration is prevalent over all the rest; and that is, that every
one is obliged by the Oath he has taken in his admission to the Profession of
Pharmacy, to exercise it with all care and exactness,, and the discharge of his
Conscience. This last scope then must prevail over all the rest, and be instead
of a spur and bait of well doing: for thereby shall they find the
recommendation of Physicians; and their candor and assiduity being known, will
draw upon them the esteem and affections of such as do love the preservation of
their present, and restoring of their past health. Let us then go on in
discovering some more of the Errors of ancient Pharmacy, and being not
contented to prove they have done ill, let us show how they may do better. To
this end, we will deliver three examples more, of single Syrups, viz. of
odoriferous Flowers, of Rinds of the same nature, and of aromatical Substances:
That when Apothecaries shall prepare any Syrups of this kind, their shops may
not be smelt, at three or four hundred yards distance, which is an infallible
token of the deperdition of the Essential virtue of the Volatile and Sulphurous
parts of the Flowers, odoriferous Rinds, and aromatical Substances wrought
upon: unless these Apothecaries by a vain and preposterous policy, and very
prejudicial to the public and themselves, take a delight in having their
shops smelt from a far off. And as contra ies by the opposition of their
contraries are more illustrated; we shall first declare, how the fault is
committed, secondly, wherefore; to teach in the third place, and explain to the
understanding Reader how to do better.

The old process or manner of making Syrup of Orange Flowers.
. lb ss. of new Flowers of Orange: infuse them in lb ij. of clear and clean
warm Water, during 24 hours: after which make the expression thereof, then
reiterate the same infusion twice, with lb ss. of new Flowers at each time; the
expression and colature being done, boil xx. of this infusion in Syrup with lb
i. of very white Sugar. Nota here once for all, that the weight I understand
here, is not the Physicians weight, but the ordinary one of Merchants of vi. to
the lb. Before we show the deficiency of this prescription, we will relate the
virtues attributed to the Syrup proceeding from the same, that we may the
better make it plain who is in the wrong, who in the right. It is then
attributed to this Syrup, marvellously to recreate the Heart and Brain, to
restore Spirits, provoke Sweating; and to be consequently very sovereign
against malignant and pestilent diseases, because it drives the infection of
this venom from the center of the parts, where it lurketh to the circumference,
and makes the spots to appear. All which may be true, if the Syrup be made
according to due process. But the Physician is frustrated of these noble
Effects, by the evil and wrong preparation which we have just now quoted; since
nothing is left to the Syrup so prepared but an ungrateful bitterness, which
proceeds from its material and gross Salt, instead of that pleasant quickness
to the taste it ought to have; and that subtle and delicate steem which is
discerned by the Smell: which is properly a token, that this Syrup is not
deprived of its volatile sulphurous Salt, in which are placed all the virtues
required and hoped from it. But the coction of this Syrup which cannot be
performed without boiling, carries away all that subtle virtue which occasions
it, not to answer the indications of the learned and experimented Physician,
and much less the hope of the Patient.

The Chemical and genuine Preparation of Orange-Flower Syrup.
lb. i. ss. Orange-Flowers, gathered a little after the rising of the Sun,
place them in a Glass Cucurbit, and besprinkle with ij. of good white Wine, and
as much excellent Rose Water, cover the Vessel with its head Limbeck, exactly
luted in the Joints, and being placed in B M. draw off from it, by distillation
made with graduate fire, viij. of Spirit of spirituous Water, which will be
very odoriferous and subtle, which keep by it self: then continue the fire,
and draw a second Water, until your Flowers be almost dry, then cease the fire,
and boil your remaining Flowers in lb ij. of common Water, to the consumption
of lb j. Express this decoction filled and impregnated with the extract and
fixed Salt of the Flowers, clarify it with white of Eggs, and boil it to a
consistency of Sugar Rosat with lib. j. of Sugar, which you shall dissolve
afterward with viij. of the spirituous Water, and that in the cold: and you
shall have the true Syrup of Orange-Flowers, truly impregnated with all their
virtue. The second Water extracted will serve for a Cordial and Alexiterial
Water, to mix with the Syrup, when the Physician shall prescribe it. And this
Preparation may serve as a model, to prepare the Syrups of other Flowers, which
are, or come nere to the nature of Orange-Flowers. We follow now, to give an
example of the Syrup of odoriferous Rinds, and we take for our example that of
Limon.

The old way of Preparing Syrup of Limons.
lb j. of the outward Rind of new Limons, ij. of grains of Scarlet or Kermes,
and lb v. of common Water; boil all together to the consumption of two p.
Strain it, and add lb i. of Sugar, which reduce to the just consistency of a
Syrup. Which aromatize with iv. grains of Musk. This is their manner of
prescribing and operating, altogether unworthy of a true and good Physician, as
we shall make appear by the virtues which they attribute to this Syrup, and by
their ingenuous confession, that the good sent is altogether necessary to
elevate it, and make it attain to that high degree of virtues which are by them
attributed unto it, and are these; to strengthen the Stomach and Heart, to
repel and correct putrid and corrupt humors of the Ventricle, to take away ill
breath, to resist venomous and pestilential diseases, prevent or remedy the
bearing and palpitation of the Heart, and dissipate sadness and melancholy. All
these virtues are proper and essential to the volatile sulphurous Salt of
Limon Rind, as most worthily does witness its odor and pleasant taste.

But let us see, how these pretended Masters imagine they can introduce and
preserve this taste and smell in the Syrup which we speak of, or in a Julep of
Sugar and Water, boiled together to a consistency of Syrup. They prescribe to
put in the one or the other, a judicious quantity of the external Rind of
Limon, without saying, whether it shall be done in cold or warmth; since, if
they should even have this foresight, it would be to little purpose: for, if
the Rind be put in warmth, the smell and volatile Spirit will immediately
vanish away, and there shall remain but an odor and taste of Turpentine; if in
cold, the viscosity and clamminess of the Syrup, loaded with the bitterness and
extract of the Rind, shall not be able to receive, nor be capable to extract
that virtue which is pretended to be introduced in it, though very subtle of
it self. They had nevertheless done much better, if they had prescribed to the
Apothecary, to express with his fingers from the Rind, the oleagineous part
hidden in it, and impregnate therewith a quantity of Sugar very fine and finely
powdered; until it begins to melt, and so to end the dissolution of this Sugar
with a little juice of Limons well filtrated; and thus aromatize their Syrup
already boiled with this pleasant and odoriferous Liquor. But this manner of
Preparation is not yet worthy an ingenuous Artist or Chemical Apothecary. He
shall then proceed herein after the following manner.

The manner of preparing artificially the Syrup of Limon-Rind.
lb ss. of the external thin Rind of new Limons; cut it very small with a Knife
or Cizzars; and being placed in a Glass Cucurbite, besprinkle it with lb i. ss.
of good white Wine, or, that which will be much better, in as much Malmesy or
good Spanish Wine; keep it a while in digestion, and then extract by
distillation, with those precautions we have already declared, x. or xij. of
Spirituous Water, or a very subtle or odoriferous Spirit, without any other
addition, if it be for Women, by reason of the Mother, which can neither endure
the odor of Musk, nor that of Amber. But if it be for men or women not
obnoxious to hysterical passions, put into the nose of the Limbeck you employ
for this distillation, a knot of Silk-cloth, wherein is tied ss. of grain of
Kermes not too old nor Worm-eaten, viij. grains Ambergriece, and iv. grains of
Musk: and so the first vapors which are very subtle, penetrating and
dissolving, being condensed in Liquor which shall distill by this Nose, shall
carry along with them the tincture, odor and virtue of these three Substances,
and so impregnate and perfume all the rest. This done, put iij. more of Limon
Rind, very superficial, thinly pared, and subtle, and very small shred to
digest in cold in the spirituous water which you first drew: run without
expression this maceration through a Linen clean and fine, and preserve it in
a Vial well stopped, till you have boiled in lib. ij. of common Water the Rind
which you had left from the distillation, and that of the expression also,
until the Liquor be reduced to half, which then strain clarify, and boil to a
Sugar Rosat, with lib. i. of very white Sugar, which afterward you are to
decoct in a consistency of Syrup, with the requisite quantity of spirituous
essensified Water. This Syrup must be preserved carefully, because it is as
useful in time of health as of sickness: for a spoonful of this Syrup mixed with
white Wine, or Sugar and Water, composes a kind of pleasant and odoriferous
Limonado; and those that will make this drink more acceptable, giving it a
sharp pleasant quickness, may join to it the juice of Limon, or some drop of
Spirit of Sulphur or of Vitriol, if it be in sickness, and that not without the
prescription of a Physician. From the example of this Syrup, may be drawn the
manner of making also that of Orange, nor less useful then the so e-going, and
chiefly for women; and those that are subject to Indigestions and Cholicks. We
come now to the third example of our Aromatical Substances.

The vulgar Preparation of Syrup of Cinnamon.
ij. ss. of fine and subtle Cinnamon. i. e. of a penetrating and biting taste,
make it into gross Powder, and digest it with lib. ij. of good Cinnamon Water,
by the space of 24 hours in a Glass Cucurbite in a warm place; the Vessel being
so well stopped, that nothing may transpire; then strain and express it, and put
again ij. ss. more of new Cinnamon in infusion, as long as the first, which keep
also; and thus continue and reiterate the same operation four times; keep this
infusion impregnated with the virtues of the Cinnamon by it self; then take the
Cinnamon remaining after the expressions, and infuse upon it lib. i. of Malmsey,
or some other Wine strong and generous; then extract all the Liquor by a strong
expression, and join it to the preceding infusion, with ij. of very odoriferous
Rose Water, and lib. i. of Sugar, and boil them together in a well covered Pot,
to the consistency of a Syrup.

I know there is none so little acquainted with Cinnamon and the parts which
administer and contain its virtue, as also of other Aromatical Substances, but
chiefly, that of Cloves; who does not admire, and pity this ridiculous and
simple description, of one of the noblest and most excellent Syrups which an
Apothecary can prepare or keep his shop furnished with, and which all the
Authors of it do destinate to the refreshment and repairing of vital Spirits;
to retrive the vital heat, and restore it to the Heart and Stomach, when driven
away from it by some mortal cold; correcting also the ill breath of the Mouth,
and the corruption of the Ventricle; to help digestion; and finally, to repair
and preserve all the strength of the body. I know, I say, that none never so
little verst in the Art of distilling, and extracting the ethereal substance
of aromatical bodies, but particularly of Cinnamon, cannot, but have an aversion
to so defective a prescription, taken from a Dispensatory wherein so many grave
Doctors have had a hand. All the virtues attributed to the Syrup of Cinnamon are
real and true, provided they be preserved: But let us, I beseech you, examine a
little, with what fine and judicious precaution, the Authors of this
prescription have labored to do it. They ordain to the Apothecary to boil this
Syrup in an earthen Pot exactly stopped; but consider, that at the same time
they prescribe the stopping of the Vessel, they would have the contained matter
to be boiled to a consistency of Syrup, which cannot be done, but by the slow
evaporation of the superfluous liquor, or by its ebullition. If then the cover
of the Pot has an edge inlaid in the other, and so just and exactly fitted and
shut up, and the Joints so well luted, that nothing can transpire, the Artist
or Apothecary shall never attain their end, which is to make a Syrup, according
as they are prescribed to do, since there will be a perpetual circulation of
vapors from the bottom to the top; for what shall rise from the bottom shall
condense in the top of the cover, and thence fall back again, without any hopes
to attain this way to the conslency of a Syrup. There must then of necessity be
some exspiration, and even some ebullition, to consume lb ij. ss of superfluous
and super-abounding liquor, whereby to give a body and consistency to the
Syrup. Now, would it not be a very great damage, and a considerable loss, to
let evaporate and fly away in the Air lb ij. ss. and more of a spirituous
Water, of a very fragrant smell, very pleasant taste and great efficacy. Yet
these erroneous processes and operations can only be corrected by the help of
Chemistry, since it is by her means we come to know, that Cinnamon possesses in
it self, as all other aromatical bodies, a volatile sulphurous Salt, so
subtle, that the least heat is capable to extract it and drive it away, if the
Artist does not observe to stop with a great exactness, as he ought to do, not
only the joints of the Limbeck, but also of the nose wherein it joins with the
mouth of the Recipient, otherwise he shall lose the most subtle and
efficacious part of the saline Spirit of the Cinnamon, accompanied with that of
the Malmsey, or whatsoever other Wine, the Artist does make use of.

Let us now prosecute to demonstrate the extreme impertinency of this
description, by adding ij. of good Rose Water upon x. of Cinnamon, and lib. ij.
of good Water of Cinnamon, and lib. i. of Malmsey; and that which is yet more
ridiculous, is, that the odor of this Water must vanish away with the subtle
and volatile part of the other. But it may be objected to this, That Sugar,
which is a vegetable Salt, of a median nature between fix and volatile, shall
be capable to fix and detain by it self the volatile Salt of Cinnamon; and so
without reason do we inveigh against this Syrup, since this uniting mean is
capable to preserve the virtue of what enters in its composition. But though,
this argument seem to be full of strength, and even has very much in it, we
will nevertheless illustrate the truth without destroying the same, and that by
the following distinction. We do then distinguish between warm Sugar, and
between Sugar cold; for we confess indeed, that Sugar reduced to a subtle
Powder, is capable to receive in it self the ethereal Oils of aromatical
Substances, and also all other distilled Oils, that it is even capable to unite
them, and mix them indivisibly with the Spirits and Waters, which is none of
the least secrets of Chemistry: But we absolutely deny this union and mixture
to be possible in warmth, even in the least heat; and so much less by
consequent in that heat which is requisite to the boiling of a Syrup, where it
is necessary to evaporate above lib. ij. of superfluous liquor. The intention
we had to elucidate truth more and more, has obliged us to deduce this matter
so much to the full, and to show evidently the absolute necessity of the
intervention of Chemistry, which is the fittest Mistress to teach how truly to
operate in all the Preparations of Pharmacy.

The Preparation of Syrup of Cinnamon according to the Precepts and
Prescriptions of Chemistry.
THis Syrup may serve for a pattern and rule to make all other. Syrups of
aromatical bodies, of which it would be needless to give the particular
prescriptions, since this may be instar omnium.

x. of very good Cinnamon cut very small, and put in a Glass Cucurbite, upon
which pour lb iij. of good Malmsey or Spanish Wine, or some other kind of
generous and spirited Wine, and lb i. of very good Rose Water, cover the
Cucurbite with its Glass Body, the joints being exactly luted, put it in B. M.
and adaptate thereto a Receiver, which you shall lute to the Nose of the
Limbeck very exactly; give first a gentle fire of digestion the space of 12.
hours; then increase, till the distilling drops follow close one the other,
heeding nevertheless, that the Head of the Limbeck should not grow too hot: but
may be so, as the hand may endure it. Continue thus until the Cinnamon in the
bottom appears dry; the cease, and put by the Cinnamon. Reiterate your operation
with like quantity of fresh Cinnamon, pouring upon it the Water first extracted,
and distill as you did at first, reiterate it until the third time; and having
ended, put your Water in a Bottle well stopped with waxed Cork, and cover it with
a wet Bladder, lest that it should lose and exhale away the best and subtilest
part of its virtue. Then take afterward all the remaining Cinnamon, put it in a
Cucurbite, and pour upon lb iiij. of common Water; cover it with its Head;
lute, and distill in Sand, and draw off lb i. ss. that in case any volatile and
virtual substance should remain in the Cinnamon, it may be drawn off again
without loss: This last Water shall serve in the Laboratory for the last lotion
of Magisteries and Precipitates, as also for the extraction of some Tinctures.
Strain and express all the liquor impregnated with the extract and fixed Salt
of the Cinnamon, clarify, and then boil to the consistency of Lozenges, with lb
ij. of refined Sugar, which you must dissolve in cold, with lb i. of the
spirituous Water before received: This Syrup must immediately be put in a well
stopped Bottle, that what you have preserved with so much labor, smay not be
lost. It is a treasure and present remedy in all weakneses: but chiefly, in
long and difficult travels of Women, where their strength is exhausted, and
they consequently deprived of the best part of their Spirits and natural heat:
and as there is no Vegetable that possesses more of Spirits then Cinnamon, and
principally, being animated with the Spirits of Wine, all that virtue is found
concentrated in this Syrup by an admirable harmony, so, that is capable to
produce all the effects we have attributed unto it. The Dosis is from one half
to one and two spoonfuls. They that shall desire to make this Syrup yet more
excellent, must put in the mouth of the Limbeck i. of Ambergrice mixed with i.
of true wood of Aloes reduced to Powder, and shall distill over again lb ss. of
their best Cinnamon Water, whereof they shall make the Syrup which will be much
more efficacious.

We will end this Discourse concerning Syrups, by the notes and observations we
shall make upon compounded Syrups: because that as they are destinated to
several ends, so are they compounded with different matters, which do require a
different manner and way of preparation. But before we enter into our matter,
we must say something that may affect the mind of the Reader, and open his
understanding, whereby we may also instruct those that apply themselves to the
study of the noblest Pharmacy. And to begin, I will say: that Natural
Philosophers, which are the soundest Judges of things, do assure us, that all
whatsoever receives, does receive according to its proper way of receiving
Secundum modum recipientis; and not according to the way of the thing received,
Secundum modum recepti, which is to introduce some new quality in the
Recipient. If this Phylosophical Axiom is true in it self, as no body of sound
judgment can doubt of it; it will chiefly appear to be so, and we will make it
evident herein. Because no Apothecary can make a compounded Syrup, without
extracting before hand the virtue and tinctures of the several ingredients
which are to be received into the liquor, which is that which commonly Chemists
do call their Menstruum: Now of whatsoever quality or nature that Menstruum be,
it cannot take upon it self, nor be impregnated with the Tincture or Essence of
any Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral whatsoever, but according to its own way or
capacity of receiving, which cannot be otherwise disposed then by the weight of
Nature, which is nothing else but the capacity, and sufficient quantity of the
most subtle matter of the extracted body, whereof the Menstruum is
impregnated; and when it is thus filled and satiated within, either cold or
warm, all the power of Art cannot make it to take up more; because, as we have
said, he is laden according to the weight of Nature, which cannot be
transgressed, unless with a design to lose all, or frustrate the operation:
for, Est modus in rebus, sunt certi deni que fines:
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.


For example. Take iv. of ordinary Salt, dissolve them in viij. of common Water
warm, and you shall see the Water to take up but iij. of the Salt, and leave
behind the fourth, and though you never boil or agitate so much the Water with
the Salt, yet it shall not be capable to receive more; because if it appears
dissolved in the heat, it sinks nevertheless afterward to the bottom, and
coagulates when the water is grown cold. But to prove more evidently, that the
Water is naturally and sufficiently loaded; take a competent quantity of this
Water so impregnated with Salt, that an Egg may swim in it, whereby you may
immediately know, whether the Water is loaded according to the weight of
Nature; for if it has as much as it can be capable to receive, the Egg will
swim above the Water; but, if it be not sufficiently laden or impregnated, the
Egg will immediarely sink to the bottom; because the Water is not sufficiently
filled with the dissolved body of the Salt to hinder the sinking of that of the
Egg. Another proof and experiment thereof, is made in the boiling of Hydromel
or Mead; for, when the Water is not yet sufficiently loaded with the small
bodies of Honey, the Egg will never swim above the Water; but to the contrary,
will immediately sink to the bottom: but, when by reiterated experiments, you
are come to bring the Egg to swim above Water, it is then a true sign of the
sufficient boiling of the Mead, and that the Water is as much impregnated with
Honey as it can bear, to have a pleasant and vinous drink thereof, after due
fermentation; whereas if it be more loaded, the drink will prove clammy and
cleaving to the lips, by reason of the over-abundance of Honey; and if it be
not enough, then it is defective, and wants its sufficiency of the body of
Honey, to give it the taste and strength it ought to have; because the Spirits
of Honey, which cause its goodness, are in too small a quantity to cause due
fermentation. We say the same thing of Spirit of Wine, Aqua-vitae, plain and
distilled Vinegar, corrosive Spirits of Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, or Copparis, all
Strong Water generally, Liquors or Menstrua's, which are capable to extract or
dissolve any Body, Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral. For example, put Coral
grossly powdered in a Mattress, and pour upon distilled Vinegar, by degrees, to
the height of three or four fingers, you shall immediately perceive its action,
and hear a certain noise in its ebullition, which causes the dissolution of the
body of Coral; but when this ebullition and noise is ceased, filtrate the
liquor which swims above, and put it upon new Coral in Powder, and you shall
perceive no more action or noise; which evidently proves that liquor to be
satiated with the body received, and incapable to admit any more; Take also
Water, Aqua-vitae, or Spirit of Wine, and put upon Saffron, until it be exhaled
to a very high color; then take afterward new Saffron, and pour this tincture
upon it, and you shall perceive, that this will extract no more, and that your
Saffron will remain of the same color as when you did put it in at first.

It happens so to all Vegetable Bodies entering in the preparation of compounded
Syrups, as Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds and Roots. All these bodies have a
Salt in themselves, which though of a different nature, does notwithstanding
load or impregnate of its substance more or less Clammy, the Menstruum, which
the Apothecary does use, according to the Dispensatory from whence he has his
direction, proportionally to the weight of Nature; and when this Menstruum is
once impregnated, with the virtue or essence of any of these things, to the
concurrence and proportion of the weight of Nature, it is impossible it should
attract to it self the tincture or, virtue of other bodies added to it
afterward, without some deperdition and loss: for the nature of these bodies
will be either fixed or volatile; if fixed, the Menstruum is already loaded with
some thing of like nature, and so this body shall never communicate its virtue
to the decoction of the Syrup already sufficiently loaded: but, if the virtue
of this body be volatile, it will needlessly evaporate during the ebullition of
the superfluous liquor in the concocting of the Syrup.

All what we have said here above, may sufficiently show the necessity of
delivering our promised notes upon the compounded Syrups, and the examples of
the dividing the matters which enter into the composition of these Syrups, to
extract their essence and virtue, according to the several nature which is in
them, whether it resides in the fixed part, or be found in the volatile.

We shall then make use of the example of six kinds of Syrups, having six
several uses, and consequently, compounded of different substances, and
extracted with different Menstruums, to demonstrate the better the truth of all
the possible means. These Syrups are; first, a Stomachal one, which is the
compounded Syrup of Wormwood. Secondly, an aperitive Syrup, which is the
acetous, or compounded Syrup of Vinegar. The third is, an hysterical Syrup, or
good for the Mother, which is the compounded Syrup of Mugwort. The fourth, a
cholagogick and hepatical Syrup, which is the compounded Syrup of Endive or
Chicory, with Rhubarb. The fifth is, a thoracical or pectoral Syrup, dedicated
to the diseases of the Breast, which is that of Hysop. The sixth is, a purgative
and phlegmagogical Syrup, which is the Syrup of Carthamie, or Bastard Saffron.
We shall first deliver them according to the ancient dispensations, and then
shall make our notes thereupon of their imperfection: after which shall follow
our prescpition for preparing after the modern way, i. e. Chymically and
without defects.

The old way of preparing the compounded Syrup of Wormwood.
lb. ss. of Absynthium Ponticum, or Romanum, ij. of red Roses, ij. of Indian
Nard. Put it in maceration reduced to a gross Powder, in an earthen Vessel
glazed, the space of 24 hours, with good old Claret Wine, and well depurated
Juice of Quinces, ana lb iij. iv. After this, let all boil and percolate; and
thereof with lb ij. of Sugar, make a Syrup according to Art.

This Syrup is none of the least in an Apothecaries shop, provided it be well
and duly prepared: for it is compounded of such things as may produce those
effects attributed unto it by Authors, provided that by a gross and
unpardonable ignorance, that which does constitute its virtue be not lost: such
as are the Spirit of the Claret Wine, the volatile, odoriferous, and subtle
essence of the Wormwood, Roses, and Indian Nard. But we have already
sufficiently said before, the reasons, why this common Preparation was
erroneous, when we discoursed concerning plain Syrups; wherefore we will
content our selves, only to say, that no body can boil to a consistency the
infusion of this Syrup with lib. ij. of Sugar, unless you evaporate first by
coction and ebullition lib. 5. and more of the superfluous liquor, which cannot
be done without the loss of the Spirit of Wine, and the volatile Sulphurous
Salt of the ingredients, and so there shall remain only the sharpness of the
Juice of Quinces, and the gross and material of this Remedy, and the manner of
well operating without any loss of the best substance.

How the compounded Syrup of Wormwood must rightly be prepared.
vi. of new Wormwood, iij. of Mint, i. Galanga, ij. Calamus aromat. i. ss.
red-Roses, and ss. Indian Nard, which shred very small, and put in a Glass
Cucurbite with lb iiij. of good Claret Wine; put all in B. M. with the
requisite pre-cautions to the work and distillation, and after 24. hours
infusion, extract xviij, of spirituous and odoriferous water, which put in a
double Vessel, or blind Head, and add to it ij. ss. more of the tops of
Wormwood, ij. of Cloves, and ss. of Nutmeg, and ij. of select Mastick, all
reduced to subtle Powder; and after two days infusion in a vaporous bath,
strain it in the cold, and filtrate the liquor, which you shall keep in a Vial,
until you have boiled the remainder of your distillation and expression in a
glazed Pot of Earth, to the consumption of half, which clarify, and boil
afterward to the consistency of Lozenges, to dissolve again in Syrup with the
essensified water of the stomachal virtue of Wormwood and Aromatical
Substances. If you will ^ender it more active yet, and ready to answer your
indications, add to it Spirit of Vitriol, or of Salt, until it has acquired a
pleasant sharpness, much better then that which might have been left from the
juice of Quinces, after so long unnecessary an ebullition.

The ancient way of preparing your acetous Syrup, or the compounded Syrup of
Vinegar.
Roots of Fennel, Smallage and endive, or Chicory ana iij. of the Seeds of the
same ana i. except Endive ss. boil all, shred and reduce it to a gross Powder
in lb x. of Spring Water with a slow fire, to the consumption of one half, then
in an Earthen Vessel glazed; reduce it to a Syrup with lb iij. of Sugar and lb
ij. of very strong Vinegar: We have the same reasons to take and note the
Errors, whereof was spoken above: For, who cannot (I beseech you) perceive the
gross and plain absurdities herein obvious, to boil Seeds and Roots, compounded
of Volatile and subtle parts, with a slow fire, and lb x. of water: and
moreover, to join two pound of Vinegar to lb v. of liquor, to destroy the most
penetrative and active part of it, and upon whom depends all the incisive and
aperitive virtue of this Syrup. Let us not grow tedious nevertheless, in
repeating so often the same lesson: but show the way and means how to do
better, since we have sufficiently explicated this matter here above in our
preceding Notes upon the plain acetous Syrup.

The Chemical Preparation of the compounded acetous Syrup.
Roots of Smallage, Chicory or Endive ana iij. Seeds of Anis, Fennel and
Smallage ana i. Endive ss. beat the Seeds grossly, and shred the Roots very
small, then put in a Glass Cucurbite and pour upon it lb ij. of distilled
Vinegar well dephlegmated; distill it all in B. M. until you have drawn off all
the Vinegar, and the substances be dry in the bottom; keep in a Vial the
distilled Vinegar, which is impregnated with the volatile Salt of the Roots and
Seeds, which communicate unto it its chief virtue of opening obstructions: draw
off the remainder from the Cucurbite, and make it boil in lb iij. of common
water, until a third part remains, which clarify, and boil to the consistency
of Lozenges, with lb iij. refined Sugar: to dislolve afterward in the
lukewarm heat of the Bath, to a consistency of Syrup, with the Vinegar you had
before drawn off by distillation. This Syrup is excellent for clensing of the
Ventricle in pituitous bodies, which for the most part is stuffed with slimy and
mucilagionous substances, which spread over the internal tunicles, and hinder
the digestion of meats and stomach, and are the occasional causes of bastard
Fevers: it is also very good to open obstructions of the Reins or Kidneys,
Liver, and Spleen, by reason of the subulity of the Tartar volatilized, in the
distilled Vinegar, assisted with the subtle and penetrating virtue of the
Volatile Salt of the Roots and S^eds.

The ancient way of preparing the Syrup of Mugwort.
THE Preparation of this Syrup is ordinarily prescribed as a Masterpiece for
young Apothecasies to make trial of their skill: I believe nevertheless, more
to try their skill and abilities in the knowledge of Plants, than preparing the
Syrup with a true preservation of the virtue of its ingredients, which are
indeed capable of producing noble effects, since it is, composed of Herbs,
Roots, Seeds, and aromatical Substances, all-concurring to the same end; and
all specifical remedies of the Mother, and fit to remove the suppression of
Months, and cleanse, and as it were sweep the Womb of all the filth wherewith
it might be infected, and free it from the pains which winds will sometimes
cause in this part, which for the most part irritate it even to Convulsions,
Suffocations, and Lipothymies.

But all this shall never be performed, unless, by the help of Chemistry, all
the subtle and penetrative virtue, which enters into this Syrup, be duly
preserved.

The Description of the said Syrup.
M. ij. Mugwort, after it is overgrown and yet in flower; Penyroyal, Calamint,
Origan, Balm-Mint, Dittany of Creet, Persicary, Savin, Marjerom, Chamaedry, St.
John's Wort, Chamaepytis or Ground Pine, Feverfew with its flower, small
Centaury, Rhue, Betony, Bugloss, ana M. i. Fennel roots, Knee-holm, Parsley, as
Asparagus, Smallage, Pimpernel, Woodbind, Cyperus aromaticus, Madder, Iris, and
Paeony ana i. Juniper Berries, seeds of Lovage-Parsley, Smallage, Anis, Hi^h,
wild Spikenard, Sneesing-wort, or Pepper-wort, Valerian, Costus amarus, Carpo
Balsamum, C^bebs or Cardamom, aromatical Cassia Lignea, and Calamus, of all ana
ss shred the Herbs and recent Roots, and reduce to gross Powder all the dry
substances, and infuse and macerate 24 hours in pure water; then boil and
evaporate to the consumption of the whole half, and removing the Vessel from
the fire, when the decoction is grown lukewarm, rub and handle the substances
with your hands; and having made an exact straining of all, boil it to a
consistency of Syrup with lb iiij. Sugar. Nota, That the prescription runs,
iteratively, that before the decoction be boiled with Sugar, it may very
exactly and cleanly be strained and strained again, or that otherwise the Syrup
will gather a Mother, and easily lose its clearness and color; because they
pretend not to clarify it, lest the white of Eggs should attract all the
virtue of the decoction to themselves: and moreover, do ordain to put in the
aromatical substances only toward the end of the ebullition, that the virtue
of these volatile substances should not deperish by too long a coction. By
which it appears, that these men only fail in their operations, for want of
having been initiated in the Mysteries of Chemistry, whereby they should have
been taught to reason with more judgment, and work with more circumspection.
But let us come to the examination of this Preparation, and necessary notes for
the instruction of the Chemical Apothecary; and only with three we shall
sufficiently give to understand the impertinency of their proceeding: And first
of all, To what conduces, I beseech you, that friction, and handling of the
species, since they must be pressed, to extract by this violence all the liquor
whereof they are imbibed and impregnated? To what purpose again this duplicated
and triplicated colature? Since it shall never be able to purify the
decoction, and that it is absolutely necessary to clarify it with whites of
Eggs, to prepare therewith a Syrup, which may be pleasant to the sight and
taste. The second ever is, that they will have the aromatical substances to be
put in only toward the latter end of the decoction; lest, say they, their
virtue which does consist in very subtle parts should vapor away; not
considering, that although the decoction might have received some virtue from
the aromatical substances, no ebullition of them being previous, yet this
virtue must vanish away, when this same decoction shall be boiled with Sugar,
and so their precaution is both unjudicious and ignorant: But as for the third,
is it, that nothing else but the aromatical substances are to be heeded ^n the
preparation of this Syrup? Since all the Plants, all the Fruits, all the Roots
and all the Seeds which enter into its composition are aromatical and
odoriferous, and consequently filled with a Salt Spirit, and Sulphur very
subtle; which is no less to be preserved then the virtue of the said
aromatical substances, since these principles only give efficacy and power to
the Syrup, to appease, as they pretend, all the irritations and exorbitancies
of the Mother. It is not necessary, we should deliver a particular method o^
preparing this Syrup according to Chemical directions, since we have enough
taught and repeated the manner of doing it, in the others which we have before
described, and chiefly, where we spoke of the compounded acetous Syrup: Those
that shall prepare this Syrup, with those precautions and Chemical method which
we have before insinuated, may boast they have made a Masterpiece of Pharmacy:
Since it does not suffice to know the Ingredients, and make thereof a pompous
show; to neglect afterward the preserving of the virtue of those things which
enter into its composition, whereof for the most part, a great show is made
before the Master Apothecaries.

The vulgar preparation of the Syrup of Chicory with Rhubarb.
Physicians do make use of this Syrup for a very solid reason, since it has
its ground and foundation in the nature of the thing, and the experiency of its
virtues: for, nothing comes in the composition of this Syrup, which may not
very well second their good intentions, and produce the good effects by them
wished for and desired; provided it be made with the depurated juice of the
Plants which do compose it; which by their bitter taste give a sufficient
testimony of the essential Nitro-tartarous Salt abounding in them, which is
both aperitive and diuretic; moreover, the aperitive Roots possess in
themselves a Salt which is analogous to that of Plants; but, that which does
constitute its chief virtue is the Rhubarb, which is the root of one of the
kinds of Lapathum, containing in it self a volatile, subtle and very
efficacious Salt, a Balsamic and Conservative Sulphur of the faculties of the
Stomach: which is proved by its taste and tingent color, which not only
communicates it self to Excrements and Urin when well conditionated, but even
carries the penetration of its tincture to the Eyes and the Nails. It would
then be a very great damage to lose the virtues of this wonderful root, or to
neglect directions, how to extract them right, and preserve them carefully.
This Syrup is used against Obstructions, Jaundise, Splenetical Diseases,
Cachexy and impurities in the Entrails, debility of the Ventricle, Epilepsie or
Falling Sickness in general; but principally, against that of Children, and
finally it is employed, to expel by Stools and Urins, all what can be vitiated
in us; and all this is true enough, because this Syrup must be filled with the
essential Salt of Plants, and the volatile Salt of Roots accompanied with the
Balsamic Sulphur of Rhubarb, which do correct all the defects of the Spleen
and Stomach, the two parts which cause all the disorders which this Syrup can
appease and resettle as is fitting.

The Vulgar manner of this Process is then such.
domestical and wild Endive, ana M. ij. ss. Chicory and Dendelion ana M. ij
Sow-thistle, Hepatick Lettuce, Fumitory and Hops, ana M. i. Barley whole ij. of
eack kind of the Capillaries ana ij. ij. Alkakengi, Liquorish, Ceterach, Doddar
ana vi. Fennel Roots, Smalage Asparagus ana ij. shred the herbs, and roots, and
make them boil in lb xxx. water, to the consumption of one half, then boil this
decoction to a Syrup with lb x. clarified Sugar, and in boiling add in a knot
of clean linen, vij. ss. of excellent Rhubarb small shred, and ij. of Indian
Nard; from time to time you must press the knot, and when the Syrup shall be
boiled to a sufficient consistency, and put up in its Pot, hang the same knot
therein, with your Rhubarb and Spike, the better to entertain its virtue.

This is the common way of making this Syrup: to which vulgar Apothecaries have
thought fit to join some other Observations to make it the better, which
nevertheless, do not much surpass the other: for, though they imagine in them
to have somewhat better mended the matter, they go nevertheless to work but
blindly, and grope without being able to find out the true way, because they
are not guided by the light of Chemistry. They say then, that the Barley must
be macerated 24 hours with the Roots and dry Substances of this Composition, in
such a quantity of water as is required, and that all the rest may be together
boiled to the consumption of the one half. That the decoction must afterward
be percolated, and a part of it taken, wherein for 12 hours together, at least,
must be infused vij. ss. of Spikenard and Rhubarb, to extract the tincture and
virtue thereof; after which, they must boil a little, then softly be expressed,
and that this tincture must not be joined with the remainder, but when the
other part of the decoction shall be boiled to a perfect consistency of Syrup,
and to put there also the Rhubarb and Indian Nard in a knot of cloth, that they
may communicate their virtue to the remainder of the Syrup; because otherwise
it would not be perceived, that the suspension of this same knot in the Syrup
might contribute to its virtue, and when all shall be put together, then must
the Syrup be thickened by degrees, until it comes to a true and requisite
consistency. It seems by this, that great care is taken in reformning the
preparation of this Syrup: but it is very coorsely; for, Do they not judge,
that this decoction is charged with the body of the Roots, and that of the
Herbs, and so can take no more? neither extract well the Rhubarb, which is the
basis and foundation of the virtue of this remedy? But yet, had they prescribed
before to clarify this decoction, to divest her from the gross body, which the
collature cannot take away; they should have shown some spark of judgment,
which yet would be defective in this, that it might indeed thus extract better;
but would not preserve the volatile part of the Rhubarb, nor the odor of the
Spikenard, because before you can make a true Syrup, lb x. or lb xi. of water
must first be evaporated away: which cannot be done but by the means we shall
now prescribe.

The right way of preparing Chymically the compounded Syrup of Chicory with
Rhubarb.
enough of all juycie Plants which enter into the composition of this Syrup, to
make lib viij. of the juice thereof, shred and bruise them in a stone Mortar,
express the juice, and put it in B. M. in a Glass Cucurbite covered with its
Head-Limbeck to make a due depuration thereof; keep the water extracted, run
the juice through a Flannel, and put again in B. M. and add the Roots mundified
and the Capillaries; then draw of lib. iiij. of water, which join to the first,
then put the quantity of Rhubarb and Indian Nard, which you destinate to your
Syrup: I do presuppose it to be ss upon each ounce of Syrup, which is one ounce
to each pound, in a Mattress, and pour upon of the water extracted from the
juyces three fingers high above the matter, digest it during 12 days in a
vaporous Bath to make the extraction thereof; percolate and squeeze softly this
first expression, put the Rhubarb again in the Mattress with new water, and so
continue till three re-iterated times, and you shall have all the tincture of
the Rhubarb, which you shall by settlement purify in B. M. by reason of the
expression which ever transmits some gross body and material. This done, decoct
the rest of your juice, after you have strained and clarified it with the
Sugar, and reduce it to a consistency of Lozenges, which with your tincture of
Rhubarb dissolve in a true Syrup possessed with all the intended virtues, and
which without loss of its faculties shall preserve it long, by reason of the
great store of the Salts of Plants, and the true Balsamic Sulphur of Rhubarb,
Nota, that ss of this Syrup is more efficacious then a whole ounce of that of
the vulgar preparation.

The manner of Preparing the compounded Syrup of Hysop according to the method
of the Ancients.
Hysop not very much dried, Roots of Smallage, Fennel, Parsley, Liquorish ana
x. French-Barley ss. Gum-Dragan, Seeds of Mallows and Quinces, ana iij.
Capillaries vi. Jujubes and Sebestens ana N. xxx. Raisins of the Sun stoned i
ss. Figs and Dates something fat, ana N. x. decoct all in lib. viij. water
until half be consumed away; reduce the rest in a consistency of Syrup after
you have expressed it with lib. ij. Sugar refined.

If in the fore going descriptions of Syrups we have noted some things improper
and ill digested; this discovers yet much more the ignorance and supinity of
vulgar Pharmacy. For, if we take the pains to examine thoroughly the ingredients
wherewith it is compounded, we find nothing in it but an abyssus of mistakes
and Chaos of Errors; and what I do yet find worst, is, that Chemistry here is
at a nonplus, not knowing where to have her recourse and repair the defects of
this practice: For, the Roots and Herbs yield already from themselves a
decoction sufficiently course; the Fruits render it clammy and viscous, but the
Gum and Seeds shall render it altogether muscilaginous; So, that it will ever
be impossible to take a Syrup therewith; and, if any does advance himself so
much, as to boast that he may effect it --

-- Talem vix repperit unum,
Millibus e multis hominum consultus Apollo.
For, if he pretends to make his decoction superficially, without well
concocting the Roots, Fruits, Seeds, and Gums, he shall frustrate the intention
of the Authors and Compilers of this Prescription, and deprive the Syrup of the
pretended virtue which is attributed unto it; and, if moreover, he decocts it
as it must and ought to be, he shall lose the volatile part of the Roots, and
chiefly of the Hyssop and Capillaries; but, if he does clarify his decoction
the whire of Eggs shall keep the Gums and Muscilagineous Substances. I know,
moreover, that the vulgar of Apothecaries who prepare this Syrup, do pretend to
have quitted themselves of their duty, when they have boiled the muscilagineous
Substances in the decoction in a knot, which they afterward draw back again
without expression, and so is their decoction divested from the required
virtue: moreover, what more ridiculous thing can there be, then to substitute
the refined Sugar, or in cake, to common Sugar; for, I can satisfy my self
with no reason I can imagine, unless it be to raise the price of the Syrup, and
to abuse the vulgar and ignorant people. As then, this Syrup cannot possibly be
well made according to this prescription, no more can it have the virtues which
are attributed unto it, viz. to contribute to the cure of cold diseases in the
Breast; where it is required to cleanse and attenuate the crass and clammy
matter which does obsess it, take away Obstructions, alleviate Hypochondriacal
pains, and to be sovereign against the gravel. Now there is no body, that is so
little acquainted with the Ingredients of this Syrup, who sees not it is a
manifest absurdity, to hope to open with viscosities and clammy glewing
matters, which enter in the composition of this Syrup, to open Obstructions,
which they would much sooner be capable to produce, then to remove. Therefore,
whosoever requires a good pectoral Syrup, let him make it in the following
manner.

Pectoral Syrup of Hysop very singular.
new Hysop iiij. Roots of Smallage, Fennel, Parsley, Liquorish ana ij. shred
and beat it grossly, and then put in a Glass Cucurbite, and pour upon lb i.
Juice of Hysop: xij. Juice of Fennel, and lb ss. Juice of Ground Ivy. Distill
all in B. M. until the grounds look almost dry. Infuse again during the space
of a natural day in your water i ss. fresh Hysop,, and as much unprepared
Squilla: i. Fennel Roots, as much of the tops of Ground Ivy: strain, express,
and filtrate this infusion, and keep it by it self. After this, boil the matter
remaining after distillation and expression in lb iv. water to half
consumption; again, strain and clarify, then boil it, to a consistency of
Lozenges with lb ij. ss. Sugar, which dissolve in Syrup with the essensified
water of the Tincture and Salt of pectoral Plants. So shall you have a Syrup
which will be of very great service and use.

The vulgar way of Preparing the Syrup of Carthamy.
IT seems that both ancient and modern Physicians have pretended only to show
their great skill, both in the Theorical and Practical part of Physic, when
they have heaped up great store of needless Ingredients for the composition of
Waters, Electuaries and Opiats; but chiefly, in the descriptions which they
have left us of their Magisterial Syrups. That of Carthamy or Bastard Saffron,
the examination whereof we come now to handle, affords us a sufficient example
thereof: For, I know not what Masterpiece they pretend to have made, in mixing
often one with another such kinds of Drugs as are altogether different among
themselves, and contradictory for the most part to their purposes: the Error of
this is only occasioned by their ignorance in the different nature of Salts,
and Spirits, and much more in the action and reaction of the one upon the
other; as is daily seen in the laboratories of such as apply themselves to the
Anatomy of natural Bodies, to learn by this way the manner of operating of
Nature, and follow it close in the things which Art does prescribe us: For,
those which have either made formerly, or make daily Receipts of a foot and a
half long, have in truth neither well conceived, nor well known by any
experience, that, as Nature is but one and plain, so does it but act plainly;
and, so of necessity must the Physicians which are but her Agents and Apes,
study to know the plain and specifical virtue of natural products, to use them
with the same plainness, that so they may become the true imitators of Nature.

Now have they not contented themselves to make a needless rapsody: but,
moreover, they have ordained the modus faciendi in so confused a manner, and so
incapable to extract the virtue of all these different species mixed together,
that it even terrifies and moves to pity Artists, and as these Syrups are used
yet in many places, though cut off for the future from the practice of more
expert and illuminated Physicians: we have thought necessary to relate it here,
thereby to guide to the true method of well making these Syrups, the
Apothecaries not knowing and skilled in that mysteries of Chymisty.

But, before we go further, let us explain the common way of operating.

therefore this compounded purging Syrup, of true Capillary, Hysop, Thyme,
Origan, Chamaedrys or Germander, Chamaepitys or Ground Ivy, Ceterach or
Stone-wort, Bugloss ana M ss. Dodder, Alkekengi, Roots of Angelica, Liquorish,
Fennel, Asparagues, ana i. Palypody of the oak i. ss. rind of tamarise ss.
Annis, Fennel, Herb-William seeds, Dock seeds, ana i. Carthami seeds slightly
beaten iiij. Raisins of the Sun stoned ij. Boil all these substances shred and
grossly beaten together in lb vi. clear water, which reduce by boiling to a
third, percolate this decoction, and put in warm to infusion i. ss. Senne
mundified, and ss. Agarick in Trochisks vi. select Rhubarb, and i Ginger: leave
all to macerate during the space of a whole night, and the next day make a
strong expression, then strain, and the straining decoct to a Syrup with lb i.
refined Sugar, and add of Violat and Rosat, both solutive Syrups, and of
acetous plain Syrup ana ij. The use of this Syrup, is by vulgar Apothecaries
assigned to the cure of inveterate Fevers, Quotidians and Quartans, to open
Obstructions, which proceed from the clamminess and crassness of that humor
called pituita, and to drive by the Belly the noxious serosities.

I ask now, whether it be possible, that this decoction loaded with the
substance of the first matters of this Syrup, and moreover reduced to a third,
is capable to receive, much less to extract the virtue of Purgatives: and then,
to what purpose, I beseech you, the addition of ij. of each of these Syrups
prescribed, since a quantity of Sugar may be substituted in the place, and in
their stead also; infusion of Violets may be added, and of Roses, and something
of common Vinegar, or of distilled, as we shall say hereafter. But this is not
all; but, besides this, must be considered the most important loss of volatile
and sulphurous Salts, Herbs, Roots, and Seeds, which fly away, and evaporate
by decoction. Let us then say, how the business may be mended, and let the
following Syrup, be a rule and model for all other purging compounded Syrups.

The true Chemical Preparation of the Syrup of Carthamy:
the true Capillary, Hysop, Thyme, Origan, Germander, Ground Ivy; Spleen-wort,
Angelica root, Annis, Fennel, and Herb-William seeds, shred the Plants and
Roots, and beat to Powder the Seeds grossly; place all in a Cucurbite in B. M.
with lb ij. water, and iiij. juice or infusion of Roses, as much of Violets,
and i. distilled Vinegar, cover the Cucurbit with its Limbeck-head, and draw of
lb ss. of a spirituous and odoriferous water, which preserve. Add to this first
decoction Bugloss, Dadder, Grains of Alkakengi, Liquorish Roots, Fennel,
Asparagus, Polypody of the Oak, Tamarisk rind, Seed of Carthamy, and Raisins
mundified, and add lb iij. of water more, boil all to the consumption of a
third or half; percolate and express the remainder of the Ingredients. Clarify
this decoction with whites of Eggs, and infuse in a slow warmth in this
clarified decoction the Senne, Agarick in Trochisks, Rhubarb and Ginger,
during, the space of 24 hours, after which you shall let it boil a little
together, and then percolate; keep the colature by it self, and let boil once
more the Purgative Species in lib. i. new common water, to extract all the
remaining virtue; percolate and express this last decoction, which join to the
first extraction of your Purgarives, and clarify and concoct to the
consistency of an Electuary with lib. ij. Sugar in Powder. After which, you
shall bring your Syrup to a due consistency with the spirituous and aromatical
water which you have drawn by distillation. In this manner shall you have a
Purgative compounded Syrup, very pleasing, and full of the virtue of all its
ingredients, and which for many years will keep without alteration; provided it
be kept as all other Syrups, in a moderate place, neither hot nor cold; because
from these two qualities, for the most part, proceeds the cause of
fermentation, whereby they become sharp and acide, or from gathering of mother
and ranckness, which does corrupt and spoil them.

Thus much had we to say upon the subject of Plants; and these are the notes we
thought necessary to observe, for such as will make good distilled waters and
Syrups. What we have said, is sufficient to teach well, not only what is useful
to these two Preparations: but may be also with great reason observed and made
use of, to prepare all macerations, infusions, decoctions, digestions and
ebullitions, of whatsoever the Physicians prescribe to Apothecaries for
Apogems, Juleps, Potions, and other Preparations prescribed for the good of the
Patient: And I know, that after Apothecaries have known what useful substance
may by the action of heat be evaporated, they will study to preserve it the
more, to advance in all things the good of their Neighbor, the discharge of
their Conscience, and the honor and credit of Pharmacy: and moreover, they
will know, that they could not receive these lights from any where else, but
the Precepts of Chemistry.

Now having thus given a general Idea of Integral Vegetables, and their
constitutive parts, of what is fixed in them, and what volatile; and having
given the necessary Notes, whereby a Chemical Artist may lose nothing of what
he ought to preserve: it is time to come to the part which Nature and Art do
furnish us with, in this ample family, and that we give a Section to each of
the 14 subalternate Species, which are extracted from the principal Vegetable
kind: that the example we shall give of Chemical Operations, which must be
performed upon the same species of that subalternate gender, may be as a guide
and beacon, whereby the Artist may be directed to operate upon all other
species that are of a like nature.

These subalternate kinds, as already we have said, are Roots, Leaves, Flowers,
Fruits, Seeds, Rinds, Woods, Grains or Bays, Juyces, Oils, distilled Sap,
Rosins, Gum-Rosins, and other Gums. We will afford a Section to each of these
kinds in particular, that if these kinds, though subalternate in themselves,
have yet some other subordinated to them, we may nevertheless subdivide them,
to give by this means, so much the more light to the Artist, because there is
often a variety and differen^e found between the parts of the same kind, which
by consequence require a different Operation. We will begin by the Roots.

SECT. I. Of Roots.
ROots are the lower parts of Vegetables; and as it were, the shop and place of
their first digestion: Now the digestion is, but the volatilization, or
spiritualization of an aliment which in some kind was fixed: It seems then, that
it was not without some ground of reason, that some have affirmed, that Roots
were more fixed then any other part of the Plant, because they are nourished
with a less elaborate nourishment then the rest. This indeed seems true, if you
have respect to some peculiar kind of Roots, but not generally to all: for,
some do possess the virtue of the whole Plant, so, that these are some Plants
whereof the sole Root is of use for Physical Preparations, because searchers of
Nature have found by experience, that the Salt Sulphur and Mercury of these
Plants had its principal heat in the Root, as their tastle and odor may
witness. And as some Roots are woody, nervous and knotty; so, there are others
that are thin, soft, and spongious; some are mucilaginous and full of jelly, as
others are lacteous and full of marrow: some are bitter, some sweet, some sharp
and pleasant to the taste; as to the contrary, other sharp, biting, and even
corrosive; finally, some are of a pleasant smell, others very unpleasant, and
even offending the Brain and Breast, whereas the first do recreate and
strengthen it.

The end of our specificating all the differences, is only to give the better
to the workman to understand, that he must not use the same way of Operation
upon all Roots, before he has maturely and judiciously examined of what parts
they are composed, which is fixed, and which volatile, that after he shall have
well conceived their nature, by the help of the external senses, he may
conclude upon this knowledge, which way he may proceed in extracting their
virtue: And, as we come to examine the particulars of Chemical Operations made
upon Vegetables and their parts, we will follow with examples of the manner of
working according to the diversity of Roots.

EXAMPLE. I. Of the Preparation of Odoriferous Roots, which abound in Spirit
and Volatile Salt.
WE will take for our first example of these Roots, that of Angelica, brought
unto us from foraign parts, which is dry: For, as there is much virtue in this
Root, and that it is one of the best Alexiteries: we have chosen it for a rule,
upon which may be prepared the Roots of Calamus Aromaticus, Carlin-thistle,
Lagwort, and Valerian, Pellitory of Spain, and others of the same nature, or in
some way approaching, either by the smell or the taste.

then lb vi. of Bohemian Angelica Root, well-conditioned, i. e. neither too Dry
nor Worm-eaten; shred it, and reduce it to gross Powder, which you shall put to
digest by slow heat, in a double Glass Vessel or Blind-head, with lb xij. of
distilled Rainwater, and as much white Wine, during the space of four natural
days; After which put all in a Still-body, and give it fire by degrees, until
the Spirits begin to ascend, and to condense and drop: then continue the fire
in a well regulated equality, until you have extracted all the spirituous
water; which will appear when that which comes off, shall have no more of taste
or odor left.

They that shall desire to separate the Spirit from the Water, must make the
rectification of it in B. M. in a slow heat; and so shall they have a very
subtle Spirit impregnated with the volatile Salt of Angelica Root, which is,
of a very rare virtue in all Pestilential diseases and fits of the Mother. This
Spirit is Diaphoretical, Diuretical, and Alexiterial. The dosis is from ss. to
i. in Wine, Broth, or even in its own Water.

The first Spirit being ascended, increase the fire, and extract the spirituous
water, which shall follow until it comes out without taste or smell; throw away
the remainder, because it is unprofitable: and preserve this water to mix some
of its Spirit with it, or dissolve the extract of the Root from whence it has
been extracted. The dosis is from ss. to iiij.

Most commonly there swims over the first distillation made per vesicam, an
Aetherial Oil which must be separated by the Flannel, or Funnel, and carefully
preserved; for it is a very noble Essence, to make thereof a potable and
dissoluble Balsom in Liquors, or a Preservative Balsom in time of Plague. But,
because it often happens, that this Oil sinks in the bottom of the Vessel which
has received the water, because the violence of the ebullition has caused it
to take along with it self a portion of the fixed Salt of the Root; it must also
be separated with care, for it will not be inferior in virtue to that which
swims above, though it be nevertheless something less subtle, and of less
activity.

But let us return to examine that which did remain in the Vessel after
distillation, containing in it self the fixed Root of the Root and a portion of
its Sulphur, which never parts from it, by reason of the strict union and tie
they have together; this truth is justified by the color of the remaining
liquor and its taste: which would argue a great imprudence, and defect of
knowledge and judgment in the Artist, if by his negligency and ignorance he
should suffer a deperdition of that substance, which nature and his own senses
make not only appear by the outward judgment, but is also really good in its
self. Therefore must the Chemical Apothecary acknowledge, that this virtue
cannot be concentrated but in that which he calls an Extract, which is to be
made after the following method.

Express and strain the whole, then clarify with whites of Eggs, and let run
through the Flannel or the Hypocras Bag, and evaporate this liquor by a very
gentle heat to the consistency of an extract, which may be called between the
consistency of a mass of Pills, and a liquid Electuary, that it may be given
either in Bolus or Pills, when the Physician shall prescribe; or, that it may
be sooner dissolved in some appropriated liquor, according to the intention for
which it is used. Now before we determine the Dosis of this Extract, we must
say, by the way, that all Extracts which are made in this manner, are friendly
to the Stomach, and do gently loosen the Belly, without interrupting the
economy of digestion, and making any superfluous or hurtful colliquation. And
let this serve as a general Note for all the extracts which are made out of
sulphurous and volatile Vegetables, after the Spirit, Oil, and Water is drawn
from them. The dosis of this extract, as of others of the same nature, is from
ss. to ss. either alone or dissolved, and mixed in its own water, or some other
analogous liquor, and that to open gently the Patients Belly, without any fear
of those perturbations which do use to happen, by reason of the irritation and
violence of ordinary Purgatives.

And as nothing is to be lost of what possesses some virtue, you must dry the
Cake remaining after expression, and calcine it in an Earthen Vessel, or
Crucible not glazed, until the matter be reduced to gray Ashes, whereof make a
Lie with distilled Rainwater, which filtrate and evaporate till it be dry, to
extract the Salt of the Roots; which afterward put in a Crucible, and heat, it
glowing-red upon a fire of Coals without melting; then dissolve it in the last
water extracted; filtrate and evaporate it to a skim, and let it shoot into
Crystals in the cold, then draw the Salt which shall come pure and clean: and
so continue until there be no more Crystallization. You may mix a portion of
this Salt in its own water, to render it less susceptible of alceration, you
may also put another part in the extract, and it will increase the stomachal
and cathartical virtue thereof. The rest you shall keep, to the end, that if
you desire to reunite all the fixed and volatile virtues of the Root of
Angelica in one body to make a Clyssus thereof (which is that substance
properly which contains in it self, as in a compendium, all the virtues of a
Mixed, the parts whereof have been severed and depurated) you may join again the
rectified Spirit and aecherial Oil, by the uniting medium, which is the fixed
Salt, without which it is impossible to make any union of the Oil and Spirit,
because they are of a different nature, and will swim ever the one on the top
of the other: but, when you have alkalized the subtle and rectified Spirit with
the proper Alkali of the Plant, then shall you inseparably join the Oil,
whereof is produced a mavelous substance: but, as for the Clyssus, there is
no need of so much refining, mix only one part of fixed purified Salt, with 2 p.
of distilled Oil, and 3 p. of the very subtle Spirit, and digest together in
the vapor of a Bath in a circulatory Vessel, until all the substance be
indissolubly joined and united together; which for the most part is performed
within the time of a Philosophical Month, which is 40 days, or that which we
commonly call the space of six weeks. This remedy thus prepared, may be given
instead of the Spirit, Oil, Extract and Salt. Having all the Essential
faculties of these four togther. The Dosis is from vi. grains to i. in all
diseases wherein Physicians do make use of the body of Angelica root, whereof
it has been prepared.

How to prepare the Potable and Dissoluble Oil of the Root of Angelica.
ALthough this Preparation be not very full of mystery, as it will seem to the
Reader, yet is it not unworthy his consideration, since it will serve to
demonstrate more and more the truth of what we have asserted heretofore, viz.
that Salts are but close Spirits, and possess in themselves a hidden Sulphur,
and, by consequence, a median nature between aqueous and oleaginous liquors,
which cannot coagulate, much less join together without the help of Salt, which
renders the Oil dissoluble and capable to be united to the water; and all other
liquors of the like nature, which is not one of the less important secrets of
Chemistry, though it s^ems in some manner despicable, by reason of its
plainness: but, let no body despise this commendable plainness, since whosoever
shall follow her, may boldly boast, that he is the best follower of Nature,
whose chief beauty and secret admirable operations are never found in the
confusion of things and imperfect mixtures, unless it be to contribute to
generation of Monsters. Now, as our study must be, to render things pleasant
and easy, and, that those that want these noble remedies, are not still in
places to come by Furnaces and Vessels, to unite the fixed Salt to the Oil of
its subject; and moreover, this Salt is for the most part unpleasant, by reason
of its lixivi^l and urinous taste: I have thought more fitting, to take of
Sugar well refined and reduced to very small Powder; or, as they call it,
Alkool, whereof you shall fill an Ivory or Silver guilt Box, upon which you
shall drop by drop let fall some of the distilled Oil of Angelica Roots, or
some other, until the Sugar be sufficiently impregnated, and reduced to a
consistency capable to be contained in the Box, although it were turned upside
down. So shall you have an admirable Balsom, which by way of precaution, and
for a Preservative, you may use in the time of Pestilence; yet, with this
precaution, that it be so taken in a less dosis, than if you took it for a
curative remedy. The dosis is from the bigness of a Pea to that of a small Nut.
In Wine in the morning fasting, if it be for a Preservative; or in its own
Spirit or Water for a curative remedy.

Let no body wonder, that Sugar should cause Oil to mix well and dissolve in
water, for Sugar is a Vegetable Salt, whose nature it is to work, so being mixed
of Sulphur and Mercury, whereby it is rendered perceptible of Oil, whose nature
it alters nevertheless so much, that it easily dissolves and unites it self
with water, by reason of the saline substance of the said Sugar. These Balsoms
are properly such as you find in modern Authors: under the name of
Elaeo-saccharum.

How the unctuous Balsom of the Oil of Angelica Root may be prepared.
TO make this Balsom, choose an incorruptible substance, without either smell or
color, which might be capable to receive the Oil, and preserve its odor and
virtue. Those that have addicted themselves to this operation, have much
labored and took great pains, before they could meet with a substance divested
of color and smell, and that should not turn to corruption in time. For some
years, white Wax and Marrow, were two subjects used to this purpose; as also
the fat or suet of Kid and of Pork, well prepared and washed: but this lasted
very little, these substances becoming rank, of ill odor, and yellow. To make
short, Chemists have exercised their wit further, and refining this process,
made use of the Oil, which by expression is extracted from the Nutmeg, to make
therewith the body of their Balsoms; without losing, nevertheless, the subtle
ethereal and odoriferous virtue of the Nutmegg, which is thus performed.

iiij. of very pure Oil of Nutmegg, and free from any other mixture; put it in
a Mattress with a long Neck, or in a double Glass, or blind Head, and pour upon
it tartarized Spirit of Wine, to the height of four fingers, then put in B. M.
and with a gentle heat extract and digest, and when the Spirit shall be
sufficiently impregnated with the tincture of the Oil; draw it off by
inclination, and pour other, and re-iterate until it takes no more of the
tincture. Then put all what remains in a white Earthen dish, and wash with
boiling water, until the whole mass becomes white and inodorous, and this will
serve to make the Body of all unctuous Balsoms, which contracts no ill quality,
and will easily be impregnated, with the odor and virtue of odoriferous and
aromatical Oils. But, because the eye as well as the smell must be pleased, the
green color is imparted to the Balsoms of Plants, with the juyces of some
inodoriferous Herb, wherein the Body of the Balsoms is put to boil, which you
intend to have thus colored: The Balsoms of Oils of Roots and aromatical
Substances are colored with yellow Earth, when they come near that color in
their nature, and those of Flowers, with a little of fine Gumlack, which the
Painters are wont to make use of. Now as this body of Balsoms is dried, by
reason of the extraction of its subtle and unctuous Oil, made by the help of
tartarized Spirit of wine, there is no more to be done further, then to feed it
again with a proportionate quantity of the Oil of Angelica Root, or some other
aromatical Oil, to make the unctuous Balsom thereof, with whom the Nostrils and
Temple of the Head, as also the back of the hand does use in time of contagious
diseases to be rubbed, to hinder ill smells and savours from invading the Brain,
and to correct the malignity of those pestiferous and hurtful Spirits, which
fill up the Air in such dangerous times, or, when there is a necessity to
converse in places exposed to nauseous smells, or where sick people use to lie.
But, before we proceed further, it will not be amiss, to direct the Artist what
he is to do with the extraction made by him, out of the Oil of Nutmegg with
Spirit of Wine. This Spirit must he draw off again in B. M. to the consistency
of a Syrup or boiled Honey and so shall he obtain the extract of Nutmegg
impregnated with the best of its corporeal substance; and a Spirit possessed
with its Oil Spirit, and volatile Salt; if you please, you may keep some part
of its extraction; for this shall be as a medium between the Extract, and
Spirit, which has been drawn off it, and may be made use of to the same
purposes, because it possesses the same virtue and efficacy. The virtue of the
Extract, Spirit and Tincture, refreshes and delights the Stomach, Brain, and
Womb, corrects the ill smell of the breath, dissipates wind, helps digestion,
strengthens the Embrio in the Womb, is good against Swoundings and beating of
the Heart, opens and dissipates Obstructions of the Spleen, stops Lasks and
Vomitting. And as I am a witness of the vulnerary virtue of Nutmegg; I think my
self obliged for advancing public good, to relate here, what I have seen done
in Germany, in the person of a Captain of Horse, filled all over the Body with
wounds both of shot and Sword, and who nevertheless, had never felt any touch
of Ague in all the time his wounds were about to be cured, not even when the
suppuration was working. This will seem, without doubt, very strange and
Paradoxical: But, when I have told you, that this Gentleman did ever wear about
him Nutmegg, and as soon as he felt himself hurt, did eat a whole one; your
admiration will cease, since the Balsamical virtue of Nutmegg, residing in its
Oil and volatile Salt, being driven by the heat of the Stomach in all the parts
of the Body, did correct the malignant and dangerous serosity, which is the
occasional cause of pains, inflammations, and by consequence, Fevers, and
finally, Death, in the greatest part of those which are hurt in some principal
part of the body. Chirurgions then must not so lightly fear vulnerary Potions,
neither to make use of this Aromat in the Broths of their Patients, by reason
of its too great pretended heat: to the contrary, the more expert and skilful
they are, and guided by good judgment, they have their recourse to the same,
as to a very safe refuge, which will never fail them; but chiefly, if they use
externally as well as internally, the tincture extracted after the manner by us
related here above. Let it not be objected to me, that I bring a personal
example; since the same has happened to several of his friends, though they
were of a different temper, as they speak, and had been very ill and sick in
the cure of several other wounds, because they made no use then of the said
Nutmegg.

I hope, this digression will not have proved unpleasant, since it is useful
both to the general and private good; but, we will make appear, that Chemistry
does not content it self with the color of unctuous Balsoms, whereof we have
made mention even now, since it has found the secret to color the body of
Balsoms, with the Magistery of the same Plants wherewith the Balsom is to be
made; and it is thus performed.

Rhue or Marjoram, or any other balsamic and odoriferous Plant, as much as you
will, when they are yet in the vigor of their green, boil it in water
sufficiently impregnated with the Oil of Tartar, made per deliquium, or plain
Tartar dissolved; strain the coction, and pour upon it dissolution of
Rock-Allom, made in distilled Rainwater, and the matter will precipitate it
self toward the bottom, in the form of a green Pap: Separate the swiming liquor
by filtration, then wash the filtrated matter with common water at first, and
with the odoriferous distilled water of the Plant it self toward the end,
until you have deprived it of all saline taste, which it may have received from
the Salt of Tartar and Allom: Evaporate afterward with a gentle heat this
Magistery, until it has acquired the consistency of a very thick Pap, with
which you shall tinge the white and inodorous Body of the Nutmegg, which you
shall gently dry in the Air, to preferve for the making of your Balsom; or, if
you add to it presently, the distilled Oil of the Plant, then will the Balsom
be perfect, and keep its odor, and its color as long as you can wish. But
note, that you must not altogether dry the Magistery of Flowers or Herbs,
before you color the body of the Balsom; otherwise, there would be no union,
nor perfect mixtion made, and by consequence, no coloring.

The same operation we have described may be made upon Flower of Roses, Pionie,
red Poppy, Iris, Scarlet-grain or Kermes, to make Magisteries thereof, which
will be useful to color the Balsoms of Flowers without any forain mixture.

Before we end this discourse of Balsoms, we will after the learned Sennertus,
teach the manner how to prepare Balsoms, as to the internal part in another way
then with Sugar; which, though they be not so pleasant, yet will have no less,
if not more virtue, and will contain, as in a small volume, the efficacy of the
Mixed whereof they receive their composition. Take then i. of the extract of the
Plant, of its Root, Flower, or Seed; to which add ij. of select Manna, mix them
together upon a gentle heat; and when the mixture is cooled, add i. ss. of the
distilled Oil of the Mixed, and so shall you have a Balsom which may be
exhibited in Bolus, or mixed in Broths, or given in other liquors appropriated
to the disease.

EXAMPLE II. Of the Root of Enula Campana.
THis Root deserves very well we should speak of its Preparation, and make some
necessary Observations to instruct thereby the Artist; for, besides, that it
has many virtues, and particular qualities, it will couduce to teach by the
same method the Chemical Apothecary, what he is to do according to judgment
and experience, in drawing from other Roots, as from this which is familiar
with us, many good remedies to adorn and furnish his shop with, where
Physicians may have their recourse when they need it, for the good of their
Patients.

We begin by the choosing of the time wherein this Root is to be taken out of
the ground, that it may be abundantly furnished, of what we seek in it, which
is a volatile spirituous and sulphurous Salt, manifesting it self by taste and
odor. This Root then is to be pulled out of the ground in the beginning of the
Spring, when it begins to bud and peep out of the Earth; for, if you delay
longer, this virtue which is concentrated in the Root, and is the soul of
Vegetation, explicates it self and shoots out, to declare the visible Character
of its invisible Idea, given unto it by the Creator of Nature, and so does
exhaust it self from its own seminal virtue, to supply the beauty of perfect
Vegetation.

Having got a good quantity of Root thus qualified, and being yet tender and
juicie, so that it may be cut in long slices or round pieces; wash it well,
then slit the most likely and most tender Roots in long bits, of the length of
the forefinger and bigness of the small; and cut the other in round pieces of
the bigness of a Crown; then put them in a Glass Cucurbite in Sand with a
sufficient quantity of clean water, cover it with a Head Limbeck, and fit to
the same a Receiver, and exactly lute the Joints thereof; then give it a
gradual fire, and distill it increasing still the heat, till what in the Vessel
begins to boil, that the Roots may be well boiled. By this Operation many
things are performed at once; for, when the Root is so boiled, as to be grown
soft to the hand, you may with the remaining decoction in the Cucurbite boil
Sugar to the consistency of a Sugar Rosat, therein to dip the long slices,
after they have yielded their superfluous water upon a Sive turned upside down;
and so shall you have a liquid Preserve of Campana, which will keep long: if
you boil further the Sugar, and put the Root once again in it, and dry it in a
Stove, you shall have a dry and solid Preserve for such as will use it in
traveling. Moreover, you may beat the round pieces, after they are strained,
and the liquor expressed in a Marble Mortar, and extract the pulp thereof,
which preserve with Sugar boiled in Lozenges, and it will be a very good kind
of Preserve also for its peculiar uses; but, which also will serve as a body,
to receive other remedies for the Spleen and Breast, and so you may frame Opiats
and Electuaries, which will be very excellent.

But we keep that which is best for the end, which is the spirituous Water and
volatile sulphurous Salt, extracted by distillation, during the boiling of the
Root, and which should have been lost, had this decoction been made in an open
Kettle or Vessel upon an open fire: and would be a great loss, and argue a
defect of judgment, knowledge, and experience in the Artist: for, this
distilled Water has the same taste and smell as the Root, and by consequence,
does possess the best part of her virtue, because it is filled with a very
excellent and subtle Salt volatile, which ascends into the Head of the Limbeck
under the form of Snow, and cleaves to the sides thereof, when heat causes the
Water to penetrate into the very center of the Root, and when this Salt is
freed from the mucilagineous substance of its body, it is sublimated by the
fires activity into the Limbecks Head; it is true, that it does not remain long
there, being immediately dissolved by the aqueous ascending vapors, and
carried along with them into the Recipient, and this Salt does communicate to
the Water its taste, odor, and efficacy. Let those which deny credit to my
discourse, proceed in the work as I have just now related, and watch exactly
when they shall observe the Limbecks Head to be full of white vapors, and some
substance cleave to the sides of it; let them be provided with another equal
Limbeck; then taking away the first, substitute a second in its room; and then
will they find themselves convicted by their own senses of the truth I have
asserted; for, the Spirit of this Salt, shall fill their Nose and Brain
immediately with the genuine smell of the Enula Campana; and, if they apply a
little of the sublimated Salt upon the tongue, they will confess, the very
Plant not to have even had so subtle, penetrative, and efficacious a taste; so
that it would be an irreparable damage, and a gross ignorance, to lose the
principal and more vertual part of the subject which is wrought upon.

Those that will make the Extract of the Enula, must dry it a little more then
half; then reduce it to a gross Powder, and place it in a double Vessel of the
Blind Head with subtle white Wine, to the heigh of four fingers, which they
shall digest and extract in heat of ashes, until the Wine be impregnated of the
taste, smell, and yellowish color of the Root; then shall they draw again what
is impregnated, and put new and fresh Wine until it attracts no more; then must
be made an expression of the whole, which put in a Cucurbite in B. M. with the
requisite precautions, to draw the Spirit and spirituous Water, until the
remaining substance has neither smell nor taste left; clarify after this what
is left in the bottom of the Vessel, and evaporate in an Earthen dish in ashes
until it comes to the consistence of an Extract, which shall possess in it self
all the virtue of what is fixed in this Root: which is not despicable, because
it opens the Belly and strengthens the Stomach. The dosis is from i. to ss. and
this extract is very efficacious to dissolve and evacuate the fixed, glutinous
and tartateous substances lurking in the Ventricle, Spleen, or Breast: but
chiefly, it conduces to the cure of Periodical Asthma's, provided you mix some
Diaphoretical Antimony, or Volatile Sal of Karabe or yellow Amber, which will
not fail to strengthen the Ventricle, and appease the motions and meteorical
swellings of the Spleen, which for the most part do oppress the Diaphragma, one
of the chief Instruments and Organs of Respiration, and which causes the
oppression of the Stomach, and shortness of breath.

This Extract shall be a rule whereby to prepare those of Valerian Roots,
Pellitory of Spain, Carline-thistle, and chiefly Contrayerval, which is a Root
coming from Peru, and one of the most Soverain remedies against Poison: but
chiefly, in all Pestilential and Malignant Diseases, as Camp and Purpled
Fevers, Measels and Small Pox, because it rids potently away the venom of it,
and expels dangerous serosities by Sweat and Urin. It is mavelous also in
corruptions of the Stomach, and chiefly Worms. There are even some, which
believe, that its use is capable to dissipate the charm and poison of Philters,
or amorous Potions. The Dosis of the Root in Powder is from ss. to i. in Wine
or Cordial, or sudorifick Waters, as that of Regina Prati, Carduus Benedictus,
or Mead Sweet, and Sassefras. But the extract of it made by exact operation,
and the Spirit drawn by distillation, are without compare much better then the
material Body of the Root, and their Dosis less by half. I could not refrain
from speaking something in my way concerning this noble Root, knowing that it
is yet concealed to most of the French Apothecaries: and I make no question,
but that those which by the order of Physicians shall make use of it, will find
those effects to answer the virtues I have attributed unto the same.

Of the Root of Consolida Major, or Great Comfrey and Satyrion.
AFter I have spoken of Odoriferous and Aromatical Roots, which are of a high
taste and full of sensible volatile Salt: we must speak afterward of
Mucilagineous and almost Insipid Roots; but, though they seem so to be
tasteless, yet do they in sufficient abundance partake of much virtue;
provided, the Artist may free and untye them of the clamminess and viscosity of
their substance, to bring to light the Salt and Spirit in them contained, the
quickness and efficacy whereof are as it were imprisoned and fettered by the
ligaments of this clammy and agglutinating substance, which hinders them to
produce within us, those noble effects which they are capable to produce, and
which they conceal in their own center. But to perform this, there is no way
but by Chemical operation, which discovers the hidden virtues, and man fests
the mystery contained in each Mixed. We will begin with the preparation of the
Great Consolida, or Comfrey, which though viscous and insipid, produces
notwithstanding very rare effects outwardly and inwardly applied; for it is of
a miraculous virtue, to dissolve all contusions, strengthen the sinewous parts
of the Joints in all sort of luxations. But it is much more efficacious in
plasters, with Powder of the Stone, called Ostoecola, both to hinder the
accidents of fractures, as to generate the callus, necessary in the re-uniting
of broken Bones. And, if this Root does produce so remarkable effects for the
external parts; it is not less wonderful to stop the spitting of Blood, whether
occasioned by the rupture of some Vein, or proceeding from the erosion of the
Vessels, which ordinarily happens in the Breast or Throat: Moreover, the use of
it does continue the healing of the several kinds of Hernia's: Provided at the
same time the part affected be kept tied up with a good fillet, and every third
day a Plaster or Cataplasma of the same Root be applied, with Croeus martis
astringent, and dulcified Earth of Vitriol. This we have only mentioned, to let
the Reader know, that this Root is full of a wonderful virtue, if so be the
Chemical Apothecary is capable to digest and extract it according to Art,
separating the hurtful heterogeneities, which hinder this so considerable
hidden virtue from being reduced into act, to bring to light the mystery of
Nature, which every individual substance deeply hides in its center. And to
attain thereunto, he must proceed in this following manner.

The manner of making the Extract or Blood of the Roots of Great Comfrey and of
Satyrion.
ALthough this extract or blood may be made with the Root only of the Great
Comfrey, and would so contain much virtue: I find notwithstanding very
necessary, to join unto it the Roots, Leaves and Flowers of Sarracene Comfrey,
and those of Bugle or middle Comfrey; also of Prunella, or of small Comfrey and
Seeds of St. John's Wort; because the balsamic Salt of the Leaves, and the
embryonated Sulphur of the Flowers, and Seeds, will infallibly contribute to
the perfection of that remedy which we are about to describe.

lb ij. Roots of the Great Comfrey, and as much of the Roots, Herbs, and
Flowers of the three other kinds; cleanse and pick, and then wash them well;
and having beaten them in a Marble Mortar, with a Wooden Pestle, until all be
reduced to a mash, add lb ss. Seeds of St. John's Wort, reduced likewise to a
Pap, by beating in the Mortar and sprinkling it with good white Wine; add to
the whole, lb i. of crumb of Rye-bread, and as much of Wheaten-bread; mix all
together very well, then imbibe it again something more with a little of good
white Wine, until it be converted to a kind of thick mash or papp; something
clear: which put in a Mattress with a long Neck, stopped with another Mattress,
whose Neck shall be inserted in the other, the length of four inches; lute the
Joints very exactly, with beaten whites of Eggs, Linen, Bladder and quick
Lime, as we have taught above, where we have treated of Lutation: Suspend the
Vessel on a vaporous Bath, or put in the heat of Horse-dung to digest, or in
some other analogous heat, and give it a slow and digestive heat, until the
matter be changed into a kind of chyle, red and as high colored as blood. Then
let the Furnaces cool again; take away the Vessels, and run through new and
clean Linen the matter which you must strongly express and strain. This
expressed substance thus red and colored, put in a vaporous Bath, to make a
second digestion thereof, and a more exact purification; for, the liquor will
much better clarify, and the feces and remaining impurities, will make a
sediment in the bottom of the Vessel, which must be separated by a gentle
inclination, until the liquor be clear, red, and transparent, so that no more
impurities appear in the bottom. Put then this liquor so depurated in a
Cucurbite, in the vaporous Bath or B. M. and draw off by distillation about the
two third parts, and in the bottom will remain the true balsamic extract of
those vulnerary Roots, which properly enough are called the Blood of the Great
Comfrey: Of wonderful virtue against all the kinds of Rupture, being ordered
with the intimated pre-cautions; it is also a most rare and excellent help to
consolidate inward ulcers, but chiefly, those of the Breast: and also very good,
being mighled in vulnerary Insections; as also to dip in the Linen or Tents,
applied to the Orifice or Lips of Wounds. The dosis is from ss. to i. in the
water drawn off by distillation, white Wine, or any other convenient liquor,
such as are vulnerary Potions; but, you must continue for several days every
day fasting; and even in inveterate diseases, it must be used during the space
of a Philosophical Month, which is 40 days.

This method of Preparation must be exactly followed, to make the extract or
blood of Satyrion Roots: except only, that no other ingredient is to be added
in the composition of it, but, that of Bread and Wine, with i. of very good
Ambergrice, to each pound of the matter which is to be digested. The dosis is
likewise the same with the former extract, both good to strengthen the Womb;
and render fruitful and apt for generation. It is also a very secure specific
to put and restore again to their own temper all the parts designed to
copulation, and the dependances of it. Those that to each pound of Satyrion
Root, before they be put in digestion with the Bread and Wine, will add i. ss.
of Vipers flesh dried in B. M. will render this remedy much more efficacious.
And note, that these Roots must be taken up in the beginning of the Spring, and
that you must only take that cod or swelling part which is smooth and full, and
reject that which is rugged and soft, the signature of this Root does evidently
testify, that Nature has furnished it with necessary virtues for the use of
those parts whose figure it represents.

Of the Root of Female Fern.
THough this Root be very common, yet is it not made use of enough, considering
the great virtues it does possess. Now that which hinders, for the most part,
Physicians, from making legitimate Observations, of the particular and
specifical virtue of things, is, that for the most part, they confound them one
with the other, which is the cause they cannot properly determinate, to which
of the Ingredients they are to atribute the effects of those remedies which
they have prescribed. But Chemical Philosophers proceed otherwise, and, as they
know Nature to be but one and uncompounded, so will they follow this good
Mother and Guide as near as it lies in their power. And as by the senses they
have discovered, that the Root of Female Fern has in it self some coagulated
viscosity, which testifies it to have much of a volatile sulphurous Salt, of a
rare and noble virtue, easily discerned by its bitterness mixed with an
astringency, but this virtue to be hidden under the shade of the body; so have
they found it necessary to free it from its prison, by the means and help of
Fermentation in the following manner.

XL. or L. lb. of this Root gathered in the beginning of the Spring, and then
when it begins only to bud out in a small yellow shoot from the ground, that it
may not have lost yet any part of its internal substance by vegetation; wash
and cleanse it from all the Earth which cleaves to it, and separate it from all
other superfluities; without taking away, nevertheless, that which already is
budded out: shred it, and then beat it well in a Marble or Stone-Mortar, then
put it in a Fat of the bigness of about xv. or xx Buckets, and pour upon it
xij. Buckets of warm Water: of a degree, as it were, to scald Chickens; and
having well agitated the same, put two Buckets full thereof to ferment with
Yest, or ordinary Bread leaven, and a little Rye Flower: and when the liquor
begins to stir or raise in boiling in the Buckets, pour it in the Cask,
provided, the liquor also contained in it, be of a moderate heat, so, as
without inconveniency the hand may be suffered in it; cover the Vessel, and let
the ferment or leaven perform its action, after you have stirred all very well
together; after which, distill the fermented liquor in a Still Body S. A. two
days after fermentation is ceased. All being thus distilled, and your
distillation continued until the matter yield no more of spirituous and saline
taste; put again all what has been distilled in a Stillatory Vessel, and
rectify the Spirit, laying a side that which comes first, as the most
efficacious and penetrative; and so the second and third, until it yields
nothing more, but an inodorous and insipid Phlegm. This Spirit is a great
opener and disopilator, dedicated in general, to open the Obstructions of the
Intrals; but specially, those of the Spleen and Matrix. The dosis is from ss to
ij. and even to ss. in the last Water drawn often by rectification, or in Broths
or white Wine. And the fermentation and distillation of this Root, must serve
as a pattern for all other Roots either of the same nature, or coming near it.

Of the Roots of Fal^p and Mechoacan.
AS we have propounded to our selves to afford examples of Roots that are
different in their nature: we have thought fitting to take that of Jalap and of
Mechoacan, because they are two purging Roots, both equally expelling
serosities, and yet differing among themselves; for, the one is of a resinous
quality, which is Jalap; and the other mucilaginous, mixed with rosin and a
saline and insipid substance; in which, partly, is placed its purging faculty,
provided, it be well extracted, and such is Mechoacan: for which cause, the
Artist is obliged to use diverse ways of Preparations, and different Menstruums
to extract the virtues of these Roots, that they may be exhibited in a less
dosis, and cause them work with less violence.

To prepare the Magistery or Rosin of Jalap.
THe Root of Jalap was first brought unto us from the India's, and is more or
less full of virtue, according as it is more or less resinous, which Rosin is
nothing else but a sulphurous volatile substance, more concocted and exalted
then the volatile Salt, ordinarily found in other Roots, and as it is in this
resinous and fat part of the Simple that the Purgative virtue is placed, and
that nothing but the aetherial, volatile and sulphurous Spirits, are capable
to extract and dissolve this Rosin; Chemical Artists do commonly use the
rectified Spirit of Wine to make this Extraction, which is thus performed.

lb i. of well chosen Jalap Root, viz. full of round blackish circles from
distance to distance, till they meet in the center, close and well compacted,
and shining inwardly when it is broken; reduce it to subtle Powder with a
Sive, and having placed it in a Mattress, pour upon it Spirit of Wine well
rectified and dephlegmated; digest it some days in Embers, and when the
Menstruum is sufficiently colored, draw it off by inclination of the Vessel,
and filtrate it, and continue this extraction until the Spirit of Wine tinges
no more. Put all your tinctures filtrated in a Cucurbite, and draw off by
distillation in B. M. the 3 parts of the Spirit, which will be useful yet for
the like operation again; after this, draw your Cucurbite from the Balneum, and
affuse upon the remaining liquor, about a pint of very clear water, which will
precipitate the Jallap Root to the bottom of the Vessel: because the Water
weakening the Spirit of Wine which held the dissolved Rosin, and kept it
flowing, causes it to lose its cold, and there being not strength and
nimbleness enough in the Spirit to keep the solution, makes it precipitate and
fall toward the bottom. Put again your Cucurbite in Balneos, and draw off the
remaining Spirit of Wine mixed with the Water, and that for two reasons; the
first, That you may not lose that portion of Spirit of Wine, which is still of
use; and the second, because by that means you make yet as a second
precipitation of Rosin, the Spirit of Wine holding yet some portion in it self,
as it does evidently appear by the milky whiteness of the Water. Take the Rosin
from the Cucurbite and put it in an Earthen Platter, and wash it three times
with pure Water, to take away the tang of the Spirit of Wine, which every one
is not equally pleased with; but you must wash it the fourth time with
Rose Water and Cinnamon mixed together; then dry it gently in embers, and keep it
for your use. The dosts of this Rosin is from iij. grains to xv. in Bolus,
Conserve, or Jelly of Quinces and Goose-berries; it may be grinded also upon a
Marble-Stone with three times as much of Cremor Tartari, until the whole be
reduced to an impalpable Powder; then dissolve a dosis thereof in Water or
Broth: but you must be very cautious, when you administer any of this Rosen, or
of the others that are alike, and chiefly those that are of a purging faculty;
because, that as their substance is not easily dissolved in aqueous liquors,
but contrariwise, does re-incorporate when you think it to be more exactly
mixed, and moreover, that the Stomach is filled most commonly with some
moistness, you may have good reason to fear, lest this Rosen should unite
again, and cleave to the sides of the Ventricle, in the passage of the Maw-gut,
or in the Duodenum, which is for the most part the cause of after-purges, not
properly to be imputed as an ill effect of the remedy, but to an accidental
cause occasioned by unskilfulness in administering the same; for, when these
Medicaments are well dissolved, and joined and allied to the aqueous liquor, by
the means of some neutral body all fear is over. You must then make use of yolk
of Eggs to dilute and dissolve purging Rosens, that they may the better
incorporate and allay either with the Ptisan or Broth wherein they are
exhibited to the Patient: for, the reason of fearing these kinds of remedies
never proceeded but from accidental causes; they, in themselves, and their
operation, being in no wise dangerous, unless, when they are ill dissolved and
united with the aqueous liquor: But, we thought very necessary to give this
Advertisement in the way, by reason of those ill accidents which daily do
happen thereby.

To make the true Extract of Mechoacan.
lb i. Mechoacan well chosen, not cariated or rotten, neither mixed with
Briony-Root, which will easily be known and discovered by the sight and taste.
By the sight, because Mechoacan Root has circles from the center to the
circumference, which that of Briony has not; and moreover, the taste does yet
better discover the truth, because, that of Mechoacan has only a farinaceous
and insipid taste: but, that of Briony pricks the tongue and throat, when long
kept in the mouth: you must then take the whitest Mechoacan, and that which
easily breaks without making any dust, by which the corruption and cariation is
discovered. Put this Root thus well chosen, into very subtle Powder, and
having placed it in a Cucurbite of Glass, pour upon it Spirit of Wine, not
rectified, to the height of four fingers and more; cover the Cucurbite, with a
Blind Head, and the Joynrs being well luted, digest the whole in heat of
embers, until the Menstruum be sufficiently colored, which draw off by
inclination, and re-affund new Spirit, re-iterating so long, that your
Menstruum will tinge no more; squeeze the Root hard, and filtrate all the
Extractions, and distill in B. M. to draw off again the Spirit of Wine used for
a Menstruum, until it be altogether insipid; then cease the fire and take the
rosenous substance which will swim above what is left in the Vessel, and dry it
in a small Platter with a slow fire in Sand: Put the liquor wherein the Rosen
was contained in a leaded Earthen Pan, adding i. of Salt of Tartar; and therein
put also the Cakes left after expression, which let boil together to
half-consumption; clarify this decoction with whites of Eggs, and run through
the cloth, evaporate it softly in Sand, to the consistency of a liquid Extract;
to which add the Rosen reduced to very subtle Powder, with three or four
peeled Almonds, and ij. Sugar, and so keep this Extract for use whenever
there is occasion, or to adminster it in Pills. You must note in your way, that
it is not without reason, I have prescribed the addition of Almonds and Sugar,
when the Rosen shall be tritu^ated. For, you must not think it only done, to
hinder the sticking of it to the Mortar or Porphyry, as it serves also for that
purpose: But it is moreover, that these two Substances may be as uniting
mediums to join closely the Rosen with its Extract, and to facilitate also the
dissolution thereof in aqueous liquors. This Extract is of singular efficacy to
evacuate superfluous serosities from all the parts of the body, and less active
and violent then the Rosen of Jalap, which is used to the same ends as this
remedy. It is above all, a Specifical to purge the head, the nervous parts, and
the breast; and therefore is very seasonably used in all Catharrous affections,
Dropsies, and all Arthritical pains, but more particularly in Venerous
diseases. The dosis is from vi. grains to xxx. either in Pills, or dissolved.

Of the Roots used for the Extraction of Fecula's.
WE cannot enough admire the long practiced abuse, even by the wisest and most
experimented Physicians, concerning Fecula's; and I wonder, that those which so
often have advowed, confessed and taught, that all the virtue of Substances
resides only in their Salts, but chiefly, of Vegetables: I wonder, I say, that
these Chemical Physicians, should have made use of Fecula's, and attributed
unto them the virtue of opening, dissolving, and penetreating even into the
utmost digestions. And to prove the true ground of my wonder, you must know,
that the Fecula's are nothing else, but the farinaceous and insipid part of the
Root; and, to speak properly, as the white Starch of it: Now there is no body
scarce, but knows, that a small quantity of the same will coagulate a great
deal of water, and so consequently, must have the same operation in the
Stomach, when the Fecula's are introduced in it, and the natural heat begins to
act upon, as the least heat does upon white Starch. But to discover the better
this mistake, I will deliver the most exact and artificial way of preparing
Fecula's, to show even to the meanest apprehension, that I have asserted
nothing against truth; and that I condemn this common abuse, grounded only upon
reason and good experience.

The manner of preparing Fecula's.
FEcula's are commonly made out of five kinds of Roots chiefly, which are Arum,
or Coockow-pint, Iris, Piony, Briony, and great Dragons. But it will suffice,
to give an example of any of the five, which will be as a model for the rest,
and all those that are of a like nature. First of all, the time wherein the
Root must be gathered, is to be attended, when you will make the Fecula, and
that is, when the Plant begins only to put out the least bud, otherwise, no
good could be done upon it. then Briony Root at such a time, and wash it
exactly; then scrape the outside of the Root, and so get the substance by
scraping very cleanly; then express hard the same, and let settle in the bottom
of the Vessel a kind of white feculency, until the juice be all cleared, which
draw off softly by pouring down: and as you will find a mucilagineous and
yellowish substance, above the whitish Flower which settles in the bottom; you
must pour upon it a little of lukewarm clear water, to make the separation
thereof, by a slow and circulary agitation; that being ended, you must put this
farinaceous Substance or white Starch in a Marble Mortar, and agitate the same
with clear water, until it be as white as Milk, then percolate this white Water
through a new Tamy somewhat close, that the grosser part may remain within;
then cover the Platter, and suffer the Fecula to make a settlement,
re-iterating this agitation with new Water three or four times, after which,
you must separate the Water by a soft and slow inclination; then cover the
Platter with a white Paper, bored through with many small holes of a Needle;
then expose it to the Sun, until the Fecula be dry, which will be as white as
any Starch, if you proceed in the operation with exactness and cleanliness.

This is the manner of artificially preparing your Fecula's: but, it were to be
wished, that they were endowed with the rare virtues attributed unto them; for,
there is no judicious man, never so little initiated in the mysteries of
Chemistry, who does not conceive, that this earthly and feculent portion, which
by its own weight is severed from the juice, is rather an excrement of the
Root, than a substance containing its virtue; for, it is not with the family of
Vegetables as with that of Minerals and Metals: Since Vegetables have only
their virtue contained in a saline and volatile substance, whereas the Metals
and Minerals are fixed in a manner; and, that in this fixed substance and their
material and close center, is placed their chief virtue. Now this saline
substance is, without doubt, in the juice of the Plant; since it is a proper
quality of Salts to dissolve themselves in Water, and if any part of it should
remain amongst the Fecula's, the washings which are to be used with single pure
Water to purify them, carry away, without any doubt, the remainder of their
virtue; so, that there is nothing left but a subtle Earth, of a mere white
Starch or Flower: It would then be much better, to use those Roots, whereof the
Fecula's are extracted, after they have been dried, either whole, or cut in
round slices; for, then may the Artist be confident, that their saline and
mucilagineous virtue is concentrated in their own body by exsiccation, and,
that nothing but the aqueous phlegmatic and unnecessary substance is vapoured
away. I dare moreover affirm, that what is commonly thrown away after the
expression of these Roots, is without compare, worth much more, then the
feculas from them extracted It is much better to strain the juice and depurate
it, and then evaporate it in B. M. to a consistency of inspissated juice or
extract, to make use thereof in case of need, since it will be endowed with the
virtue of the Root, and will not fail to produce the hoped for effects: with
this I shall put an end to the exemplification of Roots, to come to the other
parts of Plants, according to their Order.

SECT. II. Of Leaves.
ALthough we have amply and generally spoken of Leaves of Vegetables, when we
did handle their preparation, and their difference, in the beginning of this
Chapter of Vegetables: yet, there remain many things to add, as much concerning
the Distillation of their single Waters, as of their Spirits and Oils; for, as
concerning their extraction and reduction into Salt, we have spoken enough of
it heretofore; yet will we say something more particularly of it.

We have sufficiently instructed the Artist how to proceed with odoriferous
Plants; those that are acid and juycie, those we have called Anti-scorbutick,
which are juycy and biting, by reason of the volatile Salt contained in them,
to draw out several kinds of preparation: but, we must teach here, the way to
distill Plants for the general use of the Chemical Apothecary, according to the
classis unto which they belong.

To this end, the Artist shall have recourse to the Figure hereby annexed, for
the erecting a Furnace fit for his use in the distilling of inodorous Plants,
and not acid, such as are ladies-mantle, or Lions-foot, Burrage, Bugloss,
Cardnus Benedictus, Eyebright, Fumitory, Lettuce, Mercury, Nightshade,
Cowslip, Purslain, Dandelion or Taraxacon, Varvin, and all other Plants of this
classis, or that are kin to it. To the end this Vessel may be used with some
advantage, we must briefly explain the way how to do it, and the reasons why it
is to be preferred to others. Those that have made use hitherto, and make yet
daily, of the Leaden Bell, and its Vessel under, to distill the Waters of Plants
and Flowers, could never hinder their Waters to contract an ill odor or
burning smell, which is called Empyreuma, because they were impatient and
overhasty in ruling their fire, and that they neglected to make use of some
interposed Medium's, to hinder the too violent action of the fire, upon so ill
fixed a matter as is in Vegetables: but, when Chemists came to discover this
defect, they made it their study to prevent it. And to this purpose have they
invented the construction of this Furnace by us represented, and likewise of
the distillatory Vessel it contains, whereof follows the description.

First of all, build a round Furnace of 2 foot diameter, and as much in height,
wherein is left room for an Ash-hole, and a focus for the coals to burn in; a
foot higher then the grate of the focus, appropriate a Cauldron or Kettle made
with Plates of eight inches deep, and of each side an inch less in breadth than
the diameter of the Furnace, that it may receive heat from all parts; this
Cauldron or Kettle must also have a brim three inches broad, to hold fast upon
the sides of the Furnace, and supported under by two cross bars of Iron. This
brim must have eight holes in it, of one inch diameter, equally distant one
from the other, which may be made to open and shut, with the same mettle as the
Cauldron is, that these holes may be instead of Registers whereby to increase
and suppress the fire. This Vessel must have in the bottom two inches thick of
Sand or Ashes, to place thereupon the second Cauldron, which must be of tinned
Copper, 1 inches less of each side than that of Iron which is destinated to
receive it, and of five inches hight; this is the Vessel which must receive the
Plant, Fruit or Flower which is to be distilled; or any other liquor, provided,
it be not acid. This second Vessel is to be covered with its Head Limbeck,
which must be capacious and rising in the way of an Arch-roof with two Channels
or Noses, by which the Water is drawn off as it condenses in it; the remaining
proportions may better be conceived by the Figure hereunto annexed; but we
must, after this, speak of its usefulness.

The chief end of the Artist in the construction of this Furnace, and its
distillatory Vessel, has without question been to hinder the Empyreumatical
smell, which is ordinarily contracted by the too near action of the fire upon
the Vessel containing the Plant, which is to be distilled: but, that cannot
happen here for these following reasons; First, That the fire does not
immediately act upon the Vessel containing the distillable subject, since it
meets the bottom of the first Cauldron which offers the first resistance; after
this, the Sand or Ashes make the second, because either of these two substances
breaks the action of that devouring agent, and so the bottom of the Copper
Vessel receives only a temperate heat, and yet sufficient to cause all the
moisture of the matter to be distilled in the Limbeck Head to ascend, and there
to be converted into Water, which is received in appropriated Recipients, and
fitted for that purpose: Secondly, the Artist is not tied to so great a care,
nor so tedious an attendance: for, when he has once put his distillation in a
way, he may fill the focus with fuel or coals, without fear of any evil
accident, provided he takes care to stop exactly the doors of the Focus and
Ash-hole, and to leave no transpiration of Air to his Register, or at least so
little, that it may simply be capable to feed and entertain the fire in its
degree, when the two Noses of the Limbeck do drop in an orderly way, and
without intermission: for then is he assured that he need not heed the
governing of the fire six, eight, or ten hours.

But that which is yet more advantageous and considerable, is, that the Waters
thus distilled, have all the requisite virtue in themselves, which does consist
in the essential Salt, or the volatile Salt of the Leaf or Plant whole with its
Flower: but, you are to observe, that the matter to be distilled must be turned
and stirred every four hours, if it be solid, raising softly the Limbecks Head
by the string fastened to its pully for greater facility. And when the Plant
shall be wholly dried, it will be found void of smell, dry, and easy to be
crumbled; in such a wise, that it may easily be reduced to Powder with the
fingers end, without any kind of burning at all; but contrariwise it preserves
a green color, more or less brown, or blackish, according as the Plant was
juycie.

This Vessel does not only serve toward the distillation of Herbs, but is
useful also, to that of their Juyces; provided, they have been depurated in B.
M. before they be put in the Still-Body, to avoid that the herbaceous odor,
proceeding from the feces of the Plants, may not be communicated to their
water: so shall you have a very good water, and the inspissated juice or
Extract improperly called of the Plant. It conduces moreover, to the
distillation of fruits, as to make the water of green Walnuts, Apples, Melons,
Cowcumbers, and other like Fruits. With it may also be distilled Milk, Sperm of
Frogs, and Cow Dung; whereof is made the Water called Mill Florum; finally
herein, better then in any other Vessel, may be distilled the Flowers of
Nenuphar, red Poppy, Elder, Beans, and Honey-suckle: and to end in a word, it
is a Vessel which ought not to be wanting in a Chemical Laboratory, or the shop
of an Apothecary curious of distillation.

These Plants distilled in this manner, may easily be calcined, because they
are very dry, and then their Salt be extracted, to join with the Water of the
Plant; and so not only be made more full of virtue and efficacy, but also, fit
to be better and longer preserved, without any alteration: which is the
Apothecaries advantage, the satisfaction of the Physician, and the benefit of
the Patient.

We have yet to speak here of odoriferous Plants, which are Mercurial and
Sulphurous, and which attain not to the true period of their virtue; but, when
the outward heat of the Sun, and their internal Archeus, has concocted and
digested rheir superfluous moisture, which was a hinderance to their
perfection. This kind of Plant nevertheless, is, that which furnishes us with
the largest and fairest harvest to provide the Shops of Apothecaries, and
bestow their time with more advantage, and greater pleasure. The Plants of this
Classis are, Wormwood, Sothernwood, male and female Anise, Dill, Chervile,
Coriander, Fennel, Hysop, Marjerom, Feverfew, Balm, Pennyroyal, Parsley, Rhue,
Sabine, Scordium, or Water-Germander Tansie, and all other odorife ous Plants
which have some analogy or correspondency with those of this classis. The right
time of gathering these Plants to enjoy their virtue, is, when they are fully
blown, and the Seed begins to be framed in their ears, or heads: for it is the
right time in which the Root is wholly exhausted, and that Nature does aim at
the concentring and uniting in the Seed, the virtue yet dissipated and
dispersed in the stalk, leaf, and flowers, and in this embryonated Seed. But
the Artist must necessarily prevent the cementration, otherwise, there would be
little hopes to extract the virtue of these Plants, by help of distillation by
Water as it is done in the ordinary way of distilling Spirits. The reason is,
because, whatsoever is of a saline and volatile nature, is in a manner
digested, concocted and fixed by the union of this spiritual substance into an
Oyl-fat, clammy, and viscous, which does not easily communicate it self to
water, unless it be by disuniting its parts and bringing them to fermentation,
if I may so speak: but it is unfit to labor in vain, since we can take these
Plants in the nick of time that nature has not yet brought that Vegetable to
the height of its natural predestination, which is the perfection of the Seed,
the spring of the perpetuation, and multiplication of beeings.

When you shall have any of these Plants gathered in the morning, a little
after the rising of the Sun, in the state we have related above; cut it very
small with Cizzars, and put it in a Copper body filled foot, near the brim,
pour Water upon it to the same height, and apply the Moors-head, or Still; lute
the Joints with Paper fillets pasted with Pap made of Flower and Water, then
apply the fire to it, and leave the door of the Furnace and Registers open,
until the drops begin to fall in the Recipient, and that you may not without
burning your hand, grasp the Pipe which is between the Moores-head and the
Still-body; then close exactly the Door and Registers, that the matter may not
ascend in a body into the Moores-head, by too violent an ebullition: but, that
the vapors may only be raised and carried to the Pipe (or Worm) which runs
through the Fat wherein is the cold Water, which condenses them in a Liquor
mixed with Water, Spirit, and an aetherial and subtle Oil, as is evidently to
be seen in the Recipient where the spirituos Water bears up the Oil swiming
over. The fire must be maintained in the same degree, until the Water issuing
forth, be without odor and tasteless. After which, open the body, and take away
the matter contained in the same, which strain, and squeeze the Herb; to put to
dry and burn for the extraction of the Salt. But you must clatifie the
decoction, and evaporate to a consistency of extract, which shall contain what
is most fixed in the Plant: for, that which came out by distillation is of a
volatile nature. You must let the Recipient, which contains the first part of
what has been extracted by distillation, be at rest, that the oleaginous
substance may in time separate from the spirituous and aqueous, and gather
above it; and this done, you must separate the Oil and Water by the help of a
Cotton, which will draw it to it self, and cause it to run into the Vial, which
shall be tied to the upper part of the Neck of the Recipient, as it will appear
more clearly in the annexed Plate, in the figure adjoining to the Furnace and
its Vessel: and when the Cotton shall draw no more, by reason of the sinking of
the Oil; you must cause it to ascend, by pouring softly more Water of the same
Plant, whereof the Oil is extracted, and so continue till all the Oil be
separated from the Water. Having wrought upon a good Vegetable, and got good
store of spirituous Water, you may rectify it, to possess the Spirit by it
self, which will go forth first of all, and so continue your distillation, till
the Water comes without any smell, and then keep it for use,

This is the right method and way of Anatomizing the Plants of this last
classis, to extract their virtue, and all what may conduce in them to the use
of Physic: It is also the true method whereby you may attain to the intimate
knowledge of Plants: for, as they abound either in Oil, volatile, or fixed Salt,
in Mercury or Spirit, the indication of their use for fixed or volatile
maladies, i. e. where appear either Obstructions or Colliquations, are to be
taken: and I am confident, that Physicians will receive much more satisfaction
this way, then if they singly argue and rely upon the first and second
qualities; so vainly hitherto attributed unto them by modern and ancients
Authors: whence it appears, that Chemistry is the true Key to open Natural
Bodies, whereby to discover their virtues, and apply them next to the uses unto
which by the Creator's Providence they have been destinated for the cure and
easing of such maladies unto whom the infirmity of our nature has subjected us.

It is not a fit place for us to enlarge here upon the virtues of the Spirits,
Oils or Essences, Extracts or Salts, of these kinds of Plants, because we
intend only to show a general way of Operation, without coming to particulars:
but he that desires to be better informed this way, let him consult the learned
and excellent Dispensatory, of the experienced Schroderus, Ordinary Physician
of the City of Franck fort on the Main: where, in a very complete Abbreviate,
he will find an ingenuous description of the virtues of Plants, and all other
natural products, handled; with an order and method worthy of so eminent an
Author, to whom the Commonweal of Chemical Physic and Pharmacy has no less
obligation then the Galenick.

We will put an end to this Section, by a description of the manner to be used
in extracting the Oil of Plants, their volatile Salt, their Spirit and fixed
Salt, without any addition; which is performed by a Retort in open fire in a
close Reverberatory Furnace: taking now for an example, the Plant vulgarly
called Tobacco. Were we in a time where this Plant should be less known, it
would concern us to say somewhat of its original; but, there are so few that
can be ignorant, that it is brought from the Indies, that it would turn to
importunity to the Reader, to speak any thing more thereof. Let us only mention
in our way some of the names, because Authors who speak of it, have variously
denominated the same. The Indians call it Petum, or Petechenune, whence the
vulgar name Petun amongst the French; and because Jean Nicot, Ambassador for
the Crown of France in Portugal, was the first who did send Seeds to the Queen,
it was called the Queens-weed, (Herb a la Reyn,) and Nicotian. Others call it
the Holy-weed, by reason of its wonderful effects. And though this Plant be now
cultivated in France, England, Germany, and the Low Countries, and does prosper
there very well; yet, that which comes directly from the Indies, dried and
prepared there, is much to be preferred before that which grows in our Clime:
for, the Sun's heat is too weak with us, to digest the moisture contained in
the same, and to prepare in it that volatile Salt and balsamic Sulphur, which
does constitute the chief virtues of such remedies as are drawn out of it. Not,
but that new and fresh gathered Tobacco, such as grows in our parts, may serve
to make Salves, Plasters, Syrups, Honey, and the plain Balsom, so as it is
described in modern Dispensatories, as also many other common remedies,
mentioned in Authors, who have left upon record the praises of this wonderful
Plant. But, as we will anatomize this Plant without any addition, and give to
understand, what are the best inward qualities of it: we think it fittest, to
take well qualified Tobacco, such as that which is brought from the Plantation
of Virginia in the West-India's. And I cannot but declare my wonder, that
Physicians and Chirurgions have not continued more to practice upon this Plant,
and make use of it, as much inwardly as outwardly, since it produces effects,
which are above the expectation of those which can dexterously apply the
remedies it does afford: but, that it may no longer lay buried in oblivion, you
must distill it after this following manner.

lb iij. or iiij. of Virginia Tobacco, neither so phisticated nor corrupted;
shred it grossly, and put it in a Glass Retort, which place in a Reverberatory
Furnace, upon the cover of an Earthen pot turned upside down, and kept up upon
two Iron-bars, putting a handful of Ashes or Sand upon the said Cover, to
hinder the breaking of the Glass by the contiguity of the Earthen cover, whose
encompassing is to the Retort instead of a Lute, and a medium interposed to
break the violence of the fires action: cover the Furnace, and fit your
Recipient to the neck of the Retort, lute the Joints thereof, with a good
salted Lute, and let it dry gently; then give a gradual fire, and increase it
by little and little, until the Recipient begins to be filled with clouds and
vapors, at which time keep the fire in an equal temper, until the Glass begins
to be freed from fumes; then give it the last and extreme degree of fire, which
is, that of flame, that the matter may calcine, and no volatile, saline, or
oleaginous substance may remain, and when the Recipient grows clear of it self,
and that, though the fire does continue its action, no vapor nor liquor comes
out of the Retort, cease your operation: All being grown cold, open the
Vessels, and pour what you find in the Recipient in a Glass Bottle, that the
Spirit and and Oil may separate one from the other; after this, filtrate the
Spirit with Paper, and the Oil shall remain in the Funnel with the Paper, which
you must break with a little hole in the bottom, and so make the Oil drop in a
Vial, then rectify the Spirit by separating the Phlegm.

The Oil may be kept without rectification for outward uses: but, if you intend
it for any internal use, you must rectify it in a Retort in Sand or Ashes; and
to proceed more artificially, mix your Oil with the remaining matter left in
your Vessel after the first distillation, until all be reduced to a mass or
lump, whereof you may make Pellets of a competent bigness to be put in a new
clean Retort: which afterward placing in a Sand Furnace, draw off your Oil by
a second distillation, which will yield the same: very pure and subtle; which
then may be inwardly used for such purposes as we shall mention here-under.

This done, put all what remained from the first and second distillation, in an
Earthen Pot not glazed, or in a Crucible, to be calcined with a circular fire,
until it be reduced to whitish or grayish Ashes, which you must put to digest
in a Mattress in Ashes, with a sufficient quantity of Phlegm, which came out in
the rectification of the Spirit, to dissolve therewith the Salt contained in
these Ashes; filtrate this first solution, and pour new liquor upon the Ashes:
and thus continue until the Water comes our tasteless, and insipid, as it was
first put in: then put together all the filtrations, and cause them to
evaporate in an Earthen Platter, to a skim in a boiling Bath, and so place it
in a cold Cellar to shoot into Crystals, or dry it thoroughly in the same
vapor, working it gently with a small wooden Spatula, and, when it is
thoroughly dry, keep it for use in a well stopped Vial.

We shall not labor here to make a description of the general virtues of
Tobacco: for, there are so many modern Authors that have treated thereof,
according to the rules of ordinary method, that it would be superfluous; I am
only obliged to say, that I wonder how these Doctors, who know Tobacco only by
the rind, and superficially by his first and second qualities, do stretch the
passages which they find in Hippocrates and Galen, to bring them to their own
sense; and make these two great Genius's of Physic to speak for and against
Tobacco, without ever having the sight or knowledge of it, neither by its shape
nor effects. Let us do otherwise, and show, that Chemical Physicians are not
only contented with the superficies of things; but to the contrary, that they
open them, to penetrate to their very center, and discover what good virtue
they do contain, and appropriate it afterward to external and internal
maladies, to which they found by re-iterated experiences, noted with a solid
judgment, that they did conduce.

The Spirit of Tobacco is so full of volatile Salt, that it must insinuate
thereby its virtue; it being the property of this Salt to deterge, attenuate
and dissolve whatsoever is against Nature, of whatsoever quality, and in what
part soever contained: wherefore this Spirit may successfully be used in the
Asthma and other oppressions of the Breast, and the parts of it, proceeding most
commonly from glutinous and tartarous matters, of which this Spirit is the true
specifical dissolvent; it is taken in Hydromel, white Wine, Broth, distilled
Waters, or incisive attenuating and pectoral decoctions. The dosis is from iij.
drops to xv. or xx. according to the age and strength of the diseased Patient.
It works chiefly by Spitting, Urines, and Sweats, provokes even sometimes
Vomitting, if it meets the Stomach of the Patient full of any mucilagineous
matter, because this Spirit does immediately act upon, elevates and ferments
this hurtful lurking matter, and so qua data porta ruit: and if this Spirit is
profitable, inwardly taken, its use is not less mavelous outwardly applied;
for it has not its like, to mundifie sinewous and cancerous Ulcers; above all,
it does rarely well in the curing of Fistula's: It excels also above all other
remedies, for fresh Wounds, and Contusions, if it be mixed with Urine to wash
the parts, and afterward applied warm upon the wounded part: and, for the last
commendation of this Spirit, let us say, that Hartmannus, who was a very famous
Physician, as much renowned for the Theory as the Practical part, has found no
other remedy against the Critalline, which is the most pernicious and dangerous
accident which can happen in the French disease, than the Spirit of Tobacco,
which appeases, as it were, miraculously the extreme pains of this pernicious
disease; resolves powerfully that horrid venomous substance by which it is
caused; and hinders, in a short time, the evil and mortal consequences which
ever do accompany it.

We have said, that some part of the Oil extracted from Tobacco by
distillation, without rectifying, was to be kept, and that with much reason;
because, as this Oil is not destinated to internal uses, so is there no need to
purify it, with so much exactness: there is notwithstanding another reason yet
more pressing and pertinent, which is, that rectification should deprive this
Oil of the greatest part of the volatile Salt which it contains, and which is
intimately joined to its Sulphur. The greatest external use of this Oil, is to
consolidate new wounds, mundifie and cure all evil Ulcers, and remove all
accidents of contusions, because it potently resolves the extravassated blood,
and so does hinder the heat and inflammation, which are ever forerunners of
suppuration, which this extravassated blood presupposes to be necessary: But it
is never the intention of Nature, provided she be in time assisted by some
balsamic remedy, such as is the unrectified Oil of Tobacco. It is also good
for the Toothache, and to dissipate the chalky knots proceeding from the Gout,
and Venery. Now, as it is both the volatile Salt and Oil which jointly produce
these rate effects, it appears, that the unrectified is best for use; but, when
you will make any internal use of this Oil, you must in a manner correct its
empyreumatical odor, which is very unpleasant, and causes a rising of the
Stomach, and that cannot be performed but by rectification: It may be with a
very happy success employed against Suffocations and fits of the Mother,
against risings, inflations, and irritations of the Spleen, which do cause
short breath, by reason of the compression of the Diaphragma or Midriffe. It
may also be exhibited against intermittent Feavors a little before the fit
comes, in Water of small Centaury and ground Pine: But I rather advise, that
the Clyssus, whereof we shall shortly speak, may be made use of for this
purpose. As for the fits of the Mother, or other accidents thereof, you must
use the Water of Pennyroyal or Savin: and for the Spleen, Water of Sassafras,
or of juice of Chervil. This Oil is a very good antileptical remedy, provided,
it be exhibited upon the fall of the Moon, in Camphir'd Theriacal Spirit, or in
Volatile Spirit of Hartshorn, mixed of Lilly-Convallium and Balm. The dosis is
from ij. drops to x. But you must note, that this Oil must be made soluble with
Sugar powdered before you mix it with aqueous liquors. We have only to say a
word more of the fixed Salt of Tobacco, which possesses all its virtues: for,
besides that it is a mundifying skarrifier, very gentle in being applied upon
the driveling foul flesh of Ulcers, and upon the callous sides which hinder
cicatrizing; moreover, it gently moves the belly, if it be taken in Broths: it
is also contrary to Worms, and all other corruptions generated in the bottom of
the Stomach and the Entrails. It is also diureti^k and disopiling; removes all
obstructions in the parts adjacent to the Ventricle, chiefly those of the
Mesentery and Pancreas; it cleanses all the impurities of the Womb, if inwardly
taken; and if you place the party diseased upon a close stool, and perfume her
under with leaves of Tobacco, yielding a steem in the way of a vaporous Bath,
having boiled the Tobacco before in Urin and white Wine. The dosis of the Salt
is from iiij. to xv. or xx. grains, in decoctions or appropriated to the malady
for which it shall be used.

But if the Artist will be at the trouble to make the clyssus or compound out
of 3 principles of the Plant, which are, the Spirit or Mercury, the Oil or
Sulphur, and the Salt mixed together, in such a proportion as we have already
taught, and puts them to digest together, uncil the inseparable union of them
be made, it will be without compare, a much more efficacious remedy, than any
of the three principles separated: but the dosis must be less by half
proportion.

It may be, many will wonder, that I should attribute so many, and so different
virtues to the remedies extracted from Tobacco: but I doubt not, their wonder
will cease, when they shall take the pains, to make reflection upon the
different uses which it is put to when the Plannis but newly gathered, or even
in dried leaves, by the common people, and most Chirurgions and Physicians:
for, it is taken in smoke, in Masticatory and Powder, to provoke Sneezing;
whereof the effects are various, according to the various constitution of those
that use it: it inebriates some, it prevents drunkenness in others, causes
vomiting, sleeping, watching; to be short, it seems, that this Plant (as in
part it is true) has some universal virtue, not to say divine: It is also to
be considered, that there is some Chemical mystery hidden under the preparation
of this leaf: for, though those that prepare it, are not always capable to
give a reason of their proceeding, yet the Natural Philosopher does ever find
much to Philosophise upon; since there is an observation to be made in choosing
the great middle leafs, rejecting the undermost, and cutting off all the shoots
growing in the sides of the stalk of the Plant, with the buds or beginnings of
the flowers, and cutting also the t^p of the stalk, and all the small leaves
which grow on this and that side of the great ones, and of the stalk, to
concentrate the spirituous and saline nourishment of the Plant, and preserve it
for the sustenance and food of those 10. or 12. great principal leafs, which
grow above the middle. There is also a nicety of constellation, whose
observation is very necessary to gather Tobacco, as well as to sow it, if you
intend to do something with it more then the vulgar. The feed of Tobacco is
dedicated to the signs of Aquarius, and of Mars. It is to be sowed in the
increase of the Moon in April, a little before the stepping of the Sun into the
sign of Aries; and that with great reason and prudence, because it has need of
water and moderate heat in its beginning, which temper is scarce found in any
other season of the year. It is gathered in the decrease of the Moon in August,
when the Sun is in Leo, which is a constellation of dignity, strength, and
virtue; and in a season, which may by its heat digest, as is required, the
superfluous moisture of the Tobacco-leaves. But, that which deserves yet better
our consideration, is, that the leafs, buds, and growing flowers are not
useless, but contrariwise, are as a Balm, and a preparing and preserving
Liquor, without which, the best conditioned leafs should Lose their vigor,
strength and virtue, either by their too quick exsiccation, or their sudden
corruption and putrefaction. The juice of these parts so gathered and cut, is
extracted after they have been well beaten in a stony or wooden Mortar; then
let them be boiled with sweet Spanish Wine, called decocted Wine, or with
Malmsey, until all be well and curiously skimmed; after which, add some Salt,
until the liquor has acquired a taste and faltishness near unto that of the
brine of the Sea, and at last throw into it Anise and Ginger very finely
powdered; and let this liquor rest that it may depurate, and leave its
seculency in the bottom of the Vessel: this done, put it in Glasses very well
stopped; otherwise, all the virtue thereof* will fly away. With this liquor are
the Tobacco-leaves to be seasoned, when they are gathered: for, they use to be
dipped one after another in a Bucket filled with this liquor, made something more
then lukewarm; for, were it boiling, the virtue thereof would fly into the air,
by reason of its volatility: and besides, the too violent heat would bake the
leaf dipped in it, and make it useless. After this, lay these leaves thus
prepared one on the top of the other, and cover them of all sides, that they
may lay to digest and ferment in a manner, until the liquor has penetrated
them in every part thereof, and that they begin to grow hot; then take one of
these leaves, spread and expose it to the light, to see whether it has begun
to change color or no, which color must be ruddish or inclining toward a
rusty red, and if you find it so, uncover quickly your Tobacco, separate the
leafs; sow or join them together, and expose in a covered place, but open of
all sides, to the free passage of the air, so ordered, as that it may always
be shut up to the Sun and Rain, and, that so the leaves may temperately dry,
until they be rolled up, or pressed whole in Boxes well wrapped up in their own
leaves, and some other covering about, to keep their subtle and volatile
virtue from exhaling, which defect makes the Tobacco commonly called stale
Tobacco, fit for nothing, unless it be restored to some proportion of its
strength and virtue, by the decoction of some parcel of good Tobacco made in
Spanish Wine; though some make use only of a little Beer, with a few Spices
infused in it; and this is called, mended or restored Tobacco. I was the rather
invited to describe this Preparation, to show the necessity of the choice in
Tobacco for preparing of good remedies, and to give the more occasion to admire
the wonders shut up by the Creator's hand in this Plant, which is not applied
to that lawful use and purpose for which his infinite goodness has produced
it, namely, for the recovery and preservation of health; but to the contrary,
is abused and turned to excesses, which do offend his Divine Majesty, wound and
ruin man's health, and spoils families and civil society.

SECT. III. Of Flowers.
AMongst that great number of Flowers, which the Vegetable Family supplies us
with, with so fair so pleasant and so diverting a profusion; Nature seems to
have bestowed no greater care upon any then the Rose, which may in a manner be
called the Queen of Flowers, as much for the beauty and pleasingness of its
color and smell, as, because it is that which amongst all the Flowers,
supplies both Physic and Pharmacy with the best employment. For one of the
Authors, which has with more exactness examined all what Ancient and Modern
Physicians have drawn from the Rose either single or composite, reckons as much
as 37 several operations, which this noble Flower lends to their Art: which
makes me wonder how the Greeks should have been induced to give the name of
Flower ((...) in their language) to the Rosemary Flower by Antonomasie, a kind
of Rhetorical speech, and, as it were, by excellency; since this Flower does
not furnish so great a harvest of remedies as the Rose does. Notwithstanding,
as the Rosemary Flower is endowed as well as the Rose wi^h many excellent
virtues, and is even more balsamic; we will make use of these two Flowers in
the present Section, to teach Artists the manner of operating upon Flowers,
that by the example of these two, they may proceed upon others of the like or
approaching nature: For, as concerning other kinds of Flowers, we did
sufficiently insinuate how they were to be wrought upon, when we spoke in
general of Plants, in the beginning of the Chapter of Vegetables.

Of the Rose, and of the several Chemical Preparations made by it.
BEfore we begin to speak in particular of the several Operations which an
Artist may make upon the Rose, it is necessary we should say something of its
differences, and the election which he is to make of them, to attain the
proposed end of his work: for Roses differ in virtue according to the more or
less of their color taste and smell. For example, Province Roses, or Red
Roses, are higher in color then the rest, of a more harsh and austere taste,
their substance more compact and less alterable then that of the other kinds,
which argues a better proportioned mixture of their Salt and Sulphur, wherefore
they are more cephalic and stomachal, as the Physicians upon this account use
them rather then others for Conserves and making of Vinegar: but chiefly to
extract the tincture after they are dried, as we will teach hereafter. The pale
kind of Roses, which are called common Roses among the cultivated and garden
kind, are of a more penetrating and subtle smell then the Province, abound
more in juice, and are sooner faded and altered; in so much, that they can
scarce be dried; they have also a more saline and bitter taste which is a token
of their purging and loosening or colliquative quality, as appears by their
effects: wherefore they are most used for Distillations, Syrups, and Honeys, by
reason of their abounding Mercury, of their Sulphur and Salt preponderated by
their moisture, which renders them capable of a quick fermentation, and makes
them easily to communicate their virtue, to such subjects as do participate of
any of the three principles abounding in them.

There is a third kind of Roses, which are called Damask Roses, or Musk Roses,
of a very fragrant smell, and much less violently affecting the brain, than the
Pale Roses, not making so strong a colliquation, when they are used in purging,
and less prejudicial to women subject to fits of the Mother; which is the
reason they are preferred to others, in the preparation of purging Syrups
either single or compounded: but as these Muscat Roses are not found every
where, and for the most part, but in the hands of curious persons which
cultivate them, rather for the pleasure of sight and smell than Physical uses;
it will be lawful to make use in their place of the Wild Roses, which being
gathered in due season, will easily supply the effects of the other.

The fourth kind of Roses employed by Physicians, are, the white Rose, only
used for the Eyes and Women, for the reasons alleged already: we will not here
waste frivolously our time in making a description of all the ordinary
operations which the Rose yields to Pharmacy: We shall only say, what we think
to be necessary for instructing the Chemical Apothecary, to draw from this
lovely Flower the purest and best part of it, without loss of any of its
virtues. But before we come to particulars, we must briefly indicate the time
in which Roses are to be gathered, that you may find in them the advantages
which Nature has placed. To this end, when the Artist intends to make any use
of Roses, he must cause them to be gathered a little after the break of day,
when they have yet about themselves some small remains of the Balsamic
moisture, which the cool of the night did as it were gather and concentrate,
both without and within these Flowers: above all things, care must be taken,
that it should not be after a Rainy-day; but chiefly, when you intend them
either for conserve or drying: neither must they be gathered long after the
rising of the Sun; because, that Planet seems greedily to suck the Balsom and
Nectar of all the Flowers which are of an aetherial and delicate substance: and
amongst all the rest, Roses are the most delicate; therefore those that intend
to work upon them, must take their time opportunely, as we said just now.

How to Extract the Tincture of Red Roses.
HAving gathered your Red Roses, commonly called Province Roses, with the
required care you must take of their white bottom, when they are not yet fully
blown, but only pretty well advanced in their buds; neither must they be of the
double kind, but single and ordinary Roses; you must, besides, let them dry in
the shade between two Papers, that nothing but superfluous moisture may exhale;
and, what shall be of odor and color may be ^oncentrated by a slow and
moderate exsiccation: for, it is in that properly that consists the virtue
required by Physicians in the tincture of Roses, which is thus made.

i. of thus dried Roses, and put them in a Platter of Juggmettal, or white
Earth, pour upon it as much boiling water as is required to moisten them, and
when they are well soakt, pour upon it drop by drop, still turning the Roses,
iiij. of good Spirit of Vitriol, or as much of acid Spirit of Sulphur, or
Spirit of Salt, according to the indication taken of the disease and remedy;
after which, pour upon the whole lb iiij. boiling water, and cover the Vessel
until the liquor be cooled, which run through a Flannel or Filter. There may be
added to each pound of Tincture, if the Physician prescribe it so, i. or ij. of
Sugar; and in case it agrees with the Patients constitution. This Tincture is
an excellent remedy to correct all defects of the Stomach, and chiefly, when
out of order, by vomittings and lasks; when also digestion is depravated, and
natural appetite to meat is defective; either by reason of some relaxation of
the fibers of the Ventricle, or the dilatation of its Membranes: above all, it
is a specifical remedy, in the disease called Colera morbus, or voiding of the
Stomach both ways, provided the Patient drink it by very great draughts: for,
the Balsamical virtue of the Rose, assisted by the Stomachical acidity of
Vitriol, Sulphur or Salt, does admirably settle again all the agitations and
tempests of choler, and turns them to a gentle and pleasing calm: It is also a
very pleasing and useful drink in all hot Fevers, either continual or
intermittent: for, for the most part, these Fevers do proceed of some
corruption generated in the Stomach, which has produced an alteration in the
ferment of digestion, which never fails to introduce the malignity of the
conceived Ideas in the food of the Patient, and continually carries this venom,
and conveys it in the Veins and Arteries, which causes the differency of
Spirits, followed by the Fever and its redoubled fits. Now as this maxim in
Physic and Philosophy is very true, that, Sublata causa tollit^r effectus, the
cause being removed, the effect must cease; and these Fevers in their
beginnings, are nothing else but the products and sequels of the corruption
made in the Ventricle; it follows of necessity, that this cause being taken
away, so must of necessity cease the Fever, which was only an effect thereof.
And, as we have said heretofore, That the tincture of Roses did settle again
the Stomach and its functions in their duty; so must the ordinary drink be made
thereof, which Patients troubled with that kind of Fever are to take.

This drink also is of no less efficacy against Dysentery, Lientery, and
generally, all kinds of Lasks, which do cause in the Patient a very importunate
thirst and drought of mouth, which this tincture immediately allayes, and, as
it were, miraculously quenches.

The manner of Extracting the Water, Oil, Spirit and Salt of Roses.
WE will not repeat here, the reason why we do take the pale or common Roses,
nor the time fittest for gathering them, having already spoken thereof in the
beginning of this Section. Let us only say, how the Chemical Apothecary is to
proceed, in drawing the virtues contained in the same. And to begin:

lb viij. of pale Roses, and pick them, separating the leaves from their
stalks, which nevertheless, must not be thrown away, as is the common practice:
but, contrariwise, left with the Roses because, that yellow substance which is
in the midst of the Flower, contains a material Oil, which in the distillation
ascends in the form of Butter swiming on the top of the water, drawing to its
self the subtle and aetherial Oil of the leaves of the Rose, and fixing it;
so, that thus proceeding, the Artist will find the double or treble part more
of Oil than otherwise: put the Roses in a Body, whereof the Head, and Pipe or
Worm passing through the Fat of Water to cool the ascending Spirits, be made of
Tin, or at least of Copper newly Tinned: because otherwise, the Oil would draw
the taste and greenish color of the Copper, by reason of its volatile Salt
very penetrating and very active. Pour upon the Roses, which ought not by any
means to be bruised, the fourth part of Rainwater, if it be possible, or of
River water; then distill in the manner often already mentioned, Cease not your
fire until you perceive by the sight, taste and smell, that the water issuing
participates no more of Oil, being insipid and without smell; and when you
perceive it to be so, open the Body of your Still, and empty it in a Cask
whereof the Lie has been newly taken away, and begin your distillation with
new Roses, that you may not interrupt and lose the heat of your Furnace; and
continue this operation until you have a sufficient store of Oil to do
therewith, what we shall hereafter declare. And when you have gathered all your
distilled Waters in a great large Glass Vessel, let them rest together, that
the Oil may gather on the top, and so be drawn with a Silver Spoon: or, to
proceed yet better, strain all your Waters through a Linen, spread over a Un
Carlee.
square Frame, and all the Oil will remain upon the Linen, which must be
preserved in a very well stopped Bottle, by reason of the subtility and activity
of its parts. If you will preserve your Water as it is, you may, for it is
good; but, you may nevertheless, make it better, and much more active, and
efficacious, if you cohobate it twice over. lb viij. of Roses bruised in a
Marble Mortar. And, if you demand the reason why we have said above, that they
were to be left whole, and now we say, they ought to be bruised in a Mortar;
the answer is, That in the first distillation, we had no further intention then
to extract the Oil, without caring much for the goodness of the Water; and,
that as the Artist must know, the Oil is confounded with the Salt and Spirit,
by the mixture and contusion made in the Mortar, which would hinder it to
ascend and be freed by the action of the fire in distilling, because the Spirit
and Salt do invisibly keep it amongst themselves in the Water: upon which is
grounded our prescription to bruise the Roses in the second distillation,
intended only for the meliorating the Water, and communicating unto it a
greater virtue.

We return now to the remainder of our distillation left in the Cask; which
must be strained through a coorse Linen Strainer, and the Cake left must be
dried, and calcined, to extract, the Salt thereof in the manner above related
when we spoke of the fixed Salt of Vegetables. But, as we will put the liquor
come forth in the straining to ferment with new Roses; it might be asked, why
we have ordered the distilled Roses to be strained before fermentation; and
this question, being not without good grounds, must be answered and satisfied
with pertinent reasons; by which it may appear, that we have not said it
without very good grounds, and an absolute necessity: for, had the substance of
the Roses been fermented, the fixed Salt which is in them should have been
dissolved by the action of fermenting, and so volatilized, that all this saline
substance should have been converted into Spirit, whereas the first
distillation did extend no further (neither was intended) then to extract the
aetherial Oil, and a portion of volatile Salt of the Flower. You must then
moderately warm that which has been strained, and put it to ferment with xx.
or xxx. lb. of new whole Roses, with either Yest or Leaven, observing all the
requisites, and necessary precautions in this operation, which are sufficiently
delivered in the beginning of this Chapter, to which we send back our Artist;
as also for what concerns distillation, and rectification of the Spirit to be
extracted.

The way of preparing the true Essence of Roses.
THe example we are now to give, is not one of the least mysteries of
Chemistry, wherefore we will deliver it with all possible exactness, that the
Artist may make use of it with delight and advantage. To this end, take iiij.
of Salt of Roses, and put them in a small Cucurbite, and pour upon lb ss. of
the best Spirit of Roses: then apply a Head to your Cucurbite, and lute exactly
the Joints thereof, and draw off the Spirit in the slow heat of B. M. that it
may become alkoholisated, that is to say, well dephlegmed; for then nothing but
the pure and mere aethrial substance will ascend, and the Salt keep all the
Phlegmatic part. But this subtiliating of the Spirit is not yet sufficient;
for, it is required besides, that this Spirit be impregnated with the purest
and subtilest portion of the fixed Salt upon which it was distilled, and this
is that Spirit which Chemists do call alkalizated, as if they should say, a
Spirit participating of the Salt Alkali of its Plant; a name given by the
Arabians, to all kinds of Salts extracted from Vegetables or their parts, by
the help of calcination and elixiviation. Put then the Salt remaining after the
alkoholized Spirit in a Crucible, and dry it by moderate degrees to the fire,
until it grows red; and above all, take great care that it should not melt, and
when it is moderately cooled, put it in the Cucurbite, and the spirit being
poured upon it, distill as at first; and so continue and re-iterate three times,
drying the Salt, and distilling the Spirit, to acuate it, and furnish it with a
sufficient portion of its own Salt, which will be an uniting mean to join and
mix them indivisibly together, and to frame thereof an admirable Essence, as
much for its sweetness and perfume as for its medicinal virtues, which do far
transcend all other operations of Vegetables. Now the chief of all this
mystery, is, the Alkalisation of the Spirit; wherefore the Artist must have a
very exact regard, to make it with all requisite punctuality. To make the
mixture of these two bodies with a requisite proportion, you must put one part
of the aetherial most pure and most subtle Oil, and pour upon it three parts
of the alkalized Spirit, and you shall see them instantly unite together in a
wonderful manner; and so shall you have an Essence fit to be mixed to all kind
of liquors, which infinitely recreates the senses by its pleasant smell. And if
you join to it the Essence of good Ambergrice, and Limon Rind, it will prove a
Cordial and Cephalic remedy, not to be paralleled by any other, as much for
the excellency of its smell, as for the subtle and efficacious virtues of the
ingredients which compose the same, and are very penetrating, capable of
raising up again the Spirits dulled and extenuated, by soporiferous and
lethargick affections, which most commonly strike to the Brain, and benum its
affections; as also it is of great virtue in all failings of the Spirits and
passions of the Heart; whether this Essence be given in Broth, Wine, or Cordial
Water, or even any drops be let down between the teeth if they be closed, and
thrusted with a Feather or a little Cotton in the Nostrils: The ordinary dosis
of these Essences is from ij. to vi. drops viij. or x. in any of the
aforementioned Vehicles.

In this very manner may be prepared all the Essences of such Vegetables, as
yield an aetherial Oil, and may be fermented to extract the Spirit; whether
those Plants be odoriferous or no. For those which we do not like for the
smell, have notwithstanding their profitable uses, and specifical virtues, for
some part or other of the humane body. But, as there are some substances
extracted from Vegetables or some other bodies, which do yield notwithstanding
Oils of very great virtue, but would afford much more, were they converted into
Essences, as are Gums, Resins, and yellow Amber; we will say here only in few
words, that alkalized Spirit of Wine may be made use of to essencificate them,
or the Spirit of some other Plant which may have a correspondency with the
Disease or affected part. And this shall suffice for the Rose. We come now to
the Rosemary, which may be used in the same manner, and according to the same
directions, and so have we no more to add here, but only the manner of
preparing the Water, called of S. Elizabeth, or Isabelle, Queen of Hungary,
which is in truth a worthy noble remedy.

To make the Queen of Hungary's Water with the Flowers of Rosemary.
xx. of Rosemary Flowers, gathered a little after the rising of the Sun, put
them in a double Vessel, and pour on them xxx. of alkoholized Spirit of Wine;
lute exactly the Joints where they meet, and put in digestion to extract in a
very slow heat of the vaporous Bath, during three natural days: let the Vessel
cool before you open it; after that, draw the Tincture and strain the Flowers:
filtrate and keep by it self one part of this Balsamic Tincture, to use both
internally and externally; for it has as much if not more virtue than the
Water, but is not so pleasant nor subtle. You must distill the other part in B.
M. in a heat so well graduated, that the heat of the Limbeck may not contract
any heat at all, and that the Artist may distinctly reckon two or three,
between the falling of each drop, and so continue till you have reduced the
Tincture to the consistency of an Extract. You must exactly stop the Bottle in
which you put this Water, because it is extraordinarily subtle. Zapata, an
Italian, both Physician and Surgeon, does attribute to the remedies
extracted from Rosemary almost innumerable virtues, and that with much reason;
for, this Plant is full of a volatile Salt and Sulphur, two of the chiefest
agents of Nature: but chiefly, when their virtue is animated by the subtility
of the Spirit of Wine, which does in a moment penetrate from the center of the
Stomach to the circumference of the Body, and does inspire a new vigor into
all the functions of our life. All the virtues of this Balsamic Tincture Water
and Extract, can scarce be worthily enough described and magnified. For, what I
be seech you, can be more wondered at and magnified, then the restoring of the
Queen of Hungary, by the help of this Water, when she was sick with Palsy and
Gowt, and grown so decayed, that she had no motion of the body free from
impediment, and that, being 72 years of age; and yet this subtle and balsamic
Spirit proved to have so noble irradiating a virtue, that she was restored to a
very great degree of health and vigor; insomuch, that she did not appear to
have been above five and twenty years old: and the King of Poland, taken with
her beauty and youthfulness, courted her to his wife. This is a remarkable
effect of this remedy as to the internal virtue, which we owe to the faith of
History: But I must also relate here another external cure, to prove more and
more the noble and excellent virtue of this Water, by what happened to a
Serving-Maid in my own house; which by falling upon the hindg of a Door, had
received a great bruise in the Forehead; and having on a sudden repercuted the
tumor raised in the place, by binding hard upon it Linen dipped in fair Water,
with a piece of Gold put upon it, took away all outward sign of any hurt; but,
the accidents which followed a little after, made it sufficiently appear, that
there was blood shed under the Pericranium: for she soon after grew heavy and
sleepy, did stagger as Drunkards use to do, and spoke nothing but idly, without
feeling, with all this, any sharp pain, and leaving any outward token of her
Disease, which occasioned me to apply a cross-folded Linen dipped in this Water
of the Queen of Hungary upon the place where she had received the contusion,
and to make her take a good spoonful of it inwardly, which did put her in a
slumber, or rather sleep, for the space of one hour; and when she awoke again,
she said, she found her self cured, and immediately walked and recovered her
perfect Senses: but, that by which her cure did much better appear to be true,
was, that all her Forehead, Nose, and the parts about the Eyes, did appear of
a color as of Marbled Paper; because, the blood which had settled under the
Skull or Pericranium, and did cause all the former accidents, had been
digested, and as it were dissolved, by the subtle and penetrating virtue of
this admirable Water: so, that after this, she needed no more but the
application of a second folded Linen, which perfected the cure, without ever
any accident since. I have yet many other Experiments and Observations made of
the noble Effects of this Water: but, it suffices to have spoken generally of
the virtues and dosis of the Tincture, Water, and Extract. They are in truth
specifical remedies, and chiefly dedicated to the Brain, Womb, and all Diseases
incident unto it; as Apoplexy, Palsy, Epilep^ie, Vertigo's, and other like
Diseases. They strengthen the sight, and do correct the ill savor of breath,
corroborate the Stomach, remove the obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and the
Mother; are wonderful against Jaundise, and a sure remedy against the Whites;
finally cherishes the Heart and all it functions, repairs decayed Memory, and
preserves in an equal state and vigor both internal and external Senses,
either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied. The dosis of the Tincture and the
Water, is from i. to iiij. in white Wine, Broths, or some other appropriated
liquor to the disease. But you must note, that in case you exhibit these
remedies in Broth, you must expect to mix them, until the Broth be of a
temperate heat to be taken, otherwise all the virtue would be lost and vapor
away, by reason of its too great subtilty. The dosis of the Extract is from ss.
to i. either alone or mixed with some Conserve, or dissolved in white Wine, or
some distilled Water. This remedy is so necessary by reason of the accidents
happening every moment in a family, as hurting, burning, over-weariness, and
colds, that it would be almost necessary to have it still at hand, to prevent
by a ready help and sure assistance, the evil consequences and great griefs
which ordinarily follow the beginning of these Diseases. Principiis obsta: sero
medicina paratur, Dum mala per long as invaluere moras.

SECT. IV. Of Fruits.
FRuits are that part of Vegetables which are less regarded and made use of in
Chemical Pharmacy: wherefore, we shall have little to say concerning their
Preparation. Since we find Coloquint only worth our taking notice, and
bestowing of our pains. And, as it is a Purgative often used, and in whose
correction hitherto much error is committed; we shall set forth only here what
Reason and Experience have taught us upon that subject.

Though the most famous Chemical Authors have prescribed to make the Extract of
Coloquint with Spirit of Wine, yet do I differ from them in judgment in this
particular. Because the Fruit of Coloquints is volatile, and has a subtle and
dangerous Salt in itself, which causes strange colliquations, and corrodes the
Stomach and Guts, as it plainly appears, when this unsafe remedy has caused
any hyper-catharrs or over-purgings. Now the Spirit of Wine draws from the
substance of the Coloquint, nothing else but the volatile and hurtful Salt,
without touching the fixed part at all, which is that that truly purges the
serosities, clammy substances and mucosities of the body: Moreover, the Spirit
of Wine does so subtilize and attenuate the Body of the Colloquint, that it
carries it into the very Veins and Arteries, whence it attracts the best and
purest part of the blood. The Artist then must find out some way to correct and
extract this purging Fruit, that it may yield its faculty very conducing to
that end, without any hurt or danger. But it must be performed by a Menstruum,
differing in nature from Spirit of Wine, that it may fix in some manner the
malignant volatility, which predominates in this Fruit, and causes all its ill
effects; wherefore the corrective and Menstruum of Coloquint, must of necessity
be distilled Vinegar, provided, it be assisted and animated with a fixed
penetrating and subtle Salt, which may act upon this volatile part, and alter
its nature: this Salt is that of Tartar, according to Sennertus his
preparation, as we will teach when we come to teach the Operations upon Tartar.
For we regard very little here, the pretended correction of ancient and new
Dispensatories, which rest only in the pulverisation and mixture of Aromatical
Substances and Gum Dragant, to hinder the dangerous effects of Coloquint. The
manner then of the true Extract is this.

How to prepare truly the Extract of Coloquints.
Coloquint of the whitest and lightest you can find; separate the Seed
contained in the pulp or flesh of the dried Coloquint, because some are afraid
of its violent operation: But, because it can proceed from no other cause, but
its volatile sulphurous Salt, in which consists all the venomous and hurtful
quality; and, that we teach here, how to fix and correct it; we shall also take
the half of the Seed to the double of the Pulp to make our Extract; reduce all
to gross Powder, which pour in the Mattress, and imbibe by little and little
with good distilled Vinegar, impregnated with ss. of the prepared Tartar,
according to Sennertus way for every pound of Vinegar, and when all is well
soakt, pour over of the same Vinegar about four fingers height, and put it to
digest in Ashes to a moderate heat the space of 8 days, agitating and stirring
the Glass 3 or 4 times every day at the least; observing also, that your vessel
be not filled above half, because this Fruit having been much contracted in the
former drying of it, when it comes to resume its ordinary bulk in the
Menstruum, it swells extraordinarily, and so might endanger the breaking of
the Vessel, and loss of the substance and labor, when you should least think
of it; having then laid it thus 8 days, strain and percolate the liquor, and
put the Cake again in new digestion as before. The liquor you must only
filtrate through a Linen; and, if there remains any substance of the Body,
join it again to the new digestion, and re-iterate three times the operation of
straining, percolating, filtrating and digesting in embers, and, so shall you
be sure to have extracted and corrected all what was good and bad in the
Coloquint: Evaporate after this all your Digestions to a consistency of
Extract; whereof keep one half, to exhibit with some good Mercurial Preparation
in Venerous diseases; as also in Dropsies, and Arthritical Diseases, provided,
your Patient be of a strong and robust constitution: The dosis is from grain
ij. to ss. and a whole. If it be exhibited without Mercury, you must prescribe
after it a small draught of Malmsey, Spanish Wine, strong Mead, or some other
good generous Wine; or give it in the same. But, if there be any Mercury
incorporated with the Extract, you must prescribe a small Broth after, wherein
you have mixed X grains of Coral, and as much of powdered Mace. But in case, you
desire to give the Extract of Coloquint in a larger dosis, and without any
danger of doing hurt; you must pursue and complete the due preparation of this
Extract: Put it then in a Mattress, and to each dragm of the same add i. of
soluble Magistery of Coral, and circulate it one whole Month in a Mattress
doubled, or Pelican, well luted; having first poured upon it Spirit of
tartarized Wine to the eminency of four fingers; the circulation must be
performed in a slow heat of B. M. And when it is ended, all must be poured in a
Glass Cucurbite, adding to it the weight of i. of Nutmeg-Oyl made by
expression, well mixed and united with ij. of Sugar in Powder; put this
Cucurbite in B. M. and draw off the Spirit of Wine by distillation, and when no
more Spirit ascends, increase a little the fire, and evaporate all this mixture
to the consistency of an Extract, which may be made in Pills: so shall you have
a purging Extract perfectly corrected, and of safe use in all cases where
Coloquint is wont to be recommended by Physical Authors: but chiefly, in all
diseases of the Brain, Nerves, Joints, and Lungs: and, therefore no scruple is
to be made in exhibiting this Extract or Magistery so prepared to persons
affected with either Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Vertigo's or swiming of the Head, but
chiefly, in all accidents of Venerial diseases: The dosis is from vi. grains to
i. and ss. in the Pap of a roasted Apple, or some pleasing Jelly: It might also
be dissolved in Spanish Wine; but it may contract an ungrateful bitterness,
therefore some such vinous Liquors o^ Broths are rather to be taken after,
according to the constitution of the Patient, and the nature of the disease.
But, as those which apply themselves to Chemical Physic, and consequently, to
the reading of Authors treating thereof, shall find in Rullandus, and several
others, mention made of a Specifical Spirit against several obstinate diseases,
to whom the name of Spiritus vitae aureus Rullandi is attributed, and yet the
description thereof is not to be found in the Author it self, and what others
do deliver of it, is but conjectural; I have thought it necessary, to ease the
mind of Artists upon this matter, to join my own opinion to that of others for
their satisfaction. They that maintain this Spirit to be made out of Coloquint,
say, that one of the conditions of it was to Purge without Vomit; and that, by
consequence, this remedy could not proceed, but from this fruit, which is the
only Vegetable purging with so small a dosis, and chiefly, being exalted by the
help of Spirit of Wine: for, had this Medicine been both Purging and Vomiting
at once they would have all attributed its virtue to some Antimonial
Preparation; but as it is not Emetik, the most judicious have believed, that it
was Spirit of Wine impregnated by a long digestion and Circulation with the
virtue of Trochisks Alhandal, which are nothing else but prepared Coloquint.
Others do maintain the contrary, amongst whom Franciscus Antonius, a London
Physician, is none of the least considerable: for, they will have it to be a
preparation of Potable Gold, or some other tincture extracted from this noble
metal; and allege for their reason, that Coloquint being a Vegetable cannot
extend so far its virtue, as are those attributed by Rullandus to this his
Preparation in the Centuries of his Observations; and, that none but a Mineral
remedy, or Metallic one, can be capable of this Universality of action: and
moreover, that it is not without reason or mystery, that this Author gives unto
it the name of Golden Spirit of Life, or spiritus Vitae de auratus: seeming to
be willing by this denomination, to insinuate what he would have concealed in
his writings. Though it seems, that the reasons alleged of both sides are
valuable; yet I am forced to subscribe to the first opinion, which holds for
Coloquint; because I am informed by several very ancient and creditable
Physicians, who profess to have it from young Rullandus, that the Spirit which
his Father used, and whereof he relates the Histories in his Centuries, was
nothing else but the Tincture of Trochisks Alhandal: But, that the time,
Menstruum, weight of the Trochisks, and their Preparation, was to be observed;
and, as this remedy is full of many noble virtues, I have thought my self
obliged to set it here, though it be not so well corrected as the last Extract,
whereof we have given the description, since the acid and fixative Spirit has
not been used, but for the Preparation of Trochisks; and, that the Salt which
did accompany it was an Alkali, which deads and bl^nts the malignant action of
the volatile Salt of Coloquint; it is nevertheless to be considered, that the
Menstruum used in the preparation of the Spiritus vitae deauratus is
impregnated with the purest parts of this Salt Alkali, since it must be the
Spirit of Wine alkalized, which shall extract the Trochisks Alhandal, and that
by consequence it shall correct the malignity thereof, by the help of this
Salt, and the long re-iterated digestion: which is thus performed.

The manner of Preparing the Spiritus vitae aureus, Rullandi.
THe Golden Spirit of life of Rullandus. very white and light Coloquint,
cleanse it exactly from all its seed, and shred and cut it as small as you can
with Cizzars; then reduce it to Powder, having first anointed your Pestle with
expressed Oil of Nutmeg, or Oil of Mastick drawn by distillation; searce the
Powder, and with good distilled Vinegar, reduce it to a Paste in a Mortar; then
frame this Paste into Pills, or Trochisks, having first anointed your hands
with the said Oils; dry these Trochisks or Pellets in the shade, between two
Papers, and reduce them to Powder again: and beat them the second time in a
Mortar with the same Menstruum of Vinegar; frame your Pills or Trochisks, and
dry them, and so re-iterate the third time; and, thus shall you have your
Trochisks Alhandal fit for all uses and appositions, and much safer then those
that are prepared after the old way with the mucilage of Gum-Dragant.

i. of these Trochisks reduced to very subtle Powder, and put them in a
circulatory Vessel, or a double Vessel (de encontre), pour upon it lb i.
alkalized Spirit of Wine; stop exactly the Joints of the Vessels, and expose
your matter to digest and extract, to the reverberation of the Suns rays during
the space of 15 days; this time ended, open the Vessel, and add ss of these
Trochisks in Powder, then stop it and put it again as long a time in digestion;
open your Vessel again, and add for the third and last time ij. of the same
Trochisks reduced to Powder, and continue the same digestion for 15 days more.
This ended, strain or percolate the liquor, and squeez the remaining matter,
then filtrate the Tincture by a Paper, and you shall have the Golden Spirit of
Life of Rullandus, in its perfection, which you may make use of in such cases
and diseases as you shall find related in his Centuries, or in all other
diseases wherein we have already said, that the Extract was useful and
conducing. The dosis is from i. to vi. and even to i. if it be used in liquor:
but, if you draw back the Spirit of Wine, and reduce this Liquor to an Extract:
the dosis then must be from vi. grains to xxiv.

We could have added to this Section of Fruits, several other Operations drawn
from these Mixts, as the burning Spirit of Pears or Apples, and several other
fruits of this nature: but, as no body is ignorant, that the juyces of these
fruits will ferment of themselves; and, that Art contributes no more to it than
the bare distillation, to draw the Spirit thereof: I have thought it
unnecessary, to deliver particularly the manner of it here, since we shall
furnish a sufficient example, when we come to teach of the Anatomy of Wine, in
the Section of Juyces. It seems also, that we should have been obliged, to
declare in this Section, how the burning Spirits of Elder-Berries and
Dane-wort, of black Cherries, Straw-berries, Raspeses, Goos-berries, and other
like fruits should be made: But, as we reserve the example of their
fermentations, where we shall speak of Juniper Berries, we refer to deliver our
selves here fully to the Artist there. There is only a warning to be given
concerning these fruits, that the Juniper Berries are to be disti^led before
fermentation, because they have in themselves great store of aetherial Oil,
which must be extracted before they ferment; but, that as these other fruits
are only juicy and without any portion of Oil, unless it be that which is
concentrated in their Seed, so is it not necessary to distill them before
fermentation.

SECT. V. Of Seeds, or Berries and their Seeds.
WE have already given a general Idea of the Composition of Seeds and their
difference, when we did treat of Vegetables in general; we have also
insinuated, as it were, the manner of distilling them, to extract their virtue;
but, as we know by our own experience, that these general Maxims do not enough
design the work; we must particularise the Operations, according to the
division we shall make of this universal genus in four other subalternate
kinds, which will be, The insipid and inodorous Seeds; the odoriferous and
aromatical; the inodorous, but of a subtle and biting taste; and finally,
those which have scarce any smell, unless they be rubbed or squeezed, and are
endowed with a Honey-taste mixed with some Balsamic and Aromatical favor. For
the first, we shall take the Wheat, Rye, and Barley, to make their Anatomy, and
Extract out of them the true Aqua-vitae: For the second, we shall take the
Seeds of Anise, Fennel, and Parssey, from whom we shall extract a spirituous
Water, and aetherial Oil: For the third, we will take the Mustard Seed, or
Garden-Cresses, which we put into fermentation to distill thereof a volatile
Spirit, and which we will distill also without addition by Retort, to extract
the volatile Salt, the gross Oil, and the acid biting and mercurial Spirit: For
the fourth, we will take Juniper-berties, whereof we will prepare several
differing remedies, and very useful to Physic and Pharmacy.

I doubt not, but many will think it to be a very common theme to insert here
the Anatomy of Wheat, or Corn, Rye, and Ba^ley; because as these eeds are very
common, it would seem I should bring in some more rate Subjects for my purpose:
but let them seriously consider, and make a due reflection upon their daily
food, that they should not be displeased to be taught, what portion of Spirit
of life is contained in the Bread they eat, and without the daily use of which
they cannot be; and, though the vain babbling of some, who pretending much to
Philosophy, and thinking to have search Nature thoroughly, make a great noise,
and seem to be sufficiently satisfied, with saying, That digestion is performed
by the proper heat of the Stomach; without showing in what manner this heat
does act upon the matters which it is to digest: that, besides, this digestion
produces a chyle as white as any Cream, without explaining at all by what means
it is performed, and, that they infatuate by these empty words, the minds of
those which apply themselves to common Physic and its parts: It concerns our
duty and public safety, to give to understand, that all these defects do
proceed only from the ignorance of Chemistry, which would have taught them as
we are going to show; That the fermentation artificially used in the Corn, is
the same which the Stomach uses in the Ventricle: and consequently, the
Chemical Artist may make a real and true demonstration thereof, without any
need of opening or anatomizing any living Animal to be surer of it. For we will
give to understand, by the action of fermentation and the Spirit we shall
extract thereof, that it is in vain to use so many words as there are daily
made about heat and cold, and the first and second qualities of Mixts; which
are properly Chimera's filling the mind with unnecessary terms, and dulling our
natural light, discouraging many from the earnest search of Physical truths, to
acqui^e thereby the knowledge of several noble remedies, which would be
profitable to the Members of Civil Society: This truth was illustrated two
years ago in the Royal Garden established for the culture of Medicinal Plants,
and the Theorical Lectures of Chemistry, and demonstration of its Operations,
which I then was appointed to make by order of the Kings first Physician M.
Vallot: for, when I came to speak of fermentation and its wonderful effects,
and was about to prove the truth of my reasonings by an operation which I made
upon Seeds: the most part of the Auditors, which had been prepossessed with a
doctrine relying only upon words, but void of effects, went away, as if what I
said then, and did demonstrate, had been some trivial and too familiar a
business: though none of them could understand or apprehend this manner of
Philosophy, neither conceive the great mysteries which Nature has been pleased
to reveal to us, when she made obvious to our eyes natural fermentations, which
ought to be our true model, to attain to the perfection of artificial ones; as
we will make appear in the sequel.

Of Ferment and its Action, and how the Fermentation of Corn is to be
performed; as also of Rye and Barley, to extract the burning Spirit thereof.
ALthough the art of baking Bread, and brewing Beer, seems for the present vile
and abject; yet nevertheless, there be many learned persons, and even of those
which will be accounted searchers of Nature, and vers't in her mysteries, that
feed upon both, without ever having made a judicious reflection, why these
aliments do nourish and sustain them, much less, what portion of them is
converted into their substance for the preserving of their life. Though such a
study should be the chief employment of those that undertake to treat of Nature
and its Products: and, as we have so often said, that Chemistry only can
introduce Man into Natures Closet and Sanctuary, there to discover her naked
and hidden beauty; so will we endeavor to clear this truth, and explain it
more essentially here than any where else. By the description we intend to make
of the Introduction of the Leven and Ferment in those substances by which we
are nourished, which does evidence and manifest unto us by its action, what
portion of vital spirituous and celestial substance there is in the matters
which are employed daily by us for the preservation of our life. Now we must of
necessity have recourse to the inventor of Leven, if we pretend to find its
original any where else, than in the hand of God himself, and the nature of
Light and Spirits: since the action of ferment is all divine; it is properly
that fire of Heaven which ancient Poets have adumbrated in the theft of
Prometheus, and which fince has been instrumental in the propagation of all
Arts, since it is the only sharpener of Spirits, which illuminates and guides
them to the noblest knowledge. For if any do attribute the knowledge of Leven
to Tradition, we must return to the first Inventor which can be no body else,
but our first Parent, who had his knowledge by infusion; and if we attribute it
to Chance, it must of necessity follow, that the first discoverer should have
found by accident some fermented matter which should have made him conceive,
that the substance acting in this fermented body, did open and dilatate it, and
introduce in it several qualities by the alteration caused by the ferment,
which occasioned him to take notice of some new productions, and as a kind of
new generation in the fermented subject. Now it is not possible for any man to
have all these considerations, and make these reflections, without a previous
tincture, or acquired and adopted knowledge of natural Philosophy. And so by
the help of either of these two guides, he must have extricated by the help of
the External Senses, that which his Internal had preconceived, or, what is yet
truer, his smell and taste must have invited him to meditate thereupon, since
there is no fermentation, without some spirituous subtle and penetrative
odor, which suggests immediately to our reason this conclusion, that such an
effect cannot be produced, but by a celestial agent, and of an igneous nature;
moreover, the taste does meet with a certain biting acidity, which is neither
harsh nor corrosive: but, to the contrary, pleasant and evincing clearly that
there is some very subtle Spirit hidden therein: which must of necessity have
obliged him who found out the first use of Leven, to make his Experiment of
this fermented matter, with the mixture of some other that should naturally
incline to fermentation, and so came to discover the effect thereof, which
since has spread and communicated it self to Posterity. Nevertheless, which
way soever men came first to the knowledge of ferment and its action; we must
refer the praise and glory of the invention to the Author of Nature, and the
Creator of all natural productions; since those that have applied themselves to
seek its original, and the way of its operation have manifestly been convinced,
that it had a source and original above Nature it self, since all what the
sublimest wits have ever been capable to say of it, has never been sufficient
to express its Essence; they contenting themselves only to say, That as God and
his Attributes are the same thing, of which the humane mind can only conceive
the existency, and whereof also we can affirm nothing but by Negatives: so
likewise, the deepest Philosophers acknowledge Ferment and its action: but,
they could never come to give an exact definition of what it is, and the manner
of its action. For we find in holy Writ, that Moses has employed no other term
but Gods fiat, let the thing be, to express the mind and will of God, which
made, as it were, created things issue from Himself, as very well has noted
one of the most learned Physicians of our age, when he he says, That God in
the work of Creation, did in a manner open and explicate Himself, as in a Book,
in which he has left his Picture drawn in most beautiful and visible
Characters; as if God had lodged and placed himself amongst the Beeings or
created Substances; that they may the better partake of his goodness. Now as
the intention of the Creation was to cause a duration and perpetuity of created
substances, by a long sequel of generations; God placed the ferment or leven in
the confused mass of the Chaos, to introduce in it by his Omnipotency the Seeds
of all sublunary things, whereof he had the Idea's in himself from all
Eternity. By which we know Ferment to be nothing else, but a spark of celestial
and divine light, harboring in all individual Substances, which nevertheless
does not appear to the Internal Senses, much less to the External, and yet
notwithstanding does work perpetually, and reduce all things from power into
act, to convey them to the end of their natural predestination. We have no more
at present to say upon this matter, but, that our ignorance causes here
admiration; and, that we are forced to depart from contemplation, and stoop to
action, according to the measure of knowledge which God has permitted us, that
is, to imitate, though a far off, and at a great distance the mysteries of
natural fermentations by artificial ones.

To attain then to the perfect way of this noble operation, you must prepare a
portion of the Seed which you are to ferment, that it may entirely be disposed
to receive the ferment; and, be capable besides, to introduce it in a great
quantity of the like unprepared Seed, which is thus performed. Choose the time
of the Vernal Equinox for this preparation; because, then Nature is in a kind
of motion, to make all things bud and germinate in the renewing of the year:
wherefore she makes use to this end of all the astrations or influences of the
Stars; which by means of the vernal Rain, impregnated with a very subtle and
efficacious. Spirit and Salt, which renders it penetrative and permeable, more
than at any other time of the year, does soecundate the Earth. Take then lb L.
of Wheat, Rye, or Barley, and put it to soak in a wooden Tub in Rainwater
gathered in the Vernal Equinox; or, if the season will not afford it, in good
River-water; let there be no more water then what is sufficient to soak well
your Grain, and leave it so during 24 hours, then let the water run away, by a
hole which is to be under the Tub; after which, take away your Grain from the
Tub, and put it in an aired place, but not exposed to winds; make an heap
thereof of the height of one foot and an half; cover it with a Linen cloth
first, and a Woollen one thereupon, and so let it lie together and softly
contract a heat* until you find that the Grain has begun to germinate, or bud
and shoot out a small filament white and very thin, as if it were white Silk;
then uncover your grain, because, that filament witnesses that the heat has
already sufficiently excited the internal and fermentative Spirit of the Grain,
to reduce it from power into act, by the means of that spirituous substance
which it had drawn from the water, that had rowsed and excited this Internal
Spirit, which before did lie Dormant, and concentrated in it self: for, if you
did let it lie longer covered, it would absolutely ferment, and turn to
putrefaction, which would spoil all the inmost part of the heap, and convert it
into a confuse and shapeless mass, which would degenerate into Earth, and
become as a ground and place of nourishment to the other part of the Grain in
the Superficies; and in a short time would grow and be converted into grass, by
reason of the excess and abundance of water, and the precipitation of the heat.
Now to prevent all these accidents, you must spread your Malt or germinated
Corn in a well aired place, and permeable to the wind, it must not be higher
than half a fingers breadth, that it should the sooner be dried; so shall the
air and wind dissipate the superfluous humidity, and concentrate this vital and
spermatick power, which otherwise would have vanished away, and been lost and
dissipated by the excess of heat and moisture. When you begin to perceive the
grain to grow dry in the superficies, stir it often, to hasten the exsiccation
of it; and, that the Spirit that was already in action, may recoil and
concentrate it self again in its own body; which does not cease, nevertheless,
to retain a disposition more inclinable to the production of its own Spirit,
than all other Grain which has not been so prepared. And as I have said, that
the Grain had sucked the spiritual and subtle part of the water, which was as
its own preservative Salt; we must insist a little more in explicating this
mystery for the instruction, and in the behalf, of such as are not yet
acquainted with the noble actions of Nature, and the ways she uses in her
operations: Besides, that it will bring some light to what we have already said
above, of Ferment and its action. To conceive this the better, it must be
observed, that Nature has placed in every Individual Substance a kind of
magnetism, which causes it with a quick and sudden earnestness, to attract
whatsoever is analogous to its Internal Spirit, from the things with which it
is joined. Now this Internal Spirit is shut up, as invisible, in the visible
body of the sulphurous volatile Salt contained in the kernel or gross body of
the Seed, which, to speak properly, is the soul and life of the thing: so that,
when this Grain soaks in the Vernal Rainwater impregnated with the invisible
Seeds of all things, it attracts potently and greedily, what is most fitting
and analogous to advance it self to that perfection to which it was destinated
by Nature. And, when it is filled with it, it begins to conceive a heat in it
self, and to ferment, whereby to produce the bud or germen, which is the
principal of all vegetation: which would act and extend its power further, if
the Artist did not check and draw back this stirred power, which, unless
hindered, would pass into action. But the clearest and most natural proof we can
bring, that the Grain has attracted the saline and spirituous portion of the
water, is, that this water in a very short time will turn to corruption, and
does contract a putrescency and ill smell above all others, which does so
offend and irritate the Brain and the Organs of Respiration, that it will
almost choke those that come near unto it. They that in March and September use
to go by the doors of Brewing-houses, may best give testimony to this truth:
for, those two seasons being the time they prepare greater store of Malt for
brewing of their Beer, and the waters lying still in their houses and the
street, they produce a most abominable and nauseous smell. And they that have
wrought with Equinoxial water, and preserved full Casks thereof, know that it
never corrupts, and can keep without corruption whole years, which is not so
with the Rainwater of other seasons of the year. By which it evidently
appears, that this long preservation cannot proceed, but from the saline
Spirit, which the Stars had as it were darted with their influences into this
water; and that, as the Corn has attracted it by its magnetism to help
germination; so the water being deprived thereof, could not preserve it self
without alteration, corruption, and putrefaction.

Take lb xij. ss. of this Grain so germinated, or Malt, being dried, and put it
to lb xxx vij. ss. of Wheat, Rye, or Barley, severally, or all the three kinds
together; and let it be grossly grounded, as Brewers do their Malt for Beer:
Having thus your Meal prepared, put half of it in a Cask, newly emptied from
Wine, and as much in another; pour upon it half boiling water with Buckets, and
stir incessantly your Meal with a wooden Shovel, or any like Instrument, and a
four-pinned wooden Fork, to moisten thoroughly your Meal, and make as it were a
dissolution of the internal substance of the Grain; and, when you have put 8 or
10 Buckets of scalding water in the degree aforementioned, and that the Meal
is well mixed and allayed, add some cold water, until all be reduced to so
moderate a heat, that the hand may be suffered therein without hurt or
inconveniency: that done, proportion to every Tun of Liquor half a Bucket full
of Yest of Beer, which shall be unto it instead of a Leven or Ferment; because
this Yest is nothing else but fermented Flower, which the action of
fermentative Spirit expels out of the Cask as unnecessary, superfluous and full
of feculency, having preserved yet in it self the fermenting power, which it is
capable to introduce in the matter which is to be fermented. Having diligently
and exactly agitated and mixed the Leven with the matter, you must cover the
Tuns with wooden covers, and put on the top a Linen four-folded cloth, and
thereupon a Rugg, and look from time to time if the fermentation begins, which
shall be noted by the rising of the grossest part of the Corn above the Liquor,
and a swelling round about in the figure of an Hemisphery: Things being thus
prepared, take care the matter should not run over, and make too quick an
ebullition, which is a token of too much heat or too much leven; and, in such
case, take away two Buckets full of it, or pour upon it a Bucket of cold water,
and then let it work of it self. That which is most worthy of a Physical
Philosophers consideration, and more to be admired in the working of this
fermentation, is, that when that round swelling in the shape of an hemisphery
is formed; and, that the Ferment has raised the gross body of the Grain to the
superficies, then appears the wise Providence of the Great Master of
Fermentations; for it serves as a Bulwark and defense against the eruption of
Spirits, which act upon the matter from the center to the circumference, and
play under this incrustation, until they have dissolved and volatilized all the
parts of the body, upon which they act, except the uppermost skin, which is
about this incrustation, which cleaves by intervals, and discovers under it a
Cream as white as Snow, that dilatates it self and frames bubbles: which
breaking, affects the Nostrils with a spirituous penetrating vapor, subtle
and biting, that tickles the Nose, and would in a short time stupifie and
inebriate; if you held your Nose over the Vessel, just as the volatile and
narcotick vapor of Wine would do, when it begins to ferment in the Vessel. Now
as we have engaged by the Fermentation we would describe, to show the nature of
that which is performed in man's stomach; for a greater evidence of this truth,
we will make a parallel betwixt both: for, as it is evident, that purity is
separated from impurity; and that the substances which did seem to be
heterogeneous become homogeneous by the action of the Ferment, which dissolves
the substance of the Grain, and mixes it with the water, to alter its taste and
odor by communicating the Spirit unto it; the same is performed in the
Ventricle, where all whatsoever we swallow of a liquid and solid substance,
does mix and coalesce together to become one mass of the same nature, though it
should seem that what we have taken in, should be of very different kinds and
qualities, as hard and soft, salt and sweet, harsh and and spiced, fat and
Oily, the acidity of the Stomach, and whatsoever else of several substances
meet there: all that, I say, makes an uniform chyle, by the help of the
volatile Spirit, lurking in the bottom of the Stomach, and of an acid nature,
as is also aliment of Leven. But, that which does yet more illustrate this
conformity and likeness of fermentation, is, the smell, which by eructations or
belchings is brought some few hours after meals to the mouth and nostrils,
which do represent the taste and smell of what has been eaten and drunk; and
chiefly, after drinking new Wine or new Beer, the belchings in their smell
yield by their exhalation, a fermentative and tickling Spirit, like unto that
we have mentioned above, which cannot better be apprehended, then by comparing
those bubbles, which are formed in the purest part of the chyle of our
fermentation of Grain, which send forth this subtle and tickling Spirit that
does invade the Nostrils; for the same happens in the Stomach, and when the
eruption of these bubbles is made, it forces the action of belching, and then
appears to the sense the taste and smell of what predominates in the chyle. All
what we have now said, does show how much it does import, that as a Physician
should be well skilled in the good fermentation and its effects, since from her
does depend the preservation of our health: so must he also be well verst in
the contrary disposition of it, which is for the most part the occasional
internal cause of all diseases; a truth confirmed by Hippocrates himself, when
in his Aphorisms he says, That the sour or acid belchings of sick persons
recovering, are of a good presage; which signifies no more in substance, but,
that the Stomach begins to recover its strength, and the digestion to be well
performed, because the fermentative natural acid has recovered the upper hand;
whereby it may safely be concluded, and with great reason, that all things will
go better and better.

But we return to our Fermentation, which, during this digression, we left in
its progress; the knowledge whereof is of no small importance. We say then,
that when the Artist sees, that what was lifted up by the action of the Spirit,
is fallen again to the bottom of the Vessel; and knows by the taste, that the
swiming liquor on the top has acquired a taste between sweet, acid, and
pricking; and moreover, that its smell evidences the light to have contracted a
vinous and spirituous odor, which does recreate the Senses, is of a subtle
nature, and happens for the most part toward the fourth or fifth day; then
must you anoint the bottom of the Vessel to be used in the distillation of hot
Spirits, with a piece of Bacon, to hinder the matter in the bottom to cleave
unto it, and contract an adust taste or empyreumatical smell noxious to the
Spirit; after this, agitate your fermentation with a wooden Spatula, to cause
the substance in the bottom equally to mix with the liquor, whereof your Vessel
must be filled, till it reach half foot near to the top; and continually stir
it, until it be sufficiently heated by the fire, to raise up all the body; then
without danger may you close up the Vessel with its Moors-head or Still, luting
the Joints and quickening the fire, until you can no longer endure your hand to
put upon the Still-head without burning; then you must exactly close the door
of the Furnace and its Registers with great care and precaution, and so
patiently expect until the Spirits begin to ascend in a vapor into the Worm or
Pipe, where they are condensated in a spirituous burning liquor, which falls by
drops into the Recipient. You must entertain the fire in that degree, until the
liquor coming forth be totally insipid; then open the Vessel, and draw out the
matter to fill it with new; and so continue till you have distilled all what
was fermented. That done, put into the Vessel again all the distilled liquor,
and throw into it two pound of new and warm white loaf of Bread, or toast it in
want of new; because the Bread attracts to it self all what may be of ill
favor in the first distillation; then cover the Vessel, and give it a regular
fire, according to the best judgment, until the Spirit begins to distill, as we
have already taught; and so continue until the phlegm ascends, which may easily
be perceived by the taste. So shall you find after this rectification an Aqua
vitae or hot Spirit, of very good taste and odor, and little inferior to that
which is extracted from Wine, though the Grain of it self be flat and without
taste, which illustrates so much the better the wonderful effects of Art and
Nature, and verifies the saying of that learned Roman Philosopher Morienus,
Quod est occultum fiat manifestum, etc. e contra: which can never be done but
by the help of ferment which penetrates into the most inward parts of Mixts,
and discovers unto us there, that which our Intellect or Senses should never
have found otherwise.

They that will subtilize this Spirit by a third distillation, may do it, and
add upon the whole a Bucket full of Wine-lees: then will it become so subtle,
and so delicate, that the most skilful may be deceived in their differencing it
from Spirit of Wine, either by the taste or smell. It may then be applied to
all such operations, wherein Aqua vitae, and Spirit of Wine are necessary;
which will be very useful to those that apply themselves to Chemical practice,
in such places where there are no Vineyards, or Aqua vitae is at a dear rate. I
do nevertheless advise, to keep the Spirit of Wine in Chemical operations,
because it is ever more pleasant, subtle, and penetrative: but, when you are
destitute of it, you may lawfully substitute this Spirit, in the composition of
all such remedies, where Aqua vitae is necessary. We shall not mention here the
virtues of this Spirit; because, besides that it is commonly known for a great
warmer, restorer; and strengthener; we purpose to speak thereof when we shall
treat of the Spirit of Wine. We must nevertheless add something more in the
behalf of curious Artists, which have a mind to make this Spirit, and yet live
in such Countries where they know not what belongs to the making of Beer, and
by consequence have no Ferment or Yest, which proceeds from that liquor to
raise the fermentation of Meal. Now there is no place in the world where Bread
is not made, and consequently, where there is not Leven or Ferment, wherewith
the Dow is raised in making of the Bread; wherefore let them take lb ss. of
ordinary Leven, which shall be mixed with lb ij. of Meal in xv. or xx lb. of
lukewarm water; then let the Vessel containing all this be covered, and the
fermentation of this Liquor be patiently expected, and when you see it begin,
and the Meal to rise up on the top, and the Liquor to swell, then introduce
this Liquor in any matter which is to be fermented, and you shall perceive the
effects as we have already spoken of to follow, but not so quickly as if
Beer-yest had been made use of.

We have but one thing more to add, which is, that to stir up the fermentation
of Meal or Grains, you must put some of that which has already been prepared:
but you must know, that the Artist shall not extract so much Spirit, that it
shall not be so subtle nor so delicate, nor have so kind a taste: and
moreover, that which is more important, is, that fermentations shall not
succeed so well, as when this Grain is joined to the other, which makes it
fitter for fermentation, and that when it has duly been so performed, all the
distillations are much more successful, because this Grain, which has been
opened by its preparation rises up easily, and draws up to, and with it self,
that which has not been prepared. And if I am asked, why I have not p^escribed
prepared pure Grain to be made use of; I shall answer, that it would be unfit,
because the Ferment would too soon volatilize the same, and so the most subtle
part of the Spirit should vanish and lose it self before it could be distilled:
and moreover, that the matter would too soon ascend the Still-head, by its
quick ebullition, and come forth in body and not in spirituous vapor, as it
often happens with such as are not yet well verst and experimented in the
distillation of fermented matters.

The Preparation of the Spirituous Water and Aetherial Oil of Aniseeds, Fennel,
Parsley, and the like.
YOu must take one of these Seeds, the freshest you can procure it, and put
thereof 4.6. or 8. lb. grossly powdered in your Stillatory Vessel according to
its bigness and the quantity of water which it may contain, and pour upon it
River or Rainwater, till it comes to foot near the brim of the Vessel: which
being shut, administer a graduate fire, till the drops begin to fall into the
Recipient; then stop your Furnace and continue your distillation, until the
water comes away without any smell, and no Oily substance be seen to swim on
the top; then cease the fire and open your Vessel, and drawing the matter
wrought upon, substitute new whilst the Furnace is burning: but you must have
before separated the Oil from the Water, to pour it afresh upon the new Seed;
for, by this way shall you procure much more Oil in the second then in the
first distillation, and as these Seeds are commonly rather distilled for their
Oils sake then their water, this part must therefore also be more heeded. The
Oil must be separated with Cotton, as you shall be directed in the figure
described by the Vesica or distilling Vessels for Spirits in the Chapter of
Vessels. And if the Oil should not be flowing, but congealed, as it happens to
the Oil of Anise, you must strain the Water through a clean Linen, and the Oil
will remain above it, as we have said above, when we spoke of the Oil of Roses.
It must only be noted, in the way, that some Authors will have these Seeds to
be digested, before they come to be distilled, pretending that they will yield
much more Oil to the Ar^ist, because the body of the Seed will be more opened:
but they do not observe that these Seeds do abound in volatile Salt, which is
of a median nature, so that the Water cannot attract it to it self, by the
length of digestion; which will happen otherwise, if the distillation be begun
immediately after the Water and Seed be mixed together: It is true, that if
digestion does precede, that the Water thereof will be all spirituous, and of
much more efficacy then without it: but it will yield much more Oil according
to the rule of our prescription. We shall say nothing of the virtue of these
Oils and Essences so improperly called, no more than of their dosis; for so
many others have fully treated of this Subject, that it would prove but a
tedious repetition.

The Preparation of Seeds of Garden Cresses, Mustard, and other of the like
Nature.
ALthough these Seeds have in themselves great store of most subtle, volatile,
and most penetrating Salt, as may be concluded from their taste; yet
fermentation does not cause them to yield a hot burning Spirit, as many other
Vegetables: but it opens them, and rarifies nevertheless in such a manner, that
all the Salt and Oil which these Seeds have in themselves, and wherein all
their virtue is placed, ascends in Vapors and Spirits, which being condensed
into Liquor, fall again into the Recipient, with so subtle and penetrative a
smell, that it invades the Eyes and Nostrils, and passes into all the conduits
of the Brain, with as much quickness as the most subtle volatile Spirit of
Urin might do. It is not necessary we should repeat here, the process of
Fermentation and Distillation; it will only suffice, to give the necessary
precautions for the work, because these Seeds are of a different nature from
the other, by reason of the subtility of their volatile Salt. There must then a
special care be had, that the Vessel wherein the fermentation is performed, be
not above half full, that the matter may not rise too high in the action of the
Ferment; the same precaution must be used in the Stillatory Vessel not to fill
it above half, to lure it exactly, and regulate the fire with a clear
judgment, and an orderly assiduity, otherwise all would ascend in substance in
the Still-head. The Spirits may be rectified in B. M. if they are desired more
purified and more subtle than by the Vesica or ordinary Stillatory; they are
true diuretical and aperitive remedies; above all, to remove the Obstructions
of the Spleen: they are moreover true specificks against the Scurvy: the dosis
and virtue whereof has been specified above, when we spoke of Antiscorbutical
Plants, whither we refer the Artist for his better information.

But as the Oils and Spirits of these Seeds may be extracted without addition;
and that more-over it is necessary to distill them in this manner for external
uses: We say the right way of operating to be this: fill two parts of a Glass
Retort with any one of these Seeds, but chiefly of Mustard, by reason of the
singular virtues of its Oil: then place it in a Furnace upon an Earthen cover
turned upside down, filled with Sand, which will be unto it instead of a Lute;
then cover the Furnace, and fit a large Receiver to the Neck of the Retort, and
lute it with quick Lime and whites of Eggs, and give it a regulate fire, until
the drops begin to fall, keeping it in that tenor until the Oil begins to
appear; then increase the fire by little and little, and urge it until the
Receiver, which was dark with fumes, begins to clear again of it self, which is
a manifest sign, that the action of the fire has driven into the Recipient all
the vapourable substance contained in the Seed, and so consequently that no
more is to be expected. This operation is commonly ended in the space of 12
hours. All the Vessels being cold, take the Receiver off from the Retort, and
separate the Substances that will be found therein, which you may rectify if
you will: but as they are only intended for outward applications, it will not
be very necessary: but if you intend to rectify them, leave the Spirit and Oil
together, and infuse them in a low Cucurbite, which being covered with its
Head, put it in ashes, and give it a graduate fire, until the volatile Salt and
Spirit begin to appear in the Still-head; then keep the fire only in an equal
tenor, until the Phlegm begins to ascend, which the taste will discover: for
the volatile Spirit which is actuated by the same Salt, is extraordinary
biting, subtle, and penetrating, and the Phlegm has only an acid and almost
insipid taste: this done, change the Recipient, and strengthen the fire to make
the Oil ascend, and so continue till nothing more comes away; then separate the
Oil from the Phlegm, put the distilled and rectified matters in Glass Vials,
exactly stopped by reason of the subtilty of this Spirit and its volatile Salt.
The Spirit does wonders being applied upon starved Limbs, well fermented with
Spirit of Wine, and fresh stale; then make a liniment with Vnguentum Martiatum,
Mans-fat, and the Oil of Mustard Seed, applied upon it; which will raise up
again natural heat in the part, and attract the Spirits of other parts more
remote; and the itchings and vellications of the skin fore-running the total
recovery, being felt by the Patient, will be a sufficient testimony thereof:
thence it may be concluded, that it will be of a Sovereign efficacy, in all
benummings of Sinews, their shrinking looseness, which are the occasion of
Palsy, or Contraction of Limbs; provided the Spirit of this Seed made by
fermentation be exhibited, and that the Patient be made to sweat after. The Oil
unrectified, does mundifie, cleanses and fleshes again the most filthy and
malignant ulcers, dissolves the knots and hardnesses of Gowt and venereous
diseases; but you must at the same time make use, and even a little before, of
the internal remedies, such as we shall teach hereafter to extract out of
Mercury and Antimony.

We shall not speak here of the dosis, not excellent virtues of the Spirit
extracted by fermentation, from these kinds of Seeds; because we have already
sufficiently instructed the Artist of it, when we spoke of the virtue and dosis
of the Plant called Cochlearia: I will only add this, that where this Plant
shall fail, you may substitute the Spirit of the Seed of Garden Cresses, which
will produce the same effects, and be useful in the same diseases: but it would
be better nevertheless, to distill the Plant whole, when it is only between
Flower and Seed.

The manner of Extracting from Juniper Berries, all the good and virtue
contained in them, for the use of Chemical Pharmacy.
ALthough this Plant be common, it deserves nevertheless no common or mean
Eulogies, by reason of those excellent remedies it affords to Physicians by the
help and industry of Chemists: for whosoever will consider that shrub with a
disquisitive and Philosophical Eye, shall be forced to acknowledge, that it
contains some extraordinary virtue, both because it does resist the injury of
Winter, and all its storms; and by reason of the length of time which Nature
does bestow in bringing its Berries to maturation; whence we are necessarily
persuaded, that there is in this shrub some intrinsecal Balsom, which does
maintain and preserve the same, and yet hardly and with difficulty shows it
self in the fruit; since two re-iterated visits of the Sun are necessary, and
the maturation of two years, before the Juniper-berry be fit to be gathered
with all its requisite perfections. We shall then Anatomize all the parts which
this admirable Plant does furnish us withal, being thereunto invited by those
excellent remedies it does administer unto us; although we be bound to speak
also of other parts then the Seed, which is the proper subject of this Section.
We shall then, first of all, speak of the Wood, which does yield an acid
Spirit, an Oil and a Salt. Secondly, we shall speak of its Berries, which
before fermentation do yield a spirituous Water, an aetherial Oil, and a
cordial and alexiterial Extract; and after fermentation, a hot burning Spirit,
a purging and diuretical Extract, and then we will teach the Preparation of the
true Tincture and Elixir of the Berry, to conclude finally by the Gum; whereof
an Oil for the Sinews, and an anodine Balsom is extracted.

The Juniper-wood must be gathered with its leaves or pricky excrescence, and
its Berries, whether ripe or not: and shred or cut in small pieces, so as they
may be put in a capacious earthen Retort; which being placed in a close
Reverberatory Furnace, the Recipient being fitted with all requisite and
necessary precautions, a gradual fire must be given to it, and so continued
until it has driven out all the Oil or Spirit contained in the Wood, the true
token whereof is, when the Receiver does grow clear of its self; the time of
this operation will not last above 12. or 15. hours at most. The Vessels being
cooled, separate the Oil from the Spirit; the Spirit will remain reddish,
because it is impregnated with the tincture of the Oil communicated to the same
by the volatile Salt of the Plant: if you will rectify it in Sands or Ashes,
you shall have a very pure acid Spirit, provokeing Sweat, and diuretical: The
dosis is from i. to i. in Wine, or some convenient decoction; it has as much,
if not more virtue then the Spirit of Guaiacum, for venerial diseases: but
above all things, it is singular in the bitings of Vipers, Serpents, or other
venomous creatures, if it be given in the same dosis, and the wound be washed
with it, and with new stale; it is not requisite to rectify the Oil extracted
from the Wood, because it is not inwardly used: It is exceeding good to hinder
the accidents of cutting of Sinews, and bitings of any creatures when provoked,
because the volatile Salt contained in it, does penetrate to the deepest part
of the wounds, where it corrects the malignant impression of venom, and hinders
its progress and further spreading: But the Patient must take at the same time
Spirit of Juniperwood, in warm Wine, with xx grains of scraped Nutmeg. The Oil
moreover, is singular to appease the pain of rotten Teeth: it equals the virtue
of Guaiacum for the cure of old Ulcers; chiefly if they be seated near the
Joints where many sinews do concentrate, many gristles, and cartilages, which
do feed for the most part Ulcers with their jelley, slime, and viscous
superfluous moisture hindering consolidation: this Oil does digest and consume
all these substances against Nature, and restores a good ground, which does
afterward cicatrize and fill up the Ulcer, and so brings it to a perfect cure.

Having wrought upon the Wood, let us go on upon the Fruit, which are the
Berries containing the Seeds in a glutinous and viscous body, covered and wrapped
up in a thin outward skin black and smooth; when the Berry has attained its
perfect ripeness, which comes to pass the second year after its production,
about the midst of September, which is the true time of gathering; the Sun
being in the sign of Virgo: For anticipating that time the Berry would not yet
prove sufficiently ripe, neither have in it self, that sweet bitterness, and
Balsamical Honey, which contains its volatile Salt, and by consequence, its
Spirit; when you have a sufficient quantity of these Berries so conditionated;
viz. very black and smooth, odoriferous, if they be rubbed and crushed, and that
the Oil remains in the nail, and strikes the Nostril in the bruising thereof,
having their internal substance of the consistency of Honey and viscous, with
small grains within the flesh, which are the Seed thereof; and when you
masticate it, tasting at first with a sweet and balsamic taste, which by
degrees degenerates into no unpleasant bitterness. It will seem perhaps, that
we have enlarged our selves too much upon the qualities which this fruit must
have; but as the virtue of the prepared substance depends on the goodness and
qualities thereof, so was it necessary to declare it at large, that the Artist
may not lose both time and matter in vain, as it is too usual a thing to do.

lb viij. of Juniper Berries thus qualified, as we have said; beat them in a
brazen Mortar, with a great wooden Pestle, until you find them to be all
masht; then put them in a Still Body, and pour upon them either Rain or
River-water, until it comes foot near the brim; then cover and lute it, and
give it fire according to the Rules of Art and good Judgment, and so distill a
spirituous Water etc aetherial Oil, which will swim above: observing still that
you must not take off your eye from the Recipient, when the Water and Oil begin
to ascend into the Neck of the Recipient: for as this distillation is only
intended to extract the Oil, you might lose it all by your own fault; because
if the Water did overpower, all the Oil would vanish: and to prevent this
loss, you must watch carefully to substitute another Receiver when the Oil does
begin to reach within three or four fingers of the Orifice of the first
Recipient: and so continue your distillation, until no more Oil appears on the
Water, when you receive or put for trial your Water in a Spoon. This operation
ought to be continued in this manner, until you have made an end of all your
Berries, re-affunding still your distilled Water upon each distillation, after
you have separated the Oil with a Cotton. But if you will make the simple
Extract, the Honey or Theriack of the Germans with these Berries, you must
strain and percolate some part of these distillations being warmed, and slowly
evaporate them to the consistency of a thick Syrup, or liquid Extract. If it be
objected, That the Oil is already separated from it, and that consequently, the
virtue of it will be abated, the answer is easy: for you are to consider, that
the Oil would be evaporated nevertheless, during the coction and evaporation,
as is sufficiently witnessed by its smell spreading about, when the Extract is
made before the Oil be separated.

Take all what remains from all the Distillations, without separating any
thing, and join to it the Cake remaining from the expression of the Extract;
fill the Still-body full of it to warm, and so by it communicate the heart to
the remainder: which, I suppose, to be put in a Cask or Barrel for
fermentation: introduce the Leven or ferment into it with the circumstances and
requisite precautions, and so leave it four or five days; after which you
shall distill it at several times, until you have made an end of extracting all
the Spirit: the which rectify in the same Still-body ( viz. the Vesica) with
lb vi. of new select and bruised Juniper Berries, and you shall have a burning
Spirit, of very excellent and particular virtues: separate the first Spirit by
it self, as also the second and the third, to be made use of in such cases as
we shall say hereafter.

And to let you know, that Chemistry loses nothing of what may be made use of,
percolate and strain the remainder of the fermented distillation, and being
warmed, run it through a Hypocras Bag, or a Flannel; then evaporate it to the
consistency of a liquid Extract, which is one of the sweetest and gentlest
Purges that may be used: This Purgative faculty will perchance, and not without
reason, make some to wonder at it: But we will remove this scruple, giving to
understand that the action of the ferment has dissolved and united with the
Water the best part of the fixed Salt of these Berries, and as fix Salts loosen
the Belly; it is the same also, which being predominant in this Extract, does
cause its purging virtue.

This done, dry the Cake remaining from all the expressions, and calcine it, to
make a Lie thereof, and extract the Salt thereof according to the method which
we have formerly declared, then reverberate it in the Crucible without melting,
and dissolve it in the last distilled Juniper-Water; then filtrate and
evaporate it to a skin, and cause it to shoot into Crystals, which preserve for
your use. Thus much we had to say upon Juniper Berries: it remains only to
speak of the Virtue and Doses of those noble Preparations, which this Seed does
furnish us with, and to give you a description of an Elixir or Tincture of
Juniper Berries, which is a most accomplished remedy, whereof we shall also say
the use and proprieties.

We will give to Juniper Berries in general, the virtues which they deserve,
before we come to the particular proprieties of each of the remedies thereof
extracted; that this general Application may serve, to make the better our
Observations, when there shall be occasion to use those remedies. And in the
first place, we say, that the principal use of these Berries is to incite,
attenuate and dissipate in general: But they are particularly used to provoke
Urine and Sweat, to move and bring forth Lunary Purgations, remove obstructions
of the Spleen, correct affections of the Brain, Sinews, Breast, and cure Coughs,
dissipate Winds in the lower parts of the Belly and Colic; and above all, to
dissolve and evacuate the viscous and slimy substances, and Sand in the Bladder
and Kidneys: They are also most useful to use as a Preservative in time of
contagious Diseases, either eaten, or used by the way of a Perfume, to correct
the venenosity and malignant disposition of the Air.

It is now very easy to apply to every one of the Remedies prepared their
proper virtue, for it is common to all, since they were extracted from that
body which contained them, except the last Extract, which is purging, for the
reasons before declared. The aetherial Oil of Juniper is a Sovereign Remedy to
provoke Urine, and appease all pains of the Colic; it is also an excellent
Topical Remedy in all cold affections of the Sinews; as also in the pricking or
cutting of Sinews, by reason of its penetrative quality, but chiefly its
Balsamic virtue. The dosis is from iij. drops to xv. or xx. in white Wine, or
its own Water. The spirituous water which is extracted at the same time as the
Oil, is diuretical and diaphoretical: The dosis is from i to iiij. or v. but it
has quite another operation, when exalted with some drops of its Oil mixed with
Sugar in Powder, to make them dissoluble and mixed together. As for the Extract
made before the Fermentation, it is a very good Remedy of it self to strengthen
the Breast and Stomach, a very excellent diuretical, and safe alexitery;
therefore it is made use of instead of common boiled and skimmed or depurated
Honey, to receive the Powders which enter in that excellent composition, and
famous antidote, called Orvietan: It is a body of a wonderful use also for the
composition and incorporating of Substances that are destinated for Opiats, or
liquid Electuaries, against the Plague, all other contagious diseases, and the
venerious disease and its branches: The dosis is from ss. to ss. But the Spirit
is an agent far surpassing all what we have said, for it penetrates as in a
moment the whole body: so that it may be employed in all diseases wherein the
Berries do conduce. And to prove manifestly its penetrating and balsamic
virtue, this is a token, That a Patient taking never so little of it, shall be
sure that the first Urine which comes from him, will have a very pleasant smell
of Iris, or Violets: The dosis is from ss. to ij. in Broths, white Wine, or its
own Water: The dosis of the other unrectified Spirits of the second and third
distillation, may be augmented in proportion to the subtility of their parts.
The Purgative Extract is wonderful, to receive in it self the other purging
Remedies either Rosins or Magisteries, Extracts or Powders to prepare thereof
some compounded Electuary, which with its purgative faculty preserves and
advances the virtue of those things that were mixed with it. The dosis of this
Extract is from ij. to i. either dissolved, or taken in bolus; the quantity
cannot be prejudicial, as is that of other purging medicines, because it will
never cause any Hypercatharsis or over-purging, neither make any dangerous
Colliquation: but it loosens simply and softly the Belly, by a natural
detersion of all the Excrements contained in the Entrails, which is a very
requisite virtue in many stubborn and obstinate constipations or bindings.
There remains only the fixed Salt to speak of, which is diuretical and
loosening, of the weight from i. to i. in Broths or its own Water, or what is
yet better, in bolus, in the purging Extract. This Salt is also capable long to
preserve the virtue of its Water, if you dissolve i. or ij. in each pint.

To prepare the Elixir of Juniper Berries.
Juniper Berries very ripe and very smooth, and choose the biggest and
smoothest, till you have got lb i. which coursely bruise in a Marble Mortar
with a wooden Pestle; put them in a Glass-body double (or Blind-head) and pour
upon it the juice of Parietary and Golden-rod, or Virga Aurea, ana lb ij. cover
the Vessel with its Blind-head, and digest all in B. M. during three days;
then having uncovered it, percolate and strain, and distill the Expression in
Balneo with a soft and slow fire, until there remains an Extract of middle
consistency, which put in a Pelican, or some other circulatory Vessel, with lb
i. of the best Spirit of Juniper Berries; then lute it, and put it to digest
and circulate for the space of 8 days in the heat of a vaporous Bath: that
time over, let the Vessels cool, then filtrate the liquor very pure, and you
shall have the Elixir or true Tincture of Juniper Berries; which is a very
Sovereign Remedy either to preserve, or to cure, in Plague and other
pestilential and malignant diseases: but this Elixir is peculiarly dedicated to
the Kidneys and Bladder, not only to evacuate what is viscous and sandy in
them: but moreover also to remove the seminary thereof, and hinder by a
constant use of this noble remedy, that there should be no further spreading
nor generation of them. It is also a Stomachical and Hysterical Specific,
which by its heat and Alexiterial Balsamical and Cordial virtue does dissipate,
whatsoever may cause evil alterations in the Ventricle or Womb. The dosis is
from spoonful to 1. or 2.

We have no more to speak of Juniper, but concerning its Gum or Rosin, which is
a very good Perfume against all defluxions of the Brain, if you receive the
smoke in your hair and round about the Neck, as in the stopping of the Nose, or
impediment in the motion of the Neck, or when the Almonds are swelled, and the
free swallowing hindered; you must also perfume with it the Linen which are put
about the Neck, and the Head. But the best of all, is, that this Rosin, which
commonly is called Varnish, or Juniper-Gum, yields an Oil by distillation,
which is wonderful in external use for all affections of Sinews, against the
cold, and the in potency of parts which are fallen into some Resolution or
Palsy, against all shrinking of Limbs, and generally, all cold Aches in all
parts of the Body, whereof no evident cause can be given, and no swelling nor
redness appears outwardly. It is also very efficacious to dissipate all cold
cedema's, or cold swellings. And is thus done:

Gum of Juniper Coals and decrepited Salt, ana equal parts; reduce them to a
gross Powder, and being well mixed together, put it in a Glass Retort, and place
it in a close Reverberatory: fit a Receiver to it, which being well luted,
cover the Furnace, and give it a gradual fire, which increase till nothing more
comes forth, and the Recipient grows clear, which for the most part happens
within the space 12. or 15. hours. Separate the two substances which are in the
Recipient; for the one is aqueous and acid, which proceeds from the Salt, and
the volatile part of the Gum of Juniper, with a small portion of its Mercurial
Spirit which also are acid: the other substance is oleagineous, inflamable and
sulphurous in some part, yet crass and viscous: therefore must this Oil be
rectified in Sand in a Glass Retort with Salt of Tartar, and so shall you have
a clear, subtle, and penetrative Oil, capable of all the noble effects we have
attributed unto it.

SECT. VI. Of. Rinds.
WE shall have only two examples to give upon the Rinds in general, the one
upon Limon-Rind and Orange-peel, which are volatile, and must be distilled in a
peculiar manner, and with notes that are of concernment, and which the Artist
must attend with care: the other shall be upon Rind of Guaiacum, which is more
condensed and fixed, that these two extremes being opposed and compared
together, may clear the better the understanding in the apprehending of the
truth of things.

To apprehend the better for what reason we are induced to distill these
volatile Rinds, or Peels, otherwise than the Flowers which are no less
volatile, we must take notice of the taste and smell of these two Rinds, when
they are yet tender, recent, and smooth, and compare them with the taste and
smell of the same, when the fruit has been kept, the Rind is faded, grown
rugged and half dry; for it will appear, that when new and fresh, these Rinds
will yield a pleasant taste and smell, which subtly ascends and insinuates it
self into the Brain, recreates and strengthens it: whereas when the fruit is
old and withered, and its Rind shrunk in its self; the taste is unpleasant and
bitter, biting too much, and destituted of that vivacity and pleasant steam,
which it had before; which is, that notwithstanding, that ought chiefly to be
preserved, if you will have any good success in the Remedies prepared
therewith. To attain unto it, choose the time wherein you may have store of new
Limons and Oranges in great quantity, and at a cheap rate, and pare the Rind
very thin, until you have ij. or iij. lb. which shred in small pieces, and put
in a Glass Cucurbite with clear water, until it swims foot above the Rind; and
distill it in Sand with a moderate fire at first, which increase by degrees, so
long that the liquor dropping comes out without taste or smell, and no Oily
substance appears above the stilling water. So shall you find an aetherial and
subtle Oil, which shall have all the delicacy and virtue of the Limon or
Orange-Peel Peel, which keep for your use in Glass Vials exactly stopped. It
might be here objected unto me, that I otherwise proceed than those Authors,
which formerly have prescribed the manner of distilling those Oils: since I
desire they may be distilled as soon as the Rind is separated from the Fruit;
whereas others do prescribe to digest and ferment the same, to purchase a
greater store thereof. To which we answer, that we have not here regard to the
quantity, which ought to be the least care of the Artist, when he perceives it
may bring an alteration to the substance, and diminish the virtue: for as we
have noted above, that the steam of these rinds is so subtle, that it cannot
but with difficulty be preserved with its own subject, so shall it with much
more reason vanish away, when it is separated from it: and although it be true,
that the quantity of distilled Oil will be greater, when the Rind has been
left in digestion and fermentation for some time; nevertheless i. of that
distilled according to our direction, will without comparison exceed in
goodness and virtue i. of the other. They that desire to have yet less of Oil,
but will at the same time have an excellent Spirit out of the said Rinds, must
distill them with good and quick white Wine, and so shall they have a Spirit
which will not be much inferior to the Oil, which we have mentioned above,
when we spoke of the Syrups made out of these Rinds, which will occasion us to
say no more for the present.

To make the Elixir of Limon and Orange Peel.
TAke the outward Peel of either of these two fruits, which being cut very
small, put in a double Vessel (or blind body) to the quantity of ij. adding i.
of Ambergrice, and vi. grains of O^iental Musk grinded with ij. of fine
powdered Sugar, pour upon this viij. of the purest Spirit extracted with white
Wine from either of these Rinds; stop and lute well your Vessel, and put it to
digest in a vaporous Bath to a slow heat the space of three natural days; then
let it cool, and percolate and strain the contained matter, then filtrate it in
a close Vessel, that nothing of the virtue may breathe away or evaporate:
preserve this Elixir carefully, for it is a choice cordial remedy, which has
few equals in great failings of the Heart and Spirits, and chiefly in sudden
accidents, after violent exercise, or after sharp and quick pains. Both are
very good for men or women with Amber and Musk, except those which are subject
to hysterial Passions; for which reason you must not be unprovided of some
without Musk or Amber for the fits of the Mother. The Elixir of Orange Peel is
of much more efficacy than that of Limon for women, to whom it cannot enough be
recommended for the great help and benefit they may receive from it in the time
of their travels. The dosis of this Remedy is from i. to i. either by it self,
or mixed with Wine, Broth, or some distilled Water appropriated to the disease
or Remedy.

How the Spirit, Oil, and Salt, Extract Tincture and Magistery, of Rind of
Guaiacum is to be prepared.
of Rind of Guaiacum the heaviest, most compacted, and most streaked with black
lines, as you can meet with; powder it grossly, and put it in a Retort of
Jugge-mettal, which place in a Reverberatory close Furnace, which we have
called above, a Common Furnace: to the Neck of which fit a capacious Recipient,
the Joints whereof you shall lute with Salted lute; cover the Furnace and let
the lute dry, and give it a gradual fire, until you see the white vapors to
appear, and perceive small drops of a reddish Oil to mix with the veins which
the Spirit does make in the Recipient; then increase the fire, even to flame,
until the Recipient grows clearer of it self. You must expect until the next
day to open your Vessels, and you shall find in the Retort the remainder of the
Rinds converted into Coals, which you must calcine and reverberate in a Pot not
leaded with an open fire, to convert them to Ashes, whereof draw the Salt by
elixiviation, filtration, and evaporation, according to the manner which we
have already so many times declared. This Salt must ever be mixed in all the
Purgatives which you exhibit to those that have a touch of venerious diseases;
for besides that it quickens and helps the virtue of those Purgatives, it
purges of it self, and is one of the Antivenerian Specificks. There is two
Substances found in the Recipient, one aqueous mercurial and acid, which is the
Spirit of this Rind; the other is a crass and heavy Oil, which sinks under this
Spirit, by reason of the great quantity of volatile Salt, which cleaves
intimately to the sulphurous Oil, and also because a portion of the fixed
Salt, which by the violence of fire was volatilized lies confounded in this
Oil; you must separate the Oil from the Spirit by filtration with Paper upon
the Funnel, and the Oil will remain above the Paper, bored with small holes to
make the Oil flow in the Bottle appointed to receive it. This Oil and Spirit
may be externally applied without rectification: for you may put a little of
the Spirit in liquid fomentations, for the washing of cancerous, slimy,
fistulous, and corroding ulcers, and principally those which are caused by the
venenosity of the Pox: to apply the Oil afterward, either by it self, or mixed
with some unctuous body, which blunts the edge of it, that otherwise would
become too painful. The virtue of this Oil cannot sufficiently be extolled for
the cure of all old ulcers, and to dissipate Nodus's, but above all, to hasten
and to bring to pass the exfoliation of Bones, provided you mix with it a
little of the distilled Oil of Euphorbium. But if you will use this Spirit and
Oil internally, you must rectify the Spirit in Sand in a Limbeck; and as it is
an acid Spirit, the Artist must be warned, that the Phlegm does ascend the
first, and that the biting acid Spirit ascends the last; therefore must he
separate the Phlegm, and put a new Recipient when he shall perceive by the
taste, that the drops which begin to fall are acid. This Spirit does powerfully
withstand the venomous quality of the Pox, expelling the same wheresoever it
meets with it, by the way of Urines, Sweats, or insensible transpiration,
provided it be impregnated with its Oil, which possesses the best and greatest
part of the volatile Salt of our Rind, from which it must not be deprived if
you will preserve its virtue. To this end, it must be rectified in a Retort
with the Ashes remaining after the extraction of the Salt, and the Oil shall
ascend fair, clear, and subtle, divested for the most part of its
empyreumatical odor, which it had contracted in the first distillation: for
these Ashes mixed with the Oil, will retain in themselves all the impurity and
grossness, but not keep the volatile Salt, which is the active and virtual
principle, not only of this Oil but also of the efficacy and power of all
sublunary Substances, because it is the last shelter and bond of the ferment
and internal fire of all Mixts; in which resides the power and energy of all
their actions: therefore, Artists must not wonder, if we so often do repeat the
virtues of this Salt, and recommend unto them the preservation thereof with so
much earnestness, considering we do it not by a vain ostentation, nor to fall
into needless repetitions, which are never to be born with, but when absolutely
necessary, as it is now for the present here in this place.

The general virtues of this Spirit and Oil are to provoke abundantly Urine and
Sweat; and by this means to mundifie and depurate the mass of the blood from
all its impurities, to resist the corruption of the parts, and preserve their
use, as the effects thereof make it appear in all diseases of the Joints,
running Gowts, Dropsy, Cath^rres, and all other diseases which draw their
original from the viscosity and sliminess of tartareous and fixed matters: they
are above all Specificks against Venereous Diseases, and all their dependances.
The dosis of the Spirit is from i. to i. in Sassafras water, or decoction of
China Root, or Sarzaparilla. The Oil from ij. drops to vi. or viij. Which
before you mix with the Spirit or other Liquors must be distempered with Sugar.
Some are of opinion, that the Oil of Guaiacum is that which Rullandus does call
Heraclea, in the Centuries of his Observations, where he relates so many
wonderful effects thereof: which I am the more inclinable to believe,
considering that a Tailor of Paris, by name le Cerf, has been capable to raise
unto himself a credit and reputation by the sole use of Oil of Guaiacum. Others
do make use of this Oil for the cure of Epilepsie, as also to help men in
travel, and to bring forth the Child either dead or alive, as likewise the
After-burthen: It is not to be forgotten also, that this Oil does in an instant
appease the pain of cariated Teeth; for the volatile Salt does immediately
penetrate to the small Nerve, which lies at the Root of the Teeth, and
stupifies and cauterises it in a manner, taking away its sensibility. Besides
the medicinal virtues of the Spirit, it is also useful in Chemical operations
for the dissolution of Pearls, Coral, Crayfish-stones, (Crabseyes) and the
like: but that which hinders most its use, is, that it always leaves some
Empyreuma or ill savor.

To prepare the Extract of Guaiacum Rind, and its Tincture.
TAke of the best Rind of Guaiacum you can meet with, reduce it to a subtle
powder, and put it in a Mattress, and pour upon it Alkool of Wine, till it swims
above the height of four inches; then digest it in Sand, and make an Extract
thereof; separate the tincture, and so continue with new Spirit till it yields
no more of tincture: then filtrate all the tinctures, and in a vaporous Bath
draw off half of the Menstrue again; keep by it self lb ss. of this tincture,
which is a good and quick sudorifick: The dosis is from half a spoonful to one
and two spoonfuls in warm Wine or Water of Sassafras. Then take half of the
remaining Substance, and precipitate it with common Water, and you shall have a
Rosin, which you may prepare as that of Jalap: The d^sis is from x to xx
Grains, in bolus, in its own Extract: this is a Specific against the Pox,
working insensibly. Evaporate the remainder in B. M. to the consistency of an
Extract. The dosis being from i to i. it produces the same effects as the Rosin
or Magistery does.

SECT. VII. Of Woods.
THE Woods used in Physic are differing, in whose number we will rank also all
the species of it which are ordinarily employed, to make Infusions and
Decoctions, according to the various intentions of those which do employ them:
but Chemical Pharmacy works in a different manner upon woods, according to the
diversity of their nature: for some of them are gummy, resinous and fat,
pressed and compacted, and others more saline, and consequently, of easier
Extraction; there is extracted from them by the help of spagyrical operation,
Extracts, Waters, Spirits, Oils and Salts; whereof according to the diversity
of their substance more or less pressed and compacted, we are to give examples:
and for this purpose shall choose for the subject of our work the Lignum Aloes,
Lignum Rhodium, so called in the shops, Lignum Nephriticum, and Sassafras,
because the examples of all these four will be sufficient and serve instead of
all the rest: for as concerning Guaiacum, Box, and other like, we have given
you the method thereof in the distillation of Juniper-wood, and of Rind of
Guaiacum, whereunto we refer the Reader for his direction of the work, and for
the virtues to such Authors as have written thereof.

The manner of preparing the Extract and Essence of Lignum Aloes.
WE have said above, that Woods were of a different nature, and that for this
reason we were obliged to give several examples of them: this we shall declare
by the due preparation and extraction of Lignum Aloes, which is one of the best
that is to be found in shops; in so much, that the Germans do give it the name
of Lignum Paradisi, Wood of Paradise, by reason of the noble and great virtues
it does possess: It will then suffice for a pattern and example of making all
the Extracts and Essences of precious and aromatical Woods, because these two
preparations are made without any loss of its virtues.

To make the Extract, lb ss. of the true Wood of Aloes, the tokens whereof are,
that it be Blackish and of Purple color, intermixed with veins of an Ash-gray
color, heavy, and bitter; and the chief token, when you put a small piece upon
a hot glowing coal, that it should yield a gummy and resinous fat moisture, the
smoke whereof should at first bite and seize upon the Nostril, but toward the
end yield a pleasant and sweet odor, as is that of Benjuin and Peruvian
Balsom: and moreover, leave upon the coal after its burning some marks of a
kind of liquation; this Wood must be grossly scrapt, and put in a Retort
moistened with a little Spirit of Wine; then the Retort placed in Ashes, adapt a
Receiver, lute it, and give it a regulate fire, and with good judgment to
avoid the Empyreuma or smoaky taste, and so draw softly the aetherial and
subtle Oil of this Wood, which will ascend with the Spirit of Wine; and when
the veins shall cease to appear in the Recipient, and that the matter remains
dry, cease the fire, and put the remainder in a Blind Mattress, and pour upon it
Alkool of Wine to extract all its Resinous substance; the Wood being well
opened by this digestion, pour all into a Cucurbite, and distill with requisite
precautions about the third part of the Spirit by it self: which done, cease
the fire, and filtrate the remaining Spirit, to add other Wood to it until it
draws no more either of taste or color: then percolate and strain the whole,
and filtrate it, to draw off the Spirit from it to the consistency of a liquid
Extract, which keep by it self, and boil the remaining Wood in the distilled
Dew or Rainwater, straining the decoction which must be clarified with whites
of Eggs, and evaporated also to the consistency of a liquid Extract: warm those
two Extracts and join them together, to draw yet a little more of their
moisture away, and reduce them to a mass of more solid Extract, to which shall
be joined half of the first extracted Oil, being first tempered, and made
dissoluble with powdered Sugar. Keep this Extract for its uses in a Box of
Silver, shutting with a screw, that the subtle and operative part of it may
not exhale.

Take the Spirit which you kept in the distillation of the extraction of the
Wood; put therein i. more of the best Wood of Aloes reduced to a subtle
powder, which you shall digest and extract in a vaporous Bath during the space
of six natural days in a Blind Mattress, this done, express and percolate the
cold liquor, and filtrate it in a covered Funnel; join to this Liquor the rest
of the Oil which you kept with twice as much of the Salt of the Wood, or
prepared Salt of Tartar, according to the method of Sennertus, whereof we have
already spoken, and so shall you have the true Essence of Lignum Aloes,
impregnated with all the virtues and powers, of the Mixed whereof it was
extracted. The dosis of the Extract is from iiij. to x* grains in Bolus, or
dissolved with some specifical burning Spirit: for besides, that it would not
dissolve in aqueous Liquor, it should come short of the virtue; and though it
should happen to dissolve, there would be a precipitation made of the resinous
and fat substance, which would never incorporate with the Water, and debilitate
the remedy instead of increasing its virtue. The dosis of the Essence is from
iv. to x. drops to be exhibited to the Patient in burning or hot Spirits of
Juniper, black Cherries, or Elixir Vitae of Mathiolus, and not in aqueous
liquors for the reasons alleged above: but because there are many tender and
delicate persons, which cannot endure the taste and strength of these Spirits;
the Extract or Essence may be mixed with a spoonful of convenient Syrup, of
somewhat a thick consistency: for the Sugar keeps back the Water and hinders
its action upon the resinous substance of the Extract or Essence. These two
remedies are two specifical comforters of all the principal parts contained in
the lower-most, middlemost, and uppermost ventricle; it recreates the vital
Spirits and animal Spirits of the Brain and Womb: therefore it is excellent
against all infirmities of these two parts: they are also very good to
strengthen the digestive faculty of the Stomach, kill by the bitterness of
their Salt and Spirit the Worms which breed in the Ventricle, and extirpate
totally the seminary thereof, as much in aged persons, as young children,
except that a regard must be had to the dosis.

To prepare the Water and Oil of Lignum Rhodium.
WE bring this Wood for an example, to evidence that it is necessary for a
Chemical Artist, to work upon all kind of Substances to extract their virtue,
without any deperdition of their pleasantness, for it would be very easy to
distill this Wood, by a Retort in open fire: but its pleasant smell should be
lost; and besides, the Spirit and Oil which should be extracted that way, would
not have the same prop^ieties, with those of the Water and Oil extracted by the
method which we are now about to teach; and because the Lignum Rhodium is a
heavy Wood, fat and compacted; it must be opened before you can by distillation
extract the central virtue of it: Therefore procure above the quantity of xx
lb. to be scraped, and put them above six weeks in Rainwater to steep, with lb
iiij. of Tartar in powder, to volatilize in a manner, the most first parts of
the Wood: this time being expired, put the fourth part of this infusion, with
the fourth part of the Wood in a Still-body (or Vesica) and pour more Rain or
River-water, till it comes foot near the brim; cover it with a Head, and give a
gradual convenient fire, having fitted to it a pretty big Recipient, until the
Water in dropping down appears to have no more of Oil in it. We have said it
should be a capacious Recipent, because that little of Oil which it yields
toward the end would be lost in new Recipients, whereas in a capacious
Recipient, the last Oil joins and unites it self to that which issued out
before. But it is to be noted yet, that what does distill ought to be somewhat
warm, which is quite contrary to the common practice in distilling of hot and
volatile spirits, for the Oils must be separated from their bodies by a strong
ebullition, driving the same upwards, and raising it with the aqueous vapors;
but the heat must again be temperated, lest the Phlegm should ascend in too
great abundance with the Spirit; and moreover, whereas in Spirits the Water
above the Worm must be kept very cool, it must not be renewed in the
distillation of Oils. We did purpose to set these two Notes at large, because
the observation of them is of absolute necessity in the work. The Water must be
separated from the Oil, which will be clear, fair, and yellow, and of a good
smell: and thus continue your distillation till all be ended. This Oil is
excellent for perfumes outwardly: it may also be inwardly applied, reduced to
Sugar, Oil, or Elaeosaccharum to dissolve in its Water, or some diuretical
Water, for the cleansing of the Kidneys and Bladder from Slime and Sand; it may
also be used with very good success in Gargles to absterge and cure Ulcers in
the mouth, and wash and mundifie them in other parts of the body, and
particularly in the parts appointed for generation.

To make the Extract of Nephritical Wood, or Lignum Nephriticum.
THis Wood is brought from New-Spain, is tender and dry, though heavy, by which
it appears to be more Saline than Oily, and therefore communicates easily its
virtue to Water, which it dies of a yellow-brown color, in decoction appearing
somewhat bluish in the Surface. We have chosen this Wood to show its
difference from others; for although it be inodorous and insipid, it is
nevertheless endowed with much virtue, and expels powerfully by Urines, whether
simply infused in cold Water to drink the colature thereof, or mixed alone with
white Wine; or whether a decoction be made thereof, which is very insipid. In
this manner it conduces very much to help those that are troubled with the
Stone, Gravel, or stopping of Water. But above all, it is considerable in
decoctions against the Pox and Scurvy, for it frees easily and powerfully the
Patient from the venom of these two diseases; and, because this Wood is not to
be found every where, we have thought it necessary to teach the manner of its
extract, whereby the Artist may regulate himself in all other Woods, which
shall be of this kind. Scrape lb vi. of this Wood, and make a decoction with
Roots of Resta-bovis, Hundred headed-thistle, or Sea-holy; ana lb iij. and lb
i. of Virga-aurea, or Golden-rod in lb xxx. of River or Rainwater, till be
consumed: then percolate and express it, and make a second decoction of the
cake remaining after the expression in lb xx. of fresh Water, then percolate
and strain it, and so continue until the decoction takes no more color: which
done, clarify all the decoctions, and run them through the bagg, and evaporate
it in a slow heat without ebullition, to the consistency of a liquid Extract;
to which add the Salt extracted from the remains of your Extraction. This
Extract is an excellent diuretic aperitive Remedy, which may be exhibited from
i. to i. in Broths, white Wine, or decoction of Lignum Nephriticum, when those
which are troubled with Gravel, Stoppings of Water, or Nephritical Colic are
in the half Bath: but with this precaution, that they take before and render
again a Turpentine Glyster.

To make the Spirituous water and Oil of Sassafras.
THe Sassafras Wood or Pavame comes from Florida, and differs yet much in
nature from the abovementioned Woods; for it is very odoriferous; and being
never so little warmed by rubbing, it sends forth Spirits which affect the
smell with much pleasure, and shows this Tree to be very pregnant and full of
volatile Salt, whence it is evident, that it has much virtue. The smallest is
to be chosen for distillation, and must have yet its Rind about him, and if it
were possible, some of the Root with its Rind; because the Rind possesses more
of the aetherial Oil, or volatile Salt and Spirit, than the internal substance
of the Wood, which is light and spongious, as the subtle and aromatical taste
of the Rind, resembling that of Fennel, does testify: And as we said, that the
Lignum Rhodium must be opened to volatilize it; here we must proceed in a quite
contrary method, for we must distill the Sassafras as soon as it is cut in
pieces, and that in a Still-body with Rainwater: but if you desire to have an
excellent Water, and little of Oil, you must distill it with white Wine: but if
you only aim at the Oil which is very excellent, have only Water. The Oil of
Sassafras sinks in the bottom of the Water, as that of all aromatical
Substances. The spirituous Water is excellent against all kind of obstructions,
and chiefly those of the Spleen, which it alleviates more than any other
remedy. It is also excellent for the Stomach, strengthening the digestive heat,
and correcting the crudity of aliments, it wonderfully helps the Wind Cholick.
It is an infallible Sudorifick or Diuretic; for it will never miss of its
effect by the two natural ways, because if the Patient will not admit of much
covering, and that the sweat by this means remains concentrated, the virtue of
the medicament will never fail to show it self by Urins: because the actions of
Spirits and volatile Salts, can never be hindered; therefore is this spirituous
Water very specific in venerial diseases, as also in scurbutick dispositions.
The dosis of this remedy is from i. to vi. either by it self or mixed in white
Wine. The tincture which the Artist will draw from Sassafras, with white Wine,
in B. M. in a Blind-head, may legitimately be substituted to the spirituous
Water, when he shall be in haste and forced to make use of it: ss. of Sassafras
is enough for lb i. of Wine; but the dosis must be double of the Water. Now as
the Oil is more subtle than the Water, because it is only made of a little
Sulphur very subtle, and all the remainder is only volatile Salt, so ought it
also to be less: for it must not be exhibited, but from the quantity of iij. to
x. drops, reduced to a dissolubility with Sugar in powder, whether it be given
in its own Water, that of Cinnamon, white Wine, or Broth, for all the diseases
we have intimated here above: but above all, in difficult Travels of women,
whether the Child be dead or alive: as also to expel the After-burthen, and
purge the woman in Travel, without much griping: for this Oil strengthens the
Womb, and makes it discharge with more ease, and in less time, those
superfluities wherewith it was encumbered since Childbearing. Finally, this
praise may lawfully be given to Sassafras, that it is a kind of Vegetable
Panacea, since the Remedies extracted from it may be administered in all kind of
diseases; and moreover its constant use may make either sex fruitful, but
chiefly the female kind; for it heats, and softly and naturally strengthens
all the internal parts; but chiefly those that conduce to generation.

FINIS.
A Table of all the Heads of the Principal Matters contained in this Treatise.
A Table of the first Book.
Preface. Concerning Chemistry in general. page 1. Introduction. Containing
several questions touching the Nature of Chemistry. page 5 Quest. 1. Of the
Names given to Chemistry. ibid. Quest. 2. Whether Chemistry ought to be called
Art or Science, and its definition. page 6 Quest. 3. Of the end of Chemistry
page 10

BOOK I. of the first Part. OF the Principles or Elements of Natural Bodies.
CHAP. I. Of the Universal Spirit page 13 CHAP. II. Of several Substances which
are found after the dissolution and Anatomy of the Body or Compound p. 17 CHAP.
III. Of each Principle in particular. Sect. 1. Whether the five Principles
remaining after the dissolution of the Mixed, are artificial or natural p. 21
Sect. 2. Of Phlegm p. 23 Sect. 3. Of the Spirit p. 24 Sect. 4. Of the Sulphur
p. 26 Sect. 5. Of Salt p. 27 Sect. 6. Of the Earth p. 29
CHAP. IV. Of Elements in general and particular p. 30 Sect. 1. Of Elements in
general p. 31 Sect. 2. Of the Element of fire p. 35 Sect. 3. Of the Element of
air p. 38 Sect. 4. Of the Element of water p. 41 Sect. 5. Of the Element of
earth p. 42
CHAP. V. Of the Principles of Destruction. Sect. 1. Of the order of this
Chapter p. 43 Sect. 2. Of the principles of life before composition p. 44 Sect.
3. Of the principles of death p. 46

A Table of the second Book. BOOK. II. of the first Part.
OF Purity and Impurity p. 49 CHAP. I. What is meant by Purity and Impurity
ibid. CHAP. II. How Purity and Impurity do enter into the composition of all
things p. 51 CHAP. III. How the impurity of all things is to be separated from
the same p. 53 CHAP. IV. Of pure substances extracted out of mixed bodies p. 55
CHAP. V. Of the natural Generation and Corruption of Mixts, and their diversity
p. 56 Sect. 1. Of the Order of Matters contained in this Chapter ibid. Sect. 2.
Of the Alteration Generation and Corruption of Natural things p. 57 Sect. 3. Of
the difference of mixed Bodies in general p. 59 Sect. 4. Of the diversity of
perfect Mixts p. 61 Sect. 5. Of the middle Minerals or Marcassites p. 63 Sect.
6. Of Metals p. 65 Sect. 7. Of Stones p. 68 Sect. 8. Of other Mixed both Animate
and Inanimate p. 69
CHAP. VI. How Chemistry operates upon all these Mixed to extract their Purity
and reject Impurity p. 70
A Table of the first Part of the Second Book.
PART. II. COncerning this Abbreviation or Compendious Treatise of Chemistry p.
71 BOOK. I. Of the necessary terms to understand and perform all Chemical
operations p. 72 CHAP. I. Of the several species of Solutions and Coagulations
p. 74 CHAP. II. Of the several degrees of heat and fire p. 81 CHAP. III. Of the
variety of vessels p. 85 CHAP. IV. Of the variety of all kind of Furnaces p. 89
CHAP. V. Of Lutations p. 96 CHAP. VI. Of the explanation of characters, and
terms used by Chemical Authors p. 99
A Table of the II. BOOK of the II. PART. BOOK. II. of the II. PART.
OF Chemical operations p. 100 CHAP. I. Of necessary observations for
separating and purifying the five first Substances, after they are extracted
from the Compounds p. 101 CHAP. II. An Apology in the behalf of remedies
Chymically prepared according to Art p. 107 CHAP. III. Of the faculties of
Mixts, and the several degrees of their qualities p. 113 CHAP. IV. Of the order
intended in the description of Chemical operations p. 116 CHAP. V. Of Dew and
Rain p. 117 CHAP. VI. Of Honey and Wax p. 119 CHAP. VI. How to extract the
principles of Honey ibid. CHAP. VI. To make the Vinous Hydromel, and the Honey
Vinegar p. 120 CHAP. VI. To make the Tincture of Honey p. 121 CHAP. VI. To
extract the Oil of Wax p. 123 CHAP. VII. Of Manna p. 124 CHAP. VII. How to
prepare the Spirit of Manna p. 125 CHAP. VIII. Of Animals p. 112 CHAP. VIII. Of
Man p. 128 CHAP. VIII. Of Hair ibid. CHAP. VIII. Of Milk p. 129 CHAP. VIII. Of
the After-burthen p. 130 CHAP. VIII. Of Urine p. 131 CHAP. VIII. To prepare
igneous Spirit of Urine and its volatile Salt p. 132 CHAP. VIII. To prepare the
Water, Oil, Salt, volatile and fixed spirit p. 134 CHAP. VIII. Of humane blood
p. 134 CHAP. VIII. To prepare and make the salt and Elixir of the stone in the
Bladder p. 136 CHAP. VIII. Of humane flesh and its preparations p. 137 CHAP.
VIII. Preparation of modern Mummy p. 139 CHAP. VIII. To make the modern mummial
balsom p. 139 CHAP. VIII. How to prepare and distill humane fat p. 141 CHAP.
VIII. To make the spirit, oil, and volatile salt of man's bones and skull p. 142
CHAP. VIII. The manner of rightly preparing the remedies extracted out of
Hartshorn p. 144 CHAP. VIII. How to distill Hartshorn yet tender, and the
water of Stags-head p. 145 CHAP. VIII. Philosophical preparation of Hartshorn
p. 146 CHAP. VIII. The manner of preparing the spirit, oil, and volatile salt
of Hartshorn p. 147 CHAP. VIII. To prepare the tincture of volatile salt of
Hartshorn p. 151 CHAP. VIII. Preparations made of Vipers p. 152 CHAP. VIII.
How to dry Vipers, to make the powder and trochisks thereof p. 153 CHAP. VIII.
How to prepare the spirit, oil, and volatile salt, volatile fixed salt, the
sublimation of the same, and the fixed Salt of Vipers p. 155 CHAP. VIII. How to
stay, fix, and purify the volatile salts. p. 157 CHAP. VIII. How to sublimate
again the volatile salt fixed p. 158 CHAP. VIII. How to prepare the Essence of
Vipers, with their true volatile salt p. 159 CHAP. VIII. How to make the plain
theriacal salt, impregnated with the alexiterial and confortative virtue of
Vipers p. 159 CHAP. VIII. The preparation of another theriacal salt, much more
specifical then the foregoing p. 160 CHAP. IX. Of Vegetables and their
Chemical preparation p. 161 CHAP. IX. First discourse concerning distilled
waters p. 162 CHAP. IX. The preparation of nitrous juicy plants, to draw the
juice, liquor, water, extract, nitro-tartarous essential and fixed salt thereof
p. 167 CHAP. IX. Preparation of the juycy plants, impregnated with an essential
volatile salt, to draw the water, spirit, juice, liquor, essential volatile
salt, extract and fixed salt p. 171 CHAP. IX. How to prepare the spirit of jucy
plants, impregnated with an essential volatile salt p. 171 CHAP. IX. The manner
of preparing the liquors of plants and their quintessences p. 177 CHAP. IX. Of
the virtue and use of the liquor of Plants p. 179 CHAP. IX. Of the virtue and
use of the quintessence of plants p. 181 The second Discourse.
Of Syrups p. 187 How to make the plain acetous syrup or syrup of vinegar after
the ordinary and ancient way p. 190 The manner of duly preparing the syrups of
acid juyces of fruits, as of Limons, Oranges, Cherries, Pomgranates, etc. p.
192 How to prepare the syrups of juyces extracted from plants, both odoriferous
and inodoriferous, with the necessary notes to be observed in their depuration
p. 194 How to prepare the juyces and syrups of the plants of the first classis
ibid. How to prepare the juyces and syrups of plants of the second p. 195 How
those of the third p. 196 The old way of preparing the syrup of Orange-flowers
p. 198 How to prepare correctly and chymically the same syrup p. 199 The old
way of preparing the syrup of rind of limons p. 200 How to prepare it better
according to art p. 201 The vulgar way of preparing syrup of Cinnamon p. 202 How
to prepare the same according to the rules of Chemistry p. 205 The old way of
preparing the syrup of Wormwood p. 209 How to prepare the same more correctly
p. 210 How the Ancients did prepare the acetous syrup, or compounded syrup of
Vinegar p. 211 How to prepare the same Chymically ibid. How the ancients did
prepare the syrup of Mugwort p. 212 Description of the same Chymicalcally ibid.
How the syrup of Chicory compounded with Rhubarb is commonly prepared p. 214
How to prepare better the same S. A. p. 215 The preparation of compounded syrup
of Hyssop, according to ancient practice p. 217 The Chemical preparation of the
syrup of Chicory with Rhubarb ibid. Pectoral syrup of Hyssop very good p. 219
How the syrup of Carthamy has been vulgarly prepared ibid. The right way of
preparing the same p. 221
SECT. I.
Concerning Roots p. 223 Example 1.
Of the preparation of odoriferous Roots abounding in spirit and volatile salt
p. 224 How the potable and dissoluble balsom of the oil of Angelica-root is to
be prepared p. 227 How the unctuous balsom of the oil of Angelica-root is
prepared p. 229
Example 2.
Of the root Enula Campana p. 232 Of the root of the great Consolida and
Satyrion p. 236 How to prepare the extract or blood of the great Consolida and
Satyrion roots p. 237 Of the root of female Fern p. 239 Of the roots of Jalap
and Mechoacan, and how to prepare the Magistery or Rosin of Jalap p. 240 To
prepare the right extract of Mechoacan p. 242 Of the roots whereof Fecula's are
extracted p. 244 How to prepare the same ibid.

SECT II.
Of Leafs p. 246 Of odoriferous Plants ibid. Of Tobacco and the anatomy thereof
p. 252 The virtues of such preparations as are made out of the same p. 253
SECT. III.
Of Flowers p. 260 Of the Rose, and such preparations as Chemistry makes out of
the same. ibid. How to prepare the Tincture of red Roses p. 262 The manner of
extracting the Water, Oil, Spirit, and Salt of Roses p. 264 The manner of
preparing the true Essence of Roses p. 266 To make the Queen of Hungary's Water
with Rosemary-flowers p. 268
SECT. IV.
Of Fruits p. 270 How to prepare rightly the extract of Coloquint p. 271 The
preparation of the golden Spirit of life of Rulandus 274
SECT. V.
Of Berries, and Seeds p. 276 Of Ferment its action, and how the Fermentation
of Grains is to be prepared to extract the burning spirit thereof p. 278 How
the spirituous water, and etherial Oil of Seeds, Anise, Fennel, Parsley, etc.
is to be prepared p. 288 How to work upon the Seeds of Garden-Cresses, Mustard,
etc. p. 289 How to extract out of Juniper Berries what i^ more profitable and
useful in them for Chemical Pharmacy p. 292 The distillation of Juniper Wood p.
293 The distillation of Juniper Berries p. 294 To prepare the Elixir of Juniper
Berries p. 298 Distillation of the Gum of Juniper p. 299
SECT. VI.
Of Rinds p. 300 To prepare the Elixir of Limon and Orange-Rinds p. 301 How the
Spirit, Oil, Salt, Extract, Tincture, and Magistery of the Rind of Guaiacum,
and rind of the same, is to be prepared p. 302
SECT. VII.
Of Woods p. 305 How the Extract and Essence of Aloes-Wood is to be prepared p.
306 How to prepare the Water and Oil of Rose-wood p. 308 The Extract of
Nephretick Wood p. 309 The spirituous Water and Oil of Sassafras-Wood p. 310

FINIS.
A COMPLETE BODY OF Chemistry:

Teaching the whole Practice thereof by the most exact Preparation of Animals,
Vegetables and Minerals, preserving their essential Virtues.

By Nicasius le Febure, Royal Professor in Chemistry to his Majesty of England,
and Apothecary in Ordinary to His Honorable Household.

Rendered into English by P. D. C. Esquire. one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's
Privy Chamber.

The second Part.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe for Octavian Pulleyn Junior, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard near the little
North-door. 1664.

A Compendious BODY of Chemistry.
CHAP. IX. Of VEGETABLES, and their Chemical preparation.
SECTION VIII. Of Juyces and Liquors.
THE Juice of Plants which is their nutriment, has the same analogy with
Vegetables, as blood with Animals: Now as there are needless or hurtful
superfluities, resulting from the elaboration and assimilation of the blood,
when appropriated to the substance of animals, such as excrements, urine,
sweat, fat, slime, stones and vitriolated humors, nitrous, aluminous, acide,
bitter, sharp Juice, and others also of a mixed nature, whereof the animal
disburthens it self, either gently and naturally, or violently; so likewise in
Vegetables, are found juyces of several rellishes, which analogically do answer
to these excrements: such as oils, Resinous and clammy substances, gums and
viscosities, tartarous and saltish emanations. There is nevertheless this
difference, that animals have conveyances fitted and appropriated by Nature for
the disburthening of their superfluities: which is not so in the plants,
unless we will attribute it to their porosity, through which they do exhale
and evaporate both good and bad smells, as the most subtle, fine and volatile
part of their contents, the grossest remaining in the body of the Vegetable;
upon which account they need the hand and industry of the Artist to separate
and disunite them: it seems nevertheless that some of these Substances strive
naturally to free and set themselves at liberty: for experience teaches, that
as soon as some part of their rind is opened by incision, humors will flow from
thence abundantly, and therefore observe four sorts of Species: First, the
aqueous substances, which are juyces or water, as that which flows from the
Birch-tree and the Vine. Secondly, the terestrial, which are gums. Thirdly, the
Sulphurous, which are Oils; Balsams, Resins and resinated gums: Fourthly,
Salinous substances, as Tartar and Sugar. But as all this we have said;
evidences those substances to be naturally parts of plants, to each of whom we
have also designed a peculiar Section, to teach the Chemical Apothecary what
operations he may perform upon the same: Our intention is to speak in this
present Section, of such juyces only as Nature and Art do furnish us with, viz.
Wine, Vinegar, and their Tartar; Opium, which is the condensated juice of
Poppy; and Elaterium, which is the juice of the wild Cucumber: These three
examples will suffice, because there will occur enough in them whereby to
ground our observations both upon the Theory of these matters in general, and
the practice of their working in particular: and withal to instruct the Artst
in all other operations analogical.

The Anatomy of Wine.
WINE is the juice of the fruit of the Vine, exhaled by fermentation, which by
Paracelsus is called The blood of the Earth, the juice of the Prince of all
Vegetables, the Sovereign Cordial, thought also by some to be the juice of
Raymond Lully, his great Lunaria: others call it again, the juice of Janu's
plant, and of the great Vegetable: but leaving all these names, let us come to
the anatomy of the thing it self, and of its parts. Wine then, first of all,
does yield by the help of Distillation, a most subtle and incorruptible
essence, commonly called aqua vitae, burning water, spirit of Wine, he^^enly
Sulphur, Bezoartick vegetable Sulphur, Heavenly Menstruum, Celestial water,
the Heaven of Raymond Lully, the Philosophers Rey, an ethereal body consisting
of fire and water, the volatile Balsam of the Catholic or universal Liquor,
and finally the Quintessence of Wine. In the second place, it yields in the
separation, great store of insipid and corruptible water, which is called its
Phlegm. Thirdly, there comes a certain fumous or smoking Spirit, which is
nothing else but the grosser part of the volatile salt of Wine, reduced into
vapor, and ascending under the form of a whitish smoke. In the fourth place
follows, a certain fat, unctuous and combustible oil, but in very small
quantity; and fifthly, from the thick and black substance left in the bottom,
is extracted, a penetrating, subtle and fixed lixivial salt after calcination;
and finally in the sixth place, after the salt is extracted, there remains a
muddy, insipid, and needless earth.

We have said the Wine was made such only by the help of fermentation, and
therefore are bound to illustrate it by proof, which we hope easily to perform:
since none that has converse with wine can be ignorant, that Must or wine in
the Must was never Wine, and that no body gives it ever the name of Wine, but
after Fermentation is ended: but there is another more Philosophical proof, and
more satisfactory to the mind of a Chemical Artist, who knows that all
whatsoever is wine and is called so, yields its Spirit before the phlegm; and
that in the distillation of Must, improperly and commonly called sweet Wine
before fermentation, there comes nothing but an insipid mere water, resembling
that of Rain; which is a convincing proof since it falls under sensible
demonstration; for after the distillation is performed, there remains a
pleasant extract of a sweet and saccharing taste, containing in it self the
essential and volatile Salt of Must, and ^^d its heavenly Sulphur, incapable
now of action, being too much restrained, and deprived of sufficient humor or
moisture to reduce his power into act: but if you restore unto it a sufficient
portion of water, and can dexterously introduce a spark of Oil there in, by the
help of some fit and appropriated Ferment, it will work again in a short time,
and make it appear, that his fermentation only can perfect and make the wine.
For all the Mass will ferment, and the liquor by this means contract the
taste, strength, pleasantness and all other perfections of Wine, by which it
evidently appears, that Art is capable in some way to imitate Nature, and that
amongst all other Arts, Chemistry alone can attain to the Theory and practice
of this Artificial Fermentation.

Now it is not enough to have described the six parts or substances which Wine
affords in general, unless we come to its particular anatomy: they that will
please their eye, must take good wine, clear defecated and subtle, of a
generous and strong complexion, and distill it in B.M. in a grear glass
Cucurbit, that they may the better examine, with the eye which all the
substances shall ascend: for when the pure Spirit rises, the veins will scarce
appear in the Still head, so subtle they are; and when they are totally
deprived of phlegm, they ascend not in a straight line, but are crooked and
winding: but when the phlegm begins to mix with them they become more straight
and visible, by reason of the weight of water which more visibly does
incorporate with them; when this comes to pass, the Cucurbite or glasse-body
must be exposed to a Sand-furnace something warm: but the moisture must be
wiped off from the vessels first, and a graduated fire administered, to perform
thus the whole anatomy of Wine, for the satisfaction of the Artist. But because
this process is slow and tedious, and that the Laboratory of the Chemical
Apothecary, ought to be furnished with great store of Spirit of wine of all
sorts, being the chief menstruum of all, and the more conformable to our
nature, for the execution of the finest operations; we think fit to deliver a
more compendious and quick Method of distilling Wine; as a ground to explain
afterward all the processes of work which may be done upon it, to render it
useful to all preparations whatsoever, which the same Art will take in hand.

To extract the Spirit of Wine.
FILL up your (Vesica) or glasse-body, half a foot near to the mouth with a
good strong and generous wine, well defecated, then cover it with a Head, and
lute it, administering a soft and gentle fire, until the drops begin to fall,
and the pipe of the Moors head grows so hot, that your hand cannot rest upon it
without burning: then stop the Furnace on all sides, and keep the water in the
Tun (through which passes the neck or worm) very cool, guiding the fire so
judiciously and so moderately, then whatever falls into the recipient may fall
always cold; for in doing so you spare the trouble of a Rectification, because
phlegm cannot easily ascend and mix it self with the Spirit, when the heat is
well proportioned and fitted to the work: the first Spirit drawn must ever be
laid by it self, as the most pure and most subtle; and the distillation
continued, until the distilling liquor grows insipid: this phlegmatic Spirit
which comes last, must be mixed again with the next wine you are to distill, and
so proceed until you have a sufficient quantity of Spirit or aqua vitae drawn,
to supply a rectification in the same glasse-body; But now in this part of the
operation, above all things the fire must be heeded, and skilfully governed,
and cold water timely supplied and often changed, because it easily will
contract heat, the vapors of these fiery Spirits being much hotter then those
of gross bodies. That which remains after the distillation of Wine must not be
thrown away; but to the contrary evaporated to the consistency of a black and
clammy extract, much like unto pitch, which must be distilled in a Retort, with
open fire, and thence will come forth an acid and sharp volatile Spirit, and a
black and ponderous Oil, all participating much of Empyelum, and having a
strong fiery smell, what remains in the Retort must be calcined in a crucible
or a glased earthen pot until it comes to a perfect white; then lixiviate it,
and filtrate, evaporate and dry to a Sun, which is to be reverberated in the
Crucible unto redness, without putting nevertheless the matter therein
contained in fusion, then expose it to the air to dissolve it and subtiliate
the parts thereof; and so will it divest it self with many more viscous and
clammy feculencey's that are to be separated afterward by alteration, then
evaporate or separate the water from this Salt again upon ashes, and being dry,
gloom it in a Crucible without melting, and expose again to the air until
dissolution, then filtrate, evaporate and dry again, and so proceed reiterating
till seven times, or what would yet be better, until the salt leaves no more
seculenceys in the filtration, and that when you shall extract the moistness
of the dissolution in B. M. to the fourth part, you have a clear chrystalline
white and transparent Salt: then may you confidently boast you have a true salt
of Wine, which to a diligent, curious and knowing Artist, may serve as a Key to
open all natural bodies, after the same has been acuted with its Spirits, and
made capable to fly and ascend with the same: for then will they not only
penetrate into the bodies of Vegetables and Animals, but even also will act
upon Minerals and Metals, provided they have been first destroyed and made fit
to be extracted by this noble Menstruum, which we above all things do
recommend, to such as have a desire of success in Chemical Operations.

To prepare the Alkool of Wine.
THE Chemical Laboratory, which is the true shop of a good Apothecary, must be
furnished with store of very subtle and very pure Spirit of Wine, whom the
Authors use to call Alkool of Wine; and as it requires both time and store of
charges to bring to perfection, I have given the Model of a Vessel capable at
once, and with an easy charge to perform this operation, without the trouble
of so many reiterated distillations, which to do the work exactly were
necessary before this useful invention; because the Vessels wherein the
cohobations required for rectification and alkoolization were made, being too
low, it caused the phlegm still to be more with the Spirit; but in this Vessel
of invention, it is impossible the phlegm should ever ascend, let the heat of
the fire never be given so great: as it is evident in the latter end of the
distillation of Spirit of Wine made in your Vesica or still glasse-body; for
when the phlegm begins to overpower the Spirit, being in greater quantity, the
heat of the fire must be increased in a double, yea a treble proportion to
cause the remaining Spirit to rise, which is in nothing inferior in purity,
quickness and subtility to the other that first ascended, as it is made
evident by experience, and by the proofs and notes of its perfection: which
are, that this Spirit being set on a flame in a silver Spoon, or of any other
Metal, it flies and consumes all away without leaving so much as a drop of
phlegm, or sign of moisture in the bottom of the Spoon: The second note is,
that a piece of paper or Cotton, or rag of linen being dipped in this Spirit and
set on a flame, it does not only all vapor and consume away, but moreover
enflames and kindles the body which first it had moistened, provided it has
been well dried before. The third and the best note and an infallible one, is,
when the finest Gunpowder well dried is moistened and imbibed with this Spirit,
if you see it on a flame it will at last consume also the powder; for then it
is a true concluding sign, that no portion of phlegm remains mixed therein: for
did there remain never so little the Gunpowder would never take fire, wherefore
this operation saves much time and labor; For when all the Spirit of what was
put by the Artist in the glasse-still body is ascended, let him only fill a
crooked pipe or Spoon with water, and insert it in the Vessel by the small
channel it has in the side, and thus shall he empty the still body to the very
bottom, without being put to the trouble to take off the Lute of any part of
the structure of the Vessel, and by the same channel or conduit may fill up
again the same glasse-body with new aqua vitae by a Funnel, and so may he
almost continue unabruptedly day and night his work without any trouble,
provided he takes care to supply the fire as it shall waste and consume away.
And if the Artist shall propose to make yet a more subtle and refined Spirit of
Wine, more penetrating and active then the former, let him put in the bottom of
the body of our Vessel or Engine of Sal tartar. very dry, and pour upon some
rectified Spirit of Wine, luting all the joints after commissures of the
Vessels with a Hog or Neats bladder dipped in white of eggs well beaten, then
administer the fire until he has drawn again all the pure Spirit, which will
have a most pleasing taste and fragrancy then the former, and be very apt to
make therewith those impregnations and imbibitions of Salt, whereof we have
spoken here above, as also for the extraction of many fine and excellent
Tinctures. There are some which call this Spirit so alkolizated upon Salt of
Tartar Tartarizated Spirit of Wine, but very improperly: for the true Spirit of
this nature can be no other, then that through which has been wrought the most
subtle pure and refined part of the Salt of Wine: which is a very painful
operation, and deserving rather the care and industry even of the most
consummated in the practice and mysteries of Chemistry, then the impatience and
unskilfulnesse of those which are but Novices and young Practitioners in the
operations of this noble Art.

It remains only we should speak now of the great and wonderful virtues of
this noble Spirit, which can never be commended or praised enough by any body;
howsoever ignorant bablers, who are not acquainted with it, may speak to the
contrary: for it a most penetrative and incorruptible Spirit, potently
resisting to putrefaction, and to all injuries of cold and frost: and* I let
you judge and consider, whether there must not be a capacity in this Spirit to
preserve living bodies and their parts, being duly and judiciously administered;
since it preserves dead bodies; whereof those which keep therein for several
years abortive faetus 's may be sufficient witnesses, as likewise Surgeons, who
so usefully and successefully apply it for stopping the progress of Gangrenes
and other accidents tending to corruption of the parts of the body. It revives
and awakes the vital and animal faculties: and therefore produces sometimes
surprising effects in Apoplexies, Lethargies, Epilepsies, and all other
soporiferous affections of the body, where the passage of Spirits is obstructed
by some gross clamminesse and viscosity stopping the sinews which are the
Organs of sense and motion: for this Spirit penetrates in a moment even as
light, dissolves and eats whatsoever was the cause of obstruction, and causes
life and all its functions which were as buried and suffocated, to shine and
appear again; But if it has any considerable virtues in internal applications,
it shows no less estimable ones in external: for by its fiery and Celestial
quality it dissipates and resolves all cold and schirrous tumors, opens the
pores and drives or exhales the windy vapors which sometimes are raised between
the spaces of the Muscles, causing very sharp pains, it hinders the coagulating
of the blood in all manner of contusions, and so prevents all manner of
accidents which commonly use to follow them: as swelling, pains, corruption of
the extravasated blood, which of necessity without this help must putrify, and
would afterward come to suppuration, were all those ill consequences and
symptoms not hindered by this Spirit. But above all, this Spirit is a
wonderful Specific against all manner of burnings, the grief whereof it
allayes, and takes away the wildfire from it, with such a sudden help and
quickness, that no penetration or ill impression can happen in the parts
offended where it is applied, not even so much as blisters or rising pustulas
in the flesh, provided it be put upon before the skin begins to peel of, and
before any other Remedy be made use of. But I want words to express further
the worth and virtue of this Heavenly Balsom: wherefore, I leave the rest to
the experience of such as will make use of it; which I may safely and on my
conscience assure, that they shall never be deceived in the use thereof.

But as the young Artists might easily mistake, and equivocate in the rare
appellation of Spirit of Wine alkoolizated, which for abreviations sake is writ
alkolized, confounding it with Spirit of wine alhalized, it is necessary to
show in wherein they differ, and to teach the way how to prepare the last in a
more exact and artificial way then any has done hitherto: but before we come
to the description thereof we will show the difference between both: which
consists in this, that alkolized Spirit of wine, is nothing else but the said
Spirit pure and divested of all phlegm, as we have described it above: but
Alhalized Spirit of wine, is a Spirit impregnated with its own salt, which is
prepared two several ways: the first by the help of its essential salt, which
is Tartar, and this cannot very properly be called Alkalized; because Alkali
signifies a fix salt made by calcination; but when the Artist has attained the
skill to impregnate the Spirit of wine with its Alkali, it is then properly
that he may call it Alkalized Spirit of wine: for that which is prepared with
Tartar, is more conveniently named Spirit of wine acuated with his own Tartar,
or Tartar sated. I cannot bury in silence the error of those who pretend by a
single dissolution to unite the very pure Spirit of wine and its purified
Alkali together, to make therewith their Alkalibed spirit of wine: since those
that are acquainted with the nature of salts Alkali, and that of Alkohol of
wine, know that they work not one upon the other, if the salt be very dry, and
the spirit very pure, but if the salt participates of the least moisture, or
that in the spirit there remains yet any small portion of phlegm, then will
there happen some small dissolution of the salt, but there will be no union
made of either with other, because they are of a quite different nature, the
one being ethereal and combustible, the other a salt dissoluble in water:
those that know what belongs to true Chemical Philosophy, can be competent
Judges of what we have said, and will confess that not without reason we have
insisted a little on the elucidation thereof, not to prejudice the Chemical
Artist.

How to prepare the Tartarized Spirit of Wine.
lb ij. OF Spirit of Wine of the first distillation, pour it in a glass
Retort, wherein you have put j. very pure and clean reduced to a gross powder,
put your Retort B. M. filld with moistened sawings of wood, and only four
fingers high of water in the bottom, the vapor whereof will gently entertain
the heat and moistness of the saw-dust: administer moderate and soft fire,
that the drops falling into the Recipient which must be exactly luted, may
follow gently one another and without hear, so that between the falling of each
drop there may be an interval of four pulsations or beatings of the pulse, or
telling slowly four; as soon as the phlegm is perceived to come forth, you must
give over: and if any should happen to have ascended with the spirit, it must
be separated by rectification. This operation must be thrice reiterated, taking
still j. of fresh. and observing the same degree of heat: to conclude,
desiccate well the iij.. which you may use often in your distillation: put your
distilled spirit in a Retort, and add to it those iij.. reduced to powder, and
above all things well dried; fit immediately to it a Recipient and lute it
exactly, then distill in ashes softly, until you see the drops cease to fall;
then by degrees increase the fire, even until nothing more will come forth;
then shall you have the tartarized spirit of Wine, or acuated with its Tartar,
being an operative and diuretic Spirit, but above all a most excellent
menstruum for the extraction of several noble and useful Medicinal Tinctures.
And you are to note, that on the top of each of these distillations there will
swim a small portion of Oil which must be taken off every time, because it is
the true essence or oil of Wine, and a very high Cordial. But if you will have
a Spitit yet more penetrating, more active and more subtle then this last,
calcine your Tartar remaining after these distillations, with xij. more of very
pure. in an earthen glazed pot with a circular fire, or (fire rotae) until it
has contracted a mixture of blew, white and red color; and whilst it is yet
warm, beat it to powder in a brazen Mortar heated with its iron Pestle; and
immediately throw the powder in a double Vessel, and by little and little
impregnate or inbibe it with your tartarized spirit of Wine; and when the
spirit has sufficiently penetrated all the whole Mass, pour on more to the
height of four or five fingers: then stop the necks of your double Vessel where
the joints meet and lute them very exactly with a Bladder, whites of egg and
quick lime, and place your Vessel to digest in B. M. with Saw-dust, the space
of six weeks, in a moderate heat imitating that of man's body: This time being
over, take away the upper part of your double Vessel and apply nimbly a
Chaptial or Still-head, which luted, continue the fire, but of somewhat
stronger a degree, and distill the spirit from it till it leaves the bottom dry;
then about the end give a very quick fire, and you may then boast of having a
tartarizated, and in some kind an alkalized spirit of Wine, of a sweet and
pleasing fragrancy, resembling that of the flowred Vine; because the internal
Sulphur of the calcined Salt has in a manner dulled and deaded the edge and
quickness of this Spirit, which is very effectual to draw the Tinctures, and
make the extracts of all Purgatives, whose untipenesse it corrects with all
other peccant qualities, digesting the same and altering for the best, by the
help of that Celestial fire which it conceals and possesses in its entrals:
whence proceeds also the virtue it has to preserve the vigor and faculties of
all Animals, Vegetables, Minerals and Metals. It is one of the great Arcana in
the practice of Physic, and chiefly in tartarous Diseases proceeding from
obstructions of a fix and tenacious Salt, formed in the entrals, because in the
coction the stomach is destituted of that subtle, volatile and energetick
Spirit, which is capable either to expel them by insensible transpiration, or
eject them by Urine and Sweat: whence it comes to pass that this Spirit is of
a sovereign efficacy in Scorbutical and all other Diseases of the Spleen and
hypocondrical affections, of Asthma's or short breath, and Cachexye or depraved
disposition of the entrals. It causes also sleep, administered with a little of
the Tincture of Saffron. The Dosis is from ij. to j. in Wine, Broth,
Decoctions, or any other appropriated Liquors according to the intention of the
Physician; we leave all the other preparations which may be made of Wine and of
its Spirit, to the examination and curiosity of the Son of Art; holding it
sufficient to have insinuated all the necessary Methods, from which we may
fetch the Rules of not erring in his beginnings and first preparations, as also
the Method of attempting further, when he shall have a mind to satisfy himself
about any remarkable operations, which he shall meet with in the most famous
and celebrated Authors.

Of the Anatomy of Vinegar.
THE name of Vinegar does sufficiently evince that the subject of this work
must be acid Wine; but use has prevailed that the name of Vinegar should be
given to all acid Liquors, made out of Beer, Cider, or Perry: but in all
Chemical operations Wine-vinegar alone is to be used, being the most excellent
of all other Vinegars, because it proceeds from an alteration of the Prince of
Vegetables, which abounds most in vitriolick and acid salt which is its Tartar:
and when the Wine is robbed and deprived of the purest part of its spiritual
and igneous Sulphur, then the predominant Tartar changes all the remaining
liquor into Vinegar: a speculation of very great importance, and very well
worth consideration; for Paracelsus makes use in his books of Archidoxa of the
comparison of the Sphere of Activity of Vinegrifical Ferment (if I may use this
barbarous word) to prove the strength and virtue of transmutative Tinctures:
and the learned Van Helmont cannot find a better proof for the secret action
and hidden intrinsecal power of fire, light, and the internal Ferment of mixed
bodies, then by comparing that Ferment with the leaves of bread, and the
Ferment of the stomach: But moreover, he relates a story concerning the
strength and power of Spirits impregnated with the Ferment of Vinegar, which is
that, if you fill with River water a Cask of Oak very dry, wherein for some
time before has been put good Wine-vinegar, and expose the same to the beams of
the Sun, during the heat of the Dog-dayes, then the fermentative spirit of
Vinegar shall transmute and change by his magisterial tinging and transmutative
virtue all this quantity of water into Vinegar; a thing that will appear very
possible if we reflect upon this, that one pound or two of dough having in it
the principle of leaven, are capable to turn a hundred pound of wrought dough,
not only into leaven, but to convert them also into spirits Animal and water:
Now the Cask is made of boards or planks of Oak, which is a tree altogether of
a vitriolick nature, and whereof by distillation a very potent, acid or sharp
spirit may be drawn; but that which is the chief of all, is, that the pores of
this wood are filled with the most subtle parts of the Spirit and salt of the
Vinegar which it contained before, which retains still in, and with it self the
Character and power to convert into vinegas all such liquors as be put in the
Cask, provided it be assisted with the Suns or any other constant and continued
heat that may supply its room and office. But that which he notes of more
wonder, is, that this Vinegar of water was all spiritual; for whereas the
vinegar of Wine, sends forth in the distillation his phlegm first of all, and
yields but toward the end his spirit: the vinegar of Water contrariwise, does
still send forth and yield spirit equally from the beginning of the
distillation to the end, and still with the same strength and dissolutive
virtue.

The manner of distilling Vinegar.
CHOOSE of the strongest and best Vinegar you can meet with, and put it in
glass bodies or Cucurbits till they be half full, then cover them with their
heads and place it in sand, making but a plain lute with a filter of wet paper:
the administer the fire, and the first thing that shall ascend will be the
phlegm, which is an evident proof that Vinegar is nothing else but a wine,
which the salt and acid Spirit prevailing over the ethereal and subtle sulphur
has fixed. From time to time you must examine the taste of the falling drops,
that you may change your Recipient as soon as the drops shall grow acid, and so
drive the fire with an equal heat until all the spirit of the Vinegar be drawn,
which commonly is called distilled Vinegar: You must note to cease the fire
when there is but little of Vinegar left; otherwise that which is in the bottom
of the Cucuribite would burn, and so communicate an ill empyrematical smell to
the spirit of Wine: but to prevent this accident, warm Vinegar to pour again
into the Cucurbite, which may be done for three ends: First to exhale and
vapor away some part of the phlegm of Vinegar; Secondly, to hinder by the
heat, that the glasse-body should not break; and in the third place, that the
new Vinegar may dissolve the gross and feculent one which is in the bottom of
the Cucurbite, and so shall the distillation go on without contracting any
empyreuma add losing any time or heat of the Furnaces. But they who intend to
make a very strong Vinegar for metallic operations, have no need of all these
precautions, because it is even necessary to drive the salt which is found in
the remainder of the Vinegar into a Spirit, to make it penetrate the better
into the bodies or calpes of Metals: wherefore there ought to be no fear of
heightning the fire toward the end, until all the reddish fumes or vapor be
over, with this caution nevertheless, that the Vessels must be well luted,
which are to suffer such violent fire, because the last spirits are very
penetrating and subtle; and as distilled Vinegar is a menstruum of much use in
Chemical operations, so is it requisite that the Artists Laboratory be well
provided with these three kinds, viz. acid phlegm, spirit of Vinegar without
Empyreuma, and this last driven with the intensest fire, that he may be still
supplied wherewithal both to prepare Remedies and satisfy his Curiosity, in
Philosophical trials and Experiments, which daily he is invited to make for the
satisfaction of his mind, and to prove whether his reasoning is answered by
success, and know whether all what we have delivered by Authors is true or
false. Distilled Vinegar has no very great use in Physic, unless applied as
a dissolvent for the preparation of other Remedies; or to make Syrups, as we
have said above, or to prepare Bezoartick Vinegars, and Remedies against the
Plague: for it is endowed with an incising and attenuating virtue, and
therefore is Diuretic, Aperitive and Sudorisick; it is even Alexiterial and
cures the biting of Serpents, because it kills by the subtility of its acid
spirit, the volative salt of the spittle and venom of these creatures: it
produces the same effect on tart, hot and corrosive gummes and all condensated
Juyces which are deemed venomous and of a dangevous quality: Wherefore it is
employed by Chemists as the true Correctives of Remedies prepared therewith.

To prepare the Radical or alkalized Vinegar.
lb v. or vj. lb. OF very strong distilled Vinegar well dephlegmated, wherein
you shall dissolve lb j. of Chrystals of Vinegar, which are nothing else but
its own Tartar well purified, which by some is called its essential salt, and
by others its volatile salt, but improperly enough: digest them together for
the space of fifteen days in a double (or circulatory) Vessel in the heat of a
vapory Bath, in Saw-dust or minced straw, which done, put all in a Retort, and
distill upon sand till it be dry, augmenting the fire toward the end, that the
spirits of this subtle and acid Tartar may be joined to the distilled Vinegar;
calcine to whiteness the remaining matter in the Retort, and add to it lb ij.
more of very well depurated; put all these calcined salts in a Retort, and
distill your Vinegar thereupon so often by reiterated cohobations in sand-fire,
that the spirit of Vinegar may incorporate and carry along with him the
greatest part of the fixed salt, which for the most part is not performed until
the eleventh or twelfth cohobation, so shall you have a true alkalized Vinegar,
fit to dissolve in a very short time all manner of stones and shells: as
likewise to extract and penetrate the bodies of all Minerals and Metals; they
that will be at the trouble to prepare it so, and use it dexterously, will find
out more and more to how many rare effects this Spirit is conducing.

Another very subtle Spirit of Vinegar.
DISTILY in B. M. lb. xv. of very good Vinegar well depurated, and extract
shortly thereof about lb x ij. of phlegm, put the remainder in a Retort and
distill upon sand with a graduate fire until the remaining matter be very dry;
then cohobate the same spirit drawn off upon his own feces four or five times;
after which make a past of lb ph. of the Chrystals of tartar of the Vinegar,
iiij. of Sal.. with lb ph. of Bolus reduced to powder, a little of very good
distilled Vinegar; and having made this paste into Pills of a fit bigness to be
put in a Retort of glass or stone mettle, place it in a close Reverbatory, and
fit thereto the Recipient, wherein lies the first distilled Vinegar joined with
its Chrystals by cohobation, and give a gradual fire until all the spirits are
driven out by the strong expression of the fire: after all is cooled, open the
Vessels, and rectify your distillation in a sand-Furnace; and thus shall you
obtain a spirit of Vinegar not inferior to the foregoing: but contrariwise yet
more subtle, and consequently more capable of performing all the effects hoped
for.

How to prepare the Chrystals of Vinegar or its subtle Tartar:
EVaporate in the vaporors heat of B. M. xj. or L. pints of strong Vinegar very
pure and defecated, until it has attained a consistence of decocted Honey: then
put it in a cold place or Cellar to shute Chrystals, and draw after some time
the Liquor which lies under by inclination letting it run softly, until the
Crystals be quite separated: the remaining thick and blackish liquor dissolve
in acid phlegm of Vinegar; then strain it through a Hose to defecate it; then
again evaporate the liquor strained in B. M. to the same consistence as you did
before, and let it shute again Chrystals for a second time, and separate the
superfluous residence fit for nothing else but to be calcined with Tartar, to
draw the salt thereof; then put your Chrystals together and dissolve in a slow
heat of Balneo in a sufficient quantity of good distilled Vinegar, filtrate the
dissolution warm, then put it in the cold to shute Chrystals, and so continue
this work of evaporating and chrystalizing: until you have extracted all the
essential Salt; which you must dissolve, filtrate and chrystalize in this
manner three or four times, that you may have it very clear and depurated: this
Salt is useful to make the true Radical Vinegar; and moreover, it is a very
pure and subtle Tartar, which may be given in broths to cleanse the stomach
from viscous and clammy impurities lying in its bottom and about the sides of
it, by which the appetite is called away; it is also good to open disopilate
and cleanse the passages of urine, which it provokes gently, as it does sweat
also: The Dosis is from ph. to ij. and j.

Of Tartar, and the preparations extracted from it.
PARACELSVS aad his followers have so much made mention of Tartar in their
Writings, that it is enough to confound the mind of their Readers, because they
make no distinction between microcosmical Tartar, Tartar of Aliment, and Tartar
Remedy. We will then succinctly explain the difference which is between them,
to ease the search and labor of the studious Son of Art.

Tartar in the Paracelsian Physic is called whatsoever is capable to coagulate
in the form of a stone, or is already so coaguted; But nevertheless, by
microcosmical Tartar, or that which is engendered in man, called Microcosm or
little World, is to be understood a viscous and clammy matter, which by want of
digestion is framed in our bodies, and has in it self an immediate or proximate
virtue of harding and coagulating, and consequently of causing obstructions, by
reason that it wants a fermentative Spirit, capable of driving them by the
natural passages and emunctories, from the center of the body toward its
circumference, and from thence to expel them sensibly or insensibly by the
pores: the defect of transpiration being the cause of the most part of internal
Diseases no less then external.

For the evils and accidents, whereof the Root or seminary lies within our
selves, ought not to be imputed to the vice of Aliments, as the most learned
Van Helmont does very well prove in his Tract entitled Alimenta Tartari
insontia. Now the Paracelsian opinion is the cause why the name of Tartar has
been given to the Terrestrial and essential Salt which is extracted from some
Plants; whether it naturally separates its self from their Juyces, or whether
it be performed by Art, we have declared above in the beginning of the Chapter
of Vegetables, the manner of separating the Tartars or essential salts of
Plants: but as we can but intellectually conceive the help of Reason and
comparing things together, the manner of that which is separated naturally by
its own internal working, we will declare our conceit thereof, agreeing with
the most judicious Authors.

The Artist to apprehend and conceive the better the original of Tartar whereof
we are to speak, ought to call to mind, that the Principles of things are but
crude and undigested in their original, and as it were but crude and homogeneal
in this disposition of their Chaos: but afterward by maturation there is a
separation made of the gross parts from those that are more pure and subtle:
the gross parts naturally do incline to the elementary state which is aqueous
and terrestrial; but those that are subtle do exalt, and to speak more
properly, spiritualize themselves, by the power and strength of their internal
Principle or Archeus, which contains in its self the ferment and Spirit, by
whom they are also reduced to the other elementary state which is Aereous and
fiery, that is to say, participating of the ethereal and Celestial nature.
Which Philosophical consideration, if it may be suitable to any subject, it
cannot be applied more lawfully to any thing then to Wine: for when the Must is
newly drawn off from the Grape, it is a true Chaos, until the eternal Archeus
or Principle has raised up and excited the fermentative Spirit, which causes
the separation of the subtle parts from the gross, and ceases not from its
work until it has brought the substances into which it works to the highest
pitch of their natural Predestination, which is the fiery and Celestial part of
Wine: and that which is grosser, does return as by a Reinundation to that
aqueous, earthly and saline nature which creates Tartar, which is an essential,
permanent and incorruptible Salt in its self, but on whom Art and fire may
imprint several alterations, because it contains very Rare and remarkable
Virtues, of near resemblance to the nature and Power of Spirits, by the help of
its salt and sulphur, which it possesses abundantly. But let us now from this
Theorical Speculation come to the practice by which we are instructed in the
manner of purifying Tartar, its Dissillation, Salsification, and the Extraction
of the Tincture of the internal Salt of its sulphur.

The Purification of Tartar.
TARTAR may be purified by a simple washing of warm water to take away the salt
and terrestrial dregs which it always has in its self, and by which it is
ordinarily assisted and accompanied in its coagulation: To perform then this
Purification, beat to powder either German Tartar, or Tartar of Monipellier,
and having put it in an earthen Pan, pour on it some water a little more then
lukewarm, half a foot high, then stir it with a Pestle that the water may take
the substance and muddinesse of the Tartar, then let the fallen parts fettle
again, and pour out the water by inclination, and reiterate three times this
Lotion with warm water, and thrice with cold, and so shall you have a Tartar
something pure, which you may use well enough in Decoctions, Infusions or
Macerations where there shall be need, either for ordinary work or some
prescription of the Physicians. But this way of Purifying is too course, and
savours rather common and vulgar Pharmacy then Chemical, which ought totally to
separate purity from impurity: The Artist then shall thus proceed,, to make
what they call Inshops, Chrystals and Cremor Tartari, which to speak properly,
are nothing else but well purified Tartar, beat to subtle powder lb xxx. or XL.
of good. well shining and glistering in the breaking thereof, compacted,
Chrystalline and weighty: boil lb CC. of Rain, or good and pure River water, in
which throw the by degrees, and it will soon dissolve therein: then presently
strain that Liquor through two great Hypocras baggs, hanging over some great
Tub very well cleansed, and when all has run stir continually the said Liquor
with Pestles until it be totally cooled, then let it rest, and two hours after
you shall find that the pure and finest Tartar shall be sunk in the bottom of
the Tub in the form of an impalpable and shining Powder, which may without
scruple be used in stead of the Crystal, or what improperly is called Cremor
Tartari, because some have supposed that the crust which remains on the top of
the Liquor after it is drawn, was of a more subtle quality then the Chrystals
which are found in the bottom, or stick on the sides of the Vessel, though it
be the same thing; since that crust or pretended Cremor, is nothing else but
the coagulation of the purified Tartar in the superfices of the water by the
cold air. But above all this, there is yet one stronger Reason, why this
Tartar thus purified should be preferred to the Chrystals or Cremor Tartari,
which is ordinarily found in the Drugsters and Grocers shops, which is that
those who purify the Tartar in places where it is plentiful and cheap, do put
in the water which must dissolve in Quicklime with their Tartar, and that for
two reasons; the first, because the Tartar should sooner and more easily be
dissolved; the second, that the Lime may precipitate to the bottom, and draw
along with it self all the Feces and clammy viscosities which cause the
impurity of Tartar, and hinder the Chrystals to become either so white or so
pure; But in using this Method, they do not consider the great harm which may
proceed, and proceeds from thence daily: for besides that time does in some
manner fix the essential salt of the Tartar, and makes it less easy to be
dissolved in brothes and other Liquors, it does besides imprint into it a
noxious quality which offends the stomach, and heats extraordina^ily the breast,
and is prejudious to the whole habit of body of those that use often to take
it, so that the good intention of Physicians is not followed: for whereas they
intend to prescribe an Aperitive and Disopilative Remedy, it proves often to be
coagulating and Fixative by reason of the Petrifick Idea which is unspeakable
from the salt of Lime mixed and united with that of the Tartar. But this I only
say by the by, that the Apothecaries may themselves take the pains to prepare
their Remedies, whereof they are accountable unto God, the credit of
Physicians, and to their Neighbor.

The Virtues of this purified Tartar, are first and chiefly to dissolve and
attenuate the gross and tartarous Humors, which cause the obstructions of the
first Region of the Belly: wherefore it may be usefully administered also to
open those of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancreas and Kidneys; above all
things it is to be recommended in Diseases proceeding from Melancholy, and all
Hypocondrical fits and affections: All Authors seem to agree in affirming that
it is an universal Digestive; and for this reason make it ever a forerunner of
Purgation, to attenuate and prepare that which by the Purgative must be
evacuated. It is also a very convenient Remedy for all such as are naturally
caustic and close in their bodies; for it will open and gently loose the
Belly, without offending either the stomach or digestive Faculty; The Dosis is
from i. to j. or i j. in broth, or some aperitive or digestive Decoction. But
because this Remedy is destinated to open the obstructions of the Spleen and
Liver, and that Iron or Steel, is one of the choicest Specificks which may be
made use of for this purpose, Chemical Artists have found a way to unite and
associate the Steel and Tartar together, by their Reciprocal action working one
upon the other in their dissolution, which is thus performed.

To prepare the Martial or chalybeated Tartar.
lb j. of purified Tartar in the manner as we just now have taught, with which
you shall mix ij. of cleansed filings of Needles: boil in an earthen glazed Pot
lb viij. of Rainwater very clear, or rather distilled, and pour in it softly
the mixture of Tartar and filings, and let them boil together as long as you
would to make a soft Egg, then run it through a woolen strainer, and agitate
the Liquor until it be cooled; and you shall have a Powder of Martial or
Chalybeated Tartar of a greenish color, and shining when dry, and without
compare more aperitive then the purified Tartar which has been described
before: For it has in it the Vitriol of Mars, which the sharpness of the
Tartar has drawn as the greenish color does evidence: It is administered in
the same Liquors, but the Dosis must be less: for the Dosis of this must not
exceed ph. to 32. in all the Diseases and obstructions wherein we have said the
other was useful.

The distillation of Tartar, and how to extract both the Spirit and the Oil
thereof.
lb vj. of purified by dissolution and filtration, put them in a Glazen
well-luted Retort, then fit it in a close Reverberatory, and join to the neek
of it a large Recipient, whose Joints must be well luted with Saltedearth, or
mixed with a little of the caput mortuum of aquae fortis; let the Lute dry, and
then apply a gradual fire, until you see white vapors begin to ascend, and red
veins to wander about the inside of the Recipient; then increase the fire and
continue even with flame of a very dry wood, until the Recipient grows clear
again of it self, in the greatest and intensest action of the fire: the Furnace
and Vessels being cooled, take off gently by degrees the Lute from the
Recipient, by pouring warm water upon it, then take away the Recipient, and
separate the distilled matter, part whereof is aqueous, Mercurial, subtle and
spirituous, of a sharp, biting and penetrating taste, which is a token of its
volatile salt, and the rest a blackish and heavy Oil of an Empyreumatical
smell as well as the Spirit, having also a sharp and biting taste, though
inflammable as other distilled Oils, which shows also that this Oil contains
in it self store of volatile salt which is not separated from its sulphur, by
reason of the strict union between them both: This separation is performed in
the same manner as we have related above. After this the Spirit must be
rectified in ashes, with this Note, that as Tartar is a salt which has its
original from Wine, so likewise the spirit it yields is of a very resembling
nature: that is to say, that the spirit of Tartar is not of the nature of acid
Spirits, which yield their spirit the last: but contrariwise, it has two kinds
of spirits in it self, the best and noblest whereof ascends the first, and this
is the volatile Spirit, the phlegm follows after; and for the last follows an
acid or strong Spirit which hitherto has found no great use in Physic. The
Oil may be kept without Rectifying to use externally: But if in case you will
make it more Penetrative, more Dissolutive and Resolutive, you must also
Rectify it upon some of the remaining matter after Distillation, and you shall
have an Oil capable of producing such effects as we shall attribute unto it
hereafter.

In the next place, you must join again what remains from the rectification of
the Oil of Tartar, to what is left in the Retort after distillation, and
calcine it again in open fire in an earthen Pot not glazed, until all appears
white, and this dissolve in warm water and make a Lie therewith, running it
three or four times, until the water can attract no more of the virtue or taste
thereof: theu filtrate all your Elixivations and evaporate gently, without any
violent ebullition, until the top of the Liquor begins to contract a skin; then
move the remaining matter, and have a great care to gather all what you see
stick in every part of the Vessel, and to hinder the coagulation thereof in the
bottom of the Vessel, because it would prove very difficult to take it off
afterward: continue your care and work without interruption, until all be
converted into a dry and white salt, which is the true fixed salt of Tartar; to
be preserved in a very dry Bottle exactly stopped with a Cork dipped in wax, that
it return not to a Liquor, which properly is called Oleum tartari per
deliquium, being nothing else but the Liquor of the salt of Tartar dissolved,
and according to our Great Paracelsus, the water or Liquor of Tartar. But when
you have occasion to use either this Oil of Tartar or dissolved Salt, you must
let one half of it lie in an earthen or stone-metal Pan, this Salt being the
most penetrative of all calcined salts or Alkali, penetrating even through
glazed earthen Vessels: wherefore I have thought fit to give this warning, that
the Artist may not be deceived herein. Some may perhaps wonder that we did
prescribe above, to take well purified wherewith to make this Distillation;
since all other Authors seem to be contented with Tartar as it comes from the
Cask, provided it be pure and clean; whom we must satisfy, and show that it is
not without Reason and very good grounds that we have said it. We have showed
above why it was necessary to depurate the Tartar, by reason viz. of its Feces,
and earth, and some other adventitious mixtures, which are ever found in this
matter. Now all these impurities are capable of being calcined in the
distillation, and do communicate their ill taste and smell to the spirit of the
Tartar, which commonly is attributed to the fire or Empyreuma: a reason why
this Spirit is very little made use of internally, though one of the best
Remedies in Physic. Let those whom this truth will not persuade, compare the
penetrating and subtle taste of the purified spirit of Tartar with that which
is not purified, and they will know, that with very good reason we have been
obliged to correct and redress this mistake, the cause sometimes of much more
evil then is thought of, because these Heterogenities have in themselves some
noxious quality, which not only communicates it self to the Spirit, but very
intimately mixes with the salt, and imprints and stamps in it an evil Idea,
which cannot be corrected in the preparation of Remedies which the Artist is
obliged to make; and consequently may often cause very dangerous accidents,
which will elude the guess and suspicion of the Physician.

Now let us come to the virtues of Spirit its distilled and inflammable Oil,
its salt, Oil per deliquium, or with it dissolved Salt.

This Spirit being prepared as we have taught, and rectified in B. M. in a very
clear Vessel, is one of the Noblest Remedies which Chemistry can yield: for it
has the virtue and power to incise or cut, attenuate, resolve whatsoever does
cause any obstruction in the Viscera; it is moreover capable to penetrate into
the most remote parts of the body, by reason of its great subtility: for it
expels all superfluities in digestions, by Urine and by Sweat: wherefore it may
with very good success be given in Dropsies, Gouts, and all arthritical
Diseases, Palsy, Scorbute, Measels, Itch, Scab, and scrarches, and all
contraction of Limbs: the Dosis is from ph. to ij. and a whole dram, in broths,
white Wine or some other appropriated Decoctions, according to the Disease, and
the indication of the skilful and expert Physician. We have said that a portion
of the distilled Oil could be kept without Rectification, and that not without
reason: for this Oil abounds with internal salt, which remains in the bottom
whilst the Rectification proceeds: and this salt it is which by its active and
penetrative virtue causes those noble effects which this Oil does produce, in
the cure of the Scurf, Tetters, and corroding and sharp running Humors. For as
we have said, that the volatile Salts bear an antipathy to sharp and corroding
ones, by which both scurf and Tetters are produced; so is it likewise the
volatile salt of the sulphur in the Oil which kills the acidity or sharpness,
dryes and restores the skin to its natural state; and this Oil is not useful
only to such a purpose, but even works miraculously in resolving Tophus 's and
knots about the Joints of Gouty persons and infected with a touch of the Pox,
provided they have been purged before with some good preparation of Mercury,
joined to a well corrected extract of Coloquint. The rectified Oil is to be
outwardly used, but with precaution and care, by reason of its penetrability
and great activity: but it may be mixed in such Ointments as shall be prepared
for ordinary scabs, scabs called Canine, and all manner of Venerean scabs
internally: It is exhibited for the wind-Colick in white Wine, and spirit of
Elderberries, against fits suffocations of the Mother: The Dosis is from ij.
drops to vj. The salt of Tartar is of it self a potent Agent, and which should
produce unexpected effects, were it not so unpleasant to take, by reason of its
lixivial and urinous taste: for it is the most subtle and penetrating of all
the fixed salts, both used as a Remedy, as also a very useful and convenient
ingredient in the separation of several other excellent Medicines: they that
will use it without correction, may administer it from gr. vj. to xxx. in
Broths or Decoctions, to evacuate and expel by stool and Urine all such matter
as causes the itching and all eruptions of the skin, scratches, itches, scurf;
provided, that at the same time some Ointment be made use of wherein is
distilled oil of Tartar, and a little salt of Saturn. But we will deliver the
manner how to cleanse it and take away its ill taste, rendering it Purgative,
which of it self will be a very good Remedy, and an Instrument besides for the
performance of many noble operations in the hand of skilful and knowing
Artists, who by meditation, study and labor shall attain to the mysteries
which it possesses: The Oil of Tartar per deliquium, is of wonderful effect in
the extraction of all the purging Vegetables; For when the Menstruums that are
employed therein are impregnated and acuated with a small proportion of this
Liquor, they penetrate into the very center of Bodies, extract their virtues,
and correct at the same time the noxious quality which may be in them, and that
by means of the heavenly and Magical Fire, which the salt of Tartar has
borrowed from the light and the Air. This Oil may likewise be given internally
in the same manner, and for the same diseases as the Salt; The Dosis is from
iv. to xx. drops. It is also one of the principal Agents of a Chemical
Laboratory to make Precipitations therewith, and to prepare the vitriolated
Tartar.

To prepare the vitriolated Tartar, or Magistery thereof.
lb j. of Oil of. per deliquium very clear and pure: Note that when the salt
is very pure, and has been resolved in a clean place, add the Liquor well
filtrated, that this Oil is of a greenish color: put it in a Cucurbit or
Glasse-body of about a cubit high and of a narrow entrance: pour upon softly
and drop by drop of Oil of Vitriol, or the spirit thereof well Rectified,
until all ebullition or noise does cease, the weight of the oil or spirit of
Vitriol may be stinted at lb q. or thereabout, but the best way is to proceed
as we have said: then place a Still-head over the Cucurbit, and draw off all
the moisture which swims above the Magistery, until it comes to a consistency
of a pre^ty thick pap; this done, put it in a white or bottle metal earthen
Vessel, and dry it wholly to the vapor of a boiling Bath, agitating and
stir^ing continually the same with a Spatula of Glass, not of Metal: for this
salt would extract the taste and tincture thereof; Put this Magistery in a
Glasse-Viol very exactly stopped: It is one of the best digestives can be given
to prepare the Patients body to Purgation: for it dissolves all tartarous
matters which are the cause of obstructions; above all, it is of singular
efficacy against the splenetical and hypocondrical obstructions, and of the
Meseraick veins, against all Aguish distempers, but chiefly fits of the
Quartain; It provokes menstrual Purgations when suppressed, and accelerates
them when Retarded.

How to prepare the {oil} of Sennertus, or the Purgative salt of Tartar.
lb ij. of very pure and defecated salt of. and put it in a Glass-Cucurbit;
pour upon it 2 pints or lb iiij. of well dephlegmated stilled Vinegar, stir up
the whole together until the salt be well dissolved; place your Cucurbit in
ashes, and draw the moisture or liquor thereof, which shall come off tastlesse
as Rainwater: then continue to distill softly your salt with pints of new
distilled Vinegar, and to draw off the Vinegar on ashes so long until you shall
find it to come off with the same strength as when you did pour it on; which
will happen after you have proceeded thus, about twenty times: the salt
remaining after all this work is very black; but it has no more its lixivial,
harsh, biting and urinous taste; but contrariwise a savor not unpleasant,
participating of saltishnesse and acidity: the change which happens in the
taste of this Salt proves the truth of what we have asserted above, that the
acid substances and salts Alkali, convert one another in a neutral substance,
which is no more either the one or the other, and yet possesses a more
excellent and less hurtful virtue, then the bodies out of which they have been
compounded, as it evidently appears in the example of vitriolated Tartar; for
the Oil of Vitriol is a very strong Corrosive, and as an all-consuming fire,
and the oil of Tartar is of a sharp, biting and urinous taste, very
unpleasant, and nevertheless the result of both makes a very pleafing
Magistery by its acidity, participating no more of the quality of either of the
bodies whereof it is compounded, unless it be its penetrating, subtle and
dissolving quality: this appears moreover, in that the Vinegar loses all its
acidity, and turns to insipid water, and this volatile acid salt of the Vinegar
checks and turns the edge and ill taste of the salt of Tartar, to make it
become a very good Remedy; toward the last time that you draw off the Vinegar,
you must drive this salt with a pretty strong fire, that no moisture may remain
with it: dissolve the same in alkohol of wine, and filtrate, to separate from
it the blackness it has contracted: then put it in B. M. and draw off again the
spirit of Wine from it till it be dry, dissolve, filtrate, and draw again until
the 4th. time, but the 5th. time put your Vessel in ashes, and cohobate again
the spirit of Wine thereon, and continue these cohobations, giving still more
and more a stronger fire toward the latter end, until the salt becomes white:
then put it after in a moist and clean place in a Glass-vessel, and it will
easily dissolve into a red Liquor, which is to be filtrated, and part of it
kept in Liquor, and the other evaporated into salt, which must be dried and put
into a narrow-neck Viol, very well stopped, if you will prepare it without
dissolving. We cannot choose but recommend this Salt in the highest manner to
all Practitioners of Physic, considering the wonderful effects it is able to
produce; for it is beyond all Remedies, to open the obstructions of all parts
of the body, and to evacuate softly all matters incumbering the functions of
Nature; and chiefly in all Chronical diseases and desperate: for it purges
softly and without violence through all the Emunctories: The Dosis is from five
grains to twenty if it be dry: or from ten drops to thirty, if dissolved to
Liquor; it is to be administered in Chicken broth or Veal boiled with Parsley
and Scorzonera Roots, or in white Wine wherein Damask Raisons have been
steeped, with a little quanity of good Cinnamon: the Remedy must be taken
fasting in the morning, and if necessity does require it, it may be reiterated
about five in the afternoon.

To prepare the Tincture of Tartar.
lb j. of salt, very pure, and having placed it in a German Crucible, which
best resists the fire of a violent melting heat, put your Crucible in a
Wind-furnace upon an earthen foot or brick; cover it with a cover made for the
purpose, and fill up all over the Furnace with coals, and the fire being
kindled, open the doors of the Wind-furnace successfully one after another, and
place the Pipes or wind-drawers above the roof or vault of the Furnace, that
the fire may be concentrated to melt the better this Salt, which requires a
more violent and stronger heat then Gold: and when you shall perceive that the
salt is fully melted, and flows as water amidst the flames, take away the cover
and continue the fire until it has got a bluish color, and begins also to
grow red and greenish: for then is it a true sign that the internal sulphur of
this admirable Salt is opened, and as it were drawn from its center by the
extremity of the fires action; and therefere must you often take a trial with
an Iron Spatula or Slice well cleansed and dry, of the color of the Salt;
because if there did remain the least moisture in it, it would cause the salt
to fly and break the Crucible, you must then be very careful to heat the slice
before you put it in the melted salt; Then as soon as the Artist shall perceive
by the color, that the salt is sufficiently opened, let him throw it in a
brazen Mortar both warm and clean; otherwise the extreme heat of the melted
salt would crack it, and being coagulated beat the Mass into Powder with a hot
Pestle; and put the Powder also in a heated and dry Matraff, and pour upon by
little and little Alkohol of Wine, until it has attained to the height of four
fingers above the Salt, and cover the Matraff with another smaller, the neck
whereof may be inserted in the biggest about three inches: well lute the Joints
with a Swines bladder dipped in white of Eggs, and place your Matraff in his
capsula upon sand already heated, and raise the fire gradually until the spirit
of Wine begins to boil; continue the fire in the same pitch three or four
days, and the spirit of Wine shall come forth with an oriental Ruby-colour and
yield a pleasant and fragrant smell, like unto that of the flowred Vine:
filtrate the Liquor and put in other in the room, and so continue till the
Alkohol of Wine colors no longer; put all the filtrated Tinctures into a
Cucurbit, and draw off again three parts of the Menstruum, and the remainder
shall be a real and true tincture of the first salt of Tartar; the color
whereof proceeds from the internal sulphur of the said Salt, which does
communicate unto it very great and efficacious Virtues against several
obstinate and as it were desperate Diseases: For this Tincture strengthens
all the natural faculties, and sets them again in the just and true execution
of their functions, whereof the malignitie and length of the disease had made
them swerve: for it keeps the body soluble, provokes urine and sweat in great
abundance; therefore its continued use does wonderfully operate in all
melancholic affections, hydocondrical and scorbutical diseases, Dropsies, and
generally all obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancreas and
Meseraick veins: above all, it shows its virtue and its strength upon the
bodies of those whose blood is infected in the Mass with Venerean impurities:
for it does not only strengthen the vital and animal faculties, which the venom
of those impurities seises upon and destroys by degres, but it hinders also
the progress thereof, and rectifies the Mass, the mass of the blood, and
frees it from those impure and noxious serosities which cause all ill symptoms
and effects of this desperate and filthy Disease; it must be used for the most
part during the space of a Philosophical month, which is forty days: The
Dosis from iiij. to xx. drops in Broth, Wine or some convenient Decoction
appropriated to the malady: But you must have a care above all things, not to
mingle it with acid Liquors, because they would kill the volatile part thereof,
by which the best effects are produced.

How to prepare the dissoluble Glass of Tartar, and to extract the Tincture
thereof.
WE have showed in the foregoing operation the manner of extracting the central
Sulphur of the Sal, to whom we have assigned many noble Qualities: But we think
it also necessary to evince, that salts Alkali are not only the dissolvents of
Sulphurs, but also their Extractors: To illustrate this Assertion by a
demonstrative Example; We will take the Calcination, vitrification and
extraction of peble stones, by the help of Tartar and Alkohol of Wine. And we
must let the Reader know, what kind of stones are to be chosen, which may yield
the solar embryonated Sulphur contained in them, and when the salt draws to its
self, to impart afterward to the spirit of Wine, which is no small mystery in
Chemistry. To bring then this operation to pass, Take pebles out of Brooks, or
Rivulets falling from Mountains, that are rocky and full of woods, and if it be
possible where some adjacent ground may contain metallic veins, and where the
waters and small Rivers may abound most with Trouts well spotted with red
Purple spots, high in color; for this will be an infallible sign, that the
peble stones contained in those Brooks or neighboring Grounds, contain in
themselves embryonated Metals, which before and after Calcination begin to
appear: before by external marks and streaks, which are red, green, blew,
Purple veins, and mixed with some other colors arguing their metallic
Tincture: and besides, because that even inwardly are not only found
superficial spots and colors, but in some also are found small scales and
grains of perfect and true Metal, holding proof as gold and silver upon the
touchstone, as I have oftentimes made the trial my self upon stones which were
brought from about Cled^n.

To begin then this operation: Fill a great Crucible with such stones, and in a
Wind-furnace bring them to a full redness; and being thus fire-red, throw them
in a Basin half full of fresh water, by which means they become brickle and
easy to be reduced to Powder in a Mortar; after which, you must grind them on
a Porphurie Mortar or Sea-scale -- until it be reduced to Alkohol, or
impalpable Powder, which having well dried, mix it in a hot Mortar with five
times as much of salt of Tartar, very pure and very dry; you must have at least
lb j. of this mixture in a great German Crucible, so capacious, as that the
half or two of it may remain empty, to give way to the raising and boiling up
of the matter; whilst it is melting in the extreme heat of the wind-Oven, your
care also must be whilst it runs in the Crucible, to draw off with the point
of some Iron Instrument some of the melted matter, to try if it be reduced into
the substance or form of a green, yellowish-glass, clear and transparent, but
you must sound the Crucible to the very bottom, to try also whether all the
Powder or dust of the stones be melted, and united with the Salt; which if you
find to be so, take off immediately the Crucible from the fire, and throw the
vitrified matter or Glass in a very hot Mortar, and with a hot Pestle also
stirring it well, to reduce it to Powder; for if you did give it the least
leisure to cool, it would immediately be resolved into a viscous or clammy
Liquor, which should shut up the Sulphur, and hinder that the Alkohol of Wine
might not have its operation upon it; Heat the Mattress be-you put in the dust
of this Resoluble Glass, and pour thereon by degrees of very subtle spirit of
Wine, until it be moistened and penetrated on all sides; then pour of the same
Spirit three or four fingers high above the matter: put the Vessel in sand
already warm, and apply a competent fire to it to bring the Spirit to a
simpering: the Vessels must be covered and stopped with the same precautions as
in the foregoing Tincture. The Extraction being made, and the Alkohol of Wine
laden with a fine red color, draw it back and filtrate, then pour on new, and
so continue to digest, extract, and filtrate until the Spirit takes no more
color. All these Tinctures join together, and draw back the Spirit in B. M.
with a slow heat, until you see a very red Tincture, of a very good smell, and
a fiery, penetrating and piercing taste, then cease the fire and draw the
Tincture, which you are to put in a Viol of a very narrow neck, stopped if
possible with a glazen stople exactly fitted, or with Cork steept in melted
wax, and a double wet bladder over. This noble and excellent Tincture preserves
its color and virtue, much longer then that which is extracted from mere salt
of reverberated Tartar, because the salt has drawn from the pebles their
metallic Sulphur, which is of a solar nature: now the salt cannot retain this
Sulphur when it is put to digest with pure spirit of Wine, because the Sulphur
immediately is communicated to the spirit of Wine, which is an ethereal and
volatile Sulphur, which by the mutual analogy and sympathy they have together,
extracts and draws it from the center of the least part of the salt. This
Tincture has a more diffuse and general virtue then the foregoing: therefore
it may be exhibited not only in all diseases, for which we have mentioned the
other to be fit and useful, but it may moreover be administered in all
intermittent Fevers, and chiefly in the Quartane; as also in all Chronical
Diseases, which for the most part propagate themselves, by reason of the
depravation of the internal Faculties, which this Remedy repaires insensibly,
as by a Miracle. Above all, it is to be used in obstructions of the Kidneys and
Bladder, whether proceeding from viscosity of clammy humors or sand: or whether
also the Disease be occasioned by the imitation of the Archeus of those parts,
which is immediately allayed by the eradiation of the virtue of that solar
Sulphur shining in this Tincture. We should never make an end, should we relate
here of all what both ancient and modern Authors have operated upon Tartar, or
what our own experience has drawn from it. It suffices that we have
sufficiently enlightened the Artist, to guide himself both in the Theorical and
practical Part of the preparation of this Noble and miraculous Salt; which
conceals and contracts in it self the greatest part of the mysteries both of
Art and Nature, unto which the Artist will never fail to attain, if he learneth
to choose well his Wine, Vinegar and Tartar, and applies himself with industry
to the Work and study of it: which two things are the main props of all
Chemical Curiosity.

Of Opium, which is the condensed juice of Poppy.
OPIUM is one of the chief stumbling stones of those which are Sectators of the
pure Galenical Physic, and have ever avoided to set their foot in the
sanctuary of Chemistry: which Aversion can only proceed of their want of
knowledge in natural things, and a true experience of their Virtues: For ut
ignoti nulla cupido, ita nec cura; and as nothing else but Nature it self and
natural Philosophy, which is Chemistry, can have persuaded by diligent search
and labor, and reiterated Experiments, that Opium is not to be feared nor
rejected from amongst Remedies, whether it be raw and crude as it is brought to
us from the East, or prepared according to the Rules and Prescriptions of
Chemistry: So is it not to be wondered at, if they that call themselves
Christians, and yet have never been searchers of Nature, do every day despise
what they never knew, but by the Teaching and Reasoning of some Professor who
has only read that Opium was unfit to be used, and that it was condemned by
Pliny and by Galen; which is too sufficient an Authority (in their Judgments)
to be condemned by such as openly profess and make it a scruple of Conscience,
not to follow blindly their Masters; and swear as they say, in verba Magistri.
But that which is yet much more to be wondered at, is, that they will by a
sovereign and Magisterial Authority establish in their Hearers a Belief and
Assent of their Doctrine, without being obliged to prove it by effects and real
Demonstration; and the worst of all yet is, that they will treat injuriously
such as are not willing to condescend to their Opinion: Though these last,
either Ancient or Modern Writers, are grounded upon the Basis of true and solid
Reason, whose right foundation is Experience. For it is not enough for a
Chemical Philosopher to say, that Opium may be prepared and corrected in such a
manner, as it may inoffensively be inwardly taken: Since this were no better
then tacitly to confess, that it is naught and dangerous of its own nature;
But a true Naturalist must search the reason of things in their very spring; to
examine if that which produces the controverted quality, is of it self good or
bad. Now all those that are verst in the History of Plants, know that the
Poppy, from which Opium is taken, is a plant which in all times has had its use
and credit in Physic; and likewise the Opium, as without controversy it is
proved by the Syrups which are compounded therewith, by the seed put in
Emulsions, and by the Opium it self, which without any due preparation, is used
in the composition of Electuaries in all dispensatories, and whence they have
the name of Opiates: Whence it is plain, that the Poppy has at all times been
allowed amongst the best Practitioners, in the number of Remedies. Which thing
to examine a little more strictly, I shall entreat all impartial and
unprejudicated Judges to consider, that the syrup of white Poppy, that of the
red-flower Poppy, and all the kinds of Diacodium, are nothing else but
Extracts, or Juyces of Poppy mixed with sugar to reduce them into Syrups, which
are every day made use of in all kind of diseases, whereto they are proper,
with very good success: and whosoever will make a judicious and unprejudicated
reflection upon Opium, which is the Maslak of the Turks, or the Meconium of
Latins, shall find that whatsoever efficacy and virtue is in these two
condensed Juyces, comes but from the same spring from which both the Syrups and
Diacodium did originally derive theirs. For whether it be that the water draws
the virtue of the heads of Poppy which contain its imperfect seed, and that
this virtue be also concentrated in the Syrup: it is likewise the same virtue
which is extracted from these heads of Poppy by their bare incision, which
occasion those drops that by little and little are condensed, and yield that
thick and condensated Juice which is the true Opium or Maslak of the Turks. Or
whether also this expression draws the virtue of the Juice of Leaves or tender
heads of Poppy, which make the Meconium or grosser Opium; We must acknowledge,
that either the Poppy and its preparations are to be banished from the use of
Physic; or if the Decoctions, Syrups, and Diacodium continue to be in use,
then the Opium or even the Meconium cannot be rejected, since they proceed from
the same Plant: and that these Juyces thickened and condensated, have nothing
else in themselves, but contractedly what the foresaid Remedies contain and
afford in a larger bulk and proportion of matter. But if any body would object,
that the Decoction and Sugar only, take what is good in the Poppy, and that the
hurtful part remains behind, we must have recourse to the anatomy of the Plant
to answer this objection; and say, that this Plant is compounded of gross and
subtle parts: that the gross are the herb and juice which easily is drawn from
it and in good quantity; that in this Juice are invisibly contained the subtle
parts, which are an external and material Sulphur, unseparably mixed with
another internal Sulphur, and with volatile, mercurial and sulphurous Salt,
which are folded in and shut up in the gross and tenacious Mass of the
substance which constitutes the Opium, and has much of gross salt and
terrestrious or earthly parts in it self, but chiefly Meconium. Now as Poppy is
not yet ripe nor well disgested when employed to make Syrups, Opium and
Meconium, so as the sulphur cannot yet sufficiently be concentrated in the
seed, to hinder the predominancy of the salt, which is so mixed with it as to be
yet embryonated, and so dissolved and united to the water which is added in the
composition of the Decoction, or the water of its own Juice; an evident proof,
that the same virtue which is diffused in the Decoction, whereof Syrups are
made and all the kinds of Diacodium, is more contracted and united in the
Juice, which naturally comes forth out of the heads of Poppy whereof the Opium
is made by Incisions, or extracted by expression, as the Meconium is. All this
we have said above, tends only to show, that it is a wrong and injury done to
the Art, to use with Authority and great commendations those common Remedies
which by coarse and rude preparations are taken from the Poppy, and for the
most part distaste the Patient by their quantity and unpleasantnesse; and to
forbid obstinately those which are invented by Chemical Physicians, who have
moreover separated the purity from its impurity, and so judiciously with so
much Art, have redressed and corrected all the defects which might be
attributed to Opium; and that besides, they prescribe it in a very little Dosis
and small proportion; they have so much altered the case and odor thereof,
that those which without being acquainted with it, take upon themselves to
traduce and cry it down, would be much put to it to know it, if laid before
them without being told, or put in some suspicion or guess thereof by having
some small light from Chemistry, which might best of all teach them. But to add
yet more weight to what we have said, let us join Experience to Ratiocination:
for that true Touchstone will teach us, that whole Nations use every day Opium
or Maslak very pure and unmixt without interruption, for the richer sort, and
Meconium for the meaner sort of people, and that without any previous
preparation, and in a very excessive Dosis, since they take it from es. at
least to.j. wholly, without receiving thereby any hurt or prejudice, have only
a kind of giddiness in the Head as if they were drunk; which has made the
proverbial Reproach, You have taken Opium: as if we should say amongst us, You
are drunk. To confirm this Assertion, we have all the most authentic Records
and famous Relations of those that have traveled in the Indies and the Levant;
chiefly amongst the Mahumetans: who all believe that Opium does raise their
Spirits, makes them more courageous and bold, and causes them to undervalue
dangers and perils. The Indians take it to hinder sadness, and prevent
melancholy from seizing upon them; as also to be more enabled to satisfy
longer the lust and luxurious inclination of the Indian women. It is true, that
the same Authors do tell us, that if those that are not accustomed to it would
at first undertake to use as much at once, as those that by custom have made it
familiar to their nature, they may fall in very dangerous and sad accidents,
and run even hazard of their lives: but that ought not to bring a prejudice and
aspersion upon Opium to reject it absolutely, since the hurful quality with
which it is upbraided, proceeds only from the excess made by them that take it
without having been acquainted with it before, and habituated their bodies to
the same by little and little: just as if Wine should therefore be
dis-esteemed, because some body may be dis-ordered by it, either by an
over-proportion of what he takes, or because he is altogether unacquainted with
it. Do we not see that Tobacco either taken in smoke, chaw'd, or in
sneezing-pouder, causes very ill and surprising symptoms in all those which
are not accustomed unto it, bringing a sudden giddiness upon them; vomiting,
cold sweats, even as if they were at deaths-door; and yet nevertheless when
they have made it habitual, some are so wedded to the use of it, that they can
by no means be taken from it, or deprived of that comfort. Therefore we must
never rashly give our Judgment of the ill effects which are produced by the
excessive use of any thing, otherwise we must condemn the best things that are
sought for and appointed for the preservation of our life, witness this Axiom
in Physic which says, that Omnis repletio mala, panis autem pessima; and thus
much had we to say concerning Opium, and those which daily make use thereof
with very good success in their practice, to master Diseases and correct their
most dangerous and troublesome accidents. We will only add to this before we
come to the practical part, a word very considerable; and it is this, That I
believe to have found the reason why Opium does not make so great an impression
upon the Eastern people, according to my Judgment as upon Europaeans: Because
these drink Wine or some other fermented Liquor for the most part, such as are
Cider, Beer, etc. and the others drink none but commonly water. Now the
fermented Liquors do exalt the Narcotick and Soporifick sulphur of the Opium,
and by the subtility of their spirits convey it into the very Veins and
Arteries, where it makes, or is capable to make (I say Opium) many dangerous
impressions, being taken in too great a Dosis; or not prepared with all the
exactness acquired. I conclude then, this Theorical Discourse of Opium by the
protestation I make, to have exposed none but of the best and most exact
preparation, according to the prescription of the most learned and famous
Practitioners of our Age, and that in greater quantity then any Apothecary of
France since 30 years has done, without ever seeing any ill accident to happen
contrariwise; I have seen so many, so admirable, and so laudible effects, that
I will be ready all my lifetime to acknowledge in thankfulness, and to praise
those to whom I am obliged for the knowledge of this Heavenly Remedy: The
preparation whereof follows, according as study, labor and experience have
taught it me.

The common preparation of Opium.
I Do not question, but some carping Critic will say, that I have omitted in
the foregoing Discourse, the Dispute of Controversy ordinarily raised in the
Schools, between those that maintain Opium to be cold, because it was the
opinion of ancient Physicians, and others, who affirm it to be hot: because
their sense, and the experience of its effects, seem to force us to entertain
this this opinion, and to assent unto Truth. We would have handled Question pro
and con, had it not been that we profess Chemical Philosophy; whose
prescription it is, we should attend the things and not the words, and not
judge of the truth thereof by the several imaginary degrees of their qualities;
but rather dive into the knowledge of the internal essence of mixts by their
Anatomy, which gives a true light, and discovers unto us what Principle it is
which predominates in natural bodies, that from thence we may fetch the true
Indication of their peculiar proprieties, and the uses whereunto they ought to
be applied.

To perform this Creditably, we must begin in the choice of Opium or Meconium;
for it were pity the Artist should ill bestow his time and his materials:
Therefore, he must have the capacity to judge betwixt good and bad ones, and
the ability to discern between the sophisticated, adulterated, and that which
is not legitimate and skilfully prepared; Nam bonum a malo, falsum a vero
discernere periti est Artificis. But as the true and right Maslak of the Turks
can but difficultly and rarely be met with, whose qualities are a very strong
and unpleasant smell, of a yellow color, inclining somewhat to the redness of
Lions hair, very bitter, biting and fiery in the palate, and upon the Tongue,
so that it seems to set it on a flame, being compacted and well united in a
heap, as a small Cake consisting of many small grains of several colors,
because in gathering the drops flowing from the Incision made in the
Poppy-heads, there will ever some corn of the seed be mixed with the flowing
Liquor: It it necessary we should give some notes of Direction to choose the
best and purest of that which is called Meconium, drawn by Expression from the
juice of Poppy-heads bruised, or by the mixtue of the juice of the leaves: it
were to be wished, that those from whom we have it, would be contented with this
coarse preparation without super-adding other Juyces to increase the Mass: for
the Cakes of Opium which are brought from Natolia, are ordinarily of the weight
of iiij. or lb ph. at the most, whereas those that come from Alexandria,
Egypt, Venice and Marsilia, are for the most part of a pound weight, whereby
it is easy to discover that those who drive a trade of it, do increase the
weight thereof at least of one half part.

The Sophistication of it is performed three several ways: The first is, with
juice of Glaucium or Apple of Love; but this Cheat is easily discovered with
dissolving it in a little water, which immediately turns yellow as if Saffron
had been in it. The second is done with juice of Endive and wild-Lettice, but
this also is known, in that when you cut the Cakes of Opium or Meconium, the
inside is ruffer and less smooth, and has a more mixed odor, obscurer and more
difficult to be discerned. The third and last way of disguise is done with Gum,
which also is very easy to be discovered, for the Cake is more brickle and
more shining; and moreover, this is the worst sort of all having much less
strength and virtue. By which it may be evident, that the true notes of Opium
can be no other then those we have already assigned, except that the Meconium
which is the most common sort amongst us, is more compact and united, more
black and strong in smell: but it is not so bitter, harsh and biting in the
mouth, by reason of the other parts of the Poppy mixed with it, which are not
yet exalted, nor their volatile salt concocted, as is the juice proceeding from
the head alone, either by incisions or Expressions. The Artist then having
chosen his Opium such as he ought to have, must cut it in very slender slices,
which he shall sprinkle in an Iron-pan with good Rose-vinegar until the Opium
be reduced to pap with the Vinegar, by agitating and stirring of it with an
Iron-slice; then put the pan on a very small fire, and so by degrees dry the
Opium without increasing the fire to prevent burning, until it be wholly dry
and be crumbled from its lump, and reduced to a powder and making no more
smoaks. This pure and single operation produces two considerable effects: The
first, that by its slow and moderate exhalation and the continual agitation of
its external sulphur, it drives away the impure and undigested Opium, by which
all those disorders which commonly happen and are feared, be produced. The
second is, that it corrects and fires in a manner the volatile salt of the same
by the acid spirit of the Vinegar: and that moreover, it changes also the
bitterness and the ill taste thereof: The Chemical Apothecary shall keep this
Opium thus corrected in his shop, to use in the composition of all such
ordinary Remedies when that Ingredient is required; as also to make therewith
the most exact and Philosophical preparations, according to the prescription
which we will give hereunder.

To make the Extract of plain Opium.
PUT in a Matrasse iiij. of prepared Opium, prepared after the way above
related, in very small powder, pouring upon good distilled Vinegar the height
of four fingers: stir very well the same, and then put your Mattress to digest
in sand or ashes to extract the Tincture of Opium, which will separate from its
gross and earthly parts, wherein the greatest part of its impure and inquinated
sulphur lies lurking; when the distilled Vinegar shall be well impregnated with
the color of the Opium, draw it off by Inclination and with a care of not
troubling the grounds; then pour again new Vinegar, stir and extract, and so
proceed until the spirit of Vinegar comes off no more colored then when poured
on: filtrate these Tinctures, and lay aside that which shall remain in the Bag,
and dry it, to use the same as we shall immediately direct. Evaporate softly in
sand all the Tinctures to a consistence of Honey boiled into a thick Syrup,
which you shall keep; then take the remainder of your Extraction of the Opium
made with distilled Vinegar; which having dried, put in a Mattress, and pour
upon ratified spirit of Wine a^^ated with j. of the salt of Ta^tar of
Senne^tus, to every iiij. of Spirit, that this Menstruum thus animated, may
extract the remaining internal sulphur of the Opium, which the spirit of
Vinegar could not do, and may at the same time also digest its unripeness:
continue these extractions in B. M. until the spirit take no more of the
color; filtrate the Tinctures, and draw off again the spirit of Wine in the
same Balneo (which will serve anew for like operations) to a consistency of
decocted Honey; then join the two Extracts together, and go on in evaporating
till they attain to the true consistency of a solid Extract which may be framed
into Pills, so shall you have a Body of extract of Opium depurated and
corrected, which will serve to make all the other compounded extracts of Opium,
which by excellency are called Laudanum; as if one should say, a Remedy which
cannot be exalted or praised enough, and exceeds even all kind of praise, as
the Rare and admirable effects which it daily produces in the hands of the most
skillful and excellent Practitioners do sufficiently witness every day. This
general Extract of Opium may already in a manner be called Laudanum, since it
is the ground and foundation of all others, and that without any either danger
or scruple it may be used in many Occurrences, chiefly when the Chemical
Apothecary shall be yet unprovided of the other kinds of Laudanum, which are
more exalted, and admit of some other Ingredients in their composition
appropriated to the disease in hand, or intended for help or ease of some
particular part of the body.

Before we attribute any virtue to this plain Laudanum or Extract of Opium, we
are obliged to prove that it is not capable of any of those ill effects, which
the most circumspect and less venturous are afraid will happen from the use
of Opium: which ill effects are, as they say, that Opium suspends and does
suppress the excretion of Excrements and stops the passages of Urine, benums
and enervates the limbs, changes the natural complexion into a leaden color of
the face, causes cold sweats, short breath and difficult Respiration, and in
progress of time a perturbation of the Senses and Spirit, makes drowsy and
stupifies all the animal and vital Faculties. But we have showed that whole
Nations make use of crude Opium without any Corrective, and yet never fall into
any of those so decantated accidents, except giddiness, whereof they are as
easily freed after the first impression is past, as those that have been
inebriated with Beer, Wine or aqua vitae. Wherefore we may conclude with much
more reason, that well depurated and well corrected Opium after the way we have
taught, shall not be capable to produce any of the evil symptoms which
commonly are feared from it, provided that those who shall prescribe it either
to sound or diseased bodies, exceed not the judicious Dosis, which at first
must ever be small, to avoid the surprisal of those accidents which might be
occasioned by the too great quantity: And moreover, considering that it is ever
easy to add, but very difficult, if not impossible to diminish it when once
let down into the stomach, let this be said by the by upon the precautions of
the Dosis, which ought to be from gr. j. to iiij. and vj. gr. We add now the
singular and noble Virtues wherewith this excellent Remedy is endowed: which
are first to appease all irritations, intestine, seditious and violent
commotions of the body, disquietings, rages, fury and madness of the Archeus,
which is the principal Director of the Spirit of Life, and consequently of
health and sickness; re-stablishing again peace and concord, and maintaining it
between the Motor and motions of the Body: so that after it has softly appeased
the pain and allayed the grief, it procures a soft and pleasant sleep, which
restores nature to its self, and repaires the strength of weak Patients brought
low and attenuated by reason of pain, disquiet and want of sleep, and so
without doubt is at least half of the Cure of the Disease of what nature soever
it be: for somnus reparat vires, fessaque membra levat, by which we may
conclude, that, Natura corroborata est omnium morburum medicatrix, for which
truly I can have a proof from Paracelsus out of the fifth book of his
Archidoxa, in the Chapter where he treats of the specific Anodine, of which we
have been moved to speak by several causes, having had sometimes in hand such
kind of Diseases, as all our Arcana's have failed us in the cure of them,
except the only specific Anodine which has produced wonderful effects, by us
the less admired at, because we know that by the course and Law of Nature
water does quench fire, and that in the same manner the Anodine extinguishes in
all ages the pains of Diseases, and that for several Reasons which we now omit.
For that which sleeps is at rest, naturally commits no fault: If then the
Paroxysme is set asleep, it cannnt be felt, but if it be awaked his operation
goes on and will be felt. And in this Remedy have we one comfort more, that
sleep takes away and dispels much grief, pain and melancholy. But it is to be
noted here, that it is not necessary the man should sleep, but on the disease
it self; wherefore we frame a Specific which encounters the disease alone, and
combats not the whole man; as it must be understood of Fevers, where it is
necessary to make use thereof; for are there things hurtful to the whole man
and divisible in the diseased man: which makes us to set upon the disease, and
so prepare the Specific that it may have no operation upon the Body. These are
the words of that Great Philosopher the wonderful Paracelsus, after which he
delivers the preparation of Laudanum, in the manner which follows.

Laudanum, or the specific Anodine of Paracelsus.
Of corrected Opium j. Juice of sharp Orange and Quinces well depurated ana vj.
Cinnament and Cloves ana ph. Beat all to powder and mix it in a double Vessel,
and digest either in the Sun or Horse-dung the space of a month; this done,
express the Species, and put the Liquor again in your double or circulary
Vessel, with addition of ss Musk, iij. Ambergrease, ss. Saffron, ss. Salt of
Coral and as much of Pearls; put all this again to digest in the manner
aforesaid during one month; then opening the Vessel express the Liquor and
reduce it into a liquid Extract, to which you shall add toward the end j. ss.
of Quintessence of Gold; then evaporate your matter til it comes to a fit
consistency to make Pills: The Dosis whereof of from gr. ph. to iij. or iiij.
gr. Which is (says he) the true Specific Anodine, taking away and appeasing
all inward and outward pains, so that none of the members is sensible thereof.
You see that Paracelsus does make use of acid Liquors for the dissolution and
digestion of Opium, which is the Basis and Ground of this admirable Remedy, to
which he had recourse in the most urgent and difficult Diseases. I cannot but
add here yet what he says in praise of Anodins and Soporiferous Remedies in
General, when he speaks of the Embryonated Sulphur in the first Book of his
Physic, or Treatise of natural things: What Arcanum ought the Physician more
earnestly wish for, then that which may assuage all griefs, and allay all
heats: for he that shall enjoy it shall be possessor of no less knowledge then
Apollo himself, Machaon or Podalyrius, which is an Hyperbolical way of
expression he has to extol the Somniferous Remedies or Anodins.

And though the foregoing Laudanum be indifferently fit to be used by either
Sex: it is necessary nevertheless we should give a description of an
Hysterical Anodine for such Women as are troubled with fits of the Mother, and
wherein no Must must be mixed; for Ambergrease is not so hurtful and contrary to
them, unless joined with Musk or Civet, though many are of a contrary
persuasion. This kind of Laudanum is prepared as follows.

Hysterical Laudanum for Women's use.
ij. of Karabe or white Amber such as Beads use to be of to ph of very fine
Myrrh j. of the inward and dissoluble substance of Castor; reduce all to powder
and make the Extract thereof in B. M. in a circulatory Vessel with alkalized
spirit of Wine, and changing with new Menstruum so long that the Species remain
without color in the Vessel: then filtrate all the Tinctures and draw off your
Spirit again in the vapor of Balneo till you have your Liquor in the
consistency of a Syrup; which you are to circulate during the space of fifteen
days with ij. of Spirit of. drawn in the manner we shall teach when we come to
speak of Metals: draw off again the Spirit in ashes; then join to the
remaining substance j. of extract of plain Opium, dissolved in iij. of juice of
Orange well depurated; put it to evaporate on ashes in a slow fire until the
whole be reduced to a solid Extract, that may be framed into Pills* The Mass
or Body of your Laudanum of all kinds must be kept in a Bladder anointed with
oil or aromatical Essences, as Cloves, Cinnament, Nutmeg for the plain
Laudanum, and that of Paracelsus, and with that Carabe or of Pennyroyal for
hysterical Laudanum: and put the Mass so folded in a tin or silver Box. This
kind of Laudanum may freely and without scruple be administered to Women or
Maids without any fear of provoking the fits: but contrariwise this Remedy
shall correct all the impurity and whatsoever is amiss in this part; it is
also Specific for either Sex against all diseases of the Brain proceeding from
what cause soever: but principally it is very recommendable to remove the
hurtful and sickly Idea's of Epilepticks, and hinder the accidents of Epilepsie
caused by the rising of the Mother; and let no body fear in any wise that this
Medicament should stop the lunary courses of Women or their purgations in
Childbed; but to the contrary it will never fail to expel them, having first
restored the natural functions and brought them again to their duty by
procuring rest, having first allayed all griefs and conciliated sleep: but that
which above all is furprising and less conceivable is, that the same Extract
does also without any danger and trouble stop the immoderate courses of Women,
because they proceed for the most part from certain harsh and noxious
Serosities which are by it composed, sweetened and tempered in such a manner,
that this Remedy never disappoints the hope of the Physician or expectation of
the Patient. It is also of singular use in all other bloody Fluxes or
Haemorragies arising from what cause soever, as I am my self in several
occurrences an eyewitness thereof. The Dosis is from gr. j. to gr. iiij. for
the most. But you are to note what it will sooner operate dissolved in some
Liquor, then exhibited in Pills.

Laudanum against Dysentery and all sort of Fluxes immoderate, as also against
Agues.
Root of Asclepias or Centauria Imperatoria or Or false pellitory of Spain.
Masterwort, Angelica, Carline or Zonera dried in the shade, Zedoaria,
Bistorta, or Snakeweed, Tormentil ij. Vipers flesh iij. Sanguis Draconis very
fine, or in drops j. ss. Camphire j. Chincinna Rind and Misseltoe of Oak ana
ss. Reduce all to pouders which digest in B M. in a double Vessel circulatory
with Alkohol of Wine four fingers high: the Spirit being well tincted pour it
out by inclination, and so continue your Extractions, until all the Tincture
and virtue of the Species be extracted; then strain and filtrate the Tinctures,
adding thereto j. of plain extract of Opium, j. extract of Saffron, iiij. of
dissolved Magistery of red Coral, as much of Pearls, and ph. of very good
Ambergrease, dissolved with ij. of oil of Macis made by expression, united or
incorporated to j. of fine Sugar in powder: put all these in a Cucurbit to the
vapor of Balneo, and having applied a Head and exactly luted the joints, give
a moderate fire to draw from it a Sudorifick, Cardiack and Alexiterial Spitit
which has scarce its like: Then reduce by degrees the whole into a Mass which
you shall keep for use in a Bladder anointed with oil of Cloves. This Laudanum
is a Treasure for such as shall have it in their possession in places where
Dysentery, Lientery and malignant Fluxes shall rage, as it commonly does in
Armies. Moreover, it is a sovereign Cordial and preservative in all dangerous
Agues, as well intermittent as continual, in immoderate watchings, importunate
griefs and wearisome prickings of the Cramp, or Tenasmus. Those that shall make
use of this noble Remedy must not fear to take of it before puring, upon
pretense you should (as the Proverb says) shut up the Wolf in the sheepfold;
for there must ever a greater care be had to ease the pains and procure the
rest of the Patient, then to the malignity of what is peccant or defective in
quality of quantity; considering that even after this the Patient undergoes
more chear-fully the trouble of purging, because he is refreshed with rest and
his strength increased. This Laudanum produces also wonderful effects in all
Collicks in general, and particularly in that which is called Convolvulus or
the twitching of the Guts, which is nothing else but a motion against the
nature of the entrals carried upwards from the lower parts, whereas natural
motion which is called Peristatick or consecutive, is performed from the upward
parts tending downwards; and as the cause of the disease is only either an
irritation of the Spirits, or the malignity of matters kept in, this Remecy
cures both at the same time, though it seems incredible to the apprehensions of
those who condemn this practice; Sed canis allatrat lunae, nec luna movetur. It
is also very useful and singular for all Fevers, because it brings their
crisis by Sweat and Urines after rest; And moreover comforts and strengthens
the Ventricle and digestive Faculty which always in Fevers is depraved, and
chiefly in Tertians, double-tertians, double-quartans, which oftentimes are too
lasting for poor Patients, and throws them often from one gulf and danger into
another; that is to say, from a Fever into a Dropsy. The Dosis is from gr. j.
to iiij. with observation ever to administer before it a Clyster made only with
new stale or Urine, if the Patient be sick of a Fever, and not to give any in
the day of the Paroxysme or Aguish fit, unless it be in continual Fevers and
in all the kinds of malignant ones, with this caution nevertheless, that it
must be before the fit seizes upon the Patient, if it be every day.

Of the Elaterium, or condensated juice of wild-Cucumber.
ELaterium is a very bitter Juice taken from the fruit of wild Cucumber, before
it be broken and has shed its seed, that is to say a little before it be ripe,
which juice is afterward evaporated and condensed in a thick Extract, which is
said to be one of the juices which preserves it self the longest in its taste
and virtue: for some are of opinion that it lasts above two years before it
loses any of its Faculties. By that which has been already said above touching
the unripenesse of Opium, we may easily conjecture that this also is not
without its defects, since it is drawn from a froth not yet brought to full
perfection and maturity; and therefore that it is necessary to correct it if we
will have it to produce some effect, not hurtful in respect of its purgative
verrue which is very violent, insomuch that it is capable to cause abortion or
miscarrying in women; but as this violence and its immaturity may be corrected,
and that it is a good Remedy capable of producing many good effects, to
evacuate Venerean Sweats, and Dropsical waters, we have thought fitting first
to show the way of purifying this condensed Juice; then in the second place, to
reach how to make thereof a legitimate Extract, which may without any danger be
made use of in many stubborn and obstinate diseases: this Remedy having in it
self great plenty of volatile Salt, and a Sulphur which preserves its exemplum
from corruption, communicating unto it a colliquative and purgative virtue.

Cleansing and depuration of the Elaterium.
THE Artist must dissolve what quantity he pleases of this Juice in a
sufficient quantity of phlegm of Vitriol sharpened with a portion of its acid
Spirit; then digest them together the space of six weeks in the heat of
Balneo; after this time strain and express the dissolution, then filtrate it
to separate all the crasse and heterogeneal impurities; after this evaporate
the filtration in ashes in a moderate fire, until it comes to the consistency
of an Extract, which will be the depurated Elaterium, and in part corrected by
reason of the acidity of Vitriol which has blunted the too active virtue
thereof already, capable in this state to be an Ingredient in Venerean Pills,
or pills for the Pox; if so be the bodies that are to be purged be very strong,
and that some aromatical drugs be joined to it to prevent its hurtfulnesse to
the stomach or the neighboring parts. The Dosis is from gr. j. to vj. But we
must show another way better and more capable to act upon the sulphur of this
Juice and its terrestrial salt, crude and undisgested salt, to bring it to
maturation, and make this Remedy more useful to such as may have need thereof:
which is performed in the follwing manner.

How the Extract of Elaterium is to be made.
PUT at much as you will of depurated Elaterium in a double or circulatory
Glasse-vessel, and pour upon of very pure spirit of Wine, acuated with j. of
Salt of Sennerius, for each of Spirit till your Glass be half full; then
having luted it very exactly, place it in a vaporous Bathe in sawings of wood,
or Sawdust of a moderate hear, during the space or three whole weeks; this time
being over, open the Vessel and filtrate the Tincture, to which join j. of
dissoluble Magistery of Coral, ph. of oil of Nutmegs expressed and tempered
with Sugar in powder, this proportion to each j. of Ela^erium; then draw back
the Spirit in a vaporous Bathe to a consistency of a soft Extract, which
afterward put in a wooden Bowl or white or gray earthen dish, and softly
evaporate the same in ashes to the consistency of a mass fit to work into
Pills, which are to be preserved in a Bladder anointed with oil of Cloves.
This Extract is a great and a very sovereign Remedy to evacuate all superfluous
and malignant Serosities which do infect the sinews and membranous parts:
wherefore it may be with very good success administered in all diseases of the
Joints, Atrophie's, Leucophlegmaty, Gout, Pox, Dropsy and all like affections:
but chiefly when some excellent Arcanum is mixed therewith drawn from Mercury,
as we shall hereafter teach the manner of it. The Dosis is from gr. ij. to xij.
provided the Patient remember to take the evening of that day in which he is
purged, a Julep with iiij. of water of the juice of Chicory, j. ss. of Syrup of
Gillyflower, and v. or vj. drops of very good volatile Spirit of Venus.

SECTION IX. Of Oil.
THE Physicians which have written of Pharmacy, have ever made use of the bare
name of Ojle, or common oil, when they would denote that oil which is drawn
from Olives by expression; which name it may vindicate with a very good Title
to its self, in regard it is not only of very great use in Physic outwardly
applied, but because also it is a good Aliment and Remedy inwardly applied. And
as this Section is dedicated to speak of Oil, we wll choose none other but that
which the Ancient and Modern Physicians have made use of; considering also that
Chemistry works only upon natural products to correct their defects and exalt
them in virtue; therefore we shall have nothing else to do here upon Oil, then
to separate some gross and undisgested moistness which hinders its
penetration, and so to render it more subtle and more active: for oil of Olive
to speak properly, is nothing else but the imperfect and undisgested Sulphur of
that fruit, which abounds with much volatile Salt mixed with a fat viscosity, as
it appears by its congelation, it curdling in the cold, and its inflammation.
We shall then only make two preparations thereof, which shall be a type and
model whereby to work upon all other sorts of Oil when the Artist has a mind
to depurate them, and render them more subtle and more penetrating. The first
shall be that operation by which is made that oil which is called The
Philosophers Oil, which operation is very suitable to the work: for he that
was the first Inventer of it, could not be otherwise then very well acquainted
with the Rarest secrets of the noblest Philosophy, having joined therein
Practice to Theory, and left us as the fruits of his study and his work, the
manner of making an Oil, which is wonderful in its virtues. The second
operation will be the manner of distilling common oil, to render it more
durable and less obnoxious to fuliginous emanations, that it may be more
usefully employed to the service of those Lamps, with which Chemists are used
to entertain the heat of their Lamp-furnace: as also to use upon several
occasions where it may be serviceable, both for inward and outward diseases.

How the Oil of Philosophers is to be prepared.
TAke old Tiles or Bricks, and having broken them into small pieces of the
bigness of a Philberd, heat them glowing red in a Wind-furnace with coal,
stratum super stratum, ordering it so that the first and last bed be of coals:
and when they are come to the highest color of redness, have a peuter or
b^asse Basen with a cover well fitted to shut it close and put out the flame,
when the pieces of brick or tile shall be thrown glowing hot in the oil, which
you may take off about the quan^tty of lb (...) or vj. o^ old clear oil; these
pieces of brick or tile must be taken with pincers, and one after another be
put in the oil, and the cover applied to quench the flame which will rise,
until all your oil be spent and dried up: then grind to powder these pieces so
imbibed and impregnated with oil, and mix to them equal weight of decrepitated
Salt, or as much of the caput mortuum of aqua fortis, or Colchotar; then having
put the matter in a well-luted Retort in a close Reverberatory Furnace, fit it
to a large Receiver also well luted; cover the Furnace, then give it fire by
degrees, until the drops begin to follow one after another, and that the oil
comes into the Recipient in shapes of vapors and obscure clouds; then increase
it, and entertain it even with flame of very dry wood until the Recipient
begins to grow clean of it self at which sign cease the fire and let all cool:
and the Vessels being open, you shall know that what was almost without odor
and insipid has much altered its nature; for the volatile salt of the oil is
so much exalted and changed, that it is almost impossible to hold the Nose over
the Recipient by reason of the subtle spirits of this Salt, which gives to this
distilled oil an unpleasant odor. The one half of the oil may be laid aside
without Rectifying, for it may be useful in many occurrences were there is no
necessity to have it so subtle. Take afterward the other half and mix it with
common ashes or Colchotar until it be reduced to a paste which you shall model
into Pills, and put into a Glass Retort, whose neck inwardly must be very well
cleansed; then place it in a Sand-Furnace with its Recipient, and give a
gradual fire, continuing until you have drawn off all the Oil which shall be
very subtle and fluid, and penetrating with a wonderful activity.

These two oils are good applied outwardly: but if you intend to use it
inwardly, take lb ss. of Rectified oil, and mix it with as much salt of
Tartar, and lb ij. white Wine; put all this mixture into a low Cucurbit, where
you must have a Head or Still very fitly and exactly jointed, and so likewise
luted; and give it a convenient fire until all the vapors begin to rise, which
will be mingled with oil, water and spirit; continue your fire until no part
of the oil more shall ascend; then separate the remaining oil in the Cucurbit,
and add it to that of the first distillation which has not been rectified, so
shall you have the true Philisophersoyle so called: and which being brought to
this height and perfection of sobtilty deserves well that appellation, by
reason of its Rare Virtue and the noble effects it produces, both inwardly and
outwardly.

The first Oil drawn and not Rectified, does dissolve, digest, mollify and
bring to maturation all schirrous and hard Tumors, and chiefly such as grow
without pain; Resolves potently all flatuous and cold Oedema's or waterish
swellings and all other hard and cold tumors, in whatsoever place of the body
seated, peculiarly those that are about the joints, whose action they check and
suspend. The second oil which has been rectified, is also very good to the
same purpose, for it digests with much more speed: above all, it has a
wonderful operation to dissipate all Tophus's, Schirrosities and Nodosities,
and cold gout, mixed with a little spirit of salt, and very subtle spirit of
wine. This mixture is also very salutiferous to all those that have any member
fallen into Atrophy, or benumbed with Palsy; for it does insinuate it self
into the parts, and consumes and dissipates the slime, which did hinder the
illustration and flowing of the spirits upon the parts by their obstruction, or
rather resuscitates life, and reanimates the spirits in the members already
deprived of it, and as it were half dead. But there is no comparison between
the first and second, and the third sort; for it is so subtle, that even as if
it were light it self, it penetrates the parts in an instant; wheresore they
that shall make use of it, must proceed with judgment, and observe the true
proportion; for it it be inwardly administered against Plague, or wind Colic,
the Dosis must non exceed eight drops at the most: and for the Plague it must
be exhibited in the distillation of Roots of Lagworth or butter-bur with white
wine; and for the Colic in S^ssafras, distilled water; there must also a
precaution be used, when it shall be outwardly applied; for if it be used for
the cold gout, there must be Camphire dissolved in it; and it must be applied
upon the part only with a feather, and the same not stroak'd above three times
with it; But this is not yet the best use and talent of this oil, which seems
particularly to be dedicated to the Matrix: all the bad Symptoms and
irritations whereof it does allay, in case it be internally administered in
Savine or matricarial mother, it removes all the obstructions thereof, drives
away all impurities, if applied to the neck of it, where it is immediately
volatized, by reason of the opening of the Uterus or Womb, to expel thence
whatsoever is hurtful: It may be made also to penetrate in the very body of the
womb, with an instrument made for the purpose, having a channel or conduct-pipe
proportioned to the neck of the Matrix; the end whereof must be very round, and
perforated with many holes; and in the cavity of it, a round ball, (but opened
also in the top, to contain the oil, and exhale it) which being exactly fitted
to the pipe, may be conveyed by a screw, and made to ascend from the bottom
by degrees, till it come to the top, where this subtle oil will be volatiz'd
by the heat of the Matrix working upon it, and thus receiving the vapors
thereof, whereby all defects will be corrected: this description will suffice
for those that are acquainted with the mysteries of our Art; for to say more,
would neither be necessary nor lawful. I shall end with only saying, That this
Oil matures and ripens, in a very short time, all kind of Abscesses, Botches
and Boyls; but above all, the Pestilential sore, if it be outwardly applied
thereupon, at the same time that it is inwardly exhibited to the Patient, he
being very carefully covered to be brought to sweat.

How the Oil must be defecated.
MIX lb viij. of the Oil very clear with lb ij. of salt in a glass retort; and
being put in sand, distill it slowly with a gradual heat, until nothing more
comes from it; then draw off the salt again from within the retort with warm
water, filtrate and evaporate till it be dry, then in a Crucible make it
glowing; and when it shall almost be cooled again, grind it to powder in a warm
mortar, and mix it again in the retort with the Oil already dissolved, and draw
off again upon sand as before, which you must reiterate to a third time, to
have a very subtle oil, and lasting to the Lamp, not easy to be put out, if
you have only care of the weak, yielding a less thick and black smoke, and by
consequence less soot; but it is not only fit for those purposes, but moreover
very good to resolve and mollify, as the foregoing oil, to which in a manner
it may be substituted, when there shall be any need of it for external
applications or outward griefs, in delicate and squeamish Patients which are
not capable to bear the unpleasant smell of the Philosophers oil; but it is not
so penetrating and so efficacious. It may also be used in the boiling of
Plasters and Ointments, because it does not partake any more of this
excrementitious moisture, which does, for the most part, cause the putrefaction
and colliquation frequent in wounds and ulcers.

SECTION X. Of Gummy Drops or Resins.
GUmmy drops or Resins are substances proceeding from fat and oleaginous
vegetables, and coming forth out of the same either spontaneously and
naturally, or after some incision made in the plant; their consistency is
various; for some are soft, and others hard; the soft are all kinds of
Turpentine, and soft pitch or tar; the hard are, gum. Elemi, Aninae, tacamacha,
olibanum, or Frankincense, and all other the like kinds. We will give two
examples of the manner of distilling; the one of soft or liquid Resin, the
other of solid; which shall be common Turpentine, or Venice and Gum. Elemi;
that by the manner of Working upon these, the Artist may be instructed how to
proceed upon all others.

Of the Distillation of Common Turpentine.
WE rather choose to take Common Turpentine, then a more subtle kind, because
this in a manner is more natural, and more fully possesses the mercurial and
balsamic parts, then the other sorts: It is this which Paracelsus calls Resina
de botin; and though some are of Opinion that it is inferior, and yields in
virtue to that of Cyprus or Venice, we are nevertheless of another judgment;
for although the other be clearer and more pure, this has, notwithstanding,
some volatile mercurial salt, which is not abundantly found in others; the
process thereof working upon it, is as follows. Put lb vi. of Common
Turpentine, which is the gum of the Larix tree orshrub, in a great and
capacious retort of glass, in which the two third parts must temain void of
matter or thereabouts, because the heat causes the Turpentine to rise, and so
if less crowded, might run in the body out of the neck of the retort, instead
of rising in cloud and vapors as it ought to do: which to procure, you must
put in the empty space of the retort above the Turpentine, a good handful of
Flax or Tow, that it might hinder the ebullition and rising of the matter: Put
your retort in sand, and having fitted it to a receiver, whose joints are to be
luted with paper and meal-pap, give it first a slow fi^e, until the drops of
the acide and mercurial spirit begin to fall, and keep it in this tune, until
you perceive that the ethereal and subtle oil begins to drop, and a small
cloudy and white vapor begins to appear, and condense it self into a subtle
oil in the recipient; then increase the fire by little and little, until the
drops and white cloud do cease, which is a Token that the yellow will quickly
follow; wherefore then change your Recipient, that you may have all these
substances severed: Continue your fire increasing, until the falling drops
begin to be of a very deep yellow; which when you see, change again your
Recipient, and give the last degree of fire, that all the body of the
Turpentine may rise into vapors, which will condense into a balsamic oil of a
tenacious and slow substance, and as red as blood; so shall you have wrought
all the substance of this Resin in four several liquors differing not in color
only, but also in virtue; for there is an aqueous liquor swimming above the
ethereal and subtle oil, which is commonly called Spirit of Turpentine, but
improperly; for Chemists do never call spirit, whatsoever is fat, unctious and
inflammable: this spirit is nothing else properly, but the volatile and
mercurial salt of Turpentine; for it is acide and sharp, and a philosophical
dissolvent of Chrystals, Stones and Shells, as some will have; but as there are
many others, which in worth and virtue for this purpose challenge the
precedence of it, we are not of their opinion, but we may nevertheless say in
truth, that this spirit deserves some kind of esteem, by reason of its
balsamic astriction, which does no hurt or prejudice to the nervous and
membranous parts, as all other acide or sharp spirits, not partaking of this
balsamic virtue, do: for though the Dogmaticks think to correct Turpentine
with their pretended lotion: the truth is, doing thus, they take away from it
all the purest of its detersive and mundifying faculty: for as the ethereal and
subtle oil which Turpentine contains in it self, does lenifie, and sweetens by
its balsamic quality, so likewise does at the same time that sub^ile and
detersive salt, mundifying strongly, and being, as it were, a precursor to the
other, which sweetens and tempers that, which the first had as it were
irritated. Thence must the Artist conclude, that this spirit is good and useful
to cleanse the viscosities, impurities, and other ill dispositions of the lungs,
ureteries, spermatick vessels, and kernels of the prostatae and parastatae,
when any irritation of those parts does happen, or any other unclean matter
lies lurking in the sinuosities and secret corners of those parts, which can
neither be removed nor corrected by the help of mundifying and balsamical
remedies, capable of keeping and preserving their strength without any
alteration, to conveigh it along with themselves into the parts which are in
need of it; for we must make a general note of very great importance for that
part of Physic, which is to take indication of the effects of Remedies,
chiefly of those that are to be employed for the diseases of the kidneys and
bladder; for all those Medicaments which are endowed with a sulphurous,
balsamic and volatile salt, preserve their inviolable virtue in the digestion
it self, and carry it even into the diseased parts, as the odor and smell of
the urine does witness, no less then the color, by which it evidently appears,
that no ill alteration is made by it; but that contrariwise, the Remedy has
overcome and had the victory, since it has passed through so many places
without suffering corruption; but instead thereof, has rather advanced to some
a greater degree of perfection by natural heat: For the Urine of such as have
taken Turpentine, or its ethereal oil, has an evident smell of Violet or Iris
root: and to give a more convincing proof thereof, you must know, that it is
not the Turpentine only which produces this good and pleasant smell: for the
Nutmeg, Macis, Cloves, juniper berries, Parsley, Fennel, dock-roots or carrots,
Parsnips, do all communicate the same smell of Violet to Urine, by reason of
their balsamic and sulphurous volatile virtue, which is exalted and improved
by the spirit and salt of the urine; a mystery not worthy of small
consideration for such as will take the pains to examine Remedies by the
effects of natural digestions, to know how far may extend the sphere of their
activity. But that which is yet more to be wondered at, is, that Turpentine
dissolved in a Glyster, by the vertne of its ethereal oil, penetrats through all
the membranous and nervous parts, where it imprints the character of its own
virtue, and forces an assent to this truth by the pleasant smell it leaves in
the Urine, by which it appears, that there is no danger to administer
Turpentine, or any remedies in the composition whereof it enters to wounded
persons, either by the mouth or by glysters, because the effect thereof can
never be but very succesful and redound to the good of the Patient, and
reputation of the Physician or Surgeon; it must also be acknowledged, that as
those substances which exalt themselves into a good smell, give a testimony
thereby of the good they are capable to do: so contrariwise, those who
degenerate into an ill smell, and disturb the Economy of the kidneys and
bladder, show that they have some ill quality in themselves, which is to be
shunned, as much as the other embraced and put in use. We thought our selves
obliged to say this, that those who are ever in fear of hot or cold qualities,
without examining the specific virtue of the mixed, they will employ, may more
and more shake off and root out their prejudicate opinions.

The virtue of the ethereal oil of Turpentine, called commonly, but improperly,
essence or spirit of Turpentine is great: for it subtly penetrates, cuts,
resolves, and attenuates the mus^il^gineous and tartarous viscosities of the
kidneyes and bladder, and provokes urine: it is also singular against the
Cough, and other affections of the Lungs, proceeding from some tartarous
matter, against obstructions of the spleen and mother, against strangury and
difficulty of urine, to expel the sand in kidneys or bladder, against
Gonorrheas, and finally against ulcers of the neck of the bladder, and all the
other parts of generation being infected with the venerosity of Venerean
diseases; the Dosis is from iv. drops to xx. in appropriated liquours.

The yellow oil, and balsom, which is nothing else but the red oil, differ
not very much in virtue, therefore they may either jointly or severally be
applied; for they do heat, attenuate, mundify and consolidate equally; which
makes them very useful and fit to be employed with very good success for
restoring members benumbed or contracted by cold and frost, for schirrous
tumors, old running and rotten sores, gangreen, chil-blanes, whose sores it
cures and consolidates speedily and perfectly, but the balsom sooner then the
oil.

But because the Ethereal oil which is drawn from common Turpentine is not so
subtle, nor pleasing to the smell or taste, as that which is distilled from the
Venetian in a cucurbite, we must teach how the Artist shall well and exactly
perform this operation. To this end must he take lb viij. of Venice Turpentine
of the clearest, most florid and odoriferous: for all these marks betoken that
it is new, and consequently better; put it then in the cucurbit or glass body
with one head; and pour upon it 12. pints of rose water and viij. pints of
white wine, adding thereto xxx. lemons cut in thin slices, then cover your
vessel and give a fire of the tenor of that with which you distill Aqua vitae,
and thus with one operation shall you perform 3. things: for in the first place
you shall draw an ethereal very subtle oil, and of great efficacy, and
fragrous smell: secondly you shall have a very excellent diuretical spirit: and
in the third place a water which may be used to administer the oil in it, being
first mixed with a little sugar in powder, and may be used in the same
distillation. I do not question but that many will say that this is a very
chargeable way of procuring oil of Turpentine, and that so much trouble is
needless, since one pound of it may be had cheapter then Venice Turpentine
does cost. But let those that be of this opinion consult their own reason, and
consider the smell and virtue of the one and the other; let them make trial
thereof, and they will then perceive the difference between both: therefore I
exhort the Chemical Apothecary never to regard cost or labor, because either
of these two spared will load his conscience, or lessen his reputation. Our
Artist then to proceed, must be careful to change the recipient, when there
shall be about lb iv. or v. of liquor in it, to save the trouble of rectifying
the spirit; and the distillation being ended, and the vessels cooled, he will
find the mass of Colophonie in the bottom of it, which is nothing else then
the body of the Turpentine deprived of its ethereal oil; it must be slowly
melted in water, to strain it afterward through a cloth or tamy, to purify
and sever it from the slices of Lemon. And as Colophony is nothing but a
portion of the resin, so may it lawfully challenge the same virtues, except
that it is not so penetrating or active; for it heats and dries, agglutinates
and consolidates, and as it easily melts and incorporates with unctuous and fat
substances, so is the principal use of it to bear a part in the composition of
plasters and salves; it may also be used in Opiat's instead of decocted
Turpentine: but I rather advise that Turpentine should be used, which has
neither been boiled nor distilled, that the balsamic faculty thereof may be in
it still.

How Gum Elemy is to be distilled.
THAT which in the shops is called gum Elemy, is the drop or resin of a kind of
Cedar which grows in Ethiopia: the best is that which is of clear and whitish
color, mixed with some small yellow parts or streaks, reduced into a mass, and
being made to burn or flame, yields a smell which is not unpleasant. You must
beat your gum Elemy into powder, and mix with 3. parts of pounded bricks and
1. of decrepitated salt, and put all in a retort, which must be placed in a
reverberatory close furnace, upon an earthen pot-cover turned upside down, with
a little sand on it, then fit to it exactly a receiver, and give it a gradual
fire, until it yields no more oil, a part of which may be kept without
rectifying: but distill the other mixed with iij. p. of decrepitated salt, and
make your rectification of it in a retort, in sand. Either of these two oils is
not to be taken inwardly; but they are specific and singular for all diseases
and griefs of sinews, chiefly against palsy and contraction of nerves, which
renders the parts lame and useless. They attenuate, resolve and dissipate all
catarrhous, flatuous, and dolorisick matter; for this Gum is very balsamic.
Upon the same manner and method may be distilled the oil Tacamalaca, Animae,
and Caranna, because all these roots come very near to that of Elemy.

SECTION. XI. Of gum resins, etc.
GUM refines participate and come near the nature of gums, in that they are
nothing else but the drop of certain trees, and may with great ease be
dissolved in oil, and in water also, but more difficulty, because they
participate more of the sulphurous oily and inflammable substance, then of the
saline which is the soonest dissoluble in water. They that come near this
category or are in it, are Camphir, Mastick, Ladanum, Benjuin, Styrax, myrthe,
and others which it would be needesse here to rehearse: we will then declare a
method of the work that may be made upon the chief and most useful of them.

Gummes so properly called, are nothing else but concrete liquors easily
dissolved in water or other waterish and moist menstruums, as wine and vinegar:
they are of 2. kinds: the first do consist of a volatile salt, predominant and
somewhat sulphurous, and of a gummy viscous and clamy juice, proceeding from
plants, shrubs and feculaceous trees, as Ammoniak, Galbanum, Opopanax,
Euphorbium, Sagapenum, Assa faetida, and several others: the second are purely
gummous and muscilagineous, proceeding also from some plants and fruit trees,
as gum Arabic, gum of plum and cherry trees, and Tragacinth: these cannot
suffer distillation, having none or little of salt and sulphur in themselves.

The distillation of Ladanum.
THOUGH this gum be not much in use, yet it has many excellent proprieties, and
I can say confidently, that it is but want of having made the anatomy of it,
and of experience, that it has been so much neglected: for it is impossible
that those that are better acquainted with it should not make use of it: it is
a gum resin gathered upon the leaves of a shrub called Cistus Ledon; the best
is that which is of a blackish green, easy to crumble, and yet as easily made
into pills, working it between the fingers, inflammable, and yiedling a sweet
and pleasant smell in the burning. But there is this considerable in it, that
though Ladanum be inflammable, yet will it not easily mix with oils or other
fat and unctuous substances: their use is that it abounds with volatile salt,
and a portion of herbaceous extract which hinders its union and causes it to
crumble: and this is a note of its principal virtue, because this sulphurous
salt ascends in the distillation and is turned into an oil, which is a
specific for many diseases; it is thus prepared.

. lb. 1. Ladanum made in rolls, and not of that which is in mass or lump,
powder it and mix with lb iij. of Bol, reduced in Lump with Aquae vitae; work
all this into pellets, which after they are gently dried, put in a retort, and
place it in sand, joining to it a fit recipient well luted; then give a gradual
fire, and continue it till all the liquor be come forth; and the vessels being
cooled, take out what you find in the recipient, and sever the oil from the
spirit by a funnel, and keep it for use; you may give from ij. drops of the
oil and xij. of the spirit, in a little warm wine, to open and attenuate the
gross matters whereby cathart's are generated: it is also a commendable remedy
against Dysentery: but it is a true specific to allay the fits and irritations
of the Mother, if the same dosis be administered in mguwort or mother-wort
water, or pennyroyal.

How to work upon Benjuin.
BENJUIN is one of the best and noblest gums which is found in the Kingdom of
vegetables, as much for its sweet and pleasant smell, which outwardly is used in
perfumes, as principally for the essential virtues it possesses in it self,
proceeding from the abundance of volatile sulphurous salt, whereof we shall
give an evident proof by the following operations: for it might very well be
said, to speak properly of Benjuin, that it is a dry balsom; it is brought from
Samaria and Sion, and grows on tal trees whereof in convenient time the rind is
opened, to give way to this precious gum; the best is that which in some kind
is transparent, mixed with white granes and streaks, in a yellowish red mass or
lump, apt to crumble, not very heavy, melting easily, and of a very sweet and
pleasant odor. We shall give the process of the following operations upon it
for the satisfaction of the Artist, viz. Of drawing the tincture Magistery,
flowers, oil, manna or Crystal, and Mercurial spirit, and that balsom or
gross oil of it.

To make the tincture and Magistery of Benjuin.
. 11 BENJUIN of the best note, reduce it to a very subtle powder, which being
searced through a silk Tamy that all the heterogeneous substances may be
separated, put this powder in a Mattress and pour upon it vi. of Alkohal of
wine prepared upon salt of because if there was the least of phlegm mingled
with it, the operation might be checked thereby: agitate nimbly the matter and
keep the matresse in a little of lukewarm water, and the Benjuin will disolve in
a very short time, which is an infallible argument to prove that this refine
contains a very pure and subtle sulphurous volatile salt: for if it held a
gross and unctuos sulphur, the Alkohal of wine could make but a simple
extraction of it, and not an entire and perfect dissolution: if it also did
particpate of a gross and earthly muscilage, it would by no means hold
proportion nor agree in matter with the cleanliness and subtilty of our vital
spirit, neither with that of the spirit of wine. For as the remedies extracted
from Benjuin are made use of for the diseases of the breast and lungs, it must
follow of all necessity, that the matter whereof they are extracted is composed
of very subtle, volatile and balsamic parts, that they may be guided and
appropriated by the help of the Archeus to the disgestions of the diseased
parts, servata and illibata suae virtutis potestate. The dissolution which
shall be red and transparent, must be filtrated in a very dry Vial: for if
there was the least moisture or aquosity, it would instantly turn the tincture
into white, and precipitate it to a Magistery. Keep half of the tincture in a
vial by it self, which must be very well stopped, to use upon occasion. But if
you will have very well depurated Benjuin, precipitate the other part of the
dissolution in very clear common water; and when you have drawn off the spirit
of wine again, in a small cucurbit in the vapor of Balneo, the Magistery will
be left in the bottom, then draw off the water by inclination, and wash this
pure Benjuin with rose water, and dry it softly; we will give it the name of
Magistery, though somewhat improperly, because many Authors have so. The
Tincture is not much more properly so named; for it is, to say truth, but a
dissolution: the virtue whereof is nevertheless increased, by reason of the
excellency and nobleness of the Menstruum; wherefore it may lawfully be used
both inwardly and outwardly. Outwardly applied, it is a wonderful Cosmetick,
clensing the skin both of the hands and face beyond any other, taking away all
spots, dries pimples in the face, and takes them away, as all other tumors,
buds or rednesses in the skin, resolving patiently all harsh and malignant
serosities which the outward air hinders from transpiring, because the face is
not covered as are the other parts of the body; and the matter being thus kept
in between the flesh and skin, it causes those several defects of it. To make a
right use of this Tincture, apply it toward bedtime upon all the places where
you find need, and the next day wash the place with Barley-water wherein Veal
has boiled, which you shall turn to a milk color, with some few drops of the
Tincture of Benjuin, and then sweep either face or hands (as you have applied
it) with a very dry and soft linen cloth. But besides this outward use in
repairing such defects of the skin, if after being raised, you use at any time
washing with the white water made by this Tincture, it will prevent for the
future all pimples, raising of the skin, or redness which often happens by ill
preparation of the soap-ball, and the lixivial salt, which has ever something
of fieryness that enters in the composition of it. Inwardly it may be given for
Asthma's and Short-breath; and to physical persons, or such as are troubled
with old Coughs, from ij. drops to x. or xij. in a new raw egg, or a spoonful
of Syrup of Hyssop, made after the description which we have given above; it
may be given in the morning fasting, and the evening two hours before supper.
As for the Magistery, it may also be administered in new laid eggs, or some
pectoral Conserve, from iv. grains to xv. and xx. for those which are offended
by the smell and taste of spirit of wine: It may also be mixed in Electuaries
and Tablets; they that will make good washing-balls, and such as may never
endanger by any ill accident the skin of those they will trim, must prepare and
wash carefully their soap, to divest it from the ill quality of the lixivial
salt, and leave in it only the mundifying and abstersive virtue; and when it is
brought to that pass, wash it, and feed it a good while with tincture of
Benjuin, adding thereto s. of the Magistery to each pound of soap, after which
they shall frame their balls of the bigness of ij. and let them dry softly; add
if they are pleased to add a little of Musk and ambergris, they may boast to
have washing-balls better for the perfume and sweetness, and more useful for
preserving and clensing the skin both of face and hands, then those of Bolonia
so much accounted of.

To make the Flowers of Benjuin.
As Benjuin Flowers are excellent in their Virtue, so must an Artist be careful
to bestow upon them a good preparation: for which reason, we shall demonstrate
two ways thereof: The first more plain, because it may be done at all times, as
necessity shall require. The second to be reserved, when we shall treat of the
Distillation of Benjuin. As for this first manner, take only a good Germane
Crucible, round and something high, wherein put ij. of Bnjuin reduced to
powder, place it in sand upon a Capsula, and cover it with a long sharp cap of
a good double blew paper, strong and well stiffened, the said cap being
proportionated in its basis to the orifice or mouth of the Crucible: After
this, give your fire by degree, and when you perceive the vapors of the
Benjuin beginning to rise, take away the said cap, and put a new one of the
same matter and proportion in the room, that you may have time to take away
with a feather the flowers sublimated in the first, and lose not those which
shall rise while the Crucible shall remain uncovered; and this work continue
till all the volatile sulphurous salt of the Benjuin be sublimated in flowers;
they are to be given from three grains to half a scruple in the same manner,
and for the same diseases, as the tincture and magistery: it is by this
operation that our Artist shall clearly know, that Benjuin possesses a volatile
sulphurous Salt, very subtle and penetrating: for as soon as there is heat
enough to drive it out from its body, it invades the nose, eyes and breast,
which it irritates in such a wise, as to provoke sneesing, tears and coughing,
by reason of that spirituous and subtle quickness of the salt, wherein lies
all the power and activity of the Benjuin.

The Distillation of it.
YIelds many fine preparations at once, provided the Artist be skilful and
vigilant, and not sparing of what is useful and necessary to do it punctually
and to the purpose; for the Chemical Apothecary must not entertain a false
persuasion, as many have done, and do yet at this day, that it is enough to
take the bottom and dregs of the Drugsters-box, to perform his operation
withal, being a very great absurdity to yield to this persuasion; considering,
that besides that the drugs can never give what they have not, because the salt
and spirit lies ever hidden in the purest part; it should moreover run this
hazard, that all the virtue and goodness thereof might be overcome and absorbed
by the heterogenity of the impure: They then that will duly quit themselves of
their duty in the profession of Spagyrical Pharmacy, must have as great a
regard in the well choosing of their Stuffs, as if they were to work their
Masterpiece; because that besides they should lose the distillable matter,
they would also trifle away their time, and spend it vainly with their fire and
vessels: Let this be said once for all by the by, but chiefly in this place,
where it is absolutely required, that the matter we work upon be cleanly, that
something analogous may also come forth out of the same: for in the first place
there will be drawn a spirit of wine, impregnated with a portion of the
volatile, sulphurous and spiritual salt of the Bejuin. Secondly, There shall
come forth the purest of the said volatile salt, which will cleave to the neck
of the retort: And in the third place, a fat and butyrous matter, which is
nothing else but the grossest part of the salt and sulphur. Fourthly, There
shall distill from it some small quantity of Mercurial acid spirit. Fifthly, A
little of yellow oil of Hyacinth color, of a very good smell, and finally at
the giving of the last fire, there will come forth a Balsome somewhat blackish
in color.

To perform this ample distillation artificially and methodically, choose lb j.
of the most pure and excellent Benjuin, reduce it to powder, and put it to
digest in a double or circulatory vessel in the vapor of Balneo with lb iv. of
Alcohol of Wine, during the space of five natural days; which elapsed, pour
all in a great glass retort; in which you shall put lb j. of pure and clean
sand, and lbs. of scales of iron, such as they fall from the Anvil, all these
matters not filling above a third part of the vessel, which must have a long
and broad neck, and the Orifice of a Thumb-Diameter, then place it in ashes
mixed with sand, fitting to it a middle sise recipient dry and clean; the joints
of which will be sufficiently luted with plain bladder steeped in water, that
it may be removed with more ease when you are obliged to change your recipient:
all these circumstances being exactly observed, give the fire slowly by
degrees, so as the drops may follow slowly on the other without heating the
recipient, and having a care not to make more haste; otherwise you should ruin
all your work; for as our experienced Paracelsus says, Omnis praecipitatio a
Diabolo: above all things then, our Artist must be patient and judicious,
unless he will be compelled to be so to his cost and confusion after this due
warning: and when he shall guess that all the spirit of wine is almost all come
forth, he must have a particular care of increasing gently the fire, and taking
notice when the flowers or crystal shall begin to coagulate themselves in the
neck of the retort, to change then the recipient which must not be luted,
because it must often be taken of either, to take away the flowers and crystals
which are gathered there, or to draw them with a stick, made for the purpose,
from the neck of the retort, lest they should stop it altogether, which would
cause the breaking of the retort, the vapors having no free passage left to
come forth: when all the first flowers, which are the whitest and subtilest,
shall be drawn off, and the butyrous substance begins to appear, then must you
again lute the retort to your recipient with a bladder, and increase a little
the fire, that all the acid and mercurialliquor may follow the burter; that
done, change again your Recipient, to receive the true Benjuin oil, which will
be of a yellow color, somewhat resembling Hyacinth, but there will be but very
little of it, and of a fragrant odor: the Artist therefore must take care to
observe the change of color: for where the drops appear red, it is the true
instant of time to substitute a new Recipient, to receive a thick and dark
Balsom by the last action and expression of the fire. It remains only now to
say something of the uses and virtues of the several substances, which the
Benjuin does furnish us with in this distillation: and to begin by the spirit,
we say that the same alone, without mixture or adding any more of our gum resin
above described, may serve for a very excellent Cosmetick, because already
filled and impregnated with part of the volatile salt, which is properly the
substance in which the detersive, mundifying and resolutive strength and
faculty of the Benjuin is placed; it has even a more penetrating virtue then
the tincture, and that because the tincture is laden with the unctuous body of
the Benjuin, which stops the pores, and dryes the skin. This spirit is also
more potent and capable to draw the true tincture of Benjuin: but not of
corporeal or upprepared Benjuin, but of that which is divested of its subtle
and gross oil, and its acid spirit: for you must take ij. of the flowers
crystals of Benjuin, and s. of the butyrous matter, which must be put in a
double or digesting vessel, pouring upon ij. of the aforesaid spirit, and so
let them digest some space of time together, and the spirit shall be tinged
with a yellow color, which will be nothing else but the extract and addition
of the volatile salt and sulphur graduated and exalted to the highest degree of
their perfection: filtrate the liquor, and you shall find in the bottom of the
vessel, a white gum, which may be of very good use in perfumes. This tincture
has in a Compendium all the noble virtues of the Benjuin: the Dosis is from
two drops to xij. in sassafras water, Syrup of Hyssop, or some Conserve in
Bolus, for all diseases and griefs of the breast above rehearsed. But as we
promised above, that we would here exhibit the method to make Benjuin Flowers
in greater quantity and less time, then those which may be made by sublimation
in the Crucible, we will teach how to perform it; and it is only thus: Dissolve
j. of the first butter of Benjuin, and of the whirest, which immediately
follows the crystals or flowers in boiling water, and filtrate very quickly the
liquor through gray paper, and the flowers will instantly be coagulated, even
under the hand: then draw back again the whitish water by inclination, and let
it settle, and you shall have in the bottom a magistery of no less efficacy,
then that which is made by precipitation of the Tincture, or gross dissolution:
let the flowers dry, and the magistery slowly and leisurely between the double
paper, and keep it for use. The crystals which are properly the flowers and
volatile salt of the Benjuin, are sudorifick, and a great specific against the
great Pox, if it be given from vj. gr. to xx. in a glass of tincture of
sassafras made with white wine, or in a glass of decoction of salsaperilla,
china and guajacum rind. for it is a searcher, which in an interim penetrates
the whole body; it may also be exhibited in a less Dosis, as the first
sublimated flowers: the oil is an excellent vulnerary, and noble perfume. The
blackish balsom which is clammy and viscous, is a great Mundifier of ulcers,
wherefore it may very conveniently be mixed with ointments and plasters: some
mix it amongst Peruvian Balsom, to falsify and increase its quantity; and it
is o^^ of the falsifications of most difficult discovery; The Benjuin yields so
little of an acid spirit, that it is not worthy mentioning its use;
nevertheless it may be applied to the same purposes, as we have said above, the
spirit of Turpentine would serve: they that are moved with a curiosity to make
an excellent mixture of unctious perfume for skins and gloves, may dissolve
butter of Benjuin, and some part of the flowers in oil of Ben. it will make a
very good and fit body to receive the Muse, Ambergreece and Civet, according to
the proportion they will allow, and the strength of sent they intend to give to
their skins.

To prepare an excellent Angelical Water, and the Mass or Past, which is called
the Spanish Past.
iv. OF very pure Benjuin, j. of Styrax in drops, j. of good Cloves, ij. of
Ambergreese, j. of Levantine Musk, and j. of very fine Civet; grind and beat
all to a very subtle powder in a Ma^ble Mortar; add to it the superficial and
subtle rind of xij. Citrons or Lemons, and put all in a double or digestive
vessel, and pour on it lb j. s. of very good Rosewater, and as much Muscat Wine
very clear, or some other white Wine clear, odoriferous and quick; cover your
vessel with its blind head, and place it in B.M. giving a fire of digestion for
viij. days, if it be winter; or expose the sam^ vessel in the reverberation of
the Solar rays, if summer: then opening your vessel, put aside the water which
you shall find colored, and of a very excellent odor to perfume Table-linnen,
for the use of day or night, as also to make a vaporous Cassolet, by exhaling a
little of the same water in the place appointed to eat, sleep, or entertain
company at your choice. But you must heat the Mass of Past which is settled in
the bottom, to malax and work it together with your hands anointed with Orange
or Jelsemin oil, or Orange-flower, Cloves, Cinnament, according as they that
will make use of it, are better pleased with either of these smells: for in
this respect the capriccio's and humors are as various, as in matters of
taste: there may also (if it be for a sick body) a respect be had to the
intention of the Physician, and that of the Patient, because the same smells
will restore and comfort the one, and offend the other, and chiefly among
women; therefore you may herein use your own discretion, and therefore as well
add as diminish of your own Ingredients, according to the necessity and
circumstances. The mass being thus by malaxation rendered soft and tractable,
you may frame it into braceles smelling or sweet pasts, or perpetual Cassolets,
which are made in the manner following: Have a silver Box with a double bottom,
the one distant from the other the thickness of a thumb, let there be within or
without the box a channel or pipe running through the second bottom, that you
may inject such water as you think fit, in the void space which is between the
two bottoms. This Box thus framed, must be filled with the Past or Odoriferous
mass, the height of a thumb; then shut it up with a cover fitted to it in a
convexe figure or dome-like, boren with holes all about to transmit the
vaporous petsume and exhalation the easier: and when you will ser this Cassolet
to work, fit the bottom with Rose Water, Wine, or Plain water, according as
your design is either strongly or softly to affect the smell, and thus set on a
moderate fire, which will act slowly upon the persumed Mass, and raise by
little and little its pleasant fragrancy, gently, and without interruption; you
may also dissolve, in all kind of performances which you will make of this past
in oil of Ben. giving it such a color as you shall like best, as also increase
or lessen the strengrh and sweetness of the perfume, mote or less, according as
you shall make your mixture. Let no body think, we run here out of our Text, in
teaching the Dosis or mixture of perfumes, but be persuaded rather, that they
are absolutely essential to our Treatise, since there happen pen many accidents
in the life of man, to which no remedy can be applied but by the smell, so that
this example which we have given of preparing one, which is both pleasant and
useful, may be a rule and a pattern to prepare those which shall only be
intended for physical use, and the help of sick Patients.

Of Camphire.
MAny have thought Camphire to be a bituminous substance; but they that have
more truly writ concerning their Indian Travels in the East Country and China,
do teach us, that it is a resinous drop or gum; the best kind whereof comes
from Borneo; and that which follows in goodness, from the kingdom of China and
the Province of Chineseo, distilling from a great tree somewhat like unto our
Wall-nut in the body or stock, whereof it gathers to a head. The Indian
Physicians are not of the opinion of those that fear the use thereof, by reason
of the cold quality which is attributed to it; for they use it with very great
success, as a true divine remedy; and certainly we must acknowledge Camphire to
be one of the most wonderful productions of nature, and the nearest of all
resembling light; for as we have often said, that the volatile Salt is the last
fold and cover that wraps the spirit, and that spirit is nothing else but a
concretion of light, and light nothing else but an invisible fire, and a true
emanation of the Divinity it self; so can we say, that Camphire is the only
natural production, wherein the hand of nature has more excellently discovered
one of its noblest operations, in separating a pure, volatile, sulphurous salt
from a substance which seems to be altogether incapable thereof; and what is
more to be wondered at, is, that the skill of the most knowing Artist cannot
imitate but at a very great distance this natural preparation; since the most
perfect masterpieces of their Art, are only volatile salts, which for the most
part they compare to Camphire, when they think to have brought them to the
highest piece of their perfection, but they never come near to the subtilty,
quickness, transparency and whiteness of this unparalled mixed, nature it
seems intending to have it self alone all the glory of its perfection,
nobleness and virtue: for when ever Chemical Artists have endeavored to raise
and exalt this gum to an oil, or some other analogical liquor, it has ever
returned to a body again, vanished away, or lost the purest or noblest part of
its strength or efficacy; we must then rather set here as admirers, then
operarors, since there is nothing in this substance to be corrected, and that
Camphire of it self is sufficiently pure, subtle and volatile, to be reduced
from power into act, without vainly endeavoring by an ignorant and proud
temerity to correct a thing which God has created, and nature produced with so
many perfections. To prove our Assertion, it will be necessary to give here the
character and notes of true Camphire, teach one of the noblest uses of it, and
make some observations thereupon, before we come to any of the true operations
usually made upon this noble Resin: the Camphire then ought to be very white,
transparent as crystal, very pure, without spot and mixture of any adventitious
substance, of a quick and penetrating smell, crumbling betwixt the fingers, and
almost not to be quenched whence once kindled, for it burns in the water it
self: and to discover the better, if it be sophisticated, have a Rye-loaf
coming just from the Oven, open it, and make a hole in the middle, in which put
a piece of Camphire of the bigness of a Walnut, then clap the pieces again
close together, and let it so stand a while warm, and this trial will evidently
make appear the truth of the substance or sophistication; for if the Camphire
be pure, it will all melt and vanish away; but if mixed with any heterogeneous
matter, it will burn; or to speak more properly, the Camphire will vanish away,
and the gross matter which did falsify it, shall appear in substance whole in
the bread, and as it were roasted and dried up: but to declare yet more
evidently the volatile quality of this mixed, and its subtle and penetrative
virtue, we must say that it is an approved remedy against Tertian Agues, if in
a knot of Taffeta you put some of the purest about the neck of the patient from
s. to ^v. according to age, letting the same hang upon the breast, toward the
upper Orifice of the stomach, where the first sensations of joy or grief are
raifed: The knot must be worn nine days, without intermission, and the ninth
day thrown, without examing what remains in, in a running water, and that
without omitting any of these circumstances, if you look for a recovery. But
some may perhaps object, that this number of nine is superstitious, as also the
condition not to look in the knot, and likewise to throw it in running water:
To which we answer, That all these observations are necessary, purely physical
and suitable to the nature of the Remedy and disease; for though Camphire be
very volatile, yet must there be a more violent heat then that of man to
volatilize it under the space of nine days: and it is requisite it should be
volatiliz'd to produce its effect, which is performed by the smell of the
Patient, who breaths and draws it continually, by which means this volatile
Salt makes an impression upon the natural spirits, which drive away by degrees
by a sensible transpiration or insensible, or by urine, the ferment of the
Ague, and by this slow operation destroys the action and violence thereof: As
for not looking in the knot, and throwing of it into running water, it is an
observation depending on a higher and more abstruse Philosophy, which shall
tell you that as the Camphire has blotted out, and defaced the Character and
Idea of the Ague by the irradiation of its magnetical virtue, so has the
spirit of life imprinted the Character and Idea of the disease in the knot
whence the remedy did flow, and therefore must this Idea be removed as far as
is possible from the formerly sick person, lest the irradiation and flowing of
the subtle spirits, which do continually proceed from their bodies, may cause
the said spirits to be touched again, and infected by the venom and contagion
of the Idea of the sickness, which the water carries away, and destroys, and
overcomes in such a manner that the Patient becomes wholly freed and exempted
from it without any fear of Relapse; for there is no body can be ignorant, that
a Candle newly put out, can easily be kindled again, if another burning be
brought near unto it, though kept at some distance, and not touching it with
her flame; the same will happen to them that shall have the curiosity to look
into the knot, after they have removed it from their neck, and have neglected
to throw it at the same instant in the running water. We might also find
another Reason in the strength of imagination working in the Patient; but
though that may do very much, it would be needless, since we shall evidence
hereafter, that Remedies prepared out of Camphire, work the same effect when
taken inwardly.

We must come now to the necessary marks, for proof of what we have said above:
For the trial of Camphire in new Rye-bread, and the cure of the Tertian Ague,
are infallible signs of its subtility and quick penetration, whereby it appears
that those that believe it to be cold, are possessed with a salse and vain
Philosophy, taken from old Authors who had no skill or knowledge thereof,
further then what a hearsay could suggest them, wherein they are followed by
their disciples: But, say they, Camphire cannot be otherwise then cold, because
it hinders generation, and does even hinder erection, and all other irritations
necessary to the act of it. But suppose it to be as true as it is false, it
does not follow therefore that Camphire should be cold: and granting that any
body making a trial thereof, and by long use of it both inwardly and outwardly,
that effect of impotency and barrenness should follow in him: it would much
rather be an argument of its heat, and of the subtle quickness of its volatile
sulphurous Salt, keeping still the pores open, and continually resolving
either sensibly or insensibly the spirituous exhalations, which are absolutely
necessary to the act of generation and conception: the old Romans knew better
then these Chimerical Philosophers, that those substances which have a quick
and penetrating smell do enervate, since by one of their Laws of the xii.
Tables, they did forbid their Soldiers, Mentham in bello nec edere nec cedere.
Is it not also a daily experiment, that Agnus Castus and Rue decrease the seed,
hinder erection and the heats of lust, by the same reason as Camphire, though
held by every body for hot remedies? which are proof more then invincible of
the weakness of this insipid Doctrine, which always cleaves to the appearances
and outward effects of things, without reflecting and turning the edge, of
their speculation upon the true cause. Chemistry is only capable of this noble
and discerning knowledge; upon which ground Chemical Physicians have found it
expedient to make use of Champhire in pestilential and malignant diseases, as
also in Agues, whether they administer it inwardly, or apply it outwardly in
Epithems and Frontals. But above all things, it is used with a wonderful
success in Suffocations and Fits of the Mother, if you burn j. or s. even to a
j. in a glass of balm water, or for want of it, in plain water, by which it
appears evidently, that it is the mere virtue of Camphire which produces the
effect. We would not forbear to clear this truth by this our Narrative, to
remove the scruple of those who fear to make use of Camphire; for as I am very
well persuaded of its real virtue by experience, I thought my self obliged to
recommend the use thereof, that the public may not be frustrated of the good
and advantage it may receive by it. When we have said, that our Artist could
not much operate upon Camphire without destroying it, we have said truth; for
he can add nothing to its perfection, and can but waste much of its substance,
always useful and full of virtue: there is nevertheless some little operation
necessary to reduce it into liquor, and mix it indivisibly with other
substances, which cannot easily keep it, unless you proceed in your work with
circumspection and method; and because some hitherto have thought it impossible
to reduce the substance of it into oil, we will show nevertheless that Labor
improbus ownia vincit; but it shall yield but a little quantity and proportion.
We will propound two examples, the one of Camphire oil without addition of
other oil; the other with addition of two necessary oils which will increase
more and more its virtue.

How to work the plain oil of Camphire.
lbs. OF Camphire reduced to powder, and mix it with lb js. of Bol. then put
this mixture in a glass retort, and distill in sand with a well graduated
fire, and the Camphire will come forth in the form of Butter. Take of this
butyrous substance, and mix it with its double weight of Tartar very well
calcinated; put this mixture in a Cucurbite, and pour upon it spirit of Wine,
the height of three or four fingers, and distill it in B.M. with all requisite
precautions. But above all things, you must have a careful eye to observe when
the Camphire shall begin to sublimate: for as soon as you see it appear in the
still head, take away the fire, and let the vessels cool: But the spirit of
wine you shall find in the Recipient in a narrow neck bottle, and pour upon
distilled rainwater, till you see the mixture of both turn as white as milk;
so the spirit of Wine being weakened by the mixture of water, you shall
perceive the Oil of Camphire, which was incorporated incordorated and united to
this ethereal spirit, to swim over the liquor. Continue in the same manner to
pour spirit of Wine upon the matter remaining in the Cucurbite, and distill
with the same circumspection as before, until no more of the oil does separate
and rise above the spirit of Wine and rainwater mixed. You may keep of this
spirit of Wine impregnated with the oil of Camphire; for it is the true
Camphorated spirit of Wine, and not that wherein Camphire has merely been
dissolved. There is most commonly but the eight part of Camphire converted into
oil: This oil is an excellent Remedy, for it resists putrefaction and venoms;
wherefore it may be exhibited in Plagues, malignant diseases, and continual or
intermittent Fevers: The Dosis is from one drop to six in some appropriated
liquor: the camphorated spirit of Wine, is impregnated with the same virtues,
but the Dosis must be bigger; for it may be given from s. to j. inwardly; and
the outward use is no way less wonderful: for the oil and spirit are good to
stop the Gangreen, and appease the toothach, as likewise to allay the grief of
the Gout, particularly Sciatick. Note also, that you must not lose the spirit
of wine mixed with the stilled rainwater, but draw it off by distillation in
B.M. since it may be used again, either for this same operation, or for some
others: you must not neither lose the salt of Tartar which remains in the
Cucurbite, dissolve it only with warm water, filtrate, evaporate and dry it, to
use it to all other purposes as before.

The manner of preparing compounded oil of Camphire.
PUT in a Mattress about lib. j. of spirit of Niter, vj. of Camphire; stop the
Mattress with another, that the neck of one may get into the other; lute the
joints with bladder and whites of eggs, then put it to digest in the vapor of
Balneo, until the Camphire be resolved into an oil which shall swim above the
spirit, then separate this oil, and mix it with iv. of rectified oil of Amber,
and as much juniper oil; digest them together that they may unite, then distill
in ashes by a retort three times consecutively; after which rectify upon
Choliotar of Vitriol, until the oil comes forth clear, depurated and fluid, and
the Camphire wholly deprived from body, and turned into an oil; it is a
sudorifick very secure to expel the malignity of the plague, Spotted Feavours,
and poison it self: it is also a preservative Remedy in time of Plague, both
inwardly and outwardly applied: if inwardly, this oil must be reduced in a
dissoluble Balsom with sugar in powder, and every morning must you take three
drops in a little wine: But outwardly, rub your Temples and Wrists at the
beating of the Artery, and thus shall it act concurrenly both within and
without; and so shall this noble remedy sufficiently strengthen spirits, that
they may not be infected by the venom and poison of the plague. But the use of
this oil cannot sufficiently be recommended for those that are subject to
Hysterical passions: for this Remedy penetrates as in a moment, and appeases
all the irritations of the mother; the Dosis is from 11. drops to vj. or viij.
But you must note moreover, that this oil is a very notable Specific in the
Epilepsie, both in young and old, and chifly in that kind which proceeds from
the mother.

The manner of distilling the Gum Ammoniack.
WE take this Gum for an example of the distillation of other Gums, because it
is endowed with many noble medicinal faculties, and abounds more then the
others in spirit, and in oil: This Gum is taken from a feculaceous plant
growing in that part of Africa where formerly was the Temple of Jupiter Ammon,
whence it had also the name, to draw an oil and spirit from it, which may be
recommendable by their virtue; it must be very well chosen. The chief Notes of
good Ammoniack, are, that it be yellow outwardly, and white inwardly, as Crumbs
or Granes Olibanum, of a smell drawing to that of Castoreum, bitter in taste,
and easily growing soft, if wrought a while between the fingers. But this Gum
well chosen in a glass retort filled to a third part, and fit it in an Iron-pot
so adapted in the furnace, that you may have Registers in the Corners; the
bottom of the retort must not touch the iron, but it must be propped with three
pieces of earth, as if it were a Trefoot, that the oil and spirit may contract
no Empyreuma or smoakish taste, if it be possible; cover the pot with its own
covering, and lute it so, that nothing but the warm air may encompass the
retort, to expel the vapors into the Recipient, which must be exactly luted
without fillets of linen dipped in whites of eggs, and strowed powder of quick
lime; graduate ths fire as you shall see occasion, and continue your
distillation, till nothing more comes out; and when all is cooled, separate the
oil from the acid liquor, and rectify each by it self in ashes, to apply to
their uses: The oil and spirit may be taken inwardly from iv. drops to xv. and
xx. in white Wine or Sassafras, or a little Centaury water, to open
obstructions of the parts of the inward ventricle, and chiefly of the Spleen.
It is also a specific Remedy to resolve and evacuate by seat and urine, the
flime and tartarous Viscosities which create and cause pains in the joints,
wherefore it may freely be given to those that are subject to the Gout and
Rheumatism, as those likewise whose breast is laden with clamminess and thick
phlegms hindering the motion of the lungs: The spirit above all, is of singular
use to free the Matrix from its impurities, as also to cleanse the kidneys and
bladder from slime and sand; the oil is also excellent to apply outwardly upon
the Region of the Spleen, whereby to sustain it, and restore to its natural
state, when it is grown schirrous and hard: It is likewise very efficacious to
resolve Tophus'd, Hardnesses and Callosities of the feet and hands of such as
have been troubled with the Gout in those parts of the body. It is also one of
the best remedies that can be applied to the Kings Evil, provided the Patient
may be purged at the same time alternatively with some good Antimonial and
Mercurial remedy. And thus shall we conclude this Chapter of Vegetables, in
which we think to have sufficiently instructed the Artist with a method to
guide him in such works as he shall find himself obliged to undertake upon
substances, whereof this noble and ample family of Nature does consist, whether
led by a mean curiosity to increase his knowledge and experience, or to prepare
remedies which he may use and dedicate to the public good and service. We must
follow the same Rules and Preceps upon Minerals, which we will, God willing,
perform in the following Chapter, with all the intelligibility and punctuality
possible and requisite.

CHAP. X. Of Minerals and their Chemical Preparation.
WE are at last arrived to the last Chapter of our Chemical Treatise, which
will contain the manner of working, which our Artist is to follow as a Model
and Example in any operation he will undertake upon any part of the Minerals
Family, the proper part and task as some are of opinion, of Chemistry. Fow
although we have showed how many noble Remedies this Art may extract from
Animals and Vegetables, yet all that seems but a play in respect of the
operations which must be performed, to open and disunite what Nature has so
strongly bound, and as it were fixed in the substances whereof Minerals do
consist and are composed. All this will better appear when we come to speak of
it particularly: for though in the Theorical part of this Treatise we have
already spoken of their generation, yet it is necessary that we should make a
subdivision of this ample and numerous Head, and declare the Subalternate
genders it contains, as also the Species whereof they consist; and that also we
make a description of their original, assign their definitions, and declare
their constitutive parts, that thereby the truth and nobleness of Substances
may better be conceived, as also the difficulty of their Works, which must
needs astonish and confound those that pretend to the Name and Title of
Naturalists or searchers of Nature, and yet are ignorant of the most part of
her noblest and choicest actions: For what could she produce more perfect, and
less corruptible then Gold, more white then Pearls, more resplendent and
shining then Ruby and Diamont, more wonderful then the Loadstone, and more
capable of surprising and puzling the Judgment and Learning of these conceited
and unexperienced Philosophers, then all the substances whereof this family of
Minerals is composed? But that which is no less strange, and yet is a
particular weakness of ignorance, is, That these learned Ones are not
contented to neglect the Anatomy and search of Minerals, but give themselves a
liberty and freedom to despise and calumniate both dead and living, who led by
a noble desire of Knowledge have applied, and do apply themselves to so
necessary a work, and of so great advantage for the improvement of Physic, and
think to have sufficiently done when they advance and declare, that all these
mineral Bodies have no correspondence or analogy either with Man or the dseases
which seize on him, and hinder the joy of his life: But we shall in the sequel
of this Discourse, God willing, evince the contrary, and evidently show, that
the ignorance only of the noblest handling of Physic, and their uncapacity of
undertaking the work, have been the occasion of their contradictions, which are
but vain and importunate, since Physic, Pharmacy and Surgery, cannot at all be
without those noble Remedies that are extracted from Minerals by the operations
of Chemistry.

The Mineral Kingdom contains under it self several Families or Subalternate
Genders, which are first Earths containing several kinds or Species, but
chiefly those wherein from all time has shined and been conspicuous some
particular virtue; those which are properly called Mineral and Medicinal
Earth's, are all the kinds of Bolus, as Armenian or oriental, and common, all
the sigillated Earth's, as that of Turkey or of the Island Lemnos, the Silesian
and that of Blois in France, Chalk, Plaster, Oker, red earth and Tripoly.

Secondly, This Kingdom contains Mineral-stones, divided into precious, and
less precious: the precious are, Amethyst, Cordaline, Topaz, Granate,
Hyacinth, oriental Ruby, Saphir, Emer^uld; to which, though improperly enough
is added the Pearl, Coral, oriental and occidental Bezoar; and amongst all
these which we have related, Physic and Pharmacy do by excellency name the
precious fragments, Granate, Hyacinth, Sapphire, Emerald and Cornaline. The
less precious are, Hail stone, Al baster, Alumen plumum or feather?d Alum,
Lapis Armenius or the Armenian-stone, Lapis calaminaris or Bery stall, Emathite
or boodstone, Lapis Judaicus, Lapis Lazali, Linx stone, Loadstone, Marble,
Nephritick-stone, Osteocella -- Pumice-stone, Slate, Serpentine-stone, Peable,
Smiris or Emerod, Lapis specularis, Sponge and Chalk.

In the third Classis are the Metals, and those Substances which have any
resemblance or affinity with them, and the natural or artificial Excrements of
Metals. The Metals are, Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, ^inne and Lead. The
substances of near affinity, Mercu^y or Quicksilver, Cinnabar or Vermilion and
An^imony. The natural excrements of Metals are, Marcassites or middle minerals:
as Zinck, Bismuthum, Cobolt, and metallic and natural ^admia. Artificial, are
the two kinds of Litha^g, Pompholix, and ^utty.

The fourth place in this Mineral-Kingdom is assigned to Salts, whereof there
are two sorts, Natural and Artificial: Natural are the common salt, salt Gemme
and Vitriol; Artificial are, Alloms, Armoniack and Salt pe^er which may also be
called Natural.

In the fifth and last place, Minerals contain under them the sulphurous
mixts, which are Sulphur or Brimstone, Arsenick, Auripigmentum, Realgar,
Ambergreece, Karabe or yellow Amber, Spermaceti, Asphaltum, Naptha, Petroly,
Sea-coal, Jet, which some would have to be black Karabe or Amber.

We will choose in each of these Subalternate Families what is more considerable
in them, and will allow to each of the Substances a particular Section by it
self; in which as much as in us lies, we shall explicate the nature of it, and
upon each of these declare the noblest and chiefest manner of working which our
study and experience has gained us; that both the knowledge of the thing and
the operation upon it, may serve to our Artist as a Guide and a Rule, as much
to help them in the internal and external knowledge of Minerals, as a Model for
all Chemical and Physical operations, which are necessary to draw from them
those precious and noble Remedies that God and Nature have placed in it: For as
concerning vulgar and mechanical operations which are performed upon the mines
of Metals and Minerals, they that have any curiosity in this particular, may
find them in such Authors as have written thereof fundamentally and ex
professo. Let no body also look here or seek for Sophistications, white or red
works upon Metals; for besides that they do not belong to a Discourse of
Medicinal and Pharmaceutick Chemistry, it suffices to our Artist, and serves
well enough his turn if he knows enough of it, to take heed and beware himself
of the ordinary Cheat of those who do profess it, and who are but too numerous
at this day; but moreover, we should do a prejudice to the public, in
teaching that which is but too much practiced by wicked and lewd idle persons,
though well principled and virtuous men might make no ill use thereof.

SECTION I. Of Earths.
WE begin by the Earth, as being the principle of all Physical Generations; for
it is the common Mother, not only of Animals and Vegetables, but it is also
much more properly of Minerals, since her bosom is as it were their matrix, in
the Center whereof they are bred and generated. We do not pretend to speak here
of Earth as it is a simple and pure Element, not to be conceived but
intellectually; we will neither treat of it as of the Earth which is
impregnated with the soul of the World, and which though dead of it self lives
nevertheless with an invisible life, which the universal Spirit does
continually infuse in it, to advance in her entrails the production of
Minerals, in her surface the Vegetables, and supply the necessity of Animals
which seem to be Masters of all the rest: for we have already treated of this
noble and ample Matrix in the Theorical part of this Treatise. Wherefore we
dedicate this Section to mineral Earths which are endowed with some physical
Virtue, to the end to teach the Spagyrical way of the extracting of this
virtue, and separating it by the operations of Chemistry; and even if this
virtue cannot be separated without alteration of its Subject, or its only
essential Faculties, to preserve and even increase them by an addition of what
may concur with the intention and answer to the indication of the Artist that
intends the use of them. These kinds of Earths have been declared by several
names for three principal Reasons: the first for the place of their original:
the second for the Matrix which has supplied them and given them their color:
the third by reason of certain Characters or figures impressed upon them. This
is called the Lemniac, Maltha and Turkish Earth. This the golden Mine or Solar
Earth, the silver Mine or Lunar Earth, the Venerean, Saturnine, etc. and
finally, the terra Sigillata or sealed Earth, according to the place from
whence it comes.

We shall not speak here of the mineral Earths or mines of Metals, no more then
of Marcassites, middle-Minerals, or Vitriolick and Sulphurated Earths; when we
come to treat of Metalls and their original in the following Sections we shall
be obliged to speak thereof. Our Discourse then here shall only be of Bolus 's
and Earths so properly called, that what we shall deliver, may be as a Light
and Direction to handle all other sorts of Earths that shall have some
resemblance and analogy with these.

Of Terra Sigillata or sealed Earth.
BEfore we speak of the choosing of these Earths, and design particularly the
marks of their goodness and Virtue, we must make a small mental reflection
upon the cause and reason of their chief Virtue. We have already so often said,
that Light is the spring and source of all good impressions, that we need not
farther insist thereon, being it is of absolute necessity that this Light
should have transmitted her Rays into the very center of these Earths, since
we find in them a Cardiack, Cephalic, Hepatick, Stomachical virtue, which
could not be unless this Earth were impregnated with some vitriol, or Solar,
Martial or Lunary Sulphur, which are nevertheless only embryonated in the
same, as we will make it appear in the sequel of this Discourse; For these
Earths being only found in such places where perfect or imperfect Metals are
extracted, so are they more or less pure, more or less efficatious and full
of virtue, according as they partake of the purity or impurity of Vitriol and
Sulphur, which are the principles of Metals found in the place of their birth
and original.

The most excellent of all these Earths is that which is dug in the Island
of Lemnos by order of the Grand Seigniour every year, and thence carried to
Constantinople, to be distributed afterward through Europe at his pleasure:
The second in order and goodness, is that which is found about the Town Striga
in Silesia, where they have begun to give it a Seal, viz. two Sols: some call
it the fat of Gold or axungia Solis, because impregnated with a solar Sulphur,
and it is of a reddish color; there is also a second or inferior kind which
is gray or whitish, called also the fat of silver or axungia Lunae, because
impregnated with a Lunar Sulphur. That which is Solar is dedicated to the Heart
and the diseases thereof, as the Lunar to the Brain and Liver. The third kind
of Earth in goodness is that of Blois, and all the sorts of Earth that come
nigh to it; the choice of either of them depends upon two chief notes: first,
it must be apt to stick and cleave easily to the Tongue when touched by it;
secondly, the wet or spittle that sticks upon, or any other moist liquor, must
immediately rise in small pustuls or bubbles, and make a kind of ebullition, or
any parcel thrown in water must immediately put it to a boiling; and as we
said that these earths did partake of a solar Virtue, by reason of embryonated
mineral sulphur which is in them; so may we also affirm that they are Remedies
purely natural, and capable to show their virtue as they come from the hands of
Nature without necessitating Art to contribute any help of its own:
contrariwise, it should seem that Art here would but injure and offend Nature,
since these earths have much more virtue before the common preparation thereof
pretended by vulgar Pharmacy, which are to wash and triturate them upon a
Marble or Porphyry; which in effect does nothing else, but take away from them
that vitriolick embryonated portion in which does consist their virtue and
efficacy. But there is a Spagyrick preparation better able to draw their purest
and most efficacious substance, and thus more pleasantly and in a less Dosis
it may be exhibited to Patients. The general and particular virtues of Earths
and Bolus 's are to desiccate and astringe, resist putrefaction and venom,
resolve coagulated and congealed blood, strengthen the Heart and Brain, and by
sweat purify the mass of the Blood; wherefore with great success and
advantage they may be given in Plague, malignant Fevers, Diarrhea's, Dysentery
and bitings of venomous Creatures. Their external use is to apply upon festered
and desperate wounds, and to stop Hemorrhages or issues of blood.

The distillation of sealed or sigilled Earth.
lb v. or vj. of Silesian Earth bearing the mark of two Hillocks, with all the
notes of goodness which we have assigned above: break the Cakes in three or
four pieces and put them in a Glass Retort, which you must place in a close
Reverberatory, fiting to it a capacious Receiver luted exactly in the Joints;
cover the Furnace, and give it a gradual fire during the space of xx. or xxx.
hours, or until no more clouds do appear, or that the Artist shall see a
Sublimatory made, not only about the neck of the Retort, but that it has even
penetrated into the body of the Recipient; for it is then a sure token that the
Earth has yielded all the salt and sulphur which it did contain; and though it
appears little by the bulk and quantity thereof, yet that which is extracted
ought to be highly valued by reason of its great virtue and pleasantness; for
the liquor has a very agreeable acidity: that which is sublimated must be
joined to the said liquor, put in a Glasse-Viol and so kept for use. It has no
need of Rectification, for there is nothing in it but pure and useful. It may
be used instead of the body of the Earth in all diseases whereto we have said
above that it did conduce; but this Liquor has one quality besides, that it is
extraordinary good to appease the pains of running Gouts, and to correct the
malignity of Itch and all other eruptions of the skin. The Dosis is from iiij.
to xv. or xx. drops in Broth, Wine, or some other distilled water appropriated
to the Disease. But you must note, that the Earth left in the Retort after
distillation cleaves no more to the Tongue, causes no more ebullition when
wetted with spittle or any other Liquor, though it keeps still its shape and
color, which is an infallible token that its radical moisture and internal
fire which were causes of their astringence and ebullition, are passed into the
Recipient, and that this was by consequence the chief part of its virtue.

Of Bolus.
BOLUS is a knd of reddish earth, which partakes and is impregnated of the
vapors of some Mines or veins of Iron, which is Mars, and participates
something of the solar nature. It is vulgarly called in shops Bole-Armeniack,
or oriental and fine, because it comes from the oriental parts of Armenia. The
best is that which is pure, not mixed with Sand, which insensibly melts away as
lime after it has been wetted, or like butter in the mouth is very astringent,
and easily and quickly sticks to the lips and tongue. The chief virtues of it
are, strongly to desiccate and dry, to astringe and strengthen; wherefore it is
very useful in stopping of Fluxes, hindering colliquations and resisting
putrefaction and venoms, which makes it to be employed in Diarrhea's, Lientery,
Dysentery, immoderate courses, whether white or red, spitting of blood,
bleeding of the Nose and stopping the blood in Wounds. It may also be mixed in
Cataplasms, Unguents, Salves and astringent pouders for outward applications.
Bolus may be distilled in the same manner as the sigilled Earth and applied to
the same uses. But because Bolus of it self is already an excellent Earth, we
must teach our Artist how to improve and meliorate it, not by a separation of
its parts, but rather adding some Substances which shall increase its virtue,
according to the Indication which may engage him to make use thereof; for as
this Earth is dry and void of all moisture, so does it attract to its self the
Spirits and Salts of any Liquor mixed with much eagerness, and keeps them to
its self till the heat of the Patients stomach calls them forth by making
separation thereof. We will deliver four several descriptions, that upon the
model of it others may be prepared. The first shall be to make it more
astringent, and capable of producing its effect sooner and more safely in
outward applications. The second, to render it more efficacious for dissolving
congealed and coagulated blood in the body, whereby to corroborate Nature, and
help it to expel and evacuate that blood so dissolved, either by Sweat or
Urine. The third will increase its astringency for inward applications, to make
it sooner stop the Fluxes and looseness of the Belly, Dysentery and immoderate
Courses. The fourth will render it more fit to produce very remarkable effects
in pestilential diseases and all malignant Fevers, where strength does fail by
the sharpness and abundance of the venom, which of necessity must be brought
to transpiration, and expelled from the center of the Patients body to the
circumference and outward parts by the help of this prepared earth, which
retains in it self the best, subtilest and purest of the liquor wherewith it
has been impregnated.

Preparation of the Bolus to make it more astringent for outward applications.
THis preparation cannot be made but once in a year in the month of March,
because you can have no spawn of Frogs but in this season only which is the
beginning of the Spring. Take then about that time half a Bucket full of spawn
of Frogs, which put in a linen cloth bagg somewhat thin with half a hundred of
Cray-fishes bruised in a stone or marble Mortar until they be reduced to a pap,
and having hung it over an earthen pan or other Vessel receive the Liquor
dropping from this bagg, and when you shall have about lb iiij. of this liquor,
purify it by percolation, and mix with it purified and chrystallized
Saltpeter and roch-Allum ana j. ph. After which reduce lb j. of fine Bolus to
powder; and having moistened the same with this Liquor, dry it again, and thus
proceed moistening and drying until the Bolus has drunk up all the liquor; and
this Bolus thus prepared will be very good for outward applications, both for
stopping blood and hindering inflammation and other accidents, which for the
most part follow bruises and Wounds. It may also be put in Plasters, Salves
and Cataplasms.

Preparation of Bolus to resolve coagulated blood inwardly.
Smallage, Sorrel and Plantain newly gathered, of each lb j. beat them in a
marble Mortar and express the juice thereof, which you must put in a Cucirbit
on sand with iiij. of mundified Roots of the same plants, and Manip. ij. of our
Ladies-thistle or the Milky-thistle, Manip. iij. of Chervil, and iiij. of
Pimpernel: cover your Vessel with a Blind-head and make it boil the space of
six hours, then percolate it as clean as you can; and with this liquor imbibe
lb j. of fine Bolus in powder, and let it dry, continuing this moistening and
drying until all the liquor be spent; and keep it thus prepared to administer
to such as being fallen from high, have some quantity of blood inwardly shed in
the breast or lowermost belly. The Dosis must be from x. grains to iiij. mixed
with as much Nutmeg-pouder in Broth or some vulnerary Decoction, made with
Bugle, Sanicle, Winter-green, and Consolida Sarracenica, or even administer it
in Pills and give the Patient to drink after.

Preparation of Bolus against Dysentery and Diarrhea's.
Bistorta Roots or Snakeweed, Sorrel, Cynoglosse or Dogs-tongue, Lapathum
acutum, Plantain, Tormentil, ana j. ph. fresh and recent Herbs of Plaintain,
Mille-solium, Pyrola or Winter-green, new-gathered leaves of the ends of
Oak-branches ana Man. ij. pick all these, wash and shred, and boil in an
earthen pot in sand, with lb j. of phlegm of Vitriol, and lb iij. of water of
Knotgrasse till it be reduced to a third part; then strain and percolate it
cleanly, and with this liquor sprinkle and moisten lb ss. of Bolus; and
continue moistening and desiccating until the whole Decoction be spent; and
thus shall you have a wonderful Bolus to stop Dysentery and all kind of Lasks
of immoderate loosnesses of the belly, without any fear of shutting (as the
Proverb says) the Wolf in the sheepfold: For this Remedy performs its action
by strengthening, corrects merely the irritation or weakness and relaxation of
the Maw-gut, and restores the Ventricle in a condition and sufficient strength
to retain and digest the aliments and meats injected. The Dosis is from v. gr.
to ij. with half as much salt of Coral made in Pills with vitriolated Conserves
of Roses, or mingled with some stomachical Decoction or in Broth; but it is
much better given in Bolus, that it may have so much more leisure to tang in
the stomach, and impresse better there the character and irradiation of its
virtue.

Preparation of Bolus against Pestilential and contagious Diseases.
Scordium and Rhew, ana Man. ij. upper rind of Oranges and Lemmons ana ij.
Angelica, Carline-thistle and Contrayerva Roots ana j. shred small the Plants
and Rinds, and reduce to course powder the Roots, then put in a Mattress with lb
j. ss. of Spanish Wine, and applying thereon a Blindhead, put it to digest in a
vaporous Bath the space of three natural days, which expired let the Vessels
grow cold; then express the Species and filtrate the liquor, with which imbibe
lb s. of oriental Bolus reduced to powder and divided in four equal parts: but
because it would be damage to lose the water, which by an ordinary way of
exsiccation would vapor away in the air, draw off the water again in B. M.
till the mass remains dry in a Cucurbite fitted with its Still head, and that
four times reiterated; having so many times moistened your Bolus, which
afterward keep in powder in a bottle well stopped; You must also preserve
curiously the water: for as the Bolus has preserved the centrical virtue, and
taken to himself the Extract of those Ingredients which increase its Cardiack
and alexiterial Virtue, so has the water drawn what was spirituous and
volatile in the same, which is not of lesser importance then the rest. This
antipestilential Bolus may be given from v. gr. to xxx. with half as much
Vipers flesh in a spoonful or two of the water drawn off from the preparation
in all pestilential and malignant diseases, but chiefly against the plague, and
even this admirable Remedy may generally be used against all poisons.

These are the four kinds of preparations whereof we thought our selves engaged
to speak, that they may be as Models and Examples to perform others, according
to those Indications which Physicians careful of the recovery of their
Patients shall take. The Chemical Artist may distill the Bolus in the same
manner as we have taught above the sigillated Earth was to be distilled and
appropriated to the extract thereof, according to the virtues whereof the Bolus
is possessed, observing the same Rules and Dosis as in the Remedies extracted
from sigillated Earth, as we have sufficiently declared above.

SECTION II. Of Stones.
BEfore we deliver the definition of Stones, and describe the operations
performed upon some of them, we have thought it not unfit to speak something of
the essence or mineral Spirit which rules in the Earth, in whose bosom it
begins and ends the generation both of stones and of all other mineral Bodies.
Now this essence or Spirit is void of action, unless assisted by the water
which is to it instead of a Vehicle, to convey and carry it in its soft and
fluid body into the very bowels of the Earth. This mineral essence seems to be
nothing else but the universal spirit of the Spirit of the World, impregnated
by the light of all the mineral Ideas, which it does impress and communicate to
the water, that she may be capable to produce the fruits of the mineral Kingdom
in the several matrixes of the earth, according to the Genus and species of
this essence, differing in nomination, though one and the same in essence: for
according as it is metalline, petrifying, saline, bituminous and earthly, it
produces the variety of substances depending of each of these subalternate
genders, and according to the predominant character and Idea, the mineral
substances are pure or impure, fix or volatile, and so of all the other
proprieties and faculties of these Mixts.

This being so, it is not difficult to conceive that stones in general are
nothing else but terrestrial hard bodies, not ductile, apt to crumble, and
coagulated by the power and strength of the Lapidifick Ferment: We have hinted
above the difference and variety of stones: there remains no more to do at
present, but to choose those we intend to give for an example and pattern of the
operations which generally may be performed upon all others. We will then
select for the subjects of such preparations as may be wrought upon stones,
First the Emerald; secondly the Crystal; thirdly the Coral; fourthly Lapis
Judaicus; fifthly Chalk, and finally the Limestone. But as there are general
observations which may be given for all stones in general, we must speak
something thereof, because it will much help our Artist to facilitate and
explain the meaning of all what we shall hereafter say, not only of stones, but
also of all other Minerals and of Metals themselves. They that will have a very
exact knowledge of stones, may have recourse to that learned Book which Boethius
Van Bood, Physician to the Emperor Rudolphus II. has writ, and he shall fully
be satisfied as touching this matter: for our intent is only to anatomize here
those we have named; because they will be sufficient to instruct the Chemical
Apothecary how to work upon all others that have a relation or conformity to
them.

First then we say, that our Artist must consider, that as the body of precious
or not precious stones is harder and more fix then that of Animals and
Vegetables; so must he go to work and proceed in another way in their anatomy,
and use different Menstruum's to extract and dissolve them: and moreover, that
these Menstruums shall not act for the most part upon such fix and solid bodies
as these are, unless they be calcined beforehand, either by themselves or mixed
with Salt or Brimstone, to penetrate the hardness and compactness of their
bodies, and render them porous, so as the liquors which shall be used in their
extraction or dissolution, may more easily and usefully perform their action
upon them. Calcination is one of the principal operations made upon stone,
either to make them fit for Medicinal uses, or to open them and render them
capable of the most exact Chemical operations. This dispositive or preparatory
Calcination is threefold: for it is either mere ignition, as when common Lime
is burned; secondly, ignition with an extinction of the matter in some Liquor,
to disunite it by this reiterated action, and so reduce it into Powder or Calx.
The third Calcination is performed with common salt, Saltpeter or Brimstone.
Solution follows Calcination, and is made with several different Menstruum's,
according to the greater or less fixity found in the dissoluble Bodies; the
chief and most usually employed are Vinegar, either simply distilled, or
alkalized, the spirit of therebinthinated Vinegar, and the vinegar of Honey,
spirit of Vitriol and of Salt, and oil of Sulphur or Brimstone made per
Campanam; but the spirit of Venus goes in virtue and activity beyond all the
foresaid Menstruum's, to extract or dissolve all manner of calcined or
uncalcined stones; we will show the preparation of it in the Section of Metals.
After dissolution follows coagulation, which is performed two ways: either
drawing of the Menstruum by evaporation or by distillation, and then what
remains is a salt; or else it is made by precipitation, and the remaining
powder is properly called a Magistery.

There is besides Edulcoration and putrification made by ablutions, solutions
and coagulations often repeated: and for the last operation, liquation or
solution of the salts which have been extracted from the stones, in a Liquor
commonly called Oleum per deliquium, or oil of Deficiency; it is made in some
moist place upom some Table or square of Marble or Glass; and the Crown and
perfection of all the work, is the volatization of the liquor or salt of a
stone by the help of some good Cordial Menstruum, which is not to be performed
but by digestion and reiterated distillation; for in every one of these
operations, there ascends still a portion of salt with the Menstruum; and if
the Menstruum be left impregnated with this salt, it is called the Elixir of
the stone: but if it be drawn off with a soft and gentle heat, that which
remains in the bottom of the Vessel in the form of an oil is called the essence
of the stone.

Thus by this gradation of operations stones are converted into Salts,
Magistery, Liquor, Elixir and Essence: But before we put an end to these
general hints, we will give a general process upon all kind of stones, to
reduce them into Salt and Essence with less work and less toil, which is
performed in the following manner.

Reduce to an impalpable powder such kind of stone as you shall think fit to
take by one of the three Calcinations we have mentioned above, then grind this
subtle powder on a Porphyry stone of a Sea-shell, with equal weight of Bay or
Seasalt well dried; put that mixture in a Crucible, which you shall cover and
lute exactly: the Lute being dry, put it in a Potters-furnace at the same time
as he begins to bake his pots, and there let it stand twenty four hours: after
which take out your Vessel and open it, and the matter which you shall find in
it, dissolve with warm distilled rainwater in a glased earthen pan; stir and
triturate it nimbly with a Glass or wooden pestle; pour the dissolution in
another pan also glased, and thus proceed grinding; stirring and dissolving in
new warm water, until the Calx of the stone remains indissoluble in the bottom:
then dry it and reiterate the same operation with dried salt, until all the
body of the Calx be reduced and converted into a slimy fat and glewing
substance among the body of the warm water: then being settled again, separate
the clear water which swims above the slimy grounds of setlement by
inclination; and put all these waters in a glass Cucurbite in sand; give it a
competent fire, and draw off by evaporation or distillation the half part
thereof: then pour upon the liquor remaining in the Cucurbite oil of Tartar
drawn by deficiency or per deliquium, drop by drop until this liquor becomes as
white as milk; then filter this white water, to separate the part thereof which
you shall find precipitated; and thus continue to precipitate and filtrate
until the water remains clear. Then put together all the slimy parts remaining
in the bottom of the Pans with that which is in the Filter, and wash it with
pure lukewarm Fountain water, until the water comes our as void of taste as
when it was poured on, which will be a sure token that the remaining matter is
destitute of all saltishnesse; then separate the water thereof with as much
exactness and care as you can, and put this matter in a Cucurbite, pouring
upon it very good distilled Vinegar four fingers high; put all in ashes to
digest, until the Vinegar has lost its sharpness and is become sweet; then
draw it off by inclination, and pour fresh Vinegar thereon at the same height,
and thus proceed and, go on, until the distilled Vinegar changes no more its
taste: then join all these extractions and dissolutions, filtrate and evaporate
in sand slowly without boiling until all be dry, and you shall have the salt of
the stone of a grayish color, which grind and put in a Mattress, and pour upon
tartarizated spirit of Wine the height of four fingers: stop your Vessel with a
Blindhead and extract the Tincture thereof in B. M. and when the Spirit shall
appear colored, separate it and supply with new until it takes no more color;
then filtrate all the Tinctures, and draw off softly the spirit in a vaporous
Balneo, until the essence of the stone remains in the bottom in the
consistency of a clear Syrup. This is the general method of working upon stones
of what virtue or quality soever: and whenever our Artst has made any
Essence of this kind, he shall repair to such Authors as have particularly
treated of that stone and of its virtues, and so shall be capable to apply them
to their right use. We may only add the genetal Dosis of these noble Remedies,
which is from j. or ij. drops to viij. or x. in the morning fasting, in Broth,
Wine, Decoction, or some distilled water specific and appropriated to the
Disease and Remedy; and let this be said in the way concerning stones in
general; we come now to the particular operations which we propound for a
Pattern and Model in particular.

Of the Emerald, and its Chemical preparation.
THE Emerald is a precious stone, transparent and very fair by reason of its
pleasant green color, the softest and most brickle of all others. The best
Emeralds are the Oriental, both in regard their green is deeper and more
pleasant to the eye, and because they are of greater virtue; the meanest are
those which are brought from Peru and found in Europe. After that the fragments
of Emerald have been purely calcined by ignition and extraction in water of
juice of Bugloss, and then triturated or ground to an Alkohol upon the Porphyry
stone with the same water and dried, it may be administered in Bolus or Pill,
with Conserve of Marigold flower from iiij. gr. to x. against all manner of
Lasks of the Belly and bloody Fluxes: but chiefly against Dysentery, either
proceeding from erosion of the Entrals, or from some malignant matter: it is
also a fit Remedy against the biting of venomous Creatures, Plague,
pestilential Fevers and all others that partake of malignancy. There are many
other noble virtues attributed to the Emerald being whole and unprepared: but
they only respect outward application, such as to hang it on the neck against
the Falling-ficknesse; Tie it to the Thigh for advancing delivery in Childbed;
apply it on the belly to prevent miscarrying, stop the bleeding of the Nose
with keeping it in the mouth; as likewise bloody Flux, and Emrods applied upon
the Lungs: it is also said to recreate both outward and inward senses worn on
the finger, and to expel fear and terror of ill Visions. There are some
Authors who deliver as an undoubted truth, it will oftentimes break being worn
by too lascivious a person, and who unboundedly will abandon himself to Venery.
So much have we thought fit summarily to say, that it may appear what
experience has found out toward the efficacy of precious stones, which have
all in themselves some portion of very pure metallic Sulphur, which
communicates Virtues and Faculties unto them of much more extent then that of
Animals and Vegetables. And what is this Sulphur else but the purest part of
condensed light? which yields a continual irradiation of its virtue without any
lessening or diminution, by reason of the magnetical virtue of the stone, which
perpetually attracts its like from the uppermost Heaven; as it appears yet
better by the oriental Sapphire, and the efficacy is wonderful against the
Plague, insomuch as if the Patient has many boiles or sores on his body at
once, none of them will break or run, but that about which a circle or ring
has been made with a Sapphire touching the skin: and moreover, the
scarification shall never surpass the bounds, which the virtue of the stone
seems to have prescribed ann limited unto it. But let us come to the Chemical
preparation, by which the salt Tincture and Elixir or Essence are extracted.

Of the Chemical Preparation of Emerald.
TAke fragments of Emerald the greenest and cleanest you can meet with, beat
them to powder in a steel-Mortar, and searce the powder through a fine linen
Searcer fitted in a Box, which in the French shops is called Cicotriner; or it
is as good to triturate them into an impalpable powder, which put in a Mattress,
pouring upon it of the volatile spirit of Urine having yet its phlegm, to draw
the color, and the spirit being sufficiently colored, draw it off and pour on
other until it takes no more color; then filtrate the Tincture through a
Cotton, and put them into a Cucurbite to draw off the Spirit, till you have the
bottom in the consistency of an extract, upon which pour very good spirt of
Wine; then stopping the Vessel with a Blindhead, lute it, and in the vapor of
Balneo put it to extract, digest and circulate until the spirit be tinged with
a high green, after this draw back again the half or two thirds of the spirit
with a slow heat, and you shall have an Elixir or essence of Emerald left,
which is a sovereign Remedy against Dysentery and all other kinds of flux of
the belly, red and white Courses of Women, Emrods and Hemorrhagy. It is of no
less use against all affections of the brain, and passions of the heart,
chiefly against swooning, weakness and palpitation; as also Melancholy,
Frenzy, Hebetation or weakening of the functions of the Spirits proceeding
from some long and perilous disease. For besides this Centrical and luminous
Sulphur whence all these noble virtues are derived, there remains besides in
this Elixir a certain portion of the volatile salt of Urine, which cleaves to
this Sulphur by the help of the spirit of Wine, framing together an essence
capable of all these virtues which we have attributed unto it. The Dosis is
from ij. drops unto x. in Liquor appropriated to the diseases of the Head,
Heart and lower Ventricle.

Of Crystal, and its Chemical preparation.
CRYSTAL is a transparent stone, having some likeness unto congealed water
reduced into lucid and transparent Ice; so that what the Greeks call Crystal,
we call it congealed. We shall not here insist long upon any debate to prove
that Crystal is nothing else but mere congealed water, since to discover the
untruth of that opinion, it will suffice to say, that Crystal does not melt,
but being calcined turns into Calx and Salt by the strength of the Spirit, by
which it has been coagulated of a very pure Earth and a little proportion of
water, which by help of the salt it had in it self, impregnared with the
petrifying Idea and ferment, has dissolved the said earth. Neither shall we
speak of that Hexagonal figure which the outside of the Crystal does ever
represent, but shall only say that the circular figure is the perfectest of all
others, and that Hexagonal comes the nearest to it: and that as the crystal is
one of the most pure and perfect substances, therefore also it comes nearer to
the spherical or circular figure. Crystal is found in Portugal, in the Island
of Cyprus, Germany, Hungary and Bohemia: it is not difficult to our Artist to
make his choice thereof, by reason of the transparency of the matter; it being
sufficient to choose that which is more compacted, purest and clearest; and to
prepare it a little better then usually, it must be made in a gross powder, and
heated to redness in a Crucible with a wind furnace, and when it is glowing
red, pour in radish water, or water of roots of Restabovis, or Restharrow,
somewhat sharpened or acuated with a little spirit of salt; and this ignition
and extinction continued three or four times, then grind it on a Porphyry to
implacable powder, with the same water that was used for the extinction of it;
ane thus being dried, keep it for use. Crystal has an astringent virtue,
therefore it is good for stopping of a Lask, and against Dysentery, against
Colic, Cholera Morbus, white and red c^^rses of women, Gonorrhea's, and V^en,
runnings, it increases milk in the breast, expells and dissolves all tartarous
preternatural substance in all parts of the body: above all, it dissolves
Tophus's and hardnesses in limbs proceeding from the gout. But its principal
use is to expel clammy humors and sand from the kidneys and bladder: the
dosis from j. to ij. in bolus, in some conserve of Eglantine, or Parsley-water,
if it be for nephritical passions, and so in other conserves or appropriated
waters, according to the prudence of the skilful and expert Physician, and the
diseases he takes in hand.

The Chemical Preparation of Crystal.
BEfore we come to the exact and perfect preparation of the Elixir and essence
of Crystal, we must premise an instantaneous operation, in respect of the
other, whereby our Artist may ever be in readiness to succor and assist those
that shall have need of this remedy, according to the order and prescription of
Physicians: To this end, take equal parts of Parsley, Nettle, radish water, as
also of Restabovis or Restharrow, acuated with spirit of Vitriol, or oil of
Sulphur per campanam; put all these waters in a well glased earthen pan, and
having brought to ignition in a wind furnace as many ounces of Crystal as
there are pints of these waters, let the Crystal be only grossly beaten, and
when it is glowing hot and red, extinguish it in the said waters, and so
reiterate this ignition and extinction ten or twelve times, that so the waters
may draw to themselves the best part of the Salt of Crystal: then filtrate the
liquor remaining, and add two ounces of white sugar candy to powder to each
pound, and thus shall you have a quick and easy remedy at hand, to administer
to those that shall find themselves persecuted with the pains of gravel. The
Dosis is from half an ounce to three in broths or decoction of roots of Onions,
or Restharrow, and Virga aurea or golden rod, made with equal parts of White
wine and water; and note, that the Patient must be in a half bath, when he
takes this remedy, and be prepared with a glyster of Turpentine taken and given
back before he enters into the Bath.

The Prepar^^^on of Salt of Crystal.
DRY the remainder of the foregoing Preparation, and grind it to a very subtle
powder upon a Porphyry, then flux it in a Crucible, equal weight of very pure
Saltpeter; and when it shall wholly flow, throw in it by degrees and small
parcels, the crystal powder well dried, and leave them so together by infusion
five hours; this done, dissolve that which remains in the Crucible with
distilled rainwater, to wash away the remaining Saltpeter; then dry gently
the Caly, and put it in a Mattress, pouring upon it very good distilled Vinegar,
three times cohobated upon burning Nettles; and continue this dissolution, till
the vinegar draws no more; then filtrate all the dissolutions, and evaporate
until they be dry, and you shall find in the bottom of the vessel a greyish
salt, which you must dissolve again in the same Menstruum, filtrate and
evaporate to purify it; and thus you may keep it, either dry as a salt, or
dissolve it in liquor in a cold Cellar, and you shall have that which is
improperly called the oil of Crystal. The dosis of the Salt is from iv. gr. to
xvj. in appropriated liquors, and with requisite precautions; and the dosis of
the liquor is somewhat stronger, by reason of the moistness which the salt has
attracted to it self, by which it is reduced to liquor. You must turn back to
what we have said of the Virtues of prepared Crystal, to judge of the Salt and
Liquor: Noting this nevertheless, that they are principally and more properly
used against Podagrical diseases, and specifical for kidney and bladder.

How the Elixir or Essence of Crystal is to be prepared.
OF the purest rock-chrystal, reduce it to a coarse powder, and place it in a
Crucible in a wind furnace, and being red hot, quench it a glassed pan full of
very good distilled vinegar, and reiterate this ignition and extinction three
times, or which is better, till the Crystal turns of it self into a calp as
small as sands, then dry this calp, and mix it with equal weight of flowers of
brimstone, and calcine them together in a Crucible till all the brimstone be
spent; this calcination reiterate three times, then mix the remainder in the
Crucible with its double weight of very fine Saltpeter, which must be set in a
fusion and flux, and therefore the Crucible very good for the space of xij.
hours: and if the Crucible should happen to crack, have an eye presently to
supply it with another, which therefore you must have ready at hand, rebaked,
and kept warm under the grate of your wind furnace, that it may out of hand be
trusted to a great fire without danger of breaking; the time being expired, and
the calcination over, grind the remaining matter on a porphyry stone, iv. at a
time, and add to it by little and little very good distilled vinegar to the
quantity of x. and thus continue till you have a pound of the grinded matter,
which put in a new large Mattress, and pour on it of new distilled vinegar pure
and strong; stop the vessel with its blind head, luted with quick lime and
beaten whites of eggs; then put to digest in B. M. the space of two natural
days with a moderate heat, and in the end you shall find the vinegar tinged
with a very high blood-red color; open the vessels, and filtrate the liquor,
and put it in a Cucurbite in B. M. to draw all the liquor till the grounds
remain dry; which take afterward, and put on a Matble-stone in a cold cellar,
or some other moist place to resolve them into a red liquor, which you are to
receive in a glass cup or dosis, cooperating still carefully, whether the
drops as they fall be red, because the essence of the crystal is only in them
which hold forth that color; for when the color alters, it is a manifest sign
that the fixed salt of the Saltpeter dissolves it self; wherefore you must
keep apart the first liquor, without much heeding the other: let this red
liquor settle during some days, and draw by inclination the pure part from the
impure, which preserve in a strong vial; and when you will use it, take j.
thereof, and mix it with another ounce of good white Wine in a Vial, and shake
it together; then let it settle the space of twenty four hours and there will
be yet a new defecation; pour the clear and red thereof not stirred in three
pound of white wine, to which this liquor will cleave without leaving or
separating any impurity; this mixture must be administered three times a day to
such as are tormented with the stone, gravel or nephritical Fits, and those
also which have already some disposition toward the gout, and find any
weakness or impediment in their limbs: but chiefly to those which are troubled
with Tophus's and Hardnesses, by reason of the Tartar coagulated toward the
extremities. The dosis is iv. or v. in a glass, the first time in the morning
fasting, the second two or three hours after twelve, and the third about
bedtime: The use of it must not be intermitted during the space of a
philosophical month, which is forty days, to perfect the recovery; and if
during this interval the belly does not perform its office, take no purging
medicine, but it will suffice if every other day the Patient takes a plain
Glyster of fresh stale, or urine without any addition to it, and the next day
j. of the liquor of of Sennertus in chicken or veal broth, where you have
boiled Parsley and Scorzonera roots. But if any by prevention only will take
some of essencified wine, a glass in the morning fasting will suffice for the
space of fifteen days, twice in the year; viz. viij. days before the two
Eqninoxes of March and September, and viij, days after: and in so so doing you
shall doubtless reap the fruit of your hopes.

Of Coral, and its Chemical Preparation.
WE put Coral and its peparation in the rank of stones, as much by reason of
the analogy of its stony substance, as because the operations which are made
upon it have a great resemblance with those performed upon stones, both in
respect of the manner of working, and the Menstruum's which Artists do use both
to dissolve and to extract it. The work we shall teach here upon Coral may be a
pattern for Pearls, all kind of stones proceeding from Animals, and from
shells: for it would but prove tedious to repeat so often the same thing, since
both the manner of working and Menstruum's are like in the one and the other.

We shall not lose time here in frivolous debates about the opinion of ancient
and modern Writers concerning the generation of Coral, to know whether it was
Plant-like, of a soft or hard branch before extracted out of the Sea, because
all this makes little for our purpose, it will suffice if we can but in a
guess say most probably what it is, delivering the differences and teaching
the choice thereof, and principally how it is best reduced into useful
Remedies.

Coral is nothing else but a strong shrub found growing upon stones in the
bottom of the Sea. There are several differences of it by reason of the variety
of colors, and the more or less compactedness and hardness of its substance;
but waving all other kinds, we purpose only to treat here of red Coral, which
must be of a close substance compacted, dry and hard, high in color, pure and
clean, such having more virtue, and possessing in it as in a compendium all the
efficacy and essential faculties, which the other kinds may be endowed with.
But here some body might move a question, Why red is preferable to all the
rest? to which the answer is not difficult, since this redness is an external
sign of the intrinsecal virtue of the mineral Sulphur, which is one of the
principles of Coral, and from which are derived the chief virtues of it being
of a Solar nature; which is the cause also that all Artists have at all times
sought with great study, care and diligence the way how to extract the true
Tincture of Coral, being one of the chief Remedies which Chemical Physic does
afford; for if any thinks to be capable of giving a reason for this redness by
the first and second qualities of substances, certainly he will fall short of
his purpose, since we can assign no better reason then the Will of the Almighty
Creator, who has imparted to things such colors as he has been pleased with,
and has so wisely implanted them in their seminaries, that their internal
archeus or natural and innate Architectonical spirit can never swerve from them
nor forsake them but by Error or uncapacity and unfitness of the matter, the
ordinary causes of generation of Monsters, which very unjustly are attributed
to an error and blemish of Nature.

The Chemical preparation of Coral.
AS Coral possesses many singular and noble virtues, so have our Artists in all
times sought the possible ways of opening its body with great variety of
Menstruum's, to extract from the center of this mixed the noble Remedies which
Nature has implanted in it. I can even say that there is no natural product
upon which so many, either vegetable or mineral Liquors have been tried; and to
prove the truth of this Assertion I shall only here rehearse some of the
principal, which are all manner of distilled Vinegars, Juices of Berberries,
Lemon, Quinces, Orange, spirit of dew and Honey, acid or sharp spirit of
Turpentine, the liquor or Birch-tree, the spirits of Guajacum, Box, Juniper,
tops of Alder and Service-tree; spirits of Tartar, Salt, Vitriol, Sulphur or
Brimstone, the tempered spirit of Wine acuated with those salts, the burning
spirit of Coral it self, the vinegar or acid Spirit of the same, and finally
the spirit and phlegm of Saturn; but above all, the most active and efficacious
is the spirit of Venus. whereof we have already spoken somewhere else, and will
give a description in the Section of Metals.

I have not thought it out of purpose to intimate the variety of these
Menstruum's, to make it appear more evidently how many operations have been
begun and finished upon Coral; and that when the Chemical Apothecary shall
consult any of the Authors that have treated or it, and finding so great a
difference shall doubt to which part he may best and more safely incline, he
may have a guide herein and be conducted through this Labyrinth by the thread of
Experience which we our selves have made thereof. Wherefore we will give
examples how to extract in the best manner the salt of Coral and false
Magistery; then how to make the true which ought to be dissoluble; and in the
third place we will give the method of extracting the Tincture thereof, and
finally how the true Syrup is to be made, and that he may have a true and full
Idea of the virtues of Coral, and affix it to one of these four Remedies,
according to their corporeity, spirituality and their Dosis. We have thought
fit to prefix the general and particular virtues, which both Ancient and Modern
Writers have attributed to Coral, which are these: The general virtues are to
be astringent, cool and dry, strengthen and corroborate the heart, ventricle,
liver, and purify the mass of the blood, whence it is given against the
Plague, venoms and malignant Fevers. It chears up the internal senses, as also
the external; stops all kind of Fluxes of the Belly, Womb and privy parts.
Paracelsus says, That Coral of a high color worn about the body as a
preservative, frees the party from fear of Witchcraft, Incantation, Poison,
Epilepsie, Melancholy, danger of evil Spirits, or touch of Thunder.

How to prepare rightly the salt of Coral.
TAke as much well chosen red Coral as you will, dry, hard, and of a
high-colored red; beat it in a brazen Mortar well cleansed with its Pestle to
a course powder, and thereof put iiij. in a Mattress, and gently pour upon
strong and pure distilled Vinegar: I say gently and by degrees, because if it
were poured too much at a time, there would immediately arise a sudden
ebullition by the action of the Dissolvent upon the dissoluble Body, and so
part of the dissolution should run danger to be cast away; therefore must you
act with prudence and patience until the violent action of the Spirit be
allayed, then may you continue boldly your pouring of the Vinegar all at once
to the height of four fingers: and having placed your Mattress in ashes or sand,
stir it often until the Vinegar shows no more action or is grown altogether
insipid, which is then a clear testimony that all its sharpness is lost by the
action it has upon the substance of the Coral; after this draw by inclination
this Spirit so impregnated of the Coralline salt, and pour on fresh to continue
your extraction: and thus digest, extract, and draw off until no more of the
dissoluble substance of the Coral be left; then filtrate all the dissolutions
being cold, because if you did it whilst they be warm, the heat would make some
small terrestrial corpuscles to penetrate through the Filtre, which would
hinder the purity and Dissolubility of the salt; all these dissolutions being
filtrated, put them in a Cucurbite in Sand, and draw off the moistness with a
moderate heat until a white Ring appears about the Vessel: then cease the fire,
for this is a sign that the Liquor is too much laden; touch not the Vessel
till all be cold, because it would hinder the chrystallization of the salt
which makes it more easy to dissolve and more pleasant to sight; the remaining
Liquor separate by inclination to continue the evaporation of it in a Dish till
in the bottom appears a dry salt, but it will never be so fine nor so good as
the first. But it may be objected, that the evaporation of the Menstruum could
sooner be performed in Dishes or an earthen Pan then in a Cucurbite covered
with its Still-head; which I grant, but deny that it could be so cleanly done:
for it would be impossible for the Artist to hinder the dust of the coals which
must continually be stirred in a Laboratory from spoiling and defiling the
Salt; and above all things cleanliness in Chemical operations is to be studied.
There is nevertheless another Chemical Philosophical Reason which may oblige
him to draw off the Menstruum in a Blindhead covered with its Still, viz. That
he may know by this way when the spirit of Vinegar shall be altogether changed,
and that which drops down becomes altogether insipid and as void of salt as
Rainwater; moreover, this water which he draws off is not useless, since it
is much better then many other distilled Waters to make Juleps thereof in
burning Fevers: For in this Water remains hidden a Spirit imperceptible to the
taste, but very subtle and capable of doing much good to sick persons:
secondly, the salt of Coral will be finer and purer, and likewise of more
virtue, because by this slow distillation it gets more subtility and
refinednesse, which becomes more capable of producing its efficacy.

Here we must resolve a difficulty of great importance; which is, that almost
all the Authors which have treated of the Practice of Chemistry do prescribe,
that after the salt of Coral and all others have been prepared and drawn with
distilled Vinegar, they should be dulcorated by several dissolutions and
evaporations, least the sharpness remaining in those Salts be hurtful and of
prejudice to the bodies of sick Patients, wherein to speak truth, they are much
deceived and are to be blamed: for that salt which they pretend to take away is
absolutely necessary; and I am bold to say, that even in case they could remove
and wash it off by this way which they propound, that, what should remain,
would absolutely be useless, not to say hurtful. For as Vinegar is but a fixed
Wine by the predominancy of a Tartarous acid Salt over the sulphurous volatile
spirit of the Wine, we must acknowledge that it is nothing else but a liquid
Tartar, yet involved in many impurities: but the Vinegar being distilled, it
turns to a liquid Tartar more refined and more subtiliated, which can have no
more of danger in it then the Cremor Tartari, unless it were by reason of its
phlegm. Now after this Spirit has dissolved the Coral, and that the Artist
draws off this phlegm, the subtle Tartar of the fixed Wine joins and
incorporates with the Coral, and frames that which is called Salt of Coral,
whose only virtue proceeds from the union of this volatiliz'd Tartar joined
with the Coral, because it is this Salt which conveys the Coral into the last
digestions of the body, and drives away the sensible and insensible
transpiration, and by Urines all the peccant humors and impurities against
Nature harboring in the Mass of the blood. But for a clearer proof we will
set this truth before your eyes in the immediately following Preparation.

How to make the false Magistery of Coral.
YOU must dissolve the Coral in distilled Vinegar, in the same manner as we
have prescribed for the extraction of the Salt, and filtrate the dissolution,
out of which draw back again the two third parts of the menstruum by
distillation, and the Vessels being cooled, set the remaining liquor in a Glass
or white earthen dish, and pour upon drop by drop dissolved salt of Tartar,
which improperly is called Oleum per deliquium; and you shall find a white
coagulation, which is nothing else but the earthly and stony substance of the
Coral returned to a body which leaves and forsakes its dissolvent, which is
this sharp salt of Vinegar. Now all the lixivial salts which are made by
Calcination do kill the sharp ones, which causes the dissolvent to quit the
Body which it had dissolved, and so it is restored to its self again and
precipitated wanting that subtle Salt which did render it visible in the
Liquor; after this pour what swims above this white substance, and put clear
water upon to edulcorate it, and so continue doing till the water comes off as
tasteless and insipid as when it was poured on; then dry gently this white
substance, and you shall have that which is pretended to be Magistery of Coral,
which is (to say the truth) nothing else but a fixed and astringent earth, much
worse and less safe then plain Coral prepared, or purely reduced to a very
subtle powder. For they that shall say to commend this Magistery that it
conduces to laskes of the belly, and strengthens the weak and debilitated
stomach, and consequently ought not to be prescribed out of the Rank and
Commerce of useful Remedies, must know, that the efficient cause of Lasks or
Fluxes and loosnesses of the belly, and debility of stomach, is for the most
part nothing else but a harsh serosity sharp and full of malignity, which
causes an ill colliquation not only of nutriment, but also of the very
substance of the parts: and the powder of Coral shall be capable sooner to
^emedy that then the pretended Magistery, because this acid against Nature
shall act upon and destroy it, as by experience it is ^een, that Coral sweetens
Vinegar, and that so the cause being re^oved the effect must cease. But it will
be much better to make use of the salt of Coral, wheresoever there shall be
occasion of using a Remedy, because that besides it shall correct this
malignant acidity, it will expel and evacuate by Sweats and Urines those
substances which have been altered and colliquated, and consequently that
effect which is intended by the Physician shall never fail to come to pass.
But this pretended Magistery can never be well used in such a case, because it
is fixed, and the distilled Vinegar, or even corrosive Spirits can have no
action upon it: by which it appears that it is unsufficient and incapable to
destroy or alter that sharpness agarnst Nature, by which the looseness of the
belly and relaxation or weakness of stomach is wrought, and therefore it is
altogether unprofitable in the use of Physic. But it will perhaps be urged
again, that it may also be precipitated without spirit of Vitriol with its own
oil, or oil of Sulphur, or spirit of Salt, and that it will thus be mended
and exalted, which we deny again; for, were there any good to be expected from
these Magisteries, it would be from that which is precipitated with liquor of
rather then with these Spirits, because it would yet be more fixed then the
other, and so consequently less capable of action. But we need not speak any
more of this, since Paracelsus in his sixth Book of his Archidoxa's says, That
a true Magistery must almost in an instant penetrate our whole body by the
quickness and subtility of its parts: by which it may manifestly appear to be
something else then these fixed Earths incapable of all action, much less of
penetration, being destitute of all manner of salt and spirit, from the
activity whereof all actions and powers are depending. And this shall suffice
upon this Subjectr let us come to the true manner of preparing a Magistery
answerable to its name, that is to say, a Magisterial and principal Remedy.

How to prepare the true Magistery of Coral.
WE shall not use in this operation a simple distilled Vinegar, neither the
body of any Salt to open and penetrate the body of the Coral, without
imbezlingits power and seminal Faculties: contrariwise we shall preserve them
and rather increase by the help of a volatile Spirit, penetrating, active, and
not working as Corrosives which cause indeed a dissolution of substances, but
alter and destroy the virtues thereof; it is that wonderful Spirit of we make
use of to prepare a true penetrative and dissoluble Magistery; for this true
Philosophical Vinegar shall reduce the Coral as it were to its first Being, or
to a spermatick Juice, without altering nevertheless the goodness of its
principiant Sulphur, because this noble Dissolvent is drawn off again with the
same taste, virtue and dissolutive Faculty which it had before its action upon
Coral, and may be afterward yet employed for the like operation or any other
whatsoever, which is none of the least Mysteries of Art and Nature; for the
discovery of which we are beholding to that wonderful German Physician
Zwelferus yet living, who together with the invention of this secret, has
imparted us the manner how to use it.

To attain then to the Art of making a perfect Magistery; Choose iiij. of the
best red Coral you can meet with and reduce it to powder, which being put in a
large and Capacious Mattress, pour upon softly and by degrees for fear of
violent ebullitions xx. of well rectified spirit of; and all its action being
ceased and allayed, put the Mattress to digest in a vaporous Bath the space of a
Natural day; which being over, filtrate all the Liquor, and you shall find all
the Coral to be dissolved, and that the residency remaining in the Filter is
nothing else but a fat and muddy earth, which contains the impurities and feces
of Coral; put the Filtration in a Cucurbite in B. M. cover it with its Head,
and draw off again your Spirit with so proportionate a heat that the drops may
but follow one another: and thus continue till the matter remains in the bottom
of the Vessel half dry; then cease the fire and put up the Spirit in a Vial for
it is as good as before. After this wash what is remaining in the Filter with
viij. of Spanish Scorzonera water, mixed with as much of second Cinnamon water;
for some part of the Magistery yet remaining behind will dissolve in these
Waters; filtrate them and dissolve the substance remaining in the Cucurbite;
and if this proportion of water should not suffice, take lb ph. more to perfect
the Solution, which filtrate very cleanly, and put all the filtrations in a
Cucurbite, then cover it and place in B. M. drawing off all the waters to a dry
bottom, so shall you have a Cephalic and Cordial Water, excellent against
Epilepsies and Convulsions both of young and old; and in the bottom of your
Vessel shall you have a true Magistery, melting presently, and suddenly in the
mouth and in all manner of Liquors, endowed with almost innumerable virtues.
The Dosis must be from v. gr. to xx. in Broths, Wine, or the very water
extracted from it. It is one of the most sovereign of Cordials, and a Specific
against Melancholy and Madness; it is likewise an excellent Remedy against
Scurvy, for it cleanses all the mass of the blood by all the several natural
emunctories, and almost insensibly; finally it is a true preservative against
malignant Diseases, because it strengthens so wonderfully the Ventricle that it
hinders totally their seminary; and as the Venerean Pox has its only original
from and its seat in the corruption of the blood, which by progress of time
infects all the other parts, by reason of the venenosity which serosities
convey with that universal Aliment; so there is nothing that will better either
stop or hinder it then this noble and admirable Magistery, because it corrects
or evacuates sensibly or insensibly whatsoever does foment or entertains
corruption in the mass of the blood.

Of the Tincture of Coral.
THere is nothing so common in the Mouths and Writings of Chemical Artists as
Tincture of Coral, and scarce any that has meddled with the Art, but pretends
to have the surest process and way of making it, and moreover to have wrought
miracles therewith; but there is a vast difference between words and deeds: for
it is easy to speak boastingly, but hard to prove this truth by reality. Now
as all Authors, but chiefly Paracelsus, do attribute to this Remedy
extraordinary Virtues, so is it very fitting to be prepared against the
Delusions and surprisal of those who pretend to the Art of making of it, and
who keep it as a particular knowledge and select to themselves, being not
willing to impart so much as the manner of their preparation and extraction,
much less the matter out of which they take their Menstruum, whereof they make
use in the drawing of this Tincture. The truth is, it is not without grounds we
may suspect their capacity; for they that boast themselves with the knowledge
of making this Tincture, are oftentimes altogether ignorant what Tincture is,
or what Menstruum. Let then all those that will atrain to the truth of it know,
that the greatest part of these pretended Tinctures, are nothing else but
dissolutions of the body of Coral if it be whole and without previous
Calcination; or the only exaltation and rubification of the Menstruum employed
about the Coral calcined by a simple Reverberation, or with addition of some
salts; for calcinated and Reverberated salts communicate themselves to the
Liquors used for Extraction, and so do exalt and color with red the volatile
salt of the Menstruum, by which the most part of those which hitherto have
believed to have made the true Tincture of Coral are deceived; But the truth is
easily discovered by precipitating or evaporating of the same; for by these two
actions the salt or body of the Coral is discovered, which was before invisibly
dispersed through the Menstruum. Now the Tincture of Coral must be free from
all these mistakes; it must be pure, it must be simple, not loaded with any
other substance or body, because the internal sulphurs of things have a great
irradiation and large extent in their virtue, but scarce are comprehensible and
brought under the senses by their corporeity. Moreover, the first or second
Menstruum's which are employed, must not be capable of themselves to contract
any color, though long kept in digestion without addition of any other
mixture. Our Artist being sure and well resolved in all these particulars, if
with these precautions he draws any Tincture from Coral, he may be very
confident it is true, and that it shall produce those effects which Authors do
attribute unto it. I can give no better nor more Philosophical description
thereof then that which follows.

True process of the Tincture of Coral.
TO arrive to the perfection of so noble a Medicine time and matter must not be
spared, and moreover it must not be undertook by a Novice in Chemistry, nor
thought to be performed by him at the first brunt; for he must be capable of
Distilling, Digesting, Cohobating, Rectifying, Extracting, and all with
Judgment and proportion. Wherefore we will begin by the Preparation of
necessary Menstruum's for the first and second Extraction, and the Chemical
Artist must well consider these two Menstruum's, for they are not without a
Mystery.

The first Menstruum.
lb iiij. of Tartar of Montpellier well cleansed and purified, as we have
intimated in the preparation of Tartar; reduce it to a subtle powder, and mix
exactly with lb j. of green Vitriol of Martial nature: put this mixture in a
large and capacious Mattress, and pour upon lb iij. of phlegm of Vitriol
impregnated with its volatile sulphurous Spirit; this done, stop the Vessel
with its Blindhead exactly fitted and luted, and put it in digestion in cut or
shred straw in a vaporous Bath to a moderate heat during the space of seven
days; that being ended, have a Cucurbite well luted up to the middle with a
good Lute capable of resisting the fire, and well dried, which accommodate in a
Reverberatory Furnace, leaving four Registers in the corners of the Furnace for
the regulating of the fire; pour in this Cucurbite what has been digested, and
immediately cover it with its Limbeck-head or Still, luted as is convenient, and
fit to it a Recipient with the joints also luted: then give it a gradual fire
gentle and moderate until the drops begin to follow, then entertain the fire
in that degree until the Still drops no more, at which sign increase the fire
by degrees until all the vapors be over, and the Still-head begins of it self
to grow clear, then cease the fire and let all cool. Separate from the
distilled Liquor the oil of Tartar by filtration, and rectify the Spirit on
ashes to a dry bottom, and so shall you have the first Menstruum to extract
Corals without any previous Calcination. But before we proceed further, we must
give to our Artist warning not to lose the matter remaining in the bottom of
the Cucurbite after the first distillation: contrariwise he must dissolve it in
distilled Rainwater, he must filtrate and evaporate it slowly to a dry bottom,
and he shall have a vitriolate Tartar not to be despised: for it is a great
opener and disopilative for all the obstructions of the Ventricle. The Dosis
from iv. gr. to ss. in Broths, white Wine, or some decoction of Scolopendra or
Spleenwort and Chichory or Parfly Roots.

The second Menstruum.
THis Menstruum is ordinarily called Aqua temperata, temperate Water, as also
the sweet or dulcified spirit of Salt: for it is made of equal parts of very
pure Alkoholiz'd spirit of Wine and spirit of Salt very well dephlegmated,
which you must mix together by degrees; then distill and bring over the Helm in
ashes four or five times, or what is yet better, until they be inseparably
conjoined and united together by reiterated distillation: this being performed,
you shall have a very good preservative and curative of the Plague and all
contagious diseases, because it hinders all manner of corruption, preserves the
natural parts in their equal temper and necessary vigor; this also is the
Menstruum which shall be used to keep in it self the internal sulphur of Coral,
which the first Menstruum did yet hide, or the shadow of the Body.

To make the Tincture of Coral thus.
As much of the fairest and reddest Coral you can meet with, and reduce it
cleanly to a very subtle powder, which put in a Mattress and pour upon of the
first Menstruum about j. or ij. at once, stirring it nimbly, then begin again
to pour fresh Menstruum, and stir until your matter be covered with it the
height of four inches; stop your Vessel with a Blindhead, and put to digest in
a vaporous Bath in shred straw during the space of three weeks, with a heat a
little more then lukewarm, after this open the Vessels, draw off the red
Tincture by inclination, and keep in a Vial; then reaffund new Menstruum upon
the remaining body of the Coral, and continue the digestion and extraction
until the Menstruum takes no more of the color: then join all the Tinctures
and filtrate them, and having put them in a Cucurbite on sand draw off the
liquor to a dry bottom in a moderate heat, and you shall find in the bottom of
the Glass a red powder, which hides in its center the internal sulphur of the
Coral, which constitutes its color and virtue: put this powder in a
circulatory Vessel called a Pelican, and pour upon it of the second Menstruum
called temperate water the height of vj. fingers; lute exactly the upper
orifice of the Vessel; after you have stopped it with a Glass-stople, place it in
Balneo and keep in digestion during the space of one Philosophical Month, and
this sweet and pleasant Menstruum will draw to its self this wonderful Sulphur,
and take a very pleasant color. This done, cease the fire, open the vessel and
filtrate the Tincture, to separate the feculency and sediment which remains in
the bottom of the Pelican; put then the filtration in a Cucurbite, and draw off
the two thirds or half of the Menstruum, and keep choicely the remainder, as
one of the principal Remedies of a Spagyrical shop. Let not our Artist presume
to cut off any part, or shorten the space of forty days, though he perceives
his Menstruum to be tincted: for the circulation must perform the extraction,
exaltation and union, which operations do require no less time; for the
Chemical Apothecary which desires to be successful in his work, ought to follow
the motion of Nature which works nothing but slowly, and must ever have in his
remembrance the saying of our great Master Paracelsus, that omnis praecipitatio
a Diabolo; and that he that does well, has ever done soon enough.

But before we prescribe the Dosis and virtues of this Tincture, we must
satisfy Men's minds, that it is not only good in opinion and fancy, but in
reality. To this end let us make a judicious reflection both upon the matter
and the Menstruum's. There is no body but knows and confesses that Coral has
many singular noble virtues, so that both ancient and modern Authors have all
unanimously acknowledged, that this virtue resided in its redness, and have all
stroven to find out some liquor analogous to our Nature wherewith to extract
it. This is plain in our process; for the Ingredients we employ for the
distillation of the first Menstruum, are good and harmless each of them
asunder; but besides there is a mystical and philosophical union made of them
by the distillation and digestion that has been previous, so that the
sharpness of the Vitriol has been moderated and sweetened by the Tartar, and
by their action and reaction each upon the other, and thus of this match does
result a Spirit friendly to Nature and free from corrosiveness, which may take
away all fear that it might have altered the seminal principles of Coral:
contrariwise, it only has freed them from the commerce of the matter whereby
they were fettered, and rather exalted them to a perfection then debased their
worth. As for the second Menstruum, I believe there is no body will take upon
him to say ought against it, since the spirit of Wine and that of Salt are two
real conservative Balsom's, not only of living bodies but even of dead ones,
while they are yet asunder: But who shall not admire the wonderful secrets of
Art and Nature, capable to make an union of the subtilest and most volatile of
all Spirits, with one of the most fix, and thereof make a neutral and middle
compound, which has nothing left either of the taste, or any other quality of
the two taken asunder! so that I conclude that this Tincture cannot be but one
of the most excellent Remedies which Chemistry can afford, and therefore has
it this prerogative to be one of the first and principal of all Remedies to
purify the mass of the blood from all the impurities by which it may be
tainted: either Leprosy, Venerean Pox, or Scorbute; it strengthens the Heart,
chears the Senses, drives away Melancholy, hinders sad Dreams, stops
Hemorrhagies, allayes inward pains, strengthens the Stomach, appeases the
irritation of the Mother, corrects ^oding vapors of the Spleen, removes
obstructions of the Liver, Mesentery and Pancreas or sweet bread, provokes and
stops monthly Courses, purges and cleanses the Kidneys and Bladder, and
strengthens the Brain and all the functions of the Body and Mind: briefly, I
should never have done to rehearse here all what ancient and modern Writers
have said in praise of this Tincture; and to speak ingenuously, nothing but
great matters can be expected from all the Remedies which are made by volatile
Spirits animated with the strength and virtue of internal Sulphurs of things,
and chiefly those that are of a Solar Nature, because these noble Medicines do
in an instant as the light penetrate into our last digestions, and as they go
imprint in all the parts the stamp and Character and the Idea of their
Balsamic virtue, which causes them to remove and drive away all the impurities
which the vice of digestions had left in them. This Tincture may be used by the
way of a preservative morning and evening in old Wine, or Hydromel or meade old
and well digested in Broth, or some proper water to the end which is intended.
The Dosis from j. drop to iiij. and for the cure of Diseases, it must be given
to the sick in ordinary or Chronical Diseases from j. drop to x. in Menstruum
analogical and proportionate to the Disease, and that during the space of forty
days, because that interval is sufficient to renew and repair the whole Body
in the most obstinate Diseases, and so proportionally under that time according
to the exigency of the distemper and malady; therefore we must leave it to the
judgment of the Physician; but because all are not capable of preparing this
Remedy, and knowing the Genius of our Nation to be too impatient to allow
themselves the requisite time whereby they may possess the Tinctures and
Arcana's: I have thought it fitting to join and teach here the manner of
preparing a Syrup of Coral, by a quick and easy way, and which may be made use
of instead of this Tincture; but with much difference of virtue; and I know not
whether Apothecaries will take the pains and be at the necessary charge of the
confection of this Syrup, though to speak truth, it may prove the best piece of
their furniture; yet I have some hopes that those that are careful and do
intend the good and advantage of their Neighbor, and discharge honestly the
trust of their employment, shall furnish themselves with the one and the other
of these two Remedies.

To prepare the true Syrup of Coral.
THis Syrup is commonly used to strengthen the vital and animal faculties, and
as it is its chief scope, so will we give a description thereof which will in
its contents follow the intention of the Physician; nevertheless some other
liquor may be substituted, when the Physician intends to specify and render it
more particular to some proper use, as Cinnamon in water, juice of Pomegranate
and Quinces, juice of Melissa or Balm and Cochlearia or Scurvy Grass, and so
of many others according to the Indication which shall be taken by the Artist;
this nevertheless may be used in the room of all the others, because as it
generally does strengthen Nature and its functions, so is it capable to correct
all the particular vices thereof.

To this end take some of the uppermost rind of Lemmon and Orange ana iij.
shred them very small and put in a Cucurbite, pour upon it lb j. s. very good
Spanish Wine or some other generous Wine; put in the nose of the Still a knot
of ij. of grains of Kermes wrapped in silk Tiffany, with j. of the best Saffron,
ph. of the best Ambergreece in powder exactly mixed with the other two bodies,
cover your Cucurbite with a Still head, and having luted exactly the joints
thereof, as also the Recipient which you shall fit thereunto, place it in Sand
and give fire by degrees and very slowly, until you have extracted about xij.
or xv.. of Spirit. Then take ij. of dissoluble Magistery of Coral, and dissolve
it in x. of this distilled Spirit, adding lb j. of very fine Sugar reduced to
an impalpable powder, stir all together and place it in a circulatory Vessel
well lu^ed to the slow heat of a vaporous Bath, as long as there shall be need
to perfect the dissolution: then let the Vessel cool and put the Syrup in a
well stopped Vial, and you shall have a sovereign Remedy against all weaknesses
of stomach, all diseases of the spleen, and above all a great chearer of the
Heart and Brain. To know the noble uses of this Syrup, and wherein it may be
employed with success, you must recall to mind what we have said concerning the
virtues attributed to Coral, and its Salt, true Magistery and Tincture. The
Dosis shall be from j. to j. either alone or in some convenient liquor. We
shall deliver here no other Example for working upon Pearls then this we have
done upon Coral; For an Artist be he never so little skilful, cannot but know
the difference which must be made in working upon that precious and costly
matter; and if he needs some other preparation, let him consult with those who
have written about it more punctually.

Of the Lapis Judaicus, and its Chemical preparation.
THe Lapis Judaicus is of the form, shape and bigness of an Olive, soft and
easy to crumble, it is streakt with lines or rays equally distant one from
the other as if they had been framed with a turn, it is of a white ash color;
it is called Lapis Judaicus, because found in Judea; there is some also found
in Silesia in Germany. Some will make it distinguishable into male and female,
and appoint the female to be used for the Bladder, the male for the Kidneys,
but all that is nothing else but a mere Chimera: wherefore we will lose no time
upon this speculation, to bestow it the better upon some useful matter, viz.
the preparation thereof which will be a pattern and model for preparing also
the Linx-stone and Spunges. Take then as much of Lapis Judaicus as you please,
and reduce it to a gross powder, and mix with equal weight of beaten sulphur or
Brimstone, then put all in an earthen pot not glazed or in a Crucible, and
calcine it by degrees with a circular fire until the Brimstone takes fire and
be fully consumed, then put the calcined matter in a Mattress and pour upon
spirit of vinegar of Honey four inches high, then put it to dissolve and digest
in ashes, slacking often the Vessel, and when the Menstruum shall be well
colored draw it out by inclination and pour fresh upon it, reiterating this
process three times, that the salt contained in the matter may be all
extracted, then filtrate the dissolutions, putting them in a Cucurbite, and
evaporate slowly in sand to a dry bottom, and thus shall you have the salt of
the Lapis Judaicus, which afterward you must purify by several reiterated
dissolutions, filtrations, evaporations and coagulations until it be pure and
clean: But note, that if you evacuate the Menstruum with whom you make your
purification with a little of spirit of Salt, your work will proceed more
speedily, and the salt shall be more efficacious and of a better taste; this
salt may be kept for twenty uses either dry or dissolved, and this dissolution
is properly that which they call the oil of Lapis Judaicus, in case it be given
dry in Broths, in white Wine, or some water or diuretical Decoctions. The Dosis
must be from iiij. gr. to xij. and if the liquor be given dissolved in the same
Menstruums in a double proportion, by reason of the moistness drawn from the
salt (which increases the weight) the virtue of the Salt and Liquor is to
remove all difficulties of Urin, proceeding of obstructions caused by
tarrarous, slimy, muscilagineous, sandy and stony matters which are found in
the Kidneys, Ureteries or Bladder. These Remedies also drive away the gravel
and small stones from all other places where they use to grow for the most part.

Of Talk and its Chemical Preparation.
THere are many who set no difference between the specular or shining stone
which the ancients did call Selenite, or Lunary and Talk, but they mistake very
much: for it is a stone differing from the other by its inclination to
friability, its green color and fixednesse. There are two kinds of Talk, the
white viz. and the colored: the white differs again in its kind; for there is
the Venetian Talk which is greenish and breaks in thin scales, being esteemed
the best and the purest. There is also the Moscovian, not so much valued as
that which comes from Venice, but it has not a despicable quality, though it
seems something less pure. The second kind of Talk is colored and is red and
black, wherereof Paracelsus makes mention in his Chronicles of Carinthia;
Chemical Authors use sometimes in an aenigmatical Language to call Talk the
Star of the Earth.

We shall give an Example of such operations as may be made upon a colored and
uncoloured Talk, that we may not be reproached, the neglect and passing by of a
stone, the preparation whereof has tormented so much and so violently torments
yet every day, the brain of those which labor in the extraction of its oil,
which has ever been the Idol of the most famous Courtesans, for the help they
pretend to receive from it in the preservation and increase of their beauty. I
am nevertheless rather of their mind who believe that the oil of Talk of
ancient Philosophers is an operation upon Luna or silver; or even the great
work in white, which possesses the highest luster of white that it is possible
to see in any substance, and must infallibly be capable of performing that
which is hoped from this Oil of Talk so much cried up hitherto.

The principal operation made upon Talk is the calcination of it; for this
stone being of extraordinary fixedness, it must be the scope of our Artist to
open it by this first preparation: and those that have kept pretty big lumps of
Venetian Talk six entire weeks in a Glasse-house fire, without finding any
alteration in its weight, color or aptness to crumble, are capable to deter
and astonish any that takes in hand this work, to reduce it in some unctuous
matter, and make that noble white thereof which Ladies do with so much
curiosity and at so great charges seek for; and as there is none of them which
call themselves Chym^sts, and pretend any thing to the knowledge of this noble
Art, who does not boast to have some secret Receipt thereupon; we shall
nevertheless ingeniously confess, that this matter is too fixed to pretend any
liquid substance from it, unless it be by the help of some salts capable to
penetrate this stone: for I find no experience or Reason that can convince me
to the contrary, after I have tried the invincible fixedness of the true Talk,
whenever I went about to calcinate it without any addition. But making use of
some Salts and Spirits, I do not deny but that a good Losmetick may be made to
change and whiten the skin: But it cannot be avoided that the sulphur of this
stone should ever keep with it self some portion of the fatness of the salt or
Saline spirit which returns to a Body. Therefore great discretion and heed
ought to be had in making use of these things, lest the skin be worn out and
ulcerated, instead of smoothing and rendering it fair, delicate and white.

The Chemical preparation of Venetian Talk.
TAke of true Venetian Talk, pure, clean, and of a greenish color and reduce
lb ph. in very subtle powder in an iron Mortar, made almost glowing hot in a
good fire, as also the end of the Pestle to be used, or which is yet the best
way; file it with a soft File into a very subtle and small powder; mix
diligently this lb ss. of Talk in powder with lb j. of very white Tartar and
very dry, then put this mixture in a great Crucible in a Wind-furnace, and
calcine it with a fire of the last and utmost degree during the space of xij.
or xvj. hours, which time expired, beat the mass to powder in a hot glowing
Mortar, rhen put the powder in a gray or white earthen pan in a Cellar, to
convert the salt of Tartar into Liquor, and let it run in a small Dish by the
mouth of the pan: all the salt being separated, dry the remaining substance,
and with four times as much weight of very pure Saltpeter put the whole in a
new strong Crucible able to bear the violence of the fire; put this Crucible in
a wind-Furnace, and give it fire by degrees until you bring it to the highest
pitch, and your Talk will melt into a very white and almost transparent Mass.
This Mass put in a cool and moist place, and it will dissolve in time into an
unctuous and glutinous liquor. Which Liquor is to be used for taking away and
blotting out of all spots, roughness and scurf and excrescences of the face and
skin, in the shoulders, breast, arms and hands; but this Liquor must be
dexterously and discreetly applied with a Pincel and very superficially; and
above all care must be taken that it should not lie long upon the part, which
must immediately be washed with water of white Lillies, Bean-flowers, or
Nenuphar flowers water turned white with some few drops of Tincture of Benjuin.

But when you will use this unctuous Liquor without any fear of danger, put
some part in a Mattress and pour upon alkoholized spirit of Wine, and digest
together in a heat of Horse-dung or vaporous Balneo during the space of three
weeks, then draw off the spirit by distillation in the same Bath, and cohobate
at least twenty times, adding every time iiij. of new spirit of Wine; and so
shall you kill all the corrosiveness which was remaining in the Liquor, and
have a substance fitter then any other whatsoever to clear and whiten the skin,
provided that the hands and face or other parts be well and duly cleansed
before with some good past, before you make any application of the Liquor.

To prepare a cream of Talk, of lesser trouble and work then the forementioned.
TAke q. v. of Talk reduced into a very subtle powder, which sprinkle two or
three times with some excellent distilled Vinegar in a Glass Dish, and that
until it be reduced to a kind of past, which stir with a Glass spatula two or
three hours, increase the Vinegar gently by degrees until you have poured
enough for the Talk to swim in it boiling, then put the Dish in sand, and give
it a gradual fire until the matter boyls, and insensibly will raise on the top
thereof a fat scum, which you must very carefully gather with a Scimmer, and
thus continue till no more will rise: after this evaporate gently the
superfluous moistness of the Vinegar, and keep the remainder for use, as being
one of the best Cosmeticks of the world. And if you will use it to wash the
face or other parts, dissolve and mix some part thereof with phlegm of spirit
of Salt, and immediately apply a Pomander or Ointment made with marrow of sheeps
Trotters, Sperma ceti. Virgin wax, and a little Pork suet well washed; in this
Pomander mix some of the cream of Talk, and a few Benjuin flowers, and the
clearness, whiteness and pureness of the part anointed therewith shall last
above a fortnight.

The Chemical preparation of red Talk.
IT is not sufficient to have showed some kind of preparation upon the white
Talk, which conduces only for outward beautifying, but we will also deliver the
manner of making a good inward Remedy with red Talk. For as this stone has a
mineral sulphur in its center which participates of the Solar Nature, so must
we work its extraction by the salts which are capable to open the bodies and
penetrate them, to seek therein the hidden and as it were imprisoned virtue
thereof.

To this end, iiij. of red Talk, and reduce it to a subtle powder in a red hot
Mortar, mixing this powder with as much well prepared salt of Tartar according
to Sennertus prescription, as we have taught heretofore; put this mixture in a
Crucible, and calcine it together in a wind-Furnace during the space of twelve
hours, which done, reduce to powder in a hot Mortar the matter you shall find
in the Crucible, and put this matter in a Mattress, pouring upon it tartarized
spirit of Wine four fingers high; digest them together in the vaporous Bath,
until the spirit has got a high and red Tincture, then draw it off by
inclination, and pour on new spirit. Thus continuing to digest and extract
until the spirit takes no more color, then filtrate all the Tinctures and put
in a Cucurbite, to draw off the three parts of the spirit in a slow heat of
Balneo, and so shall you have a Tincture inwardly loaded with the internal
sulphur of red Talk, which is a preservative and curative Remedy of the Plague
and of all other malignant Diseases; this Tincture is given from iij. drops to
xij. in Wine or Broth for preservative, and if for curative Remedy it be
administered to sick persons, the Dosis may be increased of a just half
proportion, and given in small Centaury, Scordium, Germander water: It is a
sovereign Cordial, a Cephalic and wonderful Stomachick, which leaves no
impurity in the ultimate digestions, but drives it away by insensible
transpiration, by Urine, or by Sweat.

Of the Calk or Stare-lime-stone, and its Chemical Preparation.
THE vulgar preparation of Quicklime made by violent calcination of ordinary
Quarry-stones, or great Flintstones, is so common and known by all persons, by
the frequent and necessary use of it in buildings, that it would be superfluous
for us to say any thing thereof. It suffices us to say by the by, that it has
very little use in Pharmacy, but in some other preparations besides and after
calcination: for Quicklime has no other virtue outwardly applied, then to
discover an ingenuous Caustic and corrosive nature: but being prepared as we
shall teach hereafter, it becomes capable of supplying Remedies altogether
unknown to the vulgar, both inwardly and outwardly applied.

How the water of quick and prepared Lime is to be made.
lb iiij. of good and well calcined Quicklime, in whole lumps as much as is
possible, such being less offended by the outward impression of the air and
water, and whole in its virtue; put it in a great Basin and pour upon it Rain
or River water half a foot high; let it be softly dissolved, and agitate it
from time to time with a wooden Spatula or Slice, and the water being well
loaded and impregnated with the salt of the Lime, filtrate it and keep it for
use. And thus reiterate dissolving with new water three times, filtrating and
keeping asunder. Then put the remaining Lime upon a Filter in Trochisk's to
dry; it is that which in shops is called prepared Calx or Lime, which is to dry
softly without any biting or mordacity: wherefore it is most excellent for the
cure and cicatrizing of malignant Ulcers, and principally those that
participate of venerean infection; it is also very good for the cure of
burnings, and may be employed in Liniments, Ointments, Plasters, and all
Epulotick and desiccative pouders, used for Ulcers which are difficult to close
again.

The first, second and third water of the quicklime, which were kept each by
themselves, may also be employed severally according as need shall require: for
they are the ground and chief Ingredient of Waters used against Gangrenes, and
for the Pin and Web and other sore diseases in the eyes. It may be so applied
even without any other addition, to wash putrid, foul and corroding Ulcers; and
the best guide therein may be the experience of the Chyrurgeon, whether the
first, second or third is to be used, according as he shall discover by the
appearing signs, the malignancy of the Ulcer to be greater or less.

To prepare the plain Water against Gangrenes, and other symptoms and
accidents thereof.
WE must confess that this Water is one of the best Remedies which at this day
are in the possessiion of Surgery to prevent the sad accidents of Gangrenes
and their sequel; and being this Remedy is so useful to public advantage, I
would not hold it longer in silence; though it will not perhaps please too many
who keep it still by them as a grand secret; but this noble Medicament owning
its invention to the search of Chemistry, so is it just that by the benefit of
the same and the ingenuity of this Treatise it should be communicated to all
Members and Practitioners of Surgery which are not yet acquainted with the
same, that they may Charitably bestow it for the help and cure of poor sick
Patients: for it is a great Gift and benefit of God, to be purchased almost
without charge, and easily to be found every where, wherefore also it ought to
be liberally dispensed and imparted to such poor Patients as shall be in want
of it. All the secret thereof does only consist in mixing with greater or
lesser proportion, sublimate corrosive Mercury in either of the three Waters,
according as it is intended and desired to be more or less strong and violent;
and so the Dosis of the mixture depends upon the judgment and skll of the
Surgeon who intends the use of it, for preventing the accidents of Gangrenes
or to stop it, and prevent the increase and progress of the same, when it has
already seized upon and deaded some part of the flesh: for the spirits and
hidden fire which are in this Water, animate and vivify again the natural heat,
call back the vanished Spirits, already banished by the beginning of corruption
and mortification, and by their subtility and quick penetration separate the
dead flesh from the quick. But in the mean while it must be observed, to mix
diligently in this miraculous Water ij. or iij. of excellent spirit of Wine
freed and depurated of all its phlegm, which may have two very considerable and
principal ends. The first is, to render this water more active and penetrating
when necessity does urge, and the danger is at hand; The second, that the
spirit of Wine may unite it self to the salts and spirits of the quicklime and
the corrosive Sublimate, and so kill and temperate them, that they may in no
wise be noxious and hurtful to the nervous or sinuous and membranous parts,
which remain bare during and after the action and time of using the Remedy: and
it belongs only to such as are well skilled and versed in the knowledge of the
action and reaction of Spirits and Salts with and against each other, to give a
solid and pertinent reason of those effects that are produced by this admirable
Remedy, after the mixture of the Calx and quicklime sublimate and spirit of
Wine. This water thus composed is not useful only to such purposes as we have
said above: but it is also singular in all Wounds and Shots where there is any
breaking of bones, and a great heat with much pain, provided in the beginning
you add the juice of a dozen River-Crawfishes pounded alive, and sprinkled with
a little phlegm of Allom.

But there is another Water yet against Gangrenes, Ulcers and sores of the
eyes, besides that we have already taught, the description whereof we will give
for the sake both of Surgeons and their Patients, though held very secret by
those who daily use it with great applause and success: after which we will
give the description of the Ophthalmick-water, and the distillation of the true
Spirit of quicklime, which is none of the least Master-piece^ of of our Art.

The wonderful and true Water against Gangrenes.
lb xx. of Rain or River water, put them in a great pewter Basin, and throw
therein iiij. pound of good unmixt or unaltered quicklime, and let it by a
slow ebullition softly quench it self without agitation, and when you shall
perceive the extinction to be performed; and that the boiling and working of
the Lime is over, add thereto ij. of Arsenick in powder, and. j. of good well
chosen Mastick also in powder, stir all together and mingle it conveniently
with a wooden Spatula or Slice, then let it setle until the matter be well
gathered in the bottom, and the water swimming over very clear: then pour out
all the clear, decanting it softly without stirring the bottom, and filtrate
the remainder to join both again in a gray earthen Pan, adding to it. ij. of
corrosive Sublimate in powder, vj. very good spirit of wine well dephlegmated,
and ij. good spirit of Vitriol; put all this mixture being yet unsettled in
Glass bottles and keep it for use. If you make use of this water for any other
purpose then for sore eyes, you must shake it and mix the bottom with the
clear, and so use it against the Gangrene and all its accidents, the cure of
old running sores, cancerous, sinuous and malignant Ulcers; against all
preternatural and painful outward heat, and against all external inflammations;
against Phlegmon's, Erysipela's, burnings and even arthritical pains proceeding
from hot causes, and finally against inflamed and dolorous wounds. If it seems
to be too strong or violent, let it be tempered by adding a greater quantity of
spirit of Wine, or phlegm of Vitriol or Allom. But if you will use it for
Ophthalmies, and small sores in the corners of the eyes or in the eyelids, you
may temper it with water of juice of Plantain, or of great Celandine, or even
with phlegm of Allom: but above all things, take care that the water you do use
for the eyes be well filtrated, and that no part of the settling in the bottom
of the Glass should be mixed with it; the application of this water is commonly
made with fillets of linen cloth, and I may confidently assure, that those
that shall make use thereof, will find it an infallible and sure Remedy and
almost of a wonderful success in all the particulars we have spoken of.

The manner of preparing the Ophthalmick water.
One part of the first water of quicklime, two of the second, and iij. p. of
the third, mix them together and dissolve therein j, of salt Armoniack to each
pound of water; put this dissolution in a brass copper or Basin, and let it
stand therein the space of xij. or xv. hours, or until it be tinged with an
oriental saphirine color, then filtrate exactly and keep it for use in a
Bottle. This water is unparalleld for all diseases and blemishes of the eyes
whatsoever without reference to their original: for the salt of the Lime joined
with the volatile salt of Urine, constituting the virtue of salt Armoniack,
draws a subtle Vitriol from the Brass or Copper, which are found inseparably
joined and united together in the water, and do communicate unto it a
refrigerating, cooling, cleansing and desiccative quality. I will say more yet,
that these three Salts so united, are capable to blunt, kill and destroy all
the malignancy of those harsh, corroding and biting Salts which are mixed in
the serosity of the blood, and are the true occasional cause not only of the
grief, inflammation and sores in the eyes; but moreover of all itching,
eruptions and Ulcers growing outwardly, and generated in the body of man:
wherefore this water ought and may not only be used against the several griefs
incident to the eyes, but against Itchings, Scabs, and Ulcers also. And in case
it had drawn too much of the salts in respect of delicate and tender persons,
or for the quick and nice sense of some parts of the body, it may be allayed
and sweetened by adding Eyebright, Euphrase, Fennel, Rose or Plantain water.

To make the spirit or true Magistery of Quicklime.
TAke as much as you please of the best quicklime you can meet with, reduce it
to very small powder and grind it upon a Porphyry to an Alkohol, or impalpable
powder, then put it in a Cucurbite and pour upon it by degrees very gently of
the subtle and purest alkohol of Wine, as much as the Calx or Lime will be
capable to drink: for you must have a special care not to drown the Lime, but
let there be only so much of this Spirit, that the Lime may thereby be satiated
without humectation, or appearing in any wise above it; then having applied a
Still-head to the Cucurbite, lute the joints exactly with a triple Bladder
moistened in the whites of Eggs, and strowed with quicklime, both of it and
the Recipient, then place your Vessel in B. M. and draw off again the spirit
with a slow heat to a dry bottom, and having cooled the Vessels, open them, and
pour again the same Spirit upon the Lime remaining in the bottom of your
Cucurbite, and go on thus distilling and cohobating with the same care and
precautions until the tenth time, that by these reiterated imbibitions the
internal fire wherein the Spirit, Arcana or Magistery of the Lime does reside,
may be increased and exalted: and that no body may be mistaken herein, it is
absolutely necessary to observe all the things we have said, otherwise the
Artist may endanger the loss of his time, vessels, and matter. These ten
Cohobations being thus performed, take the Lime out from your Vessel and grind
it most subtily, duly and without intermission upon the Porphyry, and add
thereto the tenth part of its weight of very pure and dry salt of Tartar, and
as much of the Caput Mortuum of the Tartar remaining after the salt has been
drawn by Elixiviation: But th Caput mortuum must be newly dried and heated
before you mix it with the rest, and the mixture being nimbly and exactly
performed, put all these matters in a well luted Retort, the matter not
exceeding the third part of the empty space and capaciousness of it: then place
it in a close Reverberatory Furnace, and to the neck thereof fit a Recipient,
to which may be fitted a Funnel or Pipe of a fingers bore, and four inches long
about the middle of the neck receiving the Retort, so that the end of the
Retort's neck may just meet with the upper part of the said Canal or Pipe, that
the drops of phlegm falling may directly join to the small Recipient, that is
to be fitted to the said Canal or Pipe. But you must note, that you must put
before in the body of the great Recipient before you lute it, ij. or iij. of
alkoholiz'd spirit of Wine deprived of all phlegm. The Vessels being exactly
luted together as much ss it may be, and the Lute dry, begin to give your fire
by degrees, until that little phlegm which is about the matter be driven out,
and the Artist perceiving that no drops more do fall, and that a white vapor
is issuing out of the neck of the Retort, and as a small cloud creeping along
the channel of the great Recipient, where it is attracted by the spirit of Wine
being in the bottom of the Recipient as by a Loadstone; then let him increase
and quicken the fire more and more until all the vapors be over. The Vessels
then being cooled, take off the Lute and open them, pour away the phlegm as
useless, and preserve the spirit you shall find in the great Recipient, to
rectify it and separate from it the spirit of Wine if it be possible: but in
case they be so united as to ascend together in the neck of the Still, put this
spirit in a Glass dish somewhat thick, and warmed a little before hand, and set
it on fire with a little kindled paper; the spirit of Wine will consume and
burn away, and the spirit of the Lime remain in the Dish; which preserve very
carefully as one of the most wonderful Agents which Nature and Art can afford,
as learnedly says Basilius Valentinus, speaking of the quicklime. This Spirit
is one of the best, the most present and safest Remedies that can be given
against all kinds of Gout: for it insensibly dissolves and consumes all
tartarous matters coagulated in any part whatsoever of the body, by the potent
virtue and sudden penetration of the internal fire contained ie it; it is given
from j. drop to v. in three fingers height of warm wine in the morning fasting;
then let the Patient expect the operation thereof warm between two sheets,
whether Nature determines its action by Urine or Sweat, in a condition to help
and advance the Remedy; otherwise it does act for the most part by insensible
transpiration.

There is also a very efficacious Remedy prepared with this wonderful Spirit
against the Stone and Gravel, with one part of stones of It may Crabs eyes, so
called in the shops.
Crawfishes and two parts of Calx of Rock crystal, digested and dissolved in
six times their weight of spirit of quicklime, and so often distilled and
cohobated in the heat of ashes, that all or the most part thereof be turned
into liquor: of which you must give also in a small Glass of warm Wine from j.
drop to v. in the morning fasting, to cure radically all those that shall find
themselves touched with those diseases: for it cleanses so well all the passages
and conveyances of Urine from that ill ferment, that from that time forward no
new matter can be generated or gathered there: this Spirit dissolves and turns
into Liquor all stones of what hardness and roughness soever; and
contrariwise by the action and virtue of its fire fixes the most volatile
Spirits; so that those which shall use it either for Remedy or for a
Dissolvent, may very well be cast into astonishment and wonder that Nature
should have hid so high a mystery in so vile and so contemptible a subject as
quicklime is: which has caused Paracelsus to say by an act of reflection and
great wonder, that some do throw away and kick with the feet such a stone or
flint, as would be to him of a greater Revenue then a Cow, did he know the
mysteries which God and Nature has concealed and laid therein.

SECTION III. Of Metals.
METALS are hard bodies, ductile and malleable, proceeding from a saline and
Mercurial juice, coagulated in the earth by the strength and virtue of the heat
of its own sulphur. Now as we have said above, that all things had their
original from light, which by its ejaculation and irradiation did imprint and
stamp the Idea and Character of its virtue in water as in a general and
convenient Matrix, to enable her afterward to supply both matter and Form,
Body and Spirit, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, all physical generations: so can we
now more pathetically and particularly give to understand the generation of
Metals, because the water being once stamped with the Character of Light, and
having received the Spirit and Salt which flow from the same Spring, the
internal Sulphur begins immediately to concoct, digest and ripen the Embryos by
him precipitated, whether animal, vegetable or mineral: and the water being
furnished with this fermentative and generative principle, yet undeterminated
and apt to be made any thing, is conveyed and driven into all the general and
particular Matrixes, which do determine and modifie it according to the Idea
and Character of their natural predestination in their Creation; For as God
has once created all substances, so has he given them means of succession, and
perpetuating and preserving themselves, which is nothing else but that which we
call Nature. Now as soon as the water is received in a metallic Matrix or in a
place fitted and destinated by Nature to the generating of Metals, the spirit
of Salt which is in the water yet undetermined and of a general inclination,
receives the vitriolick stamp, character and Idea, which is the first
determination to Metallic nature, and the internal sulphur of this embryonated
Vitriol, works without any interruption to digest, ripen, and concoct and
coagulate the water by him impregnated; so that the first visible principle of
Metals is a Vitriol more or less pure, and more or less mixed with metallic
seeds, according as the Matrix, water and salt are found to be pure or mixed.
And thus the Archeus which directs metallic productions, does lead and guide
them safely and by a gradation altogether surprising, and wonderful to the
scope and end of their Natural predestination. For it alters and changes the
Vitriol into sulphur of a Metallic nature, as it is proved be the examining of
Marcassites, which do already by their weight appear to be metallic, as also
by their hardness and color, and have nevertheless in them no more then a
Vitriol altered and modified by the action of the fire of its sulphur, as it
may be proved by their Anatomy made by the help of air and fire, which the
Artist does make use of to decoct and bring them again to their first visible
matter, which is nothing else but a Sulphur and Vitriol, though these
Marcassites contain also in themselves some embryonated Metals, as it appears
by the digestion and maturation of them made by fire, Salts and Spirits, after
which Metals of diverse kind and different nature may be extracted, and so illud
quod occullum erat fi^ manifestum; in so much as plausibly and lawfully
Marcassites may be called the Rudiments and imperfect seeds of Metals: which
makes me wish that pure Legitimate and true Marcassites of all Metals and each
in particular might be recovered, that the chemical Artist might have
opportunity to open them, and anatomize with much more ease before Nature has
raised them to the last and highest point of their perfection, which is their
coagulation, hardening and fixation: for it would save much charge and labor,
because there would be no necessity of making the reinundation of metallic
Bodies, to seek into the very center of their secondary principles, that virtue
which God and Nature have planted in them.

Thus much we thought fitting to say as a preliminary Introduction to the
description of each Metal in particular, and of the operations which we will
teach upon every one of them, which will be enough to guide and be instead of
models to Artists, toward reasoning and working more exactly upon the family
of Metals. Metals are divided into three Classes, and that with much reason,
partly for the disparity and conformity of their hardness, partly for the
resemblance of their preparations. The first Classis contains the noblest
Metals, which are Gold and Silver or Sol and Luna, and by the reason of the
great correspondency which is found between those two potent Luminaries and
those two noble Metals: for what the Sun and Moon are in Heaven, the same are
the Heart and Brain in Animals, and the Gold and Silver amongst Minerals and
Metals. The second Classis contains the two inferior and less noble Metals and
the hardest, Copper and Iron, or Venus and Mars, and, by reason of the analogy
which is found between those two Planets and those two Metals, and the mutual
and reciprocal love also which is between those two celestial Bodies; Venus
commands over the parts destinated to generation, and all the functions of the
Kidneys and Bladder: and Mars sends its influences upon the Liver, the Cystis
Fellis or Gallbladder, Spleen and adjacent parts of the Ventricle. The third
Classis contains the two other less noble Metals, which are softer and sweeter
then the rest, viz. Lead and Tin, or Saturn and Jupiter, and, by reason of the
resemblance which is between these two Metals, who Command upon the Spleen and
Matrix of the Microcosm: But of this we will speak more fully when we treat of
each Metal asunder. It is only requisite to subjoin here in general terms all
the operations commonly made upon Metals, to render them useful to Physic.

The first preparation which our Artist is bound to take in hand upon the Body
of Metals, is Purification. The second is their Calcination, which is performed
five several ways; The first of which is Immersion, where Menstruum's or
appropriated Dissolvents are used. The second is that which is called vaporous
or illinition, which is performed by vapor or illinition or aspersion of the
Dissolvent. The third is Amalgama, made by the mixture of the Metal with or
Quicksilver. The fourth is Cementation, performed by putting the Metals stratu
super stra^um, or by stratification with Saline or sulphurous substances,
either to correct their defect, or to straighten or compress, or to open the
Metals. The fifth is Reverberation, performed by a flaming fire, until the
Metal be reduced to a Calx capable of answering the design and intention of the
Artist. The third preparation of Metals is Extraction, or to say better, the
maturation and exaltation of the purest part, and of what is most concocted and
digested in the internal sulphur of Metals, from whence the Tincture proceeds.
The fourth is Volatilization, which is nothing else but a total alteration of
the metallic nature, so as the Artist may be capable to subtiliate them in
such manner as that they may ascend or fly, that is to say, be turned into a
Spirit or Oil not reducible again afterward into Metal, which is none of the
least operations of Chemistry. The fifth is Sublimation, by which Metals are
meteoriz'd and reduced into vapors, which stick as flowers in the receiving
Vessels: some are of opinion, that this work is capable to better and maturate
or ripen ignoble Metals, and not without some ground. The sixth is the
Salsification of Metals, which is the reduction of their body into Salt, a
thing not of so easy performance as many Artists have imagined, because some
think to have done enough, if they have dissolved the Metals with some Saline
Menstruum, and after that coagulated and chrystalliz'd in a dissoluble
substance, which is only to speak properly, the vitriol of the Metals joined to
the saline substance of the Spirit made use of for their dissolution, and
returned to a body again with the Calx of the Metal. In the seventh place is
Mercurification, or the pretended reduction of the solid and compact bodies of
Metals in a Qucksilver or flowing Mercury, much like unto the common or vulgar
Mercury, which I am also of opinion to be but a mistake introduced amongst
Artists, and crept in only by want of true understanding of the meaning of
Writers: for they pretend that when ancient Authors have said, that the Bodies
of metals were to be reduced into Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, this last was to
be understood of a flowing Quicksilver: But the meaning of these Philosophers
to my best apprehension, when they have spoken of reducing their Bodies into
Mercury, was only to bring them again as near as could be to their
Universality, that is to say, reducing them to a Spirit coming near the nature
of the volatile sulphurous Salts which are the last shelter and covering of
the Spirit invisible in it self and of coagulated light: for as the volatile
salt of Vegetable seeds, contains in its self the seminal principle and the
whole virtue of the plant; so likewise the Mercury or true spirit of metallic
bodies contains in it self their sperme, their ingress and Tincture, and by
consequence all the virtue which it did possess, and all its power and activity
since the first moment of its coagulation, to the last of its fixation:
Wherefore it must be the chief scope of an Artist, to endeavor by his study
and industrious working to reduce the King of Metals to that height of
perfection, whereby to fit it and apply afterward to the rooting out of the
most obstinate diseases: but let him reject far from himself those pretended
seekers of flowing Mercury, because besides that the search and curiosity of it
is useless and beyond Humane reach: it is besides an occasion of wasting both
the precious Time and Estate of those that give up themselves to it, and makes
them lose opportunities of discovering several other things useful to them in
particular, and next to their Neighbor and Civil Society.

Of Gold and its Chemical preparation.
GOLD is the noblest, the most solid and fix of all Metals; of a yellowish
color, compacted, and of an almost indivisible union in its substance, which
shows him to be compounded of salt, sulphur and mercury brought to the highest
degree of digestion, and for that reason most fix and intimately united
together. Chemists do give unto it the name of Sol, sun, and attribute also
to it the same Character TH, because it has, say they, a sympathy and
correspondency, both with the Sun of the great World, and of the little world
which is man's Heart, and therefore do they ascribe unto it the virtue and
faculty of curing all faintings and weaknesses; they believe it finally to be
the true and lawful Restorer of the Balsamic Faculties and natural hear, and
the sovereign Remedy against Deliquium's and swoonings, loss of Spirits and
wasting of radical moisture. But there is an abuse and mistake in vulgar
Pharmacy introduced by the Arabes, which do mingle Leaf-gold in their
Confections and Cordial powders, as if the digestive heat of the stomach and
the moisture of imperfect Chyle were capable to alter in any wise the solidity
of this noble Metal; for besides that no humor analogous to Aqua Regia can be
found in the Ventricle which might be capable of dissolving Gold, yet supposing
it might be performed by some ill fermentation of superfluous aliments, it
could not but cause mortal pains, and make such ulcerations and preternatural
colliquations, that they would infallibly destroy the subject wherein they
should be, rather then meliorate and restore the vital and animal Faculties as
it is pretended. But some perhaps will object, That though Gold be not
dissolved in the Ventricle, it is not altogether without some good use, by
reason of the irradiations and emanations of its virtue which it sends to the
Heart in respect of their mutual sympathy; To which I answer, That it will
suffice for the same reason to carry it above the body, and thus make an
outward application of it more easy and in greater quantity then what can be
swallowed; and so would it prove much more beneficial then being inwardly taken
in small quantity, and moreover there would be no loss of it; which makes us
conclude that unless Gold be prepared and opened in such a manner, as that our
digestive heat may be capable to appropriate its virtue unto its self by the
help of the volatile sulphurous Salts, which are mingled in the aliments of
the body either dry or moist, or unless Art has already so reduced this metal
into Medicine, by the assistance of Salts and Spirits which may be analogous to
those of orature and free from corrosiveness, that it may be rendered fit to be
conveyed and driven by the Director of our natural Functions into our very
last digestions, thereby to correct all the defects it shall meet with, and
purify by the impression of its Cordial and Solar Virtue the whole mass of
the venal and arterial blood, otherwise no good is to be hoped or expected from
it; but contrariwise some ill effect, being incapable to produce any other in
case it be prepared with corrosive Salts or Spirits: and being not dissolved
nor opened, it is unfit to do any good.

They that will choose well their Gold for Chemical preparations, must take it
of the purest and of that which has received the less allay; for to make any
difference between the Indian Gold and that of Arabia, Hungary, Bohemia or
Germany, is a very needless Nicety, since by the ordinary purifications it may
be brought to the highest degree of purity and goodness; and those are the
following.

First, There is a purification made of Gold, to take away the superficial
settling or foulness; Secondly, That which is done to take away some portion of
one or more imperfect metals, which were mingled either in the Mint or by the
Goldsmiths, or finally brought from the Mine. For the first purification wash
the Gold in a crude Lie, or water impregnated with Tartar and common Salt,
which is called a Bullitory, or make it boil and wash in aqua fortis something
weak or mixed with phlegm of Allom, Saltpeter or Vitriol, these three Lotions
are sufficient for the first intention.

But when some part of imperfect metals is mixed with the Gold, the separation
cannot be made but by dividing the metals asunder, which cannot be done but by
their dissolution, which is called Immersive calcination, or by the destruction
of the imperfect metal, as when Gold is purified by Lead or Antimony, or
cemented with substances capable to corrode and destroy the imperfect metals
mixed with the Gold.

As for the dissolution, which is immersive Calcination, it is performed with
ij. iij. or iv. p. of Regal water, the distillation whereof we will teach when
we shall Discourse of Salts: for the Regal water will only dissolve the Gold,
and the other metals remain in the bottom of the Vessel, chiefly if silver be
predominant, because the Regal water touches in no way the silver: the
dissolution being made, filtrate it, and gently pour it out by decantation,
then precipitate with oil of per deliquium, or spirit of volatile Armoniack
Salt, or spirit of Urine, or throwing it in some proportion of quicksilver,
which will gather to its self the Gold which was dispersed in the dissolution,
or by evaporating the dissolving water: finally, which way soever you reduce
the Gold to Calx, there remains no more to be done after then to melt it in a
Crucible with a little Borax, and cast it into Ingots, and you shall have
purified Gold.

But if you will only put it in the Capel, and drive it with Lead to separate
the heterogeneous metals, you must make your Capel with Bean ashes, putting ij.
or iij. p. of Lead, which with violence of fire and bellow's must be driven, as
we shall more fully deduct when we treat of the purifying of Silver. But
because the Capel does not take away wholly the suspicion of some remaining
part of silver being yet intimately mixed with the Gold: Artists have not found
a better way to purify it totally then to melt it with Antimony, because the
sulphur of that mineral does absolutely corrode and destroy, not only all
imperfect metals which might be mixed with the Gold, but it also destroys
totally the finest silver, be it in never so little a quantity, if the
purification be reiterated three times: which being done you may confidently
say that the Gold is very pure, and that there can be no finer, and it is thus
performed: Take as much Gold as you will, and add thereto v. or vj. parts of
crude Antimony, put them in a good Crucible to melt together in a wind-Furnace,
and when the matter flows, throw in about j. of pure Saltpeter very pure and
dry mixed with j. or iij. of filings of Iron, and when all is well melted and
flowing together glowing, and of a color tending toward Partridge eyes (as
they call it) throw the matter in a sharp earthen Vessel, such as is fit to
make Regulus (of the figure of an inverted Pyramid) being hot and first
anointed with it with a piece of wax down to the bottom, and when it is full
with the melted matter, knock gently with a Hammer on the brims of your Vessel
until a crust and thick skin covers over the matter, that being a great help to
make the Regulus fall to the bottom and separate the feces and scum from the
pure part: the matter being cooled, separate the Regulus from the skum, and mix
it again a second time with p. ij. of Antimony crude, reduced to powder, and
melt as before, and about the end of the melting of the matter throw a little
Saltpeter and filings of Iron, to separate the rest of the Regulus from the
scum or feces, in the impurity whereof some part of the Gold might remain yet
hidden, and this work may be reiterated even to the third time, that no portion
of Regulus may remain untoucht, and by consequence the Artist may rest secure
that no part of the Gold is left in it. Then reduce your solar Regulus in
course powder, and place it in a good Crucible in a wind Furnace, and give it
fire on all sides, above, beneath and in the sides, to drive the Antimony by
smoke: you may also add to it the help of bellows to advance the work and so
give it fire, continuing to blow until all the substance of the Antimony be
exhaled into vapors, and the Gold remains pure and clean in the bottom of
the Crucible. They that will not be at so much trouble, may make use of the
Regulus of Antimony ready prepared to purify their Gold: but the first way is
the best, because the Regulus is already divested of the greatest part of his
external sulphur, which is the fittest for corroding the imperfect metals mixed
with the Gold.

It remains we should speak of the third way of purifying Gold, which is
Cementation, being nothing else but putting the Gold beaten into thin plates
stratified in a Crucible, or unglazed earthen pot of a convenient bigness with
common or Regal Cement, and the plates thus well fitted, giving a circular fire
by degrees the space of three or four hours, then increasing it during the
space of six hours more, in such a manner as the Pot or Crucible may become
glowing red at the end of the operation of the fire. And thus shall you find
the plates of Gold purged of all that imperfect metal which might have been
lurking in them, the matter of the Cement having destroyed, burned and calcined
the metal; then grind the mass found in the Crucible, and wash the plates, to
purify them afterward by melting with a little of Saltpeter and Borax, or
with corrosive Sublimate.

To make the vulgar or common Cement.
of Brick dust iiij. dried salt ij. and of dried and pure Saltpeter ij, and as
much Verdegrease, reduch all to powder each by its self, and mix together to
make the vulgar Cementation. But note, that you must ever begin by the powder
of Cement to lay the first bed of your stratification, then lay over it a plate
of the metal, and thus proceed by alternative beds, until the pot, box or
Crucible be full, and order it so that the uppermost lay be also Cement; then
cover the Vessel with a very close and exactly well fitted Cover, and lute it
with a good Lute not subject to crack, and well dried before you put it in the
fire.

To make the Regal Cement, unto which only Gold does resist.
iiij. of Brick dust, Armoniack Gem, and common salt dried, ana j. mix them
together being reduced to powder and make a past thereof with Urine, and with
this make your Cementation, stratifying it with the plates of Metal. There are
yet several kinds of Cements more or less corroding the Artists intention;
there are also some that are only straightening and fixative, but as they do
not belong to our present purpose, nor concern any ways the preparation of
Gold for Physic, we think it unnecessary to mention them here, leaving to the
Curiosity of those that will enquire after, to search for them in such Authors
as have purposely treated of Metallurgy.

Of the Calcination of Gold whereby to open it.
IT is not enough for an Artist to have purified his Gold, and severed from it
all kind of heterogeneous substance; For as Gold is a solid, compact, close and
fixed Body, it must be open, that his endeavors in dissolving the same to
extract the substance he seeks for, may not be frustrated; and this he cannot
attain but by Amalgamatory, Cementatory and dissolutive Calcination, all which
do prepare and reduce to powder and Calx, which afterward may be put to a
Reverberatory calcination; we shall treat of each as briefly as may be that the
Artist may be instructed without confusion.

That Calcination which is performed by Amalgamation of the Gold with Mercury
or quick silver is free from suspicion of any violent Corrosion, which may
impart to the Gold any kind of hidden corrosivenesse, as it is generally feared
all salts and corrosive spirits will do: though we must confess however, that
neither spirits nor salts can be capable to communicate any ill quality to
Gold; neither divest him of the character of being a metallic body, unless
they be extraordinary salts and spirits, and to the knowledge of whom those
Authors which have left us any thing by writing have not attained, or in case
they have said any thing of it, it has been in so obscure and aenigmatical
terms as it is plain to be seen, that either they would not be understood by
others, or could not understand themselves: for there is not one Artist but
knows that water and fire can purge the calx of Gold from those impressions of
corrosive salts and spirits, either by Lotion or Reverberation: wherefore it
must remove all occasion of fear from such as would entertain any scruple in
this particular. For all what in past-time Artists have done, or do at the
present, is to no other end and design then to open the body of Gold, and
render it capable of being dissolved and extracted without any Corrosive. We
will deliver in the following Discourse, the surest way and method which
practice and study has brought to our knowledge, leaving the rest to the
disquisition of such as will make a further progress in this Work.

Amalgamation of Gold and Mercury.
BEat in very thin plates Gold three times refined by Antimony, and being cut
very small with sheeres or scissars, put some part of the Gold in a small
Crucible, and heat it red hot, and at the same time put in another Crucible vj.
of crude Mercury, and place it also to the fire until it begins to smoke, then
pour it upon the Gold thus red, and stir them both nimbly together with a small
stick of wood, and when all is reduced to a convenient smoothness, throw it in
a Dish half full of water; this done throw away the first water and pour new
fresh water upon the Amalgam. and stir and wash it therein to separate and
cleanse away all the blackness and fuliginosity thereof, and thus proceed until
the water comes off from it as clean as it was poured on; this done, put this
Amalgama which is tractable and unctuous in a small Retort, to the neck whereof
fit a Recipient with water; place this Retort between four bricks, and give it
an open fire by degrees, until all the Mercury be come over the Helm into the
Recipient, and the Gold remains pure and open in the bottom of the Retort; but
that cannot be done neither at the first nor second time; contrariwise, the
amalgamation and distillation must be reiterated successively at least xx. or
xxx. times, even until the Gold remains open, spongious, and capable of being
reduced to powder of it self. Now as that requires a toylsome and tedious
operation; Artists have found a way to separate and discontinue in a less time
and with much more speed the parts of Gold after amalgamation, which is
performed by cementing it with common salt desiccated, or powder of Brimstone;
for the Amalgam being grounded with double its weight of salt and brimstone, it
discontinues or separates its parts into particles or atoms so small, that it
enables the fire afterward joined to those matters to calcine it with much
more ease, and thus it is much sooner reduced into subtle powder and so well
opened, that it is capable afterward of being reverberated, and brought by the
sole action of fire to a fitting state of Rarity, and requisite spungeousness,
which is thus performed.

The Calcinatory cementation of Gold.
THough we have spoken above of the cementation of Gold, our Artist shall
remember that it was only to teach how to try and purify the same: but what we
are now about to teach, is to the end of Calcining and opening its Body as we
have already said; the Artist then shall thus proceed therein. Let him take the
Amalgam after it is well washed and dried with a clean linen cloth, so that all
moisture be taken off, and press and wring it as much as he can through a piece
of chamoy skin, to separate from it the superfluous Mercury, then let him weigh
the remainder, and grind it on a Porphyry stone with double its weight of
sulphurvivium or quick-brimstone powdered, and that until the Brimstone and
Amalgam be so exactly united and commixed that you may distinguish neither of
the substances, then put this powder in a Crucible of an indifferent bigness,
that none of the Gold may be lost by the cracking and working of the Brimstone;
cover also exactly the Crucible with a cover having a hole in the top, of the
bigness of a writing Qui^; then lute the cover of the Crucible and give it a
circular fire by degrees until it begins to grow red hot, and the Brimstone
taking fire evaporate by the hole in the Cover; this done, which you shall know
by the cessation of the flame, draw the Crucible from the fire and open it, and
you shall find the Gold swelled up, and so discontinued and dis-jointed in its
parts, that it seems to be a Sponge: this grind afterward with three times its
weight of common Salt well desiccated, or stratifie it only in a Crucible, to
which put a cover without hole, and having luted it, put it in a circulatory
fire, which increase by degrees until the Crucible becomes red, then cease the
fire, and the Crucible being grown cold, take the matter and grind it, or work
on a Marble mortar to dissolve the salt, and thus shall you have your Gold in
very subtle powder or Calx. Then reiterate this Amalgamation and both
Cementations with Brimstone and Salt, each of them seven times, which are in
all 21 operations, and so shall you have a powder or Calx of Gold capable of
being exposed to Reverberation, as we shall now declare.

The Reverberation of Gold.
TAke the prepared calx of Gold as it is taught above, and put it upon a flat
Tile of some stone of sufficient hardness to endure well the fire, cover the
Gold with a Muffel, which is an Instrument used by Goldsmiths to perfect the
melting of their work when laden with enamel; cover the Muffel with good, dry
and well seasoned Charcoal all about except toward the forepart, where it will
suffice to have only a small Iron-plate, which may be removed at will that the
Gold may be stirred sometimes with a small clean and well polished Iron rod,
then kindle the fire and continue it until the calx of Gold be very much
subtilitated and open, and exalted to a red purple color: then may you say
confidently you have a true calx of Gold which is in a fit capacity and
condition to be extracted and dissolved, when you have compassed the knowledge
of those sweet and gentle Menstruum's (capable to effect it) who may have some
analogy and sympathy with our natural spirits and radical moisture: for until
this true dissolution and radical extraction of Gold be thus attained unto, I
give no heed or belief to the pretended Remedies which are prepared for Gold by
any other way, and commonly are called potable Gold, Tincture etc. For I could
not yet have the fortune to see any of the liquor or substance which was not
again reducible to a metallic Body, which condition does absolutely contradict
the sense and opinion of ancient Writers concerning this matter; not that I
deny it absolutely possible to dissolve and extract the Tincture of Gold: but I
rather choose to make use of other strengthening and cordial Remedies, until by
my own experience, or the communication of some other more fortunate then my
self and more knowing, either by his own study or the manuduction of some
friend, I may be persuaded of the truth of this matter. But because there are
some very noble and curious preparations for the dissolution, precipitation and
extraction of Gold, which are capable to bring our Artist to much knowledge,
and raise his thoughts to the meditation and disquisition of some better
matters, and that these preparations are part of Remedies not to be despised
and undervalued; I have thought it necessary to deliver here the process
thereof, as also of a Solar Sublimation which is admired by some, and pretended
to be a very good Tincture.

To prepare the Crocus and Tincture of Gold.
TAke ph. of Gold refined by Antimony and beat it into very thin plates or
leaves, then put it in a Cucurbite with x. of very good well refined
Saltpeter, viij. Roch Allom and v. of very pure common salt, pour upon this
iiij. or v. of distilled Rainwater, then put the Cucurbite in sand and give it
a fire to cause the whole to boil, and thus continue till all the Gold be
dissolved, which will be perceived in the color of the water remaining tinged
with a very fair yellow, and when no more dissoluble substance shall appear in
the bottom of the Vessel, then continue the fire something more slowly and
evaporate the water to a dry bottom, and in it will remain a high colored
Mass containing in it self the dissolved Gold, and diffused before through the
whole substance of those salts. Take half of this Mass, reduce it to powder
which pour in a Mattress, and put upon alkoholizate spirit of Wine three fingers
high, put a Blindhead upon the Vessel containing your matter, and place in
sand, giving it a fire of digestion and extraction, and in a short time the
Spirit will be tinged with a very pleasant yellow color; this Spirit having
laid in digestion the space of three days, you must filtrate it and pour on
fresh at the same height, and continue the digestion of it, till it has
attained the same color of the first spirit already drawn off, and so proceed
in this digestion and extraction until the third or fourth time, or rather
until the Spirit takes no more Tincture; then join all these Tinctures
together, and being filtrated put them in a very clean and dry Cucurbite, which
place in B. M. to draw off with a slow heat by distillation the three parts of
the Spirit, and you shall have in the bottom a yellow Tincture containing the
best part of the Gold dissolved and extracted in and by the salts, so open and
united to this Spirit that it forsakes it in no wise, unless it be to coagulate
it self in the form of a yellowish salt when the spirit is too much loaded with
it; for this coagulation does not hinder it from having still its color, and a
bitter harshness, which shows the Gold to have divested its Body so far as to
become an analogous substance to its vitriolick principle, whereof it has the
cast and relish. I do not deny but that this Gold may be in a manner reduced
to a body again; but I deny that it may be altogether brought to it: and that
since the most pure spirit of Wine has been capable to extract it from the
salts that had dissolved it by the only help of Rainwater, part of this Gold
must of necessity be so altered, as to have been brought some part of the way
toward its first matter. Wherefore I do not altogether reject the inward use
of this Tincture of Gold, though it has not yet attained all the perfection
which the true Tincture or true potable Gold ought to have: for as I am
convinced by the experience of many of my Friends, and my own in particular, I
cannot contradict it, since we make use every day with very good success of the
dissolutions and salts of other metals, though yet reducible to a metallic
Body, as it appears in the Remedies taken from Mars and Saturn, which have also
in them this sweet vitriolick and Pontick Salt according to their respective
propriety and Nature, as Gold also has its bitterness; And nevertheless, the
taste of these preparations which are made upon Mars and Saturn, are commonly
taken by us for concluding Tokens of their virtue and of those good effects we
hope from them, which makes me not to be averse to recommend the use of this
Tincture, provided it be administered in a convenient time in a proper
Menstruum, and the Dosis be exactly observed according to age, strength and the
exigency of the Disease; The Dosis must be from gutt. ss. to iij. or iv. in
Wine, Broth, Scorzonera Root-water, Buck-horn or Balm-water. The Diseases for
which it is most proper, are all those that have some virulent quality or some
malignancy; all those wherein strength or spirits does fail or is impaired; the
Patient must be covered after he has taken it, and so expect the most calmly
and patiently he can the effects which this Remedy will produce, which most
commonly happen by Sweat, sometimes also by Urines and Stools; for as it
naturally does strengthen all the natural Functions, so does it drive away all
the evil and heterogeneous matter which it meets with in the body, by those
Emunctories which Nature has prepared for that end, when the impurities are
too gross and cannot penetrate from the Center to the circumference by
sensible or insensible transpiration.

To prepare the Crocus of Gold.
TAke the remainder of the Mass left after the evaporation of the dissolution
of the Gold with salts above mentioned, and dissolve it in a slow heat, with as
much distilled Rainwater as will be necessary to dissolve it; filtrate this
dissolution through paper, and precipitate it with a sufficient quantity of
oil of per deliquium, poured upon it drop by drop, unless the Gold be
precipitated to the bottom, then let it settle, and separate by decantation the
liquor swimming above it, and edulcorate the solar Crocus with distilled
Rainwater, then dry it gently and slowly. You must also precipitate again the
liquor separated from above the Crocus with spirit of Urine, that in case there
should remain yet any portion of Gold, it may be drawn off: after this,
edulcorate what has been precipitated and dry it, to join to the first Crocus,
and reverberate in a Crucible with a moderate heat the space of about a quarter
of an hour, and so shall you have a solar Crocus very open, and of a fair
purple Violet color, which is an excellent Diaphoretick and a Cordial not to
be despised. The Dosis must be from gr. ph. to v. or vj. in some Conserve or
Cordial gelly. There may also a very excellent Diaphoretick and comfortative
Powder be made out of it.

Solar Diaphoretick, Cordial Powder.
TAke of solar Crocus j. of very good Saffron ij. Bezoar mineral iiij. Vipers
flesh iij. dissoluble Magistery of Pearls and Coral ana ij. Ambergreece allayed
with a little oil of Cinnamon and of the outward rind of Lemon, and ground with
j. sug. j. of oriental Musk dissolved with spirit of Roses gr. x. grind each of
these substances and triturate them severally; then mingle together and keep in
a silver Box, shutting it very close with a screw, or in a Glass Viol well
stopped, to use it when occasion does require, as a sovereign high Cordial and
wonderful Sudorifick. The Dosis of which is from vj. gr. to xxiiij. in
Conserves, gelleys, Cordial waters, Wine, or finally Broth, as it will suit
best with the nature of the Disease, and agree with the constitution of the
Patient. It is an unparalled Remedy in all pestilential maladies, malignant
Fevers, Measels, Small pox; and moreover, it is generally good where there is
any necessity or occasion of repairing strength.

To make the sublimation of Sol.
TO attain to the perfection of this work, take good Regal water, such as we
shall teach hereunder how to make when we shall treat of Saltpeter, iij. and
being put in a Mattress of a sufficient capacity, dissolve in this Menstruum ss.
of laminated or Leaf-gold very thin, refined by Antimony and cut very small,
then place it in ashes to make the dissolution perfect, which done, pour your
dissolution in a small Retort and place it in sand, fitting to it a Recipient,
and draw off softly about the fifth part of the Menstruum again, or a little
more, then cease the fire, and pour upon the matter remaining in the bottom of
your Retort iij. of new Regal water, and go on in drawing it off by
distillation as before, and thus proceed with new water to the fourth time: but
at the fourth time let the bottom of your Retort be somewhat near the bottom of
the Vessel wherein the sand is held, that there be no more then a finger thick
of sand interposed, wherein to give it a more intense fire toward the latter
end of your operation, that some part of the Sol may be sublimated with the
Armoniack salt of the Regal water: for all the liquid Menstruum being ascended
and past through the neck of the Retort, the violence of the fire dexterously
given by the Artist toward the end does raise the salts of the Regal water
which the Gold had kept, and reincorporated to its self in the bottom of the
Retort, which sublimate themselves toward the neck of the same, and carry
along with them that portion of Gold that was most open, which some think to be
the sulphur or soul of the Gold, though in this mistaken, because some may be
yet brought again to a metallic Body, though not all: wherefore some virtue is
also to be expected from these Chrystals or Flowers as red as Saffron, which
are found in the upper part of the Retort and in its neck, in case the Artist
has well observed the requsite circumstances, in this most curious operation
and pleasant to behold. Now the Armoniack salt which sublimates and elevates
its self in this operation, is of a volatile sulphurous nature, and
consequently carries up along with its self the most subtle parts of the
sulphur of Gold, which the high and intense color of the sublimation
testifies, and the diminished weight of the Gold remaining in the bottom. Take
then all this sublimated matter and put it in a small Mattress, and pour upon an
inch high of Tartarizated spirit of Wine, which will immediately be tinged with
a very fair yellow color, then put this Mattress stopped with a fitting Blindhead
in a vaporous Balneo to digest, that the purest part of the sublimated matter
may be extracted, which may be performed in the space of three natural days,
then filtrate this Tincture and keep it for use. As for the Body remaining in
the bottom of the Mattress or the Filter, it must be joined again with the Gold
left in the Retort after sublimation, and melted together in a Crucible with a
little Borax or salt, then by the weight of it you may judge of the decrease of
the Gold, which may also be kept for other uses by reason of its purity. As for
this Tincture it may very lawfully be used in Physic, having nothing in it
self that may render it unacceptable: for if you narrowly consider what
ascended in the sublimation, you shall know it to be only the purest part of
the Armoniack salt, which was one of the Ingredients of the Regal water, being
of it self a volatile sulphurous Salt friendly to Nature, Diuretical,
Disopilative and Sudorifick or Diophoretical; and moreover, enobled and
animated, and laden with the solar Sulphur, which it has carried up along
with it self. Moreover, the Menstruum used in the dissolution and extraction is
a true preservative Balsom, and the purest of all Spirits, powerful enough to
stir the action of the other two substances, and render the penetrative into
our very last digestions, to correct the defects and viciousness thereof, and
drive away all impure superfluities from the habit of the body, which for the
most part are the occasional causes of our Diseases; wherefore it may be
administered from j. drop to vj. in all malignant diseases, and chiefly in those
that require speedy help by insensible transpiration, Sweats or Urines; it is a
very special Remedy in all Leptosies, venereous Diseases, Scorbute and all its
dependences: and if you will use it for a preventive Remedy, when you find the
body heavy and untoward, itching by fits, full of repletion, and troubled with
spontaneous weariness, you may take a Dosis thereof answerable to the age and
years of the Patient, to the sex and strength of the Person, either in Broth,
white Wine, or some Cordial water; then being well covered expect patiently the
sweating fit, which will not miss coming, or if you cannot conveniently expect,
endure this Remedy; it will not fail to expel superfluous humors by Urine, for
it is only this superfluity and abundance of serosities which fills up the
veins and Arteries, causing a pricking in the ends of the fingers and exciting
headache, and grief in the other lower parts of the body, irritating and
stretching beyond measure the membranous and Nervous parts thereof.

Of Silver and its Chemical Preparation.
SILVER is the second of Metals in Rank and Di^nity, less fix then Gold,
because its principal Vitriol (if I may so say) is not digested and united by a
perfect union and fixation with i^s sulphur, which causes it to yield more
easily and quickly then Gold in nitrous, vitriolick and aluminous Menstruums,
by reason of this indigest Vitriol remaining in it. Chemists do call it Lune or
Brain, because it has some sympathy with the Celestial Moon or Luna, and with
the brain in Man; for which cause the Remedies extracted from the same, are
dedicated to strengthen the head and animal Spirits: so that it is said to be a
Specific Remedy for the cure of the chief affections and diseases of the Head;
such as are Apoplexy, Epilepsey, Maniack-passion, and other distempers whose
original and spring is in the Brain.

The choice of Silver for Chemical operations is not very important, because
very little is found with an original purity, which renders it the more
beholding to Chemistry, without which it cannot even be separated from its
impurities contracted in the matrix of the Earth, or accidentally by allay; for
it is not sufficiently depurated either in the hands of Goldsmiths or
Mint-masters: for as to cleanse it from its outward soil and impurities, it is
easily performed by boiling the same in water impregnated with Tartar and
common Salt; after it has been neal'd or made glowing red in the fire, and
thence cast into Urine and then Water, thus shall it be very pure in what
concerns the outside: but if you will further purify it from its alloy, or
allowance in the Mint, you must make use of dissolution which is the immersive
Calcination, and melt it by drying in a Cupel with Lead purposely made for this
operation of purifying Silver, and that before you expose it to other
Calcinations which must be previous to the preparations of this Metal, that it
may thereby be made fitting for dissolution and extraction of its Tincture, the
three principal whereof are, immersive Calcination, Amalgation, and
Cementation; for very seldom reverberating Calcination is made use of, because
Silver having less fixity then Gold, it needs not consequently any long and
powerful action of the fire to become sufficiently opened. As for the first
separation of such impurities and Metals as are mixed in Silver, you must
dissolve it in three or four parts of aqua fortis, made with Vitriol and
Saltpeter as we shall teach hereafter; then precipitate it in a Calx or powder
with salt, water, viz. water in which you have dissolved common salt, as much
as the water can bear, which is also called amongst the Artists Pontick or
Marine water; or put small Copper plates in the said dissolution, and weaken
the aqua fortis with common water, and the Copper will draw and gather to it
self all the Silver in form of a white powder; but which way soever you make
this precipitation of Silver, you must afterward by several reiterated Lotions
edulcorate the powder or calx of Silver with common water, and then dry the
same. But because this Calx is not yet free from some mixture, it is necessary
to Cupell it, and drive it with three or four times as much of Lead upon the
said Cupel, being covered with a piece of wood dry, and adapted to the
proportion of the hollow, with good coals fitted about, and blown with a great
quickness and violence of fire, till the Lead vanishing has carried away in
its vapouring all the impurities and heterogeneous metallic mixture of the
Silver, or that the Lead be all drunk up by the Cupel, or converted on the top
of it in a skum or excrement of calcinated Lead, which is commonly called
Litharg, more or less red and high in color, according as it has more or less
participated of the heat of the fire. The most remarkable thing in this
operation is, that the Silver being once refined and purified, it grows hard
in the midst of the most violent fire, though a little before it did run like
water, whilst the Lead was yet Master over it, and some mixture of impurity did
remain.

The Silver thus left upon the Cupel is very pure, and cannot be suspected to
be guilty of any bad mixture; this is that which Artists call highly Refined,
and silver of Cupel: Take then of this q. s. and having made it into very thin
plates or small filings, put in a Mattress, and pour it upon three times its
weight of good aq. fortis, or what would yet be better, of good spirit of
Niter, put it in sand or ashes to digest and accelerate the dissolution, and
being ended, decant it in a small Cucurbite, to separate what impurities might
remain in the bottom of the Mattress; after this draw off half of the Menstruum
again in ashes and let the Vessel cool, and the next morning shall you find
your Silver reduced into Crystals, which according to some are called the
vitriol of Silver; these dry gently and keep in a well stopped viol, to
administer to such as are sick with some Cephalic disease, to purge them: The
Dosis must be from ij. gr. to x. in Broth, or some opening Cephalic Decoction;
they purge very gently, and do powerfully disburthen the Head of all bad and
noxious humors.

After this precipitate the liquor which swam above the Chrystals with salt
water, to have the calx of Lune or Silver, which edulcorate and dry, to make
therewith the following preparations: and this is that which Writers call
calcined Silver, or calx of Lune. We will give three Examples of the Extraction
of Tincture of Silver, which is called potable Lune or Silver, to make the
Artist the better to apprehend the manner of working, because the Menstruum's,
as also the manner of the work, are differing one from the other.

The first preparation of the Tincture of Lune.
TO attain to the perfection of this Tincture, there must first a Menstruum be
prepared for its Extraction, which is to be made in this following manner. Take
j. p. of very pure Armoniack salt, and ij. p. of Minium, which is nothing else
but calcinated Lead, and turned to redness by Reverberation; having mixed these
two substances together put them in a Retort in sand, and having fitted to it
and luted exactly a Recipient, give it fire by degrees, which continue until
the drops and vapors be over: But take care that the neck of your Retort be
above an inch Diameter in breadth, that in case any sublimation happens, the
matter may have a free passage into the Recipient, and not stop the neck of the
Retort to the danger of its breaking: the Vessel being cooled, pour the
distilled liquor into a Cucurbite, and rectify this spirit in ashes, to reduce
it to a greater purity; After this, take some part of the calx of Lime made
with spirit of Niter precipitated with salt water, edulcorated and dried; put
it in a circulatory or digesting Vessel, pouring upon it vj. p. of the above
said Spirit, and digest it in a vaporous Balneo with a slow heat, and you shall
see in a short time this Spirit to become tinged with a fair blew, which being
somewhat high in color, decant it, and put new in the place, and so continue
until the Menstruum takes no more color, then put all the Tinctures together
and filtrate them, and draw off the said Menstruum again to a dry bottom; and
you shall have in the bottom of the Vessel a powder of the smell of Urine, upon
which pour distilled Rain water three fingers high, and draw it off again by
distillation, and thus proceed with new distilled Rain water, until the Lunar
powder has totally lost her ill smell, and the ill-savouring taste of Urine
which the Armoniack salt had raised in it; and the powder being thus prepared
and well dried, put it in a circulatory Vessel, and pour upon it very well
alkoholizate spirit of Wine three inches high; stop the Vessel very exactly and
place in in a vaporous Balneo to extract and circulate, until it has got a
very high blew color; then cease the fire, filtrate the Tincture, and draw off
half of the Menstruum in Balneo, keeping the remainder very choicely: for it is
the true essence of Silver, very excellent against all affections of the Brain,
particularly against madness or maniacal passion, Apoplexy, Epilepsey and
Palsy, given from j. drop to vj. vij. or viij. in convenient Liquors, as are
the spirit of black Cherries, or of Elder-berries.

The second preparation of the Tincture of Lune.
THE process of the Tincture is much more philosophical then the foregoing,
which must oblige the Artist to stick close to his work and proceed in it
judiciously; and as we have spoken above of the Cementatory Calcination of
Silver, so have we defferred to teach here the best method of that Operation,
as we will keep the Amalgamatory for the subsequent.

Silver of Cupel, and having beaten it into very thin plates, put them in a
Crucible or Cementing Box, stratified with very dry vitriolated Tarrar,
prepared with very pure salt of Tartars and well rectified oil of Vitriol,
beginning your stratification by the Salt, and ending so the last bed or lay;
lute the Crucible or Box, and let the Lute dry, then place the Vessel in a
circular fire, begun slowly, and thus continued during the space of four hours,
which being over, let the Crucible grow cold, then open it to take the Silver
which you shall find calcinated and brickle, of a Glass color; reduce it to
powder, and if any remains which is not yet sufficiently calcined, reiterate
the Cementation, with new, and join all together. Put this green powder in a
Cucurbite, pouring upon it good distilled vinegar the height of three fingers;
then place the Vessel in ashes to a moderate heat, and so leave it viij. or x.
days in this tenor of heat continually, that it may dissolve and extract the
Tincture of Silver; and when the spirit of Vinegar shall be tinged with a fine
Emerald green, separate it and pour on new, until this Spirit takes no more of
the green color; then put all the Tinctures together and filtrate them. You
shall find in the bottom of the Vessel a yellowish sediment, which is the
remainde^ of the Silver, and its earth divested of sulphur.

But all the Extractions filtrated in a Cucurbite in B. M. and draw off the
Menstruum thereof by Distillation in a graduate heat till it comes to a pretty
thick consistency of Syrup, upon which pour spirit of Wine twice rectified upon
salt of Tartar four fingers high; cover the Cucurbite with its Blindhead, and
put the matters to circulate in a vaporous Balneo in saw-dust, regulating the
heat thereof as near as it is possible to the proportion of the humane Body, or
man's stomach, during the space of forty natural days, which is the
Philosophical Month, then take out the Vessel, and if you find any defecation
made in the bottom, decant or separate the impurity by inclination, or filtrate
the spirit of Wine laden and impregnated with the centrical sulphur of Lune,
which is of a very pleasant green color; put the filtration in a Cucurbite in
Balneo, and draw off back again the two thirds or three parts of the spirit,
and you shall have the true Elixir of Lune in a green liquor, which keep in a
well stopped Viol for use. The virtues of it are alike, or rather more excellent
and more in number then those of the foregoing essence: for it is a Rare Remedy
to evacuate insensibly dropsical swellings: The Dosis is from j. drop to viij.
in Broth, Cephalic and operative Waters, or even in white Wine.

The third preparation of Lunar Tincture.
WE have received in this third Tincture to give a place to the description of
the Amalgamatory calcination of Silver, for avoiding of unnecessary
repetitions, and that also the Artist may better conceive under one Tenor the
operation of this last process upon Lune. Take then very fine Silver in
leaves, and heat it moderately in a Crucible on burning or kindled coals,
having at the same time as much weight as the Silver is of running Mercury in
another Crucible, which heat also until it begins to smoke, then join both
these together, and stir them well until they be reduced to a well incorporated
Amalgame and something unctuous; to which add a fourth part of its weight of
well desiccated common salt, and having put it in the Crucible again, give it a
gradual circulatory fire, increasing it by little and little until all the
Mercury be vapoured away; then the Crucible being cold, grind the matter
remaining in it on a Marble stone, and wash it with distilled Rainwater to
separate the saltness thereof, and dry the calx remaining after Lotion; weigh
and put it in a Mattress, and pour on it three times its weight of spirit of
Niter, digesting them together to a full dissolution, then pour this liquor
into a small Cucurbite, and draw off the Menstruum again in ashes to a dry
bottom: then pour on it distilled Rainwater, and draw it off again by
distillation, and thus reiterate with new water, until the calx of Lune has
altogether lost that acrimony which it had contracted by its Dissolvent: that
done, and the calx being very dry, put it in a Mattress, and pour upon it spirit
of. Venus or Copper four fingers high, and put it to digest and extract in
ashes in a slow heat; and note, that your Mattress must be stopped with a
Blindhead, and well luted by reason of the nimbleness and subtility of the
Spirit; let it thus remain in digestion during the space of 15 days without
discontinuing the heat, then filtrate the Tincture which will be blew; and go
on in this digestion and extraction until the Menstruum takes no more of the
color, and all the Tinctures being drawn and filtrated, put them in B.M. in a
Cucurbite, to draw off again the Menstruum to the consistency of a thick Syrup,
upon which pour of the spirit of Wine acuated with the sixteenth part of its
weight of volatile salt of Urine, and put a Blindhead upon your Cucurbite, and
having luted it very exactly place it in a vaporous Bath, and give it a very
slow and moderate heat during the space of three weeks; and the spirit will
take a very pleasant blew color, by the extraction it makes of the centrinal
sulphur of Lune; this done, filtrate the Tincture, in case any impurity has
gathered to a head, then draw off again the two thirds of the Menstruum in B.M.
in a very gentle heat, and there will remain a true Antiepileptical Essence,
and the true Specific against all maladies of the Brain, by us already
related: The Dosis must be from j. drop to viij. and x. in the Flower of
Lime-tree-water, or an Emulsion made with the same water, and Piony seeds or
some other Vehicle appropriated to the Disease, and taste of the Patient.

Of Iron, and its Chemical Preparation.
IRON is one of the two Metals of the second Classis, which is that of the less
noble and most hard of metals. It is compounded of a Mercury and Sulphur, the
crudest and least fusible of all; or again, if you will, Iron is compounded of
a Mercury, Sulphur and Salt, which are mixed with many terrestrial and crude
parts; in a word, no metal abounds more in Vitriol then Iron or Mars does, so
named by reason of the analogy it has with that Planet, as we already have
said above; Iron or Mars is one of the Metals which supplies with more Remedies
the shop of our Chemical Artist, and one of those that produces the most
effects and most pathetical. We will deliver here the method of preparing the
most useful for the health of poor Patients, and the most necessary for the
instruction of Artists: such as are first the Gradatory Perfectibility (if I
may so speak) which purifies Iron of all its impurities, and changes it into
that substance we call Steel, which to speak properly, is nothing else but a
well compacted and close well depurated Iron. Secondly, we will calcine it to
prepare therewith the Crocus Martis both astringent and aperitive. Thirdly, We
will dissolve it to make thereof Vitriol, Syrup and Salt. Fourthly, We will
make the extraction thereof, which shall afford us the Astringent and aperitive
Tincture. And in the fifth and last place, we will deliver the manner of
preparing the Chrystals of Mars, impregnated with the internal soul of Steel,
which shall appear by; the red color of its sulphur, whereof these Chrystals
do participate.

How Iron ought to be purged, and made closer, to be turned into Steel.
TAke bars or rods of Iron Hammered and reduced to the bigness of the middle
finger, and stratifie them in a fitting Vessel with a course powder made with
1. b. of Beech or Willow coals, and ij. p. of Oxehorn scraped, the joints of
the cover of the Vessel being well luted, and the Vessel put in a wind-Furnace
made for the purpose, wherein you shall give a circular fire with good coals
the space of five or six hours, and all being cooled, take off your Iron which
you shall find purer, closer and more compacted, the volatile salt and
oylinesse of the Horn having penetrated the bars of Iron, and very much
corrected and sweetened it: insomuch as it is less porous and earthy, it is
also more ductile and malleable before the water be given unto it, and much
harder, and fit to cut after it has received the water; but as it does not
conduce to our present purpose, it will suffice us to say, that since Steel is
puter and more refined then plain Iron, that it is consequently Steel must be
taken by our Artist to serve his Chemical Operations therewith. They that will
use Filings, let them take of those which are found ready to hand at the
Needle-makers, in case they be in a place where they can conveniently get it,
otherwise let them take of the purest and best Steel they shall meet with, and
File it into very small dust. We have brought here this operation to no other
end then to show our Artist, that the volatile Salts ever exalt and advance to
a better quality the subjects on which they are employed, that he may the more
entertain a due esteem of them, and repose in them his chief trust and
confidence rather then in any other Remedies.

To prepare the astringent Crocus Martis.
WE will deliver two ways of preparing this Crocus, the one by Reverberation
for the inward parts; and the other by dissolution for outward applications.
For the first, Take equal parts of Filings of Steel and common Salt, and grind
them on a Marble stone together until they be well mingled and incorporated,
then spread this matter on a Tile to dry, having some edge in the sides to
hinder the matter falling, and place it in a Reverberatory Furnace, and give it
a flaming fire which may gently touch, and as it were only lick over the matter
during the space of xxx. hours: which being over, wash the so reverberated
matter with distilled Rainwater and dry it, to put it a second time to the
Reverberatory, that it may be more subtilitated and open, until the Filing or
Steel dust be changed into a high and red astringent powder, which is that
Chym^sts do call Crocus or Saffron of Mars, having given this name to such
preparations of Metals and Minerals that are reduced into a red powder, by
Distillation or Reverberation. This Crocus being well opened by the action of
fire, grind it on a Porphyry stone with water of Plantain juice or Ladies
mantle water, until it be reduced to an Alkohol, and then put it in small
Trochisks on paper to dry cleanly, and so keep for use. This Crocus Martis is
inwardly used where there is need of an astringent desiccative Remedy: as in
Dysentery, Lientery, heat of Urine, Gonorrhaea and spitting of blood; The Dosis
must be from iiij. gr. to s. in Conserve of Roses in Bolus, or preserved
Comfrey Root or Decoction of Plantain, Golden-Rod, or Ladies-mantle, a little
of syrup of dried Roses, or a little of that of Berberries.

As for the second kind of Crocus which is astringent, and to be employed to
outward uses, it is made with any kind of acid or corrosive Liquor, as the
common aqua fortis, spirit of Nitre, Salt, Vitriol, Allom and Armoniack salt;
we will only take for our model here aqua fortis made with equal parts of Allom
and Vitriol, in which the Filings of Steel must be dissolved, of which take
iiij. and pour it by s. at once in lb j. of this aqua fortis: for if the
Menstruum was poured upon the Filings, there would such an ebullition be made,
and so sudden a calefaction of the matter and Vessel, that either the one would
be wasted, or the other break; and if also too much Filings were put at once in
the Menstruum, it would send up sudden and noxious vapors, which would cause a
suffocation of breast, or stopping of breath to the Artist; wherefore the
Menstruum must be put into a Cucurbite somewhat high that nothing may be lost
by ebullition, which it is altogether impossible to hinder or prevent by any
other means, then pouring a little of Filings at once; iiij. of Filings being
all spent and put in by the Artist, if the Menstruum be not altogether spent
and drunk up, he may put as much Filings more as it can bear and he thinks
fitring; for it must be made so thick as that the Menstruum and Filings make
but one past of an indifferent consistency, which put in a Mattress having
something a broad and large neck; and being placed on a round plate of earth or
a piece of brick with a little Lute, you shall give it a circular fire by
degrees to exhale the Menstruum: then increase it until the Mattress becomes red
on all sides, and being cooled, you shall find in it an astringent Crocus of
Mars, of a high red, very useful and excellent for outward applications, viz.
to dry Wounds and Ulcers, and stop Hemorrhagy; it is of this Crocus that
Chyrurgeons must always make use in Salves and Liniments. We have this more
nevertheless to say of it, that if the Artist puts only j. of Filings of Steel
upon vj. of aqua fortis, and evaporate it in a Mattress in sand to a dry bottom,
he will have a Crocus easily dissoluble of it self, being put in a Cellar or
some other moist and cold place, into a red Liquor, which is a sovereign Remedy
to mundifie rotten, corroding and running Ulcers: as also those which have
contracted a Callus or soreness in the brim, and abound with superfluities of
spongious and corrupted flesh: for it consumes all preternatural exerescencies
by the activity of the spirits and salts which are dissolved, and renders the
Ulcer capable of cicatrization by the astringent Faculty of its vitriolick
Earth.

How the Crocus Martis aperitive is to be prepared.
WE will deliver two manners of preparing this aperitive Crocus of Mars, as
we have showed two for the astringent Crocus. The first manner is by taking lb
j. of Filings or dust of Needles very clean, which put in a stone earthen Pan
very flat, then by degrees and gently moisten it with Dew-water, if your work
falls in May, else Rainwater of the vernal Equinox, until the Filings begin to
crumble, at which sign proceed no further lest you should drown your matter;
for when it is only moistened in the form of a past or crumbs, it ferments and
grows hot of it self with water, as by the touch and smell it may easily be
noted: for there is a certain saline Spirit hidden in these waters which
penetrates the Steel, and insensibly dissolves it: wherefore it must
immediately be dried in the Sun, and being dry, grinded on a Marble, and so
moistened again without drowning, and in less then three or four days all the
Filings will be converted into a black powder, which will begin to draw to a
Violet purple color in the superficies, and by a small taste of ink, or
somewhat vitriolick, shows, that the water begins to make the reincrudation
of the metal into his seminal principles, which are Sulphur and Vitriol; for
when the water is put upon it, it sends forth a sulphurous odor, and the
taste does manifestly declare and discover the Vitriol. Note, that your matter
must be grinded on the Marble as often as you dry it, and if you will discharge
the parr of a careful Artist, you may make three exsiccations every day, and
end the operation in three weeks, otherwise you must bestow at least a month
or six weeks, before the body of this metal may be reduced to an impalpable
powder, which is colored with a brown purple Violet, which having got, put it
in a crude Iron Pot or Caldron, and upon open fire Reverberate, stirring it
still with a Rod or slice of Iron, and as soon as it begins to grow red, take
it away, and you shall have the aperitive Reverberated Crocus of Mars in a fair
red brown color. But it is much better not to reverberate it, because this
heat may cause the Vitriol that begun to be framed in the Crocus, to exhale
away, and this vitriolick salt only constitutes its aperitive virtue. The Dosis
of this Crocus must be from iij. gr. to xx. and xxx. provided it be given by
degrees, and the stomach used to it by little an little; it is administered in
Opiats and Conserves or mixed amongst aromatical Powders; it must be taken
fasting,, or the stomach being empty three or four hours before meals, and
the Patient must walk after in some smooth and pleasant place; after the walk
take a Btoth of Veal and Chicken made with Parsley and Spanish Scorzonera Roors.
This Remedy is useful for all Chronical Diseases, Cachexy, Leucophlegmacy, and
all other Diseases proceeding from splenetical obstructions, or obstructions of
the Liver, Mesentery and Pancreas; but there are alsome other Martial Remedies
more quick and efficacious in their operation, as we will show hereafter.

The second manner of preparing the opening Crocus Martis is this. Take a bar
of good Steel and make it glowing in a Smiths Forge, in that degree of heat
which they call so ering heat, which is a kind of half-fusion, and being thus,
have a great Pan full of water, over which you shall hold your Steel, and apply
close to it a cake of Brimstone, which will melt the Steel, and drop by drop
precipitate it in the water in small grains; continue this work until you have
a sufficient quantity of the Steel in grain, which must be separated from the
Brimstone that fell dropping along with the Steel in the water, then beat it in
an Iron mortar to powder, which must be run through a delicate sieve or Tamy,
then prepared on a Porphyry stone, or Sea-shel with some opening water, until
it be reduced to an Alkohol, the half whereof must be framed into Trochisks,
when dried and so kept; this is called prepared Steel. Then take the other half
and reverberate it in an Iron Cauldron with naked fire, as we have said above,
until it has attained a red purple color, without fear of consuming the
vitriolick faculty; but contrariwise it will open more and more, this
preparation being different from that of the foregoing Crocus; the Dosis is the
same with the other, the precautions the same, and the use of it for the same
Diseases; some there are that even do prefer it to the other preparations, but
I am of a contrary mind.

How the Vitriol of Mars is to be prepared.
TAke Filings or dust of Needles very clean, and put it in a Glass Cucurbite,
pouring by degrees upon it acid or sharp spirit of Vitriol, not altogether
deprived of its phlegm; stir both together with an Iron slice, pouring as much
of it as that the matter may be well imbid'd and satiated therewith, and have a
special care not to break the Cucurbite, and immediately pour upon distilled
Rainwater, or Rainwater taken up in the Equinox without distilling, which may
be almost boiling hot, to the height of four fingers, place the Cucurbite in
sand already heated, and there leave it in digestion and dissolution the space
of xij. hours; which done, filtrate the warm Liquor and put it to evaporate
gently to the consumption of one half in the vapor of a boiling Balneo, and
then place it in a cold Room to shute Chrystals, which you shall find the next
morning bright and green round about the Vessel, which put between two papers,
and dry in a slow and gentle heat; and if you desire a greater quantity, purse
the same work upon the remaining dust or Filings with the spirit of Vitriol;
then with warm water filtrate, evaporate and chrystallize until the whole body
of the metal be converted into Vitriol, or a little of earthly sediment remains
if the Filings were pure: But the quantity of your Vitriol will go much beyond
the weight of the Filings, exceeding sometimes even to a third part: by which
the Artist may be taught that it is but a Recorporification of Vitriol, having
resumed his vitriolick Idea and Character by the help of Mars, as being a body
which was once vitriol: but we must confess, that this Vitriol surpasses much
in excellency the common Vitriol, out of which the spirit used in this Work
has been distilled: for the recorporified Spirits have a great sphere of
activity, and do much more powerfully work, then the matters purely and merely
naturally. This Vitriol has more efficacy and acts with much more quickness
then the aperitive Crocus, in all the Diseases which we have before mentioned,
but the Dosis is much less: for it is given beginning with one gr. and so
continuing by degrees till you come to viij. x. and xij. gr. either in Bolus in
some Preserve, or in Broth. But you must note, that the use of Remedies
extracted from the Mars, must be long continued and taken still, increasing
from j. gr. to ij. until at last it begins to raise and provoke the stomach and
cause a nauseousnesse; then go back from ij. gr. or somewhat more, because it
appears that Nature is then in the right time of bringing the Remedy to a
desired success without much violence, if it be not increased: You must note
besides, that those that use Steel-Remedies, ought to be purged every fourth
day, in case the Remedy it self does not provoke Nature, and every other day
the belly must be opened by a Glyster of pure new made stale: for as the Steel
has a dissopilating and opening Vitriol, so has it likewise a constipating
and drying earth; wherefore every fourth or fifth day infuse ij. Sennae with j.
vitriolated Tartar in Veal or Chicken Broth, to carry away and drive out of the
body those matters which the Remedy has made fit for evacuation. Those that
desire to have a very fine and useful Crocus Martis, must calcine iiij. of this
vitriol of Mars in a Crucible with open fire, until it be converted into a fair
subtle red powder, having no ill or unsavory taste, and fit to be given to the
most delicate Palats, in Bolus, Lozenges; or Opiates from v. gr. to xxx. with
the same observations and precautions as are hinted above.

To make the Extract or Syrup of Mars.
lb s. of Filings of Needles very prue and clena, mix it with lb of good white
Tartar of Montpellier reduced to subtle powder; then fill up the third part of
some Iron Cauldron of reasonable bigness with water, and put it on the bare
fire, but your water must be Dew-water; or water taken up in the vernal
Equinox, or distilled Rainwater, make it boil, and when it is thus ready, pour
into it gently and by degrees the Steel and Tartar mixed together, not above j.
at once, by reason of the ebullition and working up which happens in the
dissolution of the matter at first; then all being put in the Vessel, stir it
continually in the bottom with an Iron Ladle, to raise up in the uppermost part
of the water amongst the walmes, that which would otherwise settle in the
bottom, and by this means hasten and ease the dissolution thereof: you must
also keep in a pot by it self upon the fire, some of the water, like unto that
wherewith the dissolution is made, that it may be restored warm in the place of
the other, that the action of the fire causes to evaporate away, which must be
repaired from time to time, lest the Tartar should too much coagulate, by want
of moisture, or burn in the bottom or about the Vessel; and moreover, have a
care that the Menstruum may be in sufficient quantity to dissolve well the
Tartar, which by its acidity does work upon the Mars and dissolves it; keep the
fire going still, stirring and renewing with new water, until the Artist sees
that the Liquor contained in the Pot or Cauldron be quite altered, and become
thick and of the color of a whitish gray, having brown and blackish veins
about it; and moreover, the matter gathers a smell and odor as of sulphur of
Mars, which is something unpleasant and nauseous; but the last and most
concluding sign of the end and perfection of the operation and the dissolution
of the Steels is the taste: for filtrating some small quantity of the Liquor,
when the above mentioned begin to appear, if the Liquor be of a brown red
color, and has a taste of Ink, and Vitriol between acid and bitter; then must
you fill up wholly the Vessel with boiling water, and filtrate it being yet
warm, putting the same as it is filtred in another Iron Vessel, wherein you
cause it gently and without boiling to evaporate away; and thus go on
filtrating and evaporating, until the Liquor be reduced to the consistency of a
Syrup or half Extract, which you may know when a thin skin shall rise above the
evaporating Liquor; then draw the Vessel off from the fire, and your matter
being cooled, put it In a white earthen Pot to keep for the time of use. It
will not be very difficult to persuade the less knowing, that Exttact or
Syrup, is one of the best Remedies produced by the Art of Chemistry; for it is
known to all, that Tartar is a friendly Salt to our Nature, and of it self a
great opener and disopilative Remedy; there are also very few but know, that
Physicians have in all Ages made use both of crude and prepared Steel, or its
Crocus to open obstructions, and for the cure of chronical and obstinate
Diseases, which have seated in the Region of the Ventricle, Liver, Spleen and
other adjacent parts: But I can very sincerely say, that all what we have
delivered above, must give way to this Martial Extract; for after that Tartar
is once intimately united to the Mars, and that both have acted and reacted one
upon another in such a manner, that the one has lost its great a cidity, and
the other its metallic corporeity as it has happened in this operation, a
third substance results from thence endowed with all necessary qualifications,
to act according to the intent of the Physician, Cito tuto, jucunde: for this
admirable Remedy can never be hurtful, but always profitable and good, as we
our selves have found it by experience, in the cure of many great and dangerous
maladies made by the due administration of this noble Medicine; which is given
very fortunately and with a surprising and unconceivable success, in the
beginning of the swellings of Dropsies, against the schirrous Tumors of the
Spleen, against all obstructions of the parts of the inferior Ventricle,
against the pains of the Reins and Bladder, against the evil fermentations of
the stomach, against Worms in young and old, the seminary whereof it does
radically extirpate; against intermittent Fevers, chiefly those which
Physicians call Stomach Fevers; and to be short, generally against all
coagulations of tartarous matters in whatsoever part of the body seated. The
Dosis is from v. drops to Lx. in Broth, aperitive Decoctions, or specific
Waters appropriated to the most apparent and predominanting Disease.

To prepare the Salt of Mars.
lb s. of Filings of Steel very small and clean, and being put in a stone Dish
or Pan, sprinkle them with very good distilled Vinegat until it is become a
Paste, which dry after to the steam or vapor of B. M. and when it shall be
sufficiently dry, grind it upon Marble, and moisten it again with the same
Vinegar; then dry, grind and moisten again so often, as you may at last discern
by the taste in your matter a sweetish taste, predominating in the body of your
Mars; then put this powder in a Cucurbite, and pour upon it phlegm of Vinegar
half a foot high, and place the Cucurbite in sand, and cause the liquor therein
to boil, that the extraction of your salt of Mars may be the better perfected;
but have a care to put still new warm phlegm of vinegar in the place of that
which in the boiling vapors away; and when you see your Menstruum sufficiently
impregnated, filtrate it being cold that it may come away the purer; the
filtrated Liquor put in B. M. and draw off ij. or iij. p. of the Liquor in the
heat thereof; then place your Cucurbite in a cold place or Cellar to make the
salt shute into Chrystals; separate the Liquor swimming over the Chrystals,
then evaporate again and turn to chrystallize; and this work continue till it
will yield no more Chrystals; then dry them all, and being dry put in a double
or circulatory Vessel, and pour upon alkohol of Wine three fingers high,
stopping and shutting closely the joints of the Vessel; and so putting it in a
vaporous Balneo to digest with a slow heat during the space of seven natural
days; which being past, unstop the Vessel and put a Still-head upon it to draw
off the spirit of Wine in the same heat, and in the bottom you will find a salt
of Mars very pleasant, and without compare to remove obstructions, chiefly for
weak and tender bodies; it is good in general against all melancholic
affections, and griefs of the Reins and Bladder, but it is particularly
dedicated to the relief of dropsical Bodies, and fits or obstructions of the
Mother. The Dosis must be from iiij. gr. to xx. in Broth or Decoctions, or
appropriated waters according to the Disease.

To make the astringent Tincture of Mars.
iiij. of Filings of Needles very pure and clean, and having put them in a
glass Cucurbite, pour upon spirit of or Copper until they be sufficiedtly
moistened and begin to cleave together; then cover the Cucurbite with a
Still-head, and draw off the spirit in a slow heat in ashes to a dry bottom;
and if what you have drawn has any taste, cohobate it again; if not, moisten
it again with new spirit of Venus, and dry as before, and go on thus doing
three times, or until your Mars. be changed into a very subtle and red Crocus;
then grind it on a Porphyry stone and put again in a Cucurbite, and pour upon
of the same spirit of four fingers high, and having adapted to it the double
Pan or Blindhead, place it in B. M. to extract, until the Spirit be turned very
red; then separate the Tincture, and pour again new Menstruum, and go on thus
doing so long as it will take color; this done, put all the Tinctures together
and filtrate them, draw off the spirit of Venus in B. M. until it has got the
consistency of a thick Syrup, upon which pour spirit of Wine three fingers
high, which digest in the vapor of Balneo and let extract; then filtrate and
extract with the same Menstruum until no more will come* and having filtrated
all the Tinctures, draw off three parts of the Liquor, and you shall have an
astringent Tincture of Mars remaining, which is none of the least secrets in
Physic, and worthy the Closet of a curious Artist. This Tincture is
administered by drops, from iiij. to xv. and xx. in Decoction of Plantain, or
water of the juice thereof; it may also be given in water sharpened with juice
of a Pomegranate. It has the virtue to stop all immoderate fluxes of the
Belly, to correct and allay the griefs and irritations of the Pylorus or
Blind-gut, cure Dysentery and Lientery, as alse red and white fluxes of Women,
and the hemorrhoidal also; finally it dryes Gonorrhea and cures heat of Urine,
and stops all manner of Hemorrhagy.

To make the aperitive Tincture of Mars.
ij. of Vitriol of Mars prepared in the manner we have taught here above,
reduce it to powder, and mix with it equal weight of salt of Sennertus, made in
powder also in a Marble Mortar, and you shall wonder that on a sudden this
wonderful Salt shall draw the soul of Mars or his sulphur out of the Center of
its vitriol; for although this salt be white and the vitriol likewise, it is no
unpleasant surprisal to behold in an instant a red to predominate higher in
color then that of the Saffron; this Mass must be stirred and agitated, and
it will soon be reduced to a Pap, then expose it to the moist air that the
whole may be resolved into a Liquor, which is already of it self an aperitive
and disopilai ve Remedy, which may be given against all manner of obstructions,
and against the coagulation of Tartar in man's body, from vj. drups to xv. in
Broth or aperitive Decoctions. But this substance is yet too course, and will
show that our Art is capable to bring substances to the highest pitch of their
perfection, and the last degree of their subtilty. To this end weigh the red
matter, after it has been mixed in a Marble mortar; and note the weight, weigh
it also after its dissolution in the air, to draw off by distillation in B. M.
the weight of the moisture it has attracted from the air, and to pour upon it
as much of the spirit of as this moisture does weigh, then digest them in the
vaporous Bath together, in a digesting or double Vessel the space 24 hours,
after which draw off the spirit with a Still-head to a consistency of Syrup
somewhat thick, upon which pout tartarized spirit of Wine four fingers high,
then close up the Vessel with a Blindhead and digest it three natural days; at
the end whereof filtrate the Tincture cold, and draw off the half or two parts
of the Menstruum in Balneo in a slow heat, and so shall you have one of the
noblest Remedies which the matter helped by Art can ever bring to pass, as much
for his virtue as for his pleasantness of taste. This noble Tincture does eat
up and resolve all manner of tartarousnesse in man's body, which wheresover it
coagulates, is the spring and cause of all obstructions: wherefore it may
securely be administered in all the maladies, where it is necessary to open and
expel superfluities. But the most wonderful thing of all is, that it has or
bears no weight upon the stomach, as for the most part are all the Remedies
taken from Mars; contrariwise, it strengthens the Ventricle, and purifies it
from the coagulated clammy humors and viscosities, which for the most part
cause the loss of appetite; it is moreover a great Antiscorbutick, because it
disburthens the Spleen, purifies the mass of the blood of those gross and
earthly impurities, whereby all the evil accidents of this pernicious Disease
are occasioned. The Dosis must be from v. drops to xx, and xxx. in appropriated
Liquors, so many times mentioned by us above.

How the red Chrystals of Mars are to be prepared.
MAke first a very good aqua fortis with equal parts of Vitriol and Saltpeter;
the description whereof we shall give in the Chapter of Salts. Of this lb j.
and therein dissolve iii!. of very pure and dry Saltpeter; then put vj. of
Steel in whole pieces, as big as the finger, and two inches long, in the bottom
of a Cucurbite placed in ashes, and having poured the aqua fortis let it act
and work thereupon; But note, that the Cucurbite must be big and capacious, and
that it is not without reason we prescribe to put Steel in whole pieces, and
not Filings; for the Vessel would too suddenly contract a heat, and cause too
sudden an ebullition, what care and precaution soever could be taken by the
Artist; but when it is in body, the Menstruum or dissolving spirit cannot
penetrate it, neither work upon it but gently and by measure. We thus alter the
manner of our work and Processes, the better to prepare the judgment of the
Artist against such accidents which may happen in the working; to hasten the
dissolution, give a slow heat to the ashes; and when all the action of the
Dissolvent or Menstruum is past over, pour in the Cucurbite lb ij. ph. of good
distilled vinegar something warm: but you must pour it in gently, and softly
stir the matter in the bottom; but if by chance some small piece of the Steel
was found left there, take it away before you pour the vinegar; then digest
this Solution three continual days in B. M. and it will become very red, then
filtrate through a paper and evaporate in B. M. to draw off the two parts of
the Menstruum by distillation, and placing the Cucurbite in a cold place, it
will shute into red Chrystals, having yet in them some kind of impurity; put
them together aside and evaporate the remaining Liquor, to draw off from it
what may turn again into Chrystals; then put all the Chrystals together, and
dissolve them in a sufficient quantity of distilled vinegar; filtrate the
Solution, and draw half of the Menstruum in the flow heat of B. M. then put it
in a cold place to shute into Chrystals; and so go on in dissolving,
filtrating, distilling and chrystallizing until your Chrystals be very fair,
red and transparent, and that no more feces or separation of impurities will
settle in the bottom of the Vessel where the chrystallization is made; dry the
Chrystals in a slow heat between two papers, and put them in a glass Viol to
keep for use. This Salt is a very subtle and pleasant Aperitive, which is
administered in Broths or Apozema's, or even may be given as a true Martial
Tartar, without any danger of the aqua fortis used in the dissolution; for it
is to be known, that all the corrosion of the spirit of aqua fortis is blunted
and deaded by its own action upon the Steel, as it may be perceived by the
pleasing taste of the Chrystals resulting thereof. The Dosis must be from vj.
gr. to xx. and xxx. and if the Artist be curious, he may take ij. of the
Chrystals, and as much of very fair Armomoniack salt, and grind and mix them
together, and being put in a luted Mattress, place it in sand, so as it may lie
but a fingers breadth from the Iron vessel containing the sand; then by a
gradual fire, drive it so high that the Armoniack salt may sublimate and carry
along with it self the sulphur of Mars, and so shall he have Flowers very red
and efficacious for a Diaphoretick and Diuretical Remedy against intermittent
Agues, and chiefly against Tertians and Quartains; and if you have sublimated
of these Flowers in any considerable quantity, you may dissolve one part
thereof in warm water, to separate the salt from it by edulcoration and lotion,
and you shall have the true sulphur or Mars in its perfection, which you may
use as a sovereign Diaphoretick. The Dosis of the Flowers is from ij. gr. to x.
or xij. and of the Sulphur from j. gr. to vj. in Bolus or convenient Liquors.

Of Copper and its Chemical Preparation.
COppet is the second of the less noble of the hard metals of the second
Classis; it is according to Paracelsus compounded of a purple Sulphur, red
Salt, and yellow Mercury. But as we have said of Iron, so may we of Copper,
that it has much vitriol in it self, and less of earth then Iron, and by
consequence less impurity. It is amongst Chemists called Venus, because it
receives the influences of that Planet, and relates to the parts in Man
dedicated to generation. The general virtues of Copper are, to strengthen the
spermatical and generative parts, both in male and female, insomuch as that the
Ancients and Hippocrates himself and his successors after him have had it in
great esteem, and made very frequent use of it though in a rude and course way,
being not yet assisted with the light of Chemistry, which does from this metal
draw admirable Remedies, and particularly that wonderful Spirit of Venus,
whereof we have spoken above, and whereto we are already come.

We could very well lay down and deliver here all the manners of calcining
Copper, either by Dissolution, Illinition or Cementation; but as all these
operations do rather relate to the metallic then Physical part, we will not
insist on it to pursue incessantly and with less intermission, our purpose of
discovering the noble Remedies which metals do afford us; we will then first
speak of the preparation of green Copper or Verdegrease, which is more full of
mystery then is commonly imagined, though this operation be common, and
performed only by the Women and Maids at Montpellier.

The preparation of green Copper, or Verdegrease.
GReen Copper to speak properly, is nothing else but the volatilization of
Copper in very subtle Vitriol, by the help of Tartar contained in the husks and
recrements of the Grape after the Wine is expressed and squeezed out of it. But
this operation cannot be performed in all places where Wine does grow, which
must give a Chemical Artist occasion to reason thereupon, and seek after the
cause, in examining the matter which produces this green, which are the copper
and the cakes of the husks of Wine. Now all kind of Grape has its recrement
after expression, and yet all expression of Grapes is not capable to reduce the
copper in green, as this is that comes from Montpell^er and the adjacent parts,
and therefore consequently there must be something in that Grape of Montpellier
capable to work upon and extract sooner then others, the vitriol of Copper
without corrosion, which cannot be done but by the help of a subtle and active
Tartar, which penetrates the copper and changes it into green, and yet this
Tartar is undiscernable and imperceptible in the recrements of the Grape; but
after the copper is stratified with this expression, and put in a convenient
place, the inward fire and fermentative spirit of these cakes of Grapes excites
and stirs up a heat, which brings it from power to act, and does volatilize the
Tartar contained thereunder, changing it into a subtle spirit not altogether
Wine or vinous, neither yet become vinegar, so that it does possess volatile
sulphurous qualities, and yet has in its self a Saline, Mercurial and acid
Spirit, which acts upon the Copper, and turns it into that substance we call
green Copper, being the ground and Basis of our spirit of V^nus. It is not
without reason we have made this digressive Discourse upon green Copper, made
with the Recrements or expression of Wine about Montpellier, for it altogether
differs from that which is made with Vinegar and Copper shut up in Barrels; for
we know that Lanquadock and Provence Wine, and chiefly that which grows about
Montpellier does yield great store of Tartar very pure, and very excellent both
for Physical Remedies and Chemical Operations: Now it is only the subtilest
part of that matter which Nature intends for Tartar, that volatilizes it self,
and without any violent corrosion works upon the Copper; for it is rather
performed by an amicable and friendly kind of dissolution: But Vinegar does
operate more violently, and does not join nor unite it self to the substance of
the Copper, as this middle Spirit does; which truth will be made manifest by
the extraction thereof, which we will teach, its chrystallization and
distillation, by the Discourse we shall annex unto it for the greater
instruction and satisfaction of curious Artists and searchers of Nature.

To make the volatile Vitriol of.
WE have showed above, that green Copper was nothing else but an open Copper
dissolved, and as it were volatiliz'd by the tartarous fermentative spirit of
the recrements of the expression of Wine; and we have said somewhere else, when
we spoke of Vinegar and its distillation, that its spirit was also nothing else
but a kind of subtiliated Tartar, spiritualized and made volatile. This
granted, we shall easily make our Artist conceive that the extraction of green
Copper, which we now are about to teach, is but a sequel and dependence to
bring this Agent and Patient to a more subtle volatilization; that after we
have converted the green Copper into a clear, blew, subtle, and as it were
already volatile vitriol, we may afterward by distillation bring it to one of
the most quick and wonderful Spirits hitherto used, either in Physic for the
cure of Maladies, or in Chemistry for the dissolution of Bodies, and being a
mean of uniting and joining together several substances which seem altogether
to be heterogeneous, and incapable of being brought together without the help
of this wonderful Spirit, which proceeds from the volatile vitriol of green
Copper, which is thus prepared.

Take lb iiij. of good green copper or Verdegrease of Montpellier, and being
made into a very subtle Powder, put it in a glass Cucurbite, and pour upon it
good distilled Vinegar six inches high, stir it often with a wooden Slice, the
Cucurbite being placed in s^nd, and the Menstruum being tinged with a very high
green; decant it clear of the matter, and pour on again fresh vinegar, which
digest and stir as before, and decant when it is sufficiently colored; this
repeat four times, and if the Menstruum be not much tinged the fourth time,
boil all together in a copper Cauldron, until it has extracted and dissolved
what it can get from the remainder of the green Copper: finally, you shall thus
continue to proceed with new distilled vinegar until all your matter be
dissolved, the utmost remainder of which will not extend to above iiij. or v.
of feces and earthly sediment, which has no metallic quality at all, except
you find it in some small pieces of Copper Plates, which by the negligence of
those who scrape the substance dissolved by fermentation do remain in it, but
all the remainders is but mere earth.

All these Tinctures then must be joined together, and filtrated cold through
Paper, and the filtration put to evaporate in an earthen stone Pan, in a slow
beat in the vapor of B. M. then digest again that which after filtration is
left in new distilled vinegar, filtrate it and join to the other Tincture, and
thus go on until all be run cold through the Filter to a clear Liquor, and as
green as Emerald; and when you shall see the evaporating Liquor to begin to
contract a skin in the upper part, put the Pan wherein it is in a cold place,
and let it rest there until the next day, and you shall find in the bottom and
sides of the Vessel Chrystals of fair blew Vitriol, which having put between
two Papers, dry in a very slow and moderate heat; for the Sun is even capable
to deprive this Vitriol from its best spirit, so volatile it is; wherefore the
Artist must be very circumspect and wary in this particular, lest otherwise he
be taught to become so at his own charge and by his own experience. And if the
last Chrystals, or even the first extracted, were not very fair, blew and
transparent, let them be dissolved in new distilled vinegar, and let there be
no more then the just or fitting quantity to dissolve them cold; let the
dissolution rest without stirring 24 hours, that in case there be any atoms of
feculent matter separated and raised in the first evaporation, they may settle
again. The clear Tincture shall be very softly drawn off by decantation without
stirring the bottom; and when you come near unto it, filtrate the remainder
through Paper; and if there be any considerable substance remaining in the
Filter, dissolve it in new distilled vinegar, then filtrate the Tincture, which
join with the remainder, and evaporate to half consumption as gently and slowly
as you can, then put it to shute into Chrystals, and you shall have them in
great perfection; dry them with the precaution and care we have already hinted
above, and end the rest of your operation in the same manner likewise: all
being dry, you shall find as much Vitriol as you have dissolved of green
Copper, if you have proceeded exactly and even, you shall find more; for all
the saline, acid, tartarous substance of the vinegar, is joined to the Vitriol,
and causes even its chrystallization; for all the evaporating steem though it
has the smell of vinegar, is nevertheless altogether insipid, and has no
more of taste then Rainwater when distilled it drops out of the nose of the
Limbeck. So that they which desire to be yet more accurate and successeful in
their operation, must proceed in the dissolution of their Chrystals in new
distilled vinegar, until they can discover by trying a distillation in B. M. or
at the most in ashes, whether the vinegar ascending be yet insipid, which if he
find to be so, let him go on in the Dissolution, Filtration, Evaporation and
Chrystallization, until the vinegar come out with the same strength and acidity
as it was poured in. This being so, you have attained the true Point of
requisite perfection which this noble Vitriol must be brought unto; then dry it
very slowly and gently between two Papers, to make the spirit thereof as we
shall immediately teach, after it has beed digested three several times with
very good alkaholiz'd spirit of Wine, three fingers high above it, in a double
or digesting Vessel the space of 24 hours, and after that this spirit has
been drawn off every time in B. M. to open it more and more, that it may be
endowed with those Virtues and Perfections, which do shine and are required in
the Spirit drawn from it.

The Distillation of the Spirit of.
THis is the Operation wherein a Chemical Artist has need of all his Patience
and Judgment, if he will successfully perform this intended Distillation,
which will be to him a guide and a Pattern whereupon to proceed in all others,
by reason of the great volatility of the matter he works upon. Let him then
take his Vitriol when it is very dry, and reduce it to powder in a Marble
Mortar, then put it in a Retort with a long neck and wide mouth, and all that
matter being put in, let him be careful to cleanse the uppermost part of the
Retort, and the whole neck with a Feather tied to a small stick, that he may
not be deceived in believing that the greenesse he shall perceive in the
distilling drops should have contracted their color of Vitriol which might
have been left there when it was poured in the Retort. After this he shall
place his Retort in a close Reverberatory Furnace, leaving four Registers on
the corners of the roof of the Furnace, and another in the middle, to be able
to govern the fire with more command and better moderation; wherefore these
Registers must be stopped with close and well-fitted stoples. Then let him fit a
very capacious and large Glass Recipient very clean and dry to the neck of the
Retort, and stop the joining parts with a wet Bladder, and lute them moreover
with Quicklime and whites of Eggs, as we have often repeated in this Treatise;
and when the Lute is dry, let him begin to give his fire judiciously and
slowly, forbearing all hastiness; and rather expecting with an exemplary
Patience that the matter should by degrees drive and send up its vapors, which
shall thicken and condense themselves in the neck of the Retort, and fall by
clear and limpid drops into the Recipient: for the nose or mouth of the Retort
must at least advance four fingers deep in the body of the Recipient, that he
may discern the diversity of color of the distilling drops; not so much to
feed and satisfy his own curiosity, though it be a very pleasant diversion, as
to regulate the better his fire, which in this Operation is one of the most
important considerations; because if he never so little increases the fire
without necessity, it may occasion the loss of the whole substance, and the
breaking of the Vessels; wherefore he must be here vety vigilant to do nothing
whereby he may receive a prejudice, a thing generally to be observed in all
other distillations of Salts, whereof our Artist intends to draw the Spirits.
We thought fitting to describe this circumstance of the Work with all
imaginable punctuality, that in case any by too much haste and precipitancy
comes to miscarry, he may not lay the fault upon us. This tenor and state of
heat is he to keep so long as the drops shall fall clear, and not to urge his
fire by any means: for the drops will fall fast enough, if slowly you reckon
six between the interval of every falling drop. But when the drops begin to
turn green, and the white vapors to appear in the Recipient, and condense
themselves into Spirit and in a subtle Liquor which frames in the glass
Filaments and winding veins about the said Recipient, it is a token that the
volatile Spirit begins to manifest it self abundantly, and that you must then
go on slowly and avoid all precipitancy and overhaste, for the Recipient grows
hot by the heat of the vapors and the afflux of the Spirits. The clear drops
last about four or five hours, the green and first volatile vapors as much.
That being over, you must begin to increase and urge the fire, and the
Recipient will totally fill it self with very white vapors, which will continue
increasing still the fire more and more the space of five or six hours, and
toward the end by the intense and vehement action of the fire, yellow drops
will fall, which by little and little will turn to a redness, which is an
absolute token of the end of the operation, lasting for the most part twelve or
fifteen hours, according to the greater or lesser quantity of matter in the
Retort. The vessels being grown cold, take off the Lute, joining the Recipient
to the Retort, and pour the yellowish Spirit, which has a strong sulphurous
smell in a Cucurbite; which having placed in B. M. and luted exactly a
Still-head to it, as also the Mattress, which is to be applied to the nose of
the Limbeck, give a fire proportionable to the volatility of the matter; for
this Spirit rises as easily and nimbly as spirit of Wine; but the fire about
the end must be a little more urged, and the whole substance will ascend
leaving a dry bottom into a volatile and very penetrating Spirit, possessing
more virtues then can be expressed, whether used as a bare Remedy, or as a
preparation to other Medicaments; this noble Spirit opening and dissolving
bodies without corrosion or alteration of their seminal powers and faculties,
and that which is more surprising and above all to be admired is, that this
Noble and Wonderful Spirit keeps the same virtue in Physic, and the same
dissolutive faculty, after it has served to the dissolution and preparation of
many different substances, either Stones or Metals. We will not affirm
nevertheless, or contend that this Spirit remains unalterable: But this we can,
that the experience we have had hitherto, has never discovered unto us that he
can lose any part of his acting faculty: contrariwise having drawn it off by
distillation, it has ever kept in our hands the same strength and vigor it had
done before, either used upon the same matter or upon another, as those will
most certainly find that shall employ it in their operations. It is a
sovereign Remedy against Epilepsies of what kind soever, Apoplexy, all
irritations of the Mother, all Hypocondriack and melancholy Diseases,
inveterated griefs and pains in the head, and all scorbutic maladies; It is
admirable fron j. drop to x. in appropriated Liquors; but the most judicious
Dosis in all Liquors is to a pleasant acidity. We cannot forbear to insert here
the very same words which Doctor Zwelfer, Physician to his Imperial Majesty,
has in that Appendix, which discovered this Treasure unto us; where he
concludes the praises he has given to this Spirit by these words: Et ut
summatim dicam, tanquam expertus in multis affectibus, qui Herculea etiam
remedia rident, and contemnunt, ad hunc sp. tanquam asylum si quis accurrerit,
medicamentum reperiet qu^vis precio redimendum; Hoc fruere lector amice
secreto, and favore mei pro fideli communicatione benevole persevera. This is
in few words the sense and testimony of this expert Physician; wherefore I do
yet insist after him, and advise earnestly all Physicians and Artists not to
neglect the practice of the Remedy and Dissolvent, both concentred and joined
in one substance.

But though we have herein taught the noblest Remedy that can be extracted from
Copper, it is nevertheless necessary to teach the workings of some useful
Operations in Physic and Chyrurgery, that when the Chemical Apothecary shall
meet with them in any Author, he may be able to prepare them, that the
Physician, when he shall find a fit and convenient way, may make use thereof,
for the preservation and recovery of Patients.

To prepare the vitriol of, with the Narcotick Sulphur, and Crocus thereof.
A Among the several preparations made upon Copper, none requires or contains
so many operations for the manner of the Work, nor so many useful Remedies at
once as this we are now about to teach; for which reason we have chosen it to
inform the better our Artist by the same, what he may be able to perform upon
Metals, to reduce them to their Principles by a gradation of operations: For as
we have said that Metals were once Vitriol, so have they been also Sulphur
before they were altogether coagulated and hardened into a metallic Body,
which is the cause that Art is necessitated to make use of Sulphur as a middle
substance to divest Metals from their Body, and reduce them into Vitriol, which
is thus prepared.

Take Copper in Plates and cut it in small pieces, which may conveniently be
stratified in a great Crucible with Brimstone reduced to powder, beginning to
stratifie by a lay of Brimstone, and then putting one of Copper, and thus
continuing to stratifie till the last lay be also of Brimstone; the Crucible
being full, which must be covered with a Cover, having a hole in the middle of
a bigness to run through it a Goose-quill, lute both Crucible and Cover with a
good Lute not apt to crack, and let it dry gently; when it is well dried, place
it in a Circular fire, and for the space of an hour give it a graduate fire by
little and little, that the Brimstone may softly melt and penetrate the plates
of Copper before it takes flame, because it will calcine it much better in this
manner; then bring the fire nearer from the Crucible, and increase it by
degrees until the Brimstone takes flame, and begins to send it out under the
form of a Pyramid by the hole of the Cover; then bring the fire close by, and
without adding any more, encompass and cover with it the Crucible, for the
addition of more fire would be unnecessary, since the flame of the Brimstone
coming to cease, the first calcination which is the scope of your operation is
performed; therefore nothing more remains to be done, then to let the Crucible
cool to draw your Copper out of it, which is raised and become spongious and
brickle as Glass, and red when grounded to powder; they that will have but a
course Crocus of, may take this calcined Copper, which in the shops is called
as ustum, grind it to powder and Reverberate it three times 24 hours, and they
will have a red powder very open, and a fit Ingredient for Salves and
Plasters; as for the true proportion of the said Crocus, we will teach it
hereafter. But there is one thing to be noted here, and not to be past by,
which is, that the plates of Copper must three times be made red hot in a
Crucible in a wind-Furnace, and as many times quenched in Urine, because this
opens them and prepares to Calcination, insomuch as all the rest of the
Operation is performed with much more ease.

Take then this Copper thus calcined, reduce it to Powder, and for ever lb* add
j. ph. or ij. of pulverized Brimstone, which must be exactly mixed: and having
fitted an earthen Pot not glazed upon the Furnace, so as to be fast and stable,
and fit to be heated by the bottom with moderation and increasing of the fire,
put the said Powder in, and give it a graduate fire, continually stirring with
a Scraper of Copper or Iron, that the Powder may not stick to the Pot, having a
special care to burn away all the Brimstone, and if the matter crumbles, cease
the fire, and after it is grown cold grind it with the same weight of
Brimstone, and thus seven time a together repeat this Calcination, or, which
may be a surer and better way, as much as there will be need, and until the
Artist perceives trying by the taste that the powder of the calcined Copper is
altogether vitriolick, and that being tried with distilled Rainwater, the
water takes both the color and taste of Vitriol; that being so, put all the
said powder in an earthen stone Pan, and softly by degrees pour upon it
scalding distilled Rainwater, and nimbly stir it, and that a great while
before you put it in digestion in sand, to extract all the vitriol from it;
otherwise the Powder would harden and crumble so, as it were impossible to mix
it well with the water, and the extraction or dissolution of the Vitriol would
not follow, and so should you be put to begin your operation again. The water
being tinged with a fair blew color, filtrate and evaporate it till it begins
to skin; then put the Vessel in a cold place, to stand there until the
Chrystals of are framed; then separate the liquor swimming above, and evaporate
again, and chrystallize, proceeding and reiterating this Work until no
Chrystals more will rise; then dry them gently, and keep for the following
preparations. This Vitriol may nevertheless without further preparation be
employed in a small Dosis against Vices and Diseases of the Stomach and Brain;
it kills Worms, and strengthens the Brain against Convulsions, and the
assaules of growing Epilepsies, it is also specifical to cleanse the Matrix;
some hold it as a grand secret to dissolve a little of it in water against the
burning and intemperate heat of the spermatical and other adjacent parts, and
so use it for injections, wherein they are much in the right; but for all that,
they ought no to deprive the Public and all Practitioners of Physic and
Chyrurgery of this Remedy (by concealing it to themselves) which produces so
Rare Effects, because this Vitriol possesses in it self a very good portion of
that sulphur of, which is capable to appease the irritation of those parts; and
the salt of it is a great detersive and present Refrigerative. The Dosis
inwards is from iiij. gr. to xv. and for Injections the weight of j. in lb j.
of Plantain water mixed with a little of the clarified juice of Housleek, or the
great Sempervivum.

Preparation of the Narcotick Sulphur of the Vitriol of.
lb ph. of Vitriol of. iiij. of Filings of Steel, mix them together by long
trituration in an Iron Mortar, then put the powder in a Mattress of smooth
Glass and very strong; moisten this matter by degrees with very good distilled
Vinegar, until the whole mass be well saturated, yet without overflowing of
the moisture; the Mattress must be somewhat broad in the neck, that the
evaporation of the moisture may the better be performed; then place the Mattress
in sand, leaving but half a fingers space between the bottom of the Vessel
containing the sand in the bottom of the Mattress, give fire and gently
evaporate the Menstruum, then increase the fire so much as the bottom of the
Mattress may grow red, if it be possible; then cease the fire and let the Vessel
cool, and break it to take away the mass remaining in the bottom, which will
be of a red brownish color, make it in very subtle powder, and put it in a
larger Mattress, sprinkle upon it good distilled vinegar, stirring the matter
still, until it swims above the matter the height of four fingers; then put it
to digest and extract in sand, and stir it often; it will become red and fair,
and the vinegar being well tinged, separate it and put new, and thus go on till
your powder yields no more color; then filtrate all the Tinctures, and slowly
evaporate to the gentle vapor of Balneo, until your Liquor be reduced to a
third part; which precipitate with oil of made per deliquium, until all the
sulphur be separated from it; For the salt of attracts to it self, and unites
it self in the Liquor to the salt of Vitriol, and the sulphur being no more
mixed with its salt, precipitates and separates it self from the moisture, and
falls in the bottom of the Vessel; let the sulphur settle, and decant and draw
off what shall remain swimming above, and pour upon the sulphur, lukewarm
distilled Rainwater to edulcoration, and thus continue it till the water
coming from it be insipid, then dry this sulphur very slowly, and keep it in a
Glass Viol for use. This Sulphur may be given in Bolus or dissolution, in some
Hysterical or Antiepileptical Water, from gr j. to vj. against all the
affections of the Uterus or Mother, Sympathetick and Idiopathetick Epilepsie.
This Sulphur is an Ingredient of the Laudanum without Opium of Hanrmannus. But
the Tincture of this Sulphur has quite another efficacy, then when it is yet
in Body, and is thus prepared.

The Tincture of Sulphur of.
j. of the above mentioned Sulphur of vitriol of four fingers high: put up the
Mattress with its B^indhead, and put the digestion in B. M. with a slow heat,
until it be well tinged with the Tincture of the Sulphur, separate the Tincture
and go on in your extraction until the Spirit takes no more, then filtrate the
whole matter, and draw off the Menstruum to the consistency of a liquid
Extract, upon which pour of the alkoholiz'd spirit of Elder-berries three
inches high; then cover or lute your double Vessel or Pelican, and place it in
the flow heat of a vaporous Balneo, and let it circulate, digest and extract
seven days together without interrupting the heat, and all the Tincture of
this Sulphur shall communicate it self to this Spirit, which already of it self
is an Hysterical Specific. This essence must be filtrated in cold, and the
half of its Menstruum drawn off in Balneo, and so shall you have the true
volatiliz'd sulphur of Venus, useful against diseases of the Brain and
affections of the Mother. The Dosis is from one drop to 8. 10. or 12. in Broth
or appropriated Liquors.

To prepare the Crocus of Vitriol of Venus.
lb j. of this Vitriol, and being put in a Cucurbite, place it in a close
Reverberatory, and fit to it a large Recipient, which being exactly luted, give
to it a gradual fire, and keep it 48 hours with coals: then after this use very
dry wood to give it the last degree of flaming sire the space of 12 whole
hours, and thus shall you be sure to have extracted the phlegm, volatile
spirit, acid and corrosive Spirit, or Oil so improperly called of the vitriol
of Venus, and to find in the bottom of the Retort an astringent Crocus, high
and subtle, which some do call the Caput mortuum of this Vitriol. There are
some who prescribe to put this Vitriol in a Crucible, to calcine and reduce it
to a Crocus, but I am of a contrary opinion, and cannot endure that an Artist
should lose what is the best and most full of virtue in his substances upon
which he does work; for Calcination being performed in a Crucible, it must of
necessity follow, that all what is found condensed in the Recipient after
distillation, does exhale and vapor away to nothing; but it must not be so,
since the Crocus found in the Retort after this distillation, is not inferior,
but rather purer and better then that made in the Crucible; if all the Liquor
be rectified in ashes or sand to a dry bottom without any distinction or
separation of substances, it is a specifical Spirit against Cephalic and
Uterine Diseases; being mixed in Julaps or Apozem's to a pleasant acidity, or
used in the ordinary drink of the Patient. As concerning the Crocus, it is an
infallible Remedy to stop the Blood, and to dry and cicatrize Wounds and
Ulcers. It is moreover a Specific internally applied in Opiates, and
externally by Injection, for the cure of Gonorrhaea's and heat of Urine. It is
also an excellent Remedy against immoderate loosnesse of the belly, Dysentery,
Lientery, spitting of blood, if it be exhibited from gr. iiij. to xv. or xx. in
Conserve of Roses, the Patient being purged beforehand with a good Tincture of
Rhubarb, prepared with water of juice of Chicory or Endive; it is also with
this Vitriol that the true sympathetical Powder is prepared, which is capable
to cure sundry Wounds without applying any other apparel then a mere Filter
dipped in common water; provided, the dresser has some of the blood or goare of
the Patient, and that the Linen into which it is received be put in a very
close Box, where some of this Vitriol be put also, gently dried in warm air, or
in a place which is fit insensibly to deprive it of its phlegm, and reduce it
of it self into powder; It stops also all kinds of Hemorrhagy's, if the same
order and method is observed with them as in the cure of Wounds.

Some Authors are also of opinion that this Vitriol may be sublimated with
Armoniack salt, to reduce it in fluid Mercury, and then concocted and
precipitated without addition, to prepare a Specific and altogether
extraordinary Remedy therewith for the Pox or Neapolitan Disease and all its
dependencies. They that will make trial thereof shall find the Processes and
method of working in Authors which have treated of it; it suffices us to have
insinuated the manner of the best operation upon Copper, being certain that he
that can perform what we have taught, shall never fail to bring to pass such
other operations as he shall undertake upon this Metal.

Of Lead and its Chemical Preparation.
WE are now come to the third and last Classis or form of Metals, containing
the less noble and softer, which are Lead or Saturn, and Tin or Jupiter. We
will speak first of the Lead, because all the operations performed upon Lead
may be a Rule for those upon Tin; for the same Menstruum is made use of, and
the same manner of operation is required in both.

Lead is the vilest and most abject of all Metals, consisting of an indigested
Sulphur, an aluminous salt more then vitriolick, and a Mercury coming very near
the nature of Antimony. It is called Saturn, by reason of the sympathy it has
with that Celestial Planet, as also its relation to the Spleen, which is called
the Saturn of the Microcosm, to which it is dedicated. Lead is generally
astringent, cooling and thickening, etc. It restores flesh about Wounds and
Ulcers, and cicatrizeth them; it cools the Venerean heats, and quenches amorous
fires, appeases the pains and heat of Ulcers, and dissolves Tumors occasioned
by serosities lurking between the skin and the body. But all this is nothing in
respect of the virtues it is endowed with, when it is well and artificially
opened and prepared by the operations of Chemistry, as it will appear hereunder.

General preparations to open Lead.
AS we have still begun by the purification of Mixts upon which our work was
intended, so must we more particularly take care of the purgation of Lead,
since it is the courfest and impurest of Metals; wherefore, when Artists will
employ it in any Operations, they must before all things melt it in an Iron
pot, and when it is in full fusion, throw upon it by intervals small pieces of
Wax, which insensibly will waste away, and when he sees the Lead bright and
with a fair aspect, and to be very clear under the uppermost or specifical
skim, let him remove the said skim, and throw it in clean water, to put
afterward to such uses as he intends.

This Lead so purified must be reduced into calx, if you intend to extract the
virtue of it; for though this Metal be soft and of easy fusion, yet must it be
calcined to be opened, not only to advance the operation of such Menstruums as
shall be made use of, but also that the extracted substance may be so much more
efficacious and full of virtue. This Calcination is performed several ways:
for there is an incineration, which reduces Lead to gray ashes or calx, which
is brought to pass only by stirring melted Lead in an earthen pot made red hot
in the fire. There is moreover a Reverberatory Calcination, when this first
Calx is reverberated in a Reverberatory Furnace with flaming fire, so ordered
nevertheless that it should not melt; and when the Calx has changed color
and begins to grow yellow, it becomes a fit color for Painters, which they
call Macicot; but if it goes to the height of an Orange red, it is called
Minium in the shops. The third Calcination is that which is performed in the
purification of Gold and Silver by the Cupel, where the Lead which remains and
flies not away in vapors, is calcined and changed as into a yellow, red or
white skin or froth, which is called Lytharg. The fourth is the Cementatory
Calcination, which is performed by cutting pieees of sheet or tally Lead, and
stratifying them with Brimstone, and calcining it afterward, as we have showed
of Copper, and when the calcined Lead is washed, dried and reduced to powder,
it is that which in shops is called Plumbum ustum, or burned and calcined Lead.
The fifth and last calcination of Lead, is that which they call Vaporous
Calcination, which is performed by suspending plates of Lead upon a Spirit or
sharp Liquor, the vapor whereof does by degrees calcine the Lead, and reduces
it into that substance which is called white Lead or Ceruss. The Artist must
choose of all these Calx's of Lead which he likes best to prepare the following
Remedies: but he must not deliberate or stick at taking those which by the
action of fire are more open, such as are Minium and Lytharg, since he shall
much better therewith attain his desired ends. We will first teach to prepare
well the Liquor and salt of Saturn, which is also called its Sugar, by reason
of its aluminous sweetness, as also the false and true Magistery, the Cremor,
butter, or nutritum of Saturn, the Balsam of Saturn, the spirit, yellow and red
oil of Saturn; all which processes and manner of working we will deliver one
after the other.

To prepare the Sugar or Salt of.
lb ss. of Minium; and as much of Lytharg, reduce it to a subtle powder, and
put it in a Cucurbite of stone or glass Metal, and pour thereon very good
distilled vinegar, four or five inches high, then place the Cucurbite in sand,
and give a sufficient fire to cause the vinegar to boil; but note, that you
must continually stir the matter with a wooden Slice as soon as you have put in
the vinegar, or otherwise it will too soon settle in the bottom of the Vessel,
and grow into a hard stony and compacted mass, which cannot be well
distempered afterward, and will stop the pores of the bottom of the Vessel,
which will occasion the breaking of it by the action of the heat finding the
free passage stopped. These Calx's of Saturn must be kept boiling 8 or 10 hours,
renewing still distilled warm vinegar, as the first does vapor away; then
filtrate all the dissoved matter warm, and lay aside a fourth part of the
filtrated liquor, which is called liquor of. But pour the remainer in a Tin
Scillet or Basin, and put in a cold place the space of 24 hours, and you shall
find all this liquor almost changed into a white chrystalline Salt, which at
first is sweet in taste, and of a vitriolick sharpness at last; the
superfluous liquor decant by inclination, and evaporate to half the
consumption, and put it also in Tin to shute into Chrystals, thus continuing
until it yields no more Chrystals; mix the remainder with the liquor set apart
before, if it be clean; if nor, run it through a linen, and mix and digest
together to unite them the better; dry afterward between a double paper the
salt of in a temperate heat, and keep it for use. If the reason be asked, why
we cause the dissolution of Lead to be put in a Tin Basin; We answer, because
this Metal has in it self a sharp coagulating, Spirit, which causes all the
matter which is fit to shute into Chrystals in this liquor, to turn sooner, and
take body better then it would do in another Vessel, as experience will teach
those that shall make proof thereof.

It is a very strange thing that all Ancient Authors, and even the most part of
Modern, have so much equivocated upon the virtue of this Salt of Saturn; for
they will have it to be cold inwardly taken, and to hinder the act of
generation, and yet do attribute to the Spirit which is drawn from this salt by
distillation, an active, subtle and penetrative virtue, which drives away by
sweats the malignancy of pestilential and venomous Diseases; and affirm
moreover, that it is a specific against the Neapolitan Disease, which are
things repugnant and dissonant to Reason; but all this mistake and confusion
proceeds only from that Ancient Authors have unn^nimoufly delivered, that Lead
was very terrestrious and consequently cold; moreover, Vinegar is an Ingredient
of its preparation, which is also cold according to their saying; but, both
they and Modern Artists should have considered that Lead is a metal that has
much Sulphur, and is called Aurum Leprosum leprous gold, and though very unripe
and earthly, yet it is never without some portion in it self of the two noblest
Metals, indivisibly mixed in the Chaotical (if I may so say) and undigested
matter of Lead, which gives and communicates unto it much virtue; it must also
be remembered, that the external fire employed in the calcination of, does
potently stir up its internal fire, which concocts and digests all the
unripenesse or pretended immaturities, driving away what is there of impurity,
and exalting and perfecting more and more the seeds of that purity which are
enclosed in it: which makes me to pronounce boldly, that the salt of Saturn is
a very good Medicine against all Agues, either continual or intermittent; it is
also a specific in diseases of the Spleen, and all vapors arising from it; it
may also be given against diseases of the Breast, dissolved in juice of
Scabious water with equal weight of purified Niter; the Chrystals are very good
against Asthma's or short breath. The Dosis of salt of is from ij. to xx. gr.
in appropriated Liquors, or in Bolus in some Conserve or Jelly. The Nitrous
salt of is from iiij. gr. to s. but if the said salt is so efficacious for
internal Diseases, it is no less for external; for this wonderful metallic
Mummy cannot enough be esteemed, this Balsam and sweet Salt which kills all
corrosive, harsh and biting salts, which cause the pains of Wounds and Ulcers,
whereby the grief and inflammation of the parts is excited, and from which flow
all other accidents; it resolves and mollifies hard and schirrous Tumors,
takes away the ill-favored color and lividity of bruises and contusions, and
hinders extravasated blood from turning to corruption, and coming to
suppuration; it is an imparalleld Remedy to take away the itching and
inflammation of the eyes, it is mixed in all Salves, Liniments, Plasters and
Collyries, by reason of the noble effects it uses to produce.

The use of the Liquor of, and how to make with it the false Magistery, Cremor,
Butter and Nutritum.
WE have said here above, that the Artist was to lay aside some part of the
dissolution of the calx of Lead for his use, which is very considerable; for
this Liquor may be made use of being mixed with common water, to make a
Saturnine Extract, which is endowed with wonderful Virtues to resolve, dry,
temper and refresh all the external parts any wise offended, dipping Fillets in
it, and wrapping about the members after they have been dressed and fitted by
the Chyrurgeon; it hinders all inflammations, and asswages all swellings; so
that I advise the careful Surgeon which minds the good of his wounded Patients,
and his Reputation, never to be without this Liquor.

Put of this Liquor in a Dish, and pour upon it oil of made per deliquium, and
immediately a salt of will precipitate it self into a very white powder, which
is that improperly called the Mag^stery of Saturn, being to speak properly,
nothing else but a very subtle Ceruss; for when the salt of the vinegar which
is acid, and holds the Lead in dissolution, comes to lose this acidity wherein
consists it dissolutive strength, by the action of the salt of which is
lixivial, the Lead must of all necessity fall down, having nothing more to
uphold it. This Precipitate must be washed to a sweetness in common water; and
the last time with very good Rose water, and dried afterward gently; it is a
very fair white for Pomatums, which may also be used in Salves and Collyrie's,
for it is an excellent desiccative, acting gently and inoffensively.

To make the Cremor, Butter or Nutritum of Saturn, grind only in a Brass mortar
liquor of with oil of Olives, or Roses, putting a little of each of the
substances one after the other, and stirring them nimbly and strongly together,
until all be united and formed into a substance like unto Cream or butter,
called Nutritum in the shops; if you make use of oil of Olives, this Liniment
will be very white; but if whey or oil of Roses, it will become yellow, the
acid of the liquor having in some kind resuscitated and revived the color of
the Rose, which was hidden, and as it were buried under the greeness of the
oil. It is a sovereign Remedy against breaking of the skin by bruises or
otherwise, Itch, Scab, inflammations of Boils, Botches, Erisipela's; for
besides that it does dry powerfully, it deads also and mortifies the ill
Ferment which is in the part, and causes all the irritations and accidents
thereof; it does wonders against burnings, and to allay the grief of hot Gouts,
without giving any occasion to fear it should strike the humor in by the
pretended coldness which is attributed unto it; contrariwise it may be used
with confidence, since all the Remedies taken out of Lead do work by the
subtilty of their parts, and resolve all superfluities; as also kill and
mortify all the acidity, malignant and preternatural acrimony which causes the
tension, inflammation and grief of the parts.

To prepare the Right Magistery of
ij. of Ceruss, and having made it into very small powder, put the same in a
Mattress, pouring upon it vj. of the spirit of by little and little, and stir
them together that the spirit may reach to the bottom; place the Mattress in B.
M. and keep it there warm in digestion the space of 12 hours, then filtrate
softly the dissolution, and let the filtration rest one night in a cold place,
after which you will find it coagulated into white Chrystals; separate the
superfluous liquor, and draw the spirit in Balneo by distillation to a dry
bottom, and you shall have in the bottom of your Vessel the Magistery of
dissoluble in all kinds of Liquors, like unto the first which was in Chrystals
in respect of its virtue, which you must dry in a slow heat between two papers.
This Magistery may be administered in all Diseases, wherein we have said the
salt of to be good and conducible, and we shall find from it much better and
quicker effects, then those we have attributed to the Salt made with vinegar;
but the Dosis of it is less: for it suffices to give of this Magistery from
ij. gr. to xij. Note, that the spirit of Venus which you have made use of in
this Operation, drawn off again by distillation, is good yet for the same
operation, and any other to which it might be employed, for it does not lose of
its action or virtue for Physical uses, nor power and efficacy for distillation
and extraction of Tinctures.

To make the Balsam of
ij. of good salt of, in subtle and light Chrystals, and being reduced to
powder, put it in a Mattress, pouring upon it iiij. of aetherial oil of
Turpentine, well distilled, which commonly is called Essence; the preparation
whereof we have taught above, but not of that spurious oil of Tar sold in
Grocers shops: digest these two matters in ashes in a moderate heat, and stir
them five or six times a day, until the oil has contracted a very fine red
color; then add s. of Camphire, and leave them together in digestion 24 hours,
until the Camphire be dissolved and united to this excellent Balsam, which must
be filtrated in a glass Funnel through a little Cotton and kept in a Viol for
use. This Balsam is endowed with very great virtues, which makes it worthy of
the Closet of Chemical Artists, and the practice of the most skilful Surgeons;
for it cures the most inveterate Ulcers, dissolves and resolves all swellings,
revives and animates again starved members, cures green and new Wounds, and
hinders bad accidents thereof, does wonders in the cure of Fistula's, growing
Cancer or Morphew; finally, it is one of the best and safest Remedies used at
this Day by the skilfullest German Practitioners.

To prepare the Spirit, yellow and red oil of the salt of
lb j. of salt of, very subtle and chrystalline, dissolve it seven times
consecutively with the best distilled vinegar, and evaporate as many times;
then put it in the Canicular or hottest days of the year, in a very cold
Cellar to dissolve in liquor; this Liquor put in a Retort placed in a
Reverberatory Furnace upon an earthen pot, cover turned upside down, having
about one inch thick of sand or ashes between the bottom and Retort; fit to the
neck a very capacious Recipient, the joints whereof must be luted with all
possible care, and the Lute being well dried, give fire to it with the same
care, circumspection and Rules of fire, as we prescribed in the distillation of
the spirit of, and when you shall see heavy and red drops to fall down, and
that the Recipient grows clear of it self, cease the fire; there is ordinarily
20 or 24 hours required for this operation. That which after distillation is
found in the Recipient, contains four several Liquors, viz. a volatile and
subtle Spirit, a yellow Oil, a Phlegm, and a red Oil; make the rectification
and separation thereof in a Retort very clean, in B. M. or ashes; then change
the Recipient to separate the said Liquors, according to the following Notes
and Direction. The volatile and aetherial spirit passes through the neck of
the Retort, without framing any veins therein; the yellow oil follows after,
which frames oblique and winding veins; wherefore as soon as this sign does
appear, the Recipient must be changed. The phlegm follows after the yellow
oil, in straight and direct veins, and the red and slow oil remains in the
bottom of the Retort.

The volatile spirit of is a wonderful Sudorifick; wherefore it is excellent
against the Plague, Madness, Palsy, Epilepsie and remainders of Apoplexy,
afflicting the body or mind, and sometimes both, as also in malignant and
burning Fevers and Pox; the Dosis must be from iiij. drops to xx. in
Decoctions, or waters appropriated to the nature of the Disease.

Digest the yellow oil upon calx of Gold well opened, or upon Crocus of TH in
a slow heat of the vaporous Balneo, in a circulatory Vessel Hermetically
sealed, and it will become as red as blood. It is a great Arcanum or secret
Remedy against all griefs of the Heart and Brain, being administered from j.
drop to iv. in spirit of Lillyconvally, or good Sack.

The red Oil is a miraculous Balsam, being circulated with equal parts of oil
of Camphire and tartariz'd spirit of Wine, the space of 15 days, after which
the spirit of Wine must be drawn again in a slow heat of Balneo, and there
remains a Balsamic Essence, which cures plain Wounds from one day to another,
being only slightly rubbed with a Feather dipped therein, It may be made use of in
the cure of all the same Diseases, to which we have said that the Balsam of did
conduce; for it is the true Balsam and Mummy impregnated with the sulphur of.

Of Tin and its Chemical Preparation.
TIN is the second Metal of the last form, and one of the less noble, though it
has many good qualities, both for Physic and Metallic. It is a white and
soft Metal shining with a brightness mixed with some blackish gloominess,
consisting of a more pure Mercury then that of the hard Metals, but softer and
more volatile; it is nevertheless more fixed then that of Lead, and has a white
undigested and unripe sulphur; this Metal has very little of salt, which is
for the most part the bond and union between the Mercury and Sulphur of Bodies,
whence proceeds its porosity and harshness. Hermetical Philosophers call it
Jupiter, by reason of its congruity with that Plant, in the great World, and
the virtual sympathy it has by the Remedies extracted from it with the Liver
and Womb, to whom it is particularly dedicated in Man the little World.

It is not necessary for us here to repeat unnecessarily the manner of
extracting the salt, and making the false and true Magistery of Jupiter, since
it is the same way we have taught upon. We are only to give notice, that the
calx of must be Reverberated, taking it as it is already prepared for Potters
to use, and that the space of two days, whereby to open it as it is fitting;
otherwise very little salt will come of it. The Salt and true Magistery are
specifical Remedies and singular against suffocations and fits of the Mother,
which are wonderfully allayd by it, whether administered inwardly, or outwardly
applied. They are also admirable Topicals for the cure of putrid, stinking,
hollow, fistulous and cancerous Ulcers, and against Wolves. The Dosis inwardly
taken is from j. gr. to vj. in Bolus, in some Conserve of Balm, or Flowers of
Peny-Royal, the spirit of Elder-berries, or spirit of Karabe or yellow Amber.
But let the Artist be very wary, in purging those Women that have made use of
this Remedy, with some gentle and convenient Purgation which irritates not the
Womb; otherwise he must begin a new. Wherefore let him have a special care, not
to stir the serosity of this dangerous Animal, after it is once quieted and
laid asleep by the eradiating virtue of the metallic or mineral Sulphurs; and
as he knows and is sufficiently instructed, that the Anodyne virtue proceeds
from this (Mineral) Family, let him make use of purgative Remedies, and those
Diuretical, etc. Diaphoretical preparations which it does so plentifully yield,
and that have neither smell nor taste, that can irritate and provoke afresh
this delicate and ticklish part.

The distillation of Tin, yielding several noble Remedies, both against
internal and external Diseases.
WE are engaged to give here the manner of an operation upon which contains
several very useful Remedies, and very considerable observations, whether in
respect of the work, or of the matters which are made use of, and whereby the
Artist may be taught to penetrate further into the knowledge of several other
and better things, whilst he is in the way toward this.

iiij. of very small filed Tin, and being mixed in a Marble mortar with xij. of
corrosive sublimate Mercury, put this powder in a Retort with a very large
neck, and having placed it in sand, about half an inch thick upon the bottom of
the Dish that contains it, give it a convenient fire, and you shall first draw
a Spirit continually smoking; then afterward it will yield a Butter, or a
kind of corrosive Icy Oil. And in the third place, the Mercury will be
revivifyed or quickened again abundantly, being no longer stayed or coagulated
by the spirits of those salts which have forsaken it, to work upon the body of
the Tin; this done, increase the fire downwards, and give it a fire of
suppression, and all the substance of will ascend in the neck of the Retort,
under the form of a gray Gum very hard, so that in the bottom will remain very
few red feces; reduce immediately this Gum into powder, otherwise it would
quickly grow moist in the air, and put it in a Cellar upon a sheet of white
Lattin, being edged about, and a small gutter or mouth, by which the moistness
and coolness of the Cellar having reduced it into a yellow Oil, it may run
and be received in a Dish of glass or stone metal, fitted under the same to be
as a Recipient. This Oil in Chyrurgery is an admirable Medicine to eat up
proud flesh, and the hard or thick skin of Ulcers; but the Surgeon must handle
it with dexterity and judgment; for it must only be applied with a Pencil very
gently, by reason of its penetrating subtility, though it be not so corrosive
as the Butter which comes forth after the Spirit; and is a true Caustic that
must also be used with discretion, when applied to hinder the progress of some
dangerous gangrening, and to make Issues or sudden Cauteries; as likewise to
accelerate the exsoliation of Bones, and the separation of rotten parts and the
Exostoses caused by Nodus's in the Pox. But there may be an excellent jovial
Diaphoretical made out of this oil or Butter, dissolving it with distilled
Rainwater; for as you shall be stirring, and the water shall dissolve the
Salts of the corrosive Sublimate which kept the Tin in dissolution, it will
immediately fall and precipitate it self in a white powder in the bottom of the
Vessel, which must be dried and edulcorated, and you shall have in it no
despicable Diaphoretick; which may be administered from ij. gr. to viij in
Conserves, Confections or Preserves, or in appropriated Waters or Spirits, for
such as are troubled with superfluous serosities, and chiefly in accidents and
cases of the great Pox; as likewise most specially for Women troubled with
slackness or too much moistness of the Womb. And as we have often said, that
the Chemical Artist must be cautious not to lose or waste any of the substances
he prepares; but contrariwise, must know them thoroughly as much as it is
possible, to be capable to employ them usefully according to the virtue which
is in them; he must take that red matter, which after distillation is found in
the bottom of the Retort, and join it with what remains after the resolution of
the Gum in a Cellar upon a leaf or plate of white Latin, which are nothing else
but the sulphur and salt of the Mercury and Tin; the separation whereof he is
to make by the help of distilled Rainwater, which dissolving the salt, the
sulphur sinks downward, the liquor whereof is to be separated, filtrated and
evaporated in salt, which dissolve again, filtrate and coagulate, and thus
continue until it be clear, fair and green as an Emerald; as for the Sulphur,
it must be edulcorated, dried gently, and kept for use. The Salt is diuretical
and aperitive, and is administered from j. gr. to iiij. in Broth or white Wine,
to cleanse the Womb and those parts which have any relation to it. The Sulphur
is a good Sudorifick and Anodyne. The Dosis from j. gr. or ph to gr. iij. in
Emulsions made with the seeds of Lemon, Carduus Benedictus or holy Thistle, and
white Poppy with Cordial Waters; it is a specific Remedy for Women troubled
with diseases of the Mother; the Spirit always steeming, which was the first
drawn, is also a very strange substance; for besides that it will not be kept
in by any Vessel, without yielding continually white vapors, and without any
sensible diminution of its weight or virtue; it is so active, subtle and
penetrating, that it stops and pets at a stand, not only Gangrenes and Wolves,
the offending parts being only rubbed with it, but even can hinder the progress
and running of the Sphacelus which is a rottenness of the bones; in which
Cure, it goes even beyond the water of Quicklime, whereof we have spoken, and
taught the making above. Besides all what we have said, there is a Noble
Preparation yet to be made with this Spirit; which is, to take as much as you
will of it, and put it in a Mattress broad at the neck, and softly by little and
little and by intervals pour upon it Tincture of salt, immediately will rise a
fermentation with several bubbles, which break with some kind of noise and
smoke or steem; you must go on in pouring of this Tincture till the noise and
bubbles do cease; place afterward the Vessel in warm ashes, and the matter
will turn into a coagulated substance black as pitch, to which giving a fire of
sublimation, you shall have white Chrystals melting as Wax, which are a very
good cure of scrophulous and cancerous Ulcers, as also any ill remainders of
the Pox, because they cauterize almost without pain to the very bottom of the
Ulcers, and cause the separation of dead flesh or scarre, leaving the Ulcer
without malignity, which must afterward be filled with the Balsam of Sulphur,
and the Plaster of Rullandus called Diasulphuris. With this we put an end to
Metals, to come to Minerals which are next kin to them.

SECTION IV. Of half or semi Metals, and middle or mean Minerals, which come
the nearest to the nature of Metals.
WE bring in this Section those substances which follow more immediately, and
have a greater affinity and correspondency with Metals, which some call
semi-Metals, middle-Minerals, and sometimes also Marcassites; but this last
appellation is only proper to Antimony, and not to Quicksilver; but the
Quicksilver and Antimony are the matter and subject of this Section; for we
will not speak of Mineral Cinnabar by it self on purpose, since we are to
mention it when we come hereafter to treat of Cinnabar or Artificial Vermilion,
which is a sublimation of Mercury and Sulphur, or Brimstone and Quicksilver.

Of Quick-filver or Mercury, and its Chemical Preparation.
MERCURY is a mineral volatile Liquor, which greedily sticks to Metals, and
above all to Gold. It is also called Quick-filver, and sometimes found running
and pure in Mines, but very seldom; for it is for the most part drawn by
Revivification from a mineral Earth, vulgarly called Cinnabar. The choice of it
is much to be heeded, because it is not equally good, but accordingly proves
more or less useful in Chemical Operations; for Mercury may hold something of
the foulness and impurity of his Matrix, which is the place of its formation
and original, either by reason of the earthly Recrements and other filth which
do pollute and defile it, or by reason of some impure mixture, or amalgamation
and sophisticating of the Merchants who use to sell it.

As for the choice to be made of it by reason of its original, that which grows
near Mines of the most pure and noble Metals, and chiefly those of Gold, is to
be preferred; wherefore that which comes from Spain and from the Mines of
Hungary, is ever to be chosen before any other. The matters which naturally
corrupt and deprave Mercury, are Arsenick, Antimony, Lead and Cadmia; but there
is besides an artificial Sophistication, very hard to be discovered and
discerned, either by sight or weight; for it is mixed with some part of Lead or
Bismuthum, squeezed through Leather, so as nothing remains behind; yet this
Cheat may be discovered and found out two several ways: the first by
distilling it in a Retort; for if no dregs or impurity remains in the bottom of
it, it is a sign that the Quicksilver is pure; the second is by evaporating of
it in a silver Spoon in open fire; for if the Mercury leaves only a yellowish
or white spot, it is a sign of its purity; but if it leaves a brown, black or
obscure, it is a sign of its foulness, and of being sophisticated. There are
yet nevertheless some other ways of depurating it wholly, which we will place
amongst the preparations of Mercury.

The general virtues of it cannot very well be described, having not yet been
sufficiently tried; for it may be said with truth, that they never were yet
discovered by any to the bottom: thus much nevertheless may be said, that
Mercury is an internal cleanser or Mundificative of the whole mass of the
blood, and that it expels from it whatsoever the depravation of digestion and
evil fermentation may have contracted and mixed in it of dangerous and hurtful
humors; but particularly it cleanses the body from the venomous infection of
the Pox; kills and expels worms, advances and hastens difficult birth; but in
outward applications cures all manner of Scabs and Itch, destroys all manner
of Vermin, and dissolves hard swellings and Tumors; hung to the neck, it is a
preservative from Plague; and some are even of opinion that it may hinder
Witchcraft, Charms and Incantations; finally, it may be said with much reason,
that except it be Antimony, there is no substance under the Sun of so general a
virtue, nor yielding so many different Remedies against all Diseases; for it
supplies us with Vomitives, Purgatives, Diaphoreticks, Lenitives, as it will
appear when we come to particularize the several descriptions, and the several
processes and Operations incident to the preparation thereof. But we must
advertise our Artist, that Quicksilver is called Mercury, by reason of the
correspondence which is between that Planet and this semi-Metal; and that as
Mercury is an inconstant and changing Planet, so likewise this Mineral makes
himself all to all, hot with the hot, cold with the cold substances, and so of
the rest. Some give it the Rule of, and place it over the Lungs; and others
subject unto it the inferior Ventricle, as also the uppermost or whole belly:
but I hold of a more universal Opinion, and say, that I believe Mercury
universally to work upon all man's body, and to drive away generally all
Diseases and griefs from it, of what nature soever; since we see that Remedies
taken from Mercury are a cure of Leprosy and Pox, which are diseases and a
corruption of the whole substance. I leave nevertheless those that will dissent
from me, in the freedom of their Judgment.

The general preparations made upon Mercury, are, Purification, Calcination,
Precipitation, Sublimation, Distillation, Extraction, Liquation, Resolution
into Liquor, and Salification. We will give some Examples of the Work which all
these general Operations do require, that they may be a Model and Introduction
to the Artist, to possess the whole Harvest of Remedies, which Mercury will
yield to such as will take the pains to examine and anatomize it; for as it is
a Proteus which takes all sorts of forms, and changes himself into all manner
of colors, it would never be done, if we would heap here all the observations,
and relate all the particulars, which both by reading and our practice we have
discovered in the Nature of this Mineral.

The purification of Mercury.
WE shall not spend time here in making a long description of all the
Lotions, Frixions and Agirations, with which some have pretended to cleanse and
purify Mercury of its natural impurities, and the spots of sophistication,
because they are not the right means to deprive it of its filth and foulness;
it will suffice only if we show the manner of Revivifying and Extracting it
from artificial Cinnabar by the help of Filings of Iron, since it is the surest
way for obtaining very pure and clean Mercury to use afterward toward all
such preparations as the Artist will take in hand.

The Revivification of Cinnabar into flowing Mercury.
lb j. of Vermilion or artificial Cinnabar, which is nothing else but
sublimated Quicksilver with Brimstone; bray it in a Marble Mortar with a
wooden or glass Pestle, and mix it with equal weight of Filings of Iron; this
mixture put in a small Retort, so as to be filled to an inch near the top of
it, then place the Retore upon a broken brick with a little of Lute under, and
fit the neck thereof to a Recipient half full of water, lute it, and having put
bricks round about the Retort four fingers distant from it, fill up the space
between with black Charcoals two inches high, then mix kindled coals with it in
four several places equally distant, and cover the remainder of the Retort of
black coals also up to the top; and so suffer the fire to kin^le slowly of it
self, that the Retort may insensibly grow hot and by degrees, and all your
Cinnabar will come over the helm in flowing Mercury, either shaped in vapors or
in body into the Recipient, leaving only behind the Brimstone which had been
sublimated with it when the Cinnabar was made, which here cleaves to the Iron
remaining half calcined and half opened in the Retort, and is then very fit to
make the aperitive or astringent Crocus therewith, that nothing may be lost.
This done, unlute the Recipient, throw away the water, and dry the Mercury,
running or squeezing it often through a white and dry linen cloth; then run it
also three or four times through Chamoy leather, and keep it in a Viol to use
in all operations, as a very clean and pure Mercury; for besides that it has
already been purified by the first operation, which was its sublimation with
Brimstone, the manner whereof we shall teach hereafter; this Revivification
does yet cleanse and purify much better, because the Iron does greedily draw
the Brimstone to it self, and keeps also whatsoever impurity might have risen
with it in the former sublimation.

The Calcination and Precipitation of Mercury.
THough commonly the Calcination of Mercury be called Precipitation, it is
nevertheless a very improper Expression; for nothing can be said to be
precipitated that has not before been dissolved, and does return to a body by
the infusion and injection of some salt or Spirit, and then the Dissolvent
leaving that which it had dissolved, it falls and precipitates it self in the
bottom of the Vessel; but use having prevailed to call Mercury concocted,
digested and calcined, a Precipitate, we will keep this appellation which is
found in all Authors. This Precipitate is made with Mercury alone, or with some
addition of either of the two Luminaries, or of both together, which are Sol
and Luna, Gold or Silver; we shall exemplify it here; as also show the method
of some other Precipitates which are made after dissolution in some convenient
Menstruum.

To make the Precipitate of Mercury without addition.
A double Vessel called Infernus, a Hell by Artists, flat and broad in the
bottom, and throw in it ij. iij. or iiij. of Mercury, purified and cleansed in
the manner by us delivered above; stop the upper part of it with a single
paper, and place it in sand very equally in its poise or Equilibrium, so as the
Mercury may be evenly spread upon the whole surface of the bottom of the
Vessel, lying no thicker in one part then in the other, that the fire might
equally work upon the whole substance of the Mercury at the same time. Begin
your fire at first slowly, and increase by degrees until the whole Mercury be
changed, calcined or precipitated into a red powder as mineral Cinnabar, very
bright, shining and sparkling to the eye. Digest it the space of three weeks
with alkohol of Wine, and kindle it seven times over, by which the concoction
and fixation of it will be perfected; it is an universal Mercurial Remedy
against all Agues, but particularly a true Specific against the Pox which it
radically cures, if it be administered seven times to the Patient to provoke
sweating, for it is an infallible Sudorifick; it kills also the worms in the
stomach, and those which are generated in the Guts and Intestines. The Dosis
must be from ij. gr. to viij. in some Conserve, Confection or Cordial Extract;
the Patient must keep his bed when he uses it, and must take care of being well
covered, expecting patiently till the sweating comes, which will not fail to
bring along with it the hoped for and desired success. But the Artist must not
grow faint and weary in this operation though it be long and tedious; he must
besides take care to rule the fire with judgment and discretion; otherwise he
will be put often to begin anew, because if there be any fault in ordering well
the fire, the Vessel will break. This Operation is slow and tedious by reason
of its length, for it cannot be perfected under six weeks, yea two, three or
four months, according as the Artist shall take care to prepare ill or well his
Mercury, and govern well his fire with care and assiduity.

To make the Solar or Lunar Precipitate.
THere is no need here to repeat any thing of the manner of the Vessel: we only
advise our Artist to note that he may make this operation, as also the
foregoing in a plain Mattress, without making use of a Hell: for that kind of
Vessel being rare, it would put a needless difficulty and rub upon the Work;
Yet let the Mattress however be flat and plain in the bottom, and stopped in the
mouth only with a wooden pin which may easily be taken away, to throw down
again the Mercury which may have raised its self by sublimating into the neck
of the Vessel. We have no more to do here then to add the Doses of the Metals
which are intended to be added to the Mercury, to communicate unto it some
other virtue then that it has already from it self: for as we have said, there
may be gold or silver added, or both together* If it be gold alone, after it
has been three times purged by Antimony, it must be made into an Amalgam with
viij. p. of Mercury purified, and this Amalgam put in the Vessel and there
concocted, as has been said above. If it be silver, it may be mixed ij. p.
upon viij. but let it be very pure silver of Capel made in leaves or very
subtle calx, that it may be the better amalgamed and incorporated with the
Mercury, and then concoct it in the Vessel, as has been said; and if the
Artist has any desire to communicate to the Mercury the properties of both
Luminaries, he shall make his Amalgam with i. p. of gold, and ij. p. of silver,
melted with vj. p. of very pure and clean Regulus of Antimony, with vij. p. of
purified Meerury, to be concocted according to Art. The Solar Precipirate is
given from j. gr. to vj. in the same Vehicles and Ingredients we have already
said, and for the same Diseases; except that it has this virtue more, to be
specificated for strengthening and corroborating the Heart, and to drive away
all weaknesses and griefs from it. The Lunar Precipitate is also as it were
specificated, and destinated to the Head, besides the general virtues it has
of it self; But neither of them are to be compared in strength or virtue to the
last, which receives a mixture of Gold, Silver, Antomony and Mercury; for it is
an universal Remedy and a kind of true Panacea: insomuch, that one of the most
learned and most renowned amongst Chemical Authors, does not think amiss to
give it the name of Physical Gold, or Medicorum aurum, and the comfort of
Patients. The Dosis of the Lunar Precipitate is from j. gr. to xij. They that
will make use of it also for a Preventive of Diseases, when they find
themselves loaded and filled with impure serosities, proceeding from
superfluities of digestion, may take vj. gr. thereof fasting, and keep
themselves well covered to expect sweat; and then after having taken a good
Broth or Biscuit dipped in Wine, shall cause their sweat to be well wiped off,
keeping their Chamber for that whole day; after which they will find
themselves so altered and so much lighter, that they may be half better
disposed for all functions. This much we had to say concerning these
Precipitates without addition of Salts and Spirits: but as their preparation is
long and tedious, and that all Artists are not capable or fitted for these high
Operations, it is necessary we should give a description of some other
Precipitates of Mercury, which may be made in less time, and never fail. It is
true, that their virtue is neither so great, nor so extensive; they may in a
manner be substituted to the foregoing, provided their Dosis be regulated with
more circumspection, and the use thereof duplicated and more often reiterated.

To make a very excellent fix Precipitate.
iij. of purified Mercury, ij. of yellow Brimstone, j. ss. of Armoniack salt
very pure: mix and pound all in a Marble mortar so long that none of the
Mercury will more appear, though being rubbed on the palm of the hand; this
mixture put in a Viol or Mattress in sand and give it a sublimatory fire; the
sublimation being ended break the Vessel, and separate cleanly the sublimed
matter, and pound it again, and mix with the matter left in the bottom of the
Vessel; then begin to sublimate again, and thus do four times: but at the
fourth time, give it a good fire toward the end, until the bottom of the
Mattress or Viol grows red hot; wherefore the Artist must leave less sand in
the bottom of the pan then at other times; the matter being cooled, keep that
you shall find in the bottom of the Vessel, and preserve it as a very good
Medicament, having the virtue to expel from the body sound or sick, all what
may be noxious to it, by sensible or insensible transpiration; it is given fron
four gr. to twenty in Treacle, or extract of Juniper berries.

To make the Precipitate called Arcanum Corallinum.
iij. of purified Mercury, and having put it in a Mattress, pour upon it iiij.
ph. of spirit of Niter, and therein dissolve it in a slow heat of ashes, and
being all dissolved, put the Vessel in sand under a Chimney; but let the neck
of the Mattress be short, and cut away to facilitate the vapouring of the
spirit; give it a gradual fire until the Mercury be dry, then cease the fire,
and let the Mattress grow cold; if it be shivered or broken, draw the mass in
it again and bray it in a Marble mortar; then pour the powder in a new Mattress:
but if the first be yet whole, you may use it to go on in your operation; for
you have no more to do, then to pour again as much spirit of Niter as before in
one of the said Vessels, and put it in ashes to digest until the mass or
powder be dissolved; then place it again in sand, and evaporate the spirit of
Niter to a dry bottom; this done, begin again for the third time with as much
spirit of Niter, and place the Vessel in sand after dissolution; and when you
perceive all the spirit to be vapoured away, increase the fire, and go on until
you find the Mercury to be changed into a red powder; but if you will be more
secure of your work, bray the mass you shall find in the Mattress after the
evaporating of the spirit of Niter in a Marble mortar, and put the powder in a
Crucible, which by degrees you shall bring to be red hot in an open fire, and
when you see your powder of a fine red coralline color, and insipid or
tastelesse, then take off the Crucible from the fire, and let the powder cool,
which afterward put in a Marble mortar, and moisten it with alkoholiz'd spirit
of Wine, poured on it till it swims over half a finger high; then giving fire
to it, exhale it to a dry bottom, thus continuing and repeating seven times,
and then may you be sure to have a purgative Precipitate capable of working
many noble effects, and without any corrosion. The Dosis must be from ij. gr.
to x. in purgative Extracts, or a little of the mass of Angelick Pills. It is
a real and true Arcanum against the Pox and all its dependances and evil
symptoms: for it equally and universally purges away all what is hurtful and
superfluous; wherefore it is good against Dropsy, Gour, venomous Plague,
Agues, and to resolve Fluxions and Catarrhs. As for outward applications, no
Remedy surpasses it for the cure of malignant and corrosive Ulcers; it is also
very good against Itch, Scabs and all eruptions in the skin, if j. or ij. be
mixed in Pomatum, and the pulses in the Head, Wrist and Feet be rubbed or
anointed therewith.

We shall not lose time here in describing the several white, red, scarlet,
yellow, green Precipitates, and of several other colors which are made with
spirit of Niter, aqua Regalis, aqua fortis, spirit of Salt and other Resolvers,
and precipitated with spirit of Salt, Seawater, spirit of Urine, U^ine,
Tincture of Smiris or Emrill stone and many other substances, because such
operations are of little Art, and require little of observation: wherefore we
refer the Artist to his own already acquired experience or the reading of such
Authors as have fully treated of Mercury, being contented to have taught what
is noblest and most worthy of observation in the preparation of Precipitates.

The sublimation of Mercury.
THis word Sublimation may generally be taken for all kind of Distillation,
since it denotes and signifies nothing else but the raising up of vapors and
exhalations of the matters upward: but here it is taken in somewhat a stricter
sense; for it signifies nothing else but the raising or lifting up of the body
of Mercury into vapors or exhalations, which are thickened and condensated
upwards in a hard and compact body, sticking to the sides of the Vessels in
which the Mercury is put after it is dissolved, mixed, or as it were united with
Salts, Spirits of Brimstone; we will give some few examples of this Work, that
our Artist may punctually and knowingly put it in practice with all requisite
and due observations.

To make the Corrosive Sublimate.
lb s. of purified Mercury, dissolve it in a Mattress with iiij. of good aqua
fortis, then put it in sand, and softly evaporate away the aqua fortis to a dry
bottom; then cease the fire, and breaking the Vessels after they be cold, weigh
the mass, and having brayed it in a Marble mortar with an equal weight of
Vitriol, calcined to whiteness, and as much desiccated salt, put the mixture
in a Cucurbite or Mattress, or between two earthen pots, and place either of
these which you will use in sand near the bottom plate; if it be a Cucurbite,
let it be low and cover it with its Head; if a Mattress, stop it with paper
only; and if two earthen pots, let the uppermost which is turned the bottom
upwards, have a hole in the middle of it, to evaporate the moisture of the
Salts, and when you see white and dry vapors come away through the same, stop
it also with paper: give it a sublimatory fire by degrees, until all the
substance of the Mercury be ascended, which will coagulate into a chrystalline
matter to the top of the Vessels, containing in it self many of the corrosive
spirits of the salts you have made use of; if you will have a very pure and
very corrosive Sublimate, bray that which is sublimated with xij. more of
desiccated salt, and iiij. of Vitriol calcined to redness, and sublime it for
the second time, and continue to the third with as much desiccated salt without
addition of Vitriol; and for the last, bray it alone again and sublimate in
sand in a Viol or Mattress, and so shall you have a sublimate Corrosive Mercury
very pure, and fit not only to prepare with it the sublimated sweat Mercury,
but to serve also for many noble Chemical Preparations; the true Artist must
have a care to prepare himself the corrosive sublimate which he intends to use,
not trusting to that which is sold at the Grocers, which has yet too much of
impurity, and is sometimes mixed with Arsenical substances, because they are
cheap in those places where those sublimates are wont to be prepared in
quantity: yet nevertheless there are marks to know and choose the same, which
are a stinking arsenical smell, cleaving strongly to the fingers if you do but
touch it, and moreover, the revivification of it; But it is as soon done to
prepare it your self, to avoid all suspicion; wherefore my advice to the Artist
is, not to trust at all to that which is bought.

To prepare the Mercury dulcis, or sweet Sublimate.
BEfore we deliver any thing of the manner of the work of this Operation, we
must as much as lies in our power, give to understand how the sweetening of
Corrosives is made, that the Artist may the better ratiocinate upon his own
work, and so avoid all error, or at least know when he commits any, how to
satisfy himself and others in the reason thereof. To this end he must
consider, that what causes the Mercury to become corrosive, which of his nature
is not, are the spirits of Salt, Vitriol and Niter, employed for the
mortification and sublimation of the same: Now as long as those spirits remain
united to the substance of the Mercury, they are capable and in power to act by
reason of their acrimony; but if any thing is offered to corrode and work upon
them which does glut and enervate the same, then they lose that great activity
they had, and leave the Mercury insipid, as it was before these spirits were
united to it. This evidently appears by the revivification of a corrosive
Sublimate, with quicklime and salt. for these salts which are Alkaly's do kill
and alter the nature of the other salts which are acid, sharp and corrosive,
and so these spirits not being able longer to detain the Mercury, it is raised
by the action of fire, and returns to its first nature of flowing and insipid
quicksilver in the Recipient: But it is otherwise in sublimation: for the
acrimony of these spiritualized and recorporified salts with Mercury, spend
most part of the extent of their activity upon the quick Mercury, which is
added to the corrosive sublimate; for they work upon to mortify and dead it,
but in so doing they dead themselves; and if any portion be yet left behind,
the fire does make an end of driving it away by its action, during the three
sublimations which commonly are made use of for the sweetening of it totally,
and it is thus performed.

xij. of a corrosive sublimate, bray it in a Marble mortar, and when it is
turned to powder, add to it by little and little viij. of purified Mercury;
stir and triturate these together until the Mercury be so deaded and mortified,
that no living atome of it more does appear; put the powder in a Viol or
Matrasse in sand, with a thumbs thickness of sand only under the Vessel, and
give it a gradual fire the space of ten hours, or until the Artist sees that
the Mercury is wholly ascended and sublimated in the top of the Vessel; then
ceasing the fire let your Vessel cool, and break it, to take the Mercury which
you shall find sublimated in a compacted and close chrystalline substance,
that has almost already lost its corrosive faculty, for the reasons before
alleged. Bray it and sublimate again for the second time; and thus continue a
third, and then shall you have that they call Mercurius dulcis, or sweet
Mercury, sweet Sublimate, the sweet and mitigated Eagle, the tamed Dragon,
which is that famous Panchymagog of Quercetanus; to be short, it is so known a
Remedy, that it is vain to say it is good against all Venereal Diseases, and
safely given to kill worms in small Children: The Dosis is from gr. iiij. to
ss. without any danger but of provoking salivation, which it does easily: but
in case it be mixed with Purgatives, as Electuaries, Gellies or Extracts, and
the Patient does take a clear Broth, or a glass of Ptisan after he has
swallowed it, he needs not be any more in fear of this great accident. But the
Artist must note, that neither Mercury, nor any of its preparations ought to be
brayed in mortars, or with pestles of metal, because it easily sticks too and
incorporates with metals. The Opiates or Electuaries also wherein is put the
Mercury, must not be chewed; but they must be swallowed in Bolus with wafel
Bread, or some Conserve of Sweetmeats, that none may remain in the mouth or
throat, because it is the occasional cause of Salivation; it is also for the
same reason that Mercurial Remedies ought not to be dissolved nor mingled with
Liquors to give the Patients to drink, because by reason of their weight they
ordinarily remain in the bottom of the Cup, or their substance sticks and
cleaves to the mouth, throat or along the gullet, and so causes salivation.

To sublimate Cinnabar, or Vermilion.
WE have deferred above to speak of mineral Cinnabar, with a purpose to
mention it in this place: and to satisfy the Artificers mind upon this
subject, he must know that mineral Cinnabar is nothing else then Mercury or
Quicksilver, raised and sublimated by internal heat of the Earth in mines,
which made a portion of mineral and embryonated Sulphur, predominant in the
same mine to ascend with it: and according to the purity of the earth, stone,
sand or place where this mercury and sulphur are sublimated and coagulated into
Cinnabar; this mixed is also more or less pure, as it appears by the mineral
Cinnabar of Corinthia, which is much purer, and abounds much more in
Quicksilver then that of Hungary, which is much earthlier, and has more of
stones and sands then of mercury and sulphur, and the mercury which may be
extracted out of this Cinnabar, is not much purer then that which may be
extracted from artificial Cinnabar, unless out of this respect, that it
proceeds from places which abound with golden Mines: but if our Artist can
recover none, let him not be put to a stand therefore, provided he takes care
to purify it well; and the first purification is made by sublimation with
common sulphur or Brimstone, in this manner.

lb ss. of sulphur or Brimstone, and with a moderate fire melt it in a well
glazed earthen pan, and when it is all well melted, squeeze x. of ordinary
Quicksilver through a Chamoy Leather to separate the parts of it, and make as
it were a very subtle Rain thereof, which immediately and suddenly mingle
with a wooden pestle and incorporate to the melted Brimstone, and thus continue
squeezing the mercury and agitating, until it be all swallowed by the
Brimstone; which being grown cold will turn to a black mass, which bray and
reduce to powder between two earthen pots, exactly luted together mouth to
mouth, the uppermost having a hole in the middle of the bigness of a Quill,
place this pot upon two bars of Iron, and give it a circular fire, beginning
under the bats by degrees, and stop the upper hole of the pot with a little
piece of paper, and when you perceive the exhaling vapor to begin to turn from
yellow to red sticking to the paper, then stop it more exactly, and give it a
good strong fire for the space of three or four hours, then cease and let the
Vessels cool, and you shall find in your pot the Mercury sublimated into a red
and shining lump or mass, which is that we call artificial Cinnabar; which may
be used for a Perfume to provoke the fluxing of the mouth, for it is not fit to
be used internally; but we have described it, that the Artist may better
conceive the manner and action of the sublimation made naturally in the earth,
and to teach him how to work and prepare it with Sulphur, as well as with Salts.

To prepare the silvered and pearled flowers of Mercury.
ALthough this Operation be long and laborious, it deserves nevertheless our
teaching, not only by reason of the virtue of these mercurial Flowers, but also
chiefly in respect of the modus faciendi, which is sufficient to instruct an
Artist, and lead him to that patience which is required in the preparation of
those Arcana's which are extracted from Mercury, so often recommended by our
incomparable Paracelsus.

To peform then this Operation, first lb j. of common salt, and as much
Saltpeter, which being reduced to a powder, mix with lb vj. of common Bolus
also in powder, and by little and little moisten this mixture to knead and
reduce it to a mass or lump, of a fitting consistency to frame Pellers
therewith, which must be very well dried either in the Sun, or upon an Oven
where bread is daily baked. Out of these must be extracted an aqua Regalis,
after the method and way we shall teach in the Chapter of Salts. Dissolve x. of
well purified Mercury in lb j. of this Regal water, and draw off again the two
parts thereof, or three in ashes, and the Vessel being cold, take away the
Limbeck or still Head, and you will find the Mercury changed into Chrystals in
the bottom of the Cucurbite, which separate from the Liquor and edulcorate;
then put it in a double or digesting Vessel, and pour upon it tartarized spirit
of Wine three fingers high; then luting it very exactly, put it in putrefaction
in B. M. the space of 40 days, which is a Philosophical month. This time being
expired, pour all what is in the Vessel into a Retort, and place it in sand;
then draw off the spirit of Wine with a very slow heat, and when it is all come
over the Helm, increase the fire for four or five hours, and some part of the
Mercury will sublimate it self, and the other part remain in the bottom of the
Retort in the form of a red Precipitate; break the Vessel and join these two
substances together, braying them in a Marble mortar, and the powder thereof
put in a Mattress, pouring upon it very good distilled vinegar two fingers high;
put this Mattress in digestion in B. M. or in sand or ashes, and give it a
gradual fire 24 hours, or until the substance of this Sublimare or Precipitate
be dissolved, which filtrate warm in a glass Vessel very clean, and the
Menstruum will immediately grow clear, and the substance of the Mercury
coagulate into Flowers, which resemble white, flat and shining silk, cotton or
flakes of snow, in color as fair-shining and well polished silver: separate
these Flowers with a silver-spoon, and put them to dry upon filtrating paper
fourfold doubled, without pressing or crushing them, that in drying they lose
not their luster and beauty. Continue the same dissolution with fresh Vinegar
in the remaining matter, then filtrare and coagulate until it be all converted
to Flowers, which are a very excellent purgative Remedy against all Venereal
Diseases, Worms, intermittent Fevers, Leprosy, and all manner of Scabs and
Itch; The Dosis is from ij. to viij. grains; they must be reduced to Pills
with extract of Liquorish to administer so to the Patient, giving to drink over
it a glass of some Decoction appropriated to the Disease, or prescribing a
Broth to be taken immediately.

The distillation of Mercury.
ALmost all Authors put the distillation of Butter of Antitimony in the same
rank and order as that of Mercury, but with very little ground and reason: for
though the corrosive Sublimate be made use of in this distillation, the butter
which proceeds from it. is nothing else but a dissolved and depurated Antimony
by the saline Spirits, which had coagulated the Mercury into Sublimate; but
that which invincibly proves and makes good this truth, is, that when Antimony
is deprived of his saline spirits by affusion of water, it turns to a
precipitate or powder, which is easily converted again into Regulus by fusion
with a little of Tartar, and that the Sublimate also returns into quick Mercury
if the butter be made with Regulus, or is sublimated into Cinnabar, if it be
done with crude Antimony, because it has yet in its self its gross and
external sulphur. But here our intention is only to treat of the distillation
of Quicksilver not prepared before, for after preparation, and teach to
extract from it several noble Remedies, which are used for the cure of the most
stubborn, obstinate, and radicated Diseases.

The distillation of spirit of Mercury without addition.
THis Operation is harder then the following, because the parts of the
quicksilver are not discontinued in it, nor opened by the temperation or
addition of salts or spirits, and moreover has received yet no impression from
their mixture, which is the cause that many do set a greater value upon this
Spirit then upon on the following, and attribute unto it more virtue and
efficacy; it is thus performed.

First, You must have a Furnace on which a Crucible must be placed, so as to
rise half a foot above the grate of it, upon this Crucible lute an earthen
stone Cucurbite of one foot and a half high, opened in the top and bottom
equally, in the bottom to receive the sides of the Crucible within, and in the
top, to he fitted for a great and capacious glass still-Head, there must also
be a small hole of two inches square above the side to which the Crucible is
joined, having a very exact stopple fitted to it, that by the same the Mercury
may be thrown into the Crucible: the joints both of the Crucible and Cucurbite
where they meet in the bottom must be exactly luted, with a Lute not subject to
crack, and the joints of the Cucurbite and still-Head with a bladder and whites
of Eggs; this done, give your fire gently so as to heat your Vessels by
degrees, and increase it until the bottom of the Crucible be turned red; then,
having at hand purified Mercury, pour about ij. at every time into the
Crucible, by the square hole of the Cucurbite, which stop without delay, and
the Mercury will pass through the Helm in vapors, which partly will turn again
into the body of flowing Mercury, and partly into a clear Liquor, but in small
quantity, proceed thus pouring and putting new Mercury, until you have enough
of this Spirit for your use. Note, that you may change the Recipient and
substitute another in the place to take away from it the distilled Liquor, and
separate the quicksilver to put in your distillation, being as good as the
other that never was yet used. Rectify this spirit in Balneo M. or ashes, and
keep for use. It is a searcher, penetrating through all the body, and driving
away all impurities from it, either by sensible or undiscernable transpiration,
and chiefly by sweats. The malignant and foul Ulcers may also be washed with
it, chiefly those that proceed from the venom and infection of the Pox; we
shall make a more exact application of the same again, after we have delivered
the description of the two following Spirits.

To prepare the white and Diaphoretical spirit of Mercury.
ALthough some give the name of Oil to these Preparations, it is improperly,
since nothing can lawfully be called Oil but what is fat and inflammable, but
not any aqueous substance; for which cause we have rather chosen to keep the
name of Spirit, as best expressing the nature of the thing; this Spirit is thus
prepared.

Take lb ij. of prepared corrosive Sublimate, such as we have taught to make
above; reduce it to a very subtle powder upon a Marble stone, and mix it with
three times as much red clay, and knead or work it with a little of distilled
Rainwater into a lump, whereof you may make pellets fit to pass through the
neck of a Retort; cause them wholly to dry in the shade, and then put them into
the Retort, to which, after you have placed it in sand, fit a capacious and
well luted Recipient: but Note, that the neck of the Retort must be above an
inch diameter in the mouth, both to give way to the pellets to pass, and also
to facilitate the success of the operation, which would be endangered, if the
matter by sublimation did stop the neck of the Retort before all the aqueous
and watery vapors are come forth, which might cause the Retort and perhaps
also the Recipient to break. The Lute being very dry, give it a gradual fire
the space of two or three hours, and there will come forth an excellent
Spirit, which put by it self; and if any Mercury be sublimated, incorporate and
work it again with new red Clay, and proceed as before, until you have turned
all this Sublimate into Spirit, which mix altogether, then rectify and keep
for use in a well stopped Viol; the Virtues and Dosis we will deliver in the
following Preparation.

To make the red and Diaphoretical spirit of Mercury.
THis Spirit being of more toil in the preparation then the former, so has it
also much more of virtue; and I say, that in case there should be any danger in
the use of these Remedies, there should be much less even however in this
whereof we are about now to teach the preparation, because the. or Iron which
is made use of does abate and slacken very much the acrimony and sharpness of
the spirits of the Sublimate: but there is no doubt at all to be made for the
safe use and goodness of these excellent Medicines, which are corrected by
fire and given in so small a Dosis, by reason of their subtle and quick
penetration, so as no body ought to fear the effects thereof, which can be but
useful and commendable. It is thus performed.

lb j. of good corrosive Sublimate, and as much of Filings of Needles very
pure, clean and small; grind the Sublimate very well, then add the Filings to
it, and this mixture put in a Cellar or some other cool place upon a glass
Table, that has an edge and a small Conduit in it, under which a Dish is to be
placed, that shall receive a yellow Liquor proceeding from the dissolution of
these two substances, which you are to preserve carefully; and when it is all
done, take the remainder, and having put it in a glass Cucurbite, pour upon it
distilled Rainwater half a foot high to draw the salt thereof; digest it in
ashes, and stir often the matter, and after three days filtrate the
dissolution and evaporate into salt, which dissolve; again filtrate, evaporate
and chrystallize until it be very pure, then dry it and make it into powder,
which mingle with the yellow Liquor kept before, and it will grow as red as
Saffron; pour it all into a low glass Cucurbite, upon which fit a still-Head
with a short and big Nose, to which having fitted a proportionate Recipient,
and luted the joints, make the distillation in sand, giving fire by degrees;
there will come forth first a phlegm, and when you see that yelow vapors begin
to appear, change your Recipient and increase the fire, and this yellow vapor
will condensate it self into a red Liquor, which will partly fall into the
Recipient, and the remainder which will be too thick, shall stick to the body
and Nose of the Limbeck; this done, let the Vessels cool, and take away the
still-Head, to which with the phlegm that came forth at first from the sides
and brims of the Cucurbite, where some part of this red substance is stuck
fast, pour again upon its own Caput Mortuum in the bottom of the Cucurbite, in
case it be not broken, if so, then take another: but leave what is in the
Limbeck and its Nose, because after you shall have luted the Vessels and begun
your fire to reiterate the distillation, as soon as the Limbeck feels the hear,
and that the vapors begin to ascend, that which is in the still-Head will
resolve itself into Liquor, and flow in the Recipient; as soon as all the red
Liquor is ascended and come over the Helm, change your Recipient to increase
the phlegm, after which more red Liquor will yet ascend, which receive by it
self and join to the other; reiterate these distillations and cohobations until
no more of red Liquor will ascend. Then put it all in a double or circulatory
Vessel, and pour upon it alkohol of Wine three fingers high; digest and
circulate it in a vaporous Balneo the space of three weeks; after which take
away the Blindhead, and put a still in lieu of it, and draw off the spirit of
Wine in the gentle heat of B. M. keeping the red Spirit remaining in a strong
Viol well stopped, as one of the best Remedies prepared from Mercury. Both these
Spirits are of a very great and commendable use in Physic; but that which is
red, is yet much more to be esteemed, and above any of the other. All of them
do equally expel and drive away by sweat whatsoever may be hurtful or offensive
to the body, and disturb the economy of life and health; they cure also
several Diseases, upon which other Remedies could have no power. It may be
truly said that these Spirits, but chiefly the red, are the true Specificks
against inveterate Pocks, which may be tried by their use: for the pustles or
pimples vanish away of themselves, the Nodus 's and hardnesses insensibly
decay; night-pains and aches do cease, and the putrid, noisome and open Ulcers
are cleansed and consolidated without application of any external Remedy. The
Dosis must be from j. drop to iv. at the most in Theriacal water, or Camphyr'd
Theriacal Spirit, spirit of Life of Paracelsus, spirit of Guajacum, spirit of
Diatrion, or mixtum simplex of the same Paracelsus, or even in Tincture of
Sassafras and China Root made with white Wine. I doubt not but most who shall
read this, may be of a different sentiment from mine; believing that I produce
impossibilities upon the Stage of Chemistry, and follow the tract of all the
rest, by attributing so many virtues to the preparations of Mercury turned into
Spirit; but I am not at all amazed at it; for those who pass this Censure and
Judgment cannot certainly be acquainted with the subtle and fermentaive
action of Mercury, and with those Remedies it yields. What change and
alteration does it not produce in man's body being only applied outwardly in
Frictions, Perfumes and Plasters? What does it not perform in Baths? What
strange effects does it not produce in Pills? and all this whilst yet cloyed
with a Body, or only altered by the intervention of salts and spirits; What
then may not be hoped from it, when it is brought to a further digestion, and
turned to a liquid spirituous substance which may be mixed with potable
Liquors! for then it is capable to be volatiliz'd by natural heat, and its
virtue brought from the Center to the Circumference, and so penetrates all
parts and carries along with it by sweat, whatsoever impurities and evil
humors it meets with, whether a matter ripe for Diseases, or only a
superfluity of digestions. But to stop the mouths of the Detractors and
obstinate unbelievers, I find my self obliged to relate here the History of a
Person eminent both in condition and place, who is yet living; having been
actually blind in former time, and now cured by a Mercurial Remedy, yet in
powder, and not brought to the perfection of a Spirit; and that which is more
to be considered in this cure, is, that there was no other Remedy used but of
one grain and half of this prepared Mercury blown with a Quill in the Nostrils,
which in a very short time did produce surprising effects! for his Head swelled
in an extraordinary manner; then did he spit, drivel, shed tears, blow his
Nose, sneeze, vomit, piss, had copious and large stools, and sweated likewise,
and all this in less then eight hours; after which those violent symptoms did
cease, and relent by degrees. But that which is more wonderful, is, that the
very next day he began to see, though somewhat confusedly, and from day to day
after that, began to distinguish objects, and finally was totally cured, and
enjoyes joys now one of the best and steadiest eye-sights a man can have, and
since that has performed many remarkable services to the Crown of France. The
same Person which cured him, did also cure the most desperate Pocks with the
fame Remedy, given in the same quantity, and blown in the Nostrils. Where is
now (I beseech you) that Medicine that shall produce the like effects, even at
a great distance? This Relation is so true, that to justify it, I can produce
many a witness of Credit and Repute; wherefore I think no body shall judge it
more strange, that I should attribute to the foregoing preparations, virtues
and effects of far inferior difficulty and worth; which makes me conclude here
in a profound admiration of the supreme Wisdom, and with scorn of humane
ignorance, saying, That the age of Man is too short to go through the exact
Anatomy of Mercury, and draw all the noble Remedies which God and Nature have
placed in this Heteroclit and neutral Mixed, which has not its like in all
created substances or sublunary Beings.

To make a sweet Oil of Mercury.
WE have yet two distinctions more of Mercury to describe, because the
processes of it are differing from the rest, and the Menstruums also, that our
Artist thereby may the better be informed, and more exactly conceive whatsoever
the most learned and experimented amongst ancient Writers have left upon
Record, for the preparation of the great Arcana's. The first is made thus.

q. v. of corrosive Sublimate made with Salt, Vitriol and Saltpeter, and
thrice sublimated with new Vitriol, and salt that has been in fluxion or
fusion, and taking at every time, half of the Caput Mortuum remaining after
sublimation, and half of new matter. Put this Sublimate in subtle powder, and
pour upon it very good distilled Vinegar three fingers high; digest and
dissolve them together; then separate the dissolution, and reaffund new
Vinegar, thus continuing until all the Sublimate be dissolved; put all these
dissolutions in a Cucurbite, and draw off the Menstruum again in a sand-fire,
well graduated to a dry bottom: then take off the matter, and having put it in
a double digesting Glass, pour upon it spirit of Wine very much alkoholiz'd;
stop the Glass with its Blindhead, and lute it exactly, then put it in
digestion in a vaporous Balneo the space of three weeks, or until the matter be
opened and becomes viscuous and clammy: then draw off the spirit of Wine in a
heat proportionate to its nature: this done, put the Vessel in sand, and distill
it with the highest degree of fire which it is capable to receive, and at last
it will yield a liquor as white as milk: cohobate that which is come forth upon
the matter remaining in the bottom, and reiterate the distillation and you
shall have a sweet and fragrant Oil, void of all corrosive quality. They that
know the action and reaction of Salts and Spirits, shall not find this change
from corrosive to sweet impossible: for these mixtures, these actions, these
digestions, these dissolutions and distillations, do produce new beings, which
the Artist should never have hoped for, as very well says the most profound
Philosopher and Physician Van Helmont. Distillatio parit novum ens.

This Oil or Liquor cures all internal Ulcers, and drives away by sweat all
impurities which are the spring of Diseases; above all, it is an admirable
Specific against Ulcers in the Throat, those of the Reins and the Bladder.
The Dosis may be from j. drop to three in some appropriated Liquor. But if the
Artist will perfect a true Magistery or Elixir of Mercury, let him digest the
calx of Gold well opened in this Oil, during the space of six whole weeks in a
circulatory Vessel, and he will have an inestimable Remedy, much exalted in
Virtue, and the Dosis whereof exceeds not from half a grain to two for the most.

To prepare the Astrum Mercurij, or star of Mercury.
lb j. s. of quick Mercury, seven times sublimated with salt, Saltpeter and
Vitriol, and as many times revivified with quicklime, put it in a Cucurbite,
and pour upon it xij. of very good spirit of Niter; cover the Cucurbite with
its Blindhead, and let them dissolve in the slow heat of ashes, if need be, or
place the Cucurbite in sand after the total dissolution of the Mercury, and
draw the spirit from it to a dry bottom: then reduce to powder the remaining
lump on a Marble mortar; this powder put in a new Cucurbite, pour upon it very
good Vinegar four inches high, cover the Cucurbite with its Blindhead, and put
it in sand, let the matter digest and boil the space of 24 hours, then taking
off the Blindhead, put a still in the place, and draw off the Vinegar to a dry
bottom, and thus draw it three times; Beat the lump to powder, and distill seven
times upon it distilled Rainwater, or so long till the lump has no taste of
the vinegar left at all; then beat it again to powder, and put it to digest,
for the last time in a double Vessel, with its equal weight of true alkohol of
Wine; cover it with the Blindhead, and being well luted, place it in a vaporous
Balneo with shred straw, and so digest it during six weeks in an equal and
continued heat. This done, pour all the matter into a Retort, and distill it in
ashes mingled with sand in a graduate heat, until even by increasing of the
fire nothing more will come forth; open the Vessels after they are cooled, and
pour what you find in the Recipient into a Cucurbite; draw off the spirit of
Wine in a slow heat of B. M. and you shall find in the bottom of the Vessel an
Oil or precious Liquor of a very good smell, which is called Astrum Mercurij,
or the star of Mercury, not to be given to sick persons but from j. drop to
iij. in appropriated Liquors. We shall relate the virtues of it after we have
taught the extraction of salt of Mercury, because it has the same proprieties
and efficacy.

To make the Salt of Mercury.
TAke what was left after the distillation of astrum Mercurij, put it in a
double Vessel, and pour upon it some of the said astrum or star of Mercury; put
them together in digestion in ashes to a moderate heat the space of three
days, after which separate the extraction by decantation, that no impurity may
go along with it, pour upon it a good quantity of very subtle spirit of Wine,
circulate them together the space of xv. days in a well stopped Vessel, after
that draw off the spirit of Wine in B. M. and cause the Oil to ascend in
ashes, and you shall have the precious salt of Mercury in the bottom of the
Vessel; keep both these excellent and noble Remedies for use. They are both a
very secret and specific Remedy to cleanse, and rectify the whole mass of
the blood: upon which account they are wonderful for the cure of Leprosy and
Pocks. They also cure all manner of never so malignant and inveterate Ulcers;
and carry away and cleanse easily all manner of scurf in the Head, scab and
itch; the Dosis of the Salt is equal with that of the Liquor. Their working is
by transpiration and sweat. We will not speak of the Liquation or Resolution of
Mercury, though we did promise above to give an Example thereof, because this
operation has an affinity and dependence on the two last distillations by us
described: wherefore nothing remains for us to treat of, but of the Extraction
whereby the sulphur of Mercury may be procured: for we have showed above how
the salt thereof is to be made.

Tincture of Mercury, which is called The Sulphur thereof.
j. p. of red Precipitate made with spirit of Niter, bray it in a Mortar, with
ij. p. of desiccated salt, and iij. p. of Vitriol desiccated also to
whiteness; put this mixture in a Mattress, and sublime it in sand, with a
strong and violent fire toward the end. Put this sublimate in a double or
digesting Vessel, pouring upon it good distilled Vinegar four fingers high,
cover it with its Blindhead, and put it in ashes to digest the space of three
weeks, and the Vinegar will take a yellow* Tincture; this draw off by decanting
the Vessel, and put new vinegar in the place; and thus proceed extracting and
digesting with new Menstruum, until it takes color no more. Filtrate all these
Tinctures, and pour them in a Cucurbite, which place in sand, and by
distillation draw off all the Liquor to a dry bottom, and in the bottom of the
Cucurbite you shall find the sulphur of Mercury in a red powder, which keep in
a glass Viol for use. Paracelsus gives very great Elogiums and commendations to
this Sulphur, and attributes unto it the virtue of curing the Gout, Epilepsie,
and the great Pocks radically, and without any fear of relapse; the sensible
effects thereof are Urines and Sweats; otherwise it works by a gentle, natural
and insensible transpiration. The Dosis may be from j. gr. to iij. in some
Conserve or Cordial Confection, or even in Extract of Juniper.

Though we have already warned before all Chemical Artists in the Theorical
part of this Treatise, not to make any use of Chemical Remedies, unless they
have prepared them themselves, or be very well acquainted with, and dare trust
to the experience, knowledge and conscience of those from whose hands they will
take them. We think our selves nevertheless yet obliged to say somewhat more
of this matter here, chiefly by reason of those pernicious accidents we have
seen to happen to several persons of all conditions, for having trusted and
having admitted Mercurial Remedies not rightly prepared: it is therefore much
safer to abstain from their use and administration, then to hazard a repenting
for all your life, either in your own person, or of those which you shall
expose to danger and torment by an ill prepared and dangerous Remedy, which
makes me to advise and counsel those, that are not yet sufficiently instructed
in the Theorical and practical part of Chemistry, not to venture upon the
preparation of the great Mercurial Remedies, until they have attained to a
sufficient and exact knowledge of the materials they are to handle and work
upon; and to a happy and long experience of the goodness of Remedies by them
prepared: and since we have the injunction of our great Master Hippocrates, to
make our experiments upon a vile subject, even in trying the virtue of a Root
or a Plant: how much more are we to be circumspect, when we go about to use
Remedies extracted from Metals or Minerals, when their virtue and activity is
not yet come fully to our discovery and knowledge. Here then must we proceed
warily, and sound the depth before we enter this Foord, lest we forfeit our
Reputation, and endanger the life of the Patient. For although the Processes
and Operations seem to be plainly delivered and easy enough to practice, yet
the ill choice of materials, the action of the fire, the want of Vessels, some
mistake or inadvertency, some neglect or impatience of the Artist familiar
enough to the French Nation; do very much alter the nature of things, and
imprints in it new faculties, and quite different from those we do expect. Let
then every body work with knowledge, prudence and circumspection, with
conscience and very long patience, if they will attain to the possession of
those great Remedies, which Mercury and Antimony, of which last we are now to
treat of, do yield.

Of Antimony and its Chemical Preparation.
AS Antimony is the stumbling stone of many of those which profess Physic,
and they that are not acquainted with it, will traduce it as the vain Idol of
Chemists and Chemistry; so must we with all possible endeavor make it appear,
that it is with very just reason and good purpose, that Artists have Antimony
in esteem, since it is grounded upon their knowledge of its nature, they having
not, as the Traducers and Dissamators thereof do, been contented with the Rind
and superficial examination of the same; but contrariwise, having opened and
anatomized it, to extract those wonderful Remedies which daily do produce such
noble effects, to the great praise and exaltation of Chemistry, and the
discredit of those who publicly profess their defaming by invectives, and
ridiculous calumnies against such as daily use it with skill and knowledge,
order and Method, and consequently with desired success.

But to clear more this truth which we have laid, we must in few words declare
the nature of Antimony, and of what substance it is made of, to make it obvious
and plain, and evident to the least capacity, that those that have an aversion
and hatred for it, do only condemn it for want of true knowledge, both of the
substance and first preparation thereof, as we will declare in the sequel of
this Discourse.

Antimony then is nothing else but a Marcassite, mean or middle Mineral, which
nature had destined to a metallic production; but has fainted in the way,
want of not having in it self the necessary dispositions to attain to that
perfection; or because it was prematurely snatched away and torn off from its
matrix, as an unripe fruit plucked off from the tree; or finally, by reason of
the terrestrial impurity of its mixture, and the disproportion and indigestion
of its principles.

But to let the Reader better understand, this we say, let the Artist know,
that Antimony does first of all consist of a mineral sulphur, partly very pure
and answering the nature of that of Gold, whose foundation is in its redness
and is fix; and it is in the center of this Solar sulphur that all the wonders
of Antimony are placed; the other part of this sulphur is impure, dissipable by
fire, and volatile as common Brimstone, and to this Sulphur are commonly
referred and attributed the violent and raging operations, when it is not well
and duly corrected, or ill and negligently separated. Secondly, This Mineral is
compounded of a metallic Mercury in abundance, which is nevertheless
indigested and suliginous; but yet more concocted and coagulated then
quicksilver, because it participates of the Saturnine nature: finally, the
third constituting part or principle of our Antimony, is a gross and earthly
substance which it holds from its matrix, containing very little of sensible
salt, though salt was the first cause of its production: but the nature of it
is changed by reason of the several alterations and disguises it has suffered
by the concoction and digestion of its centrical fire.

By which description of Antimony and its constituting parts is plain to be
seen, that it is nothing else but a gathering and conjunction of Vitriol,
Sulphur and Mercury of the nature of Lead met together, and that by consequence
it cannot be dangerous or condemnable in it self, since every day these three
substances are used by themselves, and taken apart in Physic, either as they
grow naturally, or prepared; and wherefore then should not crude and prepared
Antimony be made use of also? But it will be objected unto me, That the most
famous and celebrated Authors which have written of Antimony, call it a Poison,
and say, that it does participate of some mixture of Realgar and Arsenick; To
which we answer, that Lead, Quicksilver and Brimstone, participate also of the
same mixture, and yet are not banished from the commerce of Physic: since even
Realgar and Arsenick are made use of, after the malignancy of their salt and
sulphur has been corrected by the ministry of fire, and of the spirits that
are capable of this operation, so that they may be inwardly administered,
supplying us also with the best Topical Remedies against all dangerous and
malignant Ulcers. But it is quite otherwise of Antimony, which daily is
administered by the mouth wholly raw, and without any accident even to sucking
Children: and moreover, made to boil in the weight of lb ss. in Decoctions
against the Pocks, and also put in cold infusion of water to open the body and
remove obstructions in the Entrails. Let then our Artist know, that when ever
Ancient or Modern Authors which have treated concerning Antimony, have said it
was a Poison, it is to be understood only comparatively between the common
preparations of Antimony not yet sufficiently corrected, and so consequently
causing violent Vomits and Stools, with those they describe that are harmless
and of no danger, but which only do strengthen Nature, and help it to expel
insensibly whatever is noxious and hurtful to it. Wherefore let us conclude
this small preliminary Discourse of Antimony, by the words which Zwelferus has
to this purpose in the Appendix inserted to the end of his Notes upon the
Pharmacopea of Aufburg, in praise of this noble Mineral, and against the
unlearned and ignorant Despisers thereof. Cum stibij vel antimonij nomen apud
aliquos artis pulcherrima osores, praesertim ignorantes, tam male audiat, ut
qui solummodo ore illud excidere permittit, mox ex medentium coetu proscriptus
ad veneficos amandetur; quia tamen hoc de antimonio judicium, non in alia
officina, quam cerebri ad Lunae crescentis and de crescentis mutabilitatem
tornati excuditur; and vix alius de eo magis perverse and perfricta front
loquitur, quam qui minimam ejus habet cognitionem; Idoirco nullo canum similium
hoc sidus allatrantium, convitio a very tramite dimotus, hoc in praesens
asserere non erubesco: antimonium vere unam and principalem esse columnam
universae Medicinae; Quipe ex eo tanquam Proteo, diversis duntaxat
praeparationibus, dioersa^um operationum medicamenta saluberrima, utpote
antiloimica, antivenerea, diaphoretica, purgantia and vomitoria blanda,
sanguinem uiversum mundificantia, vulnera^ia, pectoralia, imo universale
medicamem seu Panacea ipsa, erui possunt. Nec constat ex vegetabilibus unicum
emeticum, quod minore cum periculo exhiberi possit, quam antimonium dext^e and
debite praparatum; nunquam enim tormina ventr^^, Hypercatharsin, fluxumque
nimium colliquantium causabit, etiamsi aqua frigida superbibatur. We should
think it superfluous to say any more of it: wherefore we will come now to the
choice of Antimony, and the several denominations gven unto it, by those that
would keep secret the mysteries, and hide the preparation thereof, that it may
be a Key to the Artist for understanding other aenigma's and dark Ridles, and
explicating of their mysterious Hieroglyphics.

Chemical Philosophers do characterize this Mineral with a Figure representing
the round World, and a cross on the top thereof thus antimony to denote, that
as the mystery of the Cross does purify, and heal the soul from all spiritual
filth and leprosy; so Antimony and its Remedies well and duly prepared, do
cleanse and free the body from all impurities, which breed and entertain the
Diseases whereby it is tormented and afflicted. They call it by several
aenigmatical names, as the Wolf, because it consumes and devours all metals,
Gold excepted; Others name it the P^oteus, because it turns it self into all
Forms, and takes all manner of colors, by the assistance of Vulcan, which is
the fire, Others call it the Root of Metals, both because it is found often
near their Mines, and that many are of opinion it is the rudiment and principle
of Metals: it is moreover denominated the sacred Lead, the Lead of the
Philosophers and of the Wise, because so it has some analogy and affinity to
the nature of Saturn, which devoured his children as he devoures Metals, and
because also some do take it for the subject matter of the great Work of
Philosophers, and of their Quintessence: Basilius Valentinus calls it the
Eastern Lion, Paracelsus the Red Lion, and Glauber describes it as the first
Being of Gold.

All Authors are agreed that the Hungarian Antimony, or Transilvanian is to be
chosen for the noblest and highest operations, because it is the purest, and
participates more of the Solar nature, and so its internal sulphur is much more
exalted. It is found nevertheless in many other places, and chiefly in Germany,
and France has some which is not altogether despicable. So that those which
cannot come at that Antimony which is dug about golden Mines, must take and
choose in lieu of it to supply their work, a clear, pure and shining Antimony,
with clear and bright faces or glittering flawes: if it be mineral, mixed with a
kind of changing and playing color, as that in Doves necks, or the changes of
the Opal or the Rainbow, which are all signs of the predominancy and abundance
of its sulphur: but if it be common Antimony that has beem melted already,
that which has the longest streakes or shining and sparkling lines, or flawes
with the sames notes of color, which we have recommended in the other, is to
be preferred. They that will try it further to be surer of it, must take j. of
Antimony made into very small powder, and temper or sprinkle it with very good
spirit of Vinegar; then let it dry or evaporate in the fire upon a small Iron
plate, or some small piece of an earthen pot, with this caution nevertheless,
neither to flow, or melt in the fire: and if the powder remains of a red
color, it is an assured sign of the goodness and abundance of its sulphur.
But we hold the best trial of Antimony to be its reduction into Regulus by the
help of Mars and Niter, without any mixture of Tartar, by reason of its Alkali
which dissolves sulphurs: for that which yields the greatest quantity of
Regulus and the purest, is the best, since the Regulus is nothing else but a
well purified Antimony.

The general preparations of Antimony.
BEfore we come to the particular Operations which are made upon Antimony, we
have thought it necessary to give first a general Idea of such preparations as
are made upon this noble Mineral; the harvest of them being so great, that to
describe what Modern and Ancient Authors have delivered of it, and what by our
own experience we are confirmed in, would require endless Volumns, the virtues
of Antimony being bottomless and innumerable, as by the sequel we shall make
it appear. We shall then restrain and couch up our selves according to our
wonted custom, with some examples of each of the most general Operations, by
which the Artist will be guided and ruled to perform such others, as the
necessity of Patients or his own curiosity shall prompt him to undertake, that
he may not come short of giving or receiving the satisfaction he looks for.

The general preparations then made upon Antimony, are: First, Calcination;
secondly, Sublimation; thirdly, Distillation; fourthly, Liquation or
Resolution; fifthly, Extraction; sixthly, Infusion; seventhly, Salification;
some do add in the eighth place, Mercurification: but we will omit that, having
made a hundred successesse trials, by which we could never be convinced of the
truth thereof; wherefore we abstain from it upon the same account, and for the
same reason we have hinted, speaking of the mercury of Metals; and further,
knowing full well that Paracelsus and others, understand nothing else by the
mercury of Antimony, then its well prepared Regulus, without any diminution or
loss of its Solar or Central sulphur, though we deny not the possibility
thereof: But we will impose upon no body, nor be the cause of any loss of time
upon Processes and Operations that have never, nor never shall hit or succeed
right. The Calcination is twofold, dry and moist: the dry yields the Glass,
Crocus or Saffron, Diaphoretick Remedies and Regulus; the moist gives the
Precipitates. Sublimation makes the Flowers, Cinnabar or Vermilion. The
Distillation draws Vinegars, Oils and Spirits. Extraction communicates
Sulphurs and Tinctures. Infusion gives emetical Wines and Ophthalmical Waters;
and the Salification, Salt.

The particular preparations of Antimony, and how the Glass of Antimony is to
be made by plain distillation.
THere are so many descriptions of the manner of preparing the Glass of
Antimony, that Artists are confounded in this particular, and hardly know how
to choose the best: but as we are sufficiently instructed, both by Theory and
practice, that the best is that which is made without addition or mixture, we
will exemplify and propound for a pattern the preparation of this, because
whosoever can perform it exactly, shall never be put to seek in executing the
others, the melting, clarification, and diaphaneity whereof is much easier, by
reason of the union of several salts, by which the fluxion is sacilitated and
becomes both quicker and cleanlier; this Glass without addition is thus made.

Take well chosen Antimony, and being made into very small powder, calcine it
in a very large and capacious earthen Dish, not glazed or varnished, upon a
slow fire, stirring continually with an Iron Spatula or Slice; this Calcination
is to be made in a place where the air may freely pass through, and the Artist
must stand above the wind, that he may receive no inconveniency by the vapors
exhaling from the pure sulphur of Antimony, nor oppress or suffocate his
breast; above all things great care must be had not to make too big a fire,
otherwise the excrementitious moisture being too suddenly driven away, the
melting and vitrification thereof would be hindered; after you have kept this
Antimony three or four hours upon the fire, and that you shall see it begin to
crumble it self and gather up together, draw the Vessel off from the fire, and
pour the matter upon a Porphyry stone, whereafter it is grown cold you may
reduce it into alkohol; then begin anew to calcine with a little more fire then
at the first time, and thus proceed three or four times, increasing still the
fire at every time that you bray your Antimony, and you will have an antimonial
Calx of a whitish gray, which you may use to make your Glass therewith; as also
to prepare an excellent Diaphoretick against the Plague and malignant Fevers:
to attain to this, Reverberate part of this calx in a Crucible in open fire,
until from white it turns to yellow; and if the calx do happen to crumble
during the Reverberation, take it immediately off from the fire, and bray it
again, and thus go on until all the external sulphur be evaporated, and the
internal begins to appear and manifest its self by its yellow color, which it
yields when it is come to this pass; put it in a Mattress, and pour upon it very
good spirit of Wine, and digest them together the space of fifteen days, which
being over, kindle of this spirit seven time upon your Diaphoretick to fix it
the better. The Dosis must be from iiij. gr. to xij. in some Conserve of
Marigold flowers.

But to perform the Vitrification, take lb ss. of the prepared calx, and add to
it s, of crude Antimony in powder, to facilitate and advance the fusion, which
you must make in a wind Furnace in a Crucible of very strong matter, capable to
resist the fire, and last in it, and when you shall perceive your matter in the
Crucible to flow clear and bright, try with a small sharp Iron which may be
clean, and expose it between your sight and the light, and if it be red or
transparent as a Granate or Ruby, pour it into a brass Basin, or a Copper, or
brass dressing plate well scoured, and made warm before the Glass be thrown
upon it, and thus shall you have a pure Glass, red and transparent, which may
be used for many noble and useful preparations, which we will place in their
Rank and Order, according to the Rank and Classis of their general preparation,
wherefore an Artist must never be unprovided of it.

To make the Crocus or antimonial Saffron, which is called Crocus Metallorum.
WE will give three descriptions of this Operation: the first more slight,
common and easy; the other something more intricate, and the third more
laborious; that as the work and preparation of it is various, and for different
reasons, so the Artist may be instructed in the one and the other, to be the
more capable thereby to satisfy himself and others.

The first Crocus Metallorum.
WE have in general recommended to the Artst, to have a special care of the
choice and purity of his materials: but he must be more circumspect then ever
in all the Antimonial Operations, because from thence depends very much, as
also from his prudence and knowledge, the good or the bad success of his
Operation.

Wherefore let him take well chosen Antimony, and well depurated Saltpeter to
make all the following preparations: for as Niter is called the Soap of the
wise, so must it be pure and clean to perform that cleansing, and that action
which Authors hope to find in it.. then well chosen Antimony and well purified
Sulphur ana equal parts, beat them to powder each apart, then mix and put them
in a brass Mortar covered with an earthen-pot cover, or with a round Tile,
having a hole in it of the bigness of a Thumb in diameter, through which it
may be set on fire with a small kindled coal; this Operation which is called
Fulguration, Fulmination and Detonation, must be made in an open place, and you
must get agove the wind, lest you be overcome by the smoke which is noisome and
dangerous, by reason of the corrosion of the nitrous Spirit, and the
inflammation of the external sulphur of Antimony. When the Mortar is grown
cold, draw off the matter from it which will be of two kinds: the uppermost
participating of Saltpeter, Sulphur and Antimony; the undermost, which is in a
compacted and close lump of Liver-colour and resembling unto it, for which
reason it is called Hepar antimonij, or Liver of Antimony, is properly nothing
else but an instantaneous, imperfect and opacous vitrification of Antimony, by
the calcination which the Saltpeter performs in a moment. These two matters
are to be put together in a brass Mortar, and triturated to a subtle powder,
which must be washed in warm water, to separate the fatness thereof; set the
first Lotion aside for the use we shay say hereafter, and continuing the
trituration, lotion and effusion of the Liquor laden with the subtilest
powder, until all the body of this Hepar or Liver of Antimony be transfused
with the water into an impalpable powder; separate the said water, and dry the
powder gently by evaporation, and you shall have that which commonly is called
Crocus Metallorum, or Saffron of Metals.

If the first Lotion be filtrated, and this clear water precipitated with
distilled Vinegar, there falls a red powder in the bottom, which is called
Sulphur auratum diaphoreticum, diaphoretick golden Sulphur, but very
improperly, because it is nothing else but a portion of the external sulphur of
Antimony, which the fixed salt of the Niter did keep dissolved and hidden in it
self, and has been made corporeal and visible by the help of the distilled
vinegar, because all whatsoever is dissolved by the salts alkali, is
precipitated by acid spirits; and contrariwise, all what is dissolved by acid
spirits, is precipitated by alkaly's. But let it not be fancied that this
pretended golden Sulphur be Diaphoretick; nor let the Authors word be taken for
a warrant in this matter: for it will deceive, unless you give it in a very
small Dosis, which shall not work, and if the Dosis be increased it will cause
exceeding and violent vomiting: for it is nothing else but a very subtle
Crocus metallorum, wherewith many do prepare their Emetical Wine.

The second Crocus Metallorum, which is though to be that of Rullandus.
THis second preparation does not differ in the matter, it only differs in the
work which is something of longer deduction: for you must take lb ss, of Niter,
and melt it in a Crucible, and being melted draw it off from the fire, and try
with a small parcel of Antimony reduced to powder, if it will not take fire
when put upon; and if it happens so, then stay yet a while, for it must not
burn to a flame: but as soon as by trial you have found that the mixture may be
made without inflaming, pour upon it gently and by little and little lb s. of
Antimony made in powder, and mix it well with a Spatula or Slice with the
melted Niter, until all the substances be well incorporated; this done, set it
on fire with a kindled coal, as you did the other, and you will have the same
effect to succeed. This mixture and manner of working is only for this end and
reason, that the Niter in fluxion mixes and does unite it self, and penetrates
much better the Antimony, then the Niter cold and in powder, and the
conflagration or quick burning does carry much better away the impure sulphur
of Antimony, which makes the Crocus Metallorum less violent in its operation,
since all the ill consequences commonly feared in Antimony, take their rise
from this impure and dangerous Sulphur, to which, though upon slight grounds,
are attributed the arsenical and venomous vapors of it.

The third Crocus Metallorum.
THe manner of working this third preparation is quite differing from the two
former, but not less to be valued: for it requires a longer Calcination, and
consequently a better and more exact maturation of the undigested parts of
Antimony, by the help of the salts and fire: and you must proceed thus.

Well chosen Antimony, well depurated Saltpeter, and common Salt, well
cleansed and desiccated ana equal parts, reduce them into powder by themselves,
then mix them, the mixture put in a well luted Crucible, covered with a Cover,
bored in the middle with a hole of the bigness of the small fingers end, that
the vapors may exhale through it; put this Crucible upon a thick Tile or Brick
in a wiped Oven, and lay round about it black and quick coals up to the top of
the Cover that it may be heated by degrees, and when it is once heated, and
that the vapors of the salt and antimonial Sulphur begin to rise through the
hole, increase the fire, and open all the doors of the wind-Oven, adding to it
also, if need be, the air of the bellows, that the matters may flow very well
in the Crucible, and thus continue till the smoke or vapors begin to cease,
and even then continue a quarter of an hour longer; then let the Crucible was
cold and break it afterward, and you shall find your Antimony turned into a
kind of Regulus, red as Vermilion under the salts, which as scums and dross
does lie above it; break it with a Hammer, and reduce it to powder without any
Lotion, and keep for use as one of the best kinds of Crocus Metallorum, to make
Emetical Wine; they attribute unto it the faculty of working more downwards
then upwards, though it excites also vomiting, but with less violence.

These three Crocus's may equally and promiscuously be used where the one fails
instead of the other, since they have the same virtue, only that they work more
or less violently, which inconveniency may be prevented and remedied by
diminishing the Dosis. Their faculties are, to expel the Headache which
proceeds from impurities of the stomach; as also to help the Epilepsie,
Pleuresie, Melancholy, Madness, and to help those that have running pains,
and voluntary or spontaneous weariness; they are also extraordinary good
Remedies in all Fevers, as much continual as intermittent. Their operation is
wonderful against Plague, arthritical pains, coagulation of blood. They are
never administered in substance, but their virtue is extracted by infusion or
ebullition, and when haste requires, with some fermented Liquor, as Wine,
Hydromel or Mead, Cider, Beer; The Dosis may be from iij. gr. to viij. x. and
xij. Moreover, they prove admirable Remedies in Glysters, if the infusion
thereof be put, from j. to iiij. in Meat, Broth, or some Emollient or softening
or Carminative Decoction.

Thus much we had to say of that preparation which is called Crocus, by reason
of some resemblance in color with Saffron, which has a Solar Tincture, but
their virtues not analogal to that noble spice of the Philosophers: wherefore
it is but improperly that they are called Saffron of Metals: for the true Sons
of Art will only impart this name to that noble and excellent preparation of
Metals, by which they are reduced to a saffranous, sweet and pleasant powder,
which is their mere volatile sulphur, capable of all the virtues and qualities
of Saffron: as to procure sleep, mitigate pains, strengthen the Heart and all
the functions of Life, open obstructions, serve as a consolidative Balsom, and
hinder the accidents of Wounds, maturate, ripen and dissolve the hardnesses and
Nodus's, all which virtues are attributed to vegetable Saffron, though weakly:
but the true Saffron of Metals, which is the true Philosophical Crocus, does
eminently and perfectly contain and possess all these Virtues we have related:
for it provokes sleep, and allayes all griefs, because it be calmes all the
irritations and rage of the internal Archeus, and corrects all the defects and
deviations thereof, strengthens all natural weaknesses, removes all
obstructions from the entrails very efficaciously, and in a short time: it
stops also and appeases all colliquations of humors and immoderate Fluxes;
finally, cures inwardly and outwardly all kind of malignant, cancerous
fistulous Ulcers; and to say in a word, remedies all Diseases to which humane
Nature is subjected; because it is a true volatile Sulphur, which consumes and
gently drives away by the power of its heat and internal light, all the
impurities and evil humors which lay lurking in the superfluities of the last
digestions. But this place does not allow us to say more, our design being only
to inform the Sons of Art, that then they will become capable of seeking this
noble and divine Crocus, when in earnest they shall apply themselves to the
love and true worship of their Creator, that by the help and assistance of his
Light, they may penetrate into the most abstruse Closet of those high mysteries
of Art and Nature, which are contained in the true Crocus of Philosophers.

The manner of preparing Diaphoretical Antimony.
IF we did recommend the purification of Saltpeter for the Crocus Metallorum,
we have reason to do it much more for the preparation of this Diaphoretical;
for as this Remedy is excellent, so must the Artist study with all his power to
prepare it with all requisite dircumstances; and the chief point of this
Operation does consist in the goodness, purity and sincerity of the Niter,
because by him the impure sulphur of Antimony is to be expelled, and it is he
that must digest, ripen and fix the indigestion of its Mercury, as we shall
make appear in the progress of the Operation; which is thus prepared.

ij. p. of very pure and dry Saltpeter, and j. p. of well chosen Antimony,
beat them each asunder into very small powder, and mix them to the other: then
fit a strong earthen pot not glazed, or a good Crucible upon a round Tile in a
wind Furnace, and cover it, encompassing the same with kindled Charcoal almost
to the top, that the Vessel may be heated by degrees, and when it is grown red
all about, blow in it to get out the filth or ashes if any be fallen in, then
pour half a spoonful of this mixture, and cover the pot with a well and exactly
fitted Covering; as soon as the matter touches the Pot it presently kindles,
and the Saltpeter does forcibly carry away with it the impure sulphur of
Antimony; and what remains after this detonation or fulguration, does fix it
self in the bottom of the Vessel by the action of the fixed salt of Niter, and
the activity of the fire; thus proceed till you have made an end of calcining
your Antimony, putting it thus by little and little in your Vessel: which done,
add another parcel more of very dry Niter to what is in the Vessel, that it may
flow with the matter, and perfect the Coction and fixation of it by the
penetration and action of the spirits of Niter, which by their subtilty and
quickness insinuate themselves in and amongst the least atoms of Antimony;
and thus conc^ct, wash, and fix it in a white and b^uisable substance after it
has been edulcorated and desiccated. Keep up the fire one or two hours more,
after you have put in the last parcel of Saltpeter, then cease and let the
matters cool in the Vessel: you must carefully remove all the filth and
impurity which might remain about the Pot, before you put it to soak in a pan
full of boiling water, which by degrees shall dissolve the fixed Niter, which
makes part of the lump remaining in the pot with the Antimony; and when this
lump is totally dissolved, stir that remainder in the bottom of the Vessel with
a good Pestle; and when the water appears milk-white, pour it in another
Vessel, and then grind in a Marble mortar what remains in the Pan, and
continue still to wash it with the same water, until all the antimonial
substance be converted into an alkohol, as we have already taught in the first
preparation of the Crocus Metallorum; and if you intend to have sooner done,
break the pot or Crucible as soon as it comes from the fire, and draw out the
matter from it, which bray on a Marble mortar, and wash it with lb ij. or iij.
of water only, until it be all converted into alkohol. Draw off this first
water by decantation as soon as it is settled, and lay it by it self; then pour
new upon what remains, and thus go on, until the water comes off from it
tastelesse; which done, dry the Diaphoretick and keep it for use.

It was not without reason we have said, that the first water wherein the fixed
Niter was dissolved is to be set apart; because the nature of this salt is
altered by the sulphur of Antimony, and is become of the condition of alkali
and lixivial Salt, whose quality and essence is subtle, penetrating and
igneous rather then corrosive, which is the reason it has dissolved the purest
portion of the antimonial Regulus impregnated with its fix and solar Sulphur,
very well concocted and digested by the action of the fire and Niter; and
though this water appears clear, yet it has contracted a weight: wherefore
this water must be precipitated with distilled Vinegar, and it shall
immediately turn as white as Milk, because the Diaphoretick which was hidden in
the dissolution of it does manifest it self, and with no unpleasant smell; but
contrariwise has the very smell of Cream and sowrish Whey, whilst it is
edulcorating, and after the desiccation is made to keep it for use; and as we
have said, that the precipitate of this Diaphoretick was of a very good smell,
by reason of the fixednesse of its internal sulphur, so must we make it appear,
that that which is prepared out of the pretended Sulphur auratum or golden
Sulphur, whereof we have spoken above, with distilled Vinegar, has a very
unpleasant smell, because it is nothing else but the external, impure, and
volatile sulphur which the salt had drawn to its self, being not sufficient to
draw it and expel away, much less to fix it, the parts of Niter and Antimony
to make the Crocus Metallorum being but equal, whereas in the preparation of
the Diaphoretick, there is first ij. p. of Niter against j. p. of Antimony, and
that moreover j. p. is added after the Fulguration or Detonation is ended,
which does perfect the maturation and fixation of all the crude and indigested
remaining matter. We have thought necessary to say so much to inform the Sons
of Art, that whatsoever must fix a substance, ought ever to be in triple
proportion to what is to be fixed; and contrariwise, what is to be volatiliz'd,
must in the same proportion be less, then what is to act and work upon it; and
sometimes the proportion is quadruplicated: as iiij. of spirit to volatilize j.
of salt, and iiij. of salt to fix j. of spirit; which observation passes for a
fundamental Axiom in Chemistry. The Dosis of this Diaphoreticks in Body and
gross substance, is from gr. iiij. to xxx. and of the Precipitate, from gr.
iij. to xx. The virtue of both is very estimable and of high value in Physic;
for though we call them fixed, it is only comparatively to other antimonial
Remedies which provoke violent Vomitings and Purgation: for the Diaphoretick
works by an irradiation of virtue and-efficacy almost inconceivable, because it
strengthens gently and naturally the internal Archeus, which is the principal
Director of all the functions of Life, either in health or sickness: wherefore
the use of it must be continued without interruption during the space of a
Philosophical month, because during that time, it is capable to alter and
change for the better, whatsoever is hurtful and hinders the liberty of the
actions of this principal and real Archeus. But if it be applied and
appropriated to particular Diseases, as also to parts of the body, we shall be
bold to say, that the Diaphoretical Antimony is an unparalleld Remedy, to
resist the corruption which may breed and lurk in the body, mundifying and
rectifying the whole mass of the blood, and being capable to open the most
inveterate obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancreas, and all
other parts besides: it removes the stopping of Courses, cures Green-sicknesse,
Dropsy, Hypocondrical Melancholy, Pocks and all the accidents thereof;
mundifies and cures inward and outward Ulcers, breaks inward Impostumes without
danger: and finally, is singular against malignant and spotted Fevers,
Measels, and small Pocks. And though this Diaphoretical be a general Remedy,
there are some nevertheless which think to particularize and render it
specifical to certain parts of the Body, and Diseases, adding Metals, as Gold,
Silver, Tin, Copper, or Steel to the Antimony, or its Regulus before it be
calcined with Niter, and thus pretend to render it Cordial, Cephalic,
Stomachick, Splenetick or Hepatick; but our opinion is, that those Metals are
not opened enough for this plain antimonial Fusion, to commuicate so easily
their virtue which does properly lurk in a central sulphur, not so easily
extracted; and as Antimony is a Mineral, whose sulphur is less close and
fixed, let us content our selves with what Nature and Art have so bountifully
supplied us with, and with so ample and so diffused a virtue.

Of the Regulus of Antimony.
WE have already said above, that the Regulus of Antimony is nothing else but
depurated Antimony: but that purification ought to be made without Tartar,
because the alkali which results from the Tartar and Niter is a mixed salt,
which does extract and dissolve the most fix and inward sulphurs of Mixts, as
it appears by the feces and skim swimming above the Regulus made with Tartar,
which are high in color, and by the small quantity of Regulus extracted this
way. But it may be said, that it is not so much the true Artist's part to seek
for quantity as quality; and that although he may attain to more by another
manner of working, yet ought he to prefer and acquiesce in that which yields
least, because it is thought to be more pure and more open. To answer this
Objection, we must lay first for a Foundation, that Steel is to be used for
making of the Regulus, to make it good; that Iron or Steel are capable agents
to attract to themselves the impure and combustible sulphur of Antimony, by
reason of the siccity, porosity, and terrestreity of the Iron which longs to
supply himself of what he finds to be destituted of, attracting it from every
subject or substance wherein he can find it: as we have in some manner made
manifest when we described the purification of Iron, and the turning of it into
Steel, by the help of the fat, volatile and unctuous sulphur of Ox-hornes.
Moreover, Niter does cause a sudden inflammation, and a fusion, which raises up
by an ebullition, and as it were an instantaneous fermentation, all the Iron or
Mars, the terrestrial impurities and external sulphur of Antimony, insomuch as
the only Reguline and Mercurial part of Antimony, remains in fusion in the
bottom of the Crucible, possessing in it self the fixed and solar Sulphur,
which by sympathy and analogy of substance has attracted the soul of Mars,
which is its pure sulphur. Thus must the Artist consider, that in the operation
the pure part of the Antimony is preserved, and that we deprive it of its
impurity; and moreover, that we add yet to this part another Sulphur, which
has no less efficacy then that which is contained in it: whereas Tartar never
fails to dissolve and extract the pure part and its sulphur, which must of
necessity be well preserved, if you will have the other operations resulting
from it, to succeed with that virtue and efficacy which is desired, of which
nothing can be the cause but this pure Mercury and its sulphur; all which
reasons invite us to give you the description of this following Regulus.

The best preparation of Regulus of Antimony.
lb ss. of ends of Horse-nails, or lb ph. of Filings of Iron or Steel very pure
and clean, put in a good Crucible, something big and deep, and place it in a
wind-Oven upon a round bottom or Tile, called by the French Culotte, already
mentioned above; cover it with a piece of Brick, and bury it in Charcoal mixed
with kindled coals, that they may take fire by degrees, and so by little and
little season the Crucible; and when the fire is well kindled, and that the
Artist shall see the Iron or Steel to be in a very red and clear ignition, so
as to draw near the white glowing; add then to it lb j. of well chosen Antimony
in powder, then cover again the Crucible with the Brick and coals, to advance
the Fusion and union of the two matters, and as soon as you shall by frequent
inspection perceive them in that state, make ready your Cornet or casting
Vessel for Regulus, if you have any, keeping it warm and besmearing it with Wax
in the sides toward the bottom, and throw in the Crucible iij. or iiij. of
Niter in gross powder, very dry and somewhat warmed, that it may the sooner
take flame with the sulphur of Antimony, that the fusion thereof may be quicker
and cleaner; for as soon as the Crucible is touched by the Niter, there follows
immediately an ebullition of the matters with a noise and sparkling, caused by
the internal air of the Niter and the mixture of the Sulphur with the Iron or
Mars: But the Artist must have a special care to have his Pincers in readiness
to draw the Crucible, and pour the melted matter into the Regulus Pot, as soon
as the ebullition is over; otherwise there would a crusty substance gather on
the top, which might hinder the casting of it, and is of very hard and
difficult fusion: As soon as the matters are in the Regulus pot, strike upon
the brims of it with a Pestle or Hammer, to cause the Regulus the better to
separate it self; but if you want this Vessel for casting your Regulus, you
need only draw your Crucible from the fire, and striking softly upon the brims
of it, let it cool. It would nevertheless be necessary to be furnished with
this Vessel in a Laboratory, because you might thereby preserve your Crucible
from the necessity of being broken, and so preserve them for other fusions and
the purification of your Regulus, besides that it will save much time and fire,
which otherwise must be unnecessarily spent; for your four meltings or fusions
may be made consecutively in one and the same Crucible: either of these two
Vessels being cooled, either turn upside down the Crucible and stamp or beat it
against the ground to make the Regulus come out, or break the Crucible, and
therein shall you find an uniform lump seemingly: but knock upon it about the
middle, and the Regulus which is in the bottom will forsake the feces that are
uppermost, and are nothing else but the Iron Sulphur, and terrestrial
impurities of the Antimony, with very little remaining of the Niters, which
also frame by themselves a kind of close compacted lump, which every day
dissolves it self in the air into a dry powder, resembling smutty and
terrestrious Filings of Iron. The Regulus being not pure enough in the first
melting, you must therefore beat it to powder, and add to it iij. of antimony
in powder to accelerate the melting thereof, and put it in a new Crucible, and
cause it again to flow in a wind-Furnace, and when it shall be in fusion, throw
into it ij. or iij. of very dry Niter and warmed into a powder, and there will
happen yet a small ebullition; throw it immediately into the casting Vessel,
and knock upon it; separate the Regulus from the blackish and impure dregs, and
it will come out twice as pure and white; proceed thus the third time, and the
dregs will be either more gray or whitish, which is a sign that it begins to
draw nearer the state of its purity: wherefore proceed to the fourth fusion,
and always with new Niter dry and warm, giving a very strong fire this last
time that the Niter may be in very good fusion, and draw to the color of a
Partridges eye; cast it quickly, and with nimbleness stir the casting Vessel,
being first well warmed, and turn it round, and you shall have a stellate or
starry Antimony to the very Center, white as silver, and flowing already
something of its solar Tincture: for the Niter which was in fluxion on the top
of it is all yellow, an infallible sign with the star which appears on the top
of it, that the Regulus has attained the true point of its purity and
perfection, to be freely used in the preparation of those noble Remedies which
it is capable to yield.

If the Artist will raise his curiosity so high, he may frame Cups and Pots
with this Regulus, as also Pellets or small Globes, and he will have that which
they call Pocula perpetua, and Pilulae perpetuae, the Purgative and Emetick
virtue whereof is never exhausted; though Wine be every day put in infusion in
the Cups, or the Pellets or Globes swallowed down every day, which may be taken
up again after evacuation, and being washed, made use of with as much efficacy
as before, as by daily experience it is found true, which does evidently prove
that Antimony does as much or more participate as any other Mixed, of light and
heavenly Fire, whose virtue never decreaseth, though he imparts every day his
Rays and bountiful warmth: so is it only by an emanation or irradiation of the
inward virtue that these Cups and Pills do work, and it is also by irradiation
and influence from above of the igneous and sulphurous quality of their
substance, that their virtue is miraculously, as it were repaired, and again
supplied.

diagram The Calcination of Antimony by the Sun.
a the Table. b the Glass with its upholder by which ye may raise it higher or
lower. c the Stone or Plate on which ye Antimony in powder is tayd. d ye Artist
ye orders ye Glass and stirs about ye Antimony. e ye light yt is centerd by the
Glass.




The Solar Calcination of Antimony.
WE have demonstrated above, that antimonial Calcination made with Niter,
were opened by it, purified and fixed, which could not be done unless this
salt did partake altogether of the nature of Light, which is found to be
corporified in it: but we must show patherically here, that the Sun, Father and
spring of the Light, by whom Niter is generated, does purify and six Antimony
much better, and with more efficacy then Niter can do; which is a kind of
Calcination Philosophical indeed, and worthy a son of Art, whose curiosity
leads him to search and pry into the wonders of Art and Nature; But those that
are ignorant of the noble Works and rare Effects of Magical and Celestial Fire,
drawn from the Rays of the Sun by the help of a Refracting or burning Glass,
shall scarce believe that which we have to say, and are to demonstrate upon
this Subject.

For this noble and miraculous Fire preserves and increases the substance of
Antimony, whereas common fire and salts do alter and destroy it, which truth we
make good thus: Take xij. grains of Antimony, either mineral or common, grind
it into an impalpable powder, and calcine it in common fire, or by salt, it
yields a smoaky vapor of an unpleasant smell and color, which is heavy: for
if this smoke was kept in a sublimatory Vessel, there would be found Flowers,
which are nothing else but meteoriz'd antimony, as we will make it plain when
we come to speak of the sublimation of this Mineral; which is the cause that
the Antimony is found to be decreased of five or six grains, when the
Calcination is driven and brought up to a gray or white powder, which has yet a
purging and emetical quality: but if you calcine the same weight and proportion
of Antimony with a Refracting or burning-Glass, which does concentrate the
light of the Sunbeams to make it work upon the matter, this Mineral does yield
also vapors as when it is calcined by common fire, and consequently it were
rational that it should decrease to the same proportion; but it happens
otherwise: for the Calcination being often reiterated, and the Antimony turned
into a white powder, you shall find it to weigh xv. grains instead of xij.
that were taken at first, and consequently it is increased in double proportion
almost, whereas the vapors which it has exhaled should have decreased it as
much: but that which is yet more to be admired, and less conceivable, is, that
these xv. grains of white powder are neither vomitive nor purging, but
contrariwise diaphoretical and Cordial; which does cast into admiration not
without reason, the most curious and intelligent searchers of Nature, and the
wisest Physicians. But this Wonder shall cease as soon as we begin to apprehend
and to know, that Light is that miraculous Fire which constitutes the principle
of Antimony, and it is the same now that has prepared it. By which it appears
that this noble Mineral has a kind of natural Magnes in it self, which makes
it capable to attract from the highest Heavens this noble kin and similar
light, by which it is produced and supplied with its virtue. This Solar
Calcination is then performed in the following manner.

Let the Artist have a burning-Glass of three or four foot Diameter, made with
two concave pieces of Glass joined together, the two concavites within looking
one toward another, the convexity without, and let there be a hole to fill up
the concave space with clear water; for this Glass will concentrate more
beams, and calcine better then if it was all of one piece, and broader in
Diameter. The pieces must be well glued together with Ichthyocolla or Fish
glue, that the water may not come out again; it also must be fitted upon a
Pedestal or Foot, wherein is a Screw to raise and depresse it according as
occasion shall require; it must have moreover a pair of green glass Spectacles
to help the sight and enable the Artist to lead the edge of the Sun beams upon
the Antimony, and move it as it goes on calcining; otherwise the vivacious
quickness of this light should impair and ruin the sight; place the Antimony
upon a well polished Porphyry stone very smooth, and have a grinding stone
ready at hand to grind it when it is turned into crumbs. The Antimony must be
made into the subtilest powder that can be: and a great care must be taken in
guiding the light, stirring the matter and grinding it, and so proceed till it
be reduced into a white powder, which gathers it self no more into crumbs,
neither yields any smoke or exhalation when the light is directed upon it, or
when it is put upon a red glowing piece of Iron, which is an argument of its
fixednesse. The Stellat or starry Regulus may much better be calcined in the
common Antimony, and the Diaphoretical Remedy prepared therewith, shall prove
much more efficacious and better. The Dosis may be from ij. grains to xij. to
be used in all the Diseases we have rehearsed above, and experience will make
it manifest, that this Remedy is comparably better and of more excellency then
the common Diaphoretick. The Figure here annexed will demonstrate all what
belongs to this Operation much more natively and plainly then our Pen can
represent it; and so put we an end to the products of the dry Calcination of
Antimony, and come to the moist Calcination, which is Precipitation.

Moist Calcination of Antimony.
THere is no need of repeating here to no purpose, what we have already said in
handling the Precipitates of Mercury, because it is rather a Calcination then
Precipitation; wherefore we send back the Artist to what we have delivered
above. We will give two Examples of these pretended Precipitates, that the
Artist may the better be informed of all the manners of working, which may
elevate his mind, and raise it to attempt higher and more important matters of
which these preparation are, to speak properly, but the Rudiments.

The first Precipitate of Antimony.
As much as you will of well chosen Antimony, make it into course powder, and
throw it in a long, broad neck Mattress, and by little and little pour upon it
good Regal water, agitating and stirring sostly the matter, until the Menstruum
goes above it three fingers high, but take care in the working of the
Dissolvent; put the Vessel to digest in ashes in an equal heat, until you see
the Antimony fallen to the bottom in the form of a white Calx; then pour all
into a Retort, and draw off the Regal water by distillation in sand, until the
said powder in the bottom becomes very dry; then digest it in distilled
Rainwater, and edulcorate it well with new water, then dry it gently; after
this, having put the same in a Crucible, reverberate it for the space of six,
seven or eight hours, or until the color be changed and exalted into a red:
if you will spare fire and labor, you may put this Calx in a Crucible covered
and well luted, and put it in a Potters Furnace to reverberate during the time
his work is a baking. This Precipitate does very happily and successefully
purge the yellow and mordicant, or harsh serosities, lurking for the most part
in the bottom of the stomach and adjacent parts, which it does very well both
upwards and downwards, not that it is of it self violent or purging: for it
does otherwise operate in those that are not stuffed with those superfluous
serosities, and have no vice or defectuosity in the fermentation of the
Ventricle: for it works with them by Sweats, Urine, or insensible
transpiration. The Dosis may be from gr. j. to viij* in cordial Conserves, or
gelly of some. Fruit.

The second Antimonial Precipitate.
As much as you will of well chosen Antimony, grind it to powder and put it in
a Mattress, and pour upon it Regulus water two inches high; put the Vessel to
digest in ashes, and stir it from time to time to facilitate and advance the
dissolution: then draw off the dissolution by decantation very cleanly, or
filtrate it in a glass Furnace with Glass grossly beaten: this filtration pour
into a Retort, and distill softly in sand to a dry bottom; pour upon the
remaining powder distilled Rainwater, and digest it in B. M. until it has
contracted a red Tincture; separate the Tincture, and proceed in the digestion
and extraction with new water, until it draws no more color; all these
Tinctures gather together and filtrate, then draw off the water again in ashes
by a slow distillation in a Cucurbite to a dry bottom: pour upon the remainders
very good distilled Vinegar, and extact with it again until it will take no
more of the color; filtrate the Tincture, and throw away the white remaining
feces: draw off the Vinegar in ashes flowly to a dry bottom, or rather to the
consistency of a thick Syrup, upon which pour tartarized spirit of Wine; lute
well the Vessel with its Blindhead, and put it to digest and extract in the
vaporous Balneo during three weeks, and you shall have a faif and red Tincture,
which you must filtrate again and throw away the feces; then draw off the
spirit of Wine in the slow heat of B. M. to a dry bottom, and you shall have a
Powder or Precipitate, which is none of the least preparations which Antimony
does yield. It is a sovereign Remedy against the Pocks and Scurvy; but above
all it excels all other things to dissolve congealed blood, and resolve and
evacuate all inward Impostumes, and the matter contained in them without any
danger. The Dosis must be from gr. ss. to iv. or v. in some appropriated water,
or some cordial and stomachical Spirit, or in Bolus in some Confection or
Conserve.

The sublimation of Antimony.
THis is one of the most necessary operations to open the Body of antimony, and
to begin the maturation of the crude and indigested substances that are hid in
it. And the Son of Art must know, that when Paracelsus speaks of reducing
Antimony into alkohol by the preparation of his Lili; that his meaning is not
to have it ground upon the Marble stone to reduce it into an impalpable powder;
but that he understands another much more Philosophical Trituration, which is
the meteorizing and exalting of it into vapors by the help of fire, which is
nothing else but its sublimation; for you must observe, that this great and
wonderful Artist requires that all the Body of Antimony should pass, without
leaving behind the least small portihn of its sulphur and Mercury, which it can
do by no other way but sublimation. The sublimation yields also the Flowers of
Cinnabar, whereof we shall speak hereafter.

How the Flowers of Antimony are to be prepared.
PUT an earthen unglazed Pot of strong, resisting and lasting substance against
the violence of the fire in a wind-Furnace; let there be four holes (as
Registers) about the pot to draw the better the fire; upon this pot lute
another, which may encompasse the brim of the undermost, and let the bottom of
it be bored with a hole of three or four inches Diameter, and let it have also
another hole in the side of about an inch Diameter, that the antimony may be
thrown that way into the first pot; after this, fit upon these two pots three
or four more one on the top of the other, with a hole in the bottom as the
second; but let the bottom in the last be no bigger then to pass your finger
through, that it may be stopped with a little knob of earth. Have also an earthen
stopple very exactly fitted to the hole through which you are to throw the
Antimony. The pots being well luted, and the Lute dry, give it first a gentle
fire, then increase it until the first pot be glowing red on all sides; then
begin to throw in it ij. of antimony in powder, and not above at once, renew
with as much every half quarter of an hour, and always maintain the fire that
the pot may grow more red: you may keep doing this as long as you will,
according to the quantity of matter you intend to prepare, and you shall find
your antimony to be sublimated into gray, white, yellow, and sometimes red
flowers, according to the managing of the fire. The Flowers are not much in use
for purging sick persons, by reason of their violent Operation, for they are
properly the sulphur of Antimony, but they are fit to prepare other Remedies
after they have been duly corrected. They may nevertheless be administered from
ij. grains to iv. or vj. to the strongest cens^^^^tions, in Conserve of Roses
or infusion of white Wine. But they that will make use of the flowers of
antimony without fear of their violence, must sublimate them as we shall now
teach.

Flowers of the Regulus of Antimony.
WE take for this Operation Regulus of antimony, because it is already
deprived of the most part of his impure and foul sulphur; and moreover, because
the salt armoniack added in this Operation, carries only along with it the
purest sulphur and Mercury of the antimony. then lb ss. of fair antimonial
Regulus, and as much of very pure armoniack salt, make them into powder each
severally, and mix them exactly; then put them in a Retort in sand, cover it
with its still-Head; and fit a Mattress to it for Recipient, lute and give it
fire until all what may ascend be ascended. Then take the Flowers which will be
of a yellow color, and edulcorate them with distilled Rainwater, and you
shall have an excellent Remedy, much less violent then the plain Flowers; it
is administered to mad or maniack melancholy Persons, and those that are
disturbed with Quartan agues. The Dosis ought to be from ij. grains to vj. in
Conserve of Roses, or infusion in some fermented Liquor.

Note, that if you put in fluxion the plain antimonial Flowers, with the double
proportion of their weight of very pure Saltpeter, in a Crucible in the open
fire, and edulcorate them afterward, then digest them in spirit of Wine the
space of fifteen days, and then set the spirit of Wine burning upon them,
there remains a Diaphoretical powder, which is miraculous for purifying the
blood; the Dosis of which is from iv. to x. or xij. grains. But as the plain
and white Flowers of antimony, are an admirable Remedy in the most rooted
Diseases, and that their violence hinders the free and more frequent use
thereof, we think fit to give some Directions for the true correction of the
same.

The correction of the Antimonial Flowers.
j. Of very subtle and white antimonial Flowers, mix them with j. s. of the
salt Tartar of Sennertus, put this mixture in a good Crucible, and with a
strong fire melt then in a wind-Furnace, and they will turn to a red lump:
which reduce to powder in a hot Mortar, adding to it dissoluble Magistery of
Pearls and Coral, of each j. s. put this powder in a Mattress, and pour upon it
aromatized spirit of Wine four fingers high, and having stopped the Mattress with
another opposite or a Blindhead, let it gently digest in ashes the space of
three natural days, then pour all into a small Cucurbite, and draw off the
spirit of Wine to a dry bottom, in the slow heat of B. M. and you shall have a
well corrected and pleasant Antimony, which keep for use in a well stopped Viol,
otherwise it would melt and dissolve in the air. It is exhibited in Conserve or
in Wine, from iv. grains to xvj. against all inveterate Diseases, chiefly
against the strongest and most stubborn impressions of Melancholy, intermittent
Fevers, and all kind of obstructions. It works variously according to the
matters it meets with in the stomach: for it sometimes provoks vomiting, but
not always; it purges by Stools, Urines: but the chief and best operation
thereof is performed by insensible transpiration, because it strengthens by the
irradiation and emanation of its virtue all the natural digestions, and causes
the internal Archeus to drive away or expel from the Center to the
Circumference, all what is hurtful and obstructive to the economy of Health
and Life.

How to prepare the Aromatized Spirit of Wine.
Galanga, Gloves, Cinnamon, Mace ana ij. Saffron j. s. Lignum aloes j.
Ambergreese j, and Musk vj. grains, reduce all to powder and mix them; then
extract their Tinctures in a Blindhead or double Vessel with good alkoholized
spirit of Wine; draw off the Tincture and proceed in the extraction, until the
spirit of Wine draws no more, join all together, and keep it in a bottle as a
great Cordial and strengthener of the brain and stomach; as likewise to help
digestion, and to correct Chemical Remedies, and particularly those that are
extracted from Mercury and Antimony. We will not speak here of the Cinnabar or
Vermilion of Antimony, though performed by sublimation, because we intend to
speak of it hereafter, when we shall come to treat of the distillation of
antimonial Butter, and the glasical Oil of this Mineral; for these operations
cannot be made asunder.

The distillation of Antimony, which yields the Vinegar or acid Spirit, the
Oil and Spirit of Antimony.
THE Son of Art must here be armed with patience for the distillation of this
antimonial Vinegar; for besides that very little can be extracted, much time
must be spent besides in the Operation, and much heed and circumspection used;
but as he shall find in Authors that this acid does extract its own Body, it
is necessary he should be taught a good mechanical way to make the distillation
thereof: which is performed in the following manner.

The distillation of Antimonial Vinegar.
Mineral Antimony coursly beaten to powder, and put about j. in earthen pots
made in the form of small Cupels, which must be placed Checkerwise one above
the other, in the lower part of a capacious earthen Retort cut in two pieces,
and having fitted again the upper part to it, lute it well, and bind with a
thick wyre; then place it in a close Reverberatory, and having fitted to it a
large Recipient, give it a good fire the space of twenty four hours, as you
would do for the distillation of the spirits of Salt or Vitriol; then cease the
fire, and opening the Vessels, keep the acid spirit which is come forth but in
very little quantity; then put new antimony in the small Cupels and begin anew,
and thus proceed until you have enough of this spirit for the work you intend,
or for physical uses. But you must ever set apart the Mineral antimony after it
has been distilled, and expose it to open air: for it will attract from the
heavenly influence of the stars and the spirit of the air, enough to supply
again a new distillation at the end of six weeks or two months; and thus lb
vij. or viij. of Mineral antimony will suffice for the distillation of this
Spirit, and you will never be unprovided for your use in the same Operation.
This acid Spirit is used for extracting the Tincture of its own Body: wherefore
the Artist must not be mistaken when he reads in the most famous Writers, and
celebrated Authors which have treated of Antimony, that it is to be extracted
with distilled Vinegar, for he must not understand this of common Vinegar; but
he must know that their meaning is of vinegar extracted from Antimony without
addition. This acid is singular to cool all intempery of the parts of the Body,
and chiefly ebullitions of blood, wherefore it is with a very happy success
administered in continual Fevers, malignant, hot and putrid Agues; for it
penetrates the body, and gives a great refreshment to poor Patients, you must
mix some of it with alleluya water, or only with common water, and a little of
the syrup of juice of alleluya or Wood Sorrel. The Dosis must be to a pleasant
sharpness and acidity; Besides its internal use, it is wonderful outwardly
applied: for it takes away the fire and inflammation of burnings made with
Gunpowder, if it be mixed with salt of in water, and applied with wet Fillets,
or be made into a Nutritum or Liniment with Oil, to anoint therewith the burnt
parts, and thus you shall not fail to see some very notable Effects of

The distillation of Oil or Balsom of Antimony.
Equal parts of white Sugar Candy and well chosen Antimony, grind them each
severally, and being exactly mingled, put them in a Retort, and put over M j.
of very clean Hemp, to hinder the body of the matter to rise and pass in the
Recipient, when it begins to feel the heat and make an ebullition, which cannot
otherwise be hindered then by this Tow. The Retort, place in a close
Reverberatory, and fit to the same a good Recipient, beginning the fire slowly,
and increasing it by degrees, until you see no more drops nor vapors come over
the Helm. Let the Vessels cool, and pour in a Mattress what you shall find in
the Recipient, add to it tartarized spirit of Wine three fingers high, and
digest them together in the vaporous Balneo the space of three or four days,
filtrate all in the cold through a Cotton in a small Cucurbite, which having
placed in B. M. draw off the spirit of Wine, keep this Oil or Balsom in a Viol
for use: for it is an excellent Balsam, and almost miraculous for the sudden
cure of new Wounds, Ulcers, Contusions, if it be only applied upon, or in the
same with Feathers or Cotton. But it is besides a surprising Remedy against
intermittent Fevers, and chiefly against quartans; for the cure of which are
prepared the following Pills.

Pills against Agues.
j. of antimonian Balsom, s. of Aloes purified by the juice of Carduus
Benedictus, and reduced into an Extract, ij. of Ambergrease, j. of Tincture of
good Saffron, thickened and evaporated into a thick syrup: reduce all into a
lump or mass sit for Pills, which some do call mercurial Laudauum, and good
against Agues. The Dosis must be from iiij. gr. to xvj. in Conserve of Marigold
Flowers, or Roses: they gently purge downwards, and sometimes provoke sweat, or
work by insensible transpiration.

Distillation of the Butter or icy Oil of Antimony.
IT is necessary we should deliver some Notes upon this Operation before we
describe it: for it has been made so many ways, and Authors entertain to this
day so various opinions about it, that an Artist will be much put to it, to
know what to believe. For they have first been of opinion, that the sublimated
Mercury did contribute very much to the purging virtue of such Remedies as are
prepared with this Oil, and that the substance of the Mercury did come over
the Helm and make part of this Oil, which nevertheless is neither true nor
probable, as the sublimation of Mercury with Sulphur and Antimony does
peremtorily evince, even as the remainder of the Mercury which is vivified
again into a Body of running Quicksilver, either in the Retort or Recipient.
But if this Oil be made with the Regulus of the Antimony, there is no
sublimation at all, because the Regulus is divested of its external and course
Sulphur; but all the Mercury is quickened again in its own weight, except the
spirits of those Salts that have forsaken him to work upon the Antimony, and
dissolved it to convert it into Butter. But the proof is more convincing yet,
if the Sons of Art will take the pains to receive that Emetical powder, which
is made from this Butter into a Regulus by the help of Salt, Tartar and Niter,
by which it appears that this powder is nothing else but pure Antimony. And the
last and surest proof is, that this Butter of Antimony may be prepared without
the mixture of sublimate Mercury: for if you take only Vitriol, common salt,
and Antimony, you may draw an icy Oil which will be of the same nature of that
which is prepared with Sublimate, except that it shall not be so subtle and
penetrative, the spirits of the gross substances being not so capable of
penetrating or well dissolving the Antimony, as are the spirits coagulated with
corrosive Sublimate. The second Note is concerning the Dosis of the Sublimate:
for some do take equal parts, others the double, and others more or less; but
as a true Son of Art must perform his operations without Hesitancy, and with a
real knowledge of the matters he works upon, and of their reciprocal action, he
must lay as an indubitable Axiom and truth, that the Dissolvent which is the
Agent, must ever be predominant in weight over the dissoluble substance, and so
he shall never fail to work with success, if he takes three parts to one. Some
do rank this Work amongst the Mercurial Operations, and do call it Mercurius
vitae, or Life Mercury, but we did choose to put it amongst the preparations of
Antimony, for the reasons above declared. It is thus prepared.

lb j. of well chosen Antimony, and lb iij. of corrosive Sublimate, very pure
and chrystalline, put them into powder, each severally, and mingle them
together; then having poured this mixture into a Retort, three parts whereof at
least of the four must be void, and fit a Recipient with a narrow Neck, that
the Nose of the Retort may not come into this Neck above an inch, for the need
there is to cause the icy Oil to melt and flow when it coagulates it self in
the said neck of the Retort or of the Recipient; lute the joints only with
paper and Meal-pap, and give it an open fire gently by degrees, until the
vapors and drops begin to ascend, and so keep it in that state until some
matter begins to sublimate on the top of the Retort, for it is a sign that the
Cinnabar and Vermilion begins to rise; then take off the Recipient, and
substitute another, because that which should still down, might in some kind
spoil and prejudice that which should be contained in the first: this done,
increase the fire vigorously, and even encompasse the Retort to the top with
burning coals, placing them above gently, to drive all the sublimation into
the neck of the Retort, and the rest of the Mercury which shall not have
sulphur enough to be coagulated into Cinnabar shall quicken again, as it will
appear; after the sublimation is ended, separate the Cinnabar from the running
Mercury, and keep this last for the same uses as you do common Quicksilver.
But the Cinnabar may be used for preparing Trochisks, to perfume those that
shall be in a course of cure of the Pocks. They are also used in Pills in
Venerean Diseases, and all the dependances of it, because this Antimonian
Sulphur which has cleft to the Mercury, and has coagulated it, is of a much
more exalted Virtue then common Sulphur, insomuch as the one joined to the
other, does purify together the mass of the blood, and hinder all corruptions
which may be generated in the parts dedicated to copulation. The Dosis must be
from vj. grains to xx. in Pills or Bolus, with Chian Turpentine, Peruvian
Balsom, or extract of yellow Amber or Karabe.

Pour the icy or glacial Oil which is in the first Recipient into another
Retort, after you have caused it to melt in a flow heat; the Funnel also must
be hot that nothing may coagulate, make all what is in the neck of the Retort
which receives the substance to flow, that there may be nothing in it but very
pure; this Retort place in sand, apply a Recipient to it, which may be dry and
clean, and rectify it in a graduate heat until nothing more will flow from it,
and if the encompassing air should happen to congeal the distilsing Liquor,
cause it to melt with a well kindled coal, drawn by degrees near the neck of
the Recipient and the Retort. The Rectification being ended, put the third part
of what is distilled in a Viol, which shall be the ice or glacial Oil of
Antimony or its Butter, which has no other use but for outward applications,
to hinder Gangrenes and the growing of dead flesh, the dead part being only
rubbed and besmeared over, either with Cotton wool or a Pencill. The same may
be done also upon pestilential Boyls, which it will dead immediately, so as the
scar easily will separate from it, without any greater mortification of the
flesh; and moreover the cure is far easier: this Oil chiefly is very useful
for Surgeons to make Cauteries or Issues on a sudden, hinder the rottenness of
bones and advance the exfoliation, wherefore it is also a very convenient
Caustic to bring to perfection the cure of moist and weeping Fistula's; the
two other parts are fit for Emetical powder and mineral Bezoar, as we shall say
hereafter.

How the Emetical Powder is to be prepared.
Half of what was left of your glacial oil of Antimony, and cause it to melt
if it be coagulated; if not, pour it just as it is in a pan, where there may be
about lb iij. of distilled Rainwater, and it will immediately precipitate into
a Body white as snow, because the salts which did hold fast the Reguline and
Mercurial part of the Antimony in the dissolution, join now to the water which
is their Dissolvent, and so forsake the Body of the Antimony, even as they had
forsaken the sublimate Mercury in the foregoing distillation. The precipitation
being ended, stir all with a wooden Pestle very clean, to join exactly the
saline spirits with the water, then let it rest, and the water being very
clear, separate as much as you can by decantation without stirring the bottom
and keep the water by it self; then pour new water until the pan be full, and
so proceed in the Lotion till the water comes off insipid; then separate all
the water by filtration, and dry the powder betwixt two papers very slowly, and
so shall you have an Emetical powder white and pure, which by some is called
powder of Algarot, from Algorotto an Italian, which is said to be the Inventor
thereof: others improperly and falsely call it Mercurius Vitae, or Life Mercury.
Some others do honor this Powder with the name of Angelick powder, or of the
white Eagle, by reason of its rare and precious virtues. The Dosis may be from
ij. gr. to vij. or viij. It is ordinarily used to cleanse and purge away all
the hurtful and peccant humors and matters from the body, and chiefly in the
first Region, which this powder does evacuate by vomiting and stools; wherefore
it is often used in the Plague and malignant Fevers, diseases in the Head,
Pocks, running pains, cure of malignant Ulcers and Dropsy, wherein it works
for the most part without provoking to vomit.

We have said, that the first water in which the precipitation has been made
was to be set apart, because it is impregnated with the virtue of those spirits
of salts which were used in the sublimation of Mercury, and are discovered by
their sharp and acid taste. If the water be drawn off by distillation in sand,
until it be reduced to three or four of Liquor, you shall have that which by
Hermetical Philosophers is called Philosophical spirit of Vitriol, very
efficacious and of singular virtue to put in Julaps and Drinks of feverish
persons, and of such as are troubled with Megrims: but above all it is of
wonderful virtue for inveterate pains of the Pocks, because it evacuates and
drives away sufficiently those malignant and sharp serosities which do prick
the membranes and all the nervous and sinuous parts of the Body. And if it be
not distilled, this water must be kept and mixed in the Drink of such as are
afflicted with the Pocks or Dropsy, to such a proportion as to give it a
pleasant sharpness, and you shall see unexpected effects, because these saline
Spirits have kept yet in themselves some Character and Idea of the virtue and
efficacy, both of Mercury and Antimony. They that will prepare a less violent
Emetical powder, and a more efficacious Mineral Bezoar, must distill their
glacial oil with good antimonial Regulus, but they shall then have no Cinnabar.

Preparation of the Mineral Bezoar.
The last parcel of your antimonial Butter; which having weiged, put it in a
capacious Mattress, and then throw upon it its equal weight of very good spirit
of Niter, drop by drop in the beginning, by reason of the quick action of this
Spirit upon the matter, and of the subtle and strong vapors issuing upon a
sudden from the Vessel, which might be hurtful to the Artist; thus proceed by
little and little until you have put all in; and after the dissolution is
ended, and the Liquor begins to look clear and defecated, pour it into a
Cucurbite, which place in sand under a Chimney, and let the spirit vapor away
to a dry bottom: which done, pour again as much spirit of Niter as before, but
then the action will cease, because the foam and froth of the Dragon is already
mortified by the spirit of the infernal Cerberus; make it likewise evaporate to
a dry bottom, and pour again the same weight (of spirit of Niter) for the third
and last time, and evaporate it also, until what remains in the bottom of the
Cucurbite becomes fair, white, dry, brickle and insipid; but in case there
should remain yet some pleasant sharpness in it, it can be of on prejudice:
wherefore it will be needless to increase and urge the fire higher, but
contrariwise take off the Vessel and let the matter cool, which is your Mineral
Bezoar; this put in a Viol to keep for use. It is a great Alexitery, which
works against all manner of venom, and from this excellent virtue it took the
name of Bezoar by excellency, to which was superadded the name of Mineral, to
difference it from animal Bezoar, to which is attributed also a great power and
faculty to resist poison; but it comes in no way near the goodness or virtue
of our Antimonial Remedy, which possesses yet many other virtues and essential
proprieties, by reason of the solar Sulphur which is in it, the efficacy
whereof is not to be exhausted: for this Rare Medicine does potently expel by
Sweat and Urine, but chiefly by insensible transpiration, all the hurtful and
poisonous humors lurking in the bodies both of healthful and sick persons, and
especially in all Diseases where sweat is absolutely necessary. Briefly, I can
affirm with a constant truth, that whosoever will make use of it, shall never
find himself soon or late disappointed of the benefit and help which he
expects. In case the Disease proceeds from the waters and superfluous malignant
serosities of the body, such as are those that are predominant in Pockes,
Scurvy, Itch and scabs of the skin; the Dosis is to be from ij. grains to xij.
and if necessity requires, it may even extend to twenty. But those that intend
to make use of it, must have a care to prescribe to their Patients Broths of
Veal and Chicken made with Scorzonera Roots, and keep their bodies soluble with
Glysters of plain newly made Urine, putting every third day in the Broths of
their Patient, which is to be taken fasting, j. or ph. of salt of Tartar of
Seunertus. But the Artist must know that mineral Bezoar, is properly nothing
else but a diaphoretical Antimony, fixed by the spirit of Niter, being before
an antimony reduced to Liquor by the ministry of saline Spirits, and so it
needed to fix it an ingenuous and fiery Liquor, as the body of Niter does fix
the gross body of antimony, and that as the Diaphoretick is purer and more
subtle, so does it also work quicker and in a less Dosis; they that desire to
make use of it, shall have recourse to what we have plainly and without
disguise delivered of the virtues of diaphoretical Antimony, And as this Remedy
is universal, so may it also be specificated, and appropriated to some parts,
adding any of the Metals, as Gold, Silver, Copper or Tin; the eighth part
whereof may be added with the Regulus, and fixed with a triple of pure Niter,
or distilling the same Regulus with three times as much of corrosive Sublimate,
and making thereof the glacial Oil, which the Artist may fix with three
several Solutions and Extractions of the spirit of Niter, and he shall procure
by this way that which is called Diaphoretick, or Solar, Lunar, Venerean,
Jov^al Bezoar, the description whereof is found in Authors: it suffices here
to have taught the manner of operation, which is common to all these
preparations.

How to prepare the water or Spirit of compounded Antimony.
Of well chosen Antimony, common Sulphur or Brimstone, and well purified Niter
ana equal parts; put them into powder severally, and then mingle together. This
done, have an earthen Retort, in the back of which be a gutter or conduit four
inches long, and of an inch broad in diameter; this Retort place in a close
Reverberatory, so as to be encompassed and walled in on all sides, except four
Registers to draw the fire, and the end of the conduit to throw in the matter;
fit to it a very capacious Recipient wherein must be lb j. of water, and lute
it exactly, put the fire under the Retort, and by degrees let it grow red hot;
then begin to throw in j. of the mixed matter by the conduit, and stop it
immediately, and the Recipient will soon be filled with vapors and clouds
arising from the inflamed matter; be careful not to throw above dram j. at once
of this matter, otherwise you would cause all your Vessels to fly into the
air, by the violence of so sudden an inflammation: wherefore I do advise the
Artist to make use in this Operation of a first Recipient of stone metal with
three conduits, the first whereof shall receive the neck of the Retort, and the
two others, each a great and capacious glass body called in French Bellon,
that so the vapors may find more room to extend themselves in their going
out, and neither the Artist nor the Operation may run any hazard. Keep up the
fire to maintain the redness of the Vessel, and throw in new matter, as soon
as the Recipients shall grow clearer of themselves, and go on thus until you
think you have a sufficient quantity of distilled Liquor. The Vessels being
grown cold, draw the Liquor out of the Recipient and filtrate it, and distill
off from it in sand with a slow heat; the water which you had put in the
Recipient, which will carry away with it the greatest part of the Empyreuma of
the spirit, ke^p for use. This Remedy does attenuate, cut, subtiliate, digests
and dissolves all manner of tartarous, slimy, thick and viscous matter, in
whatsoever part of the body it be found, be it never so strongly rooted and
incorporated in it, expelling the same by the appropriated Emunctories, as by
Stools, Urines, sweat, and spitting. Wherefore it is of singular virtue against
obstructions of Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancreas, Matrix and Hypocondra's,
but chiefly if it be actuated with the salt of Mars. It is administered during
the space of six weeks, in spring water with a little Sugar, to a pleasant
acidity and sharpness, so that from it is made a kind of true mineral Water,
whereof sick Patients may drink as much as they please. This same Operation may
be performed with Tartar also, instead of Brimstone: but this last will be more
unpleasant in taste then the other.

Liquation or resolution of Antimony.
THis Operation is nothing else but the resolution in the moist air, or in a
Cellar, of the skin or feces of Regulus made with Tartar, or you must calcine
Antimony, Niter and Tartar together, and expose to the air, or put it in a cold
Cellar what you find in the Retort. The union of these three substances flows
into a thick and blackish red Liquor, which has no other use then to cleanse
and cure corroding and faetid Ulcers, and chiefly fistulous and hollow ones.
For the salts do cleanse and mundifie, and the sulphur of Antimony is the
consolidative Balsom.

The extraction of Antimony.
WE are now at last arrived to the true volatilization of Antimony, to extract
the Sulphurs and Tinctures thereof, which are two of the choicest preparations
that can be made of it; wherefore we would advise the Son of Art not to be too
forward and hasty in this work, but to work punctually as Art shall require, if
he will attain to the desired end. We shall then first of all give a
description of the strong Lie, with which the sulphur of Antimony is to be
extracted; after which we shall teach the Extraction it self; and in the third
place the fixation of the said sulphur of Antimony. Then we will speak of the
Tinctures, and of the ways of extracting the same, giving two several examples
thereof, to instruct the better the Son of Art how to proceed in these
preparations, which are of the first and highest importance, by reason of their
eminent virtues and their great essicacy.

Description of the strong Lie, by which the extraction of the sulphur of
Antimony is performed.
Salt of Tartar, Potashes, quick lime and burnt Allom, ana equal parts, beat
to powder each severally, then mix them with double their weight of fire ashes,
which put in a raw, course linen cloth upon an inverted sieve, placed upon a
large earthen Pan; then pour upon it Rainwater somewhat more then lukewarm,
cohobate the water ten or twelve times to impregnate it well with the salts;
then filtrate it through paper, that no impurity may remain with it. Mercury
may be purified with it, as well as the sulphur of Antimony extracted, which is
performed in the following manner.

How to extract the sulphur of Antimony.
lb j. of antimonial Cinnabar, beat it to small powder, and throw it in an
earthen glazed pot; pour upon it of the strong Lie to fill up the third part of
the pot, let them boil together the space of three hours, or something more,
putting still new warm Lie in the room of that which vapors away by the action
of the fire; separate by decantation the Lie from the flowing Mercury which is
in the bottom of the pot, and let it rest, and the sulphur of Antimony will
settle by degrees in the said bottom of a fair red color; separate the Lie
from it softly, and wash it with distilled Rainwater, until it comes away
tastelesse, cause it to dry gently, and thus shall you have the true and
genuine sulphur of An^^^ony, whereof the following Panacea is made.

Panacea of the true antimonial Sulphur.
Some of this antimonial Sulphur and very pure Regulus, ana j. beat them each
severally to powder, and mingle exactly together, this mixture put in a Retort,
and pour upon it iij. of well rectified oil of Sulphur, or as much very good
oil of Vitriol, digest them together in a very slow heat the space of eight
days; then place the Retort in sand and distill it to a dry bottom, cohobate
that which comes out upon the feces again two times, and last of all drive the
fire as high and quick as you can the space of xij. hours, after all the
moisture is extracted. Or else it will not be amiss to break the Retort, after
all the liquor is come over the Helm, and grind the matter found in the bottom,
to reverberate afterward four or five hours upon a Test under a Mussel, to
drive away all the impressions of acid and corrosive Spirits. That which has
been reverberated put in a Cucurbite, and cohobate four times upon aromatized
spirit of Wine, prepared in the manner we have taught above. This Remedy may be
administered single from j. grain to viij. in cordial Confections or Conserves;
but it is much better if mingled with twice as much dissoluble Magistery of
Coral, and given from iiij. to xx. grains in the same Confections or Conserves,
prescribing upon it a little of good Malmesy, or some other Wine of quick and
noble Spirits. This Medicine has few to be compared with it, in driving by
sweat whatsoever corrupts and stains the mass of the blood which it perfectly
does purify, insomuch as it may be thought fit and serviceable for all
Diseases that require a sensible transpiration, and chiefly Leprosy, Pocks,
Scurvy, and noisome eruptions in the skin of what nature soever: the Dosis must
be repeated according to the fixed nature or volatility of the Disease: for it
equally serves against colliquation and obstruction, because it strengthens the
Spirits, which are the chief Masters and Directors of all the functions of life
and health. Particularly, it is an admirable specific in all pestilential,
epidemical and malignant diseases; for in such it does much more excellently
show its power and virtue.

Of the Tincture of Antimony.
BEfore we come to any particular description of the Tinctures, we must give
some general notions to the Sons of Art which will much contribute to their
information, and make it appear that it were much better to administer without
then with Wine, those Remedies which are extracted from Antimony, because that
the most volatile part of the Wine does add still to its vomitive faculty, and
opens it too much instead of closing and fixing the same. They must then
observe generally, that whenever they define an extraction of Antimony with
intent to make it a Cordial, corroborating and diaphoretical Remedy, they must
never begin either extraction or dissolution by spirit of Wine, neither by any
other volatile sulphurous spirit analogal to it; but rather it must be done
with some acid spirit of a concentrating and fixative virtue, and after this
reserve and use the spirit of Wine for the last extraction. Insomuch as it may
be said, that the Tincture of Antimony is nothing else but a dissolution of
some part of the same Antimony, and the extraction of its internal and fixed
sulphur. The first operation is performed by the help of an acid spirit, and
the second by the mediation of the spirit of Wine by digestion and circulation,
as we will show in the following practice.

The first Antimonial Tincture.
WE have taught heretofore the true correction of Antimony, and the way to
deprive it from all the foul and impure sulphur which is in it, when we showed
the manner of preparing the Glass thereof without addition, wherefore we shall
not repeat it over again here. It will suffice to advise the Artist, to take lb
ph. of that Glass made without addition, fair, red, and transparent as an
oriental Granate, and beat it to an impalpable powder, grinding it upon the
Porphyrie stone; this powder put in a Mattress, and pour upon it spirit of Venus
four fingers high; stir it nimbly in the beginning, then put it to digest,
dissolve and extract in ashes in a slow heat, and your spirit in three or four
days will contract a fair, red color higher then Burgundy Wine; draw off this
spirit by decantation, and pour new in the room, to extract again the space of
three days, and thus proceed three times; then filtrate the Tinctures, and put
in a Cucurbite in B. M. and draw off the Menstruum in a slow heat to the
consistency of a thick Syrup, upon which pour three fingers high of good
alkohol of Wine, and stop the Cucurbite with its Blindhead and lute it well;
then put this Vessel in a vaporous Balneo, and let it extract, circulate and
exalt there; the spirit will by degrees be impregnated with the centrical and
solar sulphur of Antimony; when it is well and sufficiently colored, take it
away, and put new in the room, and thus continue until the spirit of Wine
tinges no more, then join together and filtrate all the Tinctures; the
filtrated Tincture put in a Cucurbite in the vapor of Balneo, and draw off
three parts of the liquor, and keep the rest as an excellent and noble Tincture
endowed with infinite virtues; for it is a sovereign Remedy against all
inveterate obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all other parts of the
inferior belly or ventricle, as also against abstructions of the Lungs,
stopping of monthly Courses, Green-sicknesse, both kinds of Jaundice, Dropsy,
Ptysick, Asthma or short breath, Pleuresie, Cachexy, Hypocondrical Melancholy;
against all manner of Ulcers both internal and external, Leprosy, Plague,
Pocks both great and small, all kind of Itch and Scabs, Measels, and generally
whatsoever obstructs or disorders the course of health. It purges and drives
away whatsoever is hurtful to the body by Sweats, Urine, spitting or
salivation, and insensible transpiration. The Dosis may be from ij. to ix. or
x. drops in Spanish Wine, or some other analogous Liquor, as strong Hydromel,
Mead or Malmesy; they that will make use of this Remedy must take it in the
bed, and patiently expect sweats; the use may be reiterated every third day for
those that are actually sick, and once in a month for those that take it by
prevention, and to unburthen Nature from the superfluities of ill digestions.
And as these Tinctures can hardly be transported from place to place without
danger, the rest of the spirit of Wine may be evaporated to a consistency of
concocted Honey, adding to it ij. of powder of Hartshorn, philosophically
prepared to every j. of the thick Syrup, and so shall you have an admirable
Confection or Electuary, which may be sent and transporthed everywhere; the
Dosis whereof may be from iiij. to xx. grains, drinking upon it the same
Liquors above mentioned, or this Confection shall be mingled with a spoonful of
one of the said Liquors or Drinks, and a Glass of the said Drinks over it,
observing the same prescriptions as before.

The second Antimonial Tincture.
TO attain to the preparation of this Tincture, make first your Menstruum; for
whose composition well chosen Vitriol, common Salt very pure, and quicklime,
ana lb j. salt Armoniack iiij. put them each severally into powder, and having
mixed them, throw in [a Cucurbite], pouring over it lib. iij. of good distilled
Vinegar; stop the Cucurbite with its Blind-head and lute it, and so make the
digestion thereof with a slow heat the space of a natural day; which done, put
all in a Retort, and by a very well regulated and graduated fire, draw the
spirit thereof in 24 or 30. hours. Weigh what is come over the Helm in liquor,
and add as much of dry common salt to it, and rectify it in a regulate heat,
so as all what shall distill may come away fair and clear from it, and nothing
of muddinesse.

Then lb j. of antimonial Glass made without addition, and grounded to an
alkohol upon the Porphyrie stone; put it in a large Mattress, and pour upon it
your distilled Spirit, stir them together, and put them in digestion and
dissolution in ashes in an equal heat, and the Glass being dissolved, pour off
all what is clear and defecated by inclination, and filtrate the remainder:
then put all in a Cucurbite, cover it with a Still-head, lute and place your
Vessel in B. M. to draw off the Menstruum to a dry bottom in a moderate heat;
there will settle in the bottom of the Cucurbite a thick, slow, viscous and
blackish matter, which put in the cold Cellar upon a square Glass or Table, to
make it flow and dissolve into an Oil, or to speak more properly, into a red
liquor, which will leave some feces on the glass Table. This red liquor pour
into a small Cucurbite, and draw off the moisture from it in ashes till the
matter be dry, which take away immediately without delay before the air has got
and insinuated it self into it, and put it in a Pelican or double digesting
Vessel, and pour upon it of the best alkohol of Wine, dephlegmated upon
calcined Tartar, lute the joints and passages of the Vessel, and put it to
digest in the vaporous Balneo in sawdust, until the spirit be tinged with a
fair, red, high color, which draw off and put new spirit in the place, and
thus go on until the spirit of Wine takes no more Tincture, filtrate all the
Tinctures, and draw off the two thirds of the Menstruum in the slowest heat of
B. M. and keep the rest which is the Tincture, as a rich Treasure for health.
It is fit and useful for all the Diseases, to which we related above that the
first was proper, with the same precautions and the same Dosis.

But Note, that the Artist must not throw away the remainder of these two
Tinctures: but rather keep them to extract the salt thereof, as we shall teach
in its place. The Artist must also know, that the red liquor prepared in the
cold Cellar, is one of the best Balsoms in the World for curing of Wounds, and
all kind of malignant Ulcers be they never so dangerous, but chiefly those that
are pocky, and against Nodus's; wherefore let him keep some portion by it self,
to have his recourse unto it when there is need.

The infusion of Antimony.
THe infusion of prepared or unprepared Antimony is no very mysterious
business, wherefore we shall make but a short reflection upon it, and only say
that this Operation produces Emetical Wines and Ophthalmick Water. Now Emetical
Wine has several demonstrations in Writers; for some call it aqua Benedicta or
holy Water. Emetical, antimonial Wine, sacred Wine, and so^^ other names: Some
have also made use of matters variously prepared to make this Remedy, as
likewise of various Menstruums; for they have taken sometimes antimonial Glass,
sometimes Flowers, sometimes Crocus Metallorum, Emetical powder, and even crude
Antimony; the virtues of these various preparations has been extracted, either
with Wine, Vinegar, Mead or Hydromel, Beer, Cider, or aqua vitae. Moreover,
they have made Extracts, Electuaries, Lozenges and Syrups, so that they have
been disguised under any disguise at the arbitrament of the Author or liking of
the Patient; The Artist might of all these materials and Menstruums choose which
he likes best; but our advise is still that he should choose the best prepared
matter, and that which has less of impure sulphur in it: Wherefore let him
take off the Glass made without addition, and that he may be yet surer of his
way, we shall teach the manner of yet better correcting it, and preparing
therewith some infusions and preparations, by which it shall appear, that those
that cast a disreputation upon antimonial Remedies, were never well aquainted
with them, since they may be made more secure and pleasant then the easiest and
gentlest purge which may be taken out of Vegetables; and as we have said that
Wine did render Antimony too volatile, we will nevertheless show that it may
be extracted with Wine, and yet at the same time deprived from that volatile
spirit, which exalts it and advances too quickly its operation.

The correction of antimonial Glass, or Emetical powder corrected.
lb xij. of antimonial Glass made without addition, and iij. ss. of very pure
and dry Saltpeter, beat them each severally to powder, then mingle exactly
together; after this, put a small earthen pot not glazed in a Furnace upon a
round The, encompasse it with fire and coals, administering your heat by degrees
until it grows red hot, then throw your mixture by spoonfuls therein, and when
all the matter is in, let it grow glowing hot without melting, then remove away
the pot and take up the lump, which shall be of a yellowish color, beat i^ to
powder in a hot Mortar, this powder throw in in a Chop^^e or almost a pint of
distilled Rainwater, and stir it without delay, that the Niter might quickly
be dissolved, then draw off immediately the water, and dry the remaining
powder, observing this, that you mingle not the coursest part of the powder in
the bottom of the Vessel, but content your self with the subtilest part
thereof; and so shall you have so gentle an Emetical powder, and so well
corrected, that it may be given either in infusion or Syrup, and even in Wine
to sucking Children and aged persons, without any fear of the least accident.
The Dosis for Children is from iij. to ix. gr. in infusion in boiling Wine in
proportionate quantity, which must be filtrated in the morning, and so
administered to the Patient. The Dosis for strong and more aged persons is from
viij. grains to j. with the same method and observation. But if you will do
better, prepare therewith the following Syrup.

The true antimonial Syrup.
j. of this Emetical powder corrected, and put it in infusion in B. M. in a
glass Cucurbite, with pound iiij. of well depurared juice of Quinces the space
of three or four days; after this draw off the clear part of it by
decantation, and filtrate the muddy, mix with this juice impregnated with the
virtue of Antimony, lib. ij. of Sugar in powder, boil all these to the
consistency and thickness of a syrup in a glazed earthen pan in the vapor of
a Balneo; and the syrup being made, add unto it vj. drops of oil of Cinament,
and ij. drops of oil of Cloves, well wrought before into j. of Sugar in powder.
This Syrup is a noble purgative and Emetick for the most tender and delicate
constitutions, The Dosis is from ij. to j. j. ss. to ij.

The true Emetical purgative Tartar.
iiij. of the corrected Emetical powder before it has been washed, mix them
(...) as much of pure and well dried Tartar, this mixture put in a glass
Cucurbite in sadd, and pour upon it iij. of distilled Rainwater, boil and
evaporate them together to a dry bottom, then take up the lump and dissolve it
in a sufficient quantity of the same water, filtrate the dissolution to
separate the powder from it, then evaporate the filtrated liquor to a salt,
upon which pour drop by drop very good spirit of Vitriol, until you shall
perceive no more of ebullition nor any noise, which is a true sign that it is
satiated; evaporate all the superfluous moisture, until you have a very dry
salt of a pleasant taste, which is administered in Broths or some convenient
Decoction; sometimes it works only by Stools and Urines, but it provokes also
for the most part Vomiting, when it meets with a stomach stuffed with slime and
other viscous matters which do rise in the stomach and ferment easily. The
Dosis may be from s. to s. It is a Remedy which cannot be sufficiently praised
nor commended. Our Counsel then is, that the Artist prepare his Emetical Wine
with this corrected Glass, viz. infusing j. ph. of his Emetical corrected
powder in lb vj. of boiling wine in B. M. in a great double or blind glass
Body, or in a Pelican the space of 24 hours, then filtrate it afterward
through a paper, wherein has been put j. ss. of Sugar in powder, impregnated
with j. of oil of Cinnament, and ph. of oil of Cloves; and thus shall you
have an Emetical Wine, which may be relied upon without any scruple, and for
using of which no Physician can ever run hazard of being reproached. The Dosis
shall be from ounce ss. to iij. or iiij. the virtues of these three last
Remedies you shall find with those we have attributed to the other
preparations, both purging and Emetical, to which we refer him to avoid
needless repetitions.

Ophthalmick antimonial Water.
Of antimonial Glass reduced to an alkohol, or triturated Crocus Metallorum, in
the same manner s. put it in a Mattress with j. of Florentine Iris Root, and vj.
Cloves grossly beaten to powder, pour upon Rhew water, and Eyebright, and Fennel
water ana ounce vj. place them in a vaporous Balneo, or in the warm Summer Sun
to infuse, and stir often the Vessel during the space of fifteen days, which are
required for perfecting the Infusion, and you shall have an Ophthalmick water,
with which very few are comparable, for strengthening the sight against
suffusions and blemishes, and to dry and cleanse the pustulous cruptions which
grow often in the corners of the eyes, and in the lids, and cause there a kind
of itching and biting inflammation. But that which is most to be wondered at is,
that this water causes no pain, and yet produces very great effects.

The salification of Antimony.
WE shall deliver two several ways of preparing the salt of Antimony, as we
have done two different manners of extracting the Tincture. For the first, Take
the remainder of the antimonial Glass whereof the first Tincture was extracted,
and mingle it with its equal weight of Brinstone in powder, then calcine them
together, in the same manner as you did calcine Antimony to prepare Glass
thereof, and stir well the matters until all the Brimstone be consumed, but
have a special care not to give too intense a fire, otherwise the powder would
melt and return again to the Body of Antimony; this done, grind the remainder
to an alkohol upon the Porphyrie stone, put the powder in a Mattress, and pour
upon it very good distilled Vinegar four fingers high, then put it to digest
and extract in sand the space of viij. days, and drawing off the Vinegar pour
new in the place until all the salt be extracted, filtrate the extractions, and
evaporate the Vinegar till it raises a skin, or what is better yet, till it
leaves a dry bottom; dissolve the salt remaining in it in phlegm of Vinegar,
filtrate and evaporate, and thus continue till the salt be clean and white, and
being in this condition, digest it the space of fifteen days with alkoholiz'd
spirit of Wine, then draw off the spirit again slowly in B. M. and preserve
this precious Salt in a well stopped Viol; The Dosis and Virtues whereof we will
declare after we have made a description of the other, as it follows.

The second way of preparing salt of Antimony.
The black matter remaining after the extraction of the second tincture, and
dry it well in an earthen dish, put it without any other previous calcination
in a Mattress, and pour upon it spirit of Vinegar very pure and very subtle,
digest them together, and make extraction thereof, filtrate, evaporate,
dissolve and depurate as we prescribed in the foregoing description; digest it
also with the spirit of Wine which you shall draw from this noble Salt to a dry
bottom, and keep for use. This Salt is put in parallel, and as highly valued as
the salt of Gold, because it cleanses and purifies the blood, purges the body
from all superfluous humors and all filth; cures Leprosy and Venerean Pocks,
does wonders upon the Gout, digests and evacuates as it were insensibly
internal Abscessus and Impostumes; cures all inward and outward Ulcers, and
expels and drives away all Agues, but particularly Quartanes. The Dosis is from
j. to iv. grains, in the same liquors and with the same observations as those
we have hinted, treating of the use of the Tinctures of Antimony, and let no
body wonder if we have attributed so many noble virtues to antimonial Remedies;
for besides that I have not followed the most Hyperbolical Authors, yet I am so
much convinced of its noble and most excellent virtues and proprieties by the
effects I have spoken of, that I openly confess, that Man's life is too short
to go through the Anatomy of Antimony as it ought to be done, and that we are
too short sighted and our capacity too weak to discover, or penetrate into the
secret mysteries which are hidden in it, for Man's ignorance will ever leave a
larger Field therein for admiration, then comprehension and knowledge.

We have already said above, that our intention was not to speak of the
mercurial extraction of Metals, and less of Antimony; some reasons therefore
we have given, to which we add, that although we have exactly proceeded in the
experiments of several directions, both printed and taken out of Manuscrips,
with all the requisite care and punctuality imaginable, yet could we never
bring any of them to pass; however we do not proudly and magisterially deny
the possibility of this extraction: we do rather choose to leave the
feasablenesse thereof to the power of Nature and the perfection of Art,
acknowledging our ignorance, or of those which did pen the said Directions
which hitherto we have followed, and leaving the liberty of a further
disquisition, to them that will give themselves the trouble thereof.

Of Bismut, called by some white Antimony.
ALthough this Marcassite or metallic excrement be not used internally in
Physic, yet is it endowed with very excellent virtues for outward
applications: wherefore we will subjoin the preparation thereof to that of
Antimony, because some take it for a species of this Mineral, and call it
female Antimony, the French call it Estain de glass, Glass Tin, the Germans,
Bismut, and many only Marcassite, by way of excellency and distinction. We will
describe four preparations thereof, viz. the Magistery, flowing Liquor or Oil,
and Salt.

The Magistery of Tin Glass.
PRepare first a strong water with equas parts of Saltpeter and common salt.
lb ph. of this water, and dissolve therein iiij. of Bismut pure and well
chosen, filtrate the dissolution if there be any foulness in it, and
precipitate it with tartarized spirit of Wine, draw off the liquor swimming
above the Magistery, and wash it with distilled Rainwater until it be all
dulcified. It is a very good Remedy for all the vices and eruptions of the
skin, and above all against itching; it takes away spots and freckles in it,
and smoothes the roughness of the Face and Hands. But if you will make thereof
a very pure and white Cosmetick, and use it either with or without Pomatum,
precipitate it with oil of Vitriol, and you shall have an almost incomparable
white; you must dulcifie and dry it to keep for the time of use.

The distillation of Bismut.
lb v. of Bismut as it comes from the Mine, before it has ever felt the fire,
beat it to powder and digest and macerate it with good white Wine, in a blind
or double Vessel the space of three days, draw off the Wine after digestion,
and put new in the place, and thus proceed digesting with new Wine, until you
have spent viij. or x. pints of Wine: finally, pour the fourth part of the Wine
digested upon this Marcassite upon its own Body in a Cucurbite, which place in
sand, and cover it with a Limbeck; draw off the Menstruum with a moderate heat
to a dry bottom, cohobate the fourth part, then the third, and finally the
fourth in the same heat to a dry bottom, and when you see it yields no more
moisture, stop the nose of the Limbeck, and increase the fire, and there will
sublimate and rise in the head thereof white silvered Flowers, which keep
without further preparation in a well stopped Viol, or if you put them in a
Cellar upon a glass Table they will dissolve into Oil, or to speak more
properly, into Liquor, which keep also for its uses. This done, put all what
you have extracted by distillation in a capacious Cucurbite, to draw off the
spirit of Wine, which may yet be employed in some other operations upon
Minerals, and pouring the rest in a bottle metal earthen pan; evaporate in sand
till it comes to a pint, then let it rest the space of three days, and if the
Artist does not see some chrystallization of salt to shute above it, let him
evaporate half of the remaining Liquor away, and throw some very clean strawes
in the Liquor, which being put again in a cold place, the chrystals of Salt
will stick to the straw; thus go on in evaporating and chrystallizing until no
more salt does come, dry gently and slowly that which you have got, and keep it
in a Viol for use.

The Flowers are preferable to the Magistery for the outward application upon
the skin, and the liquor thereof made in cold, takes away all spots and
freckles from it; the Flowers may be mixed in Pomatum's. But the Liquor and salt
are wonderful Remedies against all kind of cancerous and malignant Ulcers, and
the cure of Fistula's. Briefly, that Surgeon that shall be industrious enough
to apply them to their proper uses, shall find them to be two external
Remedies not inferior to any other Topical Medicament whatsoever; He may also
mingle them with Injections or vulnerary Waters, with whom he shall inject them
with Syringes, and wash and foment therewith Ulcers, particularly those that
participate of a cancerous or corroding nature: for this Mineral is endowed
with a volatile sulphur and a balsamic Salt, which cannot sufficiently be
esteemed for softening and allaying of pain, and mundifying and bringing to a
full cure the most desperate and malignant Ulcers.

SECTION V. Of Salts.
WE may say in general, that Salts are nothing else then Minerals dissoluble
in water, and which after evaporation of the said water, may be restored into
salt. But as we speak not here of salts as they are principles and causes of
Physical generations; so will we only deliver plainly our mind concerning
mineral Salts, either natural or artificial which are used in Physic, and
afford many vere good Remedies, and many excellent dissolvents by the help of
Chemistry. And as we have spoken above of the preparation of animal and
vegetable salts, so have we no more left to do now, then to examine and
describe the nature of such mineral salts as are natural, and of those which
though artificially prepared, keep still in themselves the Character and Idea
of mineral natural salts. We must nevertheless say something of their original
in general terms, before we come to the particular description, and so give a
general Idea and Prospect of such Operations as are performed upon salts.

The original and spring of mineral salts cannot otherwise be conceived then
intellectually, and by the comparison which a natural Philosopher must make of
sensible and known things, with those that are hidden and removed from
knowledge. For as he can perceive some salinous substances to be generated in
Animals and Vegetables, from the superfluity of their food and nourishment, or
by some action of their internal heat, or coagulation of their Tartar naturally
coagulable; even so does he conceive the great World to be filled with a
spirituous and luminous substance analogous to food, which maintains the
generation and production of all things by the help and ministry of heat; and
when this spirituous and lucid Aliment has once stamped his character and
efficacy in any substance or place, and that it begins to contract a heat in it
self, and to overflow, there mineral salts are generated; and according as the
matrices where this coagulation is made are different, so likewise are produced
salts of a different and distinct nature: such as are common salt, salt Gem,
Allom, Saltpeter, Vitriol, to which is added likewise Armoniack salt, though
prepared by Art. The preparations of salts in general are, Purification,
Calcination, Distillation, Sublimation, Fixation and Liquation. We will give
examples of all these operations, when we describe every one of these salts in
particular, the better to instruct the Sons of art, and proceed still as we
have done hitherto, with the least possible confusion.

Of common Salt, and its Chemical Preparation.
COmmon salt, is nothing else but that substance which causes the brine of
water, whether it belongs to the Sea, or some spring yielding the same, and the
water being vapoured away, leaves that which we call Common or Kitchen salt;
And though under this general appellation many species be included, yet the
best of all them is that they call Sea Salt, or Bay Salt; and particularly that
which has been dried up in saltish Marshes, by the virtue of the Sun beams,
and the salifick ferment which is peculiar to the soil of those Marshes after
they have been impregnated with impressions and particles of the light:
wherefore our Counsel is to the Sons of Art, ever to make use of that kind of
salt, whenever they find the name of Salt mentioned in any Author, or some
practical Manuscript; and as sal gemm is nothing else but a natural conctetion
of Common salt in some Matrix of the earth, so think we unnecessary to give him
any peculiar preparation, since the way of preparing it is the same with Common
salt.

Purification of common Salt.
THis purification, is nothing else but a dissolution of the Body of the salt
upon which your operation is intended, whither in Rain or Spring Water, to
sever from it some earthly foulness and impurity, which might communicate some
ill quality to the Remedies intended to be made therewith. The dissolution must
be made in a proportionate quantity of water, and in a moderate heat; after
which, percolate the dissolution being warm through a linen cloth Bag, or a
Filter or Blanket, and if you will proceed more exactly, filtrate through a
paper, and let the salt shute into Chrystals; then proceed in evaporating the
water to half consumption, and let the Chrystals shute again in the cold, until
you have got all your salt pure and clean, which cause to dry, and put in a Box
or small Barrel very close, and keep it in a dry place for your Operations.

The Calcination of Common Salt.
THere are two kind of Calcinations of salt, Decrepitation, and Fusion.
Decrepitation is nothing else but the calcination of salt in an earthen pot not
glazed with a circular fire, until the salt makes no moncracks or noise; the
end of it is by reason of mixing the salt with other substances in some
operations, and because when the fire works upon it, it crawles, leaps and
stirs, and so might scatter and discompose the said substances joined with it,
which happens not when it is decrepitated; besides, that this Calcination
deprives it also from its phlegm and moisture: but if it be too much urged by
the fire, the acid spirit flies also away: wherefore the Artist must here
govern the fire gently and with discretion, to make it rather a violent
Exsiccation, then such a Calcination as might bereave the Body of the salt from
its active Spirit.

The Calcination made by fusion, is nothing else but the melting of the
decrepitated salt in a Crucible in the wind-furnace; if this salt be kept
melted in a warm and dry place, it will preserve it self in a lump, to be used
when there shall be occasion; But if it be exposed to the air, it dissolves in
water, which must be filtrated and put in a Bottle; it is that which Paracelsus
calls Sal solutum and aqua salis, dissolved salt, or water of Salt. There is
besides a third Calcination of salt, called the fixatory Calcination, which is
made with equal parts of Common salt and quicklime, which is put in an earthen
unglazed pot, and being exactly covered, place in a wind-Furnace in a violent
heat until it melts to a lump; which done, cease the fire, and dissolve the
lump in Rainwater, filtrate and evaporate to a dry bottom, and reiterate so
often this Calcination with quick lime, that at last it may become a fusible
salt, which is used for extracting the Tincture of Metals, upon which process
the Sons of Art may make their reflection, for this is not without some
Mystery.

Having delivered the manner of these general Preparations, we must say
something in general also of the virtues of Common salt, before we come to the
particular application of those that are found in each particular preparation.
Common salt is generally good for cleansing all rotten, putrid and hollow
Ulcers, to resolve all Tumors and Boyls, but chiefly pestilential sores; it
allayes the fire of burnings, dryes scabs and itch, takes away mange, resolves
extravasated blood, and removes the lividity or blewishnesse of Contusions and
bruises, asswages the Toothach and pains of the Head and Gout: but for all this
the use is only external, mixed in Water, Vinegat or Urine according to the
distemper; the best for all these purposes is that which has been melted
without addition, because its internal sulphur begins to produce it self, as it
appears by the redness of its color. But if salt has many virtues in outward
applieations, it possesses no less eminently several remarkable ones
internally used: for it does heat and dry, cleanses and purges, has a gentle
astriction, consumes superfluities, penetrates, digests, opens, cuts phlegm and
tough humors, provokes lust, resists putrefaction and venoms: wheresore it is
of singular use to correct the crudities of the stomach, quicken appetite, and
helps the recovery of it when lost, removes obstructions of the Belly and
Reins, and is good against griping of the Guts and Colic: Finally according
to Basilius it is the noblest and best of Aromats, and the true Balsom of
Nature.

The distillation of Common Salt.
ALthough many Artists have spent their Philosophy and meditation upon the
distillation of Common salt, and that Glauber amongst the rest, has taught a
way to extract a great quantity of it in a short time, yet have I found no
surer nor quicker way, or less intricate and more easy to put in practice,
then that which I shall now teach. But before we come to the description of it,
let us make some necessary Notes: for is it not first a very strange thing,
that the most part of those which describe this Operation, will have the salt
to be decrepitated? but as we have said above, that violent Exsiccation, not to
say Calcination, separates and takes away from the salt its volatile spirit,
phlegm, and almost always the best part of its acid spirit, which ought not to
be done, since the volatile spirit and phlegm have also their uses in Physic,
and it is not fit the Artist should want of skill and knowledge, and lose that
which he may easy preserve without any way endangering his Operation, provided
he observes well the degrees of fire. The Artist must also note in the second
place, that some do mix salt with the heterogeneous matters, pretending thereby
to facilitate the distillation thereof; as for example, burnt Allom and
Colchotar of Vitriol; but they do not consider, that by this means they alter
and change the virtue of the spirit of Salt. Some other do mix ordinary Clay,
taking no notice that oftentimes this earth is impregnated with some mixture of
metallic or mineral seed, as it is evident by the smell of the smoke, phlegm
of Kills where Bricks or Tiles are ordinarily backed, and likewise of Potters
Furnaces; so that all things well considered, the Artist must choose such kind
of Earth or Clay which may be of a most fix nature, and contribute the least of
its quality to the spirit of salt; Now amongst all the several kinds, that
which is called Sigillated or fine Bolus, are of a nature which cannot at all
bring any alteration to the salt, unless to the better: wherefore we would
have either of these two used for the distillation of this Spirit, which is
made as we will now declare, so as to hinder the fusion or melting of the salt.

How to make and duly prepare the Spirit of Salt.
lb ij. of Common salt purified, beat it in a Marble Mortar, and mix it by
parcels of ij. at once, with vj. of fine Bolus or sigillated Earth, and all the
mixture being exactly done, knead it and incorporate it with water of Salt,
which is melted salt dissolved in a cold Cellar, and thereof make a kind of
paste, whereof frame Pellets to be dried in an Oven, after the bread is
removed, or in the heart of the Sun; break one of the Pellets to know whether
it be dry to the very Center, and that being so, fill up with it a great
earthen Retort very well luted, and having placed it in a close Reverberatory,
fit a large and capacious Recipient to the neck thereof, which lute exactly and
cover the Furnace, leaving a Register in the middle above the Retort, that the
fire may the better circulate about it. The Lute being well dried, give it
first a gentle fire fit to warm only, and modifie both the matter and Vessel,
and when the drops shall begin to fall, and the body of the Recipient to grow
warm, proceed softly and gently in your work; for it is a sign that the
volatile spirit of salt, begins to free and dis-intangle himself from the Body,
and as it is a subtle and fiery spirit, you must stop the Register and
moderate the fire, until the first rage of it be allayed, for it is at that
instant and nick of time that the whole operation runs more danger, because
this sulphurous spirit is coagulated with difficulty; this will last
ordinarily four or five hours, after which the acid spirit begins to come
forth, which appears by vapors and white clouds which fill up the Recipient;
then may the Artist freely increase the fire without fear of any danger, and
continue it stronger and stronger, until the flame comes forth through the
Register, and the neck of the Retort appears red as fire through the body of
the Recipient; this Operation cannot be well completed in less space then of
xxx. hours, after which cease the fire, and the next day open your Vessels,
wherein you shall find in the Recipient a liquor mixed with the volatile spirit
the phlegm, and the acid spirit of the salt, some do add to this the oil of
Salt, but improperly. Pour all these into a Cucurbite and place it in B. M. to
draw off the volatile spirit which ascends first, having a sulphurous smell,
and frames subtle and crooked veins in the head of the Limbeck, receive it as
long as these come forth, and when you see the veins to grow straight, and the
drops falling to have none of the smell or taste of the volatile spirit; change
the Recipient to receive the phlegm, and increase the fire stronger then
before, because it does not so easily ascend as the volatile spirit, and when
the distilling drops shall have an acidity, cease the fire; for it would prove
too great a toil to endeavor to raise the acid spirit by reason of its
heaviness in B. M. the heat whereof is too weak and insufficient for this
purpose, If the Artist has a design to apply the acid spirit of salt to
physical uses, he needs not rectify it any more, for it has an excellent and
very pleasant acidity as it comes out of B. M. wherefore he may preserve of
this a third or one half part for his use, and put the Cucurbite in sand to
draw the other half by distillation, and so shall he have a true acid spirit of
salt very clear and very pleasant, and that which remains in the bottom of the
Cucurbite will be of a yellowish color, heavy, and of a biting and violent
sharpness, fit to be used in the dissolution of Metals, and chiefly stones;
this is that substance which improperly is called Oil of Salt.

We have noted here all the circumstances of the distillation and rectification
of the spirits of Salts, that we may have no need to make unnecessary
repetitions thereof when we shall speak of other salts, since whosoever can
exactly well draw the spirit of salt, can never be mistaken in the distillation
of others. So that we have no more to do now, then to add the proprieties and
virtues of several substances drawn and proceeding from the Common Salt.

First then, the volatile sulphurous spirit is a good Cephalic and
Sudorifick, wherefore it may be given from ij. p. to x. in Broths and
appropriated waters, to those which are troubled with Megrim, or any other
Headache; it is also very excellent to be mingled in the ordinary drink of
feverish or aguish persons, allaying thirst, and asswaging their restlesnesse.
They may also have Frontals applied, made with the phlegm, that have inveterate
pains in the Head, and not sleep through too much heat and disquietnesse. But
above all things the phlegm is excellent to wash Wounds and Ulcers, which it
wonderfully does cleanse without pain or grief; but contrariwise, it appeases
it if there be any. It is also a wonderful fomentation for the swollen joints
and pained limbs in gouty people, provided you mingle a little of its
volalatile spirit, and a little of salt of Saturn with it. The acid spi^^ of
salt is diuretical and good against gravel and stone, it resolves and drives
away powerfully Tartar and Muscilagineous substances from all the parts of the
body: wherefore it is of very good use to open all obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen, and generally all the parts of the Ventricle; is singular against
Dropsy, for it quenches the thirst of the Patient; it is also wonderful
against Jaundice, ebullitions of blood, driving away by Urine the causes of
both Diseases; it is of a sovereign efficacy to stop Gangrenes, and to resist
all manner of corruption and putrefaction; mixed with oil of Turpentine or oil
of Wax, it appeases the ach and grief of the Gout, dissipating the Tophus's and
Nodosity's thereof; it quickens again, and cures also the contraction of
Members and withered Limbs, and does remedy their atrophy.

We have spoken above of the sweet spirit of Salt and tempered Water, when we
made mention of Coral and of its Tincture, where also we did relate its
proprieties and virtues; wherefore we shall not use vain repetitions here. We
will only add one distillation more of an extraordinary spirit of Salt very
Philosophical, and which is altogether endowed with a particular virtue.

The essential and stomachical spirit of Salt.
Of purified and very dry salt, calcinated in open fire in a Crucible to
whiteness; put it in a Mattress and imbibe it with oil of salt, which is the
last spirit remaining in the rectification in the bottom of the Cucurbite; make
the imbibition by little and little, stirring the Vessel until the mixture be
reduced into a clear pap, lute the Mattress with a Blindhead, and put it to
digest in ashes in a moderate and equal heat, until the oil of salt be well
united with the calcined and desiccated salt; then begin again the imbibition,
digestion, union and extraction so often, that the salt refuses to receive any
more of, and be satiated with this Oil, which must swim above it without
penetrating; but the true concluding sign that this salt will be ready fitted
for distillation, is the turning of its color into a fair golden yellow
color, and having contracted a pleasing and a sweet smell, which when it has,
put it in a Retort, and distill in a well graduated fire, and there will come
out a very white smoke and clouds, which by degrees shall turn into Liquor; the
distillation being ended, rectify this spirit in B. M. to separate the phlegm
thereof, and you shall have an essential and stomachical spirit of Salt, with
which none is to be compared in Physic, to stop in a moment and as it were
miraculously all fits of vomiting in any accident or Disease whatsoever. Some
are of opinion, that this Spirit is capable to extract and-draw the Tincture of
Gold to it self, without a full dissolution or disunion of the whole body. The
Dosis is from j, to iv. drops in some Broth, or a spoonful of syrup of
Pomgranates, or rind of Oranges, or in a little Wine.

The preparation of the sweet Chrystals of Common salt, or the coagulated
spirit of Salt.
YOU must choose first a capacious and large Retort, made of good Earth, capable
to resist fire and not porous, the neck of the Retort must be three fingers
broad in diameter, that the spirits issuing forth in abundance may have a free
passage, let it also have a channel or Conduit in the upper part made
Funnel-like, only five inches high, with a very close and well fitted stopple,
easy both to be shut and drawn off again with the same ease, and without
stirring the Retort; moreover, this Retort must be walled in a close
Reverberatory, having four Registers in the four corners, the channel or
Conduit-pipe of the Retort being just in the middle; all this being so fitted
and prepared, throw into the Retort lb iiij. of Bay salt well purified and well
dried; put a large round glass Body, or Ballon to the neck of the Retort with
lb j. of distilled Rainwater in it; lute exactly the joints, and let the Lute
dry very well, that no crack may be in it; then begin to give it a gradual
fire, which increase to that height that it may leave the salt in fusion in the
Retort; this done, throw into it j. or ij. drops of cold water with a Feather
by the upper pipe or channel, and stop it immediately; it will yield great
store of vapors which will come over into the Recipient, and the Recipient
being cleared, begin again to throw j. or ij. drops more of water at the most;
for otherwise the Vessel might fly up and the Artist run hazard to be hurt;
keep up the fire in this height for preserving the salt in fusion, and proceed
in throwing of water by drops until it be turned all into spirits and vapor,
which done, let the fire cease and the Vessels cool. Put whatsoever is found in
the Recipient in a Cucurbite in B. M. if so be you find it pure and clear; if
not, filtrate it before you draw off the phlegm, and distilled Rainwater which
was added, then try in a cool place if any Chrystals will shute, which if you
find; separate the Chrystals which are sweet and of a pleasant taste, and
proceed in the extraction of superfluous moisture and chrystallization until it
yields no more Chrystals: keep some part of these Chrystals in a Viol
very-exactly stopped; because they may so be more ready and easy for
transportation, and put the rest in a Cellar to dissolve into a Liquor which
will be of the same virtue and efficacy, but the Dosis must be a little bigger.
Both Chrystals and Liquor are two good Diaphoretick's or Sudorificks, allaying
altogether the thirst of hydropical persons, and restoring to their languishing
bodies that essential moisture which is daily consumed and preyed upon by that
undermining Disease, strengthening their digestion, and restablishing all the
intrals which suffer by it and are altered; briefly, it is a true vital Balsom
in all other Diseases, and chiefly in the Plague and all malignant and burning
Fevers. They are also good Topical Remedies to mundifie evil Ulcers, and
resolve Tumors and swellings.

Of Niter or Saltpeter, and its Chemical preparation.
ALthough there are many that take Saltpeter to be an universal Salt,
believing that it possesses in it self the Soul of the World, yet we are of a
different judgment, if by Niter or Saltpeter is understood that chrystalline
Hexagonal salt, which is used in the making of Gunpowder. But if by Niter or
Saltpeter be understood a mysterious salt which is the soul of all physical
generations, a Child and Son of Light, and the Father of all Germination and
Vegetation, we confess that Salt in such a respect to be Universal: but we say
at the same time, that it is more to be apprehended by the Intellect then the
Senses, and that this divine Salt cannot be comprehended nor hidden under any
other covering or shape, then of the sulphurous and Mercurial volatile salt of
all natural Bocies, since this salt is endowed of all the essential and
centrick virtues of sublunary Mixts. But as concerning Niter or Saltpeter,
which is common in our daily use, we do not deny, but that it possesses in it
self much of a volatile sulphur and Mercutial spirit, which have their original
from Light; and are folded, wrapped, and sealed in a course and earthly saline
matter proceeding from the Water and the Earth, which is the reason that much
of Philosophy, and much of work and operation must be bestowed upon, before any
body can attain to the capacity of separating these several substances, by
disintangling this wonderful Agent from the society of its matter, without
losing or imbezelling any of its essential and heavenly qualities. But as it is
not our design to treat generally of Saltpeter, so will we restrain our selves
to speak of it here as only of a mineral salt, which is extracted from fat and
fruitful Earth. Wherefore a Lie is prepared with water which this salt
coagulates with its self, as it appears by the fusion of Niter, which by the
action of the fire loses all its aquosity, so that there remains in it nothing
but the taste and virtue of an Urinous and Lixivial salt, which properly is
nothing else but that fat and frui^ful salt extracted from the earth, separated
by fire from the water which Nature or Art had mixed with it: and this is not
one of the least secters and mysteries of Chemistry, if it be well heeded and
meditated upon. For we must confess, that Niter is one of the most wonderful
and powerfulest Agents which Nature has lent to Art, as the Sons of Art may
have noted hitherto by those Operations wherein we have used it, and may yet
note by those we shall describe in the sequel of this Discourse.

We say then, that Saltpeter is a sulphural salt, partly volatile, and mixed
with another earthly salt of a saline and bitter taste, extracted from fat
Earth's or Grounds, and from the mines of old Buildings; as likewise from
Vaults of Cellars and Stables, the Earth having received the impression and
being impregnated with the Excrements and Urines of Beasts, the volatile salt
whereof did join and imbody it self with the salt of the Earth, and these two
being knit and indivisibly united together by the power and action of the light
and air upon it, and of the Archeus of the Earth which is the Director of all
mineral generations, Chemists do call it the Chemical Ce^berus, the infernal
Salt, the sulphurate Salt; the Dragon of the Earth, the winged Serpent. Now, as
we have still begun all our Operations by charging the Son of Art, ever to be
careful of choosing well his Materials before he puts them to work, so do we
here enjoin him to take very good heed in the choice of his Saltpeter, and
would have him capable of setting a difference between that which of it self is
good, without any previous separation, and that which abounds with fixed salt,
which of necessity must be depurated and separated from it that it may be
without mixture. The visible notes of that purity, are the length of the
Needles, their whiteness and transparency, and the hexagonal Figure which this
salt takes always in its chrystallization: moreover, there is the taste which
must be of a harsh acidity and sharpness, somewhat bitter and ending in a
saline sowrishnesse: nevertheless, all these marks are not yet absolutely
concluding for its goodness and purity; wherefore the Artist must have his
recourse to that trial which is made by fire; Let him then take a burning coal,
and put one or two of Niter upon it, and so let it burn and evaporate into the
air; if nothing remains upon the coal, the action of fire being ovet, it is a
true sign of the goodness and purity of the Saltpeter; but he shall judge of
the value and goodness according to the greater or lesser quantity of fixed
salt which remains upon the coal. Physicians are in debate amongst themselves
of the first qualities of Niter; for some believe it to be cold, others
contrariwise hot; but without losing time about these trifles, we will say
generally the virtues of Niter, by the rehearsal of which it shall appear that
the last are better grounded then the first in their Assertion, since it
resists putrefaction, quenches thirst, and cooles powerfully sick and
languishing persons, chiefly feverish Bodies, but it does not produce such an
effect by any cold quality, but rather by the quickness and subtility of its
parts, which insinuates and causes the Patient's Drink to penetrate from the
center of the body to the Circumference; and moreover, because this Salt has
in it self a sulphur and subtle spirit which recreates and strengthens the
Archeus, so as to dispose him to meliorate and better qualify those functions
which it does exercise: add to this that Niter does cut and attenuate slimy
humors, and muscilagineous matters and tartarous coagulations, which are the
cause of obstructions; it resolves congealed blood and allayes pains. It is
given to persons troubled with Pleuresie, hot and putrid Fevers, against
gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder, and heats of Urine. The use of it is also
very commendable in Gargels, against inflammations in the Throat and Quinsy. It
is of very good success outwardly applied in Fomentations with Fillers, to
take away the heat and grief of burnings, and other inflammations proceeding
from effervescency of blood. But let this suffice concerning the general uses
of it, since we are to speak more particularly of it in the description of its
preparations, which are Purification, Calcination, Fixation, and Distillation.

The purification of Niter.
lb x. of common Niter, otherwise called of the first boiling, put it in an
earthen pot not glazed, place the pot in a wind-Furnace, and give it fire by
degrees until the Niter begins to melt, and whilst it is in fusion, throw by
degrees in it ij. of powder of Allom and Armoniack salt ground together; this
will cause at every throwing an effervescency, by which the fatness and
impurity of the Niter will be driven away, which remove with a hot Iron Ladle,
and having done with the powder, cleanse very well the superficie's of the
Niter from all impurities; then throw it in a brass Mortar very clean and warm;
the Niter being grown cold in the Mortar, grind and dissolve it in Spring Water
in the heat of a clear wood-fire, then strain it through a Blanket, and pour
immediately into this straining whilst yet warm iiij. of good distilled
Vinegar, and put the Vessel in a very close place, leaving it there the space
of 24. houses, and so shall you find your Niter well chrystalliz'd in fair,
clear and transparent Chrystals; separate the water from them, and evaporate it
by a slow ebullition to a reduction of its half, and let this also shute into
Chrystals in the cold; But the Artist must here note, that it is necessary he
should still make use of the Niter which proceeds from the first
chrystallization, for all the preparations which are to be taken inwardly; and
of the remaining for making of aqua fortis, and all other Operations which are
of less consequence. Dry gently your Niter between two fair Searchers or
sieves turned upside down, and covered with linen cloth or paper that it may
not be sullied; then put it in very well closed Boxes in some warm and dry
place, to use in all hind of necessary Operations, when occasion shall call for
in a Chemical Laboratory.

Calcination of Niter, to prepare the Crystal Mineral.
Purified Niter of the first chrystallization very dry, put it to melt in open
fire in a good strong Crucible capable of resisting the fire, not apt to crack
and very well reback't; when it is in fusion, throw by degrees into it ph. of
flower of Brimstone upon each ounce of Niter; this done, throw it in a brass
Skillet very clean, and stir it, that it may be extended in a flat Table or
Cake, out of which Lozenges may be cut: or you may form small Rowles thereof
with an Iron hot Ladle, pouring it upon a smooth Iron plate, or upon a Marble
stone. If you will not take so much pains, pour only this Niter so prepared
and melted in a clean and warm Mortar. Now I take this Calcination rather for a
Reiteration of purification, then a true preparation of Crystal mineral;
wherefore you must have water distilled of the juice of wild Endive, Buglosse
or Borrage, and in a convenient portion of this water melt this pretended
Crystal mineral, and filtrate it through a paper filled with Province or
Damask Roots, or Buglosse and Borrage Flowers, made wet before with a little
spirit of sulphur, salt or Vitriol, and thus shall you have a Mineral Crystal
pleasant as to the taste, color and virtue, endowed really with those
proprieties and that efficacy we have attributed to Saltpeter. But above all,
it will be a true Anodyne and an excellent allayer of thirst and restlesnesse
to Aguish and Feverish persons, to whom may and must lawfully be given the
name of Lapis prunella, or S^l prunellae; for it is a sovereign Remedy against
those malignant and putrid Fevers, which are called Fieves prunelles or
burning Fevers, because prunella in Latin signifies a burning coal. The Dosis
must be from ss. to j. in the ordinary Drink of the Patient, some Decoction,
Broth, or distilled water appropriated to the Disease. This Crystal Mineral is
a general Remedy, that may be specificated by the addition of several salts
which may be united and incorporated with it, as the salt of Saturn, whereof we
have spoken treating of Lead, salt of Pearls, Coral, and so of others; and thus
may you have a Cordial, Hepatick, Splenetical or Stomachical Crystal mineral,
according to the faculty and virtue of the salt which you have joined and
coagulated to your well prepared Niter.

The fixation of Niter.
MElt lb vj. of very pure Niter in an Iron pot in open fire; throw in it
continually by small parcels Charcoal dust, which will immediately take fire,
and softly consume by the action of its fire and sulphur, the waterish moisture
which the salt of the Earth had coagulated and united to it self in its
chrystallization; continue this throwing of Coal-dust until you find it will
kindle no more, and that the remainder of the Niter begins to thicken and turn
to a bluish and greenish color; then cease this Operation, and take off this
salt out of the pot, and put it in a warm Mortar: and if the Artist will
preserve any of it whole, let him put thereof as it is hot and dry in a Bottle,
and stop it exactly with a stople dipped in melted Wax. This is true fixed Niter,
much altered from its first nature; for it is no more volatile or apt to be
turned into Chrystals, but contrariwise turns exposed to the air into a liquor
which is subtle and penetrating, has an urinous and lixivial taste like unto
salt of Tartar, but yet more biting and more penetrating. We are beholding to
Glauber for the invention of this Liquor, who has given us the description
thereof under the name of Liquor alkahest, fit to draw the Tinctures of all
natural Bodies, whether Animals, Vegetables or Minerals, and to speak truly,
this Liquor has in it something very considerable, being capable of extracting
the sulphurs of Metals, provided they have been well opened before; those of
Minerals do easily yield unto it, from whence it may be concluded that it takes
in an instant the sulphurs and volatile salts of Animals and Vegetables. If any
Chemical Artists have a curiosity for these noble Oparations, they shall find
them in the Book which this great and famous Artist has given us thereof. But
there is left much matter of speculation and Philosophy upon this fixation of
Niter, which is made by the Vegetable sulphur of Coals, which does change it
into the nature of salt Alkali, whose taste is urinous and lixivial; this salt
being capable of fertilizing the worst Earth's, if the seeds to be put in be
prepared with a Liquor made of this salt and some other Ingredients, this
admirable Salt so nourishing and invigorating the bud or sprout of the seed,
that it multiplyes to so high a number as to seem altogether Hyperbolical, and
fabulous to those which apprehend not the hidden mystery which Nature does
extract from the light of Spirits and Salts, and how the sperm of the seed
finds in this saline Liquor that which is analogous to its principle, does
greedily suck and attract it, for which reason being as it were doubly
strengthened, it shoots and puts forth a more vigorous and numerous stalk,
yielding ears and grains of Corn above all belief, as it has been seen and
tried in Paris some years since. But to make this Assertion more plain and
palpable, let us reflect upon the practice of the Husbandman in Britany and the
Forest of Ordermes; who meeting with unfruitful and barren grounds, producing
nothing but Heath and Fern, a kind of wild Flag and Broom, use to pare off the
upper part or moale of their ground, pluck off the Broom and Fern, and drying
all in heaps something distant one from the other, set it on fire, leaving
after the heavenly influences and Rain to work upon this calcined Earth,
containing the Alkali of all the plants fixed by their own sulpbur; this Alkali
assisted by the sulphur has contracted a fatness and clammy moisture, heavy
and of slow motion, which communicated to the lightness, dryness and too
great porosity of the Earth, causes it to keep with it a kind of greediness
and delectation, a pleasant substance and nourishment; and as soon as the Rain
does abound and exuberate, it cannot so soon be disjoined from it, neither
carried away by the violent heat of the Sun by reason of its fixednesse; and so
it comes to pass, that when these Husbandmen have plowed and sowed their
grounds, they reap store of Rye for the first year and Oats in the second. We
brought in this story only to the end that the Artist may reflect with his
meditation upon this salt, and note the better its worth and excellency, which
proceeds from nothing else but the mystery of Nature contained in the
Saltpeter, which he must seek by his industry how to free and dis-ingage.

To make the Solar dissolutive Earth of fixed Niter.
lb j. of the fixed Niter which you kept in a Bottle, pour upon it lb ij. of
very good distilled Vinegar, put it in ashes to digest 24 hours, then distill
and draw off the liquor to a dry bottom, and your Vinegar will ascend
tastelesse and insipid; reiterate in the same manner the same operation with
new distilled Vinegar, until the Vinegar comes off with the same sharpness as
you did pour it on; then dry it well, and dissolve it in very good alkoholized
spirit of Wine, filtrate and digest them together during the space of four
natural days, then distill in B. M. to a dry bottom, drawing off the spirit of
Wine again, which you may yet use afterward in all other Operations. Put after
this your Cucurbite wherein lies the salt in a sand-Furnace, and give it a
good fire, so shall the salt cleanse it self from all remaining impurities, and
settle in the bottom into a substance something resembling Calk, white, of a
good and pleasant taste, and dissoluble in all manner of Liquors, melting in
the heat like Wax. It is one of the best Remedies amongst Chemical
preparations, for it opens all obstructions and purges gently and without
prejudice, and giving offense to the digestive faculty of the stomach, both by
Stools, Urines and Sweats. It corrects the malignancy of all Purgatives, and
increases their strength in double proportion, it is one of the most sovereign
Medicaments that can be made use of against Chronical and obstinate Diseases.
The Dosis may be from j. to ss. and ij. in infusion of Rhubarb made with this
salt, a little of Cinnamon and white Wine, or in Broth.

The distillation of Niter, and how to prepare the spirit of Niter.
lb ij. of depurated Saltpeter, grind it by little and little with lb vj. of
common Bolus, and being thus well mixed make a paste of it with water
impregnated with as much pure Saltpeter as it is capable to dissolve in the
cold, knead and work well the paste, and roll it to make Pellets therewith fit
to be put in a great earthen well luted Retort, which place in a close
Reverberatory, and fit a capacious Recipient to the neck of the Retort, exactly
luted with a salted Lute. The Lute being dry, begin to give it your fire by
degrees, and thus proceed the space of 20 or 24 hours, with the same gradation
as we have taught in the distillation of the spirit of Salt. There is
nevertheless this difference between them, that Saltpeter alone yields red
spirits, by reason of its soul and internal spirits, which are children of the
Sun, for all other salts send forth only whitish vapors; this is that Spirit
which ancient Philosophers have called the Salamander's blood, as if one should
say, the blood and soul of Fire. This is the most ordinary way of preparing the
spirit of Niter, to use in all dissolutions and other Chemical operations. But
there is yet another manner of preparing it with more subtility for inward
uses, to apply it as a Remedy; which is thus performed.

Of the finest Saltpeter you can find, and very dry, reduce lb ij. thereof in
powder in a warm Mortar, in a very dry and fair day, pound also lb vj, of pots
made with ordinary Clay, only wrought and dried before they be baked; mingle
these two substances exactly together, and pour them in a capacious glass
Retort with a very broad or wide neck, and chiefly from that side which is
toward the belly of the Retort, let it be luted with a very good sticking
Lute, abiding in the fire and not easily falling off, neither cracking; fit to
the neck thereof a very large Recipient, and lute or close the Vessels together
only with a wet Bladder, begin the fire very slowly at first, and thus go on
increasing by degrees until all the phlegm be come over, and the Recipient
begins to grow red, then empty the Recipient, or substitute another like unto
it very dry and clean, which lute with the same Earth wherewith the Retort was
luted; then increase the fire and keep it still higher, so as you perceive that
the falling drops shall be of a red or yellow color, or that the Recipient
begins to lose something of its high red color, even during the great height
of the fire; for this is a true sign of the end of the Operation, and do not
expect till the color begins to grow cleater, for this would never happen by
reason of the red vapors which this spirit continually sends forth. But the
Artist must be preadmonished to take heed, when he comes to unlute the Vessels
and pour out this red spirit, for it is so vaporous, subtle and volatile that
it would endanger and suffocate him, or it may be cause him to lose all by
breaking his Vessels: wherefore let him stand above the Wind and stop his Nose,
not opening the mouth, and taking very great heed in the pouring out of it; and
to this end let him have both his Bottle and Funnel in great readiness, that
he may meet with no stop. The Viol wherein this Spirit is put, must be very
exactly closed with an earthen stople, very closely joining on all sides that
nothing may evaporate: this spirit is endowed with many admirable faculties,
both for Physic and Metallic: but considering it is so subtle and so
volatile that it cannot almost be preserved, much less transported or sent
upon occasion abroad; there is a way found to mix and circulate it as follows
for better prservation.

The circulated spirit of Niter for Physic.
vj. of the red spirit of Niter, xij. of Balm water, ij. of spirit of Lilly
Convally Flowers, put them together in a capacious Pelican, or two joined
Matrasses with a long neck, and place them in a vaporous Balneo in Oat straw,
and digest them in a temperate and gentle heat the space of seven continual
days: then put this circulated and united spirit to the other, and to the water
in a strong Viol very well stopped; as we have said of the spirit; it is an
admirable Remedy, both against Apoplexy and Epipilepsey, against Colic, and
generally against all obstructions; it is also very good against Agues and
Plague. The Dosis is from j. to j. and j. ss. in Wine, Broth, some Decoction or
distilled water appropriated to the Disease.

Now as the aqua fortis and Regal water take only their dissolving faculty
properly from Niter, though for the most part other salts be mingled with it,
such as are Allom, common Salt, sal gemme, Vitriol, and salt Armoniack;
therefore will we give a description of them here, as we did promise above.

How the good aqua Fortis is to be prepared.
THe name of aqua fortis has been given to the spirit extracted from Niter and
Vitriol, because it has the strength and faculty to dissolve all kinds of
Metals, Gold excepted, whom it cannot touch or work upon unless it be
Regali^ed; that is to say, made capable of dissolving Gold which is the King of
Metals, for which cause the name of Regal or Regal water has been given to
this other Dissolvent. Aqua Fortis is made thus:

Equal parts of Saltpeter of the second chrystallization, and Vitriol only
desiccated, to which add half their wright of Brickdust very dry, and put these
in a good earthen Retort well luted, fitting to it a Recipient, and make your
Operation and Distillation with the same care and precaution as we prescribe
above in distilling the spirit of salt. Drive the fire the space of 24 hours,
making it the last eight hours of a very quick flame, that the last spirits
may be very well drawn off from the Center of their own Earth, wherein they be
strictly entangled. Then there remains a salt of middle nature in the Caput
Mortuum (as it is called) which is of very great virtue, by reason of the
mixture and action and reaction of the Vitriol and Niter one upon the other,
whereof a very good Remedy may be prepared in the manner following.

The vitriolated Niter, otherwise the Arcanum of Niter and double Panacea.
PUT the Caput mortuum of your Aqua fortis to digest in boiling distilled
Rainwater, and stir it often, the better to extract the salt, filtrate the
dissolution, and slowly evaporate it in ashes in an earthen Pan or glass
Vessel, and when you shall perceive a small skin gathering on the top of the
Liquor, put it to chrystallize, then continue to evaporate until you have
extracted all the salt; which you must so often dissolve, filtrate, evaporate
and chrystallize, that it appears clear, pure and bright. Then ij. p. and ph.
of this salt, and p. ph. of mineral Crystal, prepared as we have taught, put
them together in a well luted Cucurbite, being first triturated into very
subtle powder, calcine them together in open fire in this Cucurbite, giving it
a gradual fire until they be together in fashion; the Vessel being cooled draw
out the matter, and grind it once more with an eighth part of mineral Crystal,
and begin again the Calcination and Fusion in a new luted Cucurbite. After this
second Calcination, dissolve that which did remain in the distilled Rainwater,
and filtrate the dissolution, then evaporate in the vapor of B. M. to a dry
bottom; this salt being so dried, grind upon a Porphyrie stone into Alkohol
with an eighth part of calx of Gold well opened, and mix them as it were
indivisibly together by trituration; then put this mixture in a new luted
Cucurbite, and calcine it in a very well graduate fire till it has attained to
a fluxion, which done, cease the fire and let the Vessel cool; and out of it
take that Grand Remedy, whereof abundance of experiments have been tried
against diseases of Melancholy, and all kind of Agues and feverish distempers,
both continual and intermittent, also against gravel and scurvy, and finally
against all obstructions. The Dosis must be from scruple ph. to scruple ij. in
some Confection, Conserve, or appropriated Liquor. The virtues of this Salt and
its manner of operating cannot sufficiently be praised; for it sweetly provokes
sleep, and settles the archeus of the Ventricle in its ordinary state and
calmnesse when it is out of order. Briefly, there is a certain hidden Mystery
in it, whereof it is very difficult to render any reason, unless we conceive
that this salt must have received the eradiations of the anodyne sulphur of
Vitriol, by the great expression of the fire, or sufficiently opened the Gold,
to make him yield and communicate his salutiferous influences; but we rather
give credit to the first then the last Conjecture.

How the Aqua fortis is to be regaliz'd or made Regal.
ARtists use to Regalize their Aqua fortis with decrepitated salt, or salt
Armoniack. Some dissolve either of it only without more ado in the aqua fortis,
viz. j. p. salt, and iv. p. of aqua fortis. Others mix ij. p. of Niter, and j.
p. of Armoniack salt, with iij. p. of the Caput mortuum of the aqua fortis and
distill it S. A. Others do make Gradatory waters, as they call them, with
Sublimate, Arsenick, Orpiment, Brimstone, Cinnabar, as ustum, spanish-green,
and many other Ingredients; but as all these are not for Physical uses, and
that moreover, the ill smell proceeding from those operations does kill and
hebetate the Brain, and causes evil accidents and shakings of the Limbs, we
shall afford no description thereof here since they make nothing to our
purpose, which is to preserve and restore health, not to impair or destroy it.
But as we have occasion of a good Regal water, pure and well prepared to reduce
Gold in a subtle and well opened Calx, the son of Art shall thus prepare it.

How the true Regal water is to be prepared.
v. of red spirit of Niter, and iv. of sal gem in powder, put the sal gem in a
pretty capacious Retort, and pour upon it the spirit of Niter, mixing them very
well together, place the Retort in sand, and fit to it a very capacious
Recipient, which lute without much circumspection, provided the neck of the
Retort be large, and strikes half a foot into the body of the Recipient; give
fire to it by degrees, and increase it by little and little till the sal gem be
altogether dried, and that neither drops nor vapors will come forth any more
from it. Pour this true Regal water into a good Lortain Glass bottle, double
and well backed, stopping it with a Glass stopple made very fit to the neck of
the bottle, by working and turning it within with powder of Emerod and Oil,
otherwise this water would fly and vapor away; which makes me counsel the
sons of art, not to prepare it till they be ready to use it in their
operations: this is the Dissolvent wherewith they shall be capable to prepare
Gold in the right manner, to reduce it into a Calx capable to answer their
expectation, in such preparations as they shall design with it, or to satisfy
their curiosity in discovering the sphere of activity of this noble Art, or to
extract such Remedies as may be useful for the relief of afflicted Patients.

Of Allom and its Chemical preparation.
WE understand nothing else by Allom but a saline substance dissoluble in
water, though many other things bear improperly this name, which rather
participate of the nature of Calk by their incombustibility then of Allom,
whereof we intend to treat as of a fit subject for this Section, where we only
handle Salts. That Allom whereof we intend to give the manner of preparation,
is that which in Pharmacy is called alumen rupeum or Roch Allom, and being
nothing else but the salt substance of a mineral earth, participating of the
nature of Lead or Saturn, having in it self an acid spirit and a harsh,
canstick salt* Our Allom is made three several ways: for some of it is first
found ready prepared by Nature, and condensated of it self in the veins of
aluminous Earths. Secondly, It is made by the evaporation of mineral aluminous
Waters: and thirdly, it is also drawn by the dissolution of Earths, Stones, or
other Minerals abounding with aluminous salt. The general virtues of this Salt
are to desiccate, astringe, thicken or incrassate, there is not much use of it
inwardly without preparation, though by some it is given against Agues; but it
is much used in Gargarism's, which are appointed for diseases and pains in the
Throat, and chiefly in the swelling and inflammation of the Almonds, and
falling, swelling or inflammation also of the uvula; it is also good against
Quinsy, rottenness and putrefaction of the Gums, proceeding either from a
Scorbutical venom or Tincture, as also of Venereous infection; it is also a
good Resolutive, taking away swelling and oedematous Tumors of the feet, being
mixed in a Bath which is called a lavepieds or feet-washer, because it resolves
and allayes the inflammation and heat of spirits attracted and irritated in
these lower parts, either by toil and weariness or indisposition of body.

The preparations commonly made upon Allom are, purification or
chrystallization, Calcination or Vstion, Distillation and Extraction, or
Subtiliation, of each of which Operations we will give some Examples, that the
Artist may fully be instructed both of the Work and virtue of the Remedies
resulting from the same.

Purification of Allom.
THe Purification of Allom, is not made upon the bare intention of separating
the impurities and earthlinesse of it, but the son of Art must have a more
excellent prospect and end in it, which is the correcting of its harsh, austere
and unpleasant taste; to attain to this, dissolve as much Roch Allom as you
please in distilled Rainwater, heated before in a glazed earthen pan, for
Allom must not be put in any metallic Vessel because it immediately works upon
it, and by its acid and penetrating spirit draws the taste and Tincture
thereof. The Allom being dissolved, filtrate it, and evaporate afterward the
superfluous*moisture in a slow heat, like unto that of the boiling vaporous
Balneo until it contracts a skin; then put the Vessel in a cool place to cause
the Chrystals to shute, and go on in evaporating and chrystallizing until no
more Chrystals will come; this Work reiterate four times, and so shall you have
a subtle and pleasant Allom if compared to common, which you may administer
both inwardly and outwardly with much more success, safety and delight.

The Calcination or Vstion of Allom.
IT would not be worth while to speak of this Operation by reason of its
easiness, unless we had some notes and reflections to make upon; for there is
none but is capable to put a piece of Allom upon an Iron plate, and to give
fire under it until the phlegm and spirit be evaporated away, and that this
piece which was smooth, heavy, clear and compacted is become light, opacous,
spongious and white. And now since the Artist has need of the phlegm and
spirit of Allom, and that the substance remaining after they are extracted by
distillation, has the same virtue with that which remains upon the Iron
plate, it will be much more convenient to distill first the same in order to
Calcination, whereby to preserve the phlegm and spirit, which otherwise are
wasted without any advantage. Burnt allom is very good to consume by degrees
and without pain, the moist and spongious flesh and excrescencies of the lips
of Wounds and Ulcers; it is good also to hinder corruption, because it
desiccates and resolves their superfluities. The fixed salt of Allom is also
drawn from it, as we shall say after we have spoken of the distillation thereof
in order to calcine it.

The Distillation of Allom.
As much Allom as you will, and put it in small pieces in a capacious glass
Retort, filled with it to a third part, place it in sand, and adaptate to the
neck of it a large Recipient, give it fire by degrees to draw the phlegm
thereof with a well and duly graduated fire, and when the white vapors shall
begin to come forth out of the neck of the Retort, change the Recipient, and
increase the fire by degrees until all the spirit be come forth, and you shall
find your calcinated Allom in the bottom of the Retort. But this Spirit being
unpleasant and of an ill taste, has need of being rectified, corrected and
sweetened, which is performed with the spirit of Wine, with which it must be
rectified three or four times, so it becomes sweet and pleasant, and an
excellent Remedy to mingle in the ordinary Drink of Febricirants, because its
little sharpness and quickness, does cool and temper their predominant heat,
and allayes their thirst. But if it be good inwardly applied, it is no less
successeful outwardly; for it cleanses and heales wonderful well all Ulcers in
the mouth, and particularly those small Ulcers called aphtha, or the sore mouth
of sucking children. The Dosis must be from iv. drops to x. in Wine or some
convenient Decoction. The phlegm of Allom is good to temper the inflammation of
the eyes, as also that of Phlegmons or Eresypela's; it is also very useful to
wash and foment Wounds, Ulcers and Burnings.

How Allom may be turned into a liquid Magistery.
As much purified and chrystallized Allom as you will, put it in a glass
Cucurbite and sprinkle it with distilled Rainwater, and put the Vessel in a
cold place, until all the Allom be resolved into Liquor; which filtrate and
distill in ashes to a dry bottom; sprinkle again the remaining Allom with
distilled Liquor, and let it dissolve again, and so distill to a dry bottom as
before, going on thus sprinkling, resolving and distilling, until the body of
the Allom be all converted into Liquor, and come through the nose of the
Limbeck, which is that we call the liquid Magistery of Allom, or to speak more
properly, his true astringent Spirit; for this Remedy is one of the noblest and
surest Stipticks and Astringents to be found amongst all Physical Preparations,
not inferior to Martial Remedies, Bolus or any other, whether for inward or
outward application, as experience will make evident. The Dosis inward is from
iv. to xij. drops, in immoderate Fluxes, Gonorrheas or heat of Urine, the
Venereous stain being first taken off by some excellent Purge appropriated to
the Person or the Disease. It may be mixed with hopes of a speedy and hasty
success in Epulotical Waters, for nothing advances better Cicatrization and
reunion of the several solutions of continuity.

How Sugar of Allom is to be prepared.
PUT lb ij. or iij. of Allom in a good glass Retort, which place in sand to
draw off softly the phlegm of it in a well graduated heat; as soon as this is
done, remove the fire, and the Retort being cold, cohobate the phlegm upon the
desiccated Allom, and digest them together in a simple heat of the vaporous
Balneo the space of 24 hours: this done, put the Retort again in sand, draw
off the phlegm from it, and thus seven times consecutively reiterate the
cohobation, digestion and extraction of phlegm, which being performed, put that
which after the seventh separation of the phlegm remains in the bottom of the
Cucurbite, in a Cellar or some other cool place to dissolve it into Liquor; the
dissolution ended, filtrate it cleanly, and put it to digest in a double or
circulatory Vessel in ashes in a slow heat, the space of twelve natural days;
after which, having placed it in a Cucurbite in ashes, you must distill off all
the moisture to a dry bottom, and there shall remain the sugar of Allom, which
is a particular Remedy against Diseases of the Breast, allaying also Toothach
applied upon the Gums. Above all, it is of singular use for those whose Breast
is infected with any metallic, mineral, arsenical, mercurial vapors, or the
like. The Dosis must be from v. to xv. grains in Broths, or some Pectoral or
Diuretical Decoctions. It serves also to allay thirst in Fevers, and is o^
singular comfort to them that feel heates and periodical pains about the
Region of the Sternum or the upper part of the Breast, by reason of malignant,
sharp and biting serosities, which the Venereous infection sends ordinarily in
these parts to such as have long had the stain upon themselves; it works by
Urine, spitting, sweats, and an insensible and natural transpiration.

The salification of Allom.
TO obtain the fixed part of Allom, lib. j. or ij. of the Caput mortuum of the
distillation of the spirit of Allom, and put it in a Cucurbite; then pour upon
it distilled Rainwater six fingers high, digest it in ashes in a moderate
heat, which must be increased by degrees, till the Liquor begins almost to
boil; stir it from time to time with a wooden Slice, then filtrate, and
evaporate the filtration in the vapor of a boiling Balneo, in a gray earthen
or white earthen Dish till the skin begins to cover it, then let it stand in a
cool place and there shute into Chrystals, or evaporate it to a dry bottom,
stirring continually till it quite dry. This Salt is much more active then
burnt Allom, because it is separated from its earth, and for this reason may be
a plied in much less quantity to the same uses. It may be also internally
given to those that have a stomach stuffed with slime or other foulness which
deads and duls the appetite: for it will cut them, attenuate and expel, either
by stool or vomiting. The Dosis must be from grain vj. to xij. or xv. in Broth
or decoction of wild Endive, or Spanish Scorzonera Roots.

Extraction of Allom.
lib. vj. of very pure and clean Allom without any previous preparation, bake
it in an earthen unglazed Pot in a very moderate heat, until all the phlegm be
vapoured away, then increase the fire by degrees, so as both the Pot and Allom
in it may grow red glowing hot on all sides; which done, have in readiness in
a great earthen Pan lib. iv. of distilled Vinegar, wherein you shall throw this
calcined Allom glowing red, and the Vinegar will draw immediately and take to
himself the Essence and Magistery of Allom, and the remainder of the body will
precipitate it self in the bottom of the Pan into a white powder, which after
separation must be washed to a sweetness, or edulcorated, then dried and so
kept for use. But the remaining Vinegar impregnated with the virtues of the
Allom must be filtrated, and having joined to it ss. of Tincture of Elder
berries made with its own fermented spirit, put all together in a Cucurbite in
B. M. and draw by distillation all the superfluous liquor to a consistency of
boiled Honey or Syrup; then place your Cucurbite in a very cool place, and there
letting it rest four or five days, you shall find by this time Chrystals
framed in this Liquor, which separate and dry, and proceed in the evaporation
and chrystallization until no more Chrystals will shute. These Chrystals are
Sudorificks, Diueticks and Stomachical, and therefore a good Remedy against the
Scurvy; they may be administered twice in the week, in decoction of Nettle
Roots, or juice of Chervil well depurated and mixed with a little white Wine; it
may also be given three times to those that are molested with Tertain Agues a
little before their fit in the same Liquors: the Dosis is from vj. gr. to j.

Of Armoniack Salt and its Chemical preparation.
THere is mention made in ancient Writers of a natural Armoniack Salt, which
was wont to be found in the Lybian sands, there formed and sublimated as they
say, by the mixture of the stale of Camels used in their Carava^es, and making
for the most part their Stations and Baitings in places appointed for that
purpose. But we have none of it for the present, and know none other but that
which is artificial and compounded of common salt and sal gem, salt of Soot and
of Urine; this salt has a harsh taste, mixed with an acid bitterness very
subtle and biting. Chemists do call it the solar Salt, the white Eagle, the
white Morcurial Rain, and the Philosophers Mercurial Salt. That which is purest
is to be preferred in choice, as also the clearest and whitest. That which
comes from Venice is the best, and the second in order of goodness is that of
Antwerp, the coursest and worst is that which comes from Holland. The general
virtues of it are, to provoke Sweat and Urine, and to work also by insensible
transpiration: it is of very great efficacy against all aguish distempers, and
chiefly against Quartans, it resists corruption and putrefaction. The Dosis is
from iv, grains to j. It is used also outwardly against Gangrenes, and to
consume the superfluous and corrupted flesh. It is also very good used in
Gargals against the Quinsy; and moreover, it is mixed in waters for sore eyes.

Moreover, the Artist must note, that Armoniack Salt is one of the most
powerful Agents amongst all Chemical Operations, for extracting the sulphuts of
Metals and Minerals by the help of sublimation: wherefore it is not without
very good reason, that the greatest part of the most famous Writers in our Art,
have disguised it with several aenigmatical and figurative appellations.

The preparations of salt Armoniack are, purification or chrystallization,
sublimation, calcination, distillation and liquation; we will treat in the
sequel of this Discourse of all these Operations in particular, and will give
examples both of the Remedies and the manner of working, that the Sons of Art
may be so well instructed by it, as not to be surprised with the several
changes that use to happen by the mixture of this salt with sundry different
matters upon which it operates with so much efficacy, that it ravishes with
wonder even the most knowing in those mysteries which it opens, and draws from
the bosom and center of natural beings: and chiefly because this Salt is
compounded of several parts which are united amongst themselves, and produce a
Salt quite different from all other salts, and which consequently operates in a
very different way, as it will evidently appear to those that shall put it in
practice.

The Purification and Chrystallization of Armoniack Salt.
THis Purification is not made otherwise then by dissolving it with distilled
Rainwater in a slow heat, after which filtrate and evaporate in the same heat;
then put it in a cool place to shute its Chrystals, and thus continue until you
have extracted all your Armoniack salt fair, pure and clear. This Salt has not
any greater efficacy then common Armoniack in Cakes, though it be something
purer: wherefore we will not attribute also more virtue, nor prescribe any
other Dosis.

The sublimation of Flowers of Salt Armoniack.
As much melted Salt as Armoniack, and mix them exactly together; then pour
this mixture into a Mattress or Cucurbite, and sublime it in ashes, reiterating
this sublimation four times, to purify, subtiliate and volatilize the better
the Armoniack; some will have a like proportion of Filings of Steel mixed with
the Armoniack that they may sublimate together; but they are deceived: for when
the armoniack salt is mixed with Mars, it presently works upon, and the salt
corrodes all the Steel, whereof there may be made afterward a very good
Vitriol: But as the intention of those that add Steel to this sublimation, is
only to make the Flowers of this Salt more incisive, aperitive, more
splenetical and hepatical; our advice is to the sons of Art, to mix a fourth
part of this opacous and greenish or bluish Vitrification, which is found in
Iron works or Furnaces, where the first fusion of the Mine is made, or as much
of those scales which fall from Smith's Anvils: But let him note, that neither
of these two substances must be made in very subtle powder; contrariwise, it
will suffice to have it coursly beaten, that the Armoniack may only lick it
over in the action of subliming, and so draw only the soul or a portion of the
internal sulphur of it, by which it is much increased in excellency and virtue:
The Artist must consider, that as these Flowers are more subtle and
penetrating then Armoniack salt merely purified and chrystallized: so must it
consequently be endowed with much more virtue, and particularly when this salt
is made use of against Quartan and other intermittent Agues. These Flowers are
also of singular use to correct the crudities of the Ventricle, and remove ill
fermentations, if every morning the Patient takes of it fasting in a Glass of
Wormwood Wine, or in infusion of Sassafras wood, made in white Wine: But the
use of it must be continued the space of fifteen days or three whole weeks.
And if this Remedy be given against Leucophlegmacy, or the beginning of any
kind of Dropsy, which ordinarily follows after long Diseases, and the various
agitations of dangerous Fevers; you must take care that the Patient be in his
bed when the Remedy shall be administered unto him, and that he be well covered
to help the provocation of sweat, and at his coming out of it, let him take
some nourishment of easy digestion, and above all be carerfully rubbed and
dried, by reason of the ill impressions which these sweats do communicate to
the linen wherein the Patient is wrapped, and might easily raise some malignity
upon a skin which is yet open and does exhale some noxious vapors, and capable
yet to do hurt. The Dosis of these Flowers, is from iij. grains to xv. and if
the strength of the Patient can bear it, even to xx. chiefly it he has been
used to it before, increasing the quantity by little and little.

The Calcination or Fixation of Salt Armoniack.
WE have ever had a care sufficiently to inform our Artist, that he must lose
nothing, of what the substances whereupon he works may afford, that is good and
useful in themselves. For which reason we cannot admit, that he should fix or
barely calcine the Armoniack salt in an earthen Pot, in a circular fire and a
wind-Furnace; because he loses by this way all the volatile urinous spirit
which is contained in this Mysterious Salt. Wherefore we prescribe the
operation of it to be made in that kind of open Retort, which Glauber does
describe in the second part of his Philosophical Furnaces: for by this means,
what flies otherwise unnecessarily away into the air, is preserved: you must
then proceed in it in the manner following.

j. p. of quicklime well chosen and that has not been exposed to the air,
and j. p. s. of Armoniack salt; reduce them each severally to powder, then mix
together, and incorporate to a Pap with new made Urine: but before you begin
this mixture, kindle the fire under your Retort, and make it so red, that the
Lead which is in the hollow channel, and is intended to be a Lute to the Cover,
be melted: things being thus disposed, put a small spoonful of this matter at
once in the Retort, and cover it immeditately with its Cover, and the vapors
will instantly run into the Recipient, which must be fitted to the neck of it,
and the same exactly luted. Go on in this manner until all the matter be
consumed, or until you have enough of volatile spirit, if your intention be to
extract it, or until you have sufficient quantity of Armoniack salt fixed or
calcined, if your intention leads no further. Then draw the spirit out of the
Recipient and rectify it; and of this we shall speak again hereafter in the
distillation of Armoniack salt; but draw the lump remaining in the Retort
whilst the fire is yet in its strength, for then i^ is soft, and may be taken
up easily with a small Iron Ladle, having a handle somewhat long. Dissolve and
digest the same matter in Rainwater; then filtrate the liquor, and so proceed
on till no more salt will come from it; then evaporate all the filtrated*
liquors to a dry bottom, stirring them continually toward the end until all
the moisture be gone; you may keep some part of this salt wholly dry in a Viol
exactly stopped, and put the other in a Cellar to dissolve in liquor, which will
be fit for extracting several Tinctures, as the salt may serve for
Cementations. We say nothing concerning the Dosis of this fixed Salt, because
it is never inwardly used in Diseases. The dissolved Liquor may nevertheless
be used externally to mollify and resolve Corns and Callous or hard
excrescences growing in the feet, and often very troublesome: it may also be
used with a little spirit of wine to rub and chafe the hard and knotty places
of the Gout, to resolve, soften and attenuate the hardness of that tartarous
and sticking matter contained in those Nodosities.

The Distillation of Armoniack Salt.
MAny Authors have Equivocated upon the Distillation of this admirable Salt;
for some would have the volatile Spirit to be the principal part of this
mysterious Compound. Others thought the acid Spirit only could yield what the
ancient Philosophers did search in it: We must confess both Parties to have
many reasons on which they seem to be grounded: but they have not yet well
decided the Question, because those that did endea^^^ (...) ^lear it most, have
not took well enough into their consideration the double nature of Armoniack
salt, which is compounded of common salt that is acid and as it were fixed, and
of the volatile salt of Urine: Now the union and mixture of these two Salts is
so strict, that it is very difficult, yea almost impossible to turn them over
the Helm into liquor one with the other: but contrariwise, the urinous and
volatile salt carries away the body of the acid, which produces no more then
the sublimation of the same salt. But they that have attempted to possess them
both together, could never attain to it with success but by the addition of
some other body, which had the faculty to keep back the acid salt, to let the
urinous spirit and volatile salt of Urine ascend, that are both but one and the
same thing, as it appears by the sublimation of the same spirit into a body of
volatile salt. It would nevertheless be an excellent Remedy, if Art could have
attained to raise this Armoniack salt to a Spirit, equally partaker of the
virtues of the Volatile and of the common salt without any foreign or strange
mixture: because that as the action of these two salts one upon the other has
produced a salt quite differing in taste, smell and virtue from the two taken
asunder, so should we have a subtle and penetrative spirit, which would be
capable of many Rare effects in Physic, and useful for the preparation of many
other noble Remedies, if once Armoniack salt could be made to ascend into a
Spirit endowed with the virtues which do constitute it. But as many have
attempted this Operation without success, so do I find my self forced to
acknowledge here my ignorance, and say, that we must be contented wi^h the
Flowers of salt armoniack, until some more skilful Artist has improved our
knowledge and experience, or our own industry and labor discovered more unto
us, to impart it afterward to the Common^ealth of Hermetical Physic. We will
nevertheless deliver two ways of drawing the spirit of Armoniack, and its
volatile urinous salt; the first shall only teach how to draw the spirit alone,
and the urinous salt only: but the second shall teach the separation of its
acid spirit, which possesses much more of virtue then the spirit of common
salt, by reason of the mixture and working of the volatile salt of Urine, which
has blunted and killed part of its corrosive faculty.

To make the Spirit and volatile urinous Salt of Armoniack.
lb j. of well chosen Armoniack salt, and as much of well purified Tartar very
dry; beat the Armoniack to powder in a warm Mortar, and then add to it the salt
of Tartar exactly mixed; this mixture put in a glass Retort with a wide neck,
and placing it in sand, fit to it a large Recipient, and give it a gradual
fire, and in a short time you shall have a volatile spirit coming over the Helm
in liquor: the salt will sublimate it self into a clear substance as white as
Camphire, and this Operation may be ended in three, four, or five hours at the
most. The volatile salt may be dissolved with its own spirit, and they both
kept together for such uses as we have said the spirit and volatile salt of
Urine to be good, it being one and the same thing; this more only we have to
add, because it is a thing of the highest concern, that as this volatile salt
and spirit do more then any thing else correct and hinder putrefaction and
corruption, and that the poison or venom of the Plague and all analogous
Diseases unto it, is corruptive and putrefying, killing by his evil
fermentation the natural spirits; so must Physicians have a care to use this
admirable Remedy, as much to preserve bodies from that fearful scourge and
malady, as to hinder the progress of it when it has already begun to rage and
spread its infection. We will likewise say that this volatile salt and spirit
are more subtle and penetrating, and of a kinder taste and smell then those
that have been extracted out of plain Urine, because they were not fermented
and depurated by common salt: wherefore we do particularly recommend them, to
preserve the stomach from that putrefaction and corruption which is generated
by the vice and defect of the digestive faculty; as also to destroy and quench
all evil acid fermentations in the Ventricle; it is likewise good in fits of
the Mother against Epilepsie, and Apoplexy, inveterate diseases of the Head,
and it will produce surprising and wonderful effects.

How the spirit of Armoniack Salt is to be extracted.
THough we have already showed how the son of Art may extract the spirit and
volatile salt of this Mixed, yet we cannot show how the acid spirit of this Mixed
is to be extracted, without separating from it at the same time the volatile
spirit thereof. And as we have already declared the manner of that Operation
above, when we spoke of the fixation of Armoniack, we will not insist upon a
needless repetition of what we have once already said: only we will add, that
you must put here equal parts of good quicklime, and armoniack salt, and
reduce them to a pap with Urine, then distill it in a glowing hot Iron Retort,
and proceed as we have said above in the quoted place. The Artist must put all
the liquor he shall find in his Recipient after distillation in a Cucurbite of
a Cubit high, and narrow in the neck, placing it in B. M. and covering it with
a Limbeck Head exactly luted, as also with the Recipient which must be added
unto it; then give it a graduate fire, that all the volatile spirit and
volatile urinous salt may separate it self and rise with the heat, and when no
more will ascend, put the remaining liquor in a Retort, and rectify it in
sand, and you shall have an acid spirit much pleasanter then the spirit of
common salt, and endowed with the same virtue; wherefore we refer our Reader to
what we have said above: the Sons of Art must only note, that this Spirit in
respect of that of common salt, may be compared to a perfect Man, and that
which proceeds from common salt can only be resembled to a Youth; from whence
he may dra^ those consequences which we only intend to insinuate unto him by
this Comparison. The spirit and volatile salt drawn by this Process, is
endowed with the same virtues as we have related above.

The Liquation of Salt Armoniack.
THis Operation is not very mysterious, being nothing else but the resolution
of armoniack salt fixed by quicklime into liquor in the cool of a Cellar, or
it is also the resolution of the same armoniack salt purified, chrystallized
and reduced to powder, put in whites of Eggs newly boiled to a hardness, and
set it in order in an earthen Pan in a Cellar to extract the Liquor, which
Artists do call water of armoniack sal^: these two Liquors made by Resolution
are not for Physical uses, unless they be used in Metallic Preparations, and
Minerals, which they either fix or open according to the purpose and intention
of the Workman.

Of Vitriol and its Chemical Preparation.
WE have demonstrated in the beginning of the Chapter Metals the first and
immediate principles of Vitriol; wherefore we refer thereunto our Artist, to
speak only here of Vitriol reduced into a body either by Art or by Nature; for
some Vitriol is found ready prepared and chrystalliz'd in the Earth of Mines
where Metals do abound; as some is to be seen which curious searchers of Nature
have brought from the Indies, Hungary, Germany, Italy, and several other parts
of Europe: But there is also an artificial Vitriol, which is extracted from
vitriolick Marcassites, commonly found in fat Grounds, always about the places
abounding and with pregnant metallic seeds, and inclined naturally to the
generation of Sulphur. They that shall be led by a Philosophical curiosity to
instruct themselves further in this matter, must seek in places where the fat
Clay for making of Tyles and Bricks is extracted, and there may find some of
these vitriolick Marcassites, which are nothing else but what the Greeks call
(...), and we a Fire locks, Flint, Thunderbolt, Fire-flint, and the Tile-Bakers
Machefer -- Having got of these stones, let them examine them by fire, which
shall discover to them nothing but a sulphurous substance, by the vapors
striking their Nostrils and seizing upon the Breast as burning Brimstone: but
having exposed the remainder in the air, it will dissolve it self into a gray
and blackish powder, which will sublimate upon its superficies, small, white
and sharp excrescences melting in the mouth, and yielding at first a
sweetness, which ends in a vitriolick harshnesse and austerity; then dissolve
this powder in Rainwater in a slow heat, filtrate and evaporate it to a
Pellicule or skin, and let it chrystallize and you shall have an excellent
greenish Vitriol. With this short and superfi^ial Antimony, the Artist may
satisfy himself, and know in part by the seve^ing of this stone the way by
which Nature did proceed in b^inging the parts the^eof together, and
coagulating of it.

The most learned Writers which have treated of Vitriol, and best known and
apprehended the nature thereof, do all unanimously confess and acknowledge it
to be a Mixed of so extensive a virtue as to be sufficient to supply with
Remedies the third part of all Physical Practice, and even capable to make up a
complete and well furnished Shop. Basilius, Valentinus, Bedro, Paracelsus,
Sala, and many others cannot be large and diffusive enough in its praise and
commendation; and those Hermetical Philosophers, which have bestowed upon it
that excellent name of Vitriolum, have done it as they say, because the putting
together of those Letters contains (allowing a word to each of them) the
mysteries which this mineral Salt conceals in its Center. Visitabis Interiora
terrae, Rectificando invenies optimum Lapidem, veram Medicinam. These words do
insinuate where Vitriol is to be sought, how prepared, and extol the Remedy
which is to be ^ound in it. But Vitriol being so well known, we think it
needless to b^stow more time in speaking of its various names and
appellations; it will suffice to declare the choice, and the general virtues of
it, before we come to the preparations which Chemistry has found upon this
noble and excellent Compound; which properly is nothing else but a mineral Salt
near kin to metallic nature, and chiefly to Copper and Iron, or and. Venus and
Mars. There is three several kinds of it, which contain many other species
under them. For first of all there is the blew Vitriol as blew as a Sapphire, in
hard, clear, solid and dry Chrystals, called commonly Cypruss Vitriol, or
Hungarian. There is a second kind, greenish, of grass color, less compact and
in less Chrystals, broken into corns almost as common salt, something unctuous
and sticking to the hand when it is touched, though it has but little of
moisture; such is that which is extracted in the Country of Liege, made about
Spa, where are acid, sulphurous and vitriolick springs; but great care must be
had not to be surprised and deceived by that which is of a bluish white, and
very small corns and wetting the hands of those that touch it, because this is
the very worst of all. The last and third kind of Vitriol is that which is
white, and is found in small cakes at the D^ugsters shops, compacted, hard and
dry, which we call in France white Copporis, commonly made use of for Vomits
and Eye-wa^ers. Our Artist must take for the subject of his work of the second
kind of Vitriol, if he will extract such Remedies from it, as his hopes do lead
him to: for the first kind which holds of Silver or Copper, has too much of
metallic earth, and very little of acid spirit. The second which is bluish,
is aluminous and terrestrial, and has scarce any good acidity in it, but only
a course and excrementitious earth, which has little or none of metallic
Tincture: wherefore let him still generally choose of the second for his
operations, unless he has some peculiar intention of his own, or that the
Author which he follows does tie him to it, and prescribe positively so.

After the choice of Vitriol we must come to the proprieties and general
Virtues thereof, which are to heat, desiccate, astringe or bind, and excite
violent vomiting, constipate, open, and kill worms. As for external
applications it provokes sneezing, if put in the nostrils, and applied to the
orifice of the Vessels open, or to wounds, does stop the blood. We have also
spoken more particularly of the virtues of Vitriol in the Chapter of Metals,
when we treated of Copper, whereunto for more satisfaction we send back our
Artist.

The general preparations which Chemistry teaches upon Vitriol are,
purification, calcination, distillation, sublimation, precipi^ation,
salification, extraction, whereof we will give examples that the Artist may
afterward be capable to seek by himself in this noble Mineral, those Virtues
and Wonders which God and Nature for the help and ease of mankind have
concentrated in it.

Of the Purification of Vitriol and manner of Preparing the Gelly.
WE have so often already made mention of the Purification of Salts, that it
will be no difficult matter to lead the Artist to understand that of Vitriol:
it is performed two several ways and upon two several intentions. The first is
but a plain dissolution of Vitriol in Rainwater, followed with filtration,
evaporation to a Pellicula or thin skin and chrystallization. The second must
be done in distilled May dew-water; but the dissolution and filtration being
made, the Artist must put his liquor to digest in B. M. during the space of a
Philosophical month, and he will find a skin separated by the liquor on the
top of it, and feces precipitated in the bottom, which must be yet separated by
filtration, and this digestion continued until the Vitriol does cast forth no
more impurity; after which evaporate it slowly and chrystallize. The first
chrystallization or purification takes only away the superficial and outward
foulness; but the second separates the very central impurity; The first
Vitriol may be made use of in all common and vulgar operations, but the second
is to be kept for extraordinary preparations, which are the Tinctures and
Arcana's.

The Son of Art shall meet also in several Authors with a kind of preparation
they call Gilla, which are only fit for Vomits, and are nothing else properly,
but purified Vitriol separated from their metallic earth: but as these
Remedies are for the most part violent, and particularly the Gilla prepared
with blew Vitriol, my advice is to abstain from them, and to make use of the
purification of white Vitriol, which is done by dissolving of it four times in
a little Centaury water, filtrated, evaporated, and reduced to Chrystals: for
this Water does not only increase its emetick faculty, but moreover does
specificate it to become an excellent Remedy against Fevers. The Dosis may be
from x. grains to iv. in Broths, lukewarm Beer, some Decoction or convenient
Water: it provokes vomiting very gently, and cleanses the stomach from all
impurities and foulness, checking the appetite, and causing disgust of meat,
headache and fluxions: it is good against diseases of the Ventricle, tertian
Agues and quotidian Fevers, worms in the Belly, Plague and growing Epilepsie.

The Calcination of Vitriol.
THe Calcination of Vitriol is performed several ways and for several
intentions. But amongst the Calcinations of Vitriol some are rather to be
called Exsiccations, as that which is made by the Reverberation of the
Sunbeams in the Canicular days, to prepare that famous and so much
celebrated Magnetical Remedy, which is called Sympathetical powder. There is
likewise an Exsiccation made in the Sun in a Pan, or upon the top of an Oven
heated every day, to deprive it of its superfluous moisture, and make it ready
afterward and serviceable for distilling of aqua fortis, and for several other
Chemical Preparations. But as the chief scope and intention of the Sons of Art
is to reduce Vitriol into Colchotar, and that this intention is fully
accomplished and attained unto in the distillation of Vitriol, I do not find
it necessary to lose by violent ignition in an open fire, that substance which
flies from it, since it has very good uses in Physick's; wherefore we will not
insist to deliver the manner of it which is too plain to be unknown; but we
will show how Vitriol may be calcinated by a noble Philosophical Calcination,
without loss of any of its essential proprieties, provided your prescriptions
in this particular may be exactly followed.

The Philosophical calcination of Vitriol.
Vitriol purified by digestion, in the manner we have declared above; dry it
between two Papers in a very slow heat, until it turns of it self into a dry
powder, which must be put in one or several Matrasses with a flat bottom, the
thickness of a shilling or a little more, or of the back of a Knife, observing
well this prescription, otherwise it might come short of your design; heat the
Vessels Hermetically, and put them in ashes as deep as the matter is high, and
about half a finger above; then give it a fire, which must not exceed the Suns
heat in Summer, and without any interruption continue the same during the space
of a Philosophical month which is 40 days, and thus the Vitriol will by
degrees from a white color pass into a yellowish, and from yellow to a red,
which comes to the height of blood reduced to powder; then remove the fire,
break the Vessels, and keep this Philosophical Vitriol as a rare and excellent
Remedy, both inward and outward, possessing in it self the true soul and
Tincture of this Mixed, which may be extracted with the true alkohol of
Tartarized Wine, if the Artist has the gift of patience, and takes not the
shadow for the substance and body.

The distillation of Vitriol.
WE will not teach here the bare Distillation of Vitriol, to draw thereof an
acid or corrosive Spirit, which commonly and improperly is called its Oil: but
our intention is to make an exact anatomy thereof, that the Son of Art may the
better apprehend what are the several parts thereof, and his judgment by
consequence be well and duly informed of the substances which are extracted
from it, and of their Medicinal faculties.

To prepare the Dew of Vitriol.
As much as you will of purified Vitriol, put it in a broad mouth Cucurbite
only eight inches high; place it in B. M. and having covered it with a
Limbeck-head, and fitted a Recipient, the joints well luted with a bladder
wetted with white of Eggs, give it fire by degrees until the water of the
Balneo does boil, and thus proceed in this distillation until this degree of
heat drives no more liquor, and no more drops will fall. What you find in the
Recipient put in a bottle, which stop with Wax and Bladder, by reason of a
little of the volatile spirit mixed in this Dew, and wherein does consist its
greatest virtue; it is given from j. to ij. and iij. in Broth or some other
convenient Liquor, to those that are troubled with Megrim and other pains in
the Head; it allayes the heats and ebullitions of the blood, and strengthens
the entrals.

To draw the acid Water of Vitriol.
AS the Artist must work with method and study, if he intends to make any
progress; so likewise must he be a good Husband of his time, fire and Vessels.
Wherefore let him have a Furnace in readiness with a sand Vessel or Capsula,
and the sand warm in it; when he perceives that the B. M. draws no more of the
substance of the Vitriol, because it is a token to him that the matter has
need of a stronger degree of heat to be driven to yield any thing more, let him
then draw the Cucurbite from the Balneo, and wipe it to take off the moisture
from it, and place it all warm and luted upon one inch and a half thick of warm
sand, and let him put of the same equally warm round about as high as the
matter goes; then the Recipient being fitted again, let him increase the fire
by degrees until the head of the Limbeck be filled with white vapors, and that
no more drops of the liquor shall fall from the nose of it; then let him remove
the fire from the matters and Furnace. Put also the liquor which is in the
Recipient in a bottle, and stop it as the other: for it is not an useless
Phlegm as many have conceited, which did despise it and throw it away, not well
versed with the anatomy of Vitriol and the knowledge of those Liquors which it
yields by distillation. This water stath but very little acidity in it self,
but participates already of the aperitive and anodyne virtue of Vitriol; which
make it to be very successfully used for the cleansing of the Reins, and
softening and allaying of all inward corrosions. It quenches the thirst of
feverish persons, and provokes Urine abundantly. This Liquor is also very good
for washing of the eyes, if you add a little salt of Saturn with it; it takes
away also inflammations, and allayes the grief of corroding and malignant
Ulcers, if they be washed with it warm; and having a little of salt of Tartar
mixed with it, it takes away itching in the skin and drives away scabs.

To make the acid Spirit and corrosive oil of Vitriol.
TAke the dry matter left in the Cucurbite, after distillation of the two
forementioned Liquors; beat it to a course powder, pour the powder in a glass
or earthen Retort, cover it with one finger thick of such a composition as may
withstand the most violent fire; place this Re^ort in a close Reverberatory,
and fit to it a capacious and large Recipient, which must also be well luted,
and the Lute being dry, give it a graduate fire as we have taught, when we
treated of the distillation of spirit of Salt; but the fire must be driven much
higher and longer with the flame of a very dry wood; for it must be continued
three days and three nights without any interruption, so as the Recipient may
still remain full of white clouds and vapors, and that at the end drop down
red and blackish drops, which grow clearer toward the end, by which you may
perceive the operation to draw to an end, and that the fire has drawn from the
matter, as much as the Artist may and ought to hope for, though some weary
themselves unnecessarily, continuing the fire without intermission twelve or
fifteen days: but they betray their skill in so doing, and show how ignorant
they are of the matter upon which they work, and much more of the sphere of
activity of the flame of fire which they made use of; you must then remove the
fire when you perceive the signs we have noted, and begin to moisten the Lute
in the neck of the Recipient with a little warm water, unless you will stay
till the next day which would be best: go slowly to work for fear of breaking
any thing, and by an overhasty precipitancy losing on a sudden what has cost
so much labor and charge: draw then the Recipient slowly away, and what you
find in it pour in a glass Retort, which having placed in sand, and fitted a
Recipient unto i^, give a gradual fire until the drops begin to fall down,
which taste from time to time, to change the Recipient as soon as you perceive
them to have an acidity, and after you have drawn two parts of the liquor which
was in the Recipient, remove the fire, and so shall you have three Liquors: the
first whereof shall almost be of an insipid taste, but with a sulphurous
smell, which is a token of the volatile spirit, and this mix with the sour
Liquor, or keep by it self for the same uses. The second has a pleasant and
penetrating acidity or sharpness, which is that they properly call the acid
spirit of Vitriol, used in Physic: for it is Diuretical, Diapho^etical,
Aperitive, Incisive, and resists to putrefaction and inflammations. Wherefore
it is of wonderful virtue against all burning Fevers, occasioned by putrid and
malignant matters, and also against obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and
Mesentery; it is good to restore appetite, when lost; it strengthens the
faculties of the stomach, and does correct the defects of it: It asswages
Toothach, if mixed with white Wine, and gargarized in the mouth; if you mix of
this spirit with water of the juice of great Celancine, and rub with this
mixture the scurf in the head, it destroys the root of it, and kills that ill,
harsh and corrosive humor which does infect the skin; it is given in Broths or
ordinary Drinks of sick persons. The Dosis must be to a pleasant acidity or
sharpness, for otherwise it would set the Teeth on edge, and prove troublesome
to those that would use it.

Filtrate the Liquor remaining in the Retort after the distillation of the acid
spirit through Glass beaten to powder, for otherwise it would corrode all
other substance, being altogether corrosive; put it in a double glass Viol,
and stop it with a glass stopple very close. This is called oil of Vitriol,
though improperly, since it is neither inflammable, nor unctuous: but the
manner of expression of Writers must be followed, from whom this Liquor had its
first denomination, being too harsh and violent for inward Remedies, and only
fit and subservient to other Chemical works.

We will not speak here of the preparation of the sweet earth of Vitriol,
called by some Terra Damnata, or damned earth, in regard it is destitute of its
own salt; this earth and salt are extracted of the matter remaining in the
Retort after the distillation of the oil and spirit of Vitriol, which Chemists
call by the name of Caput Mortuum, or dead Head. We shall defer to speak of
these two particulars till we come to treat of Salification: the Artist must
only expose this Caput mortuum to the free air, in a place not open to the
Rain, that it may attract the influences of the heavens and of the air.

We could bring here the description of several compounded spirits of Vitriol,
and specificated for some particular Disease: but we leave the choice thereof
to the skill and fancy of the Artist, or the directions which he shall find in
Writers which have largely treated thereof; we will only give for a taste two
Processes or Preparations of it, by which he may be guided in any further work
he shall intend or undertake thereupon. The first shall be a sweet and pleasant
spirit of Vitriol, the second a very considerable Aperitive and rate
Dissolvent, both proceeding from the same spring, but only brought by us to
show the variety and difference of Operation.

To prepare the Oil or sweet spirit of Vitriol.
lb iij. of calcined Vitriol between yellow and red, in an earthen Pot not
glazed in an open fire; beat it to powder, pour it into a Cucurbite, and
sprinkle it with good distilled Vinegar until it be reduced to a Pap; stir the
Vessel without intermission, and pour in it new distilled Vinegar three fingers
high; put the Cucurbite in a vaporous Balneo and cover it with a Blindhead,
then during the space of three natural days, give it a digestive fire; the
fourth day draw off the Vinegar by decantation, and pour fresh Vinegar in the
room of it, digesting again the space of three days, and extracting and taking
off the Liquor by decantation; thus proceed seven times without omitting
digestion; filtrate all the distilled Vinegar, which is impregnated with the
virtue of the Vitriol, and put it in a Cucurbite in ashes; draw off the
superfluous Menstruum by distillation with a slow and graduate fire to the
consistency of decocted Honey; this make into Pellets with pebble stones
calcinated to powder, these pellets put in a Retort and draw the spirit and
oil thereof, as they call it, with a graduate fire of the requisite heat; this
distillation will require twenty four or thirty hours of fire, or thereabout.
The Liquor which you find in the Recipient rectify in a glass Retort in sand,
and keep for use. This Spirit or Oil is of a pleasant and sweetish taste,
having in it the virtues of Vitriol mixed with those of the subtle Tartar in
the distilled Vinegar: wherefore it may be given with much success in all
Diseases proceeding from gross and tartarous matters, as Scurvy, Gravel, great
Pocks, Gout, Rheumatism's and Catarrhs, and generally in all Diseases abounding
with malignant, gross and sharp serosities, as in Leprosy, Scabs and Itch:
for this wonderful Spirit does rectify the whole mass of the blood by Urine,
Sweats, and insensible transpiration. The Dosis must be from j. to ss. in
Broths, Decoctions, white Wine, or appropriated Syrups. The Theorical and
Practical part of this Spirit might afford unto us a large field of
speculation; but having already spoken of it when we handled the first
Menstruum for extraction of the Tincture of Coral, where we made some
reflection upon the action and mutual reaction of Vitriol and Tartar, we refer
the Artist to that place.

The Tartarized Spirit of Vitriol.
lb ij. of Vitriol well purified and only dried, and lb j. of Tartar of
Montpellier washed in white Wine and well dried; beat them to powder each
asunder, mix them exactly, and put in a glass Retort well luted, distill the
spirit in a close Reverberatory fire with requisite precautions; especially
take a care that the Recipient may be very capacious, or put one with three
mouths, that there may be the more room to keep within bounds the furiousness
of this Spirit which is very violent; drive the fire from 48 to 60 hours, and
then cease. All what is come out rectify in a Retort in sand three times at
least, and keep this Spirit in a well stopped Viol. Then take the Caput mortuum
which remains in the Retort, and put it to digest in the dew of Vitriol in the
vaporous Balneo the space of 24 hours; separate the Menstruum by inclination,
and begin the digestion with new Menstruums, until it comes off with the same
taste as it was put in; filtrate all the extractions, and slowly evaporate them
in ashes to a skin, then let it chrystallize: but it will be more expedient for
husbanding of time, to dry all the saline matter into a white and pure salt in
the vapor of a boiling Balneo in an earthen Pan or white earthen Dish: for you
must forbear using metallic Vessels, because this salt does easily and quickly
contract the taste and color of Metals; and if the salt did not prove white
and pure enough, dissolve it again in new dew of Vitriol, and let it digest in
a very gentle heat of the vaporous Balneo, that if any impurity should remain
it should be precipitated to the bottom of the Vessel; the liquor must be
filtrated in the cold, then evaporated and dried slowly and cleanly. Put this
salt in a double Vessel or Blind body, and pour upon it the rectified spi it
thereof, stop and lute the Blindhead, and put it to digest and circulate in B.
M. in a slow and moderate heat the space of three weeks, which being expired,
open the Vessel, and pour into a Retort all the matter contained in it, having
first noted the weight thereof, and distill it in sand, until it yields nothing
more by increasing of the fire; weigh the liquor which is come forth, and
cohobate it upon the salt which did remain in the Retort, reiterate the
distillation, and you shall find the spirit to be increased in weight, which
is a token that the salt ascends into Spirit, cohobate and distill so long that
all the said salt may come over the Helm; which done, put this spirit in a
Cucurbite, draw off the same gently in ashes, then increase the fire something
more toward the end and the salt will remain in the bottom of the Vessel,
which having placed in sand, give it a subliming fire, then will the salt
ascend insipid, pure and clean, leaving in the bottom its impurity and more
corporeal parts; put this salt in a Pelican, and having poured its own spirit
upon it, lute the mouth of the circulatory Vessel with a glass stople, whites
of Eggs and quick lime; and digest and circulate this matter the space of seven
natural days, and thus shall you have the most excellent and penetrating
Spirit which Art can prepare, to which we cannot attribute enough of virtue and
efficacy for preserving and restoring of health; for it is an universal
Aperitive, which never will fail in time of need. They that shall be acquainted
with his excellency, both in respect of Physic and of Chemical operation,
shall never question the truth of what I say: but I must give advice to the
Artist to carry himself with circumspection in this Operation, and not to grow
weary of the length thereof, since he will receive in the end all the benefit
and satisfaction which his hopes could entertain. This work does not concern
such as think themselves very great Artists, when they have attained to the
preparation of Mineral Crystal, Cremor of Tartar, and Crocus Metallorum; but
contratiwise is worth the labor of those that are most consummated in the
study, and most versed in all the passages of a Chemical Laboratory; and it is
only for their sakes, that we have related here this excellent, but laborious
Preparation, because they only know that, Dii laboribus omnia vendunt.

The Precipitation of Vitriol.
THe common settlement of the dissolution of Vitriol, is nothing else but a
metallic earth and Oker, and is for the most part confounded with the true
Precipitations, which are performed only by instillation of some kind of salts
or spirits: but there is a great difference between the matters proceeding from
them; wherefore we will speak of it with the requisite order.

To make the Metallic Earth or Oker of Vitriol.
As much Vitriol as you will, dissolve it in a full quart of distilled
Rainwater; this dissolution put in a great Mattress, and place it in a moderate
heat the space of four days, and all the metallic earth or Oker of the
Vitriol will fall in the bottom of the Vessel; separate the water by
inclination, and wash this Earth, then dry it; it is used so for sublimation.

To make the sweet sulphur of Vitriol.
Of the purest of Vitriol you can get, and dissolve it in water of May-dew;
digest the solution the space of seven natural days in a vaporous Balneo,
filtrate it the eighth day, and draw off again half of the Menstruum by
distillation in the boiling Balneo; draw out the Vessel whilst it is yet warm,
and precipitate the sulphur contained in the Liquor with oil of Tartar per
d^liquium; let the liquor grow clear by little and little, then draw it off by
inclination, then by several effusions of distilled Rainwater edulcorate the
remaining sulphur, and being exactly dried, keep it for use. It is a very good
Remedy against affections of the breast; it may be administered from ij. to x.
grains in some Syrup, Lohoch, Lozenges, or Conserve appropriated to the
Disease. It is also successfully used to mundifie and cicatrize evil Ulcers. It
may also be sublimated.

To make the Purging Sulphur of Vitriol.
lb ij. of Vitriol of Liege well depurated, mix it exactly with vj. of Filings
of Steel very pure and clean, put this mixture in a great Mattress, and pour
upon it sharp or sour water of Vitriol four inches high, then put it to digest
in B. M. the space of four days, stirring the Vessel five or six times every
day: this done, filtrate the liquor, and draw off one half by distillation in
ashes, then precipitate the rest with oil of Tartar made per deliquium; to lb
iij. of the liquor pour on drop by drop v. of the oil of Tartar, and
proportionably if there be more or less: let the sulphur settle, then decant
the clear liquor, edulcorate and exsiccate as we have taught above. This
Sulphur is a mild and commodious Purgative, very good for those that have any
indisposition in the breast or lungs, or do incline toward Consumption or
hectic Fevers; it may be given from two grains to six, in Conserve of Roots
of Enula Campana, or Conserve of the Berry of Eglantine, called Cynosbatos. But
my advice is to those which would proceed yet more warily and with greater
curiosity in obtaining the best Remedies, to digest this sulphur in a slow
heat, in a Mattress sealed Hermetically, during the space of 40 days, and it
will increase half in virtue, and the Dosis be less by half.

To make the fixed and volatile Sulphur of Vitriol.
DIssolve lb vj. of Liege Vitriol very well purified, in a sufficient quantity
of distilled Rainwater; this done, put lb j. of Filings of Needles very clean
in a glazed Pan, pour upon it this dissolution, and stir them together, and
place the Pan in some position where the Sun may freely play upon, and there
leave it until the matter does grow thicker by degrees, which you must stir
often, and at last dry up wholly; then beat it to powder, and add lb j. ph.
more of new Filings of Steel, and sprinkle it with distilled Rainwater until
all be reduced to a pretty clear pap, which dry again in the Sun, stirring it
often, and thus proceed to the seventh time, until the matter takes up a very
high red Tincture; then being well deprived of all aqueous moisture, put it in
a great Marrass, and pour upon excellent distilled Vinegar four inches high,
put it to digest in sand, and stir it often; this digestion continue until the
Vinegar be well tinged with a red color, then remove it and pour other in the
place, and thus continue until the Vinegar draws no more Tincture. Filtrate
afterward all the Extractions, and divide them into two equal parts, one of
which must be put in ashes in a Cucurbite, and all the menstruum thereof drawn
off by distillation by a graduate heat to a dry bottom; them make the Lotion
and edulcoration of the matter with distilled Rainwater until the water comes
off tastelesse from it; after this dry it gently between two papers in a
moderate and equal heat; and thus shall you have the burning and volatile
sulphur of Vitriol, mixed with that of Mars, easy to take flame, and even to be
consumed wholly away if it be set on sire, yielding a purple flame as Cinnabar
does which has store of sulphur in it self; keep it for use for Asthmatick
persons instead of flower of Brimstone, being much more efficacious and full of
virtue; it is given from iv. gr. to ph. in Lozenges with Benjuin flowers, or in
Bolus, with Conserve of flowers of Coltsfoot.

The other half of the Liquor kept also as above, must be put filtrated in B.
M. in a Cucurbite. Then draw off one half or the two third parts of the
Menstruums, and precipitate the remainder with oil of Tartar made per
deliquium poured drop after drop, until no precipitation will longer ensue; let
the fixed sulphur settle in the bottom of the Cucurbite some space of time;
then separate the liquor from it, wash and edulcorate the remainder, and dry it
according to Art; put this sulphur in a Matrasse or Philosophical Egg, and
concoct and ripen it in an equal and fermentative heat the space of a
Philosophical month, and it will become of a fair red and high in color. It is
a true Preserver and Restorer of health, being given four times in the month
as a Preservative, and three times in the week for a Curative, from j. grain to
viij. in Confection of Hyacinth fasting, drinking upon it a small glass of
some good Wine, or Cordial and stomachal Drink; for this sulphur drives the
irradiation of its virtue through the whole body, and expels from it all
impurities, either sensibly by Sweat or Urine, or insensibly by gentle and
amicable transpiration. It may even be raised higher, but we keep that process
for the end, when we come to speak of the Extraction of Vitriol.

The Sublimation of Vitriol.
WE have just immediately before taught how the sulphur of Vitriol or its
Metallic earth was to be separated by precipitation, and the sublimation
teaches how the Flowers of it are to be severed from it, which are nothing else
but the substance of Copper or Iron, which is found in all the kinds of
Vitriol. Our purpose of giving this Preparation, is only to demonstrate to the
Artist the truth of the composition of things. Take then equal parts of
metallic earth or oker of Vitriol and Armoniack salt, and beat them to powder
each by themselves; then mix them exactly together, and sublime in sand in a
Cucurbite somewhat low, covered with a still-Head; give it first a slow fire,
and increase it by degrees, until you perceive that no vapor more ascends;
then remove the fire, and let the Vessels cool, and take from the Limbeck-head
and sides of the Cucurbite the sublimated matter, and having put it in a
Mattress, pour upon it common water; then place the Vessel in B. M. and digest
it in a moderate heat the space of 24 hours, and the water will dissolve the
salt, and the substance of the metallic Martial and Venerean Flowers falls to
the bottom in subtle powder, which must be separated from the liquor loted and
edulcorated, then dried. It is a very good astringent and desiccative Remedy
for all kinds of Ulcers, and chiefly for any pain in the eye. It breeds and
repaires flesh, mundifies and siccatrizes better then any other Remedy.

The Salification of Vitriol.
WE have deferred hitherto to speak of the Caput mortuum of Vitriol remaining
after distillation, saying only above, that it was to be exposed to the open
air and influence of Heaven in a covered place, exposed to the free passage of
the winds: but we will now teach here how to extract the salt thereof, after it
has been penetrated by the air during the space of six weeks or more. Take it
then after that time and put it in a Cucurbite, or which is yet better, in an
earthen Pan, and pour upon it distilled Rainwater, or new and fresh River
water, and stir the matter as you pour the water in; otherwise it would grow
hard in the bottom; digest all the matter in sand and stir it often, that the
salt may the better be extracted; then filtrate the liquor, and slowly
evaporate till it contracts a skin, and let it shute into Christals, and go on
thus evaporating and chrystallizing until you can get no more salt; this salt
dry gently between two papers, and keep for its uses. After this, take care to
edulcorate well the red brownish earth which remains after the salt is
extracted, and to dry and keep it for its use, which is both inward and
outward. Internally it is a very good Remedy against the bloody Flux and
Dysentery; it is also very good to dry running of the Reins, and stop the
fluxion of Gonorrhaeas, the Whites and Reds in Women, and Hemorrhagy, and above
all against spitting of blood; externally applied it is a very good Emplastical
and Balsamical Remedy, which mundifies and cicatrizes gently and without pain,
all Wounds and Ulcers: wherefore it is used in Ointments, Cerecloths, Liniments
and Plasters.

The true Vitriolick salt which we extracted from this Earth must be white
inclining upon the pale red of Roses, and chrystalliz'd as the salt of Saturn
in small streaks, long and thin; the taste must rather incline toward mite
then acerbity or harshnesse, for it must not keep the Idea or Character of of
Vitriol, nor take the cubical or Lozangical figure; otherwise it would not be
the true salt of Vitriol; this salt being so qualified as we have described, is
full of many excellent virtues, which makes it to be a fit remedy for Epilepsy,
and for such as are troubled with frequent and great headaches, proceeding from
the corruption and superfluity of matters stuffing the stomach. It is given
also against Pleuresy, malignant and pestilential Fevers, and swoonings, and
Deliquiums proceeding from some repletion of the ventricle, as also against
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Reins. It may also be drawn into the
nostrils to provoke sneezing, and unburthen the brain from such serous and
excrementitious matters, which do oppress and cause the distention of its
membranes: for it is an excellent and specifical Sternutatory. Tsie Dosis must
be from vj. gr. to ij. and j. in broth, beer, or some appropriated Decoction.

The extraction of Vitriol.
BY the extraction of Vitriol we do here understand nothing else then the
operation which is made to draw the Tincture of it, which can proceed of
nothing else but the sulphur thereof; wherefore we will teach-two several
extractions of this Sulphur: the first of the volatile sulphur, the second of
the fixed, that a; the processes are various, so the spirit of the Son of Arr
may be the better enlightened to penetrate further into the search and
operation which will be requisite and necessary to obtain to the possession of
the greatest Arcana's which are concealed in natural bodies.

The Tincture or essence of the Sulphur of Vitriol.
BEfore we come to the extraction of the Tincture, the body of the sulphur must
have been open and deprived of all its materiality and coursnesse, that it may
communicate its soul to the Menstruums which is used for this pu^^^se; Take lb
j. of the sweet sulphur of Vitriol very dry, and mix it with lb ss. of salt of
Tartar very white, very pure, and very dry; this mixture being put in a Retort,
place it in a close Reverberatory, upon the cover of an earthen pot turned
upside down; having the thickness of one inch of sand upon it, and fit to it a
well luted Recipient; then give it a gradual fire, and go on still increasing
the fire, until the red oil begins to come forth by drops; then keep the fire
in the same tenor and degree, and continue it until by that degree of heat
nothing will come forth more, which is a sign the last and extreme degree of
heat must be used, which is called the fire of suppression, being a violent
fire kindled both upwards and downwards, which must be continued the space of
four hours; that being over, remove the fire and let the Vessels cool. The
liquor or red oil must be poured into a small Cucurbite, pouring upon it drop
by drop very good distilled Vinegar, until the internal sulphur of the Vitriol
which was ascended into liquor, be precipitated to a red Violet purple powder,
which must afterward be separated from the liquor and washed to edulcorate,
and afterward dried very gently. This precious powder put in a blind Mattress,
and pour upon it true alkohol of tartarized Wine three fingers high; then stop
the Vessel well, and lute it with a bladder thrice doubled, made wet in whites
of Eggs beaten in water. This Vessel place in a vaporous Balneo in shred straw
the space of three weeks, or until the Artist does perceive that the essence of
this sulphur has forsaken its matter, and swims above the spirit of Wine in
the form of a Wine distilled from Cinnament, which separate with the Funnel,
after the Vessels are grown cold, and keep it choicely and carefully in a well
stopped Viol. All that have treated of this Essence of sulphur of Vitriol, do
attribute unto it admirable virtues, and equal it to the Tincture of Antimony;
it is given from j. drop to vj. in Balm-water, made with the Plant, digested
and fermen^ed with its own juice, to drive away insensibly and yet naturally
all what can be hurtful to the body, and may be the occasional cause of the
irritations of the Archeus; it provokes appetite and Venery, strengthens the
Matrix, and allayes all irregular motions of it, rectifies and increases the
seed, and makes it prolifick and fruitful in either sex; it does wonders in
Dropsies if administered in Parsley water; hinders all Meteotisms and violent,
rising vapors of the Spleen, given in water of Sassafras: briefly it may be
said to be Pa^acea of Vitriol; you must observe that the use of it is to be
continued according to the greatness and stubbornness of the Diseases; but to
preserve health it will suffice to take of it two or three times in a month.

The Tincture of fixed Sulphur of Vitriol.
WE said above, that we did refer our selves to speak in this place of the
extraction of fixed sulphur of Vitriol, the preparation whereof we have already
taught, and it is performed in this manner. iv. of this fixed sulphur of
Vitriol, concocted and matured in it self, and put in a Pel^ican. also vj. of
tartarized spirit of Vitriol, and as much pure alkohol of Wine, unite them
together by distillation in B. M. then pour them upon the sulphur into the
Pelican; lute exactly the joints thereof, and put it to digest and circulate
in a vaporous Balneo, until you see the liquor grown blood red; then remove the
fire, and decant what you find to be pure and clear into a small Cucurbite, to
draw off the half of a third part of the Menstruum, and keep the rest as a
Remedy yet more universal in operation and virtue, and more precious then the
foregoing. We will nevertheless attribute unto it no other faculty; for
whosoever can prepare it, shall never fail to know also the way to use it. The
Dosis may be from j. drop to iv. in Broth or Wine.

SECTION VI. Of Sulphurous Minerals, and Sulphurs.
TO put a period and Conclusion to this Treatise, it remains only we should
speak of inflammable and sulphurous Minerals; and as we have said, That a
Chemical Philosopher could not apprehend the generation of Metals or Minerals,
but by comparing them with other natural productions, more palpable and more
obvious to his senses; so may we lawfully speak the same thing concerning the
generation of sulphurous substances, which can only be conceived by comparing
the same with other fat and oily substances which Nature does digest, concoct,
and bring to perfection in the Family of Vegetables and Animals: for as the
Oils, Rozins and Gums of Vegetables; the Fat, Tallow, Grease and unctuous
excrements of Animals are produced in them, by the excess and superfluity of
the fat and sulphurous part of their food; so likewise sulphurous Minerals do
proceed from the introduction of the Character of the Sulphur and light in the
recesse and most abstruse parts of the Matrixes of Minerals, where this Fire
works perpetually toward the generation, increase, digestion, concoction and
perfection of several sulphurous Mixts according to their species and kind;
such as are Arsenick, Brimstone, Bitumery, yellow Amber, Ambergreise, Sperma
ceti, Asphaltum, Naphta, Petroly, Seacoal and Jet. We will give some examples
of the manner of working upon the chief sorts, to put an end to what we have
begun, with the same punctuality and clearness, which we have endeavored to
use hitherto.

Of Arsentck, and its Chemical Preparation.
ARsenick is a soot or minearal juice coagulated, which is fat and inflammable,
it is called also Orpiment; there are three kinds of it; the first is white,
which is that properly we most use, and is called Arsenick; the second is
yellow, called Realger or Orpiment, and the third red, called by the Greeks
Sandarick. The white and chrystalline Arsenick is not natural, but prepared by
Art, with equal parts of common salt and fragments of Orpiment mixed and
bruised together, and sublimated afterward between two po^s. The most
dangerous and pernicious of all is the red kind; the yellow much less, being
not so hot, nor so much exalted as the red; and the white is the least hurtful,
because part of his heat, corrosivenesse and venom, has been corrected by the
salt with which it was sublimated. All three are deadly poison and most
dangerous; for they possess so evil and so strange an acrimony, and so great
an enemy to the vital Balsom, that they immediately raise fearful and
stupendous accidents if inwardly taken, or outwardly applied; for they bring
immediately Convulsions, cause perclusions of hands and feet, cold sweats,
palpirations of the heart, Syncops and swoonings, vomiting, erosions, gripings,
noise and great rumbling in the belly, and intolerable thirst and prodigious
heat. All this malignity nevertheless may be taken away and corrected by
Chemical preparation, and the venom of it made a Remedy capable of much good
both outwardly and inwardly: but notwithstanding this unprepared Arsenick is
sometimes used; for in time of Plague it is a Preservative worn in a bag hung
to the neck in form or manner of an Amulet or Periapt. It is also used in
Depilatories, and sometimes with other ingredients for opening of Cauteries or
Issues. Now all the end of preparing Arsenick, must only tend to remove its
acrimony and dulcifie it, to separate the impression and idea of the venom from
it, which cannot be performed without the help of Chemical preparation, which
is threefold; Sublimation, Fixation, Resolution or Liquation.

The sublimation of Arsenick; To prepare the dulcified Arsenick.
TAke as much of chrystalline Arsenick very pure and clean as you think fit;
beat it to a powder, and sublimate by it self in a Mattress in sand with a
graduate fire. The Sublimation being ended, let the Vessel grow cold, then
break it, and throw away the most volatile and sublimated part, resembling to
the finest flying Meal in grinding; but that part which is more compacted beat
in a Marble Mortar, and put it in a Crucible covered with another luted unto
it, which place in a circular fire, and digest and bake gently the space of
three or four hours; this done, mix your Arsenick so prepared, with scales of
Brass such as do fall from the Anvil of Brasiers, and sublimate this matter
once more; for this Copper half calcinated draws to its self the gross venom
and malignity of the Arsenick, as digestion and baking did deprive it from its
volatility and blackness. This done, sublimate it three times consecutively
with common salt melted, and this salt will perfect the concoction and
sweetening of it, so as it may be afterward used inwardly and outwardly, after
it has been well washed with distilled Rainwater, until the water comes away
insipid from it. But before it is put to use, you must try whether or no it be
duly corrected, which will easily be known by throwing the same upon melted
Copper: for if it does blanch it, and that the white Tincture be fair and can
abide a second melting, it is an evident sign that it is deprived of its
malignity: but if it spoils and blackens the Metal, it argues the contrary. It
may also in part be discerned by smell; for crude and ill prepared Arsenick
has an unpleasant and ill-savoured taste, which immediately strikes the brain,
and disaffects the heart, whereas that which is corrected gives no offense at
all. Many do highly extol the virtues of this dulcified Arsenick: but my advice
to those that are skilful in Remedies, is, to use rather such as are taken from
Mercury and An^imony, then prepared from this Mineral, because it leaves the
mind still more at rest and satisfied: but it may usefully be applied outwardly
in the cure of the most dangerous and stubborn Ulcers, and chiefly when it is
converted into Liquor by resolving it in a cold Cellar. If any will
nevertheless make use of it in desperate diseases, and where the danger bids
to play quit or double, he may make use of this Sublimate of dulcified Arsenick
in infusion from iij. to viij. grains.

To make the diaphoretical Rubies of Arsenick.
SUblimate three times your Arsenick without addition, and this sublimation
must be performed in a Cucurbite, that the volatile sulphur may the better
separate it self in the upper part of the Alembick: for it rises in the form of
a very subtle powder, which at every sublimation must be thrown away, because
it is the most pernicious and venomous part of the Arsenick. That which you
find compacted and in Chrystals, take and grind with its equal weight of
Flowers of Brimstone, and sublimate in sand, and you shall have a chrystalline
Arsenick red as Ruby. These Rubie are given against diseases of the breast, and
chiefly when the Lungs are st^ft with crass, tartarous and muc^lagineous
matters. It is also good to provoke swear in malignant and venomous diseases.
The Dosis may be from iij. to viij. grains in pectoral Conserves, or in
extract of Juniper berries. This Remedy is also very excellent for the cure of
all obstinate, corrosive, fistulous, cancerous and dangerous Ulcers: for it
kills all the venom by which they are generated, if you have care to purge the
Patient at the same time with some Mercurial Remedy, and administer unto him
every day Antimonial Tincture in vulnerary Potions.

The same kind of Ruby may be prepared out of Orpiment: for as we have already
said above, Arsenick is nothing else but Orpiment sublimated with salt, and in
some manner already corrected. It may be exhibited in the same Dosis, and
against the same diseases.

The fixation of Arsenick.
TAke one part of pure chrystalline Arsenick, or what is yet better, Arsenick
already sublimated, and two pints of purified Saltpeter, reduce them each
severally to powder, and mix exactly; then put in a great Crucible, which cover
with another having a hole in the bottom, that the malignant and noxious
vaprous may easily come forth; lute both Crucibles together, and let the Lute
dry very well; put them in a circular fire, increasing it by degrees the space
of three hours, to exhale and evaporate the most dangerous part; then increase
again the fire, and let it so continue the space of eight or ten hours, and
let the Crucible be well encompassed with coals toward the end. The Vessels
being cooled, take off the matter, and wash it with Rainwater, and when the
water comes out tastelesse, dry the powder which you finder in the bottom,
which will be very fix and white. They that will yet be more confident of the
fixative, must reiterate three times their Operation with new Niter, washing
well the matter at every time. This Powder is only used in the preparation of
the fixed Sudorifick Arsenick, and the oil of it per deliquium in a Cellar.

To prepare the fixed sudorifick Arsenick.
As much as you will of the finest powder of Arsenick, imbibe it with oil of
Tartar per deliquium to the consistence of a liquid pap in sand or ashes,
stirring it with a slice of Glass or Spatula; this imbibition and exsiccation
reiterate three times. B^ay this mixture afterward in a Marble Mortar with
common aqua vitae, and the powder after dissolution of the salt of Tartar will
remain in the bottom; this powder must be edulcorated and dried, which may be
given in Bolus, from grain ph. to v. in Treacle or extract of Elder berries to
provoke sweat: but the mineral Bezoar is better and safer then this Remedy,
unless outwardly applied.

The liquation or resolution of Arsenick.
THis Liquation is nothing else but the resolution of the six powder of
Arsenick into liquor in the Cellar, or else the resolution of butter of
Arsenick by deliquium; this Butter is prepared in the same manner as that of
Antimony, wherefore we do not insert the manner here. Both these Liquors are
used against malignant Ulcers of what nature and condition soever they be, but
must not be applied alone; but mixed in Plantain juice water, or Arsmart or
Culrage, until these waters may be endured on the tip of the Tongue; then warm
them, and so you may wash venereous, cancerous, hollow, fistulous Ulcers; as
also the bitings of mad Dogs. They must also be applied upon the said Ulcers or
others with Feathers, or Fillets dipped in it.

Of Brimstone and its Chemical Preparation.
IT is not without reason that the Greeks gave to Brimstone the name of (...),
that is to say Divine; for we must confess that all Sulphurs have in
themselves something heavenly and great, being nothing but the productions of
salt, spirit and light: and as light does easily penetrate and reach
everywhere, so do likewise Sulphurs by their odor and color extend and
communicate themselves far and broad, and that with an almost unconceivable
efficacy. But this is not the place to speak of the internal sulphurs of
things, which do constitute to the best part of their essence and being: for we
will now treat only of that Rozin and earthly fat of the earth, which is mixed
with some portion of an acid and vitriolick substance, commonly called
Brimstone in Shops and Chemical Laboratories. There is two kinds of it, the one
Natural, the other Artificial: the natural is that which is called Sulphur
vivum, or which has not passed through fire, and the Artificial is that which
is extracted from those peble stones or fire-stones, whereof we have spoken in
the operations of Vitriol; they that will know how it is made, must consult the
most learned Georgius] Agricola, which has wrote about Metallicks, and
Minerals.

The Artist must for his Operation choose the purest Brimstone, as that which is
in small cakes of a gray color inclining to green, easy to inflame, burning
without intermission, and sending forth a more bluish then whitish flame; and
if this Brimstone is not to be met with, let him have recourse to yellow
Brimstone, which is in bigger cakes, and may be substituted in the place of the
other: he must nevertheless try whether it easily inflames and burns
constantly; for if it does not so, it is too much indigested, and by its easy
extinction does show its self to participate yet too much of Vitriolick nature.
The virtues and qualities of Brimstone are noble and efficacious before its
preparation: for it is generally devoted to the Breast, and the cure of all
diseases which do molest and afflict the same; it opens, outs, resists
putrefaction and venom, as also the biting of venomous creatures; it provokes
sweating, softens and allayes the irritations and irregular motions of the
Archeus: wherefore it is used against P^hisick, Cough, Asthma, Pestilence,
generally against all malignant, putrid and pestilential Fevers. If it be
outwardly applied, it resolves mightily all hardness of tumors, does cute
corroding Tetters or Ringwormes, Scab, Itch, and hinders itching in the skin.
But if crude Sulphur has so noble and so great virtues and proprieties, what
may not be expected from this Mineral, when according to the precepts and
directions of Chemistry, which only aims at the correction and melioration of
substances upon which Artists do work, it shall be either opened or fixed,
dissolved or coagulated, precipitated or sublimated! the sons of Art ought then
to spend their time and care in working upon this Mixed, as upon one of the
chief Instruments, put in their hands by the power of the Creator, to draw from
it variety of noble and good Remedies, with which he may charitably supply the
wants and necessity of many poor Patients.

The general preparations which are made upon Brimstone, are, sublimation,
precipitation, distillation* infusion and extraction. We will according to our
accustomed method give some examples of all these operations, that the Artist
may well apprehend the manner of working, and learn also the Virtues and Dosis
of Remedies proceeding from it.

The sublimation; To make the Flowers of Brimstone.
AS we have said heretofore that Tartar was purified by dissolution,
percolation or straining, and chrystallization, and Antimony by its reduction
into Regulus, so do we say here, that the Brimstone is only purified from its
feces and earthly superfluity, by sublimation into Flowers, which are
absolutely nothing else but a well purified Brimstone; to prepare well these
Flowers, you must choose of the best Brimstone and bray it grossly, then put a
Cucurbite of earth in sand, the bottom near the plate of Iron on which it
stands, having but the thickness of a finger of sand between; put lb ss. of
Brimstone at every time, and cover it with a Head which must not be luted; have
another also warm in readiness to substitute into the place of this which
lies on the Cucurbite, when it shall be filled with Flowers; after you have
given it a gentle and gradual fire of sublimation: there must also be a small
Mattress for a Recipient, to receive at first a little portion of sharp fine
spirit, which rises before the Flowers and condenseth into liquor in the
Limbeck. Thus proceed taking away the Flowers, and substituting a Head to the
former taken away, until you perceive the greatest part of the sulphur to have
ascended into Flowers; after which you may put again another lb ph. and thus go
on till you have enough for your purpose. But you must be nimble in exchanging
the Heads or Limbecks, lest that the air should set the Brimstone on fire, and
if that should happen, let it be extinguished with ashes or burnt Allom. You
must also regulate the fire conveniently until the sublimation begins to work,
and entertain it in the same state; otherwise too much heat would melt the
Flowers, before they were sufficiently carried up into the Limbecks Head.

Now there are some that do add Colchotar with the Brimstone and melted salt,
to be able more boldly to give it fire, thinking also by this way to draw more
pure and subtle Flowers. Others do mix also Bolus or terra sigillatae, which
we do much better approve of then the process of those who think it enough to
mix only Brick flower or small Brick dust, because the oriental Bolusses or
sigilled earths have in themseves a solar sulphur, which joining with the
flowers of Brimstone, renders them more efficacious. But we altogether
disapprove of those who with the Brimstone do mix Gums and Aloes, because the
sublimation cannot be performed until the Gums also burn, what care or
precaution soever is had in it: wherefore it is much better if the Gums beaten
to small powder, be mixed with the flowers of Brimstone already sublimated, or
what will be much better, the virtue of both be jointly extracted, as we shall
teach hereafter. The flowers of Brimstone may be 3 or 4 times sublimated, for a
greater depuration, concoction and maturation by the reiterated action of fire,
which thus perfects by degrees what Nature had not yet accomplished, by reason
of the heterogeneous and terrestrial mixture of matters.

The flowers of Brimstone resists putrefaction, provokes sweating, and dry
humors. They are given with very great success against pestilence and all
malignant Fevers, whether used as a curative or preservative Remedy. They are
also of singular use against Asthma's and short breath, diseases of the Lungs,
inveterate Coughs, Suffocations of the breast, Catarth's and Fluxions. There is
not above ss. given for preservative, but for cures of diseases it is
administered from j. to j. They are for the most part mixed in Lozenges or
Opiat's, and often also given in new laid Eggs: but if you desire to quicken
more their working, give them with Treacle, Conserve of Roots of Enula,
Campane, or Extract of Juniper berries. There are some yet that sublimate the
Flowers of Brimstone with red Coral, and extract the Tincture thereof with oil
of Aniseed, which they give to Consumptive persons as a true specific Remedy
for their cure: but all these contrivances depending from the knowledge and
experience of Physicians, we shall not instance upon any here to examplifie;
for it is enough for us to have taught the best and surest way of performing
the plain sublimation; for whosoever can make the simple Flowers, shall be in
much less danger of erring in the preparation of those that are compounded.

The Precipitation. To prepare the Milk, Cremor, Butter, or Magistery of
Brimstone.
WE have ever recommended the choice and purity of Materials, which makes us
again to enjoin hereunto the Sons of Art, not to spare the fair salt of Tartar
in the dissolution of Brimstone, although several Authors content themselves
with ashes of Wine lees or Glasiers ashes, which are the salt of the herb Kali,
to make this preparation: but besides, that they cannot well filtrate their
Tincture, by reason of the viscosity and clamminesse of the ashes, the Remedy
is not so good, so fair, nor endowed with the requisite virtue, because these
salts have not the penetrating and fiery vigor which is required for the
dissolution of Brimstone, and the concoction and maturation of that Mineral;
and this part must the Artist heed, because the good or evil of his Operation
depends from it; therefore you must proceed in it as follows.

Flowers of Brimstone twice sublimated, at least some part thereof, and three
parts of very pure and white salt of Tartar; put them in a gray earthen pot, or
a glass Cucurbite, and pour upon xij. or xv. p. of distilled Rainwater, cause
them to boil together in sand the space of five or six hours, or until all the
substance of the Brimstone be dissolved, and the liquor clean, and tinged with
a very high red; and as the ebullition causes the Menstruum to lessen in
quantity, add to it some other warm, stirring continually the matter, to hasten
the sooner your dissolution. Moreover, the mixture of the salt of Tartar and
flowers of Sulphur must have been made before in a Marble Mortar warm and dry.
The dissolution being duly made, warm a great earthen gray pan, putting in it
the clear part of the dissolution, without any previous filtration, which
cannot be soon enough performed, the Brimstone returning into a body as soon as
the Menstruum begins to cool; pour upon the Tincture very good distilled
Vinegar sprinkling it every where, until the whole turns into a liquor as white
as Milk, which when you see, fill up the remainder of the pan with clear and
pure Spring Water, to begin the edulcoration and settling of it; then cover it,
and leave the space of 24 hours in a secure place, and separate after that the
clear liquor by inclination, then pour new clear water upon the milky substance
settled in the bottom, and thus continue the lotion thereof until both the ill
smell, and lixivial taste of the salt of Tartar be gone away. But note, that
the first water must not be thrown away, but contrariwise evaporated, and so
you shall find again your salt of Tartar, which reverberate in a Crucible to
redness; then dissolve and filtrate, and it will be as good and as pure as
before, to serve in the same operation or any other whatsoever; You must wash
the Magistery of Sulphur for the last time in equal parts of Cinnamon,
Rose Water, and then dry it slowly and keep it for use.

But because this Magistery cannot be made in small quantity, and that the
Artists are not always provided with salt of Tartar and distilled Vinegar, we
will teach them a good and sure way, to prepare with small expense, and ar all
times a milk of Sulphur or Brimstone, which in virtue shall not be inferior to
the former; the Dosis and faculties whereof we will declare after we have
spoken of the preparation of the other.

The true and infallible manner of preparing the Milk of Sulphur.
Of good quick lime that has not been exposed to the open air ij. p. and j.
p. of good green Brimstone in small Cakes j. p. mix them exactly together in an
Iron Mortar by a long trituration, and afterward let them boil in a good
quantity of Rainwater in a great Iron Cauldron, stirring continually with an
Iron Slice, until three parts of the water be boiled away, and the remaining be
as red as blood by the dissolution of the brimstone, run it then warm through
the straining bag, and let the strained liquor cool, then with new made Urine
precipitate before it grows cold; this Magistery suffer to settle, and separate
the upper part of the liquor, and wash it twelve or fifteen times with warm
Spring Water, and when it has no more ill taste or odor left, wash it as the
foregoing Rose and Cinnamon water, and let it dry gently, to keep for use. The
Remedy is called the Balsom of the Lungs, which by the eradiation of its
virtue, consumes and dryes up all malignant, serous and watery superfluities.
Wherefore it is usefully exhibited to those that are tormented with melting and
suffocating Rheumes and Catarrh's, to Asthmaticks and Phthisical Persons, and
such as are troubled with old and inveterate Coughs, or subject to Colic and
Ventosities, which it does hinder and dissipate. It is given also to those
which are troubled with malignant humors and serosities in the joints; it
facilitates expectoration, and wonderfully strengthens the breast. The Dosis may
be as much as will turn Cinnamon or Balm water to a milk white; it is given
every day to the Patient morning and evening, one spoonful at once. Though this
Remedy be highly celebrated amongst Authors, yet our advice is to trust rather
to the Tinctures extracted from it, then to this body, yet too coarse and
material to hope from it all the good and commendable effects which are
attributed unto it; we do nevertheless leave it to every ones liberty to make
use thereof, until the truth of our Assertion be better known by study and
practice, which are the two Touchstones by which things are to be examined and
known.

The Distillation of Sulphur.
THe Sons of Art have sought long how to find a way of Distilling from sulphur
of Brimstone a good acid Spirit, which they improperly call the oil of
Sulphur, and to draw quantity from it, which has caused a hundred manners of
contrivances and processes upon this Subject. They also have endeavored to
turn Brimstone into an unctuous Oil, which might be fit both for inward and
outward Diseases, wherein every body has also brought in his mite of
experience and industry to attain that end: but as we have found that Brimstone
has been Vitriol before it could attain the Character of Sulphur; our wonder
has been the greater, that they should have labored so much to get out that
acid spirit, since they do confess and say themselves, that the spirit of
Vitriol is like in virtue and operation to that of Brimstone; and it will be
easier to draw lib. x. from one, them lib. s. from the other. We must confess
notwithstanding, that there shall be something found more quick and subtle in
the acid of brimstone, then in that of Vitriol, because the substance from
which it is extracted has been more exalted, more concocted and ripened then
Vitriol, which is much inferior in these respects, and consequently more
undigested. Wherefore we will declare here two ways, which have ever been very
successeful unto us to draw the acid of Sulphur or Brimstone. After which we
will also give the Method of turning the body of Brimstone into Oil properly
so called, which will be more unctuous and inflammable; and is a very
considerable Remedy, both in Physic and Surgery.

The first manner of preparing the spirit of Brimstone.
WE have caused a draught to be made of the figure of the Vessels for both
these operations, because the mind of the Artist is more sensibly touched with
this representation of them, and he may thereby much better apprehend how to
dispose of things; for objects move more powerfully the apprehensive faculty,
then words can do; wherefore we refer to that Scheme, they that shall be
inclined to put in practice the following operation.

Take a great gray earthen pan, in the midst whereof place an Iron Trefoot,
capacle of upholding an earthen dish glazed without and within; fill up this
dish with Brimstone beaten to coorse powder, and melt it in a slow heat, then
set it on fire with a brimstone-Match, or an Iron made red hot in the fire
After which hang up a glass Bell, such as those that are used to cover Melons;
let it be moistened with aqua vitae above the earthen dish so as the flame may
come into the Bell, but not reach to the top or touch it; take also care that
there be not more distance between the circumference of the pan and that of the
Bell, then the breadth of an inch, or one inch and a half, because this space
is diagram The Furnaces and Vessailes to make ye Oil of Sulphur
a The Table which up houlds the Furnace. b The Furnace of baked Earth. c Where
the Ashes fall. d The Harth. e The Cacurbite in the Fire. f The Little Port to
cast in the Sulphur. g The Registers. h The Head with two descendants ballow. i
The Receivers. k The up holders of ye Re^^ients with their Rolls. l The Dishes
with the Sulphur in Powder. m The vpperprops which sustayn the Head.


diagram The Bell to make the Eager or the Spirit of Sulphur
a The great earthen Vessail of Potters clay or other Stiff clay. b The Dish
that contayns ye burning Sulphur. c The Bell. d The Supporters which uphold ye
Dish.


sufficient to entertain the flame of the Brimstone, and hinder the extinction
thereof, which if it should happen, great care must be had to kindle it again,
that no interruption may happen in the work: and when all the Brimstone shall
be spent, have another dish in readiness to substitute in the place of the
other. So shall you have the true spirit of Sulphur per campanam very heavy,
acid and of a brown red color; if the time has not been too moist, and the
Brimstone not too much impregnated with vitriolick Salt. And if the distilled
Liquor proves to be only clear and yellow, let it be rectified, and the
superfluous phlegm thereof drawn away. The Artist may place as many earthen
pans and bells under a Chimney as it can hold, to advance the more his work,
for he may as easily use four or five as one; above all times choose that of the
two Aequinoxes, vernal and autumnal, to work this Spirit. That season being
moist for the most part and rainy, which is a thing necessary in this
operation, otherwise you shall draw very little spirit from lib. j. of
Brimstone, because if the air be too dry by intervention of either cold or
heat, it is not capable of coagulating the acid and vitriolick spirit of the
Brimstone, which contrariwise is totally dissipated with the fat and
inflammable substance of the Brimstone. We will speak of the virtue and
faculties of this Spirit after we have taught the second manner of preparing it.

The second manner of making the spirit of Sulphur and Brimstone.
HAve a small Furnace of baked earth, capable of receiving a strong earthen
Cucurbite which may endure well the fire, having a square hole made in the body
or belly of it, whereto a piece to close it up, must be exactly fitted; let the
Cucurbite also have four small eminencies distant the one from the other, to
keep up the border of the Limbeck-head, which is to be applied upon, that there
may be room and air to let go and evacuate part of the smoke ascending from the
Brimstone when it takes flame, otherwise you should have nothing but acid
Flowers and a whitish Liquor; this done, heat softly the Cucurbite at first,
then ^^crease the fire till it become red, and have at hand very good Brimstone
well chosen and dry, beaten to gross powder, and throw about ij. thereof at
once into the Cucurbite through the square hole, and immediately shut it close
again, thus continuing until the ascending vapors begin to condensate
themselves and thicken in the still-Head, and drop down into the Recipients,
which must be applied to both noses of the still. You must also make choice of
a moist and rainy weather to work this Spirit, if you will have it in quantity;
the time being seasonable, the Brimstone good, the Artist watchful in keeping
up his fire, and throwing in Brimstone as soon as the flame does cease; you may
hope j. s. from each lb of Brimstone. The proportion of the Furnace and
necessary Vessels for this work, may be better seen by the Artist in the
Figure, then we could be able to describe, wherefore we refer him thither. He
may also find out the virtues and proprieties of this acid spirit of Sulphur,
by comparing those we have a^tributed to the spirit of Vitriol; to which we add
nevertheless, that this spirit is a specific Remedy against the Plague, and
other diseases occasioned by putrefaction and corruption, as likewise against
Asthma; above all things it preserves health if it be taken in the quantity of
gutt. iij. every morning in white Wine or in Broth, because it redresses the
defects of the Ventricle, and sufficiently strengthens it to hinder
indigestions, which are the springs, causes, and originals of most diseases in
our bodies. This Spirit is also used with good success mixed with
Plantain-water, in the falling of the blind Gut, fomenting and bathing gently
the part with a Sponge dipped in the Liquor.

How the true Oil of Brimstone is to be distilled.
THose that are versed in matters of natural Philosophy, know that Minerals are
only crude and undigested, because their constitution is such, or because they
are prematurely taken off from their Matrix as a green and unripe fruit,
plucked off before his time from the Tree, and it is want of a due digestion
only, that they are incapable to produce all the noble effects which nature
has made them apt to bring forth: but the intention of that good and kind
mother, aiming still at the best, has by the mixture of some other matter been
frustrated and disappointed, or by being interrupted in her work which she
could not bring to perfection by the privation of inward and outward heat which
did foment and cherish it, to bring it to the highest degree of its natural
predestination: wherefore all the Philosophers that have known and followed
Nature closely, have ever endeavored to let Art begin again where Nature had
ended and had been interrupted, to digest and bring to maturation unripe
substances, and supply the defects thereof. They have made use of visible fire
and of its heat to stir up that invisible one which is hidden in the Center of
mixed bodies, and constitute the chief part of their soul, essence, efficacy and
virtue: And if this only way could not bring them to their desired scope, they
have sought in other Mixts some analogous substance, which could sympathize and
answer with a proportional heat to that which they intended to perfect and
multiply. This same way we do intend to hold in the maturation of common
Brimstone to correct it, and this way to stir up the faculties and wonderful
virtues it hides under the shade of its body, which is the rind and cover of
the light and internal fire by which it is produced.

To this end let the Artist take as much of well chosen common Brimstone as he
does think fitting; then beat it to powder, and digest in ashes with a moderate
heat in a Mattress, without any melting at all the space of forty days
uninterrupted; this digestion will correct the stench and ill smell of the
Brimstone, and will increase the virtues thereof in a quadruple proportion,
which immediately he will perceive by dissolving a small portion of this
digested Brimstone in some oil, and doing the like with other not digested and
ripened; for the one will yield an unpleasant smell as it uses to do, and the
other will rather recreate and please the smell then offend it. After this
first operation a second must be put in practice, which cannot be but by the
means of a subtle, ethereal and volarile oil which may open the body of this
Brimstone, and make it capable of being converted it self into a subtle,
penetrating and pleasant Oil. This Oil must be none else but of Turpentine,
drawn after the manner we have taught above. And as we have laid for an
infallible and sure Axiom, that the substance which must open and subtilitate,
must in many degrees exceed that body that is to be opened and subtilitated; so
must the Artist put viij. p. of this Oil upon j. p. of digested B^imstone made
into very subtle powder, and let them digest together in B. M. until this Oil
has almost dissolved all the substance of the Brimstone, and be turned as red
as an oriental Ruby; which done, distill the Turpentine Oil, and draw it off
again in the slow heat of ashes, untll that which remains in the Retort
becomes as thick as a Syrup; then cohobate that which is extracted and digest
it together the space of eight days, and reiterate the distillation as before,
and so continue seven times together digesting, cohobating and distilling; but
the seventh time draw off the Oil of Turpentine as before to the consistency
of a liquid Syrup; then increase the fire in some small degree, and change the
Recipient, and thus proceed in the distillation thereof, and you shall have a
true oil of Brimstone, red, well smelling, and penetrating, which is a very
Balsom both inwardly and outwardly, the efficacy and virtue whereof cannot
sufficiently be exalted. It is a most excellent Vulnerary, curing internal
Ulcers, resisting mainly corruption, and allaying all irritations and fits of
the Mother; it is a wonder of Remedy against the Plague, Colic, Catarrh's and
Fluxions, Asthma's or short breath and Empyema's, or corrupted Ulcers in the
stomach; it abundantly provokes sweating and Urine, and does work also by
insensible transpiration. The Dosis may be from one drop to vj. in some
appropriated Syrup, or the yolk of a new laid Egg in the morning fasting. For
outward application it is an unparalled Remedy, to dissolve and digest
Tartarous and scrophulous Tumors, as also to allay griefs, particulatly that of
the Sciatica: Finally it may be said, that this true Sulphur is none of the
least Masterpieces of our Art, provided the Artist be punctual and sedulous,
and has been careful to ripen and digest well the Sulphur, as we have
prescribed. He ought then to follow the exhortation of that great and renowned
Philosopher and Physician Van Helmont, when he says, speaking to Artists that
are desirous to learn some profitable and good Operation, Hortor itaque
Tirones, addiscant sulphura mineralium spoliare vi peregrina ^c virul^ntae sub
cujus custodia abditur ignis, Arccum in scop^; ^c nsideratos placidissime
deducens. But as this Operation is long and painful, and that every one shall
not have the time or capacity to attain to the perfection of it, we will give
yet another way of distilling a Balsamic oil of Brimstone, only good for
outward uses, yet withal endowed with many excellent virtues.

How the faetid oil of Sulphur or Brimstone is to be prepared.
lib. j. of Brimstone made into fine powder, mix it with lib. j. s. of oil of
Linseed in an earthen glazed pan; put this pan on a slow fire at first, and
stir continually the matter, increasing the fire by degrees, until all be well
boiled and united into a lump, which will have some likeness unto coagulated
Ox blood; let the matter cool to mix it afterward with lib. ij. of calcined
Vitriol; and put it in a capacious and well luted Retort, to make the
distillation thereof in a close Reverberatory, according to the several degrees
of fire; aft^r distillation separate the oil from the waterish Liquor; then
rectify the oil in sand with twice its weight of salt of Tartar, and this
will subtiliate it and correct much the stench and ill odor thereof. It is an
admirable secret in time of Plague to bring the boyles or sores to maturation,
and cure the Ulcers after the skars are fallen from the sore: it advances also
their maturation and falling, and hinders the venom from spreading too far.

The Infusion and Extraction. How the Balsoms and Tinctures of Sulphur are to
be made.
WE join together the operation of Infusion and Extraction, because the last
does necessarily follow the first. Both do supply us with Balsoms and
Tinctures, which are Remedies highly to be esteemed by reason of their efficacy
and virtue. For as Brimstone is of it self uncorruptible, and preserves dead
bodies from putefaction, with how much more reason shall he hinder the
corruption and decay of living bodies, and restore the defects of the radical
Balsom of our life, when once altered. Wherefore above all things we recommend
unto the Artist to delight himself in the works of Balsoms and Tinctures of
Brimstone, which will supply him with Medicaments less subject to fail in
their operations then others. For we must confess, that whatsoever the most
excellent Remedies have of virtue, faculty, efficacy and power, only proceeds
from that Ray of Light and internal Sulphur they have in themselves, whether
extracted from animal, vegetable or minerals; and it is for this only reason
also that we have so much recommended the conservation of the volatile
sulphurous salts or substances, because it is the last rind and covering of
Spirit and Light, from whence proceed all the virtues and actions of natural
bodies.

We will deliver three several manners of Balsoms of Brimstone, and as many
ways to extract the Tincture of it, that the Artist may the better be informed
of the method of working, and better apprehend the nature of things and their
intrinsecal virtue.

The plain Balsom of Sulphur or Brimstone.
PUt in a long neck Mattress Flowers of Brimstone twice sublimated with Vitriol
iv. and pour upon viij. of ethereal oil of Turpentine distilled in the manner
we have already taught; place this Mattress in sand, and give it at first a
moderate fire, which increase by degrees until the Flowers of Brimstone be
dissolved, and the oil of Turpentine be tinged with a very red color; then
let it cool, and filtrate the same through a Cotton, and put in a close Glass
Viol to keep for use. Some make use of the distilled oil of Aniseed, Fennel,
or Juniper berries to extract this Balsom whereof we leave the choice to the
freedom and liberty of the Artist, since the oil cannot choose but be very
good to increase the virtues of this Balsom, which are excellent: for it is
singular against Phthisick, and to correct defects of corrupted breath, and to
cure Ulcers in the Lungs; but above all it is commendable against Pestilence,
and all other contagious diseases, whether administered as a Preservative, or
given to Patients and already sick persons as a curative Remedy. The Dosis from
j. drop to xx. in Lagwort or Butter-bur-water, or distillation of Enula Campana
Roots.

The Compounded Balsom of Brimstone.
THis compounded Balsom is called antipestilential Balsom, or Balsom of Life,
by reason of the admirable virtues that are thereof. It is made with viij. of
distilled oil of Juniper berries, iv. of oil of Amber, ij. of oil of Rhew, j.
of oil of Camphire, all which put in a long neck Mattress, and add iij. of Milk
or Magistery of Brimstone; ij. of Mirth, j. of Aloes Succotrin, and s. of well
chosen Saffron; digest all the^e in ashes together in a slow heat the space of
seven natural days, or rather until all these substances be converted into a
very red Balsom, which must be filtrated through a Cotton, and kept as a choice
and precious treasure against the Plague, and all pestilent and dangerous
Diseases. The Dosis may be from j. drop to xij. in appropriated Syrups or some
Spirits.

The Vulnerary Balsom of Brimstone.
iv. of good and well chosen Brimstone; beat it to fine powder, and mix it with
as much salt of Tartar very dry; this mixture put in a glazed earthen dish, and
place it upon a slow and moderate fire, stirring it continually with a wooden
slice until all be reduced to a Mass, called the liver of Brimstone; having
proceeded thus far, remove the fire and let the matter cool; then beat it to
powder and put in a Mattress, adding to it j. of Aloes Succotr. s. or fine
Mirth, and ij. of Saffron, all beaten to fine powder; pour upon it one p. of
yellow oil of Turpentine, and two p. of its red oil, which some call the
Balsom thereof, and that until the oils swim above the matters four fingers
high; place the Mattress in ashes, and there keep it in digestion, increasing
the fire by degrees until the matter begin to simper; then look whether the
Extract of the substances be made, and they dissolved, which being so, filtrate
the Balsm through a Cotton, to keep fo^use, and in case it be not ready, keep
it on the fire till it be. We dare confidently warrant that this Remedy shall
never fail those that shall know how to use it skilfully, in the cure of
Wounds, Ulcers and Contusions; for it is one of the most excellent Balsoms
which Art can contrive for outward applications, whereof the Chemical
Apothecary which is curious of the reputation of his Art, and his own, must
make use, whenever he intends to make the Plaster called Diasulph* if he
expects the operation and virtues which are attrbuted unto the same.

The first Tincture of Sulphur or Brimstone.
THe Artist having made the plain Balsom of Brimstone, and this Balsom being
well impregnated with the internal redness of the Sulphur, he must put it in a
glass Cucurbite, and pour upon it twice as much distilled Rainwater, then
place the Vessel in B. M. and draw off the spirit thereof by distillation, and
the ethereal spirit or oil of the ethereal Turpentine will leave the sulphur
which it had extracted and ascend with the water, and the true Balsom of
Sulphur shall remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite; which may be given from
j. drop to viij. in all diseases wherein the plain Balsom does conduce, for this
is more efficacious. And to make the better the true Tincture thereof, pour
upon that which remains in the Cucurbite very well alkoholized spirit of Wine
four fingers high, then cover it with its Blindhead, and having luted them
together with bladder and white of Eggs, put it to digest and extract in the
vaporous Balneo, until the spirit of Wine be tinged with a very high color;
then draw it off and put new in the place, and thus proceed until the spirit
will take no more color; then filtrate all the Tinctures, and distill in B. M.
till the two third parts be distilled away. They that will add ij. of good
Saffron, in a knot at the last distillation, will increase very much the virtue
of this Tincture, and so shall the Artist be free to make yet some other
additions according to his skill and judgment, and as he shall intend it for
some peculiar use; But it is very necessary to have it plain, because some
other thing can still be added there according to the exigency and several
natures and conditions of diseases. This Tincture is more sovereign yet then
the Balsoms, because it is more open and more exalted by the help of the spirit
of Wine, which is the Menstruum more analogous and conformable to our natural
spirits: which causes it to drive and make those Remedies which it has
volatiliz'd to penetrate into the ultimate digestions. Wherefore it may be used
for internal diseases with a quite different success then that which Balsoms
can produce; it may be administered from ij. drops to x. in wine impregnated
with the virtue of Juniper berries, new laid Eggs, or some Pectoral or
Alexiterial Syrup.

The second Tincture of Sulphur:
BEat to powder lb j. of very pure and very dry Saltpeter, and iiij. of well
chosen Brimstone, and mix them together: after which place a good Crucible, or
an earthen pot not glazed, such as in vulgar French is called un Carnion, on an
earthen round Tile in a wind-Furnace, and put round about it quick Charcoal to
kindle by degrees, and so gently at first heat the Vessel until it be red on
all sides; then pour into it your matter before mixed by one spoonful at once,
and renew it still in the same quantity, after the noise of every throwing in
is past; this done, increase the fire and open all the Registers of the
wind-Furnace, and drive the fire till all the matter be reduced and brought to
a red mass or lump, which having taken off from the fire, and beaten to powder
in a warm Mortar, put in a Mattress, and pour upon gently tartatiz'd spirit of
Wine to the height of two fingers; then having stopped the Mattress with its
Blindhead and well luted, put it to digest and extract in embers until it be
tinged with a very high red; then remove the fire and filtrate the Tincture,
and draw off half of the Menstruum by distillation in B. M. with a very gentle
heat, and in the bottom of the Cucurbite will remain a true Tincture of
Sulphur; which is an excellent specific against the Plague, Agues, Scurvy,
obstructions of the Liver, and all diseases of the Lungs. The Dosis must be
from iij. to xij. drops in the above mentioned Liquors.

The third Tincture of Sulphur.
AS there are many delicate and tender persons, who cannot endure the smell of
Balsoms and tinctures of Brimstone, and yet these Remedies are absolutely
necessary for the cure of many great and dangerous diseases; therefore have
Chemical Artists endeavored to reduce into a body again the Tincture of
Sulphur and deprive it of its ill-favored smell, which does annoy the brain
and stomachs of delicate persons, which is performed in the following manner.

as much as you will of the first Tincture of Sulphur prepared as we have
prescribed above; draw off one half of the Liquor, and put the remainder in a
cold place or Cellar, that the coldness of the air may reduce to a body again
and coagulate this Tincture into Crystal, which contain in themselves the
quintessence and centrical virtues of the Brimstone: separate from these
Chrystals the Liquor which is in them, and dissolve them in new spirit of Wine;
then draw it off by distillation to a third part, which put again in the
Cellar, and let it shute into Chrystals, and so begin anew reiterating this
process seven times, or until these Chrystals have lost altogether all the ill
smell they had got in their first preparation. So shall you have a true
Magistery, or a true dry Tincture of Brimstone, which will be as useful in
every respect as the forementioned Remedies, provided it be used a little
longer. The Dosis may be from ij. to x. or xij. grains, in some convenient
Liquor, in Lozenges, Conserve, or some appropriated Electuary, suitable to the
delicacy of the Patient and quality of the Disease.

The salification, To prepare the salt of Brimstone.
THere remains for the most part in the bottom of the dishes which have been
used, to keep in the burning Brimstone in the distillation of the spirit
thereof, a kind of feces or blackish caput mortuum, light, spongious, and as it
were in leaves or beds, which must be calcined and reverberated in a Crucible,
until it turns to a whitish gray; make a lie afterward with distilled
Rainwater, or dew of Vitriol, which filtrate and slowly evaporate in ashes to
a thin skin or dry bottom; for as there is little of matter, so is there little
of salt: wherefore that of Vitriol may always lawfully be substituted in the
place of that of Brimstone, without any scruple or question to be made of it,
because they spring from the same original and have the same virtue, which is
to cleanse and strengthen the stomach, and root from it all seminaries of
worms and corruption, and expel them from thence. This is all we thought
necessary to say concerning Brimstone, to instruct fully the Artists whereby
they may take opportun^ty to enlarge further their experiments if they please.

Of Bitumen, or fat Earth.
WE have comprehended generally in this Section, Sulphurs so properly called
and Bituminous substances; and as we have hither to spoken of the first, we
must end by Bitumens or earthly pitch, which are the last. Britumens are
generalty understood and accepted for all kind of very fat and clammy Minerals:
wherefore Naturalists do constitute several species of it, as the Karabe or
yellow Amber, Ambergrise, sperma ceti, Britumen properly called Asphaltum
petroli, Seacoal and Jet. We will treat here of the other Britumens which are
more considerable, and whereon the operations of Chemistry are intended to draw
Remedies from them, and separate the purity from the impurity thereof: amongst
all others, Karabe and Ambergrise obtain the chief and principal place:
wherefore we will only speak of these two kinds of Britumens principally,
because the others admit of so little of preparation, as it would be
unnecessary to speak thereof, since the Artist may sufficiently be informed by
what we have already said, and shall say anon of the Karabe.

Of yellow Amber or Karabe.
THe opinions of Authors who have writ about yellow Amber are very various, but
principally those of the former age, because they wanted the light of
Chemistry, to give them a deeper impression of knowledge in the things of
Nature: but in this latter age where we are enlightened by that noble Torch,
and where it has been so successefully used to advance Anatomy of mixed bodies,
without any other prevention of mind then to discover truth for our own
advantage, and leave it to improve to others; Chemical examination has taught
us, that yellow Amber or Karabe, is nothing else but a bituminous juice or
Pitch and Rozin of the Earth well digested, flowing from the subterraneous
veins of it into the Sea, where it gathers, coagulates its self and hardens
finally more and more. There are three principal kinds thereof; The first which
is more esteemed and sought for, is white and opaco us, the most digested and
ripened of all, which is known by its purity, pleasant smell and great quantity
of volatile salt, which is the most infallible token of its goodness and
virtue. The second is yellow, which is lucid and transparent, abounding more in
oil then in salt, and by consequence more digested and less valuable. The
third is that, which between both is mixed of white and yellow, but with some
touch of earthlinesse and impurity, which makes it inferior in worth to the
two former. All three are endowed with no common virtues: but if any will make
use of yellow Amber for Physical purposes without any other preparation then
triturating it upon a Porphyrie stone the whitest must ever be taken and
preferred, having a Balsamic smell almost like flower of Rosemary, when it is
a little stirred by friction. It is the white also that must be chosen to make
the Tincture or essence thereof, as we shall teach hereafter. But the second
and third sort may be used for distillation, because the pure part thereof is
severed from the impure, and that rectification may correct the defects of the
first distillation, by which the vitiousnesse of the natural digestion of
Karabe is already corrected, and the action of fire has separated the
heterogeneous and gross substance lurking in it. Karabe in the Persian tongue
signifies attractive of straw, which is one of the proper qualities of Amber.

The general virtues of Amber are, to warm, desiccate, strengthen and bind
moderately; it is principally dedicated to the head, spleen and Matrix.
Wherefore it is very successefully made use of in Catarrhs and Fluxions,
Epilepsy, Apoplexy, Lethargy and Vertigo, as also to allay all irritations and
risings of the Spleen. It is also a wonderful Specific against all fits of the
Mother, and chiefly against the rising of it and suffocations which it causes.
It is also a true coagulated Balsom, used against bloody flux and Gonorrhae^,
and above all against the Whites; briefly it may lawfully be said of Amber,
that it is the life and soul of Remedies dedicated to the cleansing of the
Mother, and redress all the defects thereof. Some believe* that they that wear
Amber Collars are not subject to eye sores, or diseases in the throat, whereof
they say, it hinders the swelling: The Dosis of prepared Amber is from ph. to
j. in new laid Eggs, some Syrup, Lozenges, or Conserve.

The Chemical preparations of Amber are Dissolution or Extraction, to make the
Tincture, Essence or Magistery thereof: and Distillation, by the help of which
its Mercurial Spirit is extracted, as also the subtle Oil, Balsamic Oil,
volatile Salt, and Colophony or Rosin.

How the Tincture or essence of Amber is to be prepared.
PUt iij. or iv. of white Amber prepared on a Porphyrie sto^^ in a Blindhead,
and pour upon it very much alkoholized spirit of Wine four fingers high, and
having shut up close the Vessel and well luted it, put it in ashes to digest,
dissolve and extract in a moderate heat, until the liquor be tinged with a fair
golden yellow; then open the Vessel, draw off the liquor by inclination, and
reiterate again a new dissolution and extraction until the spirit of Wine takes
no more of the Tincture. Filtrate all the Tinctures afterward, and draw off
the three parts of the Menstruum by distillation in the slow heat of B. M. and
the essence of Amber will remain impregnated with the taste and smell of its
own mixed, which is capable to produce very noble effects, by reason of the
subtility of the parts thereof. Some do pretend to make the Magistery thereof,
precipitating this Tincture in common water, but they are in a great error:
for it is properly to unmake or undo what has been made with great labor,
since the water drawing to it self the spirit of Wine, the body of the Amber
forsakes it and precipitates into a Gum or Rosin, which is not much better then
white prepared Amber, except only that it is somewhat purer. The Artist then
shall preserve this Essence in liquor, and shall use it in all diseases for
which we have assigned the general virtues of Karabe. But this Remedy must be
exhibited in some Syrup, as that of Cinnamon, Coral, Flowers of Paeony or
yolks of Eggs; it may also be given in ethereal or burning Spirits, as of
Juniper, Elder berries, Black Cherries, or spirit of flowers of Lilly
Convallium drawn with Sack, because if it was given in any waterish liquor, the
Amber would return to a body, and so would not produce so good nor so quick
effects as when it remains in liquor, and all its parts disunited and
volatiliz'd, that the Archeus of the Ventricle may bring all the powers thereof
to action in the highest perfection. The Dosis may be from x. to xx. drops,
even to xxx.

How the Magistery of Amber or Karabe is to be prepared.
AS we with very good reason did condemn the false and pretended Magistery of
Amber, so must we recommend that which is truly made, and is capable of
producing some good effects in relation to health; you may proceed therein as
follows.

White Amber reduced to an impalpable powder, as much as you will; put it in a
Mattress or Cucurbite, and pour upon it very good and very subtle distilled
Vinegar four fingers high, then place the Vessel in sand, and let the matter
boil three or four days, pouring still new distilled Vinegar very warm, as the
first vapors away, and this continue till the liquor is become red; then
filtrate it and draw off the Menstruum in ashes to a dry bottom, and the
Magistery shall remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite, which dissolve in equal
parts of Rosewater, Balm water and Cinnamon water, and digest them together the
space of 24 hours, then draw off the water again in ashes slowly, which also
must be observed the first time when you draw off the Vinegar; for overhast and
too much of fire spoils all the work, and mars the virtue of the substances.
This digestion and distillation must be reiterated three times, but at the
third time you must remove the fire after you have drawn off the three parts of
four, adding to the remainder j. of well filtrated juice of Lemon, or j. of
very acid and well rectified spirit of Vitriol; this done, go on gently in your
distillation until the matter be well dried, which reduce to powder and keep
for use: for it is a very good Medicine to provoke swear, and strengthen the
heart and its functions; it may be given with hope of very good success in
Measels, Smallpox and Pleurisy: but above all it is a Specific against the
Scurvy and its dependances. The Dosis may be from vj. to xv. and xx. grains,
in Conserve of Gelly flowers, Confection of Hyacinth, or Diascordium
Fracastoris, giving to the Patient to drink upon it Carduus Benedictus or
Meadow sweet (Vlmaria) water.

How the distillation of Amber is to be made.
OUr advice to the Son of Art is to take for this operation of the third kind
of Karabe or Amber whereof we made men^ion above, because it contains much
oil, and abounds also in volatile salt. Let him then take lb iij. or iv. and
having put them in a great Retort, so capacious as the matter may fill up but
the third part, let him place it in a close Reverberatory upon the cover of a
pot with two fingers thick of ashes under the bottom of the Retort, which will
be to it instead of a Lute, and having also fitted to the neck of the Retort a
large Recipient exactly luted, let him give a gentle and graduated fire until
the drops of the acid spirit be over, and the oil begins to appear; then he
must increase a little the fire, and regulate it so that the drops may follow
one another. But he must begin to increase and drive it hard when he perceives
the oil to grow thicker, and the volatile salt to sublimate it self, which may
be known by the vapors and clouds coming forth out of the Retort, and let the
fire be kept in this state until the Recipient grows clear of its self, which
is an infallible token of the end of the operation. That which is found in the
Recipient after distillation contains three distinct substances proceeding
from one and the same root. The first is the spirit or Mercurial acid and
watery liquor of the Amber, which comes forth in the first place. Secondly, the
oil which is mixed with much volatile salt which has made it somewhat thick,
unpleasant to the smell, and high in color. The third is the volatile
sulphurous salt, which is not the least considerable of the three in virtue
and efficacy. The Artist must know how to separate skilfully these substances
the one from the other, to use them each severally according to the several
proprieties which are in them; and this is performed in the manner following.

How the spirit of Amber is to be separated.
PUt in a Mattress with a long neck all what you shall find in the Recipient
after the distillation of Amber, and stop it with another Mattress, then put it
to digest in the vaporous Balneo in Sawdust, in a degree of heat analogous to
the natural heat of man, the space of three or four days, that the Mercurial
and acid Liquor may sever it self from the oleaginous part; that done, pour the
oil swimming above by inclination; and when there shall remain but little in
the Vessel, wet a Filter of paper with Balm or Rosewater, and pour into it by
degrees and very gently, the Liquor remaining in the bottom of the Mattress, and
the oleaginous substance will remain upon the Filter, because it is wet with
water, and the Spirit shall pass clear through, which must be rectified gently
in ashes to a dry bottom, that if any volatile salt remains dissolved in the
Spirit, which almost is of the same nature, it may remain in the bottom without
sublimating and burning; keep this Spirit in a well s^opt Viol for the time of
use. It is a sovereign Diuretic, Di^opilative and Cephalic Remedy, which may
be used upon all occasions where the Amber may be useful: but particularly
against obstructions, and schirrus of the spleen or splenetical tumors, when
acuated with its volatile salt. The Dosis may be from iiij. drops to xij. in
Tincture of Sassafras, white Wine, or Broth.

How the volatile salt of Amber is to be separated and rectified.
AFter the separation of the acid and Mercurial Spirit of oil of Amber is
made, put about lb ss. thereof by it self, which may be used when necessity
shall require for outward and inward Remedies, though it be not very pleasant:
but as it is animated with its volatile salt, so may it much better and more
successefully be used against suffocations and fits of the Mother, and
Epileptical Paroxysms; as also to apply upon shrunk members, starved and
paralytical limbs, where without comparison it is much more excellent and
active, then that which is deprived of this friendly Salt. Take then all the
remaining oil, and put it in agreat Mattress or Blindhead, and pour upon it
distilled Rainwater, until it be in the same or a little greater quantity then
the oil; cover and lute the Vessel and put it to digest in ashes in a moderate
heat, stirring it every hour, to separate the better the volatile salt from its
oil; for though it be intimately mixed with it, because the oil is of a
volatile and sulphurous nature, yet in process of time will it come off from
it, and be dissolved and united to the water by reason of its saline nature,
which easily joins and unites its self to water. When you see the water well
impregnated, remove the fire, separate the oil, and filtrate the water which
is full of the volatile salt of the Amber, as it will be perceived easily by
the acid and biting taste thereof; draw off again three parts of the water by
slow distillation in ashes, and put the Vessel in a cold place, leaving it
there the space of two days, and you shall find the volatile salt
chrystallized and coagulated into a red brown substance, which separate from
the water, and dry between two papers in a slow and moderate heat: continue the
evaporation of the superfluous water, and draw back all the salt, and having
dried it join it to the first, which is ever the purest and the best. You may
keep part of it as it is if you think fit; if not, put it all in a small
Cucurbite, covered with a blind still-Head, and sublimate it in sand with a
well graduated heat, and so shall this salt rise fair, pure, white and clean,
leaving all its impurities in the bottom of the Vessel. This volatile Salt is
the best and most excellent part of Amber, worthy that Artists should seek it
with all imaginable curiosity, considering its high virtues, which are yet more
general and less confined then those of Amber, or its spirit or oil, since it
is the soul and intrinsecal essence thereof. It is an admirable Remedy in the
first beginnings of Dropsies, and particularly in Leucophlegmacy where it is
wonderful, because it potently discharges the Spleen and all other parts of the
lower belly, by Urines and transpiration; above all this, it has all the
virtues we have attributed to Amber in a quadruple proportion. I must then once
more recommend the use of it to the sons of Art, with promise and engagement
they will not find themselves deluded by it. The Dosis, from iij. to xx.
grains in Wine, Broths, or other appropriated Liquors, both suitable to the
Disease and the Patient.

How to make rightly the Rectification of oil of Amber.
AFter the separation and rectification of these two first substances, we must
also come to the third, which is the Oil. For as it is of a brown red color,
stinking, thick and gross, we must teach the Artist three several ways how to
purify it, and render it fluid, subtle and penetrating, that it may the
better bring forth the wonderful proprieties and virtues which lie hidden in it.

For the first way, Mix the oil remaining after the separation of the volatile
Salt, with ij. parts of ashes taken from the hearth, and j. p. of decrepid
salt, putting as much as needs to reduce all into a lump or paste which may be
framed into Pellets, or of a fit bigness to go through the neck of a glass
Retort, which must be filled only half with them, and placed in a close
Reverberatory with a well luted Recipient; give it first a gentle fire until
the oil begins to come forth bright and clear, and keep it in this state, or
increase it by little and little gradually, until you observe the falling drops
to begin to grow yellow, or inclining to redness; then change your Recipient,
and substitute another well luted to it, then increase the fire somewhat more,
to force the oil to separate it self from the least atoms of bodies with
which it is mixed, and thus proceed increasing still more and more, until you
find no more substance to come forth. The second way of rectifying this Oil,
is, in putting it with Rose, Marjoram, and Balm-water, ana three or four pints,
in a still-body, and stilling it with the Moors Head, the Fat and the Worm,
making the same observations which we have enjoined the Artist heretofore for
the distillation of vegetable Oils, and you shall have an oil of Amber fluid
and clear, fit for all those uses and purposes which Authors do commend it for
in their Writings. The third and last manner of Rectification is this: Pour it
into a Retort, and put upon it drop by drop its equal weight of spirit of salt,
placing the Retort in sand, and distill it with a well regulated and graduate
fire, and your oil will come forth as pure and as clear as may be wished. We
will not unnecessarily repeat the virtues of this Oil, because they may be
found comprehended in those which we in general have attributed to Karabe. They
that desire to know more, must consult Writers that have treated thereof, and
do esteem it and cry it up for an Heavenly Remedy.


Of Ambergrise and its Chemical Preparation.
AMbergrise is one of the substance whose original has much puzzled the wits
of Philosophers: but they that have traveled in the East-India's and have
searched more exactly into the nature of it, do unanimously say that Ambergrise
is nothing else but a Bitumen rising from the bottom of the Sea, which by the
virtue of its own salt is coagulated, and then digested and ripened by the Sun
beams; it is commonly found about the coasts of Sofola, Mozambique, Melinda,
as also toward the Maldive Islands and the Cap Comorrin; the best Ambergrise,
is that which is of a yellowish gray color, melts easily, and yields when you
thrust into it a hot Needle; but the best trial is the dissolution thereof in
very subtle and fine spirit of Wine, for that which is purest and leaves less
terrestreity and feces, is ever accounted the best. It is used in Perfumes; and
inwardly; it warmes desiccates, resolves, strengthens the stomach and brain,
recreates and increases the vital and animal spirits by its volatile sweet
sulphur, which is friendly to our nature. We have showed a way to make a very
good Perfume out of it, in the preparation of Benjuin. But there being a way
also of opening and dissolving it, to reduce more easily the power of it into
act, we will deliver here two ways of preparing the Essence or Tincture
thereof, to put a period to our work by the preparation of this noble product
of the Sea.

The first Essence of Ambergrise.
Ambergrise of the purest ij. and xij. grains of very good Musk, white
Sugar Candy j. grind altogether very exactly, and all being well mixed and
incorporated, add to it by degrees in the grinding of it ph. of burning spirit
of Roses; this mixiure put in a Matraso, pour on it ij. of alkohol of Wine;
stop the Mattress with a Blindhead, and put it to digest four days in a
vaporous Balneo; after which filtrate this Tincture through a Cotton, and keep
it for use as one of the greatest Restorers that can be found for aged persons
and cold constitutions; it increases the radical moisture, and enables both
male and female for generation. It is given from j. drop to vj. in Spanish
Wine, Malmesy, Hypocras, or some other analogous Drink, pleasing to the palate
and smell of diseased persons or they that take it.

The second Essence of Ambergrise.
AS there are many that will be glad to have open and dissolved Amber without
any mixture, and being a thing necessary both in the state of health, and in
case of sickness, so will we give here a way to make this dissolution plain
and without affectation.

then ii. of very good Ambergrise, and grind them with ana of white
Sugar Candy, until the two substances be well incorporated and reduced to an
impalpable powder, and so exactly united as they seem to be but one body; being
thus, put this mixture in a Mattress, and pour upon it four parts of its weight
of spirit of wine three times drawn over salt of Tartar; then stop the Mattress,
and put it to digest in a vaporous Balneo the space of seven days, in a slow
and constant heat, stirring often the matter; and when the Artist shall see the
dissolution and union of Salt, Sulphur, and spirit of Tartar made, so that the
liquor be clear, yellow and pure, except some small feces proceeding from the
Ambergrise, which will settle in the bottom of the Mattress, then let him
filtrate the whole substance warm through a Cotton in a Viol, and stop it well,
and then this essence being cooled, will coagulate it self and be congealed
into a substance like unto whitish butter, which melts with the least touch of
heat, even of the palm of the ^^nd, into a yellow Liquor very subtle, and very
excellent to perfume Broths, Jellies, Sweetmeats, Conserves and all kind of
Drinks; it may be used against swoonings, weaknesses, to strengthen the
stomach, as also to correct the ill smell of the mouth, or stinking breath. The
Dosis may be from j. drop to viij. in the above mentioned Liquor.

Thus much we had to say to put an end to the Chemical preparation of An^mals,
Vegetables and Minerals, thinking to have omitted nothing of what can serve for
an exact instruction of such as intend to apply themselves to the study and Art
of Chemistry; wherefore we do exhort all Artists to follow punctually the path
which we have traced and showed them, that they may more and more improve their
skill in the search of Physical truths: and above all we exhort all
Apothecaries, which are not yet initiated to the mysteries of Chemistry, to
bestow seriously their labor and industry in that noble Art, without suffering
themselves to be carried away by the unruly torrent of vulgar Opinion, swelling
only with ignorance, presumption, malice and envy, that all of them may
according to my lawful wishes, render themselves capable of serving the
Public, as I in my particular have endeavored to be in some manner useful to
them: The only earnest desire I have for the good and ease of poor Ptients, and
for instructing those of my Profession, having induced and provoked me, to
communicate what experiences improved by thirty years labor and study have
taught me, that all may redound to the glory of God, the good of my Neighbor,
and the exaltation of Physic and true Pharmacy.

FINIS, Et Laus Deo.
A Table of all the Heads of the principal Matters contained in this second
part of Chemistry.
CHAP. IX. Of Vegetables and their Chemical Preparation. p. 1 SECTION VIII.
OF Juyces and Liquors, Page 1 The Anatomy of wine, p. 3 To extract the spirit
of wine, p. 5 To prepare the alkohol of wine, p. 6 How to prepare the
tartarized spirit of wine, p. 10 Of the Anatomy of Vinegar, p. 12 The manner of
distilling Vinegar, p. 14 To prepare the Radical or alkoholized Vinegar, p. 15
Another very subtle spirit of Vinegar, p. 16 How to prepare the crystal of
Vinegar or its subtle Tartar, ibid. Of Tartar, and the preparations extracted
from it, p. 17 The purification of Tartar, p. 19 To prepare the Martial or
chalybeated Tartar, p. 22 The distillation of Tartar, and how to extroct both
the spirit and the oil thereof, ibid. How to prepare the vitriolated Tartar or
Magistery thereof, p. 26 How to prepare the {oil} of Sennertus, or the
purgative salt of Tartar, p. 27 To prepare the Tincture of Tartar, p. 29 How to
prepare the dissoluble Glass of Tartar, and to extract the tincture thereof, p.
31 Of Opium, which is the condensed juice of Poppy, p. 34 The common
preparation of Opium, p. 39 To make the extract of plain Opium, p. 41 Laudanum,
or the specific Anodyne of Paracelsus, d. 44 Hysterical Laudanum for the use
of Women, p. 45 Laudanum against Dysentery and all sorts of fluxes immoderate,
as also against Agues, p. 46 Of the Elaterium or condensated juice of wild
Cucumber, p. 48 Cleansing and depuration of the Elaterium, p. 49 How the
Extract of Elaterium is to be made, ibid
SECT. IX.
OF Oil. p. 50 How the Oil of the Philosophers is to be prepared, p. 51 How
the oil must be desicated, p. 54
SECT. X.
OF Gummy drops, or Resins, p. 55 Of the distillation of common Turpentine,
ibid. How Gum Elemy is to be distilled, p. 60
SECT. XI.
OF Gum Resins, p. 60 The distillation of Ladanum. p. 61 How to work upon
Benjuin p. 62 To make the Tincture and Magistery of Benjuin, p. 63 To make the
flowers of Benjuin, p. 65 The distillation of Benjuin, p. 66 To prepare au
excellent Angelical water, and the Mass or Paste which is called the Spanish
Past, p. 69 Of Camphire, p. 71 How to work the plain Camphire, p. 75 The manner
of preparing the compounded oil of Camphire, p. 76 The manner of distilling the
Gum Ammoniack, p. 77
CHAP. X. Of Minerals and their Chemical Preparation. p. 79 SECT. I.
OF Earths, p. 82 Of Terra S^gi^lata or sealed Earth, p. 83 The Distillation of
sealed or sigilled Earth, p. 85 Of Bolus, p. 86 Preparation of the Bolus to
make it more astringent for outward applications, p. 87 Preparation of Bolus to
resolve coagulated blood inwardly, p. 88 Preparation of Bolus against Dysentery
and Diarrheas's, ibid. Preparation of Bolus against pestilential and contagious
diseases, p. 89
SECT. II.
OF Stones, p. 90 Of the Emerald and its Chemical preparation, p. 94 Of the
chemical preparation of Emerald, p. 95 Of Crystal and its chemical
preparation, p. 96 The chemical preparation of Crystal. p. 97 The preparation
of salt of Crystal, p. 98 How the Elixir or essence of Crystal is to be
prepared, p. 99 Of Coral and its chemical preparation, p. 101 The chemical
preparation of Coral, p, 102 How te prepare rightly the salt of Coral, p 103
How to make the false Magistery of Coral, p. 106 How to prepare the true
Magistery of Coral, p. 107 Of the Tincture of Coral, p. 109 The true process
of the tincture of Coral, p. 110 The first Menstruum, p. 111 The second
Menstruum, p. 112 How to make the tincture of Coral, ibid. To prepare the true
syrup of Coral p. 115 Of the Lapis Judaicus, or its chemical preparation, p.
116 Of Talk and its chemical preparation, p. 118 The chemical preparation of
Venet^an Talk, p. 119 To prepare a cream of Talk, of lesser trouble and work
then the forementioned, p. 120 The chemical preparation of red Talk, p. 121 Of
the calk or Starelime-stone, and its chemical preparation, p. 122 How the water
of Quick and prepared Lime is to be made. ibid. To prepare the plain Water
against Gangrenes and other symptoms and accidents thereof, p. 123 The
wonderful and true Water against Gangrenes p. 125 The manner of preparing the
Ophthalmick water, p. 126 To make the Spirit or true Magistery of Quick lime,
p. 127
SECT. III.
OF Metals, p. 129 Of Gold and its chemical preparation, p. 134 To make the
vulgar or common Cement, p. 138 To make the Regal Cement, unto which only Gold
does resist, ibid. Of calcination of Gold whereby to open it, p. 139
Amalgamation of Gold and Mercury, p. 141 The calcinatory cementation of Gold,
p. 140 The Reverberation of Gold, p. 142 To prepare the Crocus and Tincture of
Gold, p. 143 To prepare the crocus of Gold, p. 145 Solar Diaphoretick cordial
Powder, ibid. To make the sublimation of Salt, p. 146 Of Silver and its
chemical preparation, p. 148 The first preparation of the tincture of LUNE p.
151 The second prepa^ation of the tincture of LUNE, p. 152 The third
preparation of the tincture of LINE, p. 153 Of Iron and its chemical
preparation, p. 155 How Iron ought to be purged and made closer, to be turned
into Steel, p. 156 To prepare the astringent Crocus Martis, p. 157 How the
Crocus Martis is to be prepared, p. 159 How the Vitriol of Mars is to be
prepared, p. 161 To make the exact Syrup of Mars, p. 162 To prepare the salt of
Mars, p. 164 To make the astringent Tincture of Mars, p. 165 To make the
aperitive Tincture of Mars, p. 166 How the red Crystal of Mars is to be
prepared, p. 168 Of Copper and its chemical preparation, p. 169 The preparation
of green Copper, or Verdegreece, p. 170 To make the volatile Vitriol of, p. 171
The distillanion of the spirit of, p. 174 To prepare the Vitriol of, with the
Narcotick sulphur and crocus thereof, p. 177 Preparation of the Narcotick
Sulphur of the Vitriol of, p, 180 The Tincture of sulphur of, p. 181 To prepare
the crocus of the Vitriol of Venus, ibid. Of Lead and its chemical preparation,
p. 183 General preparations to open Lead, p. 184 To prepare the Sugar or Salt
of, p. 185 The use of the Liquor of, and how to make with it the false
Magistery, Cremor, Butter and Nutritum, p. 187 To prepare the right Magistery
of, p. 189 To make the Balsam of, ibid. To prepare the spirit, yellow and red
oil of the salt of, p. 190 Of Tin and its chemical preparation, p. 191 The
distillation of Tin, yielding several noble Remedies, both against internal and
external Diseases, p. 193
SECT. IV.
OF half and Semi Metals or middle or mean Minerals, which comes the nearest
to the nature of Metals, p. 196 The purification of Metals, p. 198 The
Revivification of Cinnabar into flowing Mercury, p. 199 The calcination and
precipitation of Mercury, p. 200 To make the Preciptate of Mercury without
addition, ibid. To make the Solar or Lunar Precipitate, p. 201 To make a very
excellent fit Precipitate, p. 203 To make the Preciptate, called Arcanum
Corallinum, ibid. The sublimation of Mercury, p. 205 To make the corrosive
Sublimate, ibid. To prepare the Mercury dulcis, or sweet Sublimate, p. 206 The
sublimate of Cinnabar or Vermilion, p. 208 To prepare the silvered and pearled
flowers of Mercury, p. 209 The distillation of Mercury, p. 211 The distillation
of spirit of Mercury without addition, ibid. To prepare the white and
Diaphoretical spirit of Mercury, p. 213 To make the red and Diaphoretical
spirit of Mercury, p. 214 To make a sweet oil of Mercury, 217 To prepare the
Astrum Mercur^i, or star of Mercury, p. 218 To make the salt of Mercury, p. 219
Tincture of Mercury, which is called the Sulphur thereof, p. 220 Of Antimony
and its Chemical preparation, p. 223 The general preparations of Antimony, p.
226 The particular preparations of Antimony, and how the Glass of Antimony is
to be made by plain distillation, p. 227 To make the Crocus or Antimonial
Saffron, from which it is called Crocus Metalorum, p. 229 The first Crocus
Metallorum, ibid. The second Crocus Metallorum, which is thought to be that of
Rullandus, p. 231 The third Crocus Metallorum, ibid. The manner of preparing
Diaphoretical Antimony, p. 234 Of the Regulus of Antimony, p. 237 The best
preparation of Regulus of Antimony, ibid. The solar calcination of Antimony, p.
241 Moist calcination of Antimony, p. 243 The first Precipitate of Antimony,
ib. The second Antimonial Precipitate, p. 244 The sublimation of Antimony, p.
245 How the Flowers of Antimony are to be prepared, p. 246 Flowers of the
Regulus of Antimony, p. 247 The correction of the antimonial Flowers, p. 248
How to prepare the Aromatized spirit of wine, ibid. The distillation of
Antimony, which yields the vinegar or acid spirit, the oil and spirit of
Antimony, p. 249 The distillation of antimonial Vinegar, ibid. The distillation
of Oil or Balsom of Antimony, p. 2^0 Pills againg Agues, p. 251 Distillation
of the Bu^ter or ^cy Oil of Antimony, ibid. How the Emetical Powder is to be
prepared, p. 254 The preparation of the Mine al Bez^ar. p. 256 How to prepare
the water or spirit of compounded Antimony, p. 258 The Liquitation or
Resolution of Antimony, p. 259 The Extraction of Antimony, ibid. The
distillation of the strong Lie, by which the extraction of the sulphur of
Antimony is performed* p. 260 How to extract the sulphur of Antimony, ibid.
Panacea, or the true antimonial sulphur, p. 261 Of the Tincture of Antimony, p.
262 The first antimonial Tincture, ibid. The second antimonial Tincture, p. 264
The infusion of Antimony. p. 265 The correction of antimonial Glass, or
Emetical powder corrected, p. 266 The true antimonial Syrup, p. 267 The true
Emetical purgative Tartar, ibid. Ophthalmick antimonial Water, p. 268 The
salification of Antimony, p. 269 The second way of preparing salt of Antimony,
p. 270 Of Bisnut, called by some white Antimony, p. 371 The Magistory of Tin
Glass, ibid. The distillation of Bisnut. p, 272
SECT. V.
OF Salts, p. 273 Of common salt and its chemical preparation, p. 274
Purification of common salt, p. 275 The calcination of common salt, ibid. The
distillation of common salt, p. 277 How to make and duly prepare the spirit of
salt, p. 278 The essential and stomachical spirit of salt, p. 281 The
preparations of the sweet chrystals of common salt, or the coagulated spirit of
salt, p. 282 Of Niter or Saltpeter, and its chemical preparation, p. 283 The
purification of Niter, p. 286 Calcination of Niter, to prepare the crystal
Mineral, p. 287 The fixation of Niter, p. 288 To make the solar dissolutive
Earth of fixed Niter, p. 290 The distillation of Niter, and how to prepare the
spirit of Niter, p. 291 The circulated spirit of Niter for Physic, p. 292 How
the good aqua fortis is to be prepared, p. 293 The vitriolated Niter, otherwise
the Arcanum of Niter and double Panacea, p. 294 How the Aqua fortis is to be
regalized or made Regal, p. 295 How the true Regal water is to be prepared,
ibid. Of Allom and its chemical preparation, p. 296 Purification of Allom, p.
297 The calcination or Vstion of Allom, p. 298 The distillation of Allom, ibid.
How Allom may be turned into a Liquid Magistery, p. 299 How sugar of Allom is
to be prepared, p. 300 The salsification of Allom, p. 301 Extraction of Allom,
ibid. Of Armoniack salt and its chemical preparation, p. 302 The purification
and chrystallization of Armoniack salt, p 303 The sublimation of flowers of
salt Armoniack, p. 304 The calcination or fixation of salt Armoniack, p. 305
The distillation of Armoniack salt, p. 306 To make the spirit and volatile
Vrinous salt of Armoniack, p. 308 How the spirit of Armoniack salt is to be
ex^racted, p. 309 The Liquation of salt Armoniack, p. 310 Of Vitriiol and its
chemical preparation, ibid. The purification of Vitriol, and manner of
preparing the Gelly, p. 313. The calcination of Vitriol, p. 314 The
Philosophical calcination of Vitriol, p. 315 The distillation of Vitriol, ibid.
To prepare the Dew of Vitriol, p. 316. To draw the acid water of Vitriol. To
make the acid spirit and corrosive oil of Vitriol, p. 317 ibid. To prepare the
Oil of sweet spirit of Vitriol, p. 319 The tartarized spirit of Vitriol, p.
320 The precipitation of Vitriol, p. 322 To make the Metallic Earth, or Oker
of Vitriol, p. 323 To make the sweet Sulphur of vitriol, ibid. To make the
purging Sulphur of Vitriol, ibid. To make the fixed and volatile Sulpbur of
Vitriol, p. 324 The sublimation of Vitriol, p. 326 The salification of Vitriol,
ibid. The extraction of Vitriol, p. 326 The Tincture or Essence of the sulphur
of Vitriol, ibid. The Tincture of fixed Sulphur of Vitriol, p. 329
SECT. VI.
OF sulphurous Minerals and Sulphurs, p. 330 Of Arsenick and its chemical
preparation, p. 331 The sublimation of Arsenick, to prepare the dulcified
Arsenick, p. 332 To make the Diaphoretical Rubies of Arsenick, p. 333 The
fixation of Arsenick, p. 334 To prepare the fixed sudorifick Arsenick, ibid.
The Liquation and Resolution of Arsenick, p. 335 Of B^imstone and its chemical
preparation, ibid. The sublimation to make the flowers of Brimstone, p. 337 The
precipitation to prepare the Milk* Cream, or Butter, or Magistery of Brimstone,
p. 339 The true and infallible manner of preparing the Milk of Sulphur, p. 340
The distillation of Sulphur, p. 341 The first manner of preparing the spirit of
Brimstone, p. 342 The second manner of making the spirit of Sulphur and
Brimstone, p. 343 How the true Oil of Brimstone is to be distilled, p. 344. How
the fetid Oil of Sulphur or Brimstone is to be prepared, p. 347 The infusion
and extraction. How the Balsomo and Tinctures of Sulphur are to be made. p. 347
The plain Balsom of Brimstone, p. 348 The Compound of Balsom of Brimstone, p.
349 The vulnerary Balsom of Brimstone, ibid. The first Tincture of Sulphur or
Brimstone, p. 350 The second Tincture of Sulphur, p. 351 The third Tincture of
Sulphur, p. 352 The sal^fication. To prepare the salt of Brimstone, p. 353 Of
Bitumen or fat Earth, ibid. Of yellow Amber or Karabe, p. 354 How the Tincture
or Essence of Amber is to be prepared, p. 35 How the Magistery of Amber or
Karabe is to be p^epared, p. 356 How the distillation of Amber is to be made,
p. 357 How the spirit of Amber is to be separated, p. 358 How the volatile salt
of Amber is to separated and rectified, p. 359 How to make rightly the
Rectification of oil of Amber, p. 560 Of Ambergrise and its Chemical
preparation, p. 361 The first Essence of Ambergrise, p. 362 The second Essence
of Ambergrise, p. 363


