ISREAL'S Condition and Cause pleaded; Or some Arguments for the JEWS Admission
into ENGLAND.

For my Brethren and Companions sake I will seek to do thee good, Psalm 127.8.
Brethren, my hearts desire for Israel is, that they may be saved, Romans 10.1.
Objections answered, Cautions added, with a Vindication of Mr. Peter's from
those foul and unjust Aspersions cast upon him by W. Prynn, Esquire;.

He that privily slandereth his Neigbour will I destroy, Psalm 102.5. LONDON,
Printed by P. W. for William Larnar and Jonathan Ball at the Black Moor. 1656.

To the Reader.
GOd by the Prophet David says, Psalm 78. concerning the People Israel, that he
would have destroyed them, had not Moses his Chosen stood in the Gap to turn
away his wrathful indignation. Meek Moses was both in his Person and Prayer
powerful with God for their safety, and God approved of his Intercession and
Supplication; and though God told Moses that he would make of him a great
Nation, yet Moses's affection was so fixed on this Peoples preservation, that
he falls earnestly to pray for them, They are thy People, and what will the
Nations say? etc. O the worth of a sanctified affection! But Moses who was
faithful in all his house, who as a Servant is now invested in glory; Abraham
is dead, and the Prophets are dead, and where shall we find any charitable
Christian alive who intercedes and acts for this Peoples Conversion or
Preservation?

Some indeed do it, but restrictively, conditionally, and sparingly, inserting
them in their Prayer, as it were by way of Parenthesis, but excluding them
their companies and Congregations, they seem to wish them some good; but they
plainly manifest it that they would not have them enjoy it, or not amongst us;
at the same time expressing some charity in words, but denying it in deeds.

What a laudable act is already do to further this their Admission by Mr.
Coysh in providing a perpetual Stipend to Preachers for this end by that weekly
Lecture at Gregory's by Paul's of fifty pounds per annum is known; the Act was
noble, and the end universally charitable, and without doubt he is gloriously
rewarded, and if we may speak home, certainly done by a Prophetic Spirit as
providing for them (against their coming in) a place to hear the power of the
Doctrine of Christ publicly preached; God certainly gave him some knowledge of
what should afterward come to pass.

Which Act of his as it will for ever speak his Charity and Zeal to this People
of the Jews, so it cannot but be thought his Intentions and Hopes were that
they should be Partakers and Hearers of the Word in this place.

Yet it seems a Paradox to preach for it, and receive Rewards for their
Labors, if yet they never intend to entreat the Jews to hear their Doctrine,
nor to be admitted to Audience in that Congregation, especially set up, and
allowed precisely for that purpose.

Truly I honor the Laborers, and would much more, if they would stir up their
Auditors to be charitable and harborous to the Jews, and that they would
square their Doctrines and Uses to those Ends for which the Lecture is set up,
viz. for the Calling and Conversion of that People.

For our Good and theirs is this Subject presented to the World, to inform our
judgments, to remove all ill conceits that are lodged in some men's breasts
against their Admission, and to stir up their Zeal and Charity toward them,
that if by any means they may provoke them to Repentance and Faith in the Lord
JESUS, that so both Jew and Gentile may be all united in the same Spirit, and
the same Faith, to our mystical Head.

For their Good also, that they may be brought out of Darkness into Light, that
they may know the Scriptures and the power of God, and JESUS CHRIST whom he
has sent, that the Veil may be taken from their Eyes and Hearts, that they may
know what is the height, the length, breadth, and depth of the knowledge of
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, that so we who were once not the People of God, and they
who once were the Beloved of God may come, we to our fullness, and they to their
ingrafting in again.

To conclude, since it is not impossible but certain, that they shall be
ingrafted, and to all probability the time is almost approached, and the
fullness of the Gentiles is almost completed, and that CHRIST is gathering his
Saints together from the four Winds under Heaven, and that the Nations are
even ripe for the Harvest, Let not England exclude or debar their Brethren from
enjoying those plentiful means of obtaining Grace and Favor, which by the
Gospel preached are here to be had, to the Glory of our Nation, to the Comfort
and Salvation both of our own and their Souls. So having discharged my
Conscience in this Work, I am

Yorrs, D. L.

ARGUMENTS FOR THE Jews admission INTO ENGLAND.
THe long, heavy, and sad punishment inflicted on this dejected, despised, and
dispersed people, has various and strong impressions upon men's spirits; some
scorning any society with them, others hating their very name, and persons, and
some compassionating their despicable condition: hence some Countries banish
and expel them, others do miserably and cruelly oppress and injure them by
base and uncivil words and actions; a third sort do afford them their prayers,
and expect their calling, and yet will not yield them place or habitation
amongst them; we have some in this Nation, who are so bitter against that poor
people, that they have vented their unsatiable spleen and malice by their pens,
and rather then their undiscreet passions should not take place, and work
others against them, have raked together all the rabble of Popish Authors, and
filled men's brains with strange stories, and their late printed books with
marginall notes of Friars, and Monks, and Abbots relations, to render that
Ancient and Honorable Nation of the Jews, odious and detestable.

And it is to be wondered at that men who profess themselves such adversaries to
all Popery and Popish superstitions should yet search all the withered and
Moth-eaten writers of that Romish faction, and fight only with Popish weapons
against the Jews, but the men are sufficiently known for their language and
passion, and so at present we pass by them, though we shall examine and
convince them afterward.

Therefore as not approving either the malice of the one, or the cruelty of the
other, being this peoples Enemies, both being irrational, uncivil, and
uncharitable, and being of those who pity and compassionate their affliction;
for if ever a Nation may truly take up Jobs complaint, certainly it is this of
the Jews, Pity me, oh pity me, ye my friends, for the hand of the Lord has
touched me; and though it is true that all affliction is justly inflicted, where
sin proceeds, provokes, and procures the Punishment, and that this people are
deep in accounts, yet there is no bar in Gods Word to hinder a tender
compassion, and Christian love to be showed toward them, much less is there
any Rule to hate them, oppress them, expel them our Country, or our Commerce;
neither has God, our Father and theirs, our Savior Jesus Christ, our, and
their precious Redeemer, nor the Holy Ghost, the spirit of love and truth, nor
yet the word of God in any one plain text, line, or expression, in any part of
it, none of these (we say, and that justly and truly) has allowed us to rail
at them, or revile them with approbrious, and unsavory, and unchristian
language, much less to exclude them all, even civil societies; for though God
in his justice did threaten to scatter them into all Nations, yet he does not
say they shall be cast out of all Nations, an have no being amongst men; and to
speak truth, they are to be scattered amongst all people, for if they should
not be amongst all Nations, how should God (and he intends it) gather them out
of all Nations? a general collection implies a general casting, and if so,
why not some into England, as well as other Countries? why we less charitable
then all, or most of other Nations? we have the word of God powerfully preached
amongst us, and therein we are commanded, not to vex the stranger, to be
barborous to strangers, not to hide our selves from our own flesh; and surely
we cannot but remember the heavy sentence denounced by our Savior against such
as did deny to entertain strangers, I was (says he) a stranger, and ye took
me not IN; therefore, go ye cursed, etc.

The Reasons inducing this treatise, are not popular applause, or gains; but
first, to do service to God and the Church, to stop the mouths and pens of the
gain-^ayers, to satisfy the scrupulous, and to speak a word in season, in the
behalf of that Nation, it being lately controverted, but by none yet clearly
decided, concerning this peoples admission into England; three things for this
purpose are insisted on, and handled.

1. Seven Reasons and Arguments positive for the Jews admission.

2. Answers to the seeming objections against their coming IN.

3. A short and succinct Apology or defense of H. P. against the tedious,
unjust, and unreasonable, unconscionable, and uncharitable slander, and
reviling of a pragmatical Lawyer, whose tongue and pen are against every one,
Princes, Priests, Magistrates, Soldiers not excepted, ex pede Herculem, you
may know the man by his Rosemary and Bays, and by his flower on the wall; but
to let him alone to be brougt in the Rear, we come to our main intendment for
the Jews admission into England, and that first.

The first of these they never heard, the second of these they never had, the
third of these they never found.
1. In hopes of their conversion, and that in three respects; first, by the
power and purity of preaching; secondly, by our upright dealing in Contracts
and Bargains with them; thirdly, by our civil and gentle comportment, and love
toward them in our markets and meetings.

1. Arg. Hopes of their conversion. 'Twas the saying of our Savior to Saint
Peter, when thou art converted, convert thy Brethren: which how effectually he
performed, is plainly to be seen in that of the Acts c. 2. where he did not
only convince, but also convert 3000. souls at one Sermon. Conversion of a
sinner to God, as it is the greatest happiness of him, so it has as large a
reward tied to it; such shall shine, says Daniel, c. 12. as the stars in the
firmament, shall cover (says James) a multitude of sins, shall save himself and
others too, (says the Apostle, St. Paul) David makes it an Augmentation of
Gods glory, that sinners shall be converted to thee, Psalm. 51. our Savior
says, (there is joy in heaven, over one sinner that repents, Luke 16.

Now as it is, the greatest happiness to effect it, and as it is so well
rewarded, so certainly should all endeavor it. 1. To himself. 2. To others;
and though it has been sometimes immediately wrought by God, and his holy
spirit, by signs and wonders, yet who will deny but that Gods word, powerfully
and purely preached, is the usual and ordinary way and means to beget faith,
and to work repentance unto salvation, now to speak truth, In most, if not in
all parts where the Jews reside, the Kings, and Princes, and People, are either
without Gods word, or else use not to have it preached purely, purely I say,
for first, the Turks, Persians, and Heathens have it not; then secondly, other
Countries are wholly Popish and superstitious, their Churches, and houses, and
highways stored with Images, Crucifixes, of all sorts and sizes, all which,
the Jews abhor; and it is feared that the Papists doctrine and discipline is so
full of scandal and offense to the Jews, that thereby they have forborne to
embrace the Gospel, which as used in Countries full of Popery, seems so full of
Idolatry, forbidden in the Law of Moses, and so have to this day rendered the
precious Gospel as the savor of death, which otherwise might have been the
savor of life unto them, and as the Apostle Saint Paul says to the Greeks, it
seems foolishness, and to the Jews a stumbling block, and a rock of offense, so
that through those Popish traditions, and superstitions, and idolatry, the Word
of God is made of none effect; and therefore as it is wondered at, that so few
Jews in so man^ Countries, and in so many years, have been Converted to
Christianity, it is plainly known, it is because they are where the Word of God
is not preached as it ought to be. A heavy burden for such as stand guilty
hereof, the more is the pity, the Pope, and King of Spain stand deep in this
particular.

And to speak home to the purpose, what was England and Scotland many years
ago, and till of late, but Dens, and Cages of unclean Birds, of Romes hatching
and breeding? were not our Kings and Rulers, Archbishops, and Bishops, and all
the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons bred up in Popery? were not our Temples, and
Cloisters, and Houses, and Cities, and Highways stuffed with Saints, and
Saints Relics, with Cross of silver and gold, the work of men's hands? and
what marvel was it if the Jews, who then lived amongst us, were unconverted,
and so were hated by the blin^e superstitious Clergy, as obstinate and
obdurate? What hopes were then to see the Jews converte, when the very
teachers and guides of the people were so blind that true, and pure, and
undefiled Religion (as St. James calls it) was almost lost and gone? One
Wickliff in one age, one Tindall in another, in all England a John Hus, and
Jerome of Prague in all Germany, and after them a Luther and Melancthon, a
Calvin and Beza, with some few others, in all France and Switzerland, and these
in their several generations by the Popish Clerg, hated, persecuted, burned,
and butchered: In Henry the Eights reign, but one Omen; what should after be
accomplished by that name, One Lord Cromwell, who endeavored, and did
unkennel, and dispossess diverse of lazy, ignorant and scandalous Monks, and
Friars, and Nuns; and was this a time to expect the conversion of the Jews?
or were these fat Bulls of Basan fit to manage the work of the Gospel, for the
conversion of a people, nor was it their intent to endeavor it in this people,
whom they so hated.

-- Quis talia fando,
Temperet a Lachrimis?
But to proceed, It having pleased God to purge this Land of such Popish
trumperies, and the Clergy at present able and industrious in preaching, and
godly in conversation; Idolatry and Images removed leaving the success, both of
our prayers and preaching, to Gods merciful and wise disposing) the preaching
of Gods word being the power of God unto Salvation, who can say but it may
please God that this work, the great work of the Jews conversion may at this
time by this powerful Engine, and our prayers for the same end, be effected
and accomplished, that it may, these things are to prove it?

1. Gods arm is not shortened, his will and power to bring this to pass is the
same.

2. His spirit and word are as powerful and ready as in former time.

3. Who can shut when God opens?

4. God has and can remove the vail, and take away the heart of stone, and
give them a heart of flesh, to tremble at his word, he has brought light out
of darkness, and converted as great and obstinate sinners as they are.

5. Many of them have been converted, and the rest shall; and oh! that the Lord
would think upon Sion, for it pitieth thy servants to see her in the dust.
That Is to the first.

2. To be upright and just in our Contracts and bargains with them.

The ways to join and cement one Nation to another are sundry, as unity in
Religion, public marriages of Princes, leagues and confederacies, assistance
in troubles, scarce any one more prevalent then public and common intercourse
of merchandise and traffic, by this course the stock of one people, or a great
part of it is transmitted to another, whereupon there is a great trust and
credit given by each Nation to another, and usually the breach of bargains and
trust is followed with a war; and therefore we should have special care to be
faithful to perform to our utmost, though it be to our loss, what we bargain
for: so the Prophet David, Psalm. 15. He that makes a bargain with his
neighbor, and disappoints him not, though it were to his own hinderance; and
the Apostle Paul, Brethren defraud not one another in bargains: Contracts and
Covenants are not to be violated, some mischief and miseries usually ensue upon
the violaters, as in that contract of the Sichemites, and that also made by
Joshua, and all Israel, with the Gibeonites, broken by Saul, severely revenged
upon Saul, and upon his bloody house. It was the disgrace of the Carthaginians,
that they were Foedi fragi, Truce Breakers, its branded also by Paul; Romans chapter
1. that amongst many other things, the Heathens were Covenant-breakers.

Now when in trading, one Nation perceives a principle of fidelity, and junate
honesty, it is a great motive, and a secret inward enforcing argument of the
fearing of God in the heart, hereupon Moses tells the Israelites, that the
Nations about them when they heard, shall say, surely this is a wise
understanding people; the credit and reputation of a Nation is Righteousness,
righteousness (says Solomon) exalts or establishes a Nation, and Gods
Scepter is by David termed a Scepter of Righteousness; and it sets out Christ's
glory, Thou have loved Righteousness, Psalm. 45. and it is that which Abraham
attributes to God, Shall not the Judge of all the world do Right?

I say then positively, that to forward and help on the long desired, and
prayed for conversion of the Jews, by admission into England, we should be
careful to be upright in all our doings, and dealings with them; they are a
people of themselves sublime, and strenuously ingenuous, and naturally addicted
to trade and traffic; and truly it is a wonder how they should, and how they do
yet subsist, and grow rich, for my part I say, that considering their severe
exiles, from one Country to Country, their taxes, impositions, confiscations,
pillages, strippings, rifellings, by public commands, by insurrections
several times, in several places, as also their wanderings from City to City,
their deep payments for a new place, little or no pity showed to them at their
coming in, or abode in a place, but most accounting it lawful to wrong or rob
a Jew, besides the several praemunires they have run into, and their mulcts
always exceeding great, and exacted with severity and rigor, by entrusted
inferior Officers: I say, it is a wonder to think how they should have any
thing left them to sustain them, their incombes not visibly much, no Crown
Lands, scarce a foot of Land in a Country their own, no ships of public
traffic built or sent out by them, no Collections of Charity made for them in
any City or Country by Christians, no beggars amongst them; surly for and
certain, God makes them to increase and abound in wealth, as the Prophet David
says, Notwithstanding, their Oppressors, and he suffered not their substance
to decrease, and it may be said of them, as it was at their first traveling
out of Egypt, He brought them out also with Silver and Gold, for it is known
they do yet abound with it, being able upon a sudden to furnish a Prince with
treasure, upon any occasion; and some of the Kings of Christendom have made
too much use of them, though they never repayed them, nay, the former Kings of
England have had supplies many times out of the Jews Coffers, and in requital
for true payment, banished them the Land, upon some false suggestions or other,
made by the Popish Priests in those times against them; whereas indeed 'twas
because they being not able to repay them, they thought it a disparagement to
have such Creditors live near the Court.

How they have been dealt withal by our Kings, and Princes, and Clergy, Nobles,
and Commons, by oppressions, frauds, confiscations, deep payments of vast and
several sums, our Chronicles largely declare; it is strange they venture again
here, knowing how unjustly, unrighteously, unmercifully, they have been used,
for certain it is, they have heard of the uprightness of our present Governors,
or else they would never desire shelter under them, nor bring in such a mass of
treasure; and trust them with it, had they not a great confidence of their
integrity, and that the fear of God was grounded in their hearts, or else they
believe that a people so much professing Godliness must needs be civilly and
religiously just, and upright. O therefore good people of England, let them see
your good works, that they may glorify God on your behalfs. To proceed.

3. By our civil and gentle comportment, and love toward them in our markets,
shops and meetings.

Religion heightens civility, a gentle affable carriage graces and adorns our
profession; we should show our peaceable and meek disposition, upon all
occasions; the Apostle Paul is excellent in his instructions and practice in
this particular, To the Greek I became as a Greek, to the Jew I am become as a
Jew, I became all things to all men, that by all means I might win some; the
Apostle had such special regard to win both Jews and Gentiles, that he framed
his carriage so that it might win, not only his preaching, but his comportment,
his life and outward demeanor toward the Jews should be such, and acted with
that sweetness and complacency of behavior, that by it he might win the Jews,
were they to be won by this means then; and why not now? does the Apostle
practice it as a sure way to effect his end to win them to Christ? sure the
same carriage would (if used toward them) be as powerful in our days: It Is
said of Moses, that there was not such another meek man upon the face of the
Earth; 'twas for certain, his meekness gained love, and authority; and made him
so admired and beloved of the people. If ye bite and devour one another (says
the Apostle Paul) ye shall be bitten and devoured one of another; what the
carriage of other Nations is toward the Jews, is known, and histories make
mention sufficiently, even to the disgrace of Christianity, but it is under the
Papal jurisdiction, yea, none so barbarous, and insolent, and scornful over
them, as the Spaniards, not being content with fleecing, but delighting to flay
them; so in some Towns of Germany, as Vlmes, and Wormbs, the people do daily
infest them with ribaldry language, and opprobrious Carriage, esteeming them
worse then their dogs, setting dogs upon them as they pass the streets, cursing
and railing upon them when they meet them, casting dirt, and filthy nastie dung
upon their clothes, and upon any seeming offense, nay, any false forged
accusation shall be enough to convene them with threats to turn them all out of
their gates, and it must be accounted a favor if the Governors will be pleased
to remit this punishment, and accept of some great sum of money for
satisfaction: Most places being Popish, are cruel and unjust in their carriage
to the poor Jews, abiding within their several jurisdictions, and can there be
much, or any hopes of their Conversion from such who aim at nothing less, nor
intend them so much good; nay indeed, who are a means to hinder their
Conversion?

And to speak truth to this particular, our Nation was in former time highly
instigated with fury and malice against these poor people, but 'twas for
certain the cunning and subtle practices of the Popish Priests, that incited
the Kings, and Nobles, and Commons, by raising some lies or misdemeanors
committed by them; and this was practiced usually when the Kings were
necessitated for moneys, and to ease themselves of the deep taxes and
Impositions, the Jews should be accused, and so forced to pay great sums to
obtain a good esteem, and to purchase their quiet and peace with the King, and
to escape the violence and rage of the people; but if it please our Governors
to admit them into this Land, surely a meek and peaceable carriage will greatly
grace our profession of the Gospel, and by Gods mercy in his due time work
much, yea very much upon their hearts, and affection. To conclude the third
branch of our first argu. I read in Gods word, that in that night the Children
of Israel came out of Egypt, it is observed in the Text, that amongst all the
noise and tumult, for they came out in have, yet there was not a Dog that moved
his tongue throughout all the Land of Egypt; Certain it was a special
commanding power of God, that not a Dog. 2. Though by nature fierce, though
watchful. 3. Not to bite, not to bark, yea, not to move his tongue against
this people: I could wish that at their entrance here, the tongues and biting
pens of all vijulent and turbulent spirits might be silent, if not of their own
accord, yet by public authority, and that Gamaliels advice may take place,
take heed what you do to these men, for if this work be of God, it will surely
stand, but if it be of men, it will fall, etc. take heed lest ye seem to fight
against God; Let then our Shops and Shambles, our Exchange and Custom-houses,
our Marketplaces and highways be civilly and soberly free; the Apostle says
plainly, What ye buy in the shambles, etc. Let no scruple be made of it; no nor
any affront or disgrace by any uncivil gesture or unjust Actions be offered to
the buyer; buying or selling, being as necessary for a Jew, as for a Christian,
and Christians should have a care that they make not their good be evil spoken
off, but to do as the Apostle admonishes, to give no offense to the Gentile,
nor to the Jew, nor to lay a stumbling block in their way, but by their just
and upright dealing, and civil, and gentle behavior toward them, endeavor
their love and affection, which both, with the preaching of Gods Word; purely
and solidly, may in Gods time win them to the faith: however, if our aims come
short of our intendments, yet we are clear in the sight of God; and if
Christians must take heed that they do not by meats and drinks offend their
weaker brother, much more must they be wary, not by idolatry and superstitious
sacrifices, to destroy these their Brethren, for whom, says the Apostle,
Christ dyed Though they be little, yet seeing they may belong to Gods love,
offend them not, says our Savior.

To proceed to our second Argument, for their Admission.

2. In Civil respects, and that proved by two things. 1. Their Relation to us
in Nature. 2. Jure Gentium, by the Law of Nations.

Relations are of deep concernment, true essential Relatives stand or fall
together, none of nearer being, then those that are natural; therefore the
infringers and violators of the Laws of Nature, have in all ages and Nations,
been execrable and odious; according to Nature every thing strives to preserve,
and love, and to cherish his own kind; and shall man of all things and
creatures, hate or destroy it? and has not God (says the Apostle) of one
blood made all mankind? there is an Identity of Nature, not only a strict
Relation: and now then, where (as the same Apostle says) is the difference of
the Jew, or of the Gentile? are we not all one? not only in Christ Jesus, but
also in Nature; we are all (says Saint Paul his offspring, we are all cut out
of the same Rock; and God, who is rich in mercy, is the father of us all (says
the Apostle) observe how the Jews did wittily and lovingly acknowledge this
Relation in that of the Canticles, We have a little Sister who has no breasts,
what shall we do for her, when she shall be spoken of? who was meant by their
little sister? it is agreed by all Expositors, that it was the Gentiles; and
behold the Relation! Jews and Gentiles are termed Sisters, the greater, and the
less; and who can but observe the Care and love of the One to the other? What
shall we do for her? says the text, she is our Sister our little Sister, it
stands us upon to take a Care of her, and to do her good in her day; and how
can this Relation cease now? had the Jews such a care for us, when we were
little and small, and shall we despise them now we are full grown, and in vigor
and ripeness of age, and hate them, because they are elder, and have been for
many years in misery and affliction, and yet are not out of it? Consider what
strict notice God took of Esaus unkindness, that he would not show any
compassion to his brother, but insulted over him, and was hateful toward him
in the anguish of his spirit, what heavy punishments were denounced against
him? and how can we which are Christians look upon our Brethrens misery,
without compunction and compassion, and not fear the like, or a heavier
Judgment will befall us, for that we had no tender bowels of Compassion and
Charity toward them? what an unnatural carriage is it, for a younger Brother
not to suffer his elder Brother to come into his house, and because he is out,
will keep him out, and persecute him too with malice, and is so far from
showing mercy, that he is angry with them who afford lodging and harbor to
him? and though he knows him in a storm, is so far from inviting him into a
shelter, that he had rather he should perish without, then he should be
admitted In? should not all Relations savor of, and be full of Love and
Charity? Consider well this serious and deep Relation in Nature, and learn to
put on Bowels of tenderness and Compassion toward these poor Outcasts of
Israel; for as St. James says well, Which of you seeing your Brother want, if
you do not relieve him, how dwells the Love of God in you? and if they shall be
condemned at the Last day, for not taking a stranger In, what shall become of
them, who scornfully shut their own Brother Out? Abraham, the father of the
faithful, urges this as a conducing Argument to Lot, Let us not fall out; for
we are Brethren; he lays the Energie of his Argument upon the Relation of
Brotherhood, and how unsitting a speech was Cains to God, concerning this
Relation, Am I my Brothers k^eper? intimating that he should have been so; and
therefore Cains sin, was a sin against Natural Relation: and admirable is that
of the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 58. When thou see the poor that are cast out, that
thou bring them home to thine house, and that thou hide not thy self from thine
own flesh. And though our Brethren the Jews at present are in a distressed
condition, must they be totally rejected? who can say but they are cast out,
that we should kindly take them In? and for certain it is, that they who will
not admit them, do not pity their casting out. And St. Paul speaks divinely of
their casting out, and if their casting or cutting off be our implanting In, if
their fall be our fullness, what shall their restoring be? and we that are bound
to help our neighbors Ox or Ass fallen into a ditch, for certain are not
debarred to help our Brother out of misery. I proceed to the second Branch for
their admittance, and that is,

2. Jure Gentium, by the Law of Nations.

The strictest Law next to that of Nature, is that of the Law of Nations, and
under this are included all Public Leagues, public Ambassadors, public
Merchandising and Commerce; and under this is that Noble saying which our
Savior himself used, What ye would that men, any men, should do unto you, so
do unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets: Now by this Rule it will
follow, that if we in misery and calamity would not be denied friendship and
succor, we then ought not to deny the same to other men, and if we would not
be excluded from shelter and favor, we should not deny it to others; no, not
to the Jews, for they being a Noble part of the universal body, why should one
member exclude, or deny admittance to another? for as the Apostle has said
elegantlie, that even those members which seem to be less comely has God put
most comeliness on, that there should be no Schism in the Body; and therefore
the head cannot say to the foot; I have no need of thee, or if the eye, or any
other superior member should say uncharitably and unchristianly to another, I
have no need of thee, is it not therefore of the body? nay, even those members
which seem less necessary, may yet be found, not only comely, but necessary
for the completing of the whole: and therefore, as Pharaoh said to Joseph,
send for thy Father and Brethren, and let them dwell amongst us, which was done
accordingly, Jacob sued not for it, yet was admitted into the Land, without any
murmuring or hatred of the people, till in length of time, by the Tyranny and
policy of another King, who knew not Joseph, they were unjustlie and
unmercifullie vexed and oppressed: but for certain it is, at their Coming In, no
man was against it, neither is it expressed that they did any injury, nor is
there any complaint made, that they made victuals dear, or were a burden to
the Land, and yet they were there 430. years, and were increased from 70 or 75.
at most, to 600000. men, besides women and children, which to all probability,
amounted to above a million of Souls; shall we be less charitable in these
times to that Nation then Egypt was? or have we any reason, in any civil
respect, to deny them Commerce and trading with us, and amongst us? Certainly
we may afford it to them by the Law of Nature and Nations: But I go on; and
say, that the Jews may be admitted into England, and that,

3. By Ties of Religion on our parts, and so, 1. We are to desire, pray for,
and further their Conversion and Calling. 2. We are earnestly to pray for their
Salvation.

Although the Hopes of this peoples Conversion by the means before mentioned,
may incite us, and though the Law of Nature and Nations may invite us, yet this
Tie, and bond of Religion, may, and does seem spiritually to force us to afford
them admittance into England; all or most of our Pulpits, I am sure the most
Learned amongst our Ministers do, (and in truth do but what they ought to do)
pray for the Calling and Conversion of the Jews, some with larger and more
patheticall expressions then others; but surely their prayers, if they be void
of Faith and Charity too, any man of understanding will say they are but vain
and hypocritical before God: I do not absolutely accuse them, yet by their
conclusions; in denying them a brotherly Admittance amongst us, it is deeply
susspected they pray not so effectually, and intentionally as they ought, for
can it be thought that they pray in faith, when as yet all know faith does work
by love; In faith we say, when as this people live as yet, in Countries subject
to Turks, Infidels, and Idolatrous Papists, where no means is used, no
ordinary means, but rather all done contrary to any such intention, how can
they in faith expect their Conversion under such darkness, Tyranny, and
Ignorance? How can they believe except they hear? and how can they hear without
a Preacher? and how can they preach except they be sent? says the Apostle; now
our Preachers holding the Popish Clergies Mission not lawful, but
Antichristian; can they believe that Antichrist will convert to Christ, and
though some of them preach, yet, it is seldom, and then full of fables, stories,
and Legends of some miracles done by Saints, of no efficacy to stir up the soul
to that height, as to work Repentance or Conversion.

And secondly, how can they pray in Charity when as they will not admit this
people into their Congregations, nay, not into the Nation, that yet they might
come out from those dark dens of Ignorance, and Heathenish Idolatry to be
hearers of Gods word powerfully taught; and to see the just and upright lives
and conversations of men who profess so much godliness as at present England
does; these men's prayers, and intentions should agree, and then certainly they
would be glad to hear that God had put it into the hearts of the Jews, to
desire such a thing at the hands of our present Governors, with leaving the
Issue to God, and the means.

But for their speedier Conversion the Apostle says, they must hear, and
hearing implies they must not be shut out of the Land, but admitted, into it,
and into our societies; it seems a Riddle, and almost Ridiculous to hope the
Conversion of that people, with whom they never converse or confer; Conference
and Conversation being two main helps to further Conversion: the Jews, when
they had heard Peter's Sermon, they heard it then, the Text says, then they
came to the Apostles and said, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? there is
their Conference, and they continued with the Apostles, there is their
Conversation too. Many other examples might be produced; I wish all Preachers,
and others, who are against their Coming In, to lay this to heart, and to take
heed that by being against their Coming In, they do not make their prayers
void, and ineffectuall; their prayers being for them, their Actions against
them.

Now seeing we do Actually pray for their Calling and Conversion, which thing
all learned men say shall be effected; nay, the Scriptures are full for it, as
shall appear, yet de modo, of the manner of it there is not a general Consent,
whether it shall be a Locis migrando; or, in Locis credendo, by traveling from
all Countries into which they are scattered into, and unto Jerusalem again; or
by believing in Christ Jesus, in the places into which they are so scattered
and dispersed: Much might here be said on both parts, but not intending
Controversies in this present Discourse, we interpose not in it.

St. Paul expressing himself in this particular to the full, says, Romans chapter
10. v. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire, and prayer to God for Israelis, that they
may be saved, for I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God; there is
heat, and therefore hopes of it: and the Apostle says, he did heartily and
truly desire it, and thereupon prayed for it, and how he could even wish
himself accursed from Christ for his Brethrens sake; and the Prophet David
prays thus: Oh that thou would bring home thy people, as thou did
sometimes, from the depth of the Sea! and, O think upon Sion, and have mercy
upon her, for it grieveth and pitieth thy servants to see her in the dust! nay,
our Savior himself, it is said of him, that he prayed for these transgressors,
Esa. 53. and upon the Cross, Father forgive them, they know not what they do;
which he meant of their Sin, in murdering him, the Prince of Life, as Peter
tells them, Act. 2. and Stephen, Act. chapter 7. prays, Lord, lay not this sin to
their charge; not only the sin of stoning him, but that their sin of
Crucifying Christ; and St. Peter took great pains to work their Repentance and
Conversion, by preaching zealously unto them, and did convert 1000s of them,
and did all these holy and eminent men labor to further this? why then should
not we? that we should, I say, for our perfection and theirs shall be both
together, not they without us, nor we without them shall be made perfect, Heb.
11. v. ult, we shall not come to the stature of a perfect man in Christ, God
being the God both of Jew and Gentile.

To stir us up therefore to be earnest with God to help on the Jews Conversion,
consider David's care, the Prophets successivelie sent to this people for the
same purpose, our blessed Lord took great pains, and wrought many Miracles,
gave them diverse instructions, as work while ye have the light; why stand ye
here idle? I would have gathered thee O Jerusalem, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens; I have called and cried all the day, and O that thou had known! and
what could I have done more for my Vineyard? and St. Peter and Paul, how
vigorous and industrious to bring them to Christ? Oh let there be in us the
same earnest desire to do this people good, for God is able to graft them in
again: O let it never be said of us, that Gods people, his Ancient people, of
whom according to the flesh Christ Jesus came, being sad and grieved in spirit,
traveling from one City to another, being few in Number, hearing that the
Gospel was purely preached here, that Justice and uprightness flourished here,
that God had done great things here, humbly desired to come In here, as hoping
and believing they should find some rest here, and that they should find a
godly and merciful people here, with gracious and wise Governors here; let it
I say never be reported, that England rejected them, England would not give
Admission to Gods Ancient heritage. England denied them to hear Gods holy Word,
whereby they might be saved; who can say what Gods Intendments may be? whether
or no we may not have the Credi^, and greatest, and first Comfort of their
happy Union with us in the same faith in the Lord Jesus? and why may not they
acknowledge the goodness of our Nation? me thinks I hear them say, Blessed be
God that has delivered us from our Enemies; and who has found out a place of
safety and refreshment to us? Oh how have we been trod on, scorned, abused,
fleeced, and butchered in many other places, but yet at last God lent us a
shelter, even England; England we say, where we find Comfort for souls and
bodies; England, who holds up Gods glory, and fights the Lords battles;
England, which is so famous for Piety, where we have received faith to believe
and embrace the Son of God: Oh blessed be God; who now of late has thus
mercifully visited, and brought us out of thick darkness, into mavelous
light, by the power of the Gospel of his dear Son, our precious Savior, and
Eternal, and Merciful Redeemer, so plentifully, and so powerfully preached in
England! O what a Comfort and Credit will this be to our Nation, that our
Righteousness, our Mercy, and Meekness, our zeal for Gods Glory, our Care for
the Gospel, our holiness of Conversation, have been provokers, and stirrers up
of the Jews; as Saint Paul said in the same Case, that by these I might provoke
the Jews to the like, and so we to be the Gracious Instruments under God, for
their happy deliverance from that blindness, and hardness of heart, under which
at present they do so heavily groan, and sigh.

4. By the Practice of many other Countries, Provinces, and free Cities.

This fourth Argument is drawn from Practice, a good way of Argumentation; for
though Gods word says that we must not follow a Multitude to do Evil; yet its
a shame on the other side, if that having such a Cloud of Witnesses before us,
we should not at all be moved, and is it not a shame that the very Heathens and
Infidels do yet show mercy, and some love to these people of the Jews, who yet
do it at best, either by the all-ruling wisdom and power of God, forceably
working their hearts to this end, they not knowing the Word of God? what these
people are, or how, or when they shall be converted; nay, not truly knowing
that ever they shall be called, or yet what the Kingdom of Christ is unto
which they shall be joined, or else, secondly, because they find profit and
gains, by suffering the Jews amongst them, or upon any pretended injurious Act
done by them; both their lives and estates are liable, the One to death, the
other to Confiscation; as is to be seen in that bloody intended Act of Haman in
King Ashuerus time, to have been put in Execution had not God in his Infinite
wisdom and mercy to that people then prevented it.

Yet any one that knows that History cannot but read that the Jews did live
with, and amongst those Persians, in a 127. Provinces without Let or
Contradiction, and had free trading in all places, nay, even at Court too, for
Mordecai is said to sit at the Court Gate until Haman moved with prid^ and
malice intended not only Confiscation of Estates, but their lives to boot; and
indeed the politic and Cruel Counselors of Covetous and ambitious Emperors
and Kings, knowing and perceiving the great wealth of the Je^s by Gods
blessing; have persuaded their masters (and any argument will serve a Covetous
mind) to take and rake the Jews wealth into their treasuries, when as they
suppose a Crime committed against their Religion and Laws; so that to speak
truth it has been the Riches and Moneys of the Jews that have rendered them to
punishments, and death it self in those Heathen Countries, not their violation
of their Laws or Religion; and yet the Persians then did, and to this day admit
them not only into their Countries, but also into their Councels and
Commissions; and have and do yet find of them admirable, judicious, discreet
and valorous persons, for the management of public affairs, either for way or
peace: nay, let me speak (and I will speak but the truth) those great and
populous Nations of the East and South, though yet not brought to Christianity,
yet they who afford the Jews, I say the Jews, the freest habitation largest
privileges, impo^e the least burdens and taxes, the fewest vexations, who
deal the m^st justly and favorably to them, who trust them most, and torment
them least, those Nations flourish most, abound in wealth, in strength, in
largeness of Empire and Dominion to this very day above others their Neighbor
Princes about them; as though one may say, that which God promised to Abraham
is really fulfilled to this very day; I will bless them that bless thee, and I
will Curse them that Curse thee; that is, those people that show kindness to
them that shall come out of thy loins, I will bless, but those that shall be
Cruel and uncharitable, and oppressors of them, I will Curse; it is not the
meaning, nor does any Expositor or Commentator upon that Text, restrain the
Blessing or Cursing to Abraham's person only, but to all the Nation of the
Jews, whose father Abraham was, as they told our Savior in St. John's Gospel,
We have Abraham to our father.

The next Nation that we will mention, is that of the Turks, populous and
Potent for Arms and Arts, yet enemies to Jesus Christ, a people apt to gain
wealth, and augment their vast Empire, sour and melancholic of disposition,
yet even these have from their first Rise, to their height, in which they now
are; suffered the Jews amongst them, and in some places with large Immunities,
not debarring them their richest Kingdoms to Inhabit, nor their wealthiest
Cities to trade and traffic in; witness all Egypt, and therein Grand Cairo,
all Greece, and therein Constantinople it self, the Metropolis, nay, all Asia,
and not one City in all that largest, fruitful, most spacious, and opulentest
part of the world, but the Jews have liberty to dwell, exercise their trade,
nay, not debarred one particular Town by any public Edict of the Turkish
Emperor, and all this done without any murmuring or repining of the natural
born Turks, nay, without any mutinies, plots, treasons, or treacheries,
practiced by the Jews in all the Turkish Dominions.

I do not say, but that the Jews in many places, and at sundry times have been
(but it was by the false information of Clandestine Enemies (as they are very
Common) to some Bashaw, Vizier, or Viceroy, addicted to Covetousness, Ambition,
or Malice) I say the Jews have been many of them strangled, and deeply punished
by severe mulcts of their purse, but this done Commonly without the Consent or
Command of the Grand Seigneur, and when the Jews have complained, they have had
sure, and just, and speedy remedy against the false Informer, if known, and
against the Chief Officer, who did the injury, but such exorbitances fall
seldom, and when acted, Punished.

But the truth is, the Jews have liberty to dwell where they please, to trade
in what Country they please, to travel whither they please, to return in peace
when they please; have freedom of Markets, Fairs, Merchandise of all sorts,
without any control, or trouble, and yet this Nation of the Turks thrives,
grows Potent, and rich every where: Victuals of all sorts plentiful, no
scarcity of any thing useful for mankind; the Turks complain not that the
Jews eat up their provision, hinder their trade, or are any way troublesome to
them, which evil (amongst such a Confluence of mankind, of such sublimated and
quick Natures) would easily be found, and remedied to the full, to the utter
ruin and destruction of those people, whose throats and estates lies open to
any affront that shall be commanded to be offered; and since these people find
such help, shelter, relief, and subsistence by trading and trafficking amongst
these very Heathens, will Christians be Inferior to them in Acts of Humanity
and Civilility; Horresco referens, -- tell it not in Gath, publish it not in
the streets of Askelon, that Heathens should exceed Christians, in harboring
and fostering Strangers; but I proceed, and come into Christendom.

And therein we find Hungaria entertains them, Germany harbors them, Poland
till these wars, and Sweden trades with them, Denmark affords them habitation
and Synagogues, Italy loves them, Holland approves them, Hamburgh, Lubeck, and
most of the Imperial Hans-towns invite them In; and yet in all these Countries
and places, who admit them, there is no disturbance in Government, no Civil or
Inbred Commotions, no popular Insurrections against the Magistrates, about the
Admission of the Jews, nor any the least offense taken at the Jew, but live
quietly and peaceably together, the Magistrate protecting, and the Jews obeying
his Orders and injunctions.

Indeed the Spaniard, with his divellish and Popish Inquisition, looks a squint
at them, and uses them as he does other Christians of the Protestant Religion,
without any Mercy or Equity; and what wonder is it, if these poor people not
liking the usage, do begin to grow wise, by forsaking his territories? we may
say, as Solomon does, the very mercies of the wicked are cruel, and so are the
Spaniards; we may trace them by their bloody footsteps, in the West Indies, and
all other Countries where they could get footing or Sovereignty, and the
Spanish Inhumane Butcheries of the Dutch, by that unsatiable Blood-hound, the
Duke of Alva forced the Hollanders, with the help of England and France, to
break his teeth, and cut his paws, or else long before this, he had showed
them the strength and length of his Catholic Inquisition for blood; He who
never spared any that came into his clutches, no marvel if he show his malice
against these poor people the Jews, by burning, racking, and torturing of them
for Religion (as he pretends) though he is as void of it, as they.

But not to take Example from such a Tyrant, Let England show it self a Nation
professing and upholding godliness, and so rather give Example to others, by
being ready and cheerful to harbor them that are Cast Out, and to show mercy
to the afflicted, as knowing God himself will reward our Labors in this kind,
and laying deeply to our heart, the Infinite Love of God to us, when we our
selves were (as the Apostle has it, Strangers, and Enemies too; then did God
Call us In, Into Grace, and Favor, and Mercy in his Son; when we wandered, and
were wearied with the burden of sin, God took off our burdens, and made us
free, free Citizens, and Coheirs with the Saints, nay, with his own Son, Romans
chapter 8. nay, being Enemies, he reconciled himself to us by his Son; behold, he
has showed us what is good! and therefore we should go and do so likewise;
It being an Act so full of Mercy, having so much of God in it; and these poor
Strangers begging at our doors for a favorable, Charitable, and Christian
Admission amongst us, I say at present, desiring it at our hands: and that
brings in our fifth Argument.

5. From Ties of Natural Affection, and so, 1. To entertain St^a^gers, and
that without respect of persons. 2. To reward Evil with Good. 3. Not to suspect
them. 4. Nor to aggravate former long buried faults. 5. To forgive and forget
all former Acts, and cover all with Christian Love.

This Argument stands in force, by verture of Antiquity, and Gods Word:
Affections are innate and powerful in the soul, they are pullies, and will
draw, and elevate the soul; take away natural Affection, and what differs Man
from Beasts? nay, a man without it is inferior to the Beast, even the
cruellest, and most savage Tigers, Lions, Wolves, and Bears, none of these but
love, and cherish their young Ones with care and Industry, the Scripture says
of the men that followed David, they were all like Bears robbed of their whelps,
not to be met or meddled withal, without danger of being torn in pieces, if
they want, or be deprived of their young Ones; and are these so affectionate,
what should man be then? nay, what should a Christian be? It is a fault the
Apostle lays to the very Gentiles charge, that they were without Natural
Affection, Romans chapter 1. but speaking to Christians, he says thus; But ye
Brethren, put on Bowels of tender Compassion, Love, Meekness, Charity, etc. If
ye have any Bowels, fulfill my Joy, Phil. 2.1, 2.

Now for certain, as it is our duty to be such qualified, merciful persons, let
us show it in entertaining Strangers, and that without respect of persons,
whither Jews or Gentiles, as St. Peter said to Cornelius, of a truth God is no
respecter of persons, But in every Nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him, Act. 10. Now the Apostle says, There is
no difference between the Jew and the Gentile, Romans 10. v. 12. for the same
Lord over All, is rich unto All; that is, as well to Jew as to Gentile; now if
there be none, nor God makes none, why should we put any difference? entertain
them therefore, though Strangers, for so did Abraham entertain Angels, Heb. 13.
It is said of Abraham, that he stood in the Tent door to wait for Strangers,
and of Lot, it is said, Genesis 19. he sat in the Gate, and when two Angels (as
Strangers) came, Lot went to meet them, and bowed to the ground, and what
language gave he to them? O my Lord, turn into your Servants house, I pray you,
and tarry there all night, and wash your feet; and when they said nay, He
pressed greatly upon them, and made them a Feast; and when the wicked Sodomites
came to offer violence, He Interposes, intercedes strongly for their safeguard,
and protection, by noble and forceing Arguments; seeming to condescend too too
much to their Impudence and Bruitishness, then Strangers should be injured and
wronged. We may see by this how the holiest, and godliest minded men did count
it their comfort, their honor and delight, to afford Strangers kind Admission
into their Houses and Tents, and shall we at present debar them, and exclude
them? and if our excluding them should grieve and vex them, are not we guilty
of Gods anger, and breach of his Word? Vex not a Stranger; however, we make our
selves unlike to God, for Psalm 146. v. 8. it is said, The Lord preserves the
Strangers, and shall we suffer them to perish for want of Admittance?

I will conclude this with that Noble and Charitable direction of Mr. Peter's,
in his Book, entitled, Good work for a Good Magistrate, page 2. S. 6. We
should give freedom of dwelling, trading and protection (mercy also) to all
Strangers, to make little or no difference, as the Lord of old commanded his
people, and promised to bless them for it; and this will enrich a Nation
mightily, as we see in Holland, and not hurt any Natives, as envious persons
think, and can by good reasons be proved; and quotes these places of Scripture
for it. Deuteronomy. 19.33, 34. Deuteronomy. 10.19. Exodus 23.9. and 22.21. worthy the
Reading, to move you to harbor Strangers.

Again, at page 53. S. 5. the same Author speaks solidly, concerning Criminal
and Civil things. Let no difference be made between Jews and Gentiles, Stranger
or Natives, in either Criminal or Civil things, for so has God commanded, and
by this means shall the Governors be true fathers of Humanity, and it will
mightily populate and enrich the Commonwealth, when the Oppressed in any other
Country know where to go dwell under so just Government, with freedom from
Oppression: and these places are quoted for proof, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. Prove. 24.23.
Prove. 20.8.

At page 90. Sect. 6. He wisely and Judiciously sets down these words: Let
forraingners, and all Strangers, Jews and Heathens, have full, as just, speedy,
and cheap Justice as any, so shall All Nations tell what the Lord has done for
you, and how will Riches flow In? 1 Cor. 6.5.

And secondly, Natural Affections bids us to do good against Evil, Be, says
the Apostle, kindly affectioned one toward another, with Brotherly Love, Romans
12.10. and v. 17. the Apostle adds this, Recompense no man Evil with Evil.

Suppose that some or most of the Jews that lived here formerly, were not so
good as they should have been; might it not be for want of good Magistrates or
Ministers; it is said in St. Matthew his Gospel, Mat. 28. And the people did as
they were taught, had they been taught better, they would have done better;
it is to be feared, the fault lies at our doors: however, to do good against
Evil, is to do as God himself does, who causes his Sun to shine, and his rain
to fall both upon good and bad; and further, must it of necessity follow, that
because those Jews were bad, that were here 300. or 200. years since, that
these that come In now, must needs be so? we know that many of our forefathers
were Popish, and the Land full of it then, but is it so still; what a
Reformation may be by Gods good hand wrought, and brought about in a few years,
is plainly seen in our own in 14. and that might have been further heightened
too; and therefore we are not to requite evil with evil, but if thine Enemy
hunger, give him bread, if he thirst, give him drink; and as our blessed
Savior has it in his Sermon upon the Mount: But I say unto you, Love your
Enemies, Bless them that Curse, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which despightfully use, and persecute you, that you may be the Children
of your Father which is in Heaven: Matthew. 5.44, 54. Look well to the performing
of this.

Next, as we are to do good against evil: so are we not to supect them: it is
the nature of true charity, 1 Cor. 13.5. To think no evil, David speaks of
wicked men they were in fear, where no fear was: (id est) when there was no
cause of fear, suspicious persons are ill to be judges; perfest love casts
out fear, and where fear is, there is no perfect love, so says John, 1 John
4.18. why then should we fear or suspect them? it is because their predecessors
were evil, or because these are thought to be naught, or that they may do us
hurt; for the first many a bad father may have a good son, was not Ahaz father
to good King Ezekiah? and Amon a wicked father, yet Josiah his son was a godly,
zealous King, 2 Chronicles. 28.29. 2 Chronicles. 33.34. Were not the children of Israel
in one Generation, bad, and in another holy and good? are not all states
subject to alteration and chang? we are not therefore to suspect this
generation, because of the former; Malus cultura fit bonus, An evil man by due
order and government is made good; to the second, I say, ill thoughts are the
froth of the soul; if they be evil, you must either have it by knowledge or
hearsay; say not, what you know not; and take not up a false Report: to lay a
scandal upon a Nation, is not a light matter, they may perhaps not be so good
as they should, yet they may not be so bad as they are accounted. All is not
Gold of Ophyr, yet may be used; I do not wonder so much that they have Vice,
but I wonder that they should retain any virtue, being so tossed from place to
place, driven to such extremities and exigencies, and necessitas soepe cogit ad
turpia, besides what comes by contraction from the persons and places where
they live; they that live in Christendom are reputed the worst, a poor credit
for those Nations that make themselves patterns for Jews to sin by; for the
third, of doing us Hurt; to our persons they dare not, to our estates they
cannot; can they that are strangers, outstrip us in our own ways? very
improbable: but to proceed.

As we are not to suspect them, so much less not to aggravate long buried
things; there are a sort of men, that are always skillful in multiplying this
way; it is an unseemly thing, always to be raking among the graves of the dead;
our Savior says, sufficient to the day, is the Evil thereof: so certain is
it, with that of a month, or a year, or a generation; an Act of Oblivion, or
an Amnesty would do well in this point; it is observed of those two men
possessed with devils, it is said of them, that they lived among the graves, and
were so fierce, that no man could pass that way, Mat. 8.28. such certain, who
live by tearing up tombs of the dead that are buried, and their names out of
mind, with their faults while they lived; aggravated with additions; certainly
I say, they may be said to be divelish men, and fierce men, that would have no
man pass quietly by them, but are ready to tear him in his good name, etc.
surely such as rail at, and revile the poor Jews, for to hinder their Coming
In, that rage, that are mad, that drive so furiously like Jehu, are they not
like, too too like those men (I say) who were possessed, and knew not indeed
what spirit they are off? these are like the raging Sea, casting out its dirt
and mire; they should remember that Solomon says, it is the Honor of a Prince
to pass by offenses; that love covers, not discovers a multitude of sins; to
consider our own infirmities and sins, against which we cannot be too active,
to hinder their Coming In, and living In, yes, and Ruling In our Souls; it is
ill to give these admittance, it is good wisdom to write against these, to
strive against these; but as for to hinder by writing or railing against the
Jews, argues but little wit, and less wisdom: so I come to the next Branch of
Natural Affection, which is indeed the chief, and the glory of Christianity,
if practiced toward the Jews as it ought.

And that is, to forgive and forget what is past, fully and freely, and to
cover all with Love and Charity. And me thinks our Savior argues sublimely in
this point, If thy Brother offend thee, forgive him, if he offends seventy
seven times, use the same remedy, forgive him, if ye will not forgive men their
trespasses, neither will your heavenly father forgive you, Mat. 6. thou evil
and wicked Servant, I forgave thee all thy debt, which thou could never have
paid me, oughst not thou to have had Compassion on thy brother and fellow
servant, and have forgiven him? take him says our Savior, and cast him into
prison, he shall not come forth, till he pay the utmost farthing. I leave the
Application of this, to those who suspitiously brand the Jews with Abundance of
foul faults, but they that are free should throw the first stone, not they
that are guilty; why do any rail against the Jews, when they are in the same
condemnation? let these either excuse themselves from sin, or cease to accuse
the Jews of theirs; a Dead carcass is to be buried for Civility and Comeliness,
suffer me to bury my dead, the sins of the Jews, were they great, yet in 200 or
150. years they may die, and so to be buried as a dead man, out of mind; Lord,
says Martha, he has been dead and buried four days, and stinketh, and
thereby seemed to persuade our Savior not to medale with him; certainly, then
we should not meddle with those Jews, who have been buried 400. years, if yet
they were faulty: We use to cover an ill savor, and keep far from it, and they
were counted unclean which had touched any dead person; and therefore
concerning what was done by the Jews toward us, or by us toward them (for
they were the sufferers and loosers) let it be, I say, let it be forgotten and
forgiven; remembering that of St. Paul, Brethren, forgive one another, even as
Christ has forgiven you. Now follows the sixth Argument for their Admission
into England, and that is,

6. By our Trading, and living with and amongst other people, who are void of
the knowledge of God, and Enemies to the Reformed Religion: As, 1. Heathens and
Idolaters; 2. Popish and Superstitious.

The Apostle Paul has a saying, 1 Cor. 5.9. I wrote to you in an Epistle, not
to company with fornicators, yet not altogether with the fornicators of this
world, or with the Covetous or Contentious, or Idolaters, for so you must go
out of this world. This place rightly understood, does not debar us trading
with such people or Nations as are Adicted to these Capital mentioned sins, and
therefore if we may trade with such sinful men, I say, why should the Jews
only, of all other Nations, Tongues, and Languages be excluded this so common,
so allowed Commerce, and Conversation? and yet it appears not that they are
such, but admit they were, certainly there is no debarment from this Text, but
that they with, and amongst us, and we with them, may trade freely; and if this
should follow, that we might not, many Clients would scarce find Lawyers to
receive unjust Fees, which yet abound every where in our Lands, and we might go
out of the world, if we should only employ Lawyers, who were free from these
faults; for which of them are free from all or most of these Crimes?

Men, especially Merchants, their affairs being more abroad then at home,
brings them into variety of company, and some with whom they trade, may be men
of dissolute carriage, as Fornicators, Covetous, shall they not then trade with
such? Not so, says the Apostle, for then you must go out of the world, you
will want vent for your wares, for such kind of people abound, especially did
at that time at Coriuth, and all Greece over: Indeed those particular sins in
the Apostles days, were the shame of Greece, and proved the ruin of them by
the Turks; 'twas to be wished that all the men of this world were free from
these sins, but since it is improbable, and impossible, you may trade with them,
and deal with them in worldly matters, as buying and selling, paying and
receiving of moneys, making accounts, with such like; but if there be any that
is a Professor, a Member of the Church, who is such a one, avoid him, eat not
with him at the Table of the Lord, he is a stain and a shame too to the Gospel
and power of Godliness: amongst worldly men he is not so scandalous, nor so
much noted, for the world will love her own; you may trade and exchange wares,
but not learn or practice his vices, but if, etc. have nothing to do with him:
Hence we observe; 1. That sins in Professors that are scandalous, are to be
shunned. 2. That those sins which are scandalous in them, may yet not be so
amongst Tradesmen and Merchants, and men of this world.

For our present purpose, that though these were Idolaters, and unconverted,
yet that did not hinder Traffic, with and amongst them; Use the world as
though you used it not; use it they might, but not comply with the sins of
persons or places; Trading and Traffic is a part of Commutative Justice, the
lying, fraud, covetousness, dissembling, extortion, etc. are not Essentials,
no, nor fit Appendixes to it; sin and vice are so far from constituting (...)
man, that indeed they deface and disgrace the best part of him, the Soul: I
only give this directory conclusion to our English Merchants and Factors, who
go out young, that they would remember they go to barter commodities, now
there is no commodity in sins; they go out for to bring home goods, but there is
no goodness in sin; they should strive to get Pearls, Precious Stones, and
rich Jewels, Gold and Silver, etc. but there is no luster, or beauty, nor riches
in vices and sins: they go out for Spices and Aromatic Drugs, fragrant and
fruitful unguents, as Balm, etc. but sin has a stinking scent, and noisome
smell, there is no fruit, or true pleasure, comes from it: trade, but keep
faith, and a good conscience; those Ships come heavy laden that are full of
sinners, sin weighs heavy in payment, though light in substance; remember, I
say, all you that go to the Indies, Persia, Turkey, Greece, Italy, and France,
etc.

Trading then being lawful with all Nations, if it were not, surely the Apostle
would not have allowed a thing of higher concernment then Trafficking with
Infidels and Heathens, and that is Marriage; of that he says expressly, What
know thou, Oh man, but thou may save thy unbelieving wife; and so again,
What know thou, O wife, but that thou may save thy unbelieving husband.
Now for certain, marriage is much higher then only trading, if the greater be
allowed, the less is included.

And now to speak to this particular, are the Jews such sinners above all
others, that only they must be excluded? sure I am that their Capital Sin was,
and is accounted by all, to be the Crucifying of Jesus Christ, the Lord of
Life. Now our Savior himself did heartily pray for the forgiveness of that,
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. To say he was not heard, and
his Petition not granted, is impious and desperate blasphemy; and if granted,
as it was, sure they are not such detestable creatures as they are proclaimed
in Prin; 'twas to be wished he had made a longer demurrer, and not vented such
irrational spleen and malice against this people; I say this people; with whom
he never spoke, but of whom he has spoken too much, may we trade with those of
Calecut, who worship the Devil, and may we not admit of Jews who acknowledge
and worship God? may we exercise trade with such as deride and vilify the
mercies of Christ, and deny him, and may we not entertain them amongst us to
whom belong the promises? and to whom were committed the Oracles of God? shall
we live amongst Such who set up Idols, and shall we not embrace those that
abhor them? May we, and do we trade with superstitious and Popish Princes, and
are with them in league for peace, or for war, and may we not bring in such as
detest the breach of Gods Commandments, and the Scarlet Whore of Babylon? I say
this, and say it again, that the veil shall be taken away, and they shall see
him (i. e.) by faith, whom they have pierced, and shall mourn bitterly, that
is, they shall believe in Christ, and repent, and be saved; they are cut off,
it is true at present, but their time of grafting In is coming, they, the Jews,
shall be grafted In and On again, their being Out, brings us In; it is Gods
will that they shall be brought In, as Christ is the Light to the Gentiles, so
he is the glory of the people Israel: Zachariah in his Song magnifies God for
visiting and redeeming his people; visiting there is in love, and redeeming is
in mercy; God loves them, and shall we hate them? the time will come when it
shall be said by of the Jews, I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my
people scattered and dispersed, I will come and deliver them; and my prayer is
that of David's, Redeem Israel, (O God) out of all his troubles. I shut up all,
and draw toward a conclusion, a step or two further, concerning their
admittance into England, we may do it.

7. From Civil Policy; and therein: 1. We being now a Free State. 2. To abolish
the Edicts of Popish Kings of this Land against them: 3. From the great good
that may come by it, not only of wealth, etc.

A well built house as it ought to have a good foundation, so also Pillars to
support it, for certain it is, that as Piety and Religion are the furest
foundation for to ground a State upon, so is Civil Policy, Wisdom, and
Justice, the best supporters of it: A great State, or potent Commonwealth, is
but the greater family, good counsel at home, guides and steers it upright and
firm in all hazards and tempests; and though not long since our present State
by want of Policy and Council was almost brought to ruin, and for certain was
in a tottering condition; yet (praised be God) by prudent Counselors, and
just, it is reedified, beautified, and stands externally and internally glorious
and renowned, and is well recovered from a desperate Fever, a lingering
Consumption, a threatened slavery, and from deadly destruction, to health,
vigor, and soundness, comfortable liberty, nay even to life and well-being.
The old foundations were decayed, and the Pillars were rotten, but (in Gods
good providence) both removed, and Others more durable, being better seasoned
with grace and wisdom, are set up and advanced; and thou (O God) who of thy
mercy did raise them for our good, preserve them as thy Builders, and
Repairers of the old Breaches.

To come close to our seventh Argument, for certain it is, that our slavery
being by Christian and Civil Policy changed into liberty, and we rendered a Free
Stat^, have we not power to relieve the oppressed, to support the weak? have we
not power to open or shut our doors, to whom we see it fitting and just? cannot
we upon just grounds admit whom we please into our Society and friendship, and
upon demerits or abuses keep out or expel? Caunot we decree and determine with
whom to trade and traffic, and whom to debar? may not we raise up an ancient
Family to Honor, which has been long cast down, and who can justly blame or
bark at our Charity? Seeing our intents are noble, the people whom we look on
justly to be pitied, and Gods hand moving in it for the augmentation of his
glory, the filling up and completing Christ's mystical Body; the gracing our
Profession of the Gospel, and fulfilling Gods purposes and the Scriptures too,
who but infatuated and malicious spirits will contradict it?

Add to these, and these are weighty things to be considered, the abundance of
wealth, the flourishing of Trade, the increase of love, the restoring and
repairing of old Breaches, the pouring in Oil to an old wound; for their own
sakes too, considering of what a royal, holy Offspring and Generation they
are, what a flourishing and indeed miraculous people they have been, who had
God for their immediate Guide, by day and by night; whose Leaders have spoken
often with God, whom God fed with Bread from Heaven forty years, a people
chosen out by God himself from and before all other Nations, considering what a
people they are at present, having neither Country, nor City, nor House of
their own; and yet have by Gods conduct (and certain it must needs be so) by
Gods conduct, I say, subsisted) in so many changes and alterations of places;
and those strange Ones too, wanting Language; and it is wonderful how they got
it, and Bread too, to uphold their fainting and hungry souls for sixteen
hundred years; which could never have been, except God had been with them: add
a little further (for my bowels do earn within me for this people) what a
glorious, renowned people they shall be, when grafted and joined to our and
their own Head Jesus Christ, and that shall be; and even for Abraham's,
Isaak's, and Jacob's sakes, their famous and never to be forgotten forefathers,
once more for their large Privileges, for the Promises made to them, for the
Covenant, for Christ's sake, who according to his flesh is bone of their bone,
not ashamed to call them Brethren. Lastlv, even for the Election sake, as the
Apostle has it, by which they are beloved of the Father, for Gods Election (I
say) of these unto his Kingdom of grace here, and glory hereafter, let their
Requests come before our Governors, and God more their hearts to entertain
this people of God amongst us, and let thy will O God be done in moving our
Governors hearts to this end.

And who but envious, ignorant, and uncharitable men will fret at it, or strive
to hinder so pious, so noble, so renowned, so gracious an Act: two things, I
say, to these kind of men, Suppose it should so please God that they should be
expelled house and home, from kindred and all relations, (and for certain it
has been so with some of them) would they not, nay did they not desire pity
and relief in their extremity, and why not the same to be showed amongst the
Jews in their low state and condition? The second, May it not so come to pass
that some of them who are at present well seated, and settled, and furnished
with all abundance, may not by some power be moved or removed? Or if not
themselves, may not some of their Loins have their flittings and wanderings, and
perhaps justly too? Would they not think it hard dealing, when as they should
come to the gates of a City, to be railed at, written against by invective
Pens, faults laid to their charge great, and perhaps more than they were guilty
of, only to render them odious to the people that live therein; to be held as
the pests and Plagues, and if admitted will overthrow all, confound all, that
they are accursed, hated of God, and utterly forsaken for their sins and gross
impieties; Would they desire to be so used or abused? to have misery added to
their sufferings, and would they that no pity, remorse, compassion or relief
should be affor ded them, nor no House, nor City, nor Country to give them
entertainment? If they would not be so dealt withal themselves, why do they
yet so hastily deal so with others that are in distress? Why so furious against
Gods own Heritage, Gods own peculiar People, against the natural Branches?
Because it pleases God to punish them for a while, will these men make
themselves Executioners? O remember the time was, when they would have taken it
ill. But why do I wonder at the unchristian railing against the Jews, when as
their Pen and Tougue scarce can spare any Christian? I have finished the
Arguments for the Jews Admission amongst us. I now come to answer the
Objections made against them, and they are four.

Four Objections against the Jews coming in answered.
1. They will infect us. 2. They will infest us. 3. They are dangerous. 4. They
are scandalous.
Turbulent Spirits are like Clouds filled with Thunder, never will leave
swelling bigger and blacker, till they burst out, and asunder, and then we have
fair Sunshine weather: surely the party who writ so furiously against the Jews
coming in, was afraid his chamber in Lincoln's Inn should have been for their
habitation, or else his Manor of Swainscomb or Swainswick, of which he writes
himself Esquire, but there is something of the Swains-Comb too in it; what, does
he now want employment to plead at the Bar, or the Bench, against Christians,
and so pleads (being set on) so violently against the Jews? what will he leave
no stone unmoved? it would have been thought a better work, and of more
necessity, if he proved Bencher or Barrister against hmself, and past sentence
upon his own virulencies, Sed panci cupiunt in se descendere, the Press must
render his fame and name in print come what will, this only to hint him a
little.

If it had not bin for such unquiet spirits, the objections would not have been
mooted, but they shall be answered, and so to the first, concerning infection,
if it be meant of their persons, they are healthy, sound, and perfect; and so
no fear from them: if it be meant of their Doctrine, they came not in to teach,
but to be taught; and what a strange fear is that, that the Disciple should
infect his Teacher, Doctrines, not taught, nor broached, nor vented; how can
they be known to be infectious? neither can they, indeed be so, till vented and
received: poison locked up, up in a box, kills not: but see what an esteem they
are made of, as a plague; but sure, should they prove such, yet these are so
sound in the faith, that they sure are out of danger; and for others they shall
not be forced to give account.

To the second, concerning their infesting us who makes more trouble than these
do? and yet they complain against these; But have we no Magistiate, or no Laws,
or have these people no consciences, they come in to be sheltred and protected
themselves from molestation and troubles; and will they beg in that here for
which they fled for quiet, and peaceble dwelling; what hopes of prevailing;
what should they get? nay, what should they not lose? they bring in such
considerable estates that sure they will have more wit than to lose all, and
themselves too for an idle quarrel, surely if the Laws should not, yet the
soldier I believe would quickly know a way, to turn such busy bodies hence
well pillaged for melding in other men's matters, without Cause; so that also
being an objection more of fear than truth, I pass it over.

To the third, for matter of danger in their admitt^nce, why more here than in
other Countries? if it be their multitude, a las! there is no Armies of them,
neither are they that come in, if yet they do come in men of the Sword; and
sure there may be provision made for disabling them to rise as well as for the
Cavalier, neither have they any Parties, Allies, Confederates; nay, but a few,
if any friends to engage for them; what is it? in matter of trade they will be
dangerous, they will quicken it, highten, augment, advance it, and enrich it:
but have they any Ships of transportation to Countries to send wealth to; where
can they lay it safe? Sure they bring none, nor I belicve shall use any but
what they hire of our Merchants, and they were never good Seamen, so that they
must trust English men with all; but perhaps they think victuals will be
dearer, then money will be the more plentiful; and for ought I know upon an
Exigent (they may by our courteous carriage to them) ease a main part of the
Taxes; and as it was said before, How does Turkey abound in all sorts of
provisions, notwithstanding all the Jews throughout the Emperors Dominions? and
therefore the danger is blown over, it is only in conceit not in reality.

To the fourth, and of it bre fly conceruing Scandal; and how comes our elder
brother to be now scandalous? Accuse him not unjustly, Scandal is either given
or taken, if we give it, the fault is ours, if they, it must first be taken
before it can be so, and then surely it must be first acted and reacted; which
if it be, it must be either in Religion or life, or both; for the first, it is
notidetermined, only imagined; they shall exercise their Jewish Rites; which
yet is not granted, however there is room enough for us not to come near, and
yet we may, and perhaps not be scandalized neither; he that will run into the
fire, if he burn the fault's his own; if for life, surely the men are generally
addicted to Morality and Civility, observing strictly the ten Commandments of
God, they are not given to excess nor riot nor pride, Content with spare diet,
mean apparel, and lodging; they are rather indeed to be blamed for too much
austerity and strickness in life, I rather think they will convince our loose
living, than any wise give occasion of scandal to us; they are no gadders
abroad, nor Tavern-hunters, nor addicted to swearing, or cursing, stealing, or
the like; but live civilly, minding their occasions, carrying themselves
strictly toward the outward man: and where is this great Bugbear run, danger
of Scandal? I wish we may not give them any, which is most to be feared.

The people are witty, wise, ingenious, well-bred, addicted to curious and neat
Arts and Inventions, pleasing themselves in a solitary retiredness; and what
Scandal is herein? I have done with the two main things. I proposed to assert,
and I leave my self to the judgment of wise, moderate, just, and real
Christians, and God grant we may all (all, I say) as well Christians as Jews,
forget the things that are behind, and to press forwards toward the mark for
the price of the high calling in Jesus Christ, that all of us would study to
live quiet, and to prevoke one another to good works, knowing that our labors
shall not be in vain in the Lord. Amen. Amen.

Psalm 132.13. For the Lord has chosen Sion, and has desired it for his
habitation.

Verse 17. There will I make the horn of David to bud.

16. So that her Saints shall sing for joy.

A just Vindication of Mr. Peter's from the virulent and unjust Accusation of
Mr. William Prynn Bencher of Lincolns Inn.
OUr Savior speaks it, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, Surely, this stickling Scribe does show that he is stuffed full of
passion and malice, because he vents so much; He is not only bitter but
superlative invective against the Jews, but he drives as furiously against his
brethren and Countrymen, and as he is unwiling the Jews should come In; so he
would be as much pleased if some of his Country men were turned Out, and though
he is never fit to be a Judge, yet what he dispairs to enjoy, he does assume and
presume to Judge and censure others from his study and Chamber, and truly most
without cause; how little he intends, our blessed Lords words appears
sufficiently, Judge not that ye be not judged: Or the Apostles, what art thou
that judge another man's servant, and sure he approves not the Prophet David's
speech, Psalm. 50. Thou satest and spakest against thy brother: If this Esquire
did but seriously think and consider that we must give an account for every
idle word, surely he would not multiply vain words so as he does to no purpose,
and if in a multitude of words there is sin, certain it is that he cannot be
free, it is to be wished he would remember, that by his words he shall be
justified, and by his words he shall be condemned: and if an ELDER be not to be
rebuked, much less is he to be reviled; the Prophet David says concerning false
tongues, that GOD will pull them out of their dwelling, then it is high time for
this party to have a better care of his tongue than he formerly had of his
Ears; the one procured the Ruin of the other, and though he thinks that LOOSERS
may speak; yet not what they list, or against whom they lust; except he intends
to do as they did in Psalm. 12. We will speak, our tongues are our own, and who
is Lord over us? but I could advise the man to remember well what the Prophet
David's practice was, Psalm. 39. I said I will take heed unto my ways that I
offend not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth as it were with a Bit and a
Bridle, and Solomon advises us to ponder our words, and it is greatly to be
suspected that Mr. Prynn does not much regard his words because he lavisheth
them so away; Well, because opprobrious language is like a Gangreen that
spreads and infects others, and because those that are written peiree the
deeper and endure the longer as being (to use the phrase of this Scribe) upon
Record, and as he urges, Records are not to be meddled withal; I think it
fitting to apply a se asonable but a short Reply to this man in his highest
carreir and to tell him how unjustly, unreasonably, and unconscionably, against
the Rules of modesty, prudence, equity, and Christianity too, he has in the
vilifying not only the Jews, but also his own brethren and fathers
trangressed, and that first;

1. He has lived in and practiced this sin of Railing and Reviling, and evil
speaking and writing for many years, the longer any lives in, and practices
his sin, the worse state and condition he must be in; and who knows not if he
know any thing, but that W. P. Esquire; has vented his spleen and gaul and
bitterness of spirit, for many indeed for too many years, though not without
public and severe punishment.

2. From the very detestable nature of the crime, being proh ibited by God and
man, Thou shall not bring a railing Accusation. And it is no good thing to
accuse, but to accuse and rail, O it is injurious in a high degree, David in
Shimei's his railing would not punish him himself, but refers him to Gods
justice, yet though he did not at present, lay and inflict vengeance upon him,
yet he puts it into the hands of Solomon to execute, and advises him not to let
his gray hairs go in peace to the grave, but bids him remember. By all means to
remember that notorious fact of the Miscreant, and Solomon forgot it not, but
acted wisely and solidly in the matter, and when time served tells him home of
it; thou know (says he) the wickedness of thy heart, etc. and lays the guilt
of his own blood upon his own head: O! it is a dangerous infesting and infecting
evil; Consider well of it.

3. He acting it against persons no ways meriting it at his hands, O! says
James, the tongue is set on fire, and it burns to Hell, it is an unruly evil;
who can tame it? but it is then worse when it opens against an innocent; surely,
it is no ways lawful or justifiable to wound and gash our neighbors, friend;
or brethren, much less our Fathers.

4. How slandring, railing, and reviling stirs up Contention, disgraces the
profession of Christianity; makes our good to be evil spoken of, gives offense
and scandal to them that are weak, argues corruption of heart, makes men the
sons of the Devil; leaves a deep tincture of strife and debate, if not blacker
and uglier mischiefs, is clean contrary to Christ's practice, who when he was
reviled, reviled not again.

But he says and urges against this our Father of our Church and Champion of
our reformed Religion two things, the first is an Act, the second is for Words,
But sure upon examination we shall find that neither the Action nor the Words
of him can justly merit so long and so deep a brand of ignominy and
disparagement as this our testy and waspish Penman has rendered both of them to
the world.

To begin, therefore first come^rning the act charged upon him; an act if the
Lawyer might have his will should be Actionable, if not Treasonable too; for he
came with a Sword of Steel under his Arm, instead of the Sword of the Spirit.
Well, and what followed? Carried my self and many other worthy Members of the
Nation into Hell, and kept us, (as he says) and it is but his say so, there
upon the hard stones all night: etc. it was well that he did come, yet not
without command and commission, which was just and warrantable from the Lord
General; but he came with a Sword; if he had done so, it had been but what he
might do, and what at that time was but necessary; Why may not a spiritual man
wear a Sword? What not upon a journey or some great employment, and this was no
other? had not our Saviors own Apostles some Swords amongst them? yet were not
condemned for carrying them, nor for striking neither, if they had had a
command for it; Samuel was a spiritual man, yet called for a Sword, and used it
severely too, the hewing Agag in pieces, yet the act is nor condemned, or cen
sured for unjust; no not that valorous act of Phinees before him, but was so
far from being unlawful that it is commended for righteous to all generations.

And if he had come armed, it might have been justified, but he did not, but
came alone to speak with two members of the House, and to use his own
expressions, 'twas in the night and without a Sword, and Mr. Prynn with others
was then in the Queens Lodgings and not in Hell: and 'twas strange that being
in Hell they should be a cold, he knows who it was, being in Hell, cried out
that he was tormented in that flame; and it seems as strange too, that Mr.
Prynn should complain of his being almost sterved; and yet he was in a Cooks
shop, but had he been truly in Hell, he could never have procured a Habeas
Corpus to get out again;

But why does the man of the long Robe exclaim so bitterly against him? did he
give him any wounds, or did he threaten him, or force any uncivil Action upon
him? If none of these, why such reviling and indeed slandering of an absent and
innocent person? But the person is hated for his calling, for being one that
has so long by doing and suffering for the truth and contending by many (I
say) tentations at home, and abroad for the faith; yet holds out and is sound,
and entire to his profession of the Gospel; if any can say, and apply that
place of the Apostle Paul, he may to himself; for he has been in perils at
Sea, in perils at Land, in perils amongst false brethren, in hunger and cold,
in famine and nakedness, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils amongst his own
countrymen, etc. and all this for his constant adhering to, and loving the
sincerity of the Gospel; but I advise Mr. Prynn to take heed how he wrongs the
least of these little Ones, it is hard to kick against the pricks, but more
specially not to cause his own Tongue and Pen to accuse and condemn himself,
for slandering the upright in heart: Nor as Solomon says to cause his flesh to
sin. That Is for satisfaction for the Acts, had it been done as Mr. Prynn
reports it.

For the second thing that inflames his spirit so to rage and rant it ad randum
in folio, is (as he says) that Mr. Prynn should desire and would have all the
ancient Records of the Nation to be burned, and that makes him bestir himself
for fear least the common Law Records should be included in the Number; To this
we say, and truly it is the safest way of answering him by, the Gentleman's own
words, out of his printed book which yet was but intended for some private
papers past betwixt him and a friend, and not so much intended for public,
though indeed they are of public use and benefit; and fit to be practiced in a
well governed and Christian Common wealth; but sure there is no such poison in
them as this Spider has sucked from them; at folio 33. of his book called good
work for a good magistrate, he says,

That if the Premises were carried on, viz. of the Law truly reformed, of
Registers in every Parish whereby every man may know, and enjoy his own whilst
he lives, and be sure his will should be performed when he is dead; It were
best all Records that lie any where to hinder such a settlement were bur'nd,
yea, the Records in the Tower, that are the Monuments of Tyranny, for mark what
he Mr. Prynn writes, Relatio fit ad proximum antecedens, and then sure he
loses his aim; for let the things be scand thoroughly and there is no such
matter as he is so startled at; for look at the matter going before, and that
was the Law regulated. How? the Exorbitancies of unjust Fees, of injurious
D^emurs, of unnecessary Offices, and unfit persons in them, with thousands
besides these, it is this is the stone of offense, and so perplexes the peevish
Gentleman; yet whether this be fiting to be done, we leave to all honest
hearted Englishmen to judge.

And yet now we are upon it; one word or two to the very Law, the common Law it
self honored and indeed idolized by Mr. Prynn; I hope he will not say it is
like that of the Medes and Persians, unalterable, it was imposed not for the
good, but the curb of this Nation, by the Norman Tyrant; and why may not
another generation find out as good or better Principles to govern by, as
that? and as wise, and as faithful Lawyers to manage it? Was the Law and the
Sword too tied only to his head-peice? We know the very constitution of men in
several ages do differ? And what might then be known to be necessary for that
time and generation of men? Must it needs be so, also now, and of force binding
for the future? Because there stands an old House built by the Conqueror, may
it not be altered, or if this age thinks and finds it fitting; utterly pulled
down? though the Law does bridle, and punish many heinous and capital crimes
justly, and keeps us from living like Wolves and Bears, yet the Law as now
practiced, and managed by some Officers, I will not say Barresters, and
Benchers too; yet they are scarce excusable, the Law is made but as a stalking
horse for gain, let any man seriously consider but these three things, which
are strange and sad to think upon in the Law; and then let him tell the
excellent necessity, and profit of it.

1. Let them consider how most men go and get into the Law; into it I say. with
what vast charge, I of Moneys and time, with malice to boot; the charge
sometimes exceeding the main suit it self, and reducing a man's estate to
Atoms: and the malice extending to two or three generations, if not more to
the disgrace of Christianity, besides the journeys in Winter and Summer, with
charg of witnesses, and the like.

2. How it is managed when a man is in: with all subtilty, policy,
contrivances, searching, plotting, undermining; tampering with Witnesses:
stretching the sense of the Law on the tenter-hooks, searching old rotten
Records, to cull out any thing that may serve to advantage the Lawyers Purses,
continuation of the Suit, and then on the Defendants side what Subterfuges?
what Pretenses? what Suggestions? what Demurs? On the other side, what haste
for Process, for Writs, Warrants, Arrests, Judgments, Executions, Extents, and
Exigents, Restringas, Fieri facias, and Capias utlegatum, and thousands of such
vexatious courses, and all grounded upon a false information, or some little
Trespass at first?

3. How to get out when once in, hopes, and friends and moneys, and able
Lawyers counsel and advice, and encouragement too, are as so many Engines to
attract and draw in Game, with desire of Revenge, and to have the credit of the
Day, and that they cry all is their own, not to leave his Adversary worth a
Groat, and the like: and add to these the subtilty of the Lawyers, who promise
fair, pretend care and dispatch, secrecy, and the procuration of helps at last
by some old quirk and quillet, though for nothing else but to keep his Client
in, till he is forced out, because he is outlawed or law'd out of all his
Estate.

I end this with a short but a true Demonstration of the Charges of going to
Law; It was showed to a Committee at Westminster of 60. of the Parliament, in
Holland that past for 2. s. for the whole Conveyance of House and Lands worth
3000. l. and at the same time 55. sheets of of Paper shown for the Conveyance
but of 1500. l. and cost 50. l. a vast difference betwixt 2. s. for 300. l. and
50. l. for but 1500. l. and yet the Law nor Lawyers would be thought to be
chargeable or unjust. But this by digression, to proceed.

Mr. Prynn condemns him generally; but let him but revise the whole, and then
sure all will be allowable: For first, he would have those just and necessary
Premises carried on. Secondly, he would have the Law not annihilated, but truly
regulated. Thirdly, he would have Registers in every Parish first settled, not
done ex tempore, hand over head. Fourthly, he would have every man know his
Estate, enjoy it, and be assured of the performance of his will. Fifthly, he
does not say all Records simply, but all such Records as do hinder that such a
settlement. Sixthly, nor all in general, but such as are Monuments of Tyranny,
and oppression, and of slavery; and what matters it whether they ly in the
Tower, or elsewhere? Now why is this Gentleman so far transported, that nothing
will satisfy him, but as much as in him lies to disgrace, to vilify, to rail
at, and revile this painful Patriot, for his wise and judicious modeling and
endeavoring to reform that which stands in high need of it.

But how would he have had matter to have so inveighed against the noble Nation
of the Jews, had not he been furnished with the old Records (as he calls them)
of Friars and Popish Legends to make his Book to swell? besides the large
Privileges and gains he has perhaps made by poring into them, to help to
lengthen and prolong a Suit in Law, tedious enough of it self, and therefore
would not have his Supporters suppressed or removed? Add hereunto the fond
humor the Gentleman has to grace his Books, and to credit himself, to show
how studious he is, and how voluminous his Library, beside to persuade men
that is all true which he writes, attested with such unlegible Marginals of
antiquated Popish Authors, not to be approved of in other cases, but the only
Champions he uses in this; But why may not we entertain some Jews in England?
when as Venice alone entertains eighty thousand of them, and Rome no less than
one hundred and fifty thousand, without any offense, or trouble, or charge, but
contrariwise with a great deal of advantage, and certain gain and profit.

But to conclude all, we and so any one that is but easily read in Politics may
find out the cause of Mr. Prynn's distempered Accusation against his own
Brother, a godly, painful, solid, and sincere, orthodox Preacher of Gods Word:
seldom does any man love those that seem to stop or hinder a man's Reputation or
Gains, we will put both in. Now Mr. Prynn was a Member of the Parliament, and to
be debarred sitting any longer (though they sat too long) amongst others, was
a seeming blemish to his credit, and a sure stop to his profit and gains, to
lose both these together unexpectedly cuts deep: and the Commonwealth having
no need of him for further imploiment, having nothing else to do, he shows you
what he would do, if his power was proportionable to his will: and because he
cannot bite ^he does injuriously and unjustly bark at those whom otherways he
cannot reach or hurt; and we say, 'Twas no matter if all the Popish Authors
out of which he has fetched his far-fetched and unprofitable quotations
against the Jews, and whose authority he so much relies upon, whether they be
those in his study or elsewhere if they were burned, we say burned, who have
been the causers and procurers of such troubles, and have had a hand in the
burning of so many of Gods people in this Land; for if their Calling be Popish,
superstitious, and Antichristian; what hopes are there that their works should
be other? Either make the Tree good and his Fruit good, or the Tree bad and the
Fruit bad; A bad Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit; Do men gather (says our
Savior) Grapes of Thorns or Figs of Thistles?

To shut up all, I found a great deal of hard measure used toward the Jews,
but by none so much as by Mr. Prynn's Pen; I have done the best I could to
clear the foul Imputations and Aspertions laid upon them; I desire all who
shall read the Book to lay aside all prejudicacy of opinion, and to consider
the business not as it is made to be, but as indeed it is, and so leave the
issue to Gods time and good pleasure, to whose protection I commend all upright
and sincere Israelites, in whom is no guile.

And lastly, I could desire that the said Gentleman would seriously bethink
himself what a sin it is to blot and blemish a Man, an Elder in his good name,
and to force and lay things to his charge that he never did speak or write, but
to corrupt and pervert his words; for certain it is a deep fault; an ingenious
Recantation or Retractation would be no derogation to him, and would show a
spirit of meekness, fobriety, and ingenuity, and evidence a conscience willing
to render satisfaction, and would be a ready way to work a fair and sure
Reconciliation both with God and Man, which how fitting and necessary this is
to be done, is left to his retired and reserved consideration.

To the Jews.
TO you, who are despised, and the Outcasts, and the offscouring of the World
in many, too many men's opinions; to you, who are adjudged of most not fit to be
entertained into Society or conference, are these few lines directed and
dedicated, who though soiled and sullied with a long affliction, may yet return
to him that has smitten you, and find rest, consolation, and refreshment to
your souls and bodies, by the infinite mercy and love of God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ blessed for ever.

You cannot but know that your Adversaries are many, both for Tongue and Pen,
you see few or none appearing to plead for you, yet amongst those few this
Author has exposed himself in your defense, he weighs not the reproaches of
men, so he may do you good, and be serviceable unto you, for your gathering and
grafting in again.

Two things are offered to you; the first is of comfort, the second is of
direction, both necessary, that of comfort shall be first, because you stand in
most need of it, and few or none afford it to you.

Know therefore that God has not cast away you his people, he that Exodus 3.
said I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people that are in Egypt
unto your noble Progenitors, sees also all your afflictions through the whole
world.

Gods Rod lay upon them 430. years in Egypt, and 70. years in the Babylonish
Captivity, yet he forgot not his promise to Abraham, but did bring them out of
both; and though this has continued almost 4. times longer than the longest of
them, yet a 1000. years are with the Lord but as one day, he will for certain,
he will yet redeem and deliver you.

And therefore lift up your heads, for the time of your Redemption draws
nigh, yet a little while and he that shall come will come and not tarry, with
healing in his wings; Malac. 3.

Secondly, know what a change you shall partake of; beauty for ashes, joy for
mourning, the Garments of gladness for the garments of sadness, he will gather
up his Jewels, and you that have been tossed, and given for lost, will he embrace
and honor and Crown with everlasting love and glory?

To stir up and kindle men's affections to regard you and show honor and love
to you, and to keep up your spirits from failing to wait upon God; I manifest
four things tending to your glory, the first is your noble Pedigree and
extraction. The second, your honorable Titles. Thirdly, your eminent
Prerogatives. And fourthly, your exceeding Privileges: of each succinctly.

First, for your extraction and pedigree, you have been studious to search
about Genealogies, now according to the Scriptures, your Original is from the
first of Men, this is evident in the first of Chron. the nine first Chapters,
and so in Luke 3. from the 23 verse. bringing your descent even to him who was
the joy of the whole earth, and the Glory of Israel, from whom you had the
truest, highest, and greatest Nobility that ever was given to men.

Secondly, for your Titles, illustrious and stupendous. Called Hebrews from
Heber Son of Salah Noah's grandchilde, Genesis 11.14. which name signifies passage
or in a passive signification, passing passage, you being as it were an
Intermedium for the conveyance of Grace, God giving you his Ordinances to
receive as it were by the first hand, the Gentiles by a second; Actively taken,
you were more near God in your services; and therefore, surpassing in the truth
and purity of your Religious worship of the true, pure, and everlasting God.
You are called Israelites from Israel, an name of Honor given by the Angel to
Jacob, Genesis 23. v. 28. Prince of God, or Prevailer or Conqueror of God, who was
a chief Patriarch of, and amongst you, prevailing in prayers, sacrifices, and
services; therefore are you styled commonly the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.1.
And frequently the people of Israel; St. Peter is very desirous to ingratiate
himself with you, for he calls you the Men of Israel. Acts 2.22. You are the
people who properly are called a chosen Generation, a holy Priesthood, a holy
Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. you are called Jews from Judah, Jacob's,
fourth son, Genesis 29.35. which signifies praise, you being the praise of all
Nations, yet the Scripture gives you higher and more honorable Titles than
these, more relating to the Deity, as his peculiar treasure Exodus 19.5. the
people of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29. the Lords Children. Deuteronomy. 14.1. his firstborn,
Exodus 4.22. his Inheritance. 1 Kings, 85.1. the Lot of his Inheritance. Jer.
10.16. you are called Gods Vineyard, Psalm. 80. Isay 5.1. Jer. 2.21.

3. For your Prerogatives large and wonderful indeed, God chose you out of a
people to be a chosen people to himself, Deuteronomy. 6.7. To make you high above all
Nations of the Earth, in praise, and in Name, and in Honor, Deuteronomy. 26.19. He is
said to be more nigh to you than any Nation, Deuteronomy. 19.7. you received Gods word
before any Nation He has not dealt so with any Nation. Psalm 104.19.20. In
Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel; in Salem or (Jerusalem) was
his Taberracle, and his dwelling in Syon; the mount whereon Solomon's Temple
stood, Psalm. 76.1.2. And John, 4 22. unto you did Christ preach, called you
Children the Gentiles Dogs; Christ would not let his disciples preach the
Gospel to the Gentiles, or to any Cities of the Samaritans, till they had begun
at Jerusalem, Matthew. 10.15. Luke 24.47. Which precedence belonged to you by
right of Covenant, to you and to your seed, Acts 2.39.

Fourthly, for your Privileges, exceeding many and high ones, God himself will
be known by this, I am the God of the Hebrews, Exodus 3.18. He promises to set
you on high above all Nations, showring down all blessings upon you, Deuteronomy.
28.1, 2. and to make you a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, Exodus 10.4,
6. Unto you did God commit his Oracles, Romans 3.2. But above all, is that, that
Christ was born of you, and made his first profers of grace and love to you;
amongst those eight several Privileges God bestowed on you: St. Paul ends all
in this, Who are Israelites, to whom appertains the Adoption, and Glory, and
the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
Promises, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Romans 9.4, 5. And
when as the Apostle Paul would defend his Apostleship, and keep up the Dignity
and Honor of it, he uses Arguments from his Privileges, as he was a Jew, Are
they Hebrews, so am I? Are they Israelites, so am I? Are they of the Seed of
Abraham, so am I? 2 Cor. 11.22. accounting these Privileges the greatest carnal
blessings that were given unto men. To these add, that you were Holy Brethren,
Partakers of the heavenly Calling, Phil. 3.1. Of you it was that Saint Paul
spoke and thought such things as accompany salvation, because of your work and
labor of love, which you have showed in ministering to the Saints, Hebr. 6.9,
10. These are those comfortable, honorable, and excellent Titles,
Prerogatives, and Privileges, that are ascribed unto you above all other
Nations and People, and are high Incentives and deep Engagements to make you
walk worthy such excellent Endowments and benefits, and to raise up your
drooping spirits, even in the midst of all your long and deep Visitation; for
as the Prophet, Though you have layn among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the
wings of a Dove covered with Silver, etc. Psalm 68.13. and God will bring again
his own people, even as he did sometimes from the depth of the Sea, Psalm
68.22. (i. e.) beyond all men's help and expectation, with a mighty hand, and
outstretched Arm, and then shall Jacob rejoice and Israel shall be glad, that
for your comfort. The second thing premised:

2. Is for your direction, and that shall be brief: First, Hate and leave off
that sin which procured this your suffering by repentance, that your sins may
be blotted out when the time of your refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord, Acts 3.

2. Be incessant with God in Prayer, that he would be pleased to remember the
time, the set time, to have mercy upon Sion, for it pitieth her Servants to see
her in the dust, and that he would open your eyes, and give you understanding
hearts to believe in and know him whom God has sent, Jesus Christ, John 17.3.

3. To search the Scriptures, and in reading them, to pray God to take away the
vail that is upon your hearts, for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life. And consider the Ministration of the Spirit is much more glorious than
that of the Letter, and old things are passed away, and all things are become
new, and that though the Law was given by Moses, yet grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ, John 1. and that now there is no difference betwixt Jew and
Gentile, Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free, but we are all one in Christ
Jesus.

4 Wheresoever you shall come, to be careful of your carriage, to give no
offense, but to walk worthy of the excellency of that high Calling in Jesus
Christ.

To conclude all, I have discharged my conscience in your behalf; God is able
to bring great things to pass by small Instruments, though I be the least, yet
I am one that wish well to Sion and do heartily pray, that God would give you
favor in the sight of the Nations, and that all those that keep you captives
may pity you, and that the Nations seeing your conversion may glorify God on
your behalf, and say, What has God done? This is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. So be it.

Yours, etc.

FINIS.
Certain Cautions concerning the Jews Admission into England.
IT is not fit to direct, much less to prescrthe to Superiors, in laying down
these few Cautions neither is intended, only to render some satisfaction to
such who are the great and violent Opposers of the Jews Admission amongst us,
who though they have no solid or subst^ntial grounds for their Opposition at
all, yet by these Cautions that may seem tolerable, if not allowable to their
judgments, which before was held altogether unjust and unreasonable.

And certain it is, that had Mr. Prynn in his multitude of Scripture-quotations
seriously considered that most, if not all these places, which mention either
the sins or the punishments of this people related to the Babylonish Captivity,
or to what of judgments, before that, God was pleased to inflict upon them, he
would not have so injuriously branded one Generation for another, and make
those Curses and Plagues which are terminated in the third or fourth Generation
of them that hate him, to be due to the thirteenth or fourteenth Generation
downwards, and of them too who he knows not, whether they hate God or not.

And so also for his almost innumerable but unnecessary Rabble of Popish
antiquated Writers, Edicts, Statutes, Decrees, and Records; for these (I say)
if he had considered that what was then (if yet it was then, for we may not
give credit to all he says and quotes) is not Now, for Now is not Then, nor
Then Now; he would (I believe) in modesty have spared that needless search, nor
have so bin confident to pin his faith upon those Popish Papers and worm-eaten
Scriblers, who yet (as it is by wise men judged) writ out of malice, and the
the Spirit of Lying too against the Jews; for how much credit is to be given to
such persons who have not blushed to corrupt the sacred Text it self, and to
adulterate all both Greek and Latin Fathers; for certain such audacious
Spirits would not spare (when their gains and credit lay at stake) and when it
was in their power too) to lay load enough and the heaviest always on the
weakest shoulders, and such was the people of the Jews in these times, to cause
them to be odious to the Nation.

This man's great opinion of Learning and Judgment has tainted and poisoned
many men's affections, and hardened them ^bsolutely against the Admission of any
Jews amongst us; when yet any one sees how weak his Arguments are, if well
scanned, and how little of truth is in them.

To persuade therefore the ingenious, that what at first did seem altogether
unfitting, upon second and serious reflections shall be found not only fitting
but beneficial also, and what at first apprehension seemed so full of danger,
may upon review be found nothing so, I say, it is not our intendment, that the
Jews should come in, so as Mr. Prynn seems to fear, to dishonor God and Chrst
Jesus, subvert Religion, disturb the Laws, raise up Wa^s and Combustions,
sterve our own Countrymen and Natives, undo merchandising, seduce the People,
disgrace the Gospel, rob us of our Wealth, bring Gods Plagues, Curses, and
Judgments amongst us, with many other such terrible conceited Chymaeraes.

No nor yet to come Rushing in, as an overflowing flood, to drown all Religion,
Laws, and all our Privileges, nor yet to be such Hors-leaches, and Spunges of
out Treasure, and transport it away; nor to usurp upon any man's Birthright, nor
yet to Cozen, oppress, poll, pill, defraud, fleece, and squeeze the English
Nation, nor yet to grind them, or cheat them by usury, fraud, or the like. Nor
lastly, to circumcise or crucify, any children in derision of Christ, nor to
sacrifices any Bulls, or Oxen, or Sheep, or Lambs; for that part of their
Religion is too costly; and the other is too painful; both unsufferable: but
for certain they may be admitted in upon diverse considerations, some of them
are these.

1. By the leave of the supreme Legis-lators of our Nation; they formerly have
been, and may if when they please be again, introduced; and who can, or dare
charge their Actions for unjust? they having power to save, or destroy; and
therefore, power to determine matters of less consequence; and then,

2. Their admission, being from them, and but Premissive, not absolute, but
quod diu se been gesserint, restrained to such solid orders as by the
Governors of our Nation shall be adjudged most convenient, justest and most
conducing to Gods glory, and ths Honor of our Religion and benefit of our
people.

3. That there chief heads, and Rulers, do at their entrance or immediately
after give in good security, for all that come in to live quietly, and
subordinately, to our Laws, in all civil respects; so that justice, as well
communitative, as distributive may have it is full vigor, as well to relieve,
succor and defend them when oppressed, or molested, as also to be executed
against them, when as they molest other.

4. All covenants, and agreements made with them by our Governors; to be
confirmed, publicly under hands, and Seals as mutually bnding and obliging our
Magistrates, to afford them just and honorable protection, and security for
Lives and Estates, and they to render all Obedience, and Tribute, and Custom;
to them for the same, that so we with them, and they with us, may lead a quiet,
sober, and godly life; as being all children of the same Father, and Heirs of
the same promise, and all hoping for the same Crown of Righteousness,
Immortality, and Glory: many others might have been added, but it is presumption
and unmanners, to give prescription to our betters; and therefore we quietly
and conscienciously submit, to their judgments and conclusions; praying
heartily to God to give them the Spirit of wisdom, and counsel, and valor,
and the fear of the Lord; that they may know how to go in and out, before this
great people of the Lord their God; and the blessings of God be upon all their
counsels and actions, for the good of the cause of God, in these and other
Nations. Amen:

FINIS.

