GLEANINGS AND EXPOSITIONS OF Some, and but some of the more difficult places
of SCRIPTURES:

Perhaps, but The FIRST FRUITS unto a more plentiful HARVEST:

By JOHN LAVVSON.

If I kn^w not the meaning of the word, I shall be to him that speaks a
Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me, 1 Cor. 14.11.
Interpretation of dreams promoted Joseph in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, Psalm.
105.19, etc. Dan. 2.48. Si foetura gregem suppleverit, aureus esto. LONDON,
Printed by T.R. and E. M. for Nath. Webb and Will. Grantham, at the Greyhound
in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

To the knowers and lovers of godly Learning in and about LONDON, or elsewhere.
BEing advertised to make a Dedication of this small work, such as it is, to
some body, I followed my affection, when I directed it, as abovesaid. Such I
love, and except my failings, shall be beloved of them. Wherefore, to you, (as
much as in me is) to every of you, be it humbly presented. Repute not this
mention of thy name, O City, as a profanation thereof. Thy mere permission of
me to dwell and to go in and out to gather food for my self and mine, (I mean
work for food) I say, this mere permission in the ten last years of the late
Hierarchy, moves me to this in way of gratitude. Let it not be a fault in the
thankful; He that is thankful to thee, has, and will pray for thee, and for
the peace of thy children: He does believe (...)

Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNAME.
May 22. 1646.
Scriptures of EXPOSITION noted in this TREATISE.
Genesis 2.6. Genesis 27.19. Genesis 33.8. Genesis 34.13. Genesis 49.10. Exodus 1.19. Exodus 3.
last. Exodus 34.4. Deuteronomy. 1. last. Josh. 2.4. 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 Samuel 15.19. 2 Samuel
21.10. 2 Samuel 24.1. 2 Chronicles. 13.4. Jonah 3.4. Zeph. 1.5. Matthew. 3.2 Mat. 4.6
Matthew. 4.7 Matthew. 9.5 Matthew. 10.11 Matthew. 10.14 Matthew. 12.27 Matthew. 12.37
Matthew. 12.38, 39. Matthew. 16.18 Matthew. 16.26 Mark 15.36 Mark 16.15 Luke 1.15
Luke 1.17 Luke 1.24 Luke 1.33 Luke 1.52 Luke 6.35 Luke 11.30 Luke 10.42 Luke
24.44. John 2.19 John 2.24 John 4.35 John 6.44 John 6.53. John 11.9 John 11.50
John 14.12 Acts 1.18 Acts 23.5 Romans 1.17 Romans 4.12 Romans 8.28 Romans 16.17 1 Cor.
7.14 1 Cor. 8.4 1 Cor. 9.21 1 Cor. 14.22 1 Cor. 14.30 1 Cor. 14.31 1 Cor. 14.32
1 Cor. 15.29 1 Cor. 15.40, 41 2 Cor. 12.4 2 Cor. 12.14 2 Cor. 12.16 2 Cor. 13.4
Gal. 4.21 Gal. 3.10 Gal. 3.12 Ephesians. 6.12 Phil. 1.18 Phil. 3.9 Col. 2.8 Col.
2.10, 11, 12 Col. 2.16. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6 2 Thessalonians. 2.4 1 Timothy 2.8 1 Timothy 2.9 1 Timothy
2. ult. 1 Timothy 4.5 1 Timothy 5.23 2 Timothy 3.6 Heb. 2.9 Heb. 4.9. Heb. 7.3 Heb. 8.7,
8. Heb. 12.16 Heb. 13.4. James 2.7 James 2.17 James 5.14 1 Pet. 2.8 1 Pet. 1.13
1 John 2.11 1 John 2.19 1 John 2.21 1 John 3.19 1 John 4.14. Jude v. 20. Rev.
18.4.
Scriptures of TRANSLATION noted in this TREATISE.
Matthew. 11.11 Matthew. 11.12 Matthew. 21.3 with Mar. 11.13. and with Lu. 19.31, 34.
and with Mark 26.24. Matthew. 26.25 Matthew. 27.5 Matthew. 27.11 Matthew. 27.38 Mark
14.26 Mark 16.15 Luke 21.8 Luke 24.30 Luke 24.31 John 2.4 John 3.12 John 11.34.
John 18.37 John 18. ult. Acts 2.1 Acts 4.13 Acts 13.48 Acts 14.13 Acts 14.23
Acts 19.36 Romans 9.3 1 Cor. 3.15 1 Cor. 14.33 2 Cor. 3.7 Gal. 6.4 Ephesians. 6.13
Col. 3.16 2 Thessalonians. 2.3 2 Thessalonians. 2.8 1 Timothy 2.8 1 Timothy 6.6 1 Timothy 6.17 Heb. 2.6
Heb. 2.12. Heb. 8.7, 8 Hebr. 12.1 Heb. 13.5 James 1.15 James 2.7 James 5.7
James 5.17 1 Pet. 1.6 1 Pet. 2.2 1 Pet. 2.13 1 Pet. 3.7 1 Pet. 3.8 1 Pet. 4.12
2 Pet. 1.15 Rev. 6.9. Rev. 13.16.
GLEANINGS AND EXPOSITIONS of some, And but some of the more difficult places
of SCRIPTURES.
Genesis 2.6. But a mist] Some render it, Or a mist: It may be rendered, And a
mist. And so the negative not expressed in the foregoing clause, is here again
to be understood, thus, There was not a man to till the ground, and a mist went
up; that is, and a mist went not up. A like phrase see Deuteronomy. 33.6. Let Reuben
live and not die, and let his men be few, that is, Let not his men be few; And
1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no more so exceedingly proud, let arrogance proceed out of
your mouth, that is, Let not arrogancy proceed out of your mouth. So that the
mist is denied to concur in the making of Herbs and Plants, as well as man,
earth, or rain are denied to concur; The Sun could not concur, for as much
as the Sun was not made until the fourth day, whereas Herbs and Plants were
made the third day. Genesis 1.12. The fruit of this note is, that, howsoever Earth,
Man, Sun, Rain and Mist may be and are nurses and furtherers of Herbs and
Plants once made, yet none of these, except the Earth, were used of God the
maker of Herbs and Plants, in the making of them; And the Earth was not then
used, as having any aptitude of it self to produce Herbs and Plants into being,
which had no being; For it is proved, that God made the Herbs and the Plants
before they were in the Earth. Genesis 2.5. Only it is probable, that God did take
a parcel of Earth (as it may be said) and thereupon did make Herbs and Plants,
which afterward he did set into the Earth, as into a fit nursery. Hence are so
many several kind of Herbs and Flowers in one small closure of ground. That
ground cannot be presumed to have so many several natures, as to effect those
where they were not; wherefore, it must needs be, that, they have and are
existences distinct from the Earth, wherein they are set and grow.

Genesis 27.19. I am Esau thy first born.] The word Esau signifies made. So that
it may be understood, as if he had said, I am made thy first born. The which
sense acquitteth Jacob from untruth. For as much, as though he were not the
first born of Isaac by priority of birth; yet he was now made first born by a
lawful contract; for, he bought the birthright of Esau, whose it was. And
that birthrights may be made his, whose descensively they were not, witness
is Joseph, who obtained the birthright from Reuben his elder brother. 1 Cor.
5.1. And, as for the afflictions wherewith Jacobs life was much load to, it
seems not safe to impute them (as some do) unto this speech of his, as to the
cause. For, so we might condemn where God has not condemned, ne condemn,
where God has blessed. For, we find Jacob blessed, but no where taxed of God
in Scripture, for a lie in these words, nor for his manner of coming by the
blessing; although it seems to some to be a sinfully deceitful way. And us
for his afflictions, commiseration and pity should be showed to such as he was,
in case of affliction, not censure. Otherwise we might condemn the generation
of the just, and would not be so dealt withal our selves in our affliction.

It may seem lawful to take to ones self in some cases ambiguous or equivocall
words,

1. Provided, that the party to whom they be uttered, be not wronged, he nor
any other present nor absent. Wronged, I say, but I do not say grieved; for a
person may be grieved, where he is not wronged.

2. Provided that there be a truth in the words though there be not that truth
or truth in that sense which or wherein the hearer conceives them.

The time when this ambiguous speaking, or this equivocation is lawful, is.

1. When the hearer has gone about either wrongfully to hinder us of some due
of ours, as in the present case of Jacob, where his father went about to
establish the blessing upon the profane son, for his venisons sake, contrary
to the oracle of God, who had foretold the blessing to be the younger sons.

2. Or when he endeavors to bring some undeserved evil upon us, as in the
Midwives of Egypt, whom Pharaoh would have slain, if they had not put him of
with ambiguity of words. Or, like unto that of Rahab, whom the King of Jericho
would have presented, if he had known that she had hid the spies. Of whom more
in the due place.

Genesis 33.8. (...) est mihi multum, I have much, not I have enough. Esau
hankered after the gift, though complementally he seemed to refuse. Jacob is
hearty (...) est mihi omne. I have all. Or I have enough. Carnal worldlings
long and linger after gain, when they seem mannerly to refuse, or never have
enough; whereas spiritual godly persons are fully content with their condition.

Genesis 34.13. And they said, Because he had defiled Dinah their sister; what
they said, being the principal clause whereon this conjunctive clause
depends, is not expressed but understood by a figure called Aposiopesis.

For, 1. Shall they which intend slaughter to Shechem and Hamor, tell Shechem
and Hamor to their face, that they intend to kill them? No, that is the way to
forearme Shechem and Hamor, and to make them stand upon their guard.
Praemonitus, praemunitus. Forewarned, forearmed. In vain is the not spread in
the sight of any bird. And if the householder did know beforehand at what hour
the theif (and specially the murderer) would come, he would have watched, and
not suffered his house to be broken through, and himself to be slain;
wherefore, Jacobs sons which intended to surprise Shechem and Hamor to the
death, must and did in policy conceal their intent.

2. As they did conceal their murtherous intent against Shechens, Hamor, and
against their people, so they must in policy pretend some plausible thing to
Shechem and Hamor, whereby Shechem and Hamor might be the more secure, and what
was more plausible then the marriage, which Shechem so much desired? Hence
therefore its more then probable, that they would be thought to intimate the
marriage, when they intend slaughter. As if they should have said, Forasmuch as
Shechem had defiled Dinah our sister, and the vitiation done, cannot be undone,
though we be loath to express so much, because of the grief and shame which is
upon us for the deflouring of our sister, yet you may presume that she shall be
granted unto you for a wife. He which humbles a Virgin, shall marry her by the
law of Moses, and of reason. But, indeed our intent is to come upon you
unawares and slay you, although we will not tell you so, nor would that you
should so suspect; false meanings use to intimate by nods and signs that which
they intend not; but he which means truly, speaks out plainly, without
reservation. Glorious is the truth which so dazleth the eyes of a false meaner,
that yet he dare not face it; else, why did not Jacobs sons plainly express
that Shechem should have their sister? It would have been but a lie; and what
can make those be afraid of telling a lie, which were not afraid of murdering
a City full of people, but the glory of the truth? Violence in affection in
Hamor to Dinah swalloweth an insufficient answer without examination; no
marvel though it be said that love is blind, else Hamor and Shechem might have
seen a manifest insufficiency in this Answer.

Genesis 49.10. (...) the Tribe (not the Scepter) shall not depart from Judah,
till Shiloh come; (...) is put for Tribe, Josh 18. 2. Psalm. 58.55. and
elsewhere. The Scepter was departed from Judah to Herod, and to Augustus,
before Christ came. But Judah abode an entire Tribe, till Christ came; the
Jews were Judah. No other Tribe did remain entire at the coming of Christ, but
the Tribe of Judah only.

Exodus 1.19. The Midwives fearing God, and not taxed for a lie, but rewarded
for their action and for their answer, probably, and more then probably are
thus to be justified.

As soon as they were bidden by the King privily to make away the male
children, I politickly they advise the Hebrews not to send for them till the
women were delivered, or near to be delivered by some other women, so that the
woman was delivered before the Midwives came, not before the Midwives might
have come.

Hence it is lawful to equivocate, provided,

1. That it be in a matter of unjust peril, such as this was: for the Midwives
lives were in danger by Pharaoh for their well-doing.

2. That the party to whom we equivocate, be not wronged. Wronged I say; for,
an enemy may be displeased and deceived, who is not yet injured. No wrong was
done to Pharaoh by these words, howsoever he was deceived by these words, and
would have been displeased, if he had known himself to be deceived by the
speakers intention.

3. That there be a truth in the words, though there be not that truth which
the hearer presumes; for, we are not bound to speak in his sense.

Exodus 3.22. Every woman shall ask of her neighbor. And in Exodus 12.36. They
gave them their asking, (...) So the words signify, Genesis 44.19. Psalm. 21.4.
Neh. 13.6. 1 Samuel 1.28.

And there is this reason for it.

Reas. 1. Its a note of a wicked man to borrow and not to pay again, Psalm.
37.21.

2. God does not use to countermand his just law.

3. How should Israel traveling and warring in the wilderness 40 years get
wherewithal to pay again?

4. Israel was forbidden to return into Egypt; where then should payment be
made?

5. Israel had gathered Straw, made Brick, built Cities, Pithom and Raamses
without pay, but Onyons, Leekes, and rigorous usage more or less 400 years,
wherefore Israel might and did demand ex condigno, some reward for their work,
especially,

1. Since the Egyptians fearful of their own death before morning by the God of
Israel, did hasten Israel out at midnight, whom formerly they would not let go
at Gods command.

2. Since Israel had no moneys, nor means to acquire food in their
peregrination, but by money: we have served you 400 years, and would you thrust
us out wagelesse? This or the like seems to be their plea.

6. Its probable, that in this case the Egyptians would give them any thing to
be rid of them; for, all which a man has, will he give for his life. The
Egyptians were urgent upon Israel to be gone, for they said, we be all dead
men, Exodus 12.33.

And as for spoiling the Egyptians, it does but imply the greatness of the
booty, not the manner of acquisition. Israel obtained as much by consent and
free gift, as if they had robbed the Egyptians.

Let non-payment of debts make what shift it can for it self, it shall never be
tolerated from this text.

He that is made to work wagelesse, shall one day have wages worklesse.

Exodus 32.4. These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt.

It may seem, that this was no less then an advised scorning of the true God;
as if they should have said, The God which professes to have brought us out of
the land of Egypt, does not show any more Godhead then this calf; he neither
appears to our eye, nor speaks to our ear; and as for this Moses, which was
chosen by us, and appointed by him, to be our spokesman, we know not what is
become of him. When God appeared to their eye in lightnings, and spoke to their
ear in thunders, etc. they seemed to fear, so as that they desired they might
never hear that voice of God, nor see that vision any more, for if they did,
they should dye; upon which occasion they desired that Moses might mediate
betwixt God and them, and they would obey, as well as if God himself had
appeared and spoken; God approves of their motion, and furnishes Moses with
Commandments and Ordinances for Israel; But before Moses was come down from
the Mount, they had begun thus to slight both God and Moses, as to prefer a
Calf before either of them. Else how is it said that they made the Calf to
provoke him to anger? Neh. 9.18. That they changed their God into the
similitude of an Ox which eats grass? And if the history be well observed,
one main drift of it is, to set out the discontent of man in every condition.
Let Israel be in Egypt, they long to be out because of their bondage; Let
Israel be delivered out by a mighty hand, yet upon every want of water, of
bread, or flesh, they would be in Egypt again, as not counting it thank-worthy,
but rather an ill turn which was done to them, when they were brought out of
Egypt. How often did they murmr against Moses, whom themselves had chosen to
represent Gods person unto them, and did set him at naught? What awe or
reverence is there in come on drunkards and such as scoff at the word and
ways of God and his people at this day? I say what awe do they stand of God
any more then of a dead Image of their own making? Wine is a mocker; Prove. 20,
1. and if Wine, then other sorts of wickedness. What is it less then a
mocking of God, yea, what it is less then to esteem God no better then a brute
creature, when the wicked say eitheir in word or in action, as in the Psalms,
How does God know, and is there knowledge in the most high?

Deuteronomy. 1.46. Ye abode in Kadesh many days, according to the days wherein ye
abode there] It may seem to be not sense: but it is elegant; thus, viz. an
incomparable abiding, as if he should have said, I cannot compare your abode at
Kadesh with any other abode, for it was like to an other, but to it self. Not
like the abode at Elim, at Merih^h, or at any other place; If I should go about
to compare it with some abode, it does so far exceed all other, for length of
time, as that it was not like to any, but to it self.

Joshua 2.4. There came man unto me, but I wist not whence they were. About the
shutting of the gate, when it was dark, the men went out, whither the men went
I wot not; pursue after them quickly, ye shall evercake them, that is, ye may
overtake them.

This might be true of other guests, her house being an Inn, as appears by
the Spies going thither; She was not bound to tell the Officers that she had
hid them; it was sufficient that there was a truth in the words, though not
that truth which she did speak, and no lie. Whereas she says, She wist not
whence they were, this might be true, both of those other, which went out in
the dark, and of the Spies themselves. For, probably she knew not the Spies to
be Spies, till the officers came and told her that they were Spies, when they
enquired for them. Can noshi, the made, but to condemn of lying, whom God
commends for faith, and whom God does not any where condemn for untruth?

Quest. 1. Sam. 24.5. Why did David's heart smite him, after he had cut off the
skirt of Saul's Garment?

Answ. Not accusing him for sin; for, there was no sin in it, but his
memory wrought, which did not before; Thinks he, what if Saul had seen me come
near him, with my knife in my hand, then he, which now reports, that I seek
his life, would then much more with some color have reported, that I was about
to thrust my knife into his body. Which thought I did never purpose, yet, it
would have carried such a show, that it would have been hard for me to persuade
the contrary to the hearer. Wherefore, if it were to do again, I should not
dare to cut off the skirt of his garment. It is the providence of God to keep
things out of men's minds, or to let them fall into their memories; suitable to
that of the Apostle, where it is said, We are are not able to think a good
thought as of our selves, but, all our sufficiency is of him. And the spirit
shall bring every thing to your remembrance. Go^ to now therefore ye which
say, I will think on this, and I will remember that, and I will not forget,
whereas, they ought to say, if the Lord will, I shall both live and remember
this and that.

Qust. 2. Sam. 15.19. How is I^^^i bidden to go to Jerusalem, and to abide with
the King; since David the King was then fleeing out of Jerusalem, and Absalom
pretending to be King, was then at Jerusalem? For this may be thought, to bid
Ittai abide with Absalom, and to forsake David, as if David had suspected
Ittaies fidelity, or as if David had misbehaved himself to his well deserving
friend?

Answ. Though thou go to Jerusalem where Absalom is, yet let thy heart be
with me, and take my part. So Hushai was at Jerusalem with Absalom, but abode
with David in heart, and did more good service to David, then if he had been
with David personalty; Forasmuch as he defeated the Counsel of Abitophell.

It Is both lawful Policy in case of Wars, and possible without lie, or sin,
to play the Agent and intelligencer to the Righteous party, in the bosom and
presence of the Rebel.

Quest. 2 Samuel 18.22. Why did Abimaaz cover to run, since his Narration to
David was so imperfect, when he was come before him?

Ans. To alleviate the sorrow of David a tanto, though he could not a toto,
when Cushi should bluntly bolt out unto him the death of Absalom; And probably
David would have been more moved then he was at the death of Absalom, had not
the wise and cheerful behavior of Abimaaz unto David, prevented the blunt
report thereof, which came by Cushi. There is discretion in the reporting of a
thing; great difference between this and that manner of relation.

Quest. 2 Samuel 21.10. What is meant by that story of Rizpah the daughter of
Aiah, her spreading of sackloth under her, till water dropped upon her, out of
heaven?

Answ. Rizpah thought to raise a new Rebellion against David, if any
considerable number of Israel would have cleaved to her, for hanging up lever
of Saul's sons, whereof two were hers by Saul. But when none would regard her
discontent to strengthen her in it, winter-wet and weather drove her in at
doors: So there was an end of her Rebellion. The Ordination of God, does not
exempt the ordained from suffering, as an usurper at the hands of Malignant
spirits. David was appointed King by the Oracle of God, when he never dreamed
of the Kingdom; yet Rizpah intimates by this action of hers, as if David were
an unrighteous successor of Saul.

Quest. 2 Samuel 24.1. etc. How came the people to perish by that plague, when it
was David which numbered the people?

Answ. The people had Rebelled against David Gods chosen, both with Absalom and
with Shebah; therefore God punished them. But lest David should grow proud
hereupon, God seems to impute the fault unto David's numbering the people;
whereas it was but David's too much fondness over the people so to number the
people, rather then any great fault perhaps otherwise of David.

Consider the three next foregoing Chapters, viz. 21.22.23. as a Parenthesis to
the maine History, as to any intelligent Reader indeed they are; and then this
Exposition by the connection of things, will receive great probability; for,
then this Chapter follows next after the twentieth Chapter, where the
Rebellion of Shebah the son of Bichri is handled, which Shebah arose
Rebelling, before the commotion about Absalom made, was thoroughly settled. So
justly they follow one upon another, as if this plague were a reckoning with
Israel for their levity and unfaithfullnesse to David, in running after Absalom
and after Shebah, a couple of Rebels, one after another as soon as the
Rebellion was past. Rebels which dye not in their Rebellion against their good
God and Savior Christ, will be mischeived one way or other shortly after; the
nature of their sin calls for it.

Abijahs plea, 2. Chron. 13.4. recorded, uncontrolled, and by success their
and there justified, seems to inform us, that Ahijahs speech to Jeroboam, 1.
King. 11.29. did not authorize Jeroboam to rend from Rehoboam, but did merely
foretell, that he should rend away and reign; for by Abijahs speech, Jeroboams
rent and reign is made altogether a sin; And Jeroboam himself does not
report any more of Ahijahs words, but that they were ameer prediction. Go
(says Jeroboam to his wife) unto Ahijah, which told me, that I should be King
over this people. Christ did foretell that Judas should betray him, he did
ordain or appoint, as allowing Judas to betray him.

In like manner, the visitation of the blood of Jezrecl upon the house of Jehu,
Hosea, 1.4. seems to teach that Jehu was not authorized of God, to out off
the house of Ahab; but only foretold of God, that he should cut off the house
of Ahab. It will not follow, that because Jehu said, he says that God laid
that burden upon him; therefore it was a burden, or a command laid upon him by
God. Judas Iscariot, considering that the Scriptures had foretold the death of
the Messiah, conceives himself a worth, worker with God, when he helps to
bring that death to pass, by delivering his Master Christ, into the hand of
his Crucifiers; or at lest a lesser sinner. Else, why does the Holy Ghost
labor to confute that conceit, where he says, The Son of man indeed goes
away, as it is written of him; but woe unto that man, by whom the Son of man is
betrayed.

And as Judas, so Iehu might, and probably did: we see people justify their
works at this day, from the decree of God, without a warrantable call of
themselves to that work.

Jonah, 3.4. Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed. If God had
purposed to destroy Nineveh, without condition of repentance or non-repentance,
God could have destroyed them, without telling them so. Nay, to what end should
God let them know that he will destroy them within forty days, if he had not
purposed to spare them in case of repentance? and if he had not desired to
spare them also, why should he send them word, that he will destroy them? We do
not use to forewarne men and to tell them, look well to your self; for, on such
a day I will come and rob or destroy you; if we have a resolute purpose to do
either of these unto them; but we rather choose to come upon them in an hour
when they think not. So that howsoever the message it self had no condition
expressed, yet the sending of it had a condition more then implicit; even as
full an express, as the sending was.

Whence learn we that,

In Divine writ, there is a difference betwixt the words written and the
writing of them; such perhaps as it between the letter and the spirit; for the
letter of this message killed Nineveh, but the sending of it, which may be
called the spirituality of the message might and did give Nineveh, both hope
and life. And if this be true, why may not the difference betwixt letter and
spirit, be expounded to be such as the difference between this message and the
mission of the message; between the Word and the writing of it?

Zeph. 1.5. Which swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham] Malcham may be
understood their Angel, or their King The obedience of Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego unto God, was good allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar; at last he confessed
it, when be blessed their religion or their God, which taught them or put it
into their hearts to change the Kings word, Dan. 3.28. God cannot err in his
commands. None is to be sworn by, but he which cannot err. How be it in the
Lord, Kings are to be obeyed as the Lord, viz. in all lawful things.

Expositions on the New Testament.
THe Starre] An Angel in the likeness of a Star; as once in the likeness of
a Pillar of fire by night. The Star went before the men, not above them. And
when it stood over the place where the Babe was, it stood close over, not at a
great distance, else the direction had been uncertain.

MATTHEW.
Matthew. 3.2. (...) Change your minds or repent] Whereof must they Repent, or
wherein must they change their minds? Whereas formerly all which had Abraham to
their Father, were Members of the visible Church of Israel; now every person
must bring forth good fruit of his and her own, or else he and she must not be
Members of this new Church, which Christ and John the Baptist were about to
found in the New Testament; which Church is meant, when the Kingdom of Heaven
is said to be hand.

Matthew. 4.6. Cast thy self down] No marvel though Christians be tempted to a
presumptuous neglect of means, when Christ him self was so tempted. It is one
of Satan's Engines to tempt Christians to a presumptuous neglect of means, under
pretense of greater confidence. Look to it Professors of Christianity.

Matthew. 4.7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God] This thou, is not Satan; as
if Christ or Moses had forbidden Satan to tempt. The Law was not given to
Satan, or his fellow-evill Angels, but unto men, and men of Israel. The devils
had never so much honor or hope, as to have a law prescribed unto them since
their fall. As we say of life, so may we say of the Law, so long as God will
prescribe us Laws, there is hope. The poor are not hopeless, so long as the
rich will set them at work. Of something doing, something comes; Only put a
man out of service, and then he becomes a vagabond. As it is said, be of good
comfort, he calls thee; So it may be said, be of good comfort, he commands
thee. Thus the Law is mingled with Gospel: Wherefore they which cast off the
Law, cast off their comfort. But this Thou, is first meant every man of Israel:
Secondly, and in this place, Christ translateth it to himself; for the meaning
is, as if Christ had said, I must not tempt the Lord my God, whom I should
indeed sinfully tempt, if I should cast my self down, when by ordinary steps or
stairs I may safely descend.

Where note, that what once of old God delivered to Israel in commandment,
that Christ takes as commanded to himself; Thus Christ himself was not
exempted from the Law, but was under the Law. What kind of men then do they
make themselves in our days, who tell us that they are not under the Law by
virtue of Christianity? taking the word Law for the moral Law in Paul's Epistle
to the Romans, not through too much learning; where it is meant of natural
descent from Abraham, as in Gal. 4.21. Tell me ye that will be under the Law;
had not Abraham two sons? And this salvation by virtue of Abraham's descent was
the great expectation of the carnal Jews, which Paul every where labors to
disprove; not the least intending in that place the moral Law: for, of the
moral Law he says elsewhere, that he himself is under the Law to Christ, 1
Cor. 9.21.

Matthew. 9.5. Whether is it easier to say, thy sins be forgiven thee, or to
say, arise and walk?] By the word, say, is meant effectual saying, which is
doing; For, to say thy sins are forgiven, or to say, take up thy bed, are
both easy, if we mean a mere saying. But the meaning is, Whether is it easier
to forgive sins, or to cause a lame man to take up his bed and walk? as if he
should say, the forgiveness of sins is as easy to declare, as to make a
palsied man to take up his bed and walk. But this latter I have done, which
cannot be done without a divine power; Ergo, I may do the lesser, or easier, if
either be lesser or easier then the other.

Matthew. 10.11. There abide till ye go thence] Abide in that house till ye go
out of that City; go not from house to house, as elsewhere it is as it were
expounded, Luke 10.7.

Matthew. 10.14. Shake off the dust off your feet] not in indignation, but to
testify your freedom from covetousness, or lucre; it was a kind of real and
significant Proclamation in the streets of the City, whereby the Apostles did
put themselves upon the trial of the whole City; as if they should have said,
thus long have we been among you, upon this and that errand we came, tell us
now, before we go, whether we have behaved our selves unseemly or covetously,
as Joshua and Samuel said, Whose Ox have I taken? whose Ass have I taken?
whom have I defrauded? where have I borrowed and not paid again? to whom have
I been chargeable? tell us here before all the City, if any man can say, that
we came for base ends? Now if any could have said, I, you shake off the dust of
your feet, as if nothing of ours did cleave unto you; but I am sure you go
away with my money, or money worth; and it is idleness which sets you upon
this work: he had had a fit opportunity so to upbraid them. But if no man could
say this or the like, then the Apostles had thoroughly cleared themselves. Whence
it seems to follow seasonably, that he which is not guilty of covetousness
in dispensation of the Gospel, is not usually overtaken with other gross
evils. But thus more clearly; that,

Professors of religion ought to carry themselves so blamelesly, that they may
put themselves upon trial before all the world, as concerning any just
reproach: for this shaking off the dust was to be done in the streets of the
City; so says the Text, Get ye out into the streets of the City, etc. Shake
off the dust, etc. Luke 10.10.

Matthew. 12.27. By whom do your children cast them out?] As much as to say,
Your disciples do not cast out devils at all. Those will be apt to vilify the
good works of others, who cannot themselves do the like.

Matthew. 12.37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned.] That is, by thy words amongst other things, but not by thy
words alone; so that words as well as works shall come into judgment.

Matthew. 12.38, 39. Three days and three nights.] That is, but three days and
three nights at the most, restrictive; not that he shall be there three days
and three nights extensive. We sold the land for so much; that is, but for so
much, Acts 5.8. The third day is prefixed as the last day wherein he shall be
held of death in all places where it is foretold of his resurrection; The third
day I shall rise again, and go before you into Galilee: and expressly he
diminishes the time, saying, Yet a little while, and ye shall see me, and a
little while and ye shall not see me: So that it was but a little while
wherein they should not see him. And in three days he would raise again the
temple of his body, implying the diminution of the time, not the extension of
the time, as if he must needs be three days in raising of it. No, he which
says, I will finish such or such a work in three days, does perform his
promise, if he perform it within the second day, though he never come to the
third day. So that the Jews, who object our New Testament to be
contradictorious to it self, from this very text, are by this exposition
answered. See the places, Matthew. 16.21. and 17.23. and 20.19. and 26.61. and
27.40, 63. The high Priests thought it was sufficient to make sure the
sepulcher till the third day, Matthew. 27.64. and that if within that time he
did not rise, his word was falsified; although in Mark 8.31. he had said, that
he must rise again after three days; that is, at least after three days. And
if this sense may not be admitted, for my own part, I do not see what
sufficient answer the Jews objecting are likely to be convinced withal. That
Synecdochicall taking of three days and three nights for part of three days
and three nights, is good and satisfactory to me also, forasmuch as Christ
reviving probably with the first moment of the third day, yet may be said to be
in the sepulcher some part of the third day.

Matthew. 14.9. Herod was exceeding sorry.] Herod seemed to be sorry, but was not
sorry; the holy Ghost ironically humoureth him, as he did Satan, when he laid
the fault upon the Serpent, because Satan would not be seen in the business,
Genesis 3.1. That Herod was not sorry indeed, appears, in as much as he had
sought long before to slay John, but feared the people. But that he should
feign a sorrow, stood very probably with his fear of the people: And that he
should plot the death of John with the damsel and her mother, and should make
this feast to bring it about, stood proportionably with his hatred. Let this
warn us, in the reading of this and other Scriptures, that we do not always
take that for serious, which seems to be serious; especially in these other
passages about Herod, where he is said to hear the word gladly, and to do many
things after him: for if these had been serious, how did he seek to slay him?
and how came it to pass that in a choice opportunity he did indeed slay him?
Ironicall is the judgment, or rather, lamentable is the ignorance of those,
who deny any Ironies to be in the Scriptures.

Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter, etc.] His name was Simon till now: His solid
confession occasioned this surname. So that every man which confesses Christ
with like uprightness as Simon did, may truly be called Peter, as well as
Simon was. The same person, or rather another principle in the same person,
Christ within a few verses calls Satan, ver. 23. So that it is their
Peter-ponce at Rome whereon they build their Church, and not on Simon Peter.
And if they did build it on Simon Peter's person, the building and the
foundation would be a miserable foundation. But, if they build it upon Peter or
Peter's, they must build it of persons confessing and professing Christ to be
Son of the living God, and not of any coacted or unknowing matter.

Principles in persons obtain in Scripture the appellation of persons: Simons
principle whereby he confessed Christ to be the Son of God, is by Christ
called Peter; the principle whereby he willed Christ to favor himself, is by
Christ called Satan: Hence comes that note, that there be two men in a man; a
good man, which out of the good treasure of his heart speaks good things, and
an evil man which etc. that is, flesh and spirit, the new man and the old.

Matthew. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, etc.] How does
this prove the Resurrection? Thus: God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living: therefore Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are still alive in their better
part, though they be dead in their bodies; and their bodies too in a sense,
though dead as we say, quoad nos, yet live in him, and unto him, inasmuch as
he is the resurrection and the life, Joh. 14.19. for if he live, they shall
live also; its Christ's doctrine to his Disciples. A thing may be said to live
and have a being in its cause, when in it self it has not yet a being: So
Levi is said to be, and to pay tithes in the loins of Abraham before he had a
being. God calls things which are not, as if they were: He that believes in
Christ, though he were dead, yet shall he live, John 11.25. Now, if Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob be yet alive when they are dead; then Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob may well be raised from the dead: But they are alive when they are dead:
Ergo, they shall be raised from the dead. You Sadduces believe neither Angel,
nor spirit to be; no marvel though you believe no resurrection: If you did
believe angels and spirits to be, you would not doubt the resurrection of the
body. For this cause may it be, that Christ does prove Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob to live in their souls or spirits, when their bodies are dead. It is his
wonted and laudable manner to kill two errors at one blow. Thus Christ does
often reach over and beyond the question propounded, to some further thing more
profitable, whence his answer is more unexpected; but being well observed, does
resolve both. The thing which Christ in this Text does expressly teach, is, that
Abraham and the rest were now alive, though dead in body. That Abraham and the
other two should be raised, he does but secretly or tacitly imply, by way of
consequence, from this more express assertion of his. Moses himself did but
(...), that is, did but intimate; so Christ does most excellently bring in
Moses, as it were, foretelling the Sadduceall and Epicureall denying of spirits
to be negation of the resurrection, and Moses condemning of both.

Matthew. 26.26. This is my body, etc.] That is, my body shall be a mere body,
soulelesse, bloudlesse; and my blood shall be severed from my body before I eat
with you again; as surely as this bread is bread, and as this wine is wine. I
call things that are not, as if they were: when I say, the bread is my body, it
is for this reason, viz. to awake your dull senses, who do not take notice of
my future crucifixion, though I have foretold you often; for, wonders of words
use to awake the auditor, as well as wonders of deeds do provoke the spectator.

It is meet you should take notice, for these reasons:

1. That when that crucifixion is come to pass, you may believe that I am he:
1. Within your selves: 2. Declare it unto others. You will doubt when you see
me crucified by the Magistrate between two thieves, and a murderers life
desired rather then mine; I say, you will doubt that I am not the man I went
for, the Messiah, the Son of God, which I professed to be: And so the Disciples
did doubt, saying, We had thought it had been this man which should have
redeemed Israel; implying, that now they doubted whether it was he or no. This
antidote I give you beforehand, to preserve your faith from failing, though
not from some fainting; for if I can foretell my death, with all the
circumstances thereof, then I am a God, though I die like a man.

2. You must be witnesses of me in Jerusalem, and through the world, that I am
the Messiah, the Son of God, and Savior of the world. Fit witnesses you cannot
be, except you take notice, that I foretell my death, with all the
circumstances thereof: but if you do take notice, that I foretell my death
with all the circumstances thereof, then are ye the fitter witnesses of me:
For howsoever every man may and must dye like a man, and I like an evil man;
yet no man can foretell his death, with all the circumstances thereof but a
God. And by my breaking bread with you in like sort after my resurrection you
shall know that I am risen, and that it is no ghost in my likeness.

Quest. But why do thou use bread and wine in the prediction of thy death?

Answ. 1. Because bread and wine are visible, tangible, mandible: you have
forgot what you heard, you will surely remember what you see, touch, taste, eat
and drink.

2. And secondly, because every god, true or false, has his tables where his
disciples eat and drink to his honor, and for his memorial; therefore do ye
thus eat and drink in remembrance of me, after I am risen again and ascended,
until I shall return again to judgment and salvation.

Quest. But on what fashion would thou that we should remember thy death
until thou come, in thus doing? Or, how does this bread and wine show forth
thy death?

Answ. Thus: He which by bread and wine foretold his death, with all the
circumstances thereof, howsoever he was put to death like a man, and like an
evil man; yet he was God: But Jesus did by bread and wine foretell his death,
with all the circumstances thereof, when no enemy touched him, nor appeared
against him: Ergo Jesus is God.

And if Christ, who was God, suffered death;

1. Then do not you wonder though you suffer at the hands of Magistrates:
evil ones would crucify God himself if they had him in the likeness of a man.

2. If Christ God-man thus suffered, be you patient in suffering, and look for
suffering.

3. If Christ thus suffered, who was able to foretell his death, and who rose
again, then shall ye also be raised again after your death.

Thus the bread and wine is neither his body nor blood, as the Papists say:
neither yet any otherwise a sign of his body and blood, then his commentary
upon them made them to be signs, and that is not of their own nature: for the
bread does not hold so near a resemblance or similitude with his body, as one
body does with another, or as one bread with some other bread, or as Cesars
image with Caesar himself, or as a lively picture of that thing or person
whereof it is a picture; or as that was the House of the Lord, and the Altar of
burnt-offering for Israel, which David said was so, 1 Chronicles. 22.1. The rainbow
in its own nature is not a sign of non-drowning the world; for we might long
see the rainbow, before we could read that in the face of it, that God will not
drown the world: for there were rainbowes before the flood as well as after.
How then came the rainbow to be a sign after the flood of non-drowning the
world, more then before? Even because God called and made the rainbow a sign
of non-drowning after, and not before: for otherwise the rainbow had as much
inherent signification of non-drowning before the flood as after. So bread and
wine did as much resemble Christ's body and blood before that Supper of his, and
Institution, as after; and perhaps neither before nor after so nearly, as that
any man would have said, This is so like to the body and blood of Christ, as
that the one is like the other at all. Then it is the word and institution of
Christ only which makes the bread and wine to be signs of his body or blood.
And how signs of his body and blood? They are rather tokens of commemoration,
then signs. What is to be commemorated? That he was God as well as man whose
body and blood this is said to be. Why? how will that follow from this bread
and wine thus used in commemoration, and by virtue of this institution, that he
was God, whose body and blood is commemorated hereby? Thus: He which could
foretell his death, with all the circumstances thereof, when yet he sat
eating, drinking, and instructing his disciples, where no hand appeared against
him, he must needs be God, howsoever he suffer and die as man, even as an
evil man: But such was Christ, this did he foretell, institute to be
commemorated to his memorial until he shall return: Ergo, The commemoration
which is done by bread and wine, to that end instituted of Christ, does rightly
commemorate his godhead.

1. It implies, that the commemorators are in the same danger that he was in.
That

2. Though they be, yet they have no cause to be afraid, nor ashamed: for their
enemies did, and would again crucify God, if they could reach him in the
likeness of man, as they did Christ, who was God. No marvel therefore if they
crucify us.

Note here also, That as his prophecy of his death did declare him to be God,
so also his eating and drinking did imply the truth of his humanity; and that
he was not a Ghost in likeness of a man. To that end the Apostle argues, we
ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead. That he did eat and drink
with them that bread and wine, the word [this] implies. Besides, that he would
drink it no more till he drank it new with them in his Fathers kingdom.

Till I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom.] That is, till I be risen
from the dead. For then the Church of the New Testament took its full state,
which is said to be that kingdom which was at hand. And at Emmaus in Galilee
he brake bread with them the first night: Breaking of bread is Synecdochically
put for the whole Supper; mention of wine needed not to be repeated; its
presumed he would and did drink it with them, since he promised to drink it with
them. (...), as he sat with them, the words [at meat] are corruptly added.
Beza renders it, in discumbendo cum illis, Luke 24. v. 30. And by this drinking
it new with them, or by breaking bread, which Synecdochically is all one, they
did know him to be the same risen which was crucified, and not a ghost in his
likeness.

Matthew. 27.5. compared with Act. 1.18. Judas seems rather to throw himself down
some rock, then to hang himself.

Matthew. 27.62. Now the day which followed the preparation.] Ironically put for
the Sabbath: Or rather by way of a facetious jesting Asteismos, against the
hypocritical Sabbatism of the high priests, who would so workiday-like beg the
body, seal the sepulcher, and set a watch on the Sabbath, for which Sabbath
they seemed to prepare so devoutly before it came. For, to prepare sabbathly
for the Sabbath before it come, and to keep it unsabbathly when it is come, is
worthy of scorn. Let not me be here thought to scorn at preparation for the
Sabbath, It is far from my thought, yea I am an enemy to them which do scorn
thereat.

MARK.
MArk, 6.12. They went preaching that men should Repent] And that else they
should not be Members of the Church; Hence it is called the Baptism of
Repentance. For of the Baptism of Repentance we do read, and not of any other.

Mark, 7.10.11. Corban] When the Father and Mother did require any help from
their able Son or Daughter, the Son or Daughter answered Corban, Corban, as
much as to say, I have given all that I am able to spare to the holy Church to
pious uses. So the Father and Mother must want. Thus piety is made a cloak, not
only of covetousness, but of unnatural crying cruelty.

Mark, 10.20. (...), etc. It is easier for a Camel to go through a needles eie]
By shreds possibly a Camel may be forced through a needles eye; but a Rich man
must enter willingly into the Kingdom, where he must forsake all his riches,
and life also. This Kingdom is hard to be willingly entered.

Mark, 3.33. Who is my Mother or my Brethren?] Perhaps to save his Father and
Mother from being noted by the Pharisees, then present; Christ may put off the
propounder with this kind of answer; especially if the propounder was
Malignant, as by his unseasonablenesse he may seem to be.

Mark, 10.31. Last first, first last] Bold demand, does not so soon speed, as
modest silence.

Mark, 14.51. A young man with linen about his bare body] The sheet of his bed
perhaps, whence he started out of bed, to see what noise and stir that was
which he heard in the night. Men will leave all and run away naked, rather
then suffer with Christ; whereas they should leave all to suffer with him
naked: Christ is left to suffer alone.

Mark, 15.36. He who brought the Vinegar, is said to say, Let alone, let us see
etc. And in Mat. 27.49. others are said to say so to him] His staying at their
bidding was a real saying; and both of them a real mocking.

Mark, 16.15, (...), To the whole creation] Creation, put for the people in the
whole creation; An ordinary Metonymie, of the containing for the contained.
More rational, then the preaching of the Gospel to every creature, as it is
fabled that a Popish Saint Francis from this Text took occasion to do.

LUKE.
Luke 1.15. HE shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, (...), now from his Mothers
wombe] The spirit of God, which moved upon the face of the waters to cherish
and preserve them, Genesis 1. shall be present with him to cherish and preserve
him; and as his capacity shall more and more grow, so shall the same spirit be
more and more exhibited unto him. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis. When he was a Child, he could but receive as a Child. As it was
with John the Baptist; so it may be with other Children. And it was not (for
any thing I know) otherwise with him, then it may be with another child.

Luke, 1.17. He shall turn the hearts of the Parents upon the Children,
(...).] Shall turn, that is shall put the hearts, that is, the understanding;
of Fathers, that is, of the ripest in age; upon the Children, that is upon the
meanest Member of the Church. As much as to say, the Kingdom of heaven or the
Church, which he shall preach and constitute, shall consist of knowers; which
was not in the old Testament; insomuch, that the meanest Member there shall
know as much as the sagest Father, or Patriarch did there. Suitable to the new
Covenant, Heb. 8.11. They shall all know me from the least of them to the
greatest of them.

Luke, 1.24. Elizabeth hid her self] Concealed that she was with child, till
she was sure that she was with child; and till appearance proved to others,
that she was with child. People would not have believed it, but would have
scoffed her. But now it is the more admirable, and to her the more honorable.
Let God go before us in the discovery of things.

Luke 1.33. Of his Kingdom there shall be no end] Why? Because his Kingdom
consists in sufferings: For so long as persecutors last, there will be
sufferings; There shall be no end of the comfort and glory, which comes by
suffering. For the sufferings of this present life, do breed a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. So that sufferings shall last till the
worlds end; and then shall come comfort and glory which shall have no end.

Luke, 1.52. He has put down the mighty from their seat] In comparison of me,
and the honor which I have by bearing this Savior, Kings and their honor are
as it were no honor, as a Candlelight is no light, where the Sun shines.
The honor which comes by suffering for Christ, is greater honor then that
which comes by ruling a Kingdom. The honor of Paul, and of other Martyrs of
Christ, is greater honor then that of Alexander, which conquered the world.
Who would not be in that Apostles condition, rather then in the condition of
Alexander the great?

Luke, 6.35. Lend looking for nothing again] Such may the case be, as that we
may and must lend, without expectation of the principal. Not that we are
always bound to lend, much less to forgo the principal. Indefinite
propositions, do not bind semper and ad semper, but with their limitations.

Luke, 10.30. Wounded betwixt Jerusalem and Iericho] The party to whom Christ
used this Parable, would have been content to have received this kindness from
a Samaritan, though himself was a Jew; if he had been wounded and half dead, as
that Jew which is supposed in this Parable, yet did he not think himself bound
to show the like kindness to a Samaritane; wherefore Christ corrects him,
teaching him to do to a Samaritane, as he would receive from a Samaritane.
Professors of Religion will be content to receive kindness, where they will
not bestow kindness; but it is unconscionable Religion so to do. Let such as
shall sequester themselves into scanty societies, examine whether they do not
thereby exempt themselves from Offices of Love and Charity, to the bodies and
souls of such as are not of their fellowship; as if they were not bound to
feed, cloth, nor yet to minister a wholesome word of reproof, or exhortation to
reduce the soul of any out of sin, but such as are of themselves. The poor
may fear, that such communities will not receive, but as Nebchadnezzar saved
whom he listed, and that whom they list, they will keep out: Which if they do,
their Religion is in vain unto them. This Lawyer (for so he is said to be
verse. 25.) would have been content that the Jew should be accounted his
Neighbor, but he would not that the Samaritanes should be expounded to be his
Neighbors, lest he should be bound to do unto them as he would that others
should do to him.

Luke, 10.42. One thing is needfull] That is, one sort of meat is as much as
needs; Martha's cumber rose (...) about variety of services. Variety of
objects does distract in huswives as well as in others; as Baking, and Boiling,
Roasting, etc. in several places at one time. Mary has chosen the better
part, which shall not be taken from her.] As if Christ facetiously should have
said, we shall by and by take and eat that from thee about which thou
labourest. But Mary is on the getting hand, and that getting is of spiritual
things. Martha was no covetous carker, but a kind lover of Christ. Corporal
repast is needful in the season, as well as the Word; therefore not the Word
only needful, though chiefly worthy. Howsoever variety of services, may not be
unlawful in feasting; yet one single course may suffice; That is it which
Christ here means. Greediness of spiritual discourse, may sometimes suspend
corporal kindness.

The hearing of the Word, though chiefly needful and useful, as indeed it is,
yet not only needful; for labor in men's callings is needful, as well as the
hearing of the Word; and in the season thereof must not be excused or shifted
with heareing of the Word. The Word only, and the Word chiefly, do differ;
although by many they be taken promiscuously, that is their unskilfullnesse.

Luke, 22.24. (...) A strife who should be greatest] This might be meant of
Judas.

Luke, 24.44. It behooveth that all things be fulfilled in Moses, and in the
Prophets concerning me] These words, concerning me, I take not to depend upon
all things, but upon the Verb fulfilled; So that the sense is not restrictive,
as if all things which concern Christ should be fulfilled; but the sense is
extensive, viz. that all things in Moses and in the Prophets do concern Christ,
and that nothing in Moses and in the Prophets is fully and completely
expounded, but that which is made to concern Christ provided we expound Christ
to be powerful conversation whereby Christ is (...) honored and declared to
be trusted i^ in in which sense I take it Christ is to be understood.

JOHN.
John 2.19. DEstroy this Temple] and in three days I will raise it up] Christ
did not only m^^^, but its said he spoke of the temple of his body verse. 21.
And the word this implies the distinction between his body and the other
Temple wherein then he was; So that the Jews did wittingly and wilfully wr^st
these words of his, as a testimony against him at his death, as they did man
[things more; am Christ gave them no just occasion by these words to mistake
the one temple for the other: Only Christ will not forbed to give the
appellation of Temple unto his body though hell was then in the Temple of stone,
Why? To teach us that we need not forbear the words and ways which are just
and good, though enemies be apt to take advantage thereby and to bring evil
upon us therefore.

John 2.24. (...) he trusted not himself to them: or he believed not himself to
them; The word (...) to believe is put transitively. And if it be so put in
this place. Was may not an accusative case, be understood other where, us (...)
it is said that we believe in God, or in Christ, or rather on God, or on
Christ, so as that the sense be this, that we are to believe our selves upon
God, or upon Christ, that is trust our selves upon God, or upon Christ, a
metaphor taken from ye, whereon A man dare trust not only his foot, but his
whole weight. Hence God is said, and Christ is said to be a rock, whereon a man
may safely trust himself; and not like the y^^, which may break and deceitfully
drown him which trusted there do, much less like a quagmire which will (...)
sink him which relyeth thereon; which if it be true, them ^e is not a
believer. which adventureth his essent only upon God or upon Christ, but which
adventureth his whole life and eternal safety upon the ways of God and of
Christ, and if he perish he perishes; God and Christ are faithful, and will
keep that which me^ come^^ to them, against that day of account, faithfully.
Thus faith is praticall yea faith is a practice or a work, a doing of so the
action and not a fancy or affiance only, not a persuasion resting in thought or
heart only. So that it may be said to those who profess themselves believers,
what singular thing do ye? not, what singular thing know ye, or are ye
persuaded of? How come works then to be evil spoken of, as if they were legal
and not evangelicall, when faith it self is a work? such faith is not
faithful, and if faith be unfaithful, how great is that unfaithfulness?
Faithful in matters of civil duty betwixt man and man; faithful in matters
of God and his word, and that unto the death. This is the generation of doers
and sufferers, which are faithful indeed, believers indeed.

John 4.35. The regions are white already to the harvest;] comers out of
Samaria over the fields, men and women in their white apparel, likened to
corn in a field, as elsewhere Christ resembles multitudes of people to an
harvest. The harvest is grout, but the laborers are few, Matthew. 9.37.

John 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father which sent me draw him;]
Whosoever will not be drawn with this consideration, that God the Father sent
Christ his Son to taste death for every man, as Heb. 2.9. he will not be drawn
with any thing: And that God draws by that engine, see ver. 45. where it is
said, that he which has heard and learned of the Father comes unto Christ:
So that God the Father draws by hearing, and what is to be heard but the
Gospel? And what is the sum of the Gospel, but, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them, sends
abroad this word of reconciliation, and beseeches men every where to be
reconciled unto him; for, he is reconciled to them. This is the ministry of
reconciliation so called, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. This I take to be the meaning of
this text, John 6.44. So that it does not give way to those which say, what can
I do, if God do not draw me? but it condemns them, saying unto them, What
drawing do thou expect more then this? He which will not be drawn with this
love, will not be drawn at all. For, greater love then this cannot be
exhibited, much less expected? Only true it is, that God by his Spirit must
and is always present with this word, but I do not say that he is always
entertained, the more sin is there to resisters.

John 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you;] By flesh and blood may be signified Ordinances; by
eating and drinking, practice of those Ordinances. For as eating and drinking
uniteth the food with the feeder, so does practice unite the practiced and the
practiser, Hence we hear of eating the Roll, and eating the Book; the goodness
of meat is known and participated by eating; So if any man will do my Fathers
will, be shall know whether my Doctrine be of God, or no. Then are ye
partakers of Christ if ye keep fast the hope of confidence unto the end, Heb.
3.14. So that doing and suffering does as it were digest Christ, and turn him
into nutriment unto us. Every man will confess that we feed on Christ by
faith; And if faith be faithful dealing, why may we not be said to feed, to
eat, drink, digest, partake of Christ, by dealing faithfully in his Ordinances
and with his truth? While we think, or hear, or speak of Christ, we do but
receive Christ into the mouth, but do not let him down. Its not enough to take
physic into our mouth, but there must be a swallowing of it down, and a
faithful retention of it, though it make the receiver sick again, or else it
will not avail. And this reception of Christ down into the stomach as it were,
is done by practice of Christianity, that is, by doing and suffering whatsoever
he has commanded us. To this is like that of the Apostle James, 1.25. He that
is an bearer only, and not a doer of the word, is like one that looks his
natural face in a glass, and forgets straight way what fashion be was of.

John 11.9. Are there not twelve hours in the day? if a man walk in them he
stumbleth not;] In the dark night a man may stumble in his own yard, especially
if there be many blocks and stocks, as in a Carpenters yard, or such like,
where there lie scattered blocks here and there. But, in the day time though he
walk amonst all those, or many other blocks, he stumbleth not, because be sees
those blocks before him, and therefore can take heed and avoid them. But what
is this to Christ's going into Judea again, where they sought lately to stone
him, the question there to be answerred. Yes, thus. As a man may go in the same
yard amongst the same blocks at several times and yet not stumble, in like
manner so may a persecuted Christ or Christian go into the same place, amongst
the same people, and yet not with like danger, because there is a difference in
the time; difference of time, brings difference of influence and difference of
providence from God; whereby it is true, that,

Those enemies, which one day rage against Christ and Christians, may another
day, be as still as a stone, while Christ or Christians pass or converse
amongst them without interruption; else, how could Christians, which have their
dwellings among their enemies, subsist?

John 11.50. It is expedient for one man to dye, etc.] This spoke he etc. The
High Priest spoke this, and in so speaking is said to prophecy; but, he did not
prophecy purposely or wittingly, that Christ should die for the people; that
is, for the eternal salvation of the people: for, then he should teach and
believe Christ to be the appointed Messiah for the salvation of mankind. But
the meaning is, that, his words abstracted from his intent, were in their own
nature a prophecy, in which words God indeed might have an hand to verify
them, as if they had by him been purposely prophesied. And to speak as the
thing is, I take it, that the word prophecy is imputed to him ironically. It
is not too much learning which makes some men deny any ironies to be in
Scripture; Some ironies are of that gravity, that it is not unsuitable to the
holiness of God himself to use them.

John 14.12. He that believes in me, the same works which I do he shall do
also, and greater then these shall he do also] Of the sense of this place I am
not so clearly settled; I propound it question wife to be considered of (under
correction of better judgment.)

1. Whether Paul and some others did not show, I say show less agony in their
sufferings then Christ in his?

2. And if so, then whether that may not be the meaning of this place?

Caution. And if any Saint or sufferer for Christ should undergo death for
Christ with less agony, or with more alacrity then appeared in Christ; it does
but argue that they are more assisted now when Christ is ascended, which is the
reason there rendered of those greater works; For I go to the Father, to teach
that Christ can ordinarily bestead his servants more and better after his
resurrection and ascension then before. This is no praise nor pride to the
assisted; for what does he perform or suffer, but whereunto he is assisted?
and if he be assisted, why should he boast, As if he were not assisted? And
that Christ could and did convey the spirit upon them in a greater measure
after his ascension, then before, is plain, where it is said, that the spirit
was not yet given unto any of them, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
Perhaps the reason may be, because the spirits of men were more capable and
receptions after the ascension of Christ then before. The very doctrine of the
death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ has that faculty in it to dilate
and unlarge the minds of men.

The use of the point of this place is, I take it, to check such as will say,
Am I like to do and suffer as Christ did? and are you like to do at as Christ
did and suffered? Yea, why not, within the compass of that God calls me to?
seeing I do it not by my own power, but by Christ, and by the spirit of God,
and by God himself, who assisteth me? Of my self I can do nothing, not live,
move, or have a being, nor think a good thought: But I am able to do all
things, through Christ which assisteth me.

John 20.19. Christ came the doors being shut] that is (say I) before the
doors were opened, A periphrasis of his priority in coming: He were before
them into Galilee, therefore before them into the house; and if the doors were
(...), when the foremost came, the doors probably, were not that after the
first was entered. And the reason why the holy Ghost does not say Christ came
first, but came when the doors were shut, is, to teach us, that the doors ought
not to be shut, where women with men are met about religious exercises! And to
teach us that religious exercises should be within doors, not without doors;
for, so it is said again, verse. 26. After eight days again his Disciples were
within. Now, if the shutting of the doors be only a Periphrasis of his
firstnesse in coming, it will not follow, that the doors were not opened unto
him by a key or like way, but rather that they were so opened, viz. by a key or
the like ordinary means; and to occasion is both taken and truly taken away
from the Papist of his real presence, which he dreameth from this place. And
indeed if Christ had miraculously conveyed himself through the doors, Thomas
might the rather have doubted Christ to be a Ghost in the likeness of of
Christ, then the same true Christ which died; as the Papists say Christ to be
in a wafer-cake, as well as to come through the doors: but Christ gave no cause
of any of these three tenants.

John 20.26. After eight days.] That is, after the daylight of the eighth day
was past, accounting the day of resurrection for one. All the meetings in the
New Testament after, Christ's resurrection on the Lords day (for as much as I
have observed) were in the night.

John 21.15. Peter, love thou me more then these?] That is, then these
fellow-disciples of thine? Thou said, that though all should deny me, yet
thou would not. Peter had reason to love Christ more, because a greater
denial was forgiven him.

John 21.22. What if I will, that he tarry till I come, etc. That is, that he
tarry where we are the broyled fish, till I come from speaking apart with Peter
some little distance, (probably) about Peter's denial, which before others
Peter, did not under stand. So far may saints mistake the meaning of Christ:
for they understood it of his coming to judgment.

ACTS.
Acts 1.18. THis man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity, and falling
headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.] Judas
probably did not purchase the field, forasmuch as he threw and left the pieces
of silver wherewith he should have paid for it, before the high priests; and
because it is said that the high priests purchased the field with the same
pieces, Matthew. 27.5, 6, 7, 8. But it is he purchased with the reward of
iniquity, because by the reward of his iniquity a field was purchased: for the
emphasis lies not in the word, hoc. so much as in the purchase and price. Like
to a phrase of Hezekias* where Hezekiah has these words, I have cut off like a
weaver my life: when the meaning is, that it is cut off; for it is God which
cut it off, or went about to cut it off, sore against the will of Hezekiah;
unless it be said, that Hezekiah by his sin provoked the Lord to cut it off,
Isa, 38.12. And so Judas might give occasion to the high priests to purchase
that field with that money: Judas was the true occasion why it was called, a
field of blood; because it was purchased with that money which was the price of
Christ's blood, by him sold to the high priests for that money.

And falling headlong, he burst in the midst, etc.] (...) (...), praecept
factus. It seems by these words, and by his bursting in the midst, and by his
bowels gushing out, that he did not stay so long as to make his p^^^ end by an
(...)* but driven with more rage then could endure such delays, he seems to
run down some steep rock, mountain, or promontory, whereof there were anew
about Jerusalem, (for, as the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord
about them that fear him, Psalm. 125.2.) So steep the promontory or rock seems
to be, that with the fall he broke himself, so that his bowels gushed out: so
that it was called the field of blood, as well from that besmearing, as from
the money wherewith it was purchased, ver. 19. whence it seems to be the same
field which was bought with that money: whether, before the death of Judas, and
by the act or consent of Judas, is worthy of consideration.

Act. 23.5. I know not, Brethren, that he was the high priest,] (...). The
word not, which stands between knew and brethren may seem to be intended by way
of a Mecathesis, as if it should be transposed and placed between was and the;
and then the words will be thus, I knew, brethren, that he was not the high
priest, or that there is no high priest, (...) viz. except Christ, who is not
now on earth. Such transposition seems to be 1. John 5.16. I say not, that thou
should pray for it: that is, I say, that thou should not pray for it. And
thus is Paul excused from untruth; yea, and made to speak courageously; who
otherwise seems to be left guilty of senseless dissimulation.

ROMANS.
Romans 1.17. FRom faith to faith.] Not from faith to flesh, as from Abraham to
his posterity; but from Abraham to those which do the works of Abraham, or
which walk in the steps of Abraham. Successors in the faith are the children
of the faithful, as the Scripture accounts children: that which is born of
their flesh is but flesh.

Romans 4.1, 2. What has Abraham found as concerning the flesh? For, if Abraham
were justified by works, etc.] Works and flesh are Synonymaes, or equivalent
terms. Works then must be that operation which the carnal Jews did imagine
that promise to have, viz. I will be the God of thee, and of thy seed. And that
operation which they imagined that promise to have, was this, namely, that the
promise did naturally and necessarily sanctify all the seed of Abraham's
posterity. Inasmuch as it was sufficient to be one of Abraham's lineage, no more
needed to make God to be his God. The which sense, if it be true, then works in
this and many) other places of this Epistle are to be understood passively, nor
actively, that is, not the works of any man, but the work or operation of Gods
promise upon a man. The great controversy between Paul and the Jews, both in
the Epistle through many chapters, and in the Galatians, was this, Whether the
Jews had not such privilege by being Abraham's seed, through that promise
made to Abraham will his seed, Genesis 17.7. as that they needed not in grafting
into som^^ (...) Church by baptism; For if they laid, yet they must be also the
grafted into Abraham's house by circumcision, or they could not be saved, as
Act. 1.15. And this lost works may be one of those difficulties in Paul's
Epistles so hard to be understood.

Romans 8.28. (...), (...) to purpose.] Called, that is, effectually called.
Effectually called are they which come when they are called: Or, effectual
call (...) coming when men are called.

According to purpose.] Whose purpose? Gods purpose (...) the calleds purpose*
Both may be admits. For that (...) should come when they are called, is Gods
purpose; and God never purposed that all things should work together for; good
unto any, but unto those which come when they are called which effectually obey
the Gospel whereto they be invited: For, to whom God exhibiteth good, mercy,
and salvation, to them God purposed good, mercy, and salvation, and to no
other; but to believers and obeyers God exhibiteth good, mercy, and salvation,
and to them alone; Ergo, God did purpose good, mercy, and salvation to
faithful believers and obeyers only, so far as the Scripture reveals. But,
according to purpose may be meant that ((...)) purpose of heart wherewith
Christians are laid to cleave unto God. So as the sense will be, That all
things work together for good unto those who not only obey for the present,
but are fully purposed for futurity of time to cleave unto God, and to his
ways through all difficulties; for such a settled purpose of heart it becomes
those to have, to whom the promises belong.

Romans 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.] No divisions but those which
are contrary to the doctrine which the Apostles have taught, are to be avoided;
and those divisions are to be avoided.

1 CORINTHIANS.
1 Cor. 7.14. ELse were your children unclean.] Else; that is, if the
unbeleeving wife be not sanctified to the believing husband. From the word
[else] it follows, That the children of believing Corinthians were not
baptized though the Father was a believer: for if they had been baptized, Paul
would not have paralleld them with the unclean wife; for baptized persons are
visible Christians: but visible Christians are not visibly unclean: Ergo,
visibly unclean are not visible Christians, visibly Christened, or visibly
baptized. And if the children of the Corinthians were baptized, why does the
Apostle impute unto them the same uncleanness as to the unbeleeving wife? And
whereas he pronounces them holy, it is for this end, to prove that the
unbeleeving wife is holy to her believing husband; an argument taken a paribus:
But if the children be some other way holy or baptized then the unbeleeving
wife, (that is, of the parent to be retained) the proportion of the Apostles
argument between the unbeleeving wife, and the children of the believing father
is improportionable, and consequently unvaluable to the purpose whereto he
produces it. As for example, he which shall say, The Christian religion is
wholesome for the Commonwealth, Else no religion is wholesome for the
Commonwealth; does not he confess the Christian religion to be full as much
wholesome for the Commonwealth as any other religion, if not more wholesome?
So, the Apostle, which says, if the wife be unclean, then the children are
unclean; does lie not as much as profess, the like uncleanness to be in the
children, which is in the wife, if not more? Now in that wife there was no
uncleanness, but of unchristianity: Ergo, in the children, he does not mean
illegitimation, but unchristianity; and that uncleanness was both in wife and
children: Ergo. those children were not christened or baptized, though the
father was a believer,

1 Cor. 8.4. We know that an idol is nothing in the world, etc. to the end of
the eighth verse.] These words are ordinarily taken to be Paul's, as if Paul had
said, that an idol is nothing in the world, etc. which nothingnesse of the
idol, for the truth of the speech, he might have said: Yet it is a great
error from the scope, sense and worth of the place, to attribute any part of
these said four verses unto Paul, otherwise then to a recorder of other men's
words. True it is, that Paul wrote these four verses, and that by the dictate
of the Spirit of God. But it is not true, that he wrote them as his own
judgment, approving them, or as the Spirits doctrine. How then did he write
them? He did record them to make way for confutation of their drift, as the
words or plea which the Corinthians had said or written unto him, wherein they
do sinfully endeavor to prove it lawful for them to go into the idols temple,
and there to eat meat sacrificed to the idol. That these words and verses were
theirs, and to this unwholesome end of theirs, I thus collect:

1. The Corinthians did write unto Paul of some things wherein they seemed to
desire his answer: so it appears by Paul's answer to them, where he says,
Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me, 1 Cor. 7.1. whereof
marriage was one, Chap. 7. and this about eating idolothytes in the idols
temple, was another, Chap. 8. see ver. 1.

2. Paul answers these words contained in these four whole verses, reproving
and confuting the insufficiency of the argument in these verses employed, along
from the beginning of the ninth verse unto the end of the tenth Chapter: the
which being observed, helps more then a little to the righter understanding
of the ninth Chapter by the way. Now, if Paul reprove these words, or the scope
whereto they tend; then it is clear, that he is not the author of them,
howsoever he be the recorder thereof.

That he does reprove and disprove these words through these four whole verses,
all and some of them as invalid unto the purpose whereto they be by the
Corinthians alleged, is plain, not only by more tacit arguments following
these said four verses; but also by a plain harping or descanting upon the
self-same words, which the Apostle does, as it is the manner of learned
Answerers to do; and that partly before these verses, as well as after.

For instance: the word [know,] We know that an idol is nothing in the world:
Howbeit, there is not in all men this knowledge. This word [know] the Apostle
strikes at, when he says in the first verse, We know that we all have
knowledge as if he should say, You not only know, (such knowledge as it is)
but you are proud of your knowledge; and yet you know nothing as you ought to
know: for if your knowledge were such as it ought to be, you would not destroy
your unknowing heathen neighbor by your example, as you do when you sit at the
sacrifice in the idols temple. You know that an idol is nothing in the world,
and that there is no other God but one, and one Lord Jesus Christ; and you say,
that there is not in all men this knowledge: for some, you say, make conscience
of the idol, and do eat to the honor of the idol, supposing the idol to be
some deity, and able to help them; and so they being weak, that is, being
ignorant, are defiled in their very mind and conscience; yea, and likely to be
destroyed too, because they put their trust in an idol which cannot save them.
And you say, It is sin to them thus to eat before the idol; but you say. that
you are free from sin though you do the same thing: Why? Because you do not eat
as to the honor of an idol: but you eat as the meat is Gods creature; and sit
in that temple, not as it is dedicated to the honor of an idol, but as it
stands upon Gods ground, alleging for that purpose a place in the Psalm, where
it is said, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. But
if the earth be the Lords, Have you not places enough upon Gods ground to go
upon, unless you go into the idols temple? And if all the fullness of the
earth be the Lords, Will no meat and drink in the whole world suffice you to
eat and drink, except that meat which is dedicated to an idol? Thus does the
Apostle answer in the tenth Chapter, repeating twice that place in Psalm. 24.1.
by which repetition a considerate Reader may discern, that it is an answer to
some objection of theirs, and that they had alleged that Psalm. 24.1. to
justify their idolothyte eating.

1 Cor. 9.21. To the Jews I became a Jew.] That is, I suffered so patiently
under the Jews, as if I had been a Jew; and so under the lawless, as if I had
been lawless: but I was neither lawless nor Jew in their sense. Christians do
use to suffer so patiently for their good deeds, as if they justly suffered for
evil doing: Not that Paul conformed to the lawless or to the Jews in their
lawlesnesse or in their Jewism. Patient suffering is a means to win the
persecuter, if any thing will win him.

1 Cor. 11.10. (...), Because of the Angels.] Women must honor men, as they
should honor Angels; and therefore be covered in presence of men, for
reverence to men, as unto Angels. The Galatians are said to reverence Paul as
an Angel of God: Jacob to have seen (as it were) the face of God, when he saw
the face of Esa^ pleased with him. A kind of transcendency of speech, much like
an Hyperbole.

1 Cor. 14.22. Tongues are a sign to unbeleevers.] That is, when hearers do
not understand that which is plainly spoken out of the word, it is a token that
they are unbeleevers: Suitable to that of the Apostle, If our Gospel be hid, it
is hid to those which perish.

1 Cor. 14.30. Let the first hold his peace.] Not that the first should cease
before his time; but that the second must forbear speaking until the first
speaker hold his peace of his own accord. The sequel about avoiding of
confusion shows this to be the meaning; for, ye may all prophecy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may be comforted. Whence it is likely that the
Corinthians were apt to be preposterous in promoting every one himself before
other, or before their desert into the speakers place.

1 Cor. 14.32. Spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.] That is,
whosoever will not forbear till the first hold his peace, shall be no prophet,
nor allowed to speak as a prophet by Paul's account.

1 Corinthians. 14.31. Ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and
all may be comforted.] That is, all the members of the Church (females
excepted) may prophecy, provided they can and do so prophecy, that all may
learn by them, and all may be comforted; otherwise not. Now whether learning as
well as godliness be necessary or not necessary to such prophecy, as whereby
all may learn, and all may be comforted, I leave to be further inquired of the
godly learned. Loath I am to deny any saint of God his privilege which Christ
has purchased for him; I have sins enough, though I make not my self guilty of
that But withal, as I would not quench the spirit, or despise prophecy in the
meanest who prophesies according to the proportion of faith, and of grace, or
gift by him received, within the limits of learning and comfort by the Apostle
here set: so do I judge that doctrine neither holy, humble, comfortable, nor
true, but a quencher of the spirit, a despiser of prophesying, which either
excludes learning from prophecy, or does prefer non-learning before
learning in prophecy; which doctrine has been published, printed, and
maintained by some who knew not what learning was, in this wanton age of ours,
Witness their own assertion, That a non-scholar is to be chosen Pastor in
the Church of Christ, rather then a Scholar, though the Scholar be equally
gifted, graced, spirited in all other things: Witness a second assertion of
the same author, That learning (which he all the way expresses to be Arts and
Tongues) is accursed from a spiritual use. He delivers, I say, That learning
is accursed from a spiritual use; with many more witnesses then two or three,
which are sufficient to prove the author and maintainers of those doctrines so
far forth to have blasphemed against the Scriptures: forasmuch as no one
sentence of Scripture was written without the art of Grammar, neither possibly
could; unless the Reader should be left void of the letter, and of the sense.
But of these it may be said in a sense, Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do: Father, forgive them, they know not what they say. For some of
them being demanded, whether the holy Ghost in the constitution of Scripture do
regard the congruity of the Adjective with his Substantive; that is, whether
the Adjective does use to agree with his Substantive in the constitution of
Scripture: they have answered, as some did about the holy Ghost, That they do
not know any Adjective or Substantive to be in the Scripture at all. And what
was the answer of these some, we are sure might be the answer of all the rest
which so teach, for any learning which they are guilty of. But, in the mean
time, let the remnant of them learn not to blaspheme: They have spoken evil of
the things which they know not; one mark (amongst many more) of the unlearned
false teachers of these later days, 2 Pet. 2.12. compared with 2 Pet. 3.16.
the very verse by this undertaker wrested against learning, as aforesaid. So
justly has his arrow (being shot up against learning) returned upon his own
head. If he and his Executors had had as much ambition unto learned
prophesying, as they had ambition to prophesying such as it was; they had been
as godly, as now they were ungodly; and they had been as true, as now they were
lying: Ungodly, I say; for, Can there be greater ungodliness then to put down
learned prophesying by a law, or by a doctrine in the name of the Lord? and to
advance ignorance of the Original Tongues and Arts, which make for the
understanding of the Scriptures: as if that ignorance of Hebrew, Greek,
Grammatical, and other learning were the only learning whereby the Scriptures
can be understood? I am not afraid to pronounce this doctrine which is against
learning aforesaid, to be a mocker, proud, envious, hypocritical, and one of
the greatest lies which ever was told in the name of the Lord since the world
began. What could the Devil do (if he were in the likeness of a man) more
worthy of himself, then to destroy learning from godliness, literature from
the holy Scriptures, and to set up non-learning, and put down learning, as the
only divine learning, for his own bellies sake? No marvel though the whole
Law of God at a clap fared no better at the same hands: for to cashiere the
Law, Learning, and Sabbath, suit very proportionably together. The holy Ghost
provideth against such in these words (foreseeing their forwardness to
prophecy), Ye may all prophecy (says he) one by one; provided, that all may
learn by you, and all be comforted: otherwise not.

1 Cor. 15.29. Else what shall they do which are baptized ever the dead?]
Death after death, Martyr after Martyr voluntarily giving himself over unto
death, rather then deny the Christian religion. What a rash and wilful part do
they play, to expose themselves to death if there be no resurrection? Surely
there either is to be a resurrection of the dead, or these said voluntary
Martyrs, which chose death rather then deliverance, are greatly deceived. For,
the reason why they give themselves to be drenched overhead and ears, not in
water only, but in afflictions, and in death; is, because they expect a better
resurrection. And they do it one after another; that is, though they see others
of their brethren martyred before their eyes, yet they are not the less, but
the more incensed to maintain that cause, for which they shall be likewise
dealt with all. This voluntary death might be expounded as a sinful casting
away of their own lives, if there be not a resurrection. For, who would cast
away his present life, if he were not sure of a better? And that this is the
meaning, the verse following seems to confirm, where it is said, And why are
we in jeopardy every hour? For, there also he argues for the resurrection
from the absurdity which would follow upon voluntary sufferings, if there were
no resurrection.

1 Cor. 15.40, 41. There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial:
But the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is
another. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another
glory of the Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in glory. So
also is the resurrection of the dead, etc.] These words have reference to the
35. verse, where it is said thus; But some will say, How are the dead raised?
and with what body do they come?] As if the sense should be this; that, whereas
it is enquired how the dead are raised, and with what body they come, I answer
says the Apostle, that the glory of the raised body is more excellent then
that of the mortal body, as far as the Sun exceeds the Stars, or as
one Star exceeds another.

II. CORINTHIANS.
2 Cor. 12.4. (...), Which it is not lawful or convenient for a man to speak.]
Not that Paul was forbidden to utter what he heard; For, what is spoken in the
ear may be revealed upon the house top. But, he who spoke to Paul had
blasphemed to say, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, if he had not been Jesus
Christ, God as well as man. But if he were God as well as man, which spoke to
Paul, then Paul had this privilege to boast of, which no false Apostle had,
that God himself spoke unto him from the third heaven. This I doubt not to be
the meaning of this place.

2 Cor. 12.16. But, I being crafty took you by guile] A preoccupation, as if he
should have said, did I send after me Titus or others, who took gain of you, as
some who will not be seen to take bribes themselves, yet will be content that
their wives, children, or servants for their use shall take bribes? then had I
been crafty indeed; but I did not so. For, Titus walked in the same spirit,
free from filthy lucre as well as I; for, so it follows in the next verse:
Not that his taking them by guile, was converting of them by guile.

2 Cor. 12.14. Parents ought to lay up for their children, the children ought
not to lay up for their parents.] Not that Paul contrarieth 1 Timothy 5.4. where
he bids that children shall recompense their parents; but that he a parent
to the Corinthians did rather lay up and exhibit to the Corinthians, then
expect that they his children should lay up, or contribute to him. Some
Scriptures, and this for one, are to be restrained to the present
circumstances, and not extended further upon pain of untruth, as that which
goes into the man defiles not the man, must be understood of eating things
with unwashen hands there spoken of, and not of all kind of eating and
drinking, otherwise it is untrue.

2 Cor. 13.4. (...), etc.] He appeared by his crucifixion to be weak like other
mortal men, yea, and as one dying for his fault; but his resurrection showed
him to be that which he had professed himself to be, good and God. For, if he
had not been such, God would not have raised him from the dead, lest God should
have justified him in his unjust pretenses.

GALATIANS.
Gal. 4.21 TEll me, ye that will be under the Law, Had not Abraham two
sons?] Law and descent from Abraham are here made equivalent terms. Works of
the Law therefore are an operation, which descent from Abraham did effect.
Carnal Jews dreamed that descent from Abraham had such virtue in it, by
reason of that promise made to Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17.7. that whosoever
was but a child of Abraham's carnal race, was forthwith (...) op^re operate
Justified without any work of his own. And so far he was by descent from
Abraham justified as to be a member of the visible Church by that means.
Howbeit, without a gracious holy use of that promise made, and a good
conversation thence proceeding, he was not accounted a child of God. For the
end of that promise, I will be the God of Abraham and if his seed, was not to
secure the seed of Abraham, but to st^^re up the seed of Abraham to believe,
love, be thankful to, and walk holily toward that God who had thus promised
to be their God Now, these perverse Jews, and so Galatians in their steps, not
willing to observe the scope, cleave to the words, and will needs have such a
visible Church in the New Testament, as wherein parents and children grafted
into Abraham's stock by Circumcision, might be justified as members of the right
visible Church of God; And if they ^e but so justified as to be members of the
outward visible Church of God, they do not think that there needs any other
justification. This hence it. Paul confuteth by the example of Ishmael,
reaching that scoffers and persecutors at a holy use of the promise, such as
holy Isaac did make, were even then by the same spirit, whereby the promise was
made, accounted for nothing, although they were the natural sued of Abraham,
at Ishmael (...) and that the Church of the New Testament: consists only of
such as make a holy use of the promises and threats of God too* If afterward
they appear otherwise, they are disfranchised or that Church: which exposition
if it be true, then the word L^^^ in this bad sense is meant a national
churching of parents and children hand over head, without respect unto any
knowledge, love, or fear of God in them and in their ways; A mighty mistake of
them the whilst who interpret the Apostle to speak against the moral Law of
God; when as it is meant only a carnal interpretation which some Jews (far
enough from conforta^^^ to the moral Law, far enough from expecting
Justification by their holy works, or from conscience of holy works themselves)
I say which some such carnal Jews did make of the promise, I will be the God
of thee and of thy seed, Genesis 17.7. Flatter they did that promise, calling it a
Law, (...), or rule which constantly and naturally without any endeavor of
theirs would bring forth salvation to the seed of Abraham, though they should
(as we say) lie in their beds all day. The work of the Law was the work,
efficacy, operation, or virtue which that Law or promise had to bring forth
salvation unto them; not their works done according to the law and commands of
God, they were not guilty of so much workfulnesse. Hence the Antinomian heresy
is taken off from his foundation, and for want of this sense, I do not see how
the Antinomians can be sufficiently answered.

Gal. 3.10. For, as many as are under the works of the Law, are under the
curse:] As many as look to be justified by the operation which that promise
has upon Abraham's seed, where it is said, I will be the God of Abraham and of
his seed, the carnal did expect that that promise should sanctify so many of
them, as were of Abraham's seed, so that they needed not any other
sanctification. And this sanctification was faith, or by faith: For, they did
believe that those should be saved, which did believe God to be the God of
Abraham and his seed, and none other; where was their fault then? In that they
did not walk holily; or in that they did not believe Christ to be meant by that
seed of Abraham? What will it avail Christ to be meant by that seed of Abraham,
and that God is his God, except we also live holily as Christ lived, so that
his spirit may be said to have life and vivacity in us?

Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of faith; for he that does them shall live in them]
Israel must do the command, or else not live in it? Ergo, Israel had not life
by being this or that, but by doing; and this doing is faith, or faithfulness.

EPHESIANS.
Ephesians. 6.12. (...), In supercelestiall things.] There is wickedness in
supercelestiall things, when there is sophistication of Doctrine, wrongnesse of
prayer, feighned Ordinances in and about the worship of God; then there is
spiritual wickedness in heavenly things.

PHILIPPIANS.
Philip. 1.18. HOwsoever Christ is preached, whether of envy or good will, I
rejoice and will rejoice.] Every divulging is preaching, as Mark 1.45. Railers
against Paul's Christ, and Paul's Christianity, are here meant to preach Christ
of envy. Paul rejoices in that envious preaching or railing, because
howsoever it was envious, yet, it was a publisher per accidens of Christ and of
Christianity, and consequently a matter of rejoicing to Paul. Not, that Paul
would conform unto Antichristian conditions, rather then forego the preaching
of the Gospel, as some Surplice conformitans have abused this text; For, Paul
speaks of others envious preaching of Christ, not of his own envious
preaching of Christ; neither does he say, that those who preach Christ of
envy, can rejoice in such their preaching of Christ, but that he does not
rejoice at the envy, but at the publication which accidentally follows upon
the envious railing. This railing was happily not in a Pulpit or solemn Oratory,
but in the streets or highways, or wheresoever in public assembly or of
neighbor to neighbor.

Phil. 3.9. All my righteousness which is of the Law.] That is, all
qualifications, which made Paul honorable, amongst which, his education at the
feet of Gamaliel in tongues and other literature was the choycest and most
capable of promotion; This learning he esteemed but dross and dung, in
comparison of the knowledge of Christ; which knowledge was not like the former
knowledge or learning merely notionall, but experimental, namely to know him
and the fellowship of his sufferings, and to be made conformable to him in his
death. Thus to learn Christ, Paul found the most hard piece of learning of all
other, but withal the most excellent piece of learning; and so necessary that
he accounted all other learning of tongues and Arts, of Scriptures and notion
of Christ himself to be as nothing in comparison of this imitation and
conformity to Christ in his doings, and especially in his sufferings; Lo here,
what learning is the hardest to come by, and the most excellent being obtained,
and so necessary, that whosoever knows Christ himself according to notion,
and can preach Christ according to all the mystery of Christianity, yet is but
as a sounding brass and tinkling Cymball, without this unfeined, faithful,
real doing and suffering as Christ did and suffered. He who has learned to
suffer as Christ suffered, even to the loss of life and all, is the highest
scholar in the world, and he who is lowest in the School or Kingdom of
Christ, must be no less learned; For, so says Christ, He that forsakes not
all, even to his own life, cannot be my Disciple. Men may conceive amiss, and
teach amiss the Doctrine of Christ, for base ends, as for vain glory, for
gain; but in imitating of Christ, in doing and suffering, has no snare in it
to catch my brother by deceit or sinister respect; No man lightly can be
powerful in his whole conversation, a doer and sufferer in jest. This did
Paul, who spoke more tongues, and had more learning then all other Apostles;
remember therefore, that once a Scholar brought up, was as great a sufferer as
any of the unscholared tribe. Let me see any of the unlearned tribe, (which
say, that there was never any good yet which were learned) I say let me see any
of them or theirs which have suffered with like patience as his learned Apostle
did? Ne, did not Paul suffer many abuses from the unlearned Corinthians, though
Christians of his own conversation, with little thanks from them for his
labor; witness, that though he both spent, and was ready to be spent for
them; yet the more he loved them, the less be was beloved of them. It was not
too much learning made them so chubbed and boggish to their most generous and
noble Apostle. They made him work with his hands day and night to the
maintenance of himself and those which were with him; yea, and to spend upon
them, and be spent for them, as before is said, with so much less love, by how
much more love he showed unto them. This piece of obedience the unlearned
Antiliterarians of our days can practice without going to School to learn it.

COLOSSIANS.
Coloss. 2.8. BEware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy.] Not that
Philosophy truly so called is vain deceit, whether natural or moral; nor yet
any other part of learning, but useful and profitable about Theology. But if
the mere notion of the Gospel it self, together with love, belief, and
admiration of the mystery, and all good utterance of the same being known, be
severed from action, and patience under the cross of Christ for the Gospel
sake, it avails not: For the kingdom of God consists not in notion and
locution only, but in power. Herod hoped to see some mighty work done by Jesus:
and one of the Kings of Israel (none of the best) delighted to hear the
miracles done by Elisha reported unto him: They counted Ezekiel as a very
pleasant song, or as one that could play well upon an instrument, who would
hear his words, but would not do them: And Herod would hear John gladly, but
cut off his head: Not, but that Paul speaks wisdom amongst those which are
perfect, and that not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this
world, but the wisdom of God even in a mystery; but the chief wisdom
consists in doing and suffering the will of God, not in near knowing or
speaking of it, though with never so much excellency.

Col. 2.10, 11, 12. Ye are complete in him, etc.] As if he should have said,
If there be any privilege in being a Jew, or in being circumcised, you have
that by baptism, putting on Christ, who was a Jew, and circumcised: But great
is the privilege of the Jew, and much is the benefit of circumcision: All
which privilege and benefit you have by putting on Christ.

Col. 2.16. Or of the Sabbath: which also may be understood weeks. Ver. 17.
Which are a shadow, etc.] so that it is understood of such Sabbaths as were a
shadow of things to conse; not of that Sabbath which was moral.

I. THESSALONIANS.
1 Thessalonians. 4.6. (...), God is -- a revenger of all such things.] What wicked
practices man cannot discern, do properly belong to God to revenge.

II. THESSALONIANS.
2 Thessalonians. 2.4. SO that he exalts himself above all that is called God, or
worshipped: That he may fit, that he has (...), or that he does fit upon, or
in the Temple of God, showing forth himself as God.

Above all that is called God.] That is, above all Magistracy: for Magistrates
are said to be gods, after a sort.

Or worshipped, (...).] That is, above all Augusteity; Sebast^^s was an
appellation given to Augustus.

Showing forth himself that he is God, (...).] Giving out, as we use to say.

In the Temple.] That is, in that which he pretends to be the Temple of God

I. TIMOTHY.
1 Timothy 2.8. I Will, that males pray every where, (...).] The emphasis is not
in the word [every where] as if the Apostle should bind or permit men to pray
in all places, albeit that is true also; for then the duty should lie upon
women as well as upon men: but the meaning is, that males, and not females
should lead the prayer, wheresoever prayer shall be made, as well in family, as
in Church. Paul had declared before, that in the Church none but males should
solemnly prophecy ^e pray. But now he further makes known, that in the family
women must neither pray nor teach; that is, not solemnly lead or utter the
prayer or doctrine, whilst a man in presence is silent. Where note, that
Apostle takes for granted, that Christians will pray and teach in their
families: An answer to them who require a warrant for family prayer.

1 Timothy 2.15. (...), She shall be saved through childe-bearing.] That is, the
pains and peril and childbirth is so great, that she is hardly saved through
that pains, though she be never so modest, Christian and godly. And seeing so
great pains are laid upon her in childbearing, She ought therefore amongst
other reasons to be in silence. S^rrowes are signs of sin, and must
respectively be grounds of humiliation in both sexes. The word [saved] implies
a narrow escape of death or danger; so that these words are a third reason of
the former silence commanded.

1 Timothy 4.5. (...), By the word of God and prayer.] The word of God commands
former differences of meats to be nullified: So the word makes meats which
were to the Jews unlawful, now to be holy; that is, to be lawful to Jews
and Gentiles. Thus the word sanctifies meats; that is, Gods ordination
sanctifies them. As for prayer, that sanctifies on our part; viz. when that
which God has decreed lawful, we receive with an holy fear, thankfulness,
and supplication, accompanied with faith, that it shall be sanctified. Prayer
implies all the worship of God, and covenant with God. Lawful meats are
sanctified to none but to the holy; none are holy but those which pray; no
prayer is accounted for prayer, but that which it made by such as are in
covenant with God though Christ.

1 Timothy 2.9. The Lord knows who are his.] That is, the Lord will know who are
his before they shall come to be called by his name, Christians; which is done
when they enter into that visible, audible covenant with him, by attestate
profession. I will go down now, and know, whether it be altogether according
to the cry which I have heard; and if not, I will know, Genesis 17.21. That is, I
will evidence it to Sodom's and all other men's knowledge. Genes. 22.12. God is
not said to know till men know: Now I know that thou love me; since thou have
not withheld thine only son from me. God, the foreknower of all things, knew
whether Abraham loved him or no, before Abraham sacrificed his son; but he
does not seem to know or take knowledge, until Abraham evidence it by
obedience. And, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. It is
not for nothing that God sends us back to our brother to be reconciled, when we
bring our gift to the altar, before our gift shall be accepted of him: That
what the Church binds on earth, is bound of him in heaven; and what the
Church loses on earth, is loosed of him in heaven: That, Whose sins they
remit, they are remitted; and whose sins they retain, they are retained: To
whom they forgive any thing, he forgiveth also. Hence in the old Testament, The
Lord God of gods must know, and Israel also, he shall know, Josh. 22.22. It is
the speech of Reuben and Gad to their brethren of the other tribes, which came
to expostulate with them about an altar which Reuben and Gad had made.

1 Timothy 5.23. (...), Use a little wine.] That is, but a little wine. We sold
the land for so much, that is, but for is much, Acts 5.8. He shall be three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth; that is, but three days and
three nights in the heart of the earth: which was verified, though he was not
three full days, and no part of the third night in the grave. This seems to
allude to Levit. 10.9. where, upon the destruction of Nadab and A^^hu, God
provided that the priests should not drink wine when he is about to meddle with
the holy things, lest he should not discern aright between holy and profane
things and persons. Probably Nadab and Abihu had exceeded in wine, when so
presumptuously and mockingly they tempted God with strange fire. For, Wine is a
mocker, P^a. 27.1. Timothy and other like officers must not be drinkers of
much wine, lest they choose or refuse whom they should not into Church office.
One drinker will favor another, both of them unfit to be officers, or
office-makers in the Church of Christ. And thus there is a fair dependence of
this with the verses before and after, which otherwise seems to be
Independent.

II. TIMOTHY.
2 Timothy 3.6. THese are they that creep into houses, etc.] That is, these before
spoken of ver. 1, 2, etc. As if he should have said, Whereas you do pretend
that my people do creep into houses, etc. I answer, It is you and yours which
creep into houses, who deny the power of godliness under pretense of a form
thereof, etc. as before is said. Now those spoken of verse. 1, 2, etc. are
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, etc.

HEBREWS.
Hebr. 2.9. THat he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.] True
and good: But withal, if God has purposed to save believers and unbeleevers,
those who make a good use of that promise, and those which make a wanton use
thereof, he could have saved them, and never have told them so: Inasmuch as he
tells them that Christ tasted death for every man; it implies, that he would
have men to know it, and believe it, to love, obey, and walk thankfully for it.
So that they which walk worthy of this promise, to them it shall be exhibited
and made effectual; and whosoever walk not worthy, to them it shall not be
made effectual. Effectual (I say) it shall not be to the salvation of such,;
but effectual to the just condemnation of such: so that Christ shall be a
sweet savor unto God as well in those which perish, as in those which are
saved; for they neglect so great salvation.

Heb. 4.9. etc. Rest there signifies continuance in the truth: so the context
will have it.

Heb. 7.3. (...), Without father, without mother, etc.] Not that Melchisedech
as a man was without father, without mother; whether he was Sem the son of
Noah, as is most likely by all Jews and Christians: but as a priest he was
without father, without mother, without kindred, without beginning of days, or
end of life; that is, his priesthood was not tied to come of such a father,
mother, kindred; for they must come of the tribe of Levi; their father must be
of the tribe of Levi, their mother must be of the tribe of Levi, and that tribe
was their kindred. And as for beginning of days or end of life, the man was
not without beginning and without end; for, It Is appointed for all men once to
die, and then comes the judgment: But his priesthood was not stinted to
begin at such a time, or to expire at such a time, as the Leviticall priesthood
was; for that priesthood was to begin at 30 years, and to end at 50 years, Number.
4.24, 30. with Number. 8.24.

Heb. 8.7, 8. Covenant at coming out of Egypt, Why might it not be
Circumcision; although circumcision was used and commanded before? For, John
7.22.
1. It was given and commanded to that generation at their coming out of Egypt,
and not to them before. 2. Circumcision, though given and used before, yet was
first written then; so that that manner of giving was never before their coming
out of Egypt. 3. Their coming out of Egypt was a solemn period of time, whereby
their Chronicles were kept, Jer. 16.14. 4. Moses is expressly said to give
Circumcision, although Circumcision was not first of Moses, but of the Fathers,
John 7.22. 5. It is said that they did that day avouch the Lord to be their
God; and that God did avouch them to be his people, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. 6. The
antithesis between the new Covenant ( ver. 11.) and Circumcision, is the most
opposite; for Circumcision took in infants, the new only knowers of God.

Heb. 12.16. Selling the birthright for a mess of pottage: That is done, when
a Christian for a meals-meat justifies the prayer or thanksgiving of a
professed unchristian before or after meat, by his presence and posture.
Christianity and truth is the elder brother to all resemblances which are made
of Christianity. Wherefore it is a kind of selling of a Christians
birthright, to be present, or to bare the head at an Antichristians prayer or
thanksgiving before or after meat at table, though in the Antichristians own
house: And the Author here would not have a Christian to justify the prayer
of an Antichristian, so much as once, by his bare-headednesse, or the like,
though perhaps he purpose never to sit bare-headed at the same, or at any like
occasion again. For so charily the holy Ghost provideth, that Christians should
not pass away their birthright not so much as for one mess of meat, much
less for two, three, or more meals of meat; because, the more meals, the more
times; and the more times, the more often selling of the birthright. Esau's
birthright was irrevocably sold as well for one me^^^ of pottage, as if he
had sold if for a whole worh^^ and by the sale thereof the blessing was
likewise irrecoverably lost.

Object. But the Apostle gives us leave to go to a feast with an unbeleever,
it woe be disposed, and there to eat such things as are set before us, asking
no question for conscience sake: Therefore it is lawful to be present at such
prayer and thanksgiving as are performed by that unbeleever before or after.

Answ. It was too far from his present purpose then and there in ^and, to
caution the gesture at thanksgiving in that place of Scripture. What there by
due method he cannot bring in, that here he forgets not to add; to teach us,
That 1. We should read one place of Scripture as well as another: The whole
Scripture is but one whole Systeme. 2. We must look for every thing in his
proper place. 3. We must learn so to speak, and so to write, as that our hearer
or reader may easily trace us, and find us: which they cannot do, if we take
in so many several circumstances as are not pertinent to the present matter in
hand.


Hebr. 13.4. And the bed is undefiled.] The Author does hereby affirm, that
the marriage bed is indeed undefiled and lawful, not sinful and
dishonorable. Some do understand this place, as if the holy Ghost had said,
That Marriage is honorable amongst all, if the bed be undefiled: But it is
affirmative, not conditional.

JAMES.
James 2.7. THe Name called upon you; or called upon by you.

Jam. 2.17. Faith and works, baptism, separation from Idolatry, and the
practice of positive parts of godliness.

Jam. 5.14. Annoynting them with oil in the Name of the Lord.] The Name of the
Lord is as precious ointment, Cant. 1.3. Consolatory speeches uttered in the
Lords Name, and from the Lords word, are as healing and medicinable as ointment.

I. PETER.
1 Pet. 2.8. (...), They were disobedient unto what they were even set.] That
is, unto that unto which they were even set: the Antecedent understood in the
Relative, as Romans 7.6. (...), being dead wherein we were held: That is, that
being dead wherein we were held.

1 Pet. 1.13. (...), At the revelation (not, at the coming) of Jesus Christ.

I. JOHN.
1 John 2.11. THere is no occasion of stumbling in him.] Neither active nor
passive.

1 John 2.19. (...), etc.] That is, they pretend, that they went out
successively from us the Apostles; and so they did: For all the feigned
Christianity of Rome is an imitation of the true and Apostolical Christianity:
but if it were the same, why is not their doctrine and scripture like his
doctrine and Scriptures? but why is it their own tradition? why is not their
baptism and breaking of bread in every circumstance like his? Why is there not
liberty to judge the doctrine then and there taught, as in 1 Corin. 14.29, 35.
is permitted unto any member, except unto women? Why has not the Church, but
the Pope, the determinative sentence in causes Ecclesiastical?

1 John 2.21. The Scripture is written by those, and for those which know the
truth; not for those, or not so much for those which know not the truth.

1 John 3.8. (...), Ab initio.] That is, from the very foundation of his nature
Satan sins.

1 John 4.14. (...).] Hence the condemnation of the world arises, so many of
them as do not believe in Christ.

JUDE.
Jude v. 20. THese are they which separate themselves.] The emphasis lies in
the word these, and not in the word separate. As if he should say, Whereas the
world blames some for separating themselves, I say, These are they which
separate themselves with a vicious separation. There is a good separation, and
an evil separation: See 2 Cor. 6.17.

REVELATION.
Rev. 18.4. (...).] Alluding to John 2.19. (...). As much as to say, Whereas
Antichrists Church pretends, that they came successively from Christ, and
from his Apostles, and therefore are the true Church; Tell her, that you have
your succession from her, and came from her, as she did come from Christ, and
from the Apostles; and that therefore your succession is lineall and regular
from Christ and from his Apostles, as well as theirs. And if she demand of you
why you depart from her, and do not abide with her, seeing you had your
succession from her; tell her, that it is as lawful for you to depart from her
unto the ancient, true, first and good ways of Christ and of his Apostles, as
it is for her to depart from Christ and his Apostles in doctrine and practice,
and yet to pretend that she is the successor of Christ and of his Apostles:
And if she be a lawful Church because they were a lawful Church,
notwithstanding her difference from them; much more are you as true a Church as
she, even by her own argument, though you depart and differ from her. And this
is to reward her double in the cup wherein she has drunk to you: For I take
this doctrine of Succession so urged by her to be the golden cup wherewith the
Harlot has made the Nations drunk, and giddy, and indeed, not able to answer
her with sense and reason. Whether this be a rational and sufficient answer or
no, I refer to judgment.

FINIS.
Certain places in the New Testament humbly propounded to the consideration of
the godly learned, whether they may not, and whether some of them ought not to
be thus translated as follows.
MATTHEW.
Matthew. 1.11, 12._(...), not captivity, but transhabitation, or translation
from house to house; as a Tenant removed by his Landlord for non-payment of
rent. Judah must not roost in the Lords tenemens, if Judah behave himself so
badly toward this Landlord. Take him Jailer of Babylon, until his manners be
mended. And if this were done to the ancient Tenant, what may we the later
expect for non-payment of our rent, but that he will take the Kingdom from us,
and give it to a people which will render the fruits thereof in their season?

Matthew. 11.11. O (...)] He that is lesser in the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater
then he; not he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Matthew. 18.17. Tell the Church] that is, the whole Congregation, at least in
Covenant, when publicly assembled upon the Court-day, which is the Sabbath.

Matthew. 21.3. with Mark 11.13. Luke 19.31.34. (...) The owner of them has
need of them. Probably Christ had bought, or some ordinary lawfully way
contracted with the owners, for the Ass and Colt, so that the Ass and Colt
were now his own. And probably, he had covenanted with the sellers, that the
Ass and the Colt should be delivered to whosoever should first loose them
without asking leave, and to whosoever being demanded should answer and say the
owner of them has need of them; a fit token between the buyer and the seller.
For, who had more right to loose them without leave, then the owner? And what
could make the expostulators so facile to let the Ass and the Colt go, but the
identity of the token formerly agreed upon between the seller and the buyer?

The need or use which Christ says that he had of the Ass and of the Colt, do
witness, the rather, that he was the owner of them by contract.

The need or use which Christ had of them, was, First, to foreshew his death
and resurrection to be near by riding into Jerusalem. Secondly, after his
resurrection to ease his pierced feet; which for soreness he would not suffer
Mary to touch, howsoever he permitted Thomas to feel and put his fingers into
the print, lest Thomas should perish for want of faith. Be not faithless, but
believing. And lest Christ should be thought to be but a Ghost in the likeness
of that Christ which was crucified, and not the same, in all things like unto
us without sin. And his riding upon them into Jerusalem before his death,
might be a real prediction of his death, of the manner of his death, of his
resurrection so shortly future, and consequently of his Godhead.

Ma^th. 26.24. (...). It had been good for him i^ he had not been borne that
man, or if he had never become that man; A softer speech then to say, it had
been good for that man if he had never been borne: like that of Peter upon the
same Judas, where it is said, He is gone to his proper place, Acts 1.25. to
teach us modest censure of immoderate sinners.

Matthew. 26.25. (...), Say thou it? Interrogative, not affirmative; else
Christ had discovered Judas to become the betrayer, which Christ modestly
forbear, save that he revealed him unto John, upon request in his ear,
periphrastically, by the Son, lest Christ should be thought ignorant of the
betrayer.

It is an easy thing, I do not say, a good thing, for a Printer to omit an
interrogative point.

Matthew. 27.5. (...).] they say it comes of (...) strangulo, but compared with
Acts 1.18. may it not come of (...) figo and a non tollendo augmentum and
interponendo g. that is, unfastened himself, as Acts 1.18. he ran headlong,
burst in the midst.

Matthew. 27.11. Of Christ unto Pilate, (...) say thou it? witness the same
answer of the same Christ, to the same Pilate, upon the same question, in
another Evangelist interrogatively; Say thou this of thy self, or did others
tell it thee of me? viz. that I am a King, John 18.34. It seems rational to
forbear the direct information of his regality before Caesar's Deputy; Because
that was the capital snare which the Jews laid for his life.

Matthew. 27.38. (...), Two liars in wait, ex (...), not (...) two thieves. Why
might they not be liars in wait for blood, rather then for theft?

1. Because Barrabas a murderer, is called (...) John 18.40.

2. The penitent confesses himself righteously crucified, when by the law of
Moses to the Jews, he might have pleaded fourfold restitution, for the safety
of his life.

MARK.
Mark 14.26. (...) hymning or praising. For, we find the words (...) to be
put transitively, with an accusative after it: (...) I will praise thee, not
(...) I will sing praise unto thee; which same in Psalm. 22.23. whence it is
fetched (...) I will praise thee, not I will sing to thee, though singing in
those days an ordinance more frequent then in these. Therefore let singing
make what shift it can for it self, it cannot be proved out of this text.

Mark 16.15. (...), Go preach the Gospel to the whole Creation; Creation being
understood metonymically for the people in the whole Creation. It seems more
rational, then that the Gospel should be preached to every creature, and
takes away all occasion of that ridiculous preaching, which hence that Popish
Saint Francis is said to preach to the brute creatures, or which any other
profanely might object.

LUKE.
Luke 21.8. (...), I am, not I am Christ, A speech which God justly
appropriateth unto himself, because he has his being of himself, I am has
sent me unto you, Exodus 3.14. yet proudly arrogated of poor wicked men, as Isa.
47.8. Babylon says in her heart, I am; and again, thou have said in thine
heart, I am, and there is name else beside me. But of this, more, and more
fitly in exposition. Its the ordinary proud word of arrogant men in Scripture
to say, I am; as if they should say I am the singular one: It is I, (with
emphasis) and no other then I.

Luke 24.30. (...), As he sat with them] not, as he sat [at me^t] with them;
nor at table, as in another reddition. So that it was not common meat, but the
Supper of the Lord. Breaking of bread synechdochically, put for the whole
Supper. The wine for brevity not mentioned, is to be presumed, because he
promised to drink it new with them in his Fathers Kingdom, which Kingdom was
this Church of him raised from the dead. And, if he had not used the wine at
this time, as he promised and practiced before his death, how came the
Disciples to know him by the breaking of bread? For, thus they argued, That was
our Master which brake bread and drank wine in prediction of his death, the
night before his suffering, promised to do the like after his resurrection in
memorial of his death; This man does break bread and drink wine in that
signification, Ergo, it is our Master and not a Ghost in his likeness.

The Papists prove themselves no Church by erring against the wine in this
place. And, if they know not the meaning of that Scripture, where Christ
promises to drink the wine new with his Disciples in his Fathers Kingdom, who
will trust them to be a^^errable in all other Scriptures? But, the Papists
argue from this text, that the cup is not necessary with the bread in the
Supper of the Lord. Ergo, one child in comparison may find out that which
their whole Catholic Church for the plainness does not see; and if their
Church cannot err, then are they no Church; for in this easy thing they err,
how much more in other places of more difficulty? The words [at meat] in our
English are put in to obscure the gesture sitting, which Christ and his
Disciples did then and there use at the breaking of bread, as well as before his
death: a thing not espied of our ungreeked people, by reason of the words, at
meat, which makes them think it to be common meat, not the Supper of the Lord
to this day; but now they are warned, as for (...) and (...), there is no
necessity to understand it of sitting to common meat.

What is that doctrine which teaches Learning to be accursed from a spiritual
use? I say what is it but a lie of unlearned ones, envying learning in those
which have it, because it obscures the glory of them which want it?

Luke 24.31. (...), He became disappearing, that is, he appeared not until that
day sevennight, on which day sevennight he appeared again, Luke 24.36. John
20.26. to discountenance the seventh day, and all the other six for having any
more Sabbatisme in them. A word provided of God to stop the mouths of those who
would have the seventh day still to be the day of Sabbath, especially if it be
conferred with that 20. of John 26. and John 21.14. of which, more in the next
Scripture.

Luke 24.33. (...) at that special hour, not the same hour; that special
hour or time is a periphrasis of the first day of the week: For, to what end
should men and women dwellers in Galilee, where Emmaus was, return to
Jerusalem at that time of the night, whence they had scarce by day light, from
morning, to Emmaus, attained.

Thomas, who was not with the Disciples till the second Lords day after Christ's
resurrection, John 20.26. was with them at Jerusalem this later meeting;
witness their instructing of him about Christ's resurrection, from their own
experience, Luke 24.34.

Jesus, whose appearance at the fishing, John 21.14. was but this third
appearance, was present at this later meeting at Jerusalem, Ergo, this meeting
at Jerusalem must needs be the second Lords day, spoken of John 20.26.

The Lords day is a special time, beyond other times, against them which think
so lightly of a Sabbaticall day in the New Testament.

JOHN.
John 2.4. (...)? What is that to thee and me woman? A rational answer to her
impertinent proposition. Not, woman, what have I to do with thee? A more tart
rejection then Christ obedient would make of his parent, for that speech,
though impertinent.

John 3.12. (...), things upon the earth, things above the heaven,
superterranea, supercelaestia. The Kingdom of heaven there spoken of, at and,
though not earthly, yet, was on earth. The elect, who are not of the world, are
praid by Christ not to be taken out of this world, Ergo, are in the world; John
17.15. The discourse of Christ with Nicodemus was about regeneration, and about
the Kingdom of God which is at hand, namely in this world, not about future
felicity in another world.

John 11.34. (...), He troubled himself; The troubles of Christ were under the
power of Christ, and by his help, of Christians. Troubles have power over
others. The godly are not tempted above what they are (in some sort) willing
and able to bear.

John 18.37. (...), Whether may it not be understood interrogatively, rather
then affirmatively? Say thou it? especially, seeing the same question is
answered interrogatively, verse. 34. Say thou this of thy self, or did others
tell it thee of me?

John 18. ult. (...), A lier in wait: Whether might not therefore the (...),
two which were crucified with Christ, be liars in wait for blood, or wilful
murderers, as this Barabbas was, seeing they confess themselves to suffer
justly, who by the Law of Moses might have pleaded restitution?

Then, justification of Christ has whited a scarlet sinner for Paradise.

ACTS.
Acts 2.1. EN (...), When the day, (that is, the daylight of the fiftieth day
after Christ's resurrection) was fully come; that is, was come and gone, and now
the night of that fiftieth day began to succeed.

They assembled in the night. Fiery-tongues, the fittest color for the night,
as the Pillar of Fire by night, which became a Pillar of cloud by day;

The night of the Sabbath and of every day follows his day. Pentecost no
proper name of any Jewish Feast in this place, much less of any Christian
Feast. The like Exposition may Pentecost receive, Acts 20.16. the fiftieth day
from the pronunciation of those words. Likewise, 1 Cor. 16.8.

Acts 2.1. (...) about the special thing; viz. the Supper of the Lord,
synechdochically put for the whole worship of God;

The worship of God is a special thing, and that special thing about which the
Sts are to assemble; And the Supper of the Lord is a most solemn and
significant sum and part of the whole worship.

Acts 4.13. (...)] (...), taking, or perversely taking them, or pretending to
take them, perhaps against their knowledge; a cleanly pretense to be rid of
them; usual amongst their successors in our time; was, or did Christ's
gainsayers think that Christ was mad, and had a Devil? John 10.20. yet so
they said of Christ.

It is no news for enemies to speak against their consciences. Probably Peter
and John of Israelitish parents were brought up in the daily reading and
understanding of the Law and Prophets, Hebraicall according to the
commandment, Deuteronomy. 6.7. of teaching their children; we find Timothy was so
taught of a child, 2 Timothy 3.15. Peter wrote two, and John three Epistles in
Greek extant with us unto this day; Our antigrammatarians cannot set readers (I
do not say riders) on them.

If Fishermen like Tent-makers might not be thoroughly lettered, why do our
antigrammatarians constrain Scholars to be tradesmen, like Pharaoh, which will
proclaim Moses and Aaron idle, if they do not like Porters, carry burdens upon
their backs?

May not we more justly charge our antigrammatarians in the name of the Lord,
from the example of the learned Fishermen and tent-makers, to get learning with
their trades, which they should had before their trades, or else to sit silent
at the feet of Gamaliel till they can skill of the original words of their
pretended fathers will?

There is as much probability, that, all Disciples tradesmen became Scholars,
as that all Scholars became tradesmen; let him that reads consider.

There is as much need of this to a better life, as there is of a handy trade
to this present life. I do not say that learning is so easily acquired as a
trade; yet much might be by rule and use. If all tradesmen were Scholars, then
our antigrammatarians might have their will to make all Scholars tradesmen.

If it be objected, that Peter and John had the Greek tongue, and whatsoever
literature they had, by miracle.

I answer, that then they had it some way, and could not be called unlearned
men.

If they had it by miracle, let our antigrammatarians show it us in themselves
by miracle, which now shortly they expect, or else their tongues abuse their
conscience; but, till then, what will it avail them, that Peter, John, and
others had it by miracle, which they themselves have no way, or else till
miracles come, which will not be so soon as the expecters vanity, let them get
by ordinary means, that which the Apostles had by extraordinary, and so shall
they learn to bless, and not to blaspheme the holy Scriptures; which without
Grammatical congruity were not written, no not so much as any one line of them.

In the mean time, Be it known unto all men, that, our Antigrammatarians which
account Peter and John unlearned, because the envious High Priests said so, do
sit in the high Priests scornful Chair successively, while they would be
thought to sit in Peter's Chair and John's by virtue of an unlearned profession.

But what should we foul our fingers with them, when many of the chiefest of
them, being demanded, whether God in the constitution of Scripture does make
his adjective and substantive to agree, have answered: That they do not know
any adjective and substantive in Scripture to be at all.

Auditum admissi risum teneatis amici? Acts 13.48. (...), As many as were set,
ordered or constituted in a fit posture, like men which will be saved. Allusion
to that phrase, where it is said, Such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God
of Israel, left Jeroboham, etc. 2 Chon. 11.16. And to that, where they are
exhorted to cleave unto God, with full purpose or posture of heart. (...), With
a position or proposition of heart. Acts 11.23. like men which wait for the
bridegroom, ready to enter with him, whenever he come. Which, as Timothy is
bidden, do lay hold on eternal life, and will not let it go, as Jacob did to
the Angel, or Ruth to her mother in law.

Such are fit (...), faithfully to commit themselves unto the obedience of Gods
ways, come life, come death, come persecution, come peril, etc. with Hesters
resolution, If I perish I perish. These are they which are (...), set, and
orderly set, as in battle array to meet with their enemies in the gate, these
are they that settle themselves to their work, as if they would be saved; And
if this posture be but equal; where this is wanting, there is far short.

This is the generation of them, which take the Kingdom of heaven by violence;
of them which set their hearts aright, as if they meant to go through-stitch
with their work.

Acts 14.13. (...), The Priest of Jupiter being before the City: that is,
Jupiter being before the City, not Priest being before the City. The congruity
of case inforceth the participle being to be understood of Jupiter the
genitive, and not of Priest the nominative; and teaches us this, that the
Image of Jupiter was placed before the City, that is, at the entrance of the
City probably, that every commer might bow to it, before they entered into the
City; so zealous were they to their imaginary gods.

Whereas, if the Priest be understood to be before the City, Jupiter, or
Jupiters Image appears not to be before the City; so the worth of that note
is lost.

The sense depends upon the congruity of the adjective with his substantive:
Ergo, congruity of adjective and substantive is no foppery. Congruity of
adjective with his substantive is used of God in Scripture to distinguish the
things that differ, Ergo congruity of adjective and substantive, is not
accursed from a spiritual use, but is blessed of God to a spiritual use.
Congruity of adjective with his substantive in the Greek tongue, must be
understood of the reader of holy Scripture, before the reader can certainly
understand the Authors intention. The congruity of the adjective with his
substantive, in this place, and in many more places, will certify an Heathen
Reader what was intended by the Author himself.

The congruity of the adjective with his substantive, is one rule in the Art of
Grammar, whereby we are so taught to speak, so to write in any language, as
that we shall certainly be understood of so many as are learned in that
language; and without the which we cannot certainly be understood. Ergo, some
Arts in every rule of them are not accursed from, but blessed to a spiritual
use.

The congruity of adjective with his substantive was as unknown to him who
preached and printed that Arts and Tongues are accursed from a spiritual use,
as the holy Ghost was to them who had not so much as heard that that there was
an holy Ghost, Acts 19. Ergo, he spoke and wrote evil of the things which he
knew not; a note of false teachers in the later days; proud of every Scholars
word which they do know, even till they do corrupt themselves again, which
pride, 2 Pet. 2.12. malignant to what they know not, whom the same Apostle
imployeth to be those unlearned and unstable, wresting the Scriptures to their
own destruction. S. H.
This worthy Preachers and Printers text, 2 Pet. 3.16. to say no worse; His
Epistle desires his error, if error (says he) it be, to be showed him. I
have done no worse in my way, then to show him his error, if he were alive to
see it; and in his absence to the re-printers of his book and of his Epistle,
who are as it were his Executors. Better by the amplitude from other
congruities, and regiments, rules of Grammar, Rhetoric, and other Arts, might
I have gratified his request; But, this place ministers no more: Thus far I
have satisfied the require of the place; and indeed satisfied to prove that
Book called The sufficiency of the, etc. Author S. H. to be an unlearned lie,
in the name of the Lord, made probably to get a name, but indeed a shame; And
if I mistake nor, it is pure spite of the unlearned, against the godly
learned, and open blasphemy against the whole bulk and body of the Scriptures
at one clap. Forasmuch, as the Scriptures are not constituted without the rules
of Grammar, to say nothing of other Arts, even unto every line of them; neither
if they were, could they be understood: And if the foundation be a lie, what
else be all doctrines built thereupon.

Act. 14.23. (...), and (...) ordained them Elders by extension of hands.

Acts 19.36. (...), These things being not spoken against: De facto, not de
posse, or de jure: Their goddess had not been blasphemed, that is, not evil
spoken of, ver. 37. The argument a non licere had not been to the purpose, but
against the purpose; For if the goddess could not be spoken against, and yet
Paul had spoken against her, then the tumult had been more rational and
tolerable which was made against Paul. But the Town Clerk justly and wisely
blames the tumult ^uers, and excuses Paul: Ergo, this cannot be spoken in
justification of that foolish idol Diana.

Whence two notes:

1. That the Town Clerk was a witting and willing friend to Paul, as appears
by all his discourse.

2. That Paul was three years at Ephesus and spoke not a word against Diana,
conomine; only he taught them, That those were no gods which were made with
hands. Demetrius could see that it reflected desperately upon Diana; yet could
not affirm, that ever Paul had mentioned Diana invectively.

There are safe words enough in general (without particular galling of brutish
opinionists) whereby the best zeal may discharge his duty, and yet keep it
self out of blame. Or, take the Doctrine thus, That

It may become the best zeal to forbear a particular provoking of brutish
superstitious people, which have multitude, might, and law on their side. What
wise man would pull an hobbyhorse out of a childs hand, whereon the child is
fond? so the house and town perhaps shall be troubled with the cries of the
discontented. When it is but a little sullied, or a more desirable object
presented, he will throw it away himself.

ROMANS.
Romans 3.3. (...), infideliter egerunt, dealt unfaithfully: No^ What if some
believed not? A proportionable opposition unto that ((...)) trust ver. 2. where
it is said, that the oracles were be trusted unto them. So that (...) faith is
faithful dealing; faith in Christ, faithful dealing with Christ. And this is
faithful dealing with Christ, to sufferage him, as he suffered for us. So Paul
expounds it, when he faith, This is (...) the faithful word, or word of
faith, that if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him: if we die with
him, we shall live with him if we deny him, he will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.11. If
justification, and salvation were promised to no faith but unto faithful
dealing, power of godliness would prevail otherwise then it does, and
Antinomian libertinisme vanish. And why should not faithful dealing with
Christ be said to make no partakers of Christ, as well as faith to make us
partakers of Christ* Faith may be without faithful dealing; but faithful
dealing cannot be without faith if faithful dealing with Christ be dangerous
against Christ, now can faith in Christ be safe unto Christ? If faith make me
partaker of Christ; faithful dealing much more will make me partaker of
Christ; that is, it will evidence both to my self and others, that I have
communion with Christ.

Romans 9.3. (...), Could I wish? As much as to say, If I could wish my self
accursed from Christ, yet it would do them no good; For this later clause is
understood by way of Apostopesis, a Figure frequent enough in Scripture, which
modestly and prudently the Apostle forbeareth to break to ^illest he should
offend the Jews, which were so apt to take offense at him.

By this Interpretacion the faith verse comes in fitly, which otherwise
follows unwillingly: which is, Not at though the word of God had taken none
effect.

By this Interpretation Paul did not actually wish himself accursed from
Christ; which if he had, seems not orthodoxall, and has bred great Scruple.
That of Moses, Race^^e out of the Book which thou have written, is no more but
this; Whereas thou lust appointed me to do the Leader of this people, I beseech
thee, exempt me from (...) office, of thou will nor pardon them this sin.

1 CORINTHIANS.
1 Cor. ^.15. (...), but he shall be saved? It, that is, (...), the foundation,
with which (...) does agree in gender, as well as with the person there spoken
of. An answer to a prevented objection, which revolters, and ligh^ (...) to the
truth do imagine; viz. that if they perish, but cause which they did profess
must perish with them, when they fall from it. But if the cause be safe, when
they desert it, the terror is theirs which forsake; no shame to the cause it
self.

(...), even so as by the fire. The word of God is tried as silver in the fire,
seven times there punished, (Psalm. 12.) every time brighter then other: And
revolt, howsoever it seems to mar the credit and honor of the truth; yet
it does not blemish it, no more then the furnace does the silver, which indeed
does dissolve and melt it, but sends it out more refined.

The holy Ghost does not use to prescribe such large pardons to evil workers,
as to burn their works, and to save their persons without more ado. That Is
more fit for Rome to do, who labor to ground their pecuniary Purgatory upon
the sinful sense which they say of this sacred Text.

1 Cor. 14.33. (...). Let them ask their men at home; not their husbands in
this place: All women have not husbands; yet all women, as well as married
women, are forbidden publicly to enquire about the doctrine in the Church. The
word their as meant, men of their own Church (...) is not always husband; a
little heed might have prevented this mis-translation: unmarried as well as
married women are forbidden this public inquisition. No members but females
are forbidden to expostulate about the doctrine then and there delivered.

II. CORINTHIANS.
2 Cor. 3.7. (...), If the ministration of death in writtens, not the
ministration of death written* the thing written might be death, or betokes
death; but the writing of it was spirit and life: As Jonah's message to Niniveh
was death within 40. days; but the sending of it did plainly argue that God
was willing to spare them. And this I take to be the difference between the
letter and the spirit; viz. the same which is between the thing written, and
the writing of it.

GALATIANS.
Gal. 6.4. (...) He shall have rejoicing against himself: (...) in this place
is a scornful upbraiding, or domineering kind of rejoicing, or ^^sultation. As
if her should have said, He which scornfully or upbraidingly rejoices or
insulteth against his brother for his casual misdoing, shall, upon examination
of himself, find more cause upbraidingly to rejoice or insult against himself.
A phrase alluding to that upbraiding kind of rejoicing or insultation against
his brother: and it is a kind of catachresticall Paronomasia, no more improper,
then that liberty to the sword, in reference to the liberty treacherously
denied to servants after the due proclamation of their liberty, Jer. 34.17. Do
you mock at the liberty of servants which I have commanded, as appears by
your retractation of your just proclamation of their liberty? He proclaim a
liberty for you, some to the sword, some to the famine, etc. whereas otherwise
a liberty to the sword seems improper. So here; Do you upbraidingly rejoice
against, and (...) over your brother for his casual failing? you have more
cause, if you well examine, to upbraid, or upbraidingly to rejoice against, or
insult over your selves. A tart kind of retorting of their base insultation
upon themselves. Do you examine your brother so nearly? examine your self. Do
you upbraid him? upbraid you self. Do you insult over him? insult over your
self. Do you laugh or mock at him? laugh or mock at your self. In all the
perioche or passage of this place, there is no occasion of rejoicing in
another: But to blame rejoicing against, or insultation over another, is the
main purpose of this place.

EPHESIANS.
Ephesians. 6.13. EN (...), in supercoelestibus, in supercelestial things, not
places. Licentiousness under pretense of free grace is a spiritual
wickedness in an heavenly thing. Under pretense of separation from
superstition and idolatry, to blaspheme the congruity of the Adjective with his
Substantive, as inconsistent with divine writ, is a spiritual wickedness or
ignorance in an heavenly thing. So that there is not more deceit in shops and
markers about earthly things, then there may be, and as men handle the matter,
often is in heavenly things. Not that heavenly things of their own nature have
any spiritual wickedness in them; for then heavenly should not be heavenly:
But men do pervert heavenly things; and mingle their wicked and carnal
sophistications with heavenly things: which when they do, there is spiritual
wickedness in or about heavenly things; not in the heavenly thing it self,
but in them that abuse that heavenly thing.

COLOSSIANS.
Col. 3.16. (...), etc. not (...), admonishing your selves; not admonishing one
another.

II. THESSALONIANS.
2 These. 3.2. (...), Men out of place: whose head stands where their feet
should; or whose legs where their arms should, as it were: Or, Out of place;]
that is, out of their calling, as the evil Angels are said to leave their
dwelling place, Jude v. 6.

2 Thessalonians. 2.3. (...), For we do not trust all men: Omnium enim non est fides;
or, All men are not to be trusted: A good argument why we should pray to be
delivered out of their hand. Or, All men have not faithfulness: and then faith
will be faithfulness as before.

2 Thessalonians. 2.8. (...), In all power, and signs, and wonders of a lie: not in all
power, and signs, and lying wonders. For (...) of a lie, may be referred unto
power, and signs, as well as unto wonders: as if it had been said, in all lying
power, in all lying signs, and in all lying wonders. So that all the power of
Antichrist, all the signs of Antichrist, and all the wonders wrought by the
spirit of Antichrist, are but lying power, lying signs, and lying wonders.
Christ and Christianity has his signs, as Baptism, a sign of burial with
Christ, etc. the Lords Supper, a sign of participation with Christ in his
sufferings, and in his glory. But Antichrists signs are ridiculous anticks, fit
for a stage play: and indeed, mockers of Christ's death and deity, rather then
setters forth of the same, if they be well examined.

I. TIMOTHY.
1 Timothy 2.8. (...), Males.] I will, that males pray every where. The emphasis
is in the word [males], not in the word pray. Males, and not females must lead
prayer in every place; that is, as well in the family, as in the Church. A
proper Text for family prayer, and for family-teaching, as follows v. 11, 12.
where it is said, I permit not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over
the man; but to learn in silence with all subjection. Paul had forbidden women
to teach in the Church before, viz. 1 Cor. 14. this therefore is meant in the
family.

1 Timothy 6.6. (...), With self-sufficiency; that is with so much as will suffice
a man's present condition: suitable to Hebr. 13.5. where we are bid to be content
((...)) with things which are present, though but from hand to mouth. Though
Paul can abound without sin, if God send abundance; yet he can be content with
present sustenance, if God deny greater quantity.

1 Timothy 6.17. (...), In the nonappearance of riches. Such as Ananias and
Sapphyra thought to reserve for themselves unknown to the Church; which neither
fellow-brethren should partake of, nor persecuting pursuivants should surprise.

HEBREWS.
Heb. 2.6. (...), When again he shall bring his First-begotten into the world.]
Not again, when he shall bring, etc. This later seems to refer to some
former argument of the Author: The former to the second coming of Christ into
the world. The order and position of the words in holy writ, is as well inspired
of God, as the words themselves: wherefore transposition is as well to be
avoided, as addition or diminution.

Heb. 2.12. (...), I will hymn, or praise thee. The verb is put transitively
with the accusative case depending on him: Not (...), I will hymn unto thee.
And the rather, because the Psalm whence this phrase is fetched, is in the
Hebrew and English, I will praise thee; not I will sing praise unto thee:
though the sweet singer of Israel in singing times sung, and wrote to be sung
these words, Psalm. 22.22.

Heb. 8.7, 8. (...), unblamed; not unblamable: (...), being blamed of them; not
blaming them: For the Covenant of Gods making could not be blameable, but it
was blamed, and God the Author (unseemly though it was on their part) was
blamed of them, when they said his ways were not equal, and that the
childrens teeth were set on edge for the grapes which their fathers have eaten.
The occasion whereon he substituteth the new Covenant, is their upbraiding of
this tooth-edge, Jer. 31.30, 31. with Ezekiel. 18. The new Covenant substituted by
virtue of complaint made against the old, must not now be maligned or made like
to the old, upon pain of greater sin, then if the old had not been murmured at.

Heb. 12.1. (...), Let us run the wrestling. A double metaphor, significantly
implying, that Christianity is like a race, and like a wrestling for endeavor,
which must be used against opposition in wrestling, which is not in running.

Heb. 13.5. (...), with things present. Though you have but from hand to mouth,
yet be content.

JAMES.
Jam. 1.15. (...), simply, or singly.] Then is a gift simple, or single, when
the giver upbraideth not the receiver. Such is Gods gift; he upbraideth not the
asker of wisdom with his former folly.

Jam. 2.7. (...), called on you.] Forasmuch as Christians are so called from
the name of Christ; as first it Antioch, Act. 11.

Jam. 5.7. (...), the morning and the evening wet.

Jam. 5.17. (...), a through-wrought prayer. A^ allusion to cloth, or such
like, which we use to say, is thoroughly well wrought, or but slightly wrought.
So that prayer may be thoroughly well wrought, or but slightly wrought.

I. PETER.
1 Pet. 1.6. (...), Wherein ye rejoice a little now, if need be, though you be
in sorrow through manifold temptations. Christians can rejoice a little in this
life at the hope of their future glory, though they be in the midst of all
sorrows.

1 Pet. 2.2. (...), now born babes.

1 Pet. 2.13. (...), humane ordinance. Though kings or other officers be but
chosen by men, and not immediately nominated of God, as Saul or David kings of
Israel and Judah were; yet God confirms these kings, as if they were anointed
and appointed of God. Why this man is king of the Gentiles, rather then that,
it comes of men who elect and ordain him thereunto, and not so immediately of
God as when David and his posterity the kings of Judah, were nominated, and by
divine oracle personally appointed thereunto: for to David and his sons was the
kingdom given by a covenant of salt for ever, 2 Chro. 13.5. yet are these
kings to be obeyed for the Lords sake, and are ratified by God when they are
chosen and ordained by men.

1 Pet. 3.7. (...), foeminino vasi, to the feminine vessel: The bodies of men
and women are vessels, and that earthen vessels, wherein is contained the soul,
with all the endowments thereof, as a precious treasure in an earthen vessel:
hence men as well as women are bidden to possess their vessels in holiness and
in honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.

1 Pet. 2.8. (...)] Unto that whereunto they were even set: the Antecedent is
understood in the Relative, as Romans 7.6. (...), being dead wherein we were
held: Instead of, That being dead wherein we were held. It enhanceth the sin
to disobey that whereto we were appointed of God, or once set with full purpose
of our own to obey.

1 Pet. 3.7. (...), living grace.

1 Pet. 3.8. (...), lovers of sagacity, wit, or, favorers of love.

1 Pet. 4.12. (...), ignitioni, fierinesse befallen unto you.

II. PETER.
2 Pet. 1.15. (...): I shall endeavor that you may have, that memory be made
of these things.

REVELATION.
Rev. 6.9. (...), The witness which they had; not, which they held. Perhaps
the meaning maybe, that though they did not suffer for the whole truth, yet
they suffered for so much of the truth as they knew, and whereof th^^ were
fully persuaded, and so were accepted of God: to teach us, that he who is
faithful in what he knows, shall be accepted, notwithstanding his
non-suffering for, or non-doing of that which he knows not.

Revel. 13.16. (...), He makes, o^ causes all, both great, etc. that he may
give them a mark.

FINIS.

