Comfortable Nevves from BREDA, In a LETTER to a Person of Honor.
My LORD,
I Read your last Leter to a Friend of mine very near his Majesty's Person, and
gave it him to peruse by himself, or show it, if he thought fit. He told me
your Lordships account of Affairs in England. As it is, in it self, very
satisfactory, so it well agrees with several Letters and Relations from
others, and confirms our hope, That his Majesty's undoubted Right, will shortly
be in signal manner, attested and asserted, by the universal suffrage of the
People of England in Parliament: And that after long Oppression, we shall once
more flourish under a King, for all Virtues, requisite in the Greatest Prince,
I dare say inferior to none of his Predecessors. Many passages, in your Letter
my Friend observed, but one above all the rest, (viz) The surmise of many
disaffected Persons, and jealousy, even of some of our Friends, That the King,
in his late great Extremities, either to procure some Assistance, or, perhaps a
bare Livelihood, which then he wanted, may possibly be Engaged, in Contracts
with Foraign Princes, not altogether consistent with the true English Interest.
This he thought, was not to be slighted, in regard it seemed to carry with it
much danger, and some color: And therefore forthwith reported it to his
Majesty, Who did me the Honor to take notice of it as my Intelligence, and
assure me upon his Royal word, That he is so far from having Contracted with
any Prince, to the prejudice of his Country, as he never yet in all his
Distresses, entertained any Treaty, which would not become the best of
Protestants and Englishmen; Or which, (had it been otherwise fit) he should
not have wished, the whole Nation might have heard; That he stands obliged only
upon the account of hospitality and great Civility, which, he hopes he shall
shortly be in a condition to requite.

My Lord, since the King has been pleased so far to condescend, as to trust me
in a matter of such importance, I hold my self obliged in Duty, and Gratitude
to his Majesty, in friendship and service to your Lordship, to transmit it to
you, That your Lordship may (as I doubt not but you will) make your utmost use
of it for his Majesty's service; And surely, my Lord, you may do well
industriously to Court Occasions of publishing, and propagating a News so
Honorable to the King, so Significant to the People, so Seasonable to the
Time, and Comfortable, I doubt not, to all Loyal English hearts: For, whether
we reflect on the mighty Providence of God, who has brought his Majesty out of
a fiery Furnace, as it were, without the singing of his Hair or Clothes; Or,
the incomparable Virtue of our King, who, next to his Blessed Father, deserves
to be ever Celebrated, as the chiefest Martyr of his Country; Or our own
unmerited happiness in such multiplied Deliverances, and especially in the
enjoyment of so Excellent a Prince, The thing is every way most considerable,
and must needs appear so even to the meanest Capacity.

By the middle of the next Week, I intend, God willing to wait on your Lordship
at London, and shall then endeavor to satisfy your Curiosity. For the present
this place affords little public News, That being a Commodity now expected
only from England, you will therefore, herein, excuse,

My LORD, Your most humble, and affectionate Servant, T. L.
Breda, April 26. S. N. 1660.
London, Printed for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet, May 3. 1660.


