A MOTION Propounded To the Committee of Parliament, for redress of the
Public Grievances of the KINGDOM. Desired to be taken into consideration,
before they present their Reports to the House of COMMONS.

For satisfaction of the Kingdom, and settling the People in their just Rights,
by a firm and lasting PEACE.

By NEH: LAVVKERRY.



Janua. 15. 1647. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbott.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 164^.

A MOTION.
THe best way to redress public grievances, is, to recover, and settle those
common Rights, whereof the Mecaenasses of corrupt times have dis-inherited the
people, yet so that the heady vulgar may not carve out their own Liberties by
multitudes: These therefore are to that end propounded, as an humble Motion to
the Committee of the House of Commons, (who daily meet by Order from the House,
to consider of public Grievances, and what promises the Parliament have made
for redress) to consider of, and proceed in, as they shall see cause.

I.
That all Popish and Prelaticall persons, may be made incapable of bearing any
public Office in the Kingdom, or of having any power left in their hands to
carry on any design in the Kingdom. Their Interests and Counsels being so
contrary (as they are) to the propagation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: The
Interest of all the Protestants in Christendom, and the peace of this
Kingdom. Of which we have had sad Experience.

1. By their prevalency at Court, with the Queen, in the beginning of his
Majesty's Reign, and since. 2. The dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford,
after two Subsidies given to His Majesty, no remedy being granted for any one
Grievance, and the unsuccessefullnesse of Parliaments since. 3. The loss of
Rochel Fleet, by the help of our shipping set forth, and delivered over to the
French, in opposition to the advice of Parliament. Which laid open the security
of the French Protestants. 4. Cales unhappy voyage, and crossing the
West Indies war 5. The violation of King James his promise, by making peace
with Spain without consent of Parliament. 6. The neglect of regard to the
Palatine cause. 7. The Pressing of Soldiers to go out of England. 8. The
concurrence of Sapin, France, and other Papists with the Rebels in Ireland, and
the engagements made to that Crown. 9. The making of the Lord Cottington, and
other Peers of England, to be Pentioners to the King of Spain. 10. Collectors
for the gathering of Recusants moneys, (to maintain the late wars) in the
several Counties of the Kingdom, being such as were the most eminent Papists of
the Kingdom, Viz.
Bedfordshire, Sir Rob. Carnock, Mr* Church, M. Rob. Hewet. Berkshire, M.
Tirrell, M. Anthony Inglefield. Buckingham shire, Sir Edward Manfield, M. Rob.
Dormer, M. Throgmorton; M. Bringhurst. Cambridgeshire, M. Hen, Huddlestone, M.
Charles Paryes M Baker. Cheshire, Sir Will. Massey, M. Bidulph, M. Will.
Stanley, M* James Poole, Chonwall, M* Victor, M. Bur^a^ey. M. Trevelion.
C^^berland, Sir Francis Howard, M. Joseph Porter, Derbyshire, Sir Francis
Willoughby, M. Aerie, M. Poole, M. Spinckill. Devanshire, Sir Edward Carey, M.
Berry, M. Anthony Gifford, Dr. Chichester. Dorsetshire, M. George Penney, M.
George Arundell, M. Webb, M. Wells, M. Parbecks. Durham, Sir Ralph Conniers, M.
George Collingwood, M. Edw Smith. Essex, M. Will. Peter's, M. Tho. Wright. M.
Rich. White. Gl^cestershir, Sir Joh. Winter, M. Wakeman, M. Benedict Hall M.
Atkinson. Hertfordsh. Huntingtonsh. Sir Tho. Shirley, M. Price, M. Tho. Cotto^,
Herefordsh. Sir Joh. Wigmore, M. Will. Bodenham, M. Will. Moore, M. Joh. Harp.
Hampsh. M. Ioh. Arundell, M. G^or. Penney, M. Will Owen, Kent* M. Benja. Wyborn,
M. Clement Finch, M. Pettits. Lancash. Sir Will. Gerard, M. Bradshaw, Sir
Cecill Crayford, M. Moleneaux, M. Townley, M. Anderton. Lecester^ Sir Francis
Englefield, M. Golding. Lincolnsh. Sir Ioh Thimb'eby, M. Antho, Mounson, M.
Rob. Constable. London and Middlesex, Dr. Kirton, M Cape, M. Tho Rox, M.
Becket, M. Rich. Betham, M. Edw. Harp. M. Morgan M Ioh. Chapperley. Norfolk^*
Sir Hen. Bendingfield, M. Everard, M Charles Walgrave, M. Will. Paston.
Nor^hamptonsh. Sir Will. Sanders, M. Ioh. Poulton. Nottinghamsh. M. Tho. Smith
Sen. M. Tho. Smi^h jun. Northumberland, Sir Will. Fenwick, M. Haggerston, Sir
Edw Ra^cliffe, M. Withrington* Oxfordsh. Sir Rich. Farmer, M. Will. Stone, M.
Ralph Sheldon, Rutland, M. Nicholas Chrispe, M. Will. Andrews, M. Alcocke,
Madam. Digby. Shropsh Sir Basil Brook, M. Plowdon, M. Ioh* H^rrington.
Sommersetsh. M. Rain. M. Ioh. Ewnis Sen. Staffordsh. M. Brook, M Stamford, M.
Phil. Draycot. Surrey, Sir Rich. Weston M Edw. Cotton. Sussex, Sir Ioh.
Shelley, Sir Ioh. Carroll. Suffolk, Sir Francis Monnock, Sir Roger Martin, Sir
Edw. Sylyard, mr. Tho. Beddingfield. Warwicksh. mr. Anthony Dormer, mr. The.
Morgan. mr. Will. Sheldon, mr. Rich. Middlemore. Wiltshire, The Lord Baltimore,
mr. Will. Arundel, mr. Edw. Stilling. Worcestersh. mr. Will. Abbingdon, mr. Will.
Sheldon, Westmerland, mr. Antho. Ducket, mr. Ioh. Leyborn, mr. Fleming.
York^sh. East Riding The Lord Dunbarre, mr. Brigham, mr. Lo^gdale, West Ridi^g,
Baronet (...), mr. Tho. Waterton, mr. Phil. H^^gate. North Riding. mr.
Craythorn. (...) m^. Anthony M^nnell, m^. Sal^. (...) Wale^. Br^cknocksh. mr.
Winter. mr. Beron mr. M^ddocks, Carnarvin, mr. Lewis. Carmarden, mr. Towley*
Cardigan, mr. Lewis Glamorgan mr. Turbervill. Denbigh. mr, Rich Lloyd, mr.
Cr^w. Flint. Sir Ioh. Connoway. mr. Pennat. Moumouth, Sir Charles S^mmerset,
mr. Morgan* Sen. mr. Morgan jun, Mountgomery, Sir Piercy Herbert. Merionith.
Pembrook, mr. Towley. Ra^norsh. mr. Thomas Crowther^ As says a Letter (said to
be from the London Papists) Dated (...) April 16^9.

II.
That the determinations of Parliaments may be effectual and (...) Houses not
made Parliaments for Court-favourites to trample on as they have been. By,

1 Procuring Parliaments to be broken up from time to time at pleasure, 2 By
Imprisoning the Members of Parliament, for standing for the peoples Rights, who
entrusted them: As in 4. King Charles (and since) suffered great misery, and
one died. 3 By fining Members, for matters done in a Parliament way. 4 By
causi^ng Proclamations and Declarations to be published against the Parliament,
and Members of Parliament. 5 By the Earl of Strafford and others, who adressed
His Majesty either to make the Parliament plyent to their will or to break it.
6 By the advice of His Majesty's council, who wickedly advised the King to
break off the Parliament, and to return to the ways of confusion, in which
their own evil intentions were most like to prosper, and succeed. Which
accordingly endeded May 5. 1640. 7 By that bold council given to his Majesty
to supply himself out of his Subjects States by his own power, at his own
will, without their consent. The very next day after the Parliament was
disolved, some Members of both Houses, had their Studies, and Cabinets, (yea,
their pockets) searched, one member committed close prisoner and a Declaration
published against the House of Commons. 8 By the Bishops convocation at Paul's
after the Parliament was risen, where they were by a new commission turned into
a Provintiall Synod, in which by* an un-he^rd of presumption they made Canons
contrary to the Kings prerogative, to the fundamental Laws, and Statutes of
the Realm, to the Right of Parliaments, and to the property and liberty of the
Subject. 2 By the Popes Nuncio residing here to act and govern the Papists
according to such influence as he received from Rome, and to intercede for them
with the most powerful concurrence of the foreign provinces of that
Religion: And by his Authority (with the assistance of Sir Francis Windebancke,
Secretary of State) the Papists of all sorts, Nobility, Gentry and Clergy were
convocated after the manner of a Parliament, 10 By raising a war (and joining
with Irish Rebels, sent for out of Ireland, to fight) against this Parliament,
called Anno. 1641. though their fitting was confirmed by an Act.
III.
That the people of England may not be deprived of their States, and liberties,
for refusing to pay needless taxes, when there is no consent of Parliament.
(As they have been forced*)

1 After the disolving of the Parliament 1. King Charles by commission of Loan,
by Privy Seals, by Excise, and other taxes. 2 After the dissolution of the
Parliament, 4. King Charles by great sums exacted for default of Knighthood,
Also Tunndge and Poundage, without consent of Parliament. The book of rates
inhansed to Merchants, by ship money. Compositions to stop the enlarging of
Forests, coat and conduct-money, and diverse other needless charges.
IV,
That the Kingdom of England may not ly naked to be prejudiced by ill affected
persons, as formerly. When,

1 The Arms were taken away from the Trained Bands of diverse Countries. All
the Gunpowder in the Kingdom was engrossed into the hands of those who
inhansed the prise of it, and delivered out none but by license. 3 The Forest
of Deane and other places where the best timber grew in England, was sold to
Sir John Winter, and other papists. 4 The Tower was committed to Sir John
Lun^ford, and other magazeenes, and places of consequence entrusted in the
hands of Papists.
V.
That no monopolies may be set up and continued in the Kingdom to the great
prejudice of the peoples Rights, as has been (heretofore and some not yet
quite down) by Pattentees, for Soape, Salt, Wine, Leather, Sea-cole, and most
of the commodities in the Kingdom.

VI.
That the Subjects Rights may not be taken away nor restraint laid upon their
liberties, in their habitations, callings, and just relations. As when.

1 The Kings title was laid to land, between high and low water marks. 2* The
people were unjustly vexed by Purveyers, Clerks of the markets, Salt-peeter
men. The sale of pretended Nuzances, as buildings, convertion of Arable ground
into Pastures, and continuance of pasture (...) depopulation. 3 Several
grounds and Commons, were forced a way upon the Statute of Improvement, and by
abuse of commission of Sewers. 4 Bullion was seized in the mint, Brass money
was making, Ships have been interrupted in their voyage by projectors. And
imprisonments, and heavy punishment inflicted on diverse for not conforming.
VII.
That all Courts may be purged from opression and injustice, and Law suits not
made so tedious and chargeable as they have been, and are, to the impoverishing
of diverse families, and vexation of the whole Kingdom. And to this end that
strict Laws may be made.

1. If any Judge shall receive a bribe, he may be uterly disabled. 2. If any
shall offer a bribe to a Judge, he may lose his cause. 3. That all Judges may
be answerable to the Parliament for wrong. 4. That such Lawyers Atturneys or
Solicitors as shall be found unfaithful to their Clients, may be disabled from
practice. 5. That the manner of swearing witnesses be regulated. 6. That the
Jury may not be interrupted from bringing in clear and free verdicts. 7. That
(none but) men of honesty and ability may be put into places of Judicature,
and conscientious men chosen upon all Juries. 8. That no place at Law may be
bought or sold.
VIII.
That in matters of Religion, all things may be settled (as near as may be) to
the purity of the Primitive Churches in the Apostles time, as is expressed in the
Scriptures. (And to this purpose) that

1. A powerful able Ministry may be settled, to set up Christ in his Throne.
2. Power may not be given to the Clergy to triumph in the Suspensions,
Excommunications, Deprivations and Degradations, of such painful, learned* and
pious Ministers, as in every thing shall not come up to them in matters of
outward form only. 3. Blasphemy and Heresy, and all scandalous ^ins may be
punished by the Civil Magistrate, and Laws made for that purpose. 4. Men truly
fearing God may not be vexed and oppressed in matters indifferent. 6. That the
Church Officers may not have power (in a faction) to v^^ their Parishioners,
without being accountable to the Civil Magistrate for miscarriages.
IX.
That all engagements to the Army and Soldiery of the Kingdom may ^e made
good, a sufficient strength kept up to secure the Kingdom from broiles from
within, and invasion^ from without: And the Militia settled (in the hands of
honest men) by the Parliament.

X.
That all possible care may ^e had for secu^ring of the Kingdom in such a
condition that a lasting peace may be settled, to the glory of God, and comfort
of all good men.

FINIS.

