A PLEA for the Use of Gospel Ordinances: Against the Practice And Opinions of
certain men of these times. Unto which is added By way of an illustrious
Instance; A Vindication of the Ordinance of BAPTISM: AGAINST Mr. Dels Book,
ENTITLED The Doctrine of Baptismes. Wherein it is proved That the Ordinance of
Baptism is of Gospel Institution, and by Divine appointment, to continue of use
in the Church, to the end of the World.

By HEN: LAURENCE Esquire

Beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. Col.
2.8. London, printed by M. S. for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head
Alley. 1652.

TO My most Dear, and most Honored Mother, the LADY LAWRENCE:
Most Honored Mother,
WE hear much of late of certain civil Heretics, they call the LEVELLERS;
Men, who by pretending Salus Populi, and the common good, would render their
own share in the World, better then it is: And finding (as their Lots are
cast) community more advantageous to them, then propriety, would take away all
those troublesome bounds, and metes, which Laws or Customs have established
upon particular rights, that all things might be reduced to their Primitive (as
they pretend) and Original Community.

I design not the process of these Men at this time, how great soever their
crime may be, and great enough certainly it will be judged, if this Charge be
true: But the Charge that this Discourse intends, is against another, and more
audacious kind of Levellers, spiritual Levellers, men that would level God;
and as it was the vanity and ambition of Adam, to make himself like God, so it
is the presumption, and pride of these men, to make God like them. We have
formerly had to do with some, who would bring the Justice of God, to the
model and scantling of their justice, which has been the occasion of that
great controversy with the Pelagians, and their followers the Arminians. And
now we are importuned by a Generation of men, who would subject the wisdom of
God to the model and scantling of their wisdom, would give laws to God, for
the government and Economy of his own house, and judge all at an undue and
under rate, that lie not level with their either reason, or fancy. And because
(self-love making up in us all defects) men are usually reasonably well
satisfied with their own wisdoms, howsoever others are; and that as the
Scripture says, Vain Man would be wise, though Man be as a wild Asses Colt;
Hence it is, that men who have not learned sufficiently, that the foolishness
of God is wiser then men, and therefore if any man would be wise he must become
a fool that he may be wise; men that have not been taught this of God, are
vying still with God for wisdom, and are extremely scandalized at his method
of saving men by the foolish, and base, and weak, and despised means of
Preaching, with all other Ordinances and Institutions.

Our Savior and Master taught us better by his own example, when considering
of the reason why God had hid the great things of the Gospel, from the wise
and learned men of the World, and revealed them to Babes: He resolved it easily
into the good pleasure of God; Even so Father, for so it pleased thee. But
these will rather dispute it out with God and Men, then they will suffer such a
blemish to their wisdom, as the aid and assistance that these foolish, and
weak, and base despised things, (as the Scripture calls them) brings with them.
And yet because it is hard to make an open War against God, and apparent and
evident truths, held forth in his Word, they employ all the pittance of
wisdom they have, to this great work of Levelling, either in wholly taking
away the use of the Scriptures, to themselves and others of their elevation, or
by so mincing and altering them by their liberty of allegorizing (Which you
must believe although it be nonsense to be the Mystery of the History, as they
call it) as they make them speak what they judge in wisdom they should,
since of themselves and naturally they are far from speaking what they would.

But I shall trouble you no farther (most Honored Mother) with prefacing,
having given you a short account who they are, and what it is that this
discourse pretends against, as the title tells you what it pretends to.

I am not (I thank God) so vain as to imagine that this Essay should convert
this kind of men, especially such as are highest flowne, and who having been
accustomed to defy reason and Scripture, do not use to be satisfied when
they are answered. But I am not without hopes (through the grace of God) but
that it may be of use to some, truly godly (for these temptations are fitted to
persons and places of light) who have not known the depths of Satan, nor are
yet effectually ensnared by these stratagems and wiles of the Devil. And I am
assured, it will be accepted by you (my Dear Mother) to whom I present it, not
only upon that just account that you commanded it (and the commands of Parents
to their Children are of the highest Prerogative:) But because it will be
satisfaction to you to see the Asserting and Vindicating of those things
indeavored, which have so much of truth, and God in them; and in a time, when
the profession and practice of them is exposed not only to the insultings of
men openly and professedly profane, but which is less sufferable, and more
abominable, to the scorn and contempt of such as would be esteemed Saints of
the highest elevation. But Wisdom is justified of her Children, whose
condition is very easily supportable with this assurance, That as Christ was in
the World, so are they in the World; and if Their life be hid with Christ in
God, when Christ who is their life, shall appear, they shall appear with him
in glory: I am,

Most Honored Mother, Your most obedient Son, and Most Humble Servant, Henry
Lawrence.

A VINDICATION OF THE SCRIPTURES, And Christian Ordinances.
NOTHING seems more to speak the misery of these evil and calamitous times in
which we live, then the extreme debordment of extravagant Opinions in matters
of Religion, diverse of which tend not only directly to the undermining of
Holiness, and Christian Religion (which by the grace of God has been long
acknowledged and professed in this Kingdom) but to the subversion also, and
destruction of civil society, and communion with men as men.

The rise of which exorbitancy (so far as my observation leads me) is laid.
First in a slighting of the Ordinances of worship, as things less profitable
and useful and more befitting Children then grown men, and then (according to
the nature of error which is easily multiplying and increasing, for one
absurdity granted a hundred will follow and grow out of it) in a reprobating
and utter casting of those Ordinances as things hurtful and destructive to the
nature of of Saintship, and altogether unproper and unmeet for that state of
growth and perfection which they pretend to have attained unto.

This wile of the Devil is not by all good men easily and at the first
observed, not do they consider that by a show of rational and spiritual
pretenses, he deprives them at last of all the Ordinances and Institutions of
God, that his inspirations and revelations may be in stead of them, and he at
last may be all in all unto them.

For I beseech you, what else is the effect of those methods in these men in
whom he has gained most upon this way, but a form of unsound words, by which
evil communication they corrups good manners; stuffing their Preachings and
Writings with an uncouth and most unsavory gibberish, or jergon language, which
the Scriptures own not, which rational and truly spiritual men understand
not, till at last growing bolder in the vanities of their minds and
expressions, they come to this to which some of them are come to make
themselves Christ and God, and to style themselves the Lord of Hosts.
Blasphemies unheard of in other ages, and such as are capable of astonishing
the most debauched and profane spirits, and such as tend not only to the
utter subversion of all Religion, but as a necessary consequence of that, to
the destruction and dissolution of all bands of civil government.

Notwithstanding the horror of these things, yet I must profess, when I
think seriously of them I cannot but rest satisfied in the wisdom and
goodness of God to his; who by letting them see the miserable consequences and
effects of opinions so depraved as the casting aside of all Ordinances of
worship, and yet of that seeming holiness and spiritualnesse as the pretense
of a more immediate and spiritual converse with God is, are bounded and kept
in order by these exorbitancies, and taught that which the Scripture teaches
frequently; that The weakness of God is stronger then men, and the
foolishness of God is wiser then men; and therefore if any will be wise (for
all these vanities arise from nothing but from a carnal and vain
Philosophating about spiritual things) he must become a fool that he may be
wise.

Now as to be isntrumental, to turn sinners and such as err from the truth,
from the error of their ways, is a thing of the greatest concernment, and
highly acceptable to God, so is it no way of more consideration, then in such
errings and mistakings as are about the fundamentals of Religion and Worship,
and which are so fertile of ill, as having gained once a prevalency and
authority, there is no stop or bounds to any thing, which a vain and carnal
heart, deluded and imboldened by the Devil, shall broach to the World for good
Doctrine.

That which immediately debauches the spirit of men this way, is (as I said) a
slighting and undervaluing of the Ordinances of worship, and holy Institutions;
and after that, a despising and abhorring of them as things carnal and
unbecomming a spiritual and raised state: But that which is yet a deeper, and
more bottom root of this untoward production: is,

Secondly, Low and mean thoughts of the holy Scriptures, the Word of God; or
which is as bad, and arises from the same root of pride and vanity, such a bold
and ridiculous allegorizing of them, under a color of going far enough from
the Letter, and understanding the mystery of them, as they obtrude upon you all
the vain reasonings of a carnal heart, and that (as the Preachings and
Writings of these times will abundantly witness) with such folly and madness,
as that after that rate a man may not despair to see the Turkish Alcoran
brought out of the New Testament; or (if there be any greater) the greatest
absurdities and follies that ever entered into the heart of any ignorant or
carnal man, since the World stood.

He therefore that would endeavor the recovery of these men, or prevent the
fallings and disorders of others, in these matters of greatest concernment, had
need speak something to such errings as are about the Scriptures. And,

First, Not to speak (if there be any such) of those that question the Divine
Authority of Scripture, as if it had not God for its Author, and Original;
that which I shall speak something to, is that Opinion which seems to be
received amongst some, as if it were a straitning to the spirit of God, and
indignity offered to it, to bring spiritual revelations to the touchstone and
Examen of the Scriptures. On the other side, to me, the Scripture seems amongst
others, to have t^o excellent ends for our advantage; the one, as other
Ordinances of God, to be a Medium of his own setting up, and which he delights
to use, for the conveying of himself to our spirits, in inlightening and
sanctifying us, and making us partakers of the Divine nature. The other, to be
a certain and fixed Standard, to which we may bring any thing that is broacht,
under the name of spiritual truth; and may thereby (as the Scripture says)
Try the spirits whether they be of God; may know the voice of God from the
voice of the Devil, and the voice of the holy spirit and good Angels, from
that of Satan, even when he transformes himself into an Angel of light. Nor is
this any indignity offered to the spirit of God, as is before pretended, since
he is confined to no Rule, but what is of his own forming. If the Scriptures
were a rule formed by man, or by Angels, it were unsufferable to subject the
spirit of God to any rule so infinitely below it self, but, All Scripture
being of Divine inspiration, holy men of God speaking as they were moved by the
holy Ghost, as it is of great use to us against the wiles of the Devil; so it
is a particular honor to the spirit of God, which by the means of such a
Standard, and rule, appears ever like it self, that is, uniforme, and
constant, and which is a high attribute of God, without variableness and
shadow of changing.

From this good understanding between the spirit of God, and the word of God,
the Scriptures dictated by the same spirit, it is that in all matter of faith
and worship and all things spiritual, the appeal is still to the Scriptures,
as to the visible and lawful Judge. So Christ convincing the Jews of their
sin of unbelief, tells them, There is one that accuses them even Moses, for he
wrote of him, John 5.45. And as for the Jews, so for all others, our Lord
says, That he that rejects him, and receives not his word, has one that
judges him; the Word, says he, that I have spoken, the same shall judge him
in the last day. So Paul gloryes in this, that the Thessalonians received the
word spoken by them, not as the word of man (a thing subject to exceptions and
limitations) but as it is in truth the word of God, which effectually works
in them that believe, 1 These. 2.13. Hence, when Christ would convince the
Sadduces of the Resurrection, he told them, They erred, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God, Matthew. 22.29. and then makes out his
assertion by Scripture authority, Have ye not read that which was spoken by
God unto you; And then brings them the very Scripture words, I am the God of
Abraham, etc. verse. 32. So when Christ would prove himself to be the Messiah,
he bids them Search the Scriptures, John 5.39. You see therefore it is no
disparagement to the spirit of God, that there is a visible Standard and Rule
manifest to all men, to which we may have a constant, and easy recourse in any
doubt or controversy of faith or worship.

so various (as we see in all experience) as it will be difficult to make it a
Sandard and Rule of Faith and Worship, or a Medium to try the spirits by, since
it needs the assistance of the spirit, to the right interpretation of it self.

If our Gospel be hid (as the Apostle says) it is hid to them that perish, in
whom the God of this World has blinded their eyes: Pride, or some evil
lusting has blinded their eyes, and then they cry out, that there is a defect
on the part of the object; that that is not visible, and the way by which they
would spiritualize and inlighten it, renders it a thousand times darker, whilst
under a pretense of running far enough from the Letter which they judge carnal
and killing, they subject it to the vanities and dreamings of every addle head,
and make the holy Scripture Echo to the sound that is already in their ears,
according to that English Proverb, As the fool thinks, so the Bell tincketh.

But first here they greatly mistake who in alluding to that place of 1 Cor.
3.6. Not of the letter but of the spirit, think there is an opposition put
betwixt the letter of the Gospel, and New Testament, and the spiritual sense
of it, for here plainly by Letter is meant the Law, and by spirit is meant the
Gospel, or New Testament in the very letter of it; as you have, John 1. The Law
was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Not as if the
Jews were only under a literal external administration, which did not
affect their spirits: God knew how to speak to his in those times, but that
was not the office of Moses, or of the Law, which propounded rules of living,
with promises and threatenings; therefore, When the Law came, sin revived and I
dyed, says Paul; But the Ministry of the Gospel he calls spirit, because the
things it declares, are quickening, enlivening, and restoring, and such (as
speaking comparatively also) the spirit accompanies, much more then it did the
Law, as being the instrument of the grace of Christ in his Ministry. The
mistake of this place, made Origin first, and since very many, loose themselves
and their auditors in senseless and idle Allegories, supposing that the
allegorical sense was spiritual, and the literal killing; whereas the
literal sense in most scriptures, is not only a spiritual sense, but the
only spiritual sense of it, and if besides what sense I have given of this
place of the Law and the Gospel, it reaches further; the letter and the spirit,
is not to be understood of the Exposition of the words, but of the fruit and
effect of it, it then being only received in the Letter, when it affects not
the heart, nor works saving changes upon us, and then in the spirit when it
indeed converts, and turns us and moulds us into that holy frame and form to
which God ordaines his people.

Now that these expressions of the Spirit and the Letter, are meant
particularly of the Law and the Gospel, appears evidently in the following
verses, 7, 8, 9. For verse 7. speaking of the Letter he calls it, The
administration of death, written and engraven in stones, which we know was the
Law; this he proves glorious from the glory and shining of Moses countenance:
In opposition to this, he calls the Gospel, The ministry of the spirit, verse 8.
and shows in one point more the excelling glory of this Gospel beyond the Law,
that it is to abide and remain evermore, whereas the other is done away and
past; verse 10, 11. It is true that what the Law is of it self, that the Gospel
is by accident, killing and destructive, 2 Corinthians. 2, 16. To the one we are
the savor of death unto death, etc. But though the Gospel be the occasion of
damnation to very many, notwithstanding it may be called the Spirit or Doctrine
of life; for as much as God uses it as the instrument or vehiculum of our
conversion or new life; and that it holds out, and offers free reconciliation
to us with God, whereas the Law (taking it simply and alone as it is here
taken) is the Letter that kills; and the ministry of death prescribing only
an exact rule of life (by which comes the knowledge and reviving of sin which
kills) without showing any releife or way to escape.

And thus have I briefly opened this place, which has been the cause to many
of such gross errings and mistakes.

But to proceed; It is certain the Scriptures have a plainness and easiness
in them to be understood, and therefore are said to be, A light to our feet,
and a Lantern to our paths; and a light shining in a dark place: Thy words
they give light, they give understanding to the simple. And if this may be
affirmed of the Writings of the Old Testament, with much more reason may it be
affirmed of those of the New. For Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. They
had many things formerly in Types and Allegories, as things that concerned
others more then themselves, For it was revealed to them, that not unto
themselves, but unto us they did minister the things which are now reported
unto you, by them that Preached the Gospel unto you, 1 Pet. 1.12. Therefore
Moses their Prophet was vayled to them, But we with open face, beholding as in
a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed from glory to glory, 1 Cor. 3.13,
18.

Nor will it be to any purpose to object here, that which is affirmed by Peter,
2 Pet. 3.16. That some things in Paul's Epistles, are hard to be understood: For
even those things be made easy by diligence, prayer to God, communication and
conference with others. God has made in all things, indigency, the bond of
Society, without we need one another, we should not value and esteem one
another, we should not have love, nor converse one with another. But who does
this difficulty or hardness here spoken of, hurt? Men unlearned and unstable;
whose sluggishnesse makes unlearned, and whose corruption and depravement makes
unstable; men that are double in their ends, and therefore unstable in their
ways, as appears by their wresting and destroying of the Scriptures, which is
there spoken of; and not only those hard places, but other Scriptures also to
their own destruction.

But if there be any difficulty in Scripture-expressions (which God sometimes
permits for holy ends, as I have said) will the way to help our selves be to
fall a Figurizing and Allegorizing, making the Word of God saplesse and
fruitless, by the vanity of our Traditions? Or because (as the men I complain
against use to do) there are some figurative and allegorical expressions in
the New Testament, as when our Savior calls himself, a Vine, or a Door
(which figurative speeches are to ordinary ears as easy to be understood as
the most literal) shall we take liberty from hence to confound Heaven and
Earth? And upon every itching of our own fancy to dissolve the whole Scripture
and Word of God, into Figures and Allegories? Which in stead of inlightning,
brings us into clouds and darkness; that in that mist the Devil may use as he
will. I will not deny, but some things are to be expounded allegorically.

The legal Ceremonies may be handled allegorically, because they were shadows
and types of good things to come, as the Paschall Lamb of Christ Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7: Christ was the scope and Butt of
the Old Testament, and therefore the Paschall Lamb, the brazen Serpent, and a
hundred other things are accommodated justly to him, also several Histories
upon this account have their allegorical use, so there be a care had to
preserve the Historical truth stable and unshaken: So our Savior accommodates
the History of Solomon and Jonas to himself, as having besides the Historical
truth, an use of typifying out him in his office, and sufferings; and if a man
by way of allusion or similitude, will allegorize a History, as to say that as
David overcame Goliath, so Christ does the Devil, so the spirit does the flesh,
if it be done pertinently, may have its use. But without all question, the
literal sense of Scripture, especially of the New Testament is principally to
be sought after, as that you may safely build upon for Doctrines, Exhortations,
and Conclusions, Symbolica Theologia non est argumentativa; except such as the
holy Ghost propounds and interprets, in which case we may safely follow and
conclude from Allegories.

I would not therefore expound any Scriptures allegorically (except as before)
but such as could not be expounded literally; as for instance, When without the
supposition of a type or figure the Scriptures would imply a falsehood; or when
in a Gramaticall sense, the words of the Scripture would imply an absurdity, as
that Christ is a Door, or a Vine; or when the literal sense is contradictory
to a rule of Faith, as when we are commanded to pull out an eye, or to cut off
a hand, or foot, but to depart needlessly from the Gramatical and literal sense
of Scripture, to subtelize it with Figures and Allegories, is that which
destroys the majesty and integrity of the Word of God, makes it a Nose of Wax,
and subjects it to the fancies of every crasie and unsound brain; so that as
in another case one complains, they do Verborum minutiis rerum frangere
pondera.

And if it be objected (as it is by some) that if the literal and Gramaticall
sense, be the Scripture sense, the natural man may be very able, in
understanding Scripture.

I Answer, that no question they may, and to their greater condemnation, but
yet they want the glory and life of this understanding, which is the spiritual
impression affecting their hearts, and making them God like. Those things which
are words of life and peace to one, are but a dead letter to them, there wants
that infusion into the words, which makes them mighty and converting, Changing
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; to one, it is
the word of Men, to others, it is the word of God, the power of God to
salvation, effectually working in them that believe. Whereas those absurd
Allegorizers we complain of, boast of the spirit, and revelations, and think
they have got all, when they have mudded, and defiled, and nonsensifyed a
Scripture with their Figures and Allegories, though they feel nothing of the
spirit and life, which should change and convert them into the form of
Doctrine delivered to them. And according to this sense must several
Scriptures be accommodated; particularly, that, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned.

That which we translate the natural man, is in the Greek (...) animalis,
(...) ab anima, the soul, so as he is a natural or an animal man which
walks according to sense, or to the flesh, that judges of things after a
carnal and humane reasoning; other things are foolishness to him, so you have
it in the 23. of the former Chapter, We Preach Christ crucified to the Greeks
foolishness, And in the words of the Text, The things of the spirit of God are
foolishness unto him.

Yet the notion of Christ Crucified, as it is laid down in Scripture in plain
and significant words, is certainly intelligible to an animal man; but the
spiritual reason of it, which is the beauty and glory of it, which should
alter and convert, and transform, by beholding that he sees not; and therefore
though custom and commonnesse have taken away the seeming absurdity of such a
notion, so as men can bear it, and take it up, and profess it with others;
yet the spiritual beauty of it, which is the taking and converting thing, they
see not. As the eye of sense sees the figure and superficies of a thing, but
cannot tell the reason of it, for want of a principle to judge by; so a
natural man that has no other principles but sense and reason, sees the truth
aright, and as it is; but it is a foolish and weak thing to him, in order to
the end for which it is appointed, because there is a spiritual beauty which
he has no eye to see, nor sense to taste.

I deny not, besides this, but that when there are diversities of
interpretations and allegorical senses, of which I spoke before; the
spiritual man has advantage of all the World besides, and that not only in
the sense of which I have already spoken; but in opposition to one more raised,
and more spiritual, a man may be called a natural or carnal man, so you have
it in the beginning of the next Chapter, And I brethren could not speak unto
you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ,
verse 3. For ye are yet carnal, for whereas there is among you, envyings, and
divisions, and strife, are ye not carnal and walk as men? Which as it shows
that the opposition of spiritual to carnal, may be made in respect of more or
less spiritualnesse in the same party; so it leads us back to that sense I
gave before:

That he is to be judged the spiritual man, and to comprehend best the
mystery of Divine things, and of the holy Scriptures, not who can most
misteriously (that is, as these men use it, obscurely and aenigmatically, and
if you will irrationally, and absurdly) discourse of Divine things, and of
interpretation of Scripture; but he, Who laying aside all malice and
superfluity of naughtiness, receives the word, and he who by seeing and
beholding it, is transformed into that which is most opposite to envying,
strife, and divisions.

The Apostle Jude, after he has made a list of the worst and vilest of men,
Unclean persons that despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities; he tells
you, verse 10. That these are sensual, or animal, or natural (for it is the
same word that is used here) having not the spirit; These were all Christians,
and Professors, and perhaps could Philosophate as mysteriously as their
neighbors, for they were such as separated themselves, verse 10. and it is
like were well opinionated of their abilities; but because the beauty of the
Word gained them not to the love of God, what ever light they had besides could
not defend them from the denomination of sensual or animal, which is the word
here opposed to spiritual.

And thus have I done with what I intend to say, in answer to the objection
above made. To conclude with what I first mentioned in this point of the
Scriptures.

The spirit of God, and the Word of God the holy Scriptures, hold so good an
intelligence, as we try the spirits by the Scriptures, and the holy spirit
enlightens us to understand the Scriptures; so Christ by his spirit enlightened
the Disciples going to Emaus to understand the Scriptures; he did not make
them wise without them, which he could have done, but he chose that medium as a
vehiculum of his spirit suitable and proportionable to them, and to his ways
and dispensations toward his people.

In like manner when Paul had exhorted the Thessalonians, not to quench the
Spirit, he does not lead them from the Word of God to vain speculations, but
immediately subjoynes a command, Not to despise Prophecy; intimating, an
aptness in men under the notion of magnifying and advancing of the spirit to
despise Prophecy; and showing also that the means to quench and extinguish the
illuminations of the spirit, is to have low and unworthy thoughts of the Word
of God, and of Prophesying, according to the Analogy and Proportion of that
Word.

Now as some think it an indignity to try the spirit by the Scripture, and
others with vain allegorizing, make the Word of God of none effect (to both
which I have spoken already) so there does not want of them which think the
use of the Scripture has its period and time with men, beyond which it is
useless and improper to attend to it, though before that time it be a duty and
of use to us. According to this sense they interpret that place of Peter, 2
Pet. 1.19. Where the Apostle, speaking of the Scripture of the Prophets, tells
them to whom he writes, That they do well to take heed to them as to a light
shining in a dark place, till the day dawne, and the day star arise in their
hearts: That is, till God have set up such a light in them, as they need no
more help of Prophecy; according to which interpretation, they adapt also
other Scriptures, as that of John 6. quoted out of Isaiah 54.13. They shall all
be taught of God, that of Jeremiah 31.34. They shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall
all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them; and particularly
also that place of John, 1 John 2.20, 21, 27. But ye have an unction from the
holy one, and ye shall know all things: Verse 27. But the anointing which ye
have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you,
but as the same anointing teaches you all things.

To speak a little to these places, and first to speak something to this last
of John: The Apostle seems to do two things, one is to bring what he says to
the examen of the spirit, who only is the full and sufficient judge; who
seals to our spirits, to the end that we may be certain that God speaks it:
Secondly, he would the better authorize his doctrine by referring them to the
judgment of the spirit within them which teaches them, that finding something
that bears witness within to the word, without it might have a full effect
upon their spirits, and work in them a strong persuasion. But then
particularly, and perhaps especially in this place, the Apostle seems modestly
to excuse himself for seeming to deal with them as with learners, and
beginners, when as he tells them they have the unction of the spirit, and know
all things: In like manner is that which Paul says, Romans 15.14. and to the
same purpose when he tells them, that they were full of goodness and filled
with all knowledge, and able also to admonish one another; and yet he tells
them, he thought it his duty to admonish them, to put them in mind as he
says; so here, Verse 21. I have not written unto you, because ye know not the
truth, but because ye know it. For if they had been altogether unlearned, and
unbottom'd and had not known something, if they had not had foundations laid,
and been principled, they had not been fit for the Doctrine he delivered:
Whereas he says, Verse 21. They knew all things, that cannot be taken in the
full extent that the words seem to bear, for we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.
but either with restriction to the subject in hand, or else to show as before,
that he does rather remember them and admonish them of such things as he writ,
then altogether lay foundations or deliver principles that are new to them, and
with which they are not acquainted. Therefore Verse 24. he admonishes them
that that might remain with them which they have heard from the beginning, as
intending rather to confirm what they knew already, and have been taught from
the beginning by the word and spirit, then to add in this exhortation any thing
in which they were raw and unprincipled.

But because John says here, that they have an unction from the spirit and
know all things; and Verse. 27 that they need not that any man should teach
them: To conclude that therefore they needed no other Ministry or teaching but
the spirit, neither Scriptures, nor Prophesies, were to make John himself
ridiculous: For wherefore did he labor in this Doctrine, and wherefore did he
teach them at all, if there were no need at all of his, teaching, when Paul
says (as he does) 1 These. 4.9. Touching brotherly love, there is no need that
I write unto you, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another:
Does he forbear therefore to exhort the Saints to that duty, or rather show
that he need not doubt of the success of that Doctrine of brotherly love
(which he and other Apostles inculcates exceedingly) because they have a
principle taught them by God himself and his holy spirit that renders them apt
to receive any hints or intimations that way.

It is a great piece of Oratory, when ye can persuade your hearers that the
things ye would enforce and make out more fully, they assent unto already.
Therefore John here professes that he wrote to them, because they knew the
truth already, and upon that very ground, that they were taught, and did know,
and that they needed not teaching; he was encouraged to the Doctrine and
exhortation he gave them. It is one of the best arguments we draw from reason,
to prove there is a God, and in the virtue of which we use many others, that
this point is a thing they need not to be taught, this they are all taught of
God, no man so barbarous, no Nation so remote from the knowledge and converse
with others, that has not this ingrafted in their nature, this
notwithstanding, we do not cease to multiply arguments to this purpose, to
confirm and draw out that principle into use and practice, of which there is
so fair a beginning laid deep, even in the nature of every man living.

The sum is (besides what I have said in the beginning that the Apostle would
use them to bring all things to the Examen of the spirit, and that he would
improve the confirmation of the truth of his Doctrine by the principles already
laid in them by the spirit of God) he uses these expressions, that they know
all things, and need not that any man teach them, but as the same anointing
teaches them, and that he writes to them, because they know the truth already;
Both to avoid the seeming to deal with them as learners, and beginners,
altogether unprincipled and untaught, when as the things were such as were
built upon principles, laid into them by the anointing of the spirit, as also
to fetch an effectual rise of arguments for the assenting to such things as
they knew and were taught already; as there is no better bottom argument (as I
said) to prove there is a God, then this, that they know it already, being all
taught it of God, nor no better foundation to the exhortation of brotherly
love, with which the Scripture abounds above any one thing, then that which
Paul lays in the place above quoted out of the Thessalonians; That there is no
need to be taught that, For that they are all taught of God to love one
another. We say it is the part of a wise man; Rerum manifestarum causas
quaerere, and it is especially the duty of those who have the care of
instructing others to improve principles already lodged into them of which the
foundations are most generally and most clearly laid by the holy spirit in all
the Saints, for those commonly are of the greatest use and concernment. So as
here will be no good warant to depart from the use of Scripture, or the
Ministry of teaching (for which God has in all times, and in these
particularly in which John wrote, endued men with gifts, and power) to follow
vain Enthusiasmes, unless we will put ridiculous and contradictory actions and
ways upon the Doctrines of this holy Apostle, and the dictates of the holy
spirit.

Having largely and sufficiently I hope, opened these words, I proceed now to
those other texts I quoted out of Isaiah and Jeremiah. That of Jeremiah is in
Chap. 31. Verse. 31. etc. which is certainly a Prophecy of those times in which
the Apostle John lived, and of that state of the Church in which in the place
before discussed he speaks.

Here the Prophet (as it was usual with the Prophet Isaiah, and the rest
rising from the Type to the Antitype) having before discoursed of the enlarging
and bettering of the condition of the Israelites, he falls naturally and easily
into the discourse of the times of the Gospel and New Testament. Behold, the
day's come says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant, etc. what this
Covenant is not, he tells you, Verse 32. Not the Covenant he made with their
Fathers, when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt. What that Covenant
was, we shall not need here to consider of; but then Verse 33. he tells you
what his Covenant shall be, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and I will be their God and they shall be my people, and
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of them to the
greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sins no more.

The great benefit of this New Covenant in opposition to the Old, lies in this,
that in this New Covenant God does not only propound the terms, but ingages
himself to perform the condition, whereas the Old Covenant set before you
life and death, good and evil, but engaged you to the performance of the good
without assistance (for the Law was without you) or to the suffering of evil.
But in the new Covenant, the Law is within, written in your hearts, by which
you are made holy and disposed for all good. If you sin (as if any man says
he has no sin he deceives himself, and the truth is not in him) He will
forgive your iniquity, and remember your sin no more. And because the knowledge
of God and his ways is of the greatest consideration to us, for our happiness
and holiness, ye shall be enlightened, have the holy unction, and be taught of
God. This inlightening (especially in things of the greatest concernment, as
that instanced in here, Knowing the Lord; that is, with a practical knowledge,
such as changes the heart and converts) is so much the work of God himself, and
of the holy spirit, as of the principal and chief agent, that the subordinate
instruments who contribute under God, by the will and institution of God to
that work are scarce considerable.

It is well known, this being the promise of the New Covenant, the time of
opening and beginning of which was after the death and resurrection of Christ,
as Heb. 8. Christ became the mediator of a better Covenant: It is known I say,
that in those times (in the course of which we live) there was the institution
of Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians.
4. and 2 Timothy 4.2. Paul commanded him there, To preach the Word, and to be
instant in season and out of season; and Romans 10. How shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher; so
that gifts and Offices and teaching were judged by the holy Ghost, extreme
necessaries to faith, holiness, and the right knowledge of God in Christ.

This notwithstanding in respect of that great part the holy spirit acts, the
agency and working of men deserves scarce a thought or mention, so as on that
consideration it may be said not to be. And it is not unusual (as elsewhere)
so in Scripture phrase that that should be affirmed of one, and den^ed of
others, which more illustriously or more frequently appears in that one,
though in some sort it be common with others. It is certain Isaac loved Jacob
and Esau too, but because he more loved Esau, its said, Isaac loved Esau, and
Rebecca loved Jacob, Genesis 25.28. And though Christ loved all the Disciples, it
is said notwithstanding that John was the Disciple whom Jesus loved. But
especially that place of Matthew. 15. where Christ says, He was not sent but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and yet if Christ were not sent as well
to the Gentiles as to the Jews, it were little for our comfort.

The preaching of the Word, how necessary soever to the begetting of faith (for
how can they believe in him, on whom they have not heard, and how can they
hear without a Preacher) yet how little does it contribute, and how truly may
so great an effect be said to be alone from God. What can the sound of words
do, but strike the ear, but it is the unction, that must affect the heart.
It Is not the noise of a voice without, but something within, that produces such
great and mighty effects. The great weight that turns the balance, and that
ignea vis, that fire that inflames the mind, and carries it up to God, to move
after God, to follow God, is some greater and higher thing then the voice of
man or sound of words, and is nothing else but the unction within us, and the
voice of God himself.

In a word, it is the effect of that which is here, and more particularly in
Isaiah promised; That they should be all taught of God; which place as it is
expounded and applied by our Savior (the best Expositor) will give the surest
witness to the exposition we have given of this: The place is, John 13.45, It
is written in the Prophets, they shall be all taught of God, every man
therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father comes to me. Our
Savior seems to have respect to the place we have been speaking of all this
while, where God undertakes to do so much as he makes the Ministry of man in
comparison nothing, or more especially to that place in Isaiah 54.13. where the
Prophet speaking of the restoration of the Church, affirms, that their
Children shall be taught of God. Now when our Savior comes to apply and
improve this passage of the Prophet, does he reject the Ministry of man, as a
thing of no use, altogether carnal and unprofitable? Does he reprobate
Preaching, Exhortation, and Doctrine? No such thing: He himself Preached, that
he was the Messiah that was to come, and he sent our Apostles, and Disciples,
to Teach and Baptize, promising great rewards to those that shall not only
prophecy, but shall receive a Prophet in his Name; so far was he from
abolishing the use of the Ministry, or the Agency or assistance of men, in that
great work of begetting and improving faith, but tells the Jews, to whom he
spoke, and who were offended with him, for the meannesse of his birth and
condition, that the reason why they believed not, was because they fell not
under that great promise, To be taught of God: That no man could come to him,
except the Father drew him. That teaching of God was especially necessary, and
that drawing of God, that secret language, and those invisible Cords without
which all the words of man, no of the man Jesus would do no good, nor
contribute effectually to so great and high an end as coming to Jesus Christ,
and believing in him. So as clearly the use of this and other Scriptures of
this kind is far from excluding the Ministry of man, and the use of the
Scriptures and other Ordinances, which the wisdom of God in the days of this
new Covenant, has made extremely necessary and useful to us; but to show us
where we must expect the Energy, force, and power, which as an infusion into
these Ordinances, must produce these blessed effects, and to give us an account
of the difference that is found amongst men under the same Ordinances and
dispensations, that some come to God in Christ, and forsake all things for him,
and others lie still dead in their sins for want of this Unction, this being
taught of God, and of this strong and powerful drawing which our Savior
speaks of in this place.

Having spoken that which is sufficient to the places last treated on, I come
now to that which I first propounded out of 2 Pet. 1.19. but this yet we have
gained already (if we assent to the expositions given) that the highest
teachings we are capable of in this life, the teachings of God, and of the
anointings of the spirit, are nothing of Supersedeas to the teachings of
others, or to our own reading, and meditation in the Word of God. So as
according to the truth already made out, this Scripture will receive the easier
accommodation.

First, It is generally believed, that those two Epistles were written to the
Jews, of whom Peter was more particularly the Minister, and the Apostle: that
this second Epistle was writ to the same persons to whom the first was,
appears by the first Verse of the third Chapter, This second Epistle, beloved,
I now write unto you, etc. Now the first Epistle is entitled, To the Strangers
scattered abroad, which James in his inscription calls, The twelve Tribes
scattered abroad, James 1. For the Gentiles were not strangers in those
Countries which Peter mentions, but the Jews which dwelt in them. So as by the
dispersed strangers, or the strangers of the dispersion, were meant the Jews.

Peter therefore writing to the Jews his Countrymen, and of whom he was the
Apostle, exhorts them to constancy in the Faith, and profession of the Doctrine
delivered to them by the Apostles. This he inforces from an argument of the
excellency of that Doctrine, the subject of which he calls the power and
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Verse 16. by which he understands his coming
in the flesh, and putting forth his power for the salvation of his people. He
further inforces this exhortation from an argument fetched from the certainety
of this Doctrine, which had for his author Christ, and God, and was not
cunningly advanced by devised Fables, and sophistical reasons, but we were
eyewitnesses of his majesty, says he, Verse 16. and heard also the voice
that came from the excellent glory, saying, this is my beloved son in whom I
am well pleased. So that as John says, what we have heard and seen, that
declare we unto you. Another argument which he uses to confirm them in this
excellent doctrine is the consent of ancient prophesies, to the Jews well
known, verse. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy. Beza translates
it Non firmiorem sed firmissimum sermonem propheticum, and shows the parallel
of other Scriptures, where the Comparative is used for the Superlative. But if
you read it not most sure, but more sure, it is in respect of those to whom he
writes, the Jews, amongst whom the Writings of the Prophets were of the
greatest and highest authority: Whereunto you do well that you take heed as to
a light shining in a dark place, till the day dawne and the day star arise
in your hearts.

This Doctrine of the Prophets, which in Verse 20. he commends from the
infallibility of it, as having the spirit for its author is another argument
for the asserting and proving of that great truth which he mentions, Verse 16.
(Viz.) The coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with power, etc. For both arguments
confirm the same thing, this from Prophecy and that from the voice of God; to
wit, That Jesus Christ was the Son of God, come in the flesh for the saving
of the World. He tells them therefore, they do well to make use of this head
of argument, and to attend to it, for it is like a light shining in a dark
place: the prophetical Scripture, like a Lantern (as the word is) had a
narrow and restrained light, and the times before the coming of Christ were
times of darkness; whereas the light of the Gospel is more day light, like
the morning star that chaseth away darkness, and this was true in the very
beginning of the Gospel to those who had received it, in the power of it; and
so ye have it, 1 John 2.8. The darkness is past, and the true light now
shines. If therefore you attend to the Scripture of the Prophets, which had
for author not any private or particular spirit, but the spirit of God, you
will have a light to guide you in your darkness, till the day at last appear,
and the morning Star, the sign thereof, scatter altogether your darkness;
that is, till the light of the Gospel (which he compares with that of former
Prophesies) bring a clearness and a brightness, like to day light, in stead
of the Candle, or Torch-light, ye enjoyed before; so as there shall be no
doubt or scruple in you concerning this great mystery of godliness, asserted
by the voice of Heaven, and confirmed by prophetical predictions, scilicet,
Christ manifested in the flesh.

And if you say here, that the Jews to whom he writ, being believers, were
clear in this point already: I answer, that it is more then appears: That
there was a day light clearness, ye have it in the 17 Acts 10. That those
that received the Word with all readiness of mind, searched the Scriptures
daily, to see whether those things were so. And yet as ye may see in a
parallel place to this, Acts 2.41. They who readily, or as it is there, gladly
received the Word were Baptized, which employed them Believers, that being the
condition of Baptism: So although these Jews were already Believers in
Christ, as having readily and gladly received the Word, yet it would be
mightily to their advantage and establishment, that they should search the
Scriptures, and attend to the Writings of the Prophets, that so there might a
day light clearness, and assurance, concerning matters of this great moment
arise in their hearts: So as many of the Jews that believed, amongst which
number some of these might be, were not come to that clearness in believing,
to which the preaching of the Gospel, joined to the search of Scriptures would
bring them.

Nor here, does the Apostle at all give a term or period to the searching or
attending to the Scripture, or written prophesies, but shows the great use of
them for the attaining the ends above mentioned. We know things are preserved
by the same way by which they are formed, or procured. No man will deny me,
that Timothy had attained a great degree in the knowledge of God and Jesus
Christ.

Paul had no man like minded to him, who naturally cared for the things of the
Lord. A man he was destined to great works by prophecy, 1 Timothy 1.18. Gifted
also and enabled for his Ministry, by prophecy and laying on of hands, and
instructed in the holy Scriptures from a Child. And yet this Timothy forearmed
already by Prophecy, and gifts, and study in the Scriptures, is commanded, 1 Timothy 4.13. to give attendance to reading, and in the 15 Verse he is commanded
to meditate upon those things, and to be in them, and give himself wholly to
them, that his profiting might be evident and appear to all: Nay Paul himself
who gave the rule of not knowing Christ after the flesh, and understood,
surely, the mystery of godliness, as well as these men, in that very place
where he says, that he is ready to be offered up, and that the time of his
departure is at hand, 2 Timothy 4.6. When having fought a good fight, his thoughts
run of Crowns and glory Verse 7, 8. commanded Timothy expressly to bring with
him when he came the Books which he left at Troas, and the parchments. That
great Apostle was not of these men's minds, that it was a carnal and
unspirituall thing to read and meditate, and use such helps, as God who knows
us better then we do our selves, judges meet for us, but is forward and ready
himself to do what he exhorts Timothy to, to give himself to reading and
meditation, and think it no dishonor to use that means as well as others.

And thus have I done with that which I propounded to my self, to say
concerning the Scriptures in order to the discourse I have in hand.

Those things which in the next place come into consideration, and need to be
vindicated from the dishonor and scorn put upon them, by a Generation of
these Times, who impose their vain and addle fancies under the name and title
of Spiritual Revelations, are Gospel Ordinances, such as Preaching the Word,
Baptism, the Lords Supper, Church fellowship and assembling, with what ever
institutions our Lord has left to entertain us with in this state, whilst we
are absent from the Lord, and present in the body, whilst we live by faith and
not by sight.

In order to this, that which I first pitched my thoughts upon, was that place
of the 1 Corinthians. 1.21. For after that in the wisdom of God, the World by
wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to save
them that believe; which seems particularly to strike at the Vanity of such
men, who being as little able as others in a way of wisdom to know God, by
the wisdom of God, are yet extremely scandalized at the weakness and
foolishness of Preaching and other Ordinances of that kind.

That I might the better discover the scope and drift of this place, I thought
it would be necessary to consider something the coherence.

In this Chapter therefore, after the usual salutations and gratulations in
the nine first Verses, in the tenth he falls upon the first subject which he
handles in this Epistle, to wit, the dissentions and divisions which were
amongst the Corinthians, with which he charges them, Verse 11, 12. and from
which he dehorts them. He gives them this authority for what he charges them
with, The household of Cloe, Verse 11. then shows what their fault was, that
they were taken, and captivated with the names of men, which though of good and
holy men, was not lawful, nor fit for them to be; nay not of Christ himself,
as if doting on his person after the flesh, his words, his deeds, his miracles,
should be only extold and magnified, with the despising or villifying of the
gifts, and miracles, and doctrines of others, though as Christ, God, Man, they
proceed from him. This Christ seems himself to reprove in the young man,
Matthew. 19.16. One came and said, Good Master, what good thing shall I do? Why
call thou me good (says Christ) there is none good, etc. But keep thou
the Commandments: Whereby Christ shows that that which the man considered,
was not so much God the chief good, and holiness the way of converse with
him, but looked upon him as some excellent and famous Master: Why call thou
me good? Why look thou so much upon my person, and outward man? Rather all
acceptance of persons laid aside, mind my Doctrine. This knowing Christ after
the flesh, as a gifted man so endowed, etc. with difference from others, Paul
disclaimes, 2 Cor. 5.16. he knew him not now, as a Preacher of the Gospel, as a
Minister conversing here on earth, full of excellent gifts and parts, of such a
spirit and nature, but in a divine and heavenly manner, as he that was the
Captain of their Salvation, that reconciled them to God, that dyed for them,
and rose again, after such a heavenly manner he knew him, and therefore was to
be new himself, both in the manner of his knowledge, and the rule of his
life, Verse 15, 16, 17, 19.

Verse 13. He tells them, this their factious dissension shows as if there
were many Christ's, many Gospels, many Saviors of the World, whereas Christ is
but one, and not divided; or as if they were baptized into another Name then
Christ's, for so they gave themselves up as Disciples to particular Teachers and
Ministers, as if they held their Baptism of them, or they were Crucyfied for
them.

I thank God, says he, it is fallen out by a good providence, that I have
baptized a very few, Least any should say I had baptized in my own name; That
is, I had formed me a Generation of followers and sect of Disciples: For that
was, it seems, a corrupt fashion amongst them, that those who baptized should
be followed and adored by them as their spiritual Father and Master, Verse 17.
For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: that is, the
principal piece of my Ministry to which I was adorned with such gifts and
graces, and miracles, was Preaching. Baptism indeed was an appendix of
preaching and was in the Apostolical Commission, but being every ones work as
the serving of Tables, was committed when it grew burdensome to others, that
the Apostles might give themselves to the word and prayer. For conversion from
Atheism, and Judaisme, being the great work, the administration of the Seals
which needed not those gifts nor labor, was done ordinarily by other hands; so
Peter instructed the house of Cornelius, but he commanded them to be baptized
by others, Acts 10. So Christ Preached, but his Disciples Baptized, John 4.

Paul had Commission to Baptize, else he would not have baptized any, but not
principally: Suitable to this is that place, Jer. 7.22. I spoke not to your
Fathers, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices, but this thing I commanded
them, obey my voice, etc. Although in Egypt they sacrificed the Passover, and
in Mount Sinai he commanded them concerning Sacrifices, but the other was the
principal: Like also unto which is that phrase, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice; that is, I require mercy rather, and more principally then
sacrifice: So the Apostle said, It was not meet for them to leave the word of
God, and to serve tables; yet Paul did gather money for the poor Saints at
Jerusalem; that is, that was not their chief and ordinary work, but the other.

Not with wisdom of words, etc. He had no sooner made mention of Preaching
the Gospel, but he taxes the principal vice of these Sectaries, which was a
certain vanity in preaching the Gospel, not only with Rhetorical
inlargements and expressions, but even so Philosophating the Gospel, as they
made it hold rather of humane wisdom, then that divine simplicity which
became so holy and heavenly a subject. Least the Cross of Christ, etc. that
is, least the Gospel of Christ Crucified should be rendered vain and useless,
as needing the power of humane wisdom to uphold it.

Verse 18. For the preaching of the Cross, is to them that perish
foolishness: This preaching of Christ crucified, or a crucified Savior,
seems to proud, and seeming wise men, the foolishest thing in the world, that
a dying man should give life to others, that he that could not save himself,
should save the World. But unto us who are saved, etc. Those who being
predestinate to eternal life, believe and are saved, they feel it is the
power of God; and what is a more admirable effect of power, and of God, then
that a crucified Savior, by a company of illiterate poor men should render
the spirit quiet and stable in God, and give that conversion in life, which all
the learned discourses of Philosophers were not able to do.

Verse 19. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, etc. God
has resolved on this long ago, that by strength no man shall prevail; wise
and prudent men in the business of Religion shall be no more then others, so
as you may ask where is the Scribe, and disputer of this World, either of Jew
or Gentile, their wisdom is made folly, and in those things wherein they have
thought to be wise, they have showed themselves the weakest and foolishest of
any other.

Verse 21. For after that in the wisdom of God, etc. Here he gives the
reason why God has made the Gospel so opposite and contrary to humane
wisdom, because that the World in the wisdom of God, by wisdom knew not
God.

By the World is meant the whole World consisting of Jews and Gentiles: To them
both, God spoke in several manners, in the moral Law, and visions and
apparitions, in the fabric of Heaven and earth, the subordination of all
things to their first cause, etc.

But the World by wisdom knew not God, in these things, in this wise and
excellent way suitable to principles in them which they might have improved,
they knew him not, nor glorified him as God, though that which was invisible
was manifest, etc.

It pleased God, or seemed good to God: Here the sin was the abuse of divine
wisdom, the punishment was the infatuation of humane wisdom; so as by the
foolishness of preaching, God would save them that believe: By that which to
carnal and wise men, was the foolishest thing in the Word, the simple and
plain preaching of a crucified Savior, by that it pleased God to save them
that believe, that denying their own wisdom, and renouncing wholly
themselves, did believe that God could by the most weak, foolish, and unlikely
mediums, produce the greatest and most considerable effects.

From this place thus considered, it will evidently follow, that worldly humane
wisdom in the knowledge and judging of God and heavenly things, is a foolish
useless thing, and that the foolishness of preaching, etc. are the means of
the salvation of the Elect. And that also which I lay especially to the charge
of these men, That the Gospel and all Gospel Ordinances, as Preaching,
Baptism, etc. are to such worldly men I speak of, no better then foolishness
and weakness, and therefore as poor and weak things, are despised by them
and cast away, No man need seek far for reasons, why these things should
have that Notion and Character in the spirits and reasonings of men not
subjected to the spirit.

Certainly because things indeed spiritual suite with none of their
principles, they have nothing they can take their measure by; a man that would
judge of any thing, judges by some principles within him: But then again,
because there is a means and lowness in them, which is abominable to carnal
wisdom, as the washing of Naaman the Leper in Jordan: As also because they
can see no suitableness and correspondence between the means and the effect,
as Epicurus disputes against the making of the World, where (says he) were the
Engines, the Ladders, what devises to raise such a mighty building?

But upon what ever ground this may be, which I purpose not here to enlarge
in; no man that considers the premises will deny me this, That to be
scandalized and offended at the Gospel, Christ crucified, and the Ordinances of
Preaching, Baptism, the Lords Supper (for they hold of the same weakness,
hold out a dying suffering Christ) is a sign of a carnal, worldly heart.

But here I must stand the Butt of some Objections which I shall be sure to
meet withal, and be engaged to answer certain demands, which these pretended
spiritualists will be sure to make to me: In the answer and consideration of
which, that truth which I contend for, will, I hope, be made manifest.



Secondly, that such seem to be the most spiritual of any other.

For the first, they must needs be prejudiced as well against a crucified
Christ, for it is no more weak and foolish to be baptized in water, or break
bread, according to the institution; then it is to believe in a Savior hanged
or crucified.

Secondly, De facto, they are so, and make the crucifixion of Christ, a kind of
figurative allegorical thing, which was to make such a representation of Gods
mind to us, and then to end, not a thing enduring and remaining, they make a
kind of notionall thing, of all the birth, life, suffering, resurrection, and
session in Heaven of Christ a thing for weak men, and weak times.



Collossians, seems to forewarne those to whom he writes, of two sorts of
errings; the one, about antiquated forms of worship and Jewish ceremonies,
which men naturally superstitious, and of a more gross and dull spirit are apt
to be deluded by; this he mentions, Verse 16. Let no man therefore judge you
in meat and drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, etc.
Which are but the shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. Those
things which were but shadows, and typical, are vanished at the appearing of
the body and substance: The other was about such deceptions and delusions as
men of more raised and notionall spirits were in danger of; of those he
speaks, Ver. 8. Take heed least any man spoil you, through Philosophy and
vain deceit.

There seems to have been in those days, as there are in these, certain
spirits, who not contented with the meannesse and lowness of the Doctrine of
Christ crucified, with such Ordinances and administrations as the spirit of God
judged proper for the exhibiting and making good to us such a Doctrine, would
frame a kind of Philosophical rational Divinity, savouring rather the spirit
of Plato, and Aristotle, then of Jesus Christ, and which being full of uncouth
and unusual expressions, made the people admire what they understood not, and
caused that to pass for spiritual (though it were but vain deceit) which
seemed most remote from the common and usual, though the truest and rightest
apprehension. I affirm therefore, that it is but a carnal spirituallity which
these men have, and hold out; such as Philosophers subtelizing spiritual
things with worldly distinctions, and notions, not holding the head, and indeed
covering their carnal apprehensions under the name of spiritual; for that
which a Socinian calls plainly and more honestly, Humana ratio, that they call
the spirit, covering it with a fairer name, but both the one and the other, are
transgressors alike; both philosophating as wildly the one, as the other,
about spiritual things, saving that these latter are worse, keeping neither to
the form of wholesome words that the Scripture gives us, nor to principles of
right reason, having this for an unanswerable cloak when ever they are driven
to a wall, that that is dictated to them by the spirit. And I doubt not but
that the evil and unclean spirit is fertile of notions and supplies, by his
suggestions, the irrationality of their opinions and practices.

mediums as these, things so unsuitable and unproportionable to the reason and
wisdom of men.

That no flesh should glory in his presence, 1. Cor. 1.29. Wherefore would God
destroy Jericho by the blowing of Rams-hornes, Joshua 6. If all the men of
War had taken it by an ordinary siege, they would have had the glory, and God
would have lost his; but when the walls of a mighty City shall fall down flat
before the blowing of Rams-hornes, and a little instituted ceremony of
incompassing it in such a manner, so many days, God alone had the glory, and
no flesh could glory in his presence, upon the same account in this great work
of salvation (wherein if in any he would entirely have the praise, and is
especially jealous least his glory should be given to another) God has chosen
foolish things, and base things, and weak things, and things which are
despised, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, Verse
27, 28, 29. Such as Christ crucified is, and all the seeming foolish, weak,
and low Ordinances of Christ, as Preaching, Assembling, Church Fellowship,
Baptism, breaking of bread, etc.

But secondly, God does this because we are poor, low, and foolish creatures,
and God would have us by such things, remembered of it continually. Our bodies
are one half of us, our souls and bodies make but one person; our bodies as
well as our spirits, are the temples of the holy Ghost, and yet what pityfull,
languishing, needy pieces are they; how do they subsist in a continual
succession of fillings and emptyings, how are they wound up by meat and
drink, and lie fallow by rest; so mean are they, as the Apostle knows no
Epithet more proportionable to them, then that of Our vile bodies; so are our
spirits, weak and foolish things, such as if they were let alone, to run to
the utmost bounds of their own speculations, would run out to the greatest
vanities and extravagancies, would be vain in their reasonings, and professing
wisdom, would become fools; therefore like fools and children, God deals
with us: And why do we not pretend as well that our bodies should live
angelical lives, without the aids of food and raiment, as that our souls
should not need such Ordinances, and Institutions, for there is the like reason
of both, and when our bodies shall not need those aids, but be as the Angels,
our spirits shall also be freed from any such tracts or forms of worship, as
for the present God has made our portion and blessing. Though some I hear
(wisely in that making the notion go round) say they are in a glorified state
also, in respect of the body, and that they do but seem to eat or drink, or
do any other actions of life.

If you ask then, what difference is between us and the Jews, who were under
Moses, who had ceremonies and mediate Ordinances.

I answer, Very much, as much as between open-facednesse, and vailing,
between seeing in a Picture and seeing in a glass; Quod videtur in speculo
non est Image, it is the thing it self, not the picture or image of it; and
therefore the Apostle, speaking of the difference between the Jews and
Christians: The veil (says he) is over their hearts, but we all with open
face behold as in a Glass the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 13.18. But the same
Apostle speaking of our present state, with the times that are to come, says,
That we see as a child, and understand as a child, and that we see through a
glass and in a riddle, but then face to face; and the seeing on this manner is
to continue till Prophecy shall fail and tongues shall cease and knowledge
shall vanish away: I think, in this life there is no body that will deny that
there is use of ability in tongues, of the gifts of science or knowledge, and
prophecy, which are of great use to the people of God, for the begetting them
to the faith, and for their building up as long as is use of faith or hope, but
when we come to live by sight and not by faith, to be absent from the body, and
present with the Lord, 3 Cor. 5.7. Then, and not before, tongues, prophesies,
faith, and hope, shall cease together; then we shall know as we are known and
not in part, and shall see no longer through a glass, darkly, but face to
face, 1 Cor. 13. That is, all those eclipsing mediums, which are proper, and
necessary to this state whilst we are in the body, and in this earthly
Tabernacle shall vanish together, and there will be a seeing and converse with
God, more raised, and more divine, then we can now conceive of: In a word,
every body will easily, I conceive, discern the vast difference of these
Ordinances, from those of old, by considering the difference of the two
Covenants, and the glory of the Gospel, from what was that of the Law; as for
Prophecy or Preaching, common to us, with the Jews, it holds out the whole
mind of God in Christ, the great mystery of godliness, God manifested in the
flesh, gives us that in history and accomplishment, which the Jews that lived
under another Covenant had but darkly in predictions and types, they but a
shadow and not the image, Heb. 10. Now we see the things have more then the
image, as I said, that which is seen in a glass is not the image; it is the
thing, and as this is true of prophesying or preaching, so there will be found
to be the same reason of other administrations, those we call Sacraments,
Baptism, and breaking of bread, which is the administration of the same
Gospel to us, by the mediation of other senses; therefore these Ordinances
have the same advantage over the Sacraments of the Law, that the Gospel it
self has over the Law, confirms to our faith by the mediation of other
senses all the riches and glory of the Gospel, and what ever revelation the
spirit of God makes to us therein, scales to us that in history, and performed,
which was darkly before represented in types, and God having made himself
visible now at last in his Son, makes his Son and all his beauties and
glories visible to us in his Ordinances, the holy Ghost speaking to our senses,
by the mediation of words, or things, or signs of the same efficacy, with
words set apart for that purpose, the great mystery of the Gospel. But lastly,
and particularly to those two Ordinances of Baptism and breaking of bread
(which besides other things, holds forth to us directly and immediately the
death and sufferings of Christ) why may it not be thought that our Lord has
particularly instituted these to keep fresh to us for our comfort and his
honor, that great love wherewith he loved us when he gave himself for us to
death, which the Scripture magnifies and values so much as to give it for the
highest instance of the love of God the Father; God so loved the World that he
gave his only begotten Son, 1 John 3. and also of the greatest and highest
engagement of our love to him. 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us:
Now this which speaks Gods love so much, and ingages ours so fully, and which
in respect of the condition of our state in this life is of so great
concernment, God would have kept fresh to us, by most visible and sensible
demonstrations, and the rather to prevent and meet with the ingratitude of
unworthy men, who after they have served their turn of him, fling away Christ
crucified, as an element as beggarly as any of those Ordinances which represent
it, and under I know not what vanity or pride of notion, cast that behind their
backs, which Paul in his preaching desired especially to know and manifest, 1
Cor. 2.2. Thus much for what I thought to say to this head concerning the
difference between us and the Jews in our forms of worship and ministration.

etc.

medium to diffuse and propagate his lies; and therefore when I have heard of
some who having prophesied notorious lies in the name of the Lord, have by the
same spirit of lying feigned themselves in the state of the resurrection, and
that therefore they were to pray and preach no more; I always said, before the
event proved it true, that for the business of preaching I would undertake
they should not long refrain that, what ever became of other things, for as
much as the Devil would not long loose that mighty engine of diffusing his
principles, and accordingly these persons have been since the most constant
and diligent Preachers, and the Devil has not been wanting to his usual
methods of transforming himself into an Angel of light, and mingling
abominable lies with seeming raised, and high, and spiritual expressions, that
the one may be set of, and take better by the aid and assistance of the other.

Then if prophesying, or preaching, or conference, which are of the same nature
will be allowed by these men that are scandalized at the foolishness of
Ordinances; why not Baptism, breaking of bread, and the rest, which are no
more foolish, nor no more carnal then the other; for cannot the holy spirit
speak as spiritually and as effectually by these Hieroglyphick's of its
institution, as by the words and reasonings of any man? Cannot it tell you the
love of the great God, the merits of the death of Christ, what conformity and
assimilation God expects from you to your head, with all the rest of those
things, wherein these Ordinances instruct you, as well as by the words or
reasonings of any man, which unless the spirit inform and inliven it, is as
dull and improper to convey spiritual things to us, and in it self as low and
carnal as any other medium you can imagine?

This being granted, as it cannot be denied, they who will admit of prophesying
or preaching or conference which go all under one head, cannot deny any of the
rest, Church Fellowship, Church-assembling, Baptism, breaking of bread, etc.
to be proper and fit mediums for Gods convaying himself to us in any piece of
spiritual knowledge or manifestation, for since it is the holy spirit that
must do all that is done in us, and upon us, for good, the holy spirit has
and can make as good use of these mediums and preach to us upon that text as
well as upon the word, or expressions, or reasonings of any man whatsoever, and
it is as proper and suitable to that blessed spirit to speak to us by things,
as by words, etc. Words in themselves and in their letter are as carnal and
unfit for our spiritual edification, as any thing you can imagine.

This answer therefore is a Pari, if you will allow of preaching or conferences
(which as I said none will be found to deny long) there will be no good reason
to reprobate or reject Baptism, breaking of bread, Church Fellowship, or the
rest, as things in their nature improper and unspirituall; for whatever reason
comes from institution we shall examine that afterward.

mediums as things more carnal and bodily then befits their state (whether
wilfully or ignorantly they deceive themselves and others) I would entreat them
to consider how they come to apprehend any things spiritual, or whether whilst
they are in the body, whilst their souls live in these houses of clay, they
can reason, understand (by which spiritual impressions are conveyed) without
the aid and assistance of the body: For though God has this pre-eminence
effectually to inlighten the understanding, and determine the will in respect
of the event, which no creature, man, or Angel, can do; yet the way by which
he accommodates himself to us in the doing of these things is still human^
more, and after the rate and proportion of our weaknesses, as we are able and
fitted to receive things being in the body, and in this mixed, lame, and
imperfect state in which we are, when Gods speaks to us by men or things, it
is always by the mediation of our external senses, but when he goes another
way to work, it is not without the body, but by the mediation of phantasmes
either formerly received, or newly injected (which God can do, though perhaps
neither men nor Angels can) he represents objects to our understandings and
wills, which take and move us as it peaseth him to give the blessing; so as you
cannot contemplate nor meditate, nor reason, nor think of God, without the
assistance and use of the body, nor receive impressions from him upon your
understanding, and will, and affections, but by the same way. It is therefore
gross ignorance in men, as it is in the most (assisted and improved by pride)
or wilfulness, which makes them subject to these mistakes to judge that
converse with God unholy and unspirituall which is administered to us by the
mediation of Ordinances, which are outward and subjected to our senses.

spiritual, as it stands in order to the discourse we have in hand.

The notion of spiritual lies not in this, that one is more raised and
improved in parts then another, as when the French say, C'est un homme bien
spirituel, they mean a man of good parts, or of a raised spirit: Though I very
much fear that this goes far for spiritual with many, and a great deal of
that language and converse which is called spiritual, is nothing but the
expressions of men of a more raised reason, or exoticke and extravagant fancy,
which because the language is unusual goes amongst a great many ignorant and
well meaning men for spiritual, as appears by their inordinate affecting
certain preachings and writings, which a sober, holy, and indeed spiritual
man would look upon with other eyes. Wherein the luck is, that such kind of
Authors are best and most readily understood, by those who as the Apostle
says, are ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth,
which suites very happily with such Teachers, who as the same Apostle says,
Know neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Spiritualnesse therefore
lies not in the following or affecting such Preachers, or Authors, or ways as
come under a show of raised or improved reason or fancy.

Nor does it lie in this, that such ways or worship are more proportionable or
more suitable to the guise and fashion of the next, or a more raised state: If
any one could by the spirit of prophecy or divine revelation, peep into
another World, and see what the converse of that shall be, such a search would
be of excellent use to us as it was to the Prophets of old, who inquired and
searched diligently after the times that were to come, 1 Pet. 1.10. But would
be no warrant to alter or change from the way of life, or worship of the
present state; for then Jeroboam had hit it, though not in his end perhaps, yet
in the thing, who by altering the times and places of worship did but
anticipate Gospel practice, when it should be lawful every where and at all
times and seasons to offer up sacrifices acceptable and agreeable to God. Then
also it had been more spiritual in the last state, or times of the Jews, to
signify Christ's death by breaking of bread, then by slaying of Oxen, or by
worshipping God without Preistly adornments and ceremonies, rather then with
them. Some of the Prophets, Isaiah particularly, and David saw far into the
way of that state that was then to come, yet neither did the one nor the other
nor any of the holy Prophets dissuade from the practice of the ceremonies or
ordinances of that time, though such as the Apostle since has called beggarly
rudiments, but encouraged and exhorted still to the constant persevering in
them, only blamed them when they were alone without holiness of life and
conversation, and faith in God, which they all tended to and taught, who of all
the Prophets understood the way of a spiritual converse more then David, as
appears by his frequent calling upon the spirit, bemoaning the absense of
glorying in the enjoyment of it, and yet this excellent and spiritual David
thought it not a carnal and unspirituall thing to converse with God in the
Ordinances of that state wherein he lived, though he saw so clearly and happily
into another and better, but longed after the ceremonious worship of those
times, and envied even the condition of the Sparrowes that found a resting in
Gods house, and by Gods Altar, from which he was excluded.

And if we consider it particularly, how absurd would such a thing be, the wise
God has fitted the liquour to the vessel, our way of converse with him in
things spiritual according to our present receptive faculty, how ridiculous
would it be to suite the garment of a man to a child's body, or because a child
has a principle in him that is rational, to labor in that incapable age to
improve that principle by rational discourses and discipline: So and much more
absurd and vain is it to suite and proportion the converse of a future and
more raised state to the lowness and incapacity of a former and more weak and
childish one; yet nothing is more frequently done by these men we have been
speaking of, by which means it falls out that being wholly unfit for the
converse of a more excellent and future state, and neglecting and sleighting
that way of converse which God has made their portion for the present, they
loose the blessing of their present state, and all those influences which God
conveyes to us, by mediums of his own fitting, and in stead of increasing in
light which they so much pretend to, they grow vain in their imaginations, and
have their foolish hearts darkened (as their abominable and cursed opinion
evidently makes appear) by that Prince of darkness who transformes himself
into an Angel of light. So that to conclude, it is the word of institution for
the present state in which we live, that gives the notion of spiritualnesse to
Ordinances, and actions, and neither the vanity of our reasonings, nor a
pretended or real sight into the state of those times that are to come.

Moses there was but a graduall change, and a greater formalizing of the
worship of the same Covenant; no man will deny me, but that it was by the
appointment of God made so visible and so public, as there was nothing left of
obscurity or doubtfulnesse in it: Moses the Minister of so great a change, was
a man who had his Letters of credence from Heaven, written in the most visible
Characters; a man that wrought ordinarily, many and great miracles, that was
owned by God by many heavenly apparitions: and yet besides all this, when the
rule of life and worship was given, God himself talked to them from Heaven, as
he says, Exodus 20.22. and after the greatest preparation of the people for
receiving those heavenly Oracles, that there might be no doubt but that they
were from God; Mount Sinai (whither the people assembled) was altogether in a
smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof
ascended as the smoke of a Furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly, and
when the voice of the Trumpet sounded long and waxed louder and louder, God
answered him by a voice, Verse 18, 19. Of which voice of God the people were so
assured, As they besought Moses that he would speak with them, and that God
might not speak with them least they dye, Exodus 20.19. So as though afterward
they proved a stiff-necked people, who having received the Law by the
disposition of Angels did not keep it, Acts 7.51, 53. Yet no man could
pretend their ignorance of the mind of God, or that the form appointed to them
by Moses was not of Divine institution and command.

In like manner when those Ceremonies and that way of worship was to cease, and
a new and a very different administration both of Doctrine and worship was to
be in the World, the wisdom of God judged it meet (as before) to give the
World a good account of it, that no man might justly pretend ignorance in a
thing of that great moment and concernment; and although the World (the Jews
especially to whom the first addresses were made) were particularly prepared
for it by a long series and consent of prophesies which told them of very
famous and notable changes, which had formed their spirits to a steady and
earnest expectation of them, yet God intending to make a greater change in the
World then was before, used a greater Minister then Moses, having therefore
formerly contented himself to speak by the Prophets, He spoke unto us now by
his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and by whom he made the
World; and that we might be obliged to hear him, and to receive from his mouth
this new Series of Doctrine and Ceremonies which have been the rule of our
Faith and Worship ever since, it pleased God to declare this Son of God with
power according to the spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead;
and to anoint others (according to their measure) with the same spirit of
holiness which should be under Ministers, to this great Shepherd of our
souls, and which by most real and mighty signs and miracles should confirm
that Doctrine, and those institutions of Worship which he brought from Heaven
and gave unto the World. So as this change was most visible to all, manifested
not only to the reason and faith of men, but to their very senses, so as no
man could pretend ignorance, or reason of doubting, so as the fault must rest
in their will, they would not come to him that they might have life, and they
loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil. Yea, our
Lord appeals to his works and miracles, and says, that if he had not done,
amongst them the works that never any man did, they had been without sin,
but now they had no cloak nor no excuse: Thus it has pleased God to deal
with us when ever he has given a rule of Faith or worship, or has shaken and
removed old forms of administration (which were the tracts and ways in which
he has met his people, and communicated of himself to them) he has ever
given such visible and sensible testimonies of these things to the World, as
was fit to give a general and full satisfaction, that such was undoubtedly the
pleasure and will of God in things of so great moment and concernment.

Now that Christians in the days of Christ and his Apostles, and since to
these very times have been possessed of certain Ordinances and forms of
worship, such as Preaching, Conference, Baptism, breaking of bread, and to
comprehend all these under one head, Church Fellowship, in all its
administrations of gifts and offices (though with much variation in the way and
reason of administering these things) I think no body will deny.

But where (in the name of God I ask it) are those Divine Warrants which
formerly have not been wanting to these cases made manifest and visible to us,
as formerly by mighty miracles, by the voice of God, or the Son of God from
Heaven (as formerly still) which should destroy that was built, and make such
changes our duty, which else without them would be the highest and greatest
Sacrilege.

I appeal to God and man, whether any such things be or no; nay I dare be bold
to say it in the Name of God, to all holy and rational men, that there has no
such thing been, and that what ever has been held out for any such mighty
change and alteration for the present has been nothing but an absurd and
ridiculous allegorizing, of certain passages of Scripture, which very
Scripture, these men that would destroy Ordinances, look upon generally, with
as ill an eye as they do on any of the rest of these forms, as they call
them, but find good to make use of it now and then, for the more assured
deceiving of themselves and others: I say there having been no such mighty and
visible and authentic warrant for this change as becomes so great a business,
and as formerly God has been used to give in things of this nature, nor
nothing like it, nor nothing at all, but the bold vanity and speculation of
some men which would intrude their reasonings and revelations as good Gospel
upon the world; I hope we shall learn to be sober, Not to be wise above what
is written, nor to think that God has altered or quitted all his methods in
matters of so great moment and concernment to the World, because it is suitable
and agreeable to the fancies of a few men, the principal and most leading of
which have been sufficiently deceived to the view of all men in those things
wherein they have most avowedly and confidently interested the name and
authority of God himself, and of whom I will be bold to say, that the best and
ingenious excuse their own friends and followers can make for them is, that
they are in some degree of madness and distraction.

This I would spare to affirm, but that it is notoriously known, and it is
fit also that the judgments of God should be known, and that the hand of God
is eminently out against those who fear not the curse of adding to, or taking
away, and either out of the vanity of their own reasonings, or from
Diabolical inspirations are bold with him in things of so great concernment as
are the utter racing and taking away of Gospel Ordinances, and Institutions.

Having said what I intended about the nature of Ordinances in general, and
the reason of their continuance, I shall labor now more particularly to
vindicate from that contempt and scorn which is put upon it by some men, the
Ordinance of Baptism, not only to rescue that Institution from the violence
that is offered to it, but by an illustrious instance in one of the same kind
with the rest, and one at this time more opposed and undermined then any, to
give a further account and show more cause for the abiding and continuing with
us of all the rest.

There has been a great and much agitated controversy between the Papists
and those of the reformed Religion concerning the identity and efficacy of
John's Baptism (as it is called) compared with Christ; The Papists thundering
Anathemaes against them who shall affirm the Baptism of John to have the same
virtue and power with that of Christ's: Those of the reformed Religion on the
other side are generally of opinion, that the Ministry of John was the the same
that was after delegated to the Apostles, and that the Baptism of John was the
same which was administered after by the Disciples and Apostles of our Lord, and
which by the command of Christ was to be propagated into all the World, and all
Nations to be Baptized with it.

This controversy though in the terms of it, it remains much the same, yet
in sense and meaning it is exceedingly changed by some men of this generation,
who would have us believe that there is no use of Water in the Baptism of
Christ (that belonging only to John's Ministry, the last term of which was the
Ascension of Christ) but that Christ's Baptism and the rule and Institution of
it, Matthew. 28.29. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. is not to plung
and dip them in cold Water, as John did his Disciples, But baptize them or dip
them into the Name of God the Father, Son, and Spirit; that is (to use their
own words) by the Ministry which shall be of the Spirit, and not of the
Letter, You shall Baptize them, or dip them, or interest them into the Name of
God, who is the Father, Son, and Spirit, or sprinkle his Name upon them, that
they may be holy, just, true, merciful, righteous, good, etc. The drift of all
is (as they affirm distinctly) to exclude Water Baptism, in lieu of which as
a thing contradistinct, they would bring you in Spirit Baptism.

To make this good, they draw most of their best weapons out of the Popish
Quiver, in the disputes between us and them, of the difference of John's
Baptism from that of Christ's, though they manage them to a quite other purpose
then they meant them, for we and they differ about the efficacy of Baptism by
Water; they (the Papists) affirming that Baptism does ex opere operato,
confer grace; that is, by the force and virtue of its administration without
any respect to the foregoing Faith and Repentance in the party baptized, in
which respect they prefer it to the Baptism of John administered also by
Water; but these would have us believe that there is no such thing remaining to
Christians as Baptism by water: When therefore I say they have helped
themselves by these borrowed arguments to show that the baptism of Christ and
that of John are two things, and abused the Popish arguments to their own
ends, then with many a specious flourish they acquaint you with the excellency
of spirit Baptism above water Baptism, wherein as in a Theme very easy they
make a great flourish, and show us (forsooth) how much the efficacy of the
spirit is more then water, which (for honor sake no doubt) ever and anon they
call cold water, and so at length conclude with that which all the premises
drive at, that all outward and carnal and earthly things are put to an end (in
which number all outward administrations are contained) by the inward
spiritual and heavenly things of a better and second testament. In which how
little sincerely and faithfully they deal with holy Ordinances, and the great
Master and Institutor of them, Jesus Christ, by imposing their Apocryphal
novelties upon the people under the specious title of a more raised and
spiritual administration, as I have in part showed already more generally in
the preceding discourse, so I shall endeavor more particularly in the
vindication of the Ordinance of Baptism to make manifest.

For my own part, I have thought that the difference of John's and Christ's
Baptism was not very considerable, for we, by the acknowledgment of all,
enjoying Christ's baptism, it was of less moment to know what the difference
of the two Baptismes were if there were any.

But as it comes stated to us by new hands (and it is the particular credit of
error that it is new) there is nothing more considerable, since by virtue of
that distinction of John's and Christ's Baptism, they would utterly take away
the Ordinance of Baptism it self, and by a like reason all the rest, which
with so much comfort and edification the Saints of God have known how to use
as pledges of love, and paths and tracts of Communion with God in Jesus Christ,
without adoreing them or putting them in Gods place; though I confess
according to what our corruption is, that is not without danger, but it is the
part of good and wise men to reform error without overthrowing foundations; on
the other side, folly ever rests in the extremities to which the Devil drives
it.

That there is a Gospel, New Testament, Baptism, that these men will grant,
and that it is particularly held out in these places, Matthew. 28.19, 20. and
Mark 16.15, 16. The words of Matthew are Go teach all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and so I am with you unto the end
of the World. To say here that Christ might mean baptism by water, of which
ceremony there should be an end within a certain time, is to contradict the
express words of the Scripture, that says he will be with them in these
things unto the end of the World, and they may with as good reason prefix a
time to the ending of Faith and Hope, or any Christian grace or Ordinance
according to their own fancies, or pleasures, or to Preaching also, since
Preaching and Baptism are here put together.

But some would Philosophate more subtlely and tell you, that by baptizing
here, is not meant dipping or plunging in water, in the Name of the Father,
etc. But to Baptize them, or dip them, or interest them into the Name of God,
or sprinkling his Name upon them, that they may be holy, just, merciful,
righteous, good. But besides that this is boldly affirmed, how ridiculous and
absurd it is, you will easily see; boldly, because in a thing of this moment,
upon a ba^e affirmation, without any proof, they go against what has been
the sense of all ages, and of all men if you will judge of their sense as we
must needs do by their preachings and by their practice; but ridiculous I say
also, and absurd it is. The words are, we know, Go teach all Nations, or
disciple them, (...), and then Baptize them, that is, first make them
Disciples, first make them believers, and then baptize them; therefore in
Mark, the place before quoted, He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved.

According to this word of Institution and command, ye have exactly the
Apostolical practice (and this I dare affirm, there can be no better way of
finding out the nature of any Ordinance then by comparing the practice with the
Institution.) The practice you will find in several places, particularly, Acts
8.34, 35. When Philip had Preached to the Eunuch, Jesus, and the Ordinance of
Baptism, as it appears, because the Eunuch demands it instantly upon the
sight of water, Philip tells him the condition of Baptism, which was believing
in Christ with all his heart, which when the Eunuch affirms he did, Philip,
according to the command of our Lord, went down into the water with him, and
baptized him: Where you have the institution run parallel with the practice as
exactly as is possible.

I shall name but one place more amongst many, which is that of the 10 of the
Acts, where, after that Peter had Preached largely to Cornelius and his Family,
the Lord Jesus, and the great things of the Gospel through him, and that their
Faith which was the condition of Baptism, was gloriously manifested by the
pouring down of the holy Ghost upon them, Peter puts them presently upon
baptism, as the second piece of his Commission, which was to baptize those
which by his Preaching were made Disciples, and did believe, and therefore
commanded them to be baptized in water.

Thus you have the rule verifyed in the practice, and there is no Comment so
good upon the rule or precept, as Apostolical practice.

I have said before, that this forced interpretation was bold, as you may see
it further evidently, by what has been last said in the exact correspondency
between the rule and practice; but you will easily see it also foolish, for I
beseech you what is that which denominates any man holy, just, and good, but
believing in God through Christ? And what is it to be a Disciple, or to be a
Christian, but to be all that? He that believes, and is made a Disciple, is
baptized or interested, as they call it, into the Name of God and is made holy,
just, true, righteous, merciful, good, which is all that they understand by
Baptism expressed in these places; then if believing, or being made a
Disciple, be all that, that interpretation which they would enforce upon these
places is nothing but a loathsome and absurd tautology, thus; indoctrinate,
teach or Disciple all Nations; that is, make them holy, just, righteous, good,
merciful, etc. interest them in God (for that no question they are when they
are made Disciples and believe) and then baptize them; that is, make them holy,
just, righteous, good, interest them in God; or as it is Mark, Chap. 16. verse.
15, 16. Preach the Gospel to every Creature, he that believes, that is, is
interested in God, is made holy, just, good, merciful, etc. And is baptized;
that is, is interested in God, is made holy, just, good, merciful, etc. shall
be saved. What a monstrous and absurd thing is this new exposition to make the
holy Scriptures speak not only any thing to the gingle of our own fancies,
but even the most abominable and loathsome tautologies and Nonsense.

Things thus stated, I am not solicitous about that question concerning John's
baptism, whether in all respects it be the same with that, concerning which
Christ Commissioned his Disciples, and was used by the Apostles after the
Ascension of our Lord; that is, whether it were generally of that efficacy and
virtue before the Ascension of Christ, as after; which is the question as it
lies between us and the Papists: but as it is urged by these men, that Christ's
or the Gospel-Baptisme, had not the same ceremony, especially in respect of the
same Element of water, with that which they call John's baptism, can never be
made out by any one argument of theirs; on the other side I take it to be
sufficiently made out already (though it will be more also in the examination
of particular objections) that the Gospel baptism which was by virtue of the
Apostolical Commission to continue, as the Preaching of the Word, unto the end
of the World, was administered by water.

To come now to their arguments, and particularly as I find them laid down by
a namelesse Author, who boasts to have been the first that broacht this
Doctrine; but if none will contend with him for the glory of this, there are
those that will not yield an inch to him in things of as great and considerable
revelation, if to make themselves God, or calling themselves the Lord of Hosts,
be things of as great and high a nature as this. This you must carry along with
you, that the great business is to prove that Christ's baptism is not by
water: He affirms therefore, as an argument to confirm his premises, that
John's Baptism and Christ's were distinct in their appellations; What will then
follow? Ergo, Christ's baptism was not administered by water? Absurd, Where lies
the consequence, or what Logic will enforce it?

But to go on, Was not Circumcision I beseech you, a leading Ceremony in Moses
Law, in as much as all the worshippers of that Covenant were styled the
Circumcision: it belonged properly and particularly, and was the great
Ordinance of the Mosaicall Law, as you may find, Acts 21.21. where the prime
instance of forsaking Moses, was, not to be circumcised, and that also, Gal.
5.3. Who ever is circumcised is a Debtor to do the whole Law: This
notwithstanding, Christ says, Circumcision was not of Moses, but of the
Fathers. So Baptism by water is a leading and principal Ordinance to
Christians, as Circumcision was to the Jews, and yet in the same sense may it
be said to be not of Christ, but of John, that is, he whom it pleased God to
make use of in the first administration of it, was John.

I beseech you, is not the Law of the Old Covenant as often called Moses Law,
as Baptism is the Baptism of John, does that make Moses therefore the Author
or Institutor of that Law, as a thing distinct from the Law of God.

In like manner, calling Baptism by the name of John's baptism, does by no
means conclude, that it should not be Christian; and Gospel baptism.

Secondly, our Author alleges, that the Scripture affirms that Christ's
baptism was to follow John's, not to go along with it at the same time, I have
Baptized you with water, but he shall Baptize you, excellent, therefore Christ's
Baptism was not by water, because it was to follow in time; this Logic is as
new as his so much boasted of notion.

In other places, as Matthew. 3.11. and Luke 3.16. John says, I do Baptize you
with water; In Mark ye have it, I have Baptized you with water, and he shall
Baptize you, etc. Mark 18. It seems here apparently, that John describes the
course of his Ministry, which was to administer the outward Element, and to
give Christ his part, which was to do the spiritual work, therefore when he
says, he has, he does not mean that he will do it no more, and when he
says, he does, it does not exclude the times past, but speaks as I say of
the proper course and parts of his Ministry.

Again, for that of Christ, He shall Baptize, the future is often put for the
present, parti^ularly in the Hebrew Idiom, when perpetuity or continuation is
designed, Psalm. 1. He shall bring forth his fruit in his season, Why not here
he shall baptize, for he does baptize; that is, has this work or office to
baptize with the spirit: Besides, John 1.33. ye have it in the Present Tense
affirmed of Christ, This is he that Baptizeth with the holy Ghost.

Acts 1.4, 5. he commanded them they should wait for the promise of the
Father, For John Baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy
Ghost not many days hence, according to what John says of himself, I Baptize
you with water, but he shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire:
Therefore John's baptism was the baptism of water, and Christ's the baptism of
the spirit, and so not one but several baptismes.

I Baptize you with water, but he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost:
Therefore when John says, I Baptize you with water, he does not handle that
point, what his baptism was, but what he was himself, to the end that they
should not attribute to him that which was proper to Christ; for so ye have it,
Matthew. 3.11. He that comes after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am
not worthy to loose, he shall Baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire. So
here ye have what is the virtue of John, or of the Minister in baptizing, and
what of Christ: This distinction is common to the New Testament, and runs
through the whole course of the Ministry, I have planted; Apollo watered, but
God gave the increase: No Minister ever gave the holy Ghost, ever baptized with
the holy Ghost and fire, that was Christ's part: So as when ever baptism is
administered, the Power and Ministry are to be distinguished. The Power is
Christ's, the Ministry John's, or any other man qualifyed for it. The baptism of
the Minister is external, conferring but the sign, that of Christ internal,
conferring the thing signified: and because John who had so great an opinion
amongst the Apostles, was to decrease, and our Lord to increase, therefore
Christ instances in him, in this place of the first of the Acts, in opposition
to his part in the Ministry.

But last of all, I ask any man, whether men were not baptized with the holy
Ghost and with fire, before that time, for first the Apostles were baptized
with the holy Ghost before that, the Saints and Believers were sanctified, and
regenerated, and made holy before then, which is all these men would have to be
that Ordinance, so as things were not annexed and affixed to that famous
sending down of the holy Ghost in the shape of fiery tongues, but was before
long, during all the course of the administration of baptism, though perhaps
not with that efficacy and fullness, and glory, as after; for so it is true
that the holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet gloryfied: So
as clearly this place of the Acts holds out the excellency and glory of Christ's
administration, in respect of all under-Ministers, and particularly in respect
of John, who being the first Minister of baptism, had a peculiar honor from
it, and the whole Church here was spiritually baptized as in a type; the
Apostles receiving eminently the holy Ghost, not for themselves but for the
Churches.

This extraordinary administration, Luke (as Calvin observes) improperly, that,
is out of the ordinary signification, calls Baptism (for baptism properly
signifies Immersion) to the end that the Antithesis and opposition between
Christ and John might be intyre; by the same reason as Paul after he had
mentioned the Law of works, to the end that the Antithesis might lie on both
sides, faith, The Law of Faith, Romans 3.27.

After this, we have a new Interpretation framed upon Acts 19. where we are
made believe that those twelve Disciples found to be baptized only by John's
baptism, were baptized again in the name of Christ, and this baptism into
the Name of Christ, he says was not the repeating of any water, but merely
the gift of the spirit: This as the rest is boldly affirmed, but where lies his
proof, or how does he make it out? It is most probable (as it has been
taken by all to this day) that if this were another baptism, or a repetition
of baptism, it was by water, as well as in several other places in the Acts,
where any are said to be baptized, he himself understands it by water, why
not as well here? But truly I am of opinion with those that think that Paul
did not here command any to be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, which
were already baptized with the baptism of John, but rather taught that those
who had received John's baptism were rightly baptized into Christ, and
therefore had no need of any new, or other baptism: It is very probable
notwithstanding that from this place did either arise, or was confirmed in
many, the opinion of the difference of these two baptismes of John and Christ;
though as it is now stated to us by our namelesse Author, he, for any thing I
shall say to the contrary, shall have the honor of the novelty of it.

But to consider the place a little particularly, Paul being come to Ephesus
found certain Disciples, which afterward, Ver. 7. are said to be about
twelve, he presently asks them if they had received the holy Ghost since they
believed? The sense must certainly be (as it will appear by what follows)
have ye received the gifts of the holy Ghost, which ordinarily accompanied
faith and baptism in those days, according to that in the Acts, Repent and
be Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus (which our Author will not deny, I
suppose, to be administered by water) and ye shall receive the gifts of the
holy Ghost, and according to that, Gal. 3.2. Received you the spirit by the
works of the Law or by the bearing of Faith; also Verse 5. He that ministers
the spirit and works miracles among you; where they are joined together as
things of a kind. Besides, being Christians, and having believed, they could
not want the spirit of God regenerating, and sanctifying, for no man can say
that Jesus is the Christ, but by the spirit, therefore it must needs be meant
of those extraordinary gifts which were peculiar to those times as an effect of
believing and baptizing, and yet not common to all.

They answered simply, as the thing was, and particularly to his question, that
they had not so much as heard whether there were an holy Ghost or no. The sense
whereof must clearly be, that they were ignorant of the holy Ghost or knew not
whether there were any such thing or no, to wit, as he was then visible or
exhibited to believers, in miraculous, and extraordinary gifts, for else being
Christians they felt the power of the holy Ghost, and being Jews as they were,
they knew that there was a holy Ghost by many Scriptures, Psalm. 51. Lord take
not thy holy spirit from me; also in the 1 Kings 22. Which way went the spirit
of the Lord from me to speak to thee; also Isa. 11. The spirit of the Lord was
upon him. So as the sense must needs as I have said be understood of the gifts
of the spirit, scil. to speak with tongues, prophecy, and the like, for they
are said to receive the holy Ghost which are adorned with any new or
extraordinary gift.

Having received an answer of this question, he presently subjoynes another,
and asks them, Ver. 3. Unto what then they were baptized? which follows very
pertinently the other, for as he took it for granted, that baptism immediately
followed believing, so the administration of spiritual gifts, called receiving
the holy Ghost, or the gifts of the holy Ghost, ordinarily accompanied
baptism, sometimes before it, as a witness they were worthy of baptism; as
in Cornelius and his Family, Chap. 10. sometimes after baptism, as to the
Apostles, yea and our Lord himself received the holy Ghost in the shape of a
Dove immediately after the receipt of baptism.

Having therefore asked them how they were initiated into Christian Religion;
that is, by whom was that ceremony administered, or how or to what purpose were
they baptized? They answer, that they were baptized into John's baptism; which
was proper enough, signifying that they in baptism professed the Doctrine
taught by John, sealed to them by the administration of that Ordinance, but
otherwise their progress was not great, as having neither heard Christ
himself, nor his Apostles. The like of which was said of Apollo, that he knew
only the Baptism of John, Chap. 18.25. being instructed, or as Beza reads it,
initiated in the way of the Lord, knowing little or nothing more of Christ then
what John preached, and sealed with his baptism.

So as to be baptized into any ones baptism, as in this place, into the
baptism of John, signifies to profess, and by the receiving of baptism to
embrace the Doctrine which John preached and sealed with that sign, the
preposition (...), signifying the final cause.

And indeed baptism seems to have a threefold signification, one proper,
which signifies immersion or dipping, which from the effect is also called
ablution, or washing: The other two translations, as when it is taken for
pouring out the gifts of the holy Ghost, or when it is taken for the Doctrine
which John delivered with the seal and ceremony accompanying it, as when it is
said, that Apollos knew nothing but the baptism of John, for new Doctrines had
new Ceremonies accompanying them. After this in the next Verses, scil. 4, 5, 6.
Paul was so far from bidding them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, that he taught them rather that those who had received John's baptism
were duly baptized into Christ, and therefore had no need of a new baptism,
but rather as a consequence and due of it, might receive the gifts of the holy
Ghost. For the fourth and fifth Verses are spoken by Paul, giving a right
account and narrative of the baptism of John with the ground of it, whereas
the fourth Verse, is commonly taken to be spoken by Paul to those Ephesians,
but the fifth to be spoken by Luke, showing what followed the word of Paul:
whereas it plainly appears by the Particles, (...), which are adversative,
that both those Verses were spoken by Paul.

Verse 4. John verily baptized, etc. Verse. 5. But when they heard this, His
vero auditis, so as both these expressions were Paul's, teaching that those who
having heard John had received baptism, were baptized into the Name of Christ,
that is, as before were consecrated or dedicated by baptism unto Christ. Then
Verse 6. begins the words of Luke telling the success of this discourse: And
when Paul had laid his hands on them, etc. signifying that Paul did nothing
else after he had informed them that they were rightly baptized into the Name
of Christ, then to lay hands on them, upon which followed the gifts of the holy
Ghost, speaking with tongues, and prophesying.

So as here is nothing of two baptismes, but a right explanation of John's
baptism to be the Gospel baptism, or baptism into the Name of Christ.



Mark 14. Truly the Son of man goes as it is written of him: But woe to him
by whom the Son of man is betrayed: No man here will grant that in the first
place Christ speaks, and in the second Mark.

Having thus vindicated the Ordinance of Gospel-baptisme from the mistakes and
objections against it, I might here make an end, but that the forementioned
namelesse Author takes upon him to answer the objections brought against his
novelty, several of which are certain men of straw set up by himself to be
the easier by his addresses overthrown. As, that by this means we are robbed
of our Christendom. Again, then so many ages have erred; also, that he is the
first man that opposed it: Then, that Christ justifies and commands water
baptism, John 3. Mat. 28. How that place of Matthew which holds out by way of
Institution Gospel baptism is to be understood; I have formerly showed also
what a sympathy and correspondency there is between the institution and the
practice, the one being the Comment upon the other, and therefore shall trouble
you no further with that which is sufficiently cleared already, nor not at all
with those petty objections I told you of before, which he so easily forms and
answers. That argument which he frames against Baptism from Paul's not being
Commissioned for it, and thanking God that he had baptized but very few, as
Crispus and Gaius, and the house of Stephanas, I have particularly considered
and answered already, when I gave the exposition of the greatest part of that
Chapter, scil. 1 Cor. 1. out of which it is raised, to which I refer the
Reader, not affecting needless repetitions.

But one objection would trouble him, if he would give it liberty, and let it
have its scope, and himself says, it seems to be the strongest, which is the
constant practice of the Apostles in this c^^e not only before Christ's
baptism came in (...) after, as he says, as appears by many places which he
quotes out of the Acts of the Apostles.

This Objection notwithstanding does not much trouble him, for he answers it
easily thus; That the Apostles indeed did practice water baptism, but not from
Christ but from John, whose baptism they took up, and an outward ceremony of
honor and account is not easily laid down. This he helps himself in, and
proves by a parallel instance, to wit, that some of the Apostles used
Circumcision, and that, after the Ascension of Christ, for Circumcision was an
honorable Ceremony used from Abraham's time, and so they could not abruplty lay
it down, but used it for their sakes who were weak: and so in like manner the
Apostles used the baptism of John, or water baptism, etc.

This Objection that in his account seems so strong, if he had dealt
ingeniously he should have beat it out thinner, and considered more
particularly some of those places in the Acts, and he would have found that so
general an answer would scarce have served the turn.

But I confess in this place as well as in some others I have much ado to
keep my self from questioning the moralls of these men more then their
intellectuals. It is true that Paul did once use a liberty in circumcising one,
to wit, Timothy, as ye find, Acts 16. Paul was to visit the Churches, and
having a desire to take Timothy along with him in that work who was well
reported of by the brethren he took and circumcised him; Because (says the
Text) of the Jews which were in those quarters, for they knew all, that his
Father was a Greek: Least therefore the brethren of the Circumcision should be
scandalized in the converse of a Gentile, the breaking down of the partition
wall being yet not so manifest as was needful for the satisfaction of their
scrupulous consciences, Paul took the advantage of his Mothers being a
Jewesse, and to avoid the scandal and offense of those brethren, circumcised
him.

But the same Paul, who to avoid the scandal of some weak brethren,
circumcised Timothy (such ceremonies as Divines use to say, having then a kind
of indifferency in them not being yet honorably buried) would by no means
circumcise Titus, Gal. 2.3. for when there were false brethren who might draw
that liberty into an ill example, he would not be constrained by them to
circumcise Titus, or he would not do that upon any occasion or ground, which
they might prsently reproach him with, as varying from his principles, that he
being the great Doctor and Preacher of liberty should yet at Jerusalem, and in
the presence of the Apostles, alter his practice.

And generally where this liberty was known and averred, Paul was zealous we
know to defend it, as we see in the case of Peter's eating with the Gentiles,
and withdrawing afterward, fearing them of the Circumcision, Verse 11, 12. and
told him, that by his example he compelled the Gentiles to Judaisme, which was
intolerable, for even the Jews by believing in Christ were delivered from the
bondage of such ceremonies, much more the Gentiles whose portion they never
were: You see now the force of this parrallell in one part of it Circumcision,
let us compare it now with the other of Baptism.

Circumcision was sometimes administered, once (as we see) and but once that I
know by the Apostles, after absolutely refused, the reason and ground manifest,
and given for the satisfaction of some Jews that were in those quarters, who
not having sufficient light about those ceremonies would have been scandalized
to have seen Paul taken Timothy with him as a companion and fellow-worker
uncircumcized; after this, and in another circumstance, this was absolutely
refused as I have said.

But baptism by water administered frequently by the Apostles and Ministers of
the Gospel, to all Nations, to all sorts, Jews and Gentiles, who were taught
and instructed in it, to take it up upon the most spiritual and Gospel
grounds, to the most spiritual and Gospel ends, and that from the beginning
of the preaching of the Gospel to this day, now above sixteen hundred years
together, without any interruption in any age, till the age of this Doctor, who
boasts of a particular felicity in administering this light to the World.

Here then I call Heaven and Earth to witness whether these men deal equally
and uprightly or no, in the way of their reasonings and parrallels. To omit
other things which will be confessed by all men, as that not only Jews, but
Gentiles, were led into, and instructed in this practice of baptism by the
Apostles, and that after the ascension of Christ, when they would have the
term put to this water baptism, even after that, the Gentiles received it as
a new thing and light from the Apostles Circumcision was forbidden the
Gentiles, and those that would have Preached it to them were said to be
troublers and subverters of their souls, Acts 15.24. but where ever they
Preached Christ among the Gentiles, they Preached also this baptism either to
Jews or Gentiles, as a Gospel and New Testament Ordinance, which was to
continue as long as Preaching, even to the end of the World, Mat. 28. So Peter,
Acts 2. had no sooner Preached and converted men, made them Disciples, but he
led them into the Doctrine and Preaching of Baptism, Verse 38. Acts 8. Those
of Samaria and the Eunuch had baptism preached and administered to them as a
Gospel Ordinance, and appendix of Preaching; so Cornelius, Acts 10. who waited
on Peter, to hear all things commanded of God, Verse 33. was led with his
Family into the Doctrine and practice of baptism by Peter.

For the ends of Baptism, every one knows they were the same with the
Preaching and believing of the Gospel (this being nothing but another way of
administration of the same Gospel) namely, our union and communion with God in
Jesus Christ.

But then for the grounds of Baptism that they were Gospel and spiritual (if
any can be) the whole course of the Scripture shows. Is not Faith in the Lord
Jesus, believing with all the heart, a spiritual and Gospel ground? Must not
that needs be a spiritual and Gospel Ordinance that has that for the rise?
But this is the ground and rise of this Ordinance, Acts 8.37. To instance but
in one place more, is not the receiving of the holy Ghost, a spiritual and
Gospel ground? Can that Ordinance be legal, and servile, and ungospell, that
has the baptism of the holy Ghost, for the rise and ground of it? Yet so it
was that this baptism by water (which they so villyfie as pretending to a
Metaphisicall Religion) after the root of their own carnal and fleshly
wisdom and not after the foolishness of Gospel administrations, which yet is
wisdom to those that are perfect:) I say this baptism by water had for its
rise and ground, the pouring out of the gifts of the holy Ghost: That
spiritual Baptism being an appendix either a due to it when this went before,
as Acts 2. Repent and be baptized, and ye shall receive the gifts of the holy
Ghost; or else a ground and rise of it, as here, the pouring out of these
heavenly gifts giving warrant or title for the administration of this ordinance.

But enough to show the vanity and falsehood of these men in their
argumentations and parrallells, who like Orators that manage an ill cause, make
least stay in the most important places.

And here I should put an end to this discourse of The Vindication of Gospel
Ordinances, having shown by general grounds of Scripture, the reason of the
thing it self, and a particular instance in a leading and prime Ordinance, to
wit, baptism, that there are certain forms and institutions remaining with
us, suited and proportioned to our state, which are pledges of Christ's love to
us, tracts and ways wherein he delights to meet us, and means by which he
conveys himself to us in this state of our Pilgrimage, Whilst we are at home
in the body and absent from the Lord, whilst we live by Faith and not by sight,
whilst we see in a glass darkly, and not face to face, whilst we know in
part and not as we are known. But least any should think that this tends to
an undervaluing of the spirit of God, or a lessening of his Empire (though no
such thing but the contrary is to be gathered out of all the premises) yet I am
not unwilling by way of Corollary, and conclusion to this discourse, to spend a
few words particularly upon this subject; and to profess before all the World,
that nothing ought to be so dear to us, and so much esteemed, and so much
sought for by us, as the accesses and influences of the holy spirit: That it is
the spirit that leads us into all truth, it is the spirit that quickens, the
spirit that comforts us, without which since our Lord went into Heaven, we had
been left Orphans and Fatherless: It is the spirit that searches all things,
the spirit that inables to judge all things, the spirit by which we live, in
which we walk when we walk with God, and do any thing that is agreeable to
his will; it is the spirit that seals us to the day of redemption, and
witnesses with our spirits, that we are the Sons of God.

It is the spirit that has done all the wonderful things which the holy
Scriptures record; it is the spirit that has given boldness in all ages to
do, and to suffer great things, for the Name and Testimony of Jesus: If I
should pursue this Theme at large, there would be no end or mean found of the
Encomiums and Elogyes of the spirit: It is the fellowship therefore and
communion of the holy spirit which my soul breaths after, and longs for, above
any thing imaginable. But that which I affirm is, that the spirit is
communicated to us particularly, and especially in such Ordinances as we have
been speaking of: It was the spirit that strove with the old World in the
Ministry of Noah a Preacher of righteousness, and in the administration of the
old Covenant the things they were taught and provoked to, were things
spiritual, and they were said to have the good spirit of the Lord to instruct
them, Nehem. 9.10. Which was undoubtedly the reason, why the Saints of those
times breathed so much after those Ordinances, which God had fitted to their
present state and capacity, as things in which the spirit instructed them, and
God blessed to them, to know more of his mind then all the World by any other way
or wisdom could do: For the new and better Covenant under which state and
condition we live, the spirit is conveyed to us by certain forms and
institutions of Gods own inventing; Preaching is a great Ordinance in the hand
of God for the conveying of the holy spirit, the Galatians received the spirit
by the hearing of Faith preached, Galat. 3.3. And we know that generally all
the great and famous conversions which are seen in the World, by which men are
said to be borne of the spirit, are administered by the Preaching of the Gospel
in the mouth of the ordinary Ministers and dispensers of it, former times for
the greater glory of the beginnings of the Gospel had greater Harvests, but the
way of administration was the same; then at one Sermon there were added to the
Church three thousand, and whilst Peter was Preaching to Cornelius and his
friends, the holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard the word, but the way as
I said, is the same ever since, and it pleases God by the foolishness of
Preaching to save them that believe. And as the holy Ghost does preside the
Ministry of preaching, so the ordinary Officers and Elders of the Church were
said to be made Overseeers by the holy ghost to feed the Church of God which he
had purchased with his own blood, Acts 20.28. And for that Ordinance for which
we have more particularly contended, Baptism, we are said, by one spirit to
be all baptized into one body; and usually the administration of the spirit
accompanied baptism, either after it as an appendix, or before it as a
qualification for that Ordinance, as I have already showed.

That therefore which makes me contend for the holy Ordinances of God, and
value them to that height, which through the grace of God I do, is that
inestimable value and esteem I put upon the holy spirit of God, who is pleased
to meet us in these tracts, and to offer himself to us in these
administrations.

But such is the vanity and perverseness of men, that to avoid errors they
run ever into extremities: We see it in civil things, those who have found
the pressures of the Tyranny of one man, think themselves never safe till they
have cast off all Government, and run willingly into Anarchy, or that which
is next to that worst Democracy, or the Government of the People. Whereas in
all things (especially in things of God and Religion) truth and right is that
which lies in the middle, as diverse in its own nature from either extreme,
as one extreme is from the other. It were certainly absurd in nature, because
it is our spirits that immediately act our bodies, for us to fall out with our
blood, as with a gross and dull substance that we would have nothing to do
with, when as our blood is the Vehiculum of our spirits: And it is not less
absurd for us in the present state wherein we are, to cry out of Ordinances as
of things gross and disproportionable to a spiritual life and man, when God
who knows our temper better then we our selves, uses them to convey his spirit
by, and makes them tracts and ways wherein he is wont to meet us. To Idolize
and make a God of Ordinances, as if the opus operatum, rendered us spiritual
and agreeable to God, as it has been the fault of Christians in many ages, so
it is the most uncomely and most unsprituall thing that can be, but for the
avoiding of this folly and fault, to fling them all away as things not at all
useful, because not suitable to our carnal reasonings about spiritual
things, or capable of an abuse, is an unspiritualnesse and uncomelynesse no
less great then the former. For my part, whilst God is pleased by the
foolishness of Ordinances to save them that believe, I shall make it my
endeavor to be in the possession of them, and shall expect God in them, for
whom only I desire them; for others that count themselves above these foolish
things, it were well for them to learn, that the foolishness of God is wiser
then men, and it will certainly be found their wisdom (as I said in the
beginning) to become fools, that they may be wise.

FINIS.
A Table, directing to several particulars in the preceding Discourse.
THE Introduction expressing the unhappiness of these times, in respect of
extravagant opinions in Religion with their tendencie and rise. Pa. 1. 2. The
good which God brings out of this evil. p. 3. That which immediately debauches
men's spirits, is an undervaluing of Ordinances, and unworthy thoughts of the
Scriptures. p. 4. Two excellent ends of the Scripture. p. 5. In all matters of
Faith and Worship, the appeal lies to the Scripture as to the standard. p. 6.
The Scripture is the rule or standard, notwitstanding the ignorance or
perverseness of Interpreters. p. 7. The vanity of affected and mysterious
Allegorizing. ibid. The 1 Cor. 3.6. Not of the Letter but of the Spirit,
opened. p. 8, 9. Scripture in it self plain. p. 10. Whom the difficulty
especiallly hurts. ibid. Scripture difficulties not relieved by the
Allegorizers of these times. p. 11. When Allegories may be used. p. 11, 12. In
what sense natural men be able to understand Scripture, and where they fall
short. p. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 2.14. opened. ibid. What advantage a spiritual man
has in interpretation of Scripture, and who he is. p. 14, 15. The good
intelligence between the Scripture and the spirit. p. 16. The objection of
those which think the Scriptures have their periods and times with men, beyond
which they are not of use, considered. p. 17. 1 John 2.20, 21, 27. Ye have an
unction, and ye know all things, opened. ibid. etc. To know all things, and to
know but in part, opposed. p. 18. It is no unusual Oratory to persuade men
they know already what we would further inlighten them in. p. 19. The benefit
of the new Covenant in opposition to the old, wherein it lies. p. 22. 2 Pet.
1.19. Considered. p. 26, ^7, etc. The Vindication of the use of Ordinances. p.
30, 31. cum sequent. 1 Cor. 1.21. Considered. p. 31. What is knowing Christ
after the flesh. p. 32. In what sense Paul was said to be sent not to Baptize,
but to Preach. p. 33, 34. Acco^modating that scripture by others parallel to
it. ibid. Reasons why the Ordinances of Institution appear so foolish to men
unspirituall. p. 36. Men prejudiced against Ordinances, are also against a
Crucified Christ. p. 37. Col. 2.8. Take heed least any man spoil you through
Philosophy, and vain deceit, considered. p. 38. Men opposing Ordinances do
but carnally Philosophate about spiritual things. p. 38, 39. Considerations
why it pleased God to ordain Mediums for worship, so unproportionable to the
reason and wisdom of men. p. 3^, 40. Of the difference between Us and the
Jews, who were under Ceremonies, and mediate Ordinances. p. 41. cum sequent.
Our sacraments have the same advantage over the Jews Sacraments, that the
Gospel has over the Law. p. 42. Many after they have served their turn of
Christ Crucified fling him away, as an element as beggarly as those Ordinances
they cry down. p. 43. The same reason of Preaching or conference in respect of
spiritualnesse with Baptism, or the Table of the Lord. p. 44, 45. The vanity
of such as would lay aside Ordinances, because outward and carnal, manifested
by the consideration of our way of holding communion with God in this life and
state. p. 46, 47. The true notion of the Word Spiritual, in order to the
discourse in hand. p. 47, 48, 49, 50. Never way of Worship was changed without
a great noteriety to those whom it concerned. p. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54. The
Ordinance of Baptism vindicated, being an illustrious instance for the abiding
and continuing with us, of other Institutions. p. 55. cum sequent. The state of
the controversy as it lies between us and the Papists, and between us and the
men we contend against. p. 55, 56, 57. The new exposition of Mat. 28.19, 20. Go
teach all Natione, Baptizing them, etc. showed to be bold and absurd. p. 59,
60, 61. Institution of Baptism, Mat. 28. and Apostolical practice which is
the best comment upon the rule, exactly agreeing. ibid. Several arguments of
these new men against Baptism by water, examined. p. 62. cum sequent. John's
Baptism and Christ's was distinct in their appellations, considered. p. 62
Christ's Baptism was to follow John's, considered. p. 63. John Baptized with
water, but ye shall be Baptized with the holy Ghost, considered. p. 64, 65.
Objection against baptism out of Acts 19. considered. p. 66, 67, 68, 69.
Receiving the holy Ghost, ordinarily accompanied Baptism, either before or
after it. p. 68. Three several significations of Baptism. p. 69. A weighty
argument for Baptism, the constant practice of the Apostles, very easily
slighted by these Novellers, how ingenuously let the Reader judge. p. 71, 72.
The forementioned Argument with the Answers of these men particularly urged and
examined. p. 72, 73, 74, 75, 76. Baptism by Water administered constantly by
the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel to all sorts, upon the most spiritual
grounds, to the most spiritual ends. p. 74, 75, 76. Contending for Ordinances,
no undervaluing the spirit, or lessening his Empire. p. 76. Nothing ought to be
so dear, and so much sought for as the accesses of the spirit. p. 77.
Encomiums of the spirit in respect of its wonderful Operations. ibid. The holy
spirit is communicated particularly and especially in the Ordinances. p. 77,
78, 79. Men usually to avoid errors, run into extremities, as is to be seen
in other things, as well as in the matter of Ordinances. p. 79.
Some of the faults escaped in the Printing, the Reader is desired to mend, as
follows.
Page. Line. Error. Correct. 2. 25. After the word jergona Comma. 4. 8. The
word Secondly to be left out. 7. 2. For sandard, read standard. 14. 14. put out
the Comma after transform, and add it after beholding. 18. 2. make a Comma
after the word without, and put out that which follows the word Word. 21. 3.
for into, read in. 23. 16. for extreme necessaries, read extremely necessary.
27. 8. for his, read its. 41. 26. after the word as, add the word there. 43. 3.
blot out the Comma after the word efficacy. 45. last. in stead of etc. read
and. 49. 12. after the word of, put a Comma. 79. 2. for occompanyed, read
accompanied.

The Reader is also desired to mind, that by reason of the Authors distance,
amongst other mistakes, there is one in the running Title: It should have
been, A Vindication of the use of Scriptures; etc.


