C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn, as well as the
Tudor rose and Scottish thistle

A CERTAIN Relation of the Earl of Ormonds nine days passages at his last
going into the Pale against the Rebels.

And also Setting forth what prisoners he has taken, and what Lords and
Gentlemen of the Pale are come in and tendered themselves to his Lordshipp.

Likewise what Towns he has burnt, and what store of Pillage he sent and
brought home with him. Latly sent from an honorable person in Dublin, to a
worthy Irish gentleman now in England.

London Printed for John Frank. 1642.

A Certain Relation of the Earl of Ormonds nine days passages at his last
going into the Pale against the Rebels. And all so setting forth what
prisoners he has taken and what Lords and Gentlmen of the Pale are come in
and tendered themselves to his Lordshipp.
Dated at Dublin the 24. day of March 1642.
Monday the seventh of March 1641 the Earl of Ormand with 3000 soote and 500
horse marched to Feildstowne, where and at Kilsalghan his Lordship with the
forces quartered that night.

Tuseday.
Tuseday the 8. of March they burnt both those Towns to the ground and burnt
also Mr. Hores house where they found plentiful pillage, and so then they
marched to Ratowth.

Wednesday
On Wednesday morning the ninth, they burnt Ratowth and marched to Dunshaghlan
that day being very foul and unfitt for a long March, on that day Leive
tennant Collonell, Read, and Birford, of Kielrow, his eldest son who rendered
them selves to the Earl of Ormon as did also Mr. Patrick Barnwall, of Kilbrue
the night before were sent by the Earl of Ormond in the Condition of prisoners
with twelfe horse to the Lords, Justices, who denying them access to their
presence Commanded their Committall to the Castle where now they are, and still
remain,

On that day also Captain Roper Sir John Borldsse and Captain Bien arrived
from Droghedah by Sea and brought us the glad news of those which were in
Tredah, Garrisens beating the Rebels from all their quarters round about
Drogheda, in so much as the Rebels and with them the Arch-rebell Sir Phelim,
Oneale have bin Constrained shameful to forsake the seige and run away,
leaveing not a man about the Town of Drogheda, and so the Lords and other
Rebels of the pale thus abandoned by the Northren Rebels are forced to
forsake their own habitations, and go along with the Northren Rebels or hide
their heads some wheare else from their own houses, with which they have
mournfully taken their last leave of as many think for ever seeing them or
their own again.

Sir Henry Tichburne has burnt several Towns about him for three or four
miles and brought to the Town in abundant store of Corn possessed himself of
Brawly whereby he is Master of the harbor, and now open market is kept again
in the Town, so as we have still more cause to join in due thankfulness to
God for his still continued miraculous deliverances of us.

Thursday
On Thursday the tenth of March other twelfe horses were returned back to the
Earl of Ormond in lieu of the twelve he had sent the day before to guard the
prisoners hither, but those twelve horse observeing some more strength in the
way some six miles hence then they could safely encounter returned back to
Dublin, again.

Therefore on the next morning Friday the Eleventh, at four of the Clock 60
horse were sent in their rooms, not the Earl wanted any such accession of
strength, but to pass strongly and unresistably in messages between the Lords
Justices, and the Earl whilst he was doing the work of burning that part of
the Pale.

Sunday
On Sunday the Thirtenth, the Earl sent a guard hither with these prisoners
following, Edward Dowdall of Muncklowne, Lawrance Dowdall his son, Nicholas
Dowdall of Brownestowne, Gerrald Ailmer the Lawyer William Mallone of
Lissmullen Stephen Dowdall of Glasslowne.

Tuesday and Wednesday
On Tuesday the fiftenth and Wednesday the sixtenth much pillage was sent home
by the Army whereby the other side are made to see that now they have don
pillaging as we degin to pillage them.

The Earl having caused diverse houses to be burnt and pillaged and amongst
the rest some of the Lords houses of the Pale, he returned to Dublin with the
Army having left 500 men and a Troop of horse, which he left with Sir Henry
Tichburne at Drogheda the better to enable him, to burn spoil wast and
destroy all the Rebels in the County of Lowsh and the other parts adjoining to
Drogheda, wcich Sir Henry Tichborne has already bhgun to do and, having 200
men which he left in Garrison at Mallahide, Sir John Nettervile also ren^red
himself in that Journey to the Earl of Ormoud.

Since that time Georg Devenish John Talbot of Robertstowne and Sir Audrew
Ailemer rendered themselves to the Lords, Justices, as also did the Lord Barron
of Dunsany on the 19 of March, and that Lord and Sir John Nettervill and all
the rest stand Committed to the Castle as Prisoners.

W. L.

FINJS

